Parents, Partners, Plans and Promises: The Relational Work of Student Loan Borrowing
Abby Stivers, University at Albany, SUNY
Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan

Abstract
When does student loan borrowing prompt relational work between borrowers and their family
members? Research on student loans has focused on quantitative estimation of the effects of
borrowing on educational attainment, economic well-being, health, and life course milestones.
Drawing on sixty interviews with respondents working as lawyers in the northeastern U.S., we
argue that student loans also have underappreciated relational effects, even for relatively
privileged borrowers. Relational work around student loans is particularly visible during three
important moments: the decision to borrow, the decision to partner, and when planning
children’s futures. While scholars have examined the effects of borrowing on marriage and
childbearing decisions, they have implicitly assumed that it is difficulty repaying that causes
such effects. Attention to relational work, however, shows how debt can create additional
burdens even when borrowers have the ability to repay, and may help explain why similar debt
levels affect different groups differently.

1

A growing body of literature explores the effects of student loan debt on borrowers (Hillman
2015; A. R. Baker, Andrews, and McDaniel 2017; Dwyer 2018; de Gayardon et al. 2018).
Primarily quantitative, it focuses on the impact of borrowing on a variety of measurable
outcomes—educational attainment, economic well-being, mental and physical health, and the
achievement of life course milestones (e.g. Dwyer, McCloud, and Hodson 2012; Henager and
Wilmarth 2018; Houle and Berger 2015; Houle and Warner 2017; Walsemann, Gee, and Gentile
2015)—as well as whether this impact varies among different types of borrowers (Addo, Houle,
and Simon 2016). Though a number of studies have examined whether student loans affect the
timing of marriage and childbearing decisions (Addo 2014; see Velez, Cominole, and Bentz
2019 for a review), much less work has focused on the subjective experience of student loan
borrowing, or on the ways borrowing might affect decisions to form, or relationships within,
families (though see Goldrick-Rab 2016; Cottom 2017; Zaloom 2019).
This study draws on 60 semi-structured interviews with practicing lawyers under the age
of 45 in the northeastern U.S. to explore the relational work that student loan borrowing
produces between borrowers and current and potential family members. As a group that is
heavily indebted but relatively privileged, law school graduates are particularly useful for
understanding the impact of borrowing on a group that typically can afford to repay, but for
whom debt is nevertheless quite salient to everyday life. We identify relational work with family
members—“the creative effort [of] establishing, maintaining, negotiating, transforming, and
terminating interpersonal relations” in the context of economic activity (Zelizer, Bandelj, and
Wherry 2012)—as critical to the subjective experience of student loan borrowing. While such
relational work may be ongoing, it becomes particularly significant at three specific moments.

2

First, there is relational work with parents at the time of borrowing: around expectations
about how much parents will assist their children financially and how much students will
borrow, around promises made (and sometimes broken) to help with repayment, and around
changes in circumstances (e.g. divorce, job loss) that affect parents’ capacity to contribute
financially. Second, there is relational work with (potential) partners regarding mutual
obligations to one’s student loan debt: to manage any stigma of debt when seeking a partner, to
negotiate a mutually agreeable strategy for repaying a manageable debt, and to deal with the
financial stress that results when debt is difficult to repay. Finally, there is relational work tied to
planning for one’s (future) children: around deciding what one’s financial obligation to one’s
children’s education actually is, negotiating that obligation with a spouse, and balancing it with
one’s own debt and long-term financial security.
Research increasingly suggests that student loan borrowing does affect family formation,
and implicitly assumes that it is the financial challenge of managing debt that causes delays in
marriage or childbearing (see e.g. Velez, Cominole, and Bentz 2019). But findings have also
been somewhat inconsistent, with some studies showing more impact than others, and with
effects varying across groups—e.g. by race and gender—even at similar debt levels. A focus on
relational work, however, shows that borrowing affects the experience of family life even when
borrowers are financially able to manage repayment, and suggests reasons debt might have
different effects on family formation for different groups. Relational work is tied not only to the
size of loans or how hard they are to repay, but to family members’ beliefs about their financial
obligations to each other, about who is responsible for paying for higher education, and about
how existing debt should be managed and repaid. These beliefs are likely to vary significantly
across populations, including by social class, gender, and race.

3

Unpacking what this relational work looks like for different types of borrowers is thus not
only important for understanding the subjective experience of student loan debt, though that
subjective experience should not be discounted. Relational work may also mediate between a
given level of borrowing and a measurable effect on family life—with potentially varying
impacts on women and men, on black and white borrowers, and on borrowers from different
socioeconomic and educational backgrounds. Understanding how different types of borrowers
experience debt in family contexts can help us better interpret existing findings on the
relationship between student debt and family formation, and additional qualitative research
focused on mapping patterns of relational work can usefully inform the quantitative literature.

Student Loan Borrowing and Its Relational Effects
The literature on student loans examines the effects of borrowing on a range of outcomes—
particularly educational attainment (Dwyer, McCloud, and Hodson 2012; Dwyer, Hodson, and
McCloud 2013; Jackson and Reynolds 2013; see A. R. Baker, Andrews, and McDaniel 2017 for
a review), but also economic well-being (Fry 2014; Henager and Wilmarth 2018; Elliott and
Lewis 2015), mental and physical health (Walsemann, Gee, and Gentile 2015; Walsemann,
Ailshire, and Gee 2016), and the achievement of life course milestones like purchasing a home
(Houle and Berger 2015; Mezza et al. 2019). A handful of studies have looked at the impact of
borrowing on family formation, including the decisions to marry and to have children, under the
assumption that increasing debt levels may be causing borrowers to delay such decisions because
they do not feel they are in a financial position to make them (e.g. Velez, Cominole, and Bentz
2019).

4

The findings of this literature have been somewhat mixed, with some studies showing
associations across the board (Addo, Houle, and Sassler 2019; Gicheva 2016), while others find
that they are limited to women (Nau, Dwyer, and Hodson 2015), vary by race (Min and Taylor
2018), or attenuate over time (Bozick and Estacion 2014). They have also focused on measurable
outcomes (e.g. age at marriage or having a first child), rather than the subjective experience that
might lead to such decisions, or have other kinds of impact on family relationships.
These studies of the effects of borrowing on family formation are themselves part of an
effort to expand our understanding of the potential impact of student loans beyond educational
attainment and economic outcomes. But without attention to how student loans are actually
experienced, they leave many questions open—about how loans affect not only borrowers
themselves but their families, about when loans become stressors within families, and about how
borrowers who look similar on paper may experience debt very differently. Examining how debt
is experienced in family contexts can show more subtle effects of student loan borrowing,
including on borrowers who are not financially struggling. It also suggests possible explanations
for why debt might affect the family decisions of different types of borrowers differently.
While holding student loan debt was once positively associated with marriage, at least for
men (Addo, Houle, and Sassler 2019), a growing number of studies find evidence that student
loan debt now delays marriage (Addo 2014; Gicheva 2016; Velez, Cominole, and Bentz 2019),
particularly for women (Bozick and Estacion 2014; Sieg and Wang 2018), though it may
increase the likelihood of cohabitation (Addo 2014). Similarly, evidence is emerging that student
loan debt delays childbearing for women (Velez, Cominole, and Bentz 2019), especially at high
debt levels (Nau, Dwyer, and Hodson 2015), but that this relationship varies with race (Min and
Taylor 2018). Evidence also exists that student loan debt is associated with “boomeranging”—

5

returning to the parental home—among some subgroups (black borrowers and those who did not
complete a degree; Houle and Warner 2017), and that consumer debt (including, but not limited
to, education debt) predicts marital conflict as well (Dew 2007).
Drawing on interview data, sociologists have shown how financial relationships within
families around higher education financing are much more complex than the traditional
assumption that parents assist children as much as they can, with children borrowing to make up
the difference. Not only are many borrowers already well into adulthood, but it is also quite
common for traditional-age students to be helping their parents financially, as is using financial
aid not only to pay for educational and living expenses but to assist a broader network of family
members (Goldrick-Rab 2016; Cottom 2017). Negotiating these expectations requires intense
interaction within families, who experience “moral conflict” as they struggle to provide children
with opportunity, but at great financial cost (Tevington, Napolitano, and Furstenberg 2017;
Zaloom 2019). Families serve as a “source of knowledge” for borrowers, although some families
are better equipped than others to provide such knowledge, as well as “emotional support” in the
borrowing process (D. Baker 2019). Parents and siblings can also serve as negative models that
lead students to avoid taking on debt, after seeing the struggles of family members to repay
(Zerquera, McGowan, and Ferguson 2016).
This qualitative evidence suggesting the importance and complexity of family relations in
student loan borrowing, along with the quantitative studies showing the association between debt
and family formation, suggest that a closer examination of family interactions around borrowing
is merited. To help conduct this examination, we draw on Viviana Zelizer’s concept of
“relational work” (Zelizer 2012). Focusing on the “interpersonal processes that actually go into
what economists usually abstract into production, consumption, distribution, and transfer of

6

assets,” Zelizer’s approach emphasizes that people are “constantly negotiating the exact content
of important social ties” (Zelizer 2005:32). Economic sociology has more generally found the
concept of relational work useful for understanding economic transactions—like student loan
borrowing—in which the public and private spheres are blurred (Bandelj 2012; Wherry, Seefeldt,
and Alvarez 2019).
Dwyer (2018) has recently proposed adopting Zelizer’s relational approach for
understanding the debtor/creditor relationship. We suggest that this relational approach is also
useful for understanding debt’s impact on close others (e.g. family members) who are affected by
borrowing even when they have no direct financial state in the debt. Zelizer (2005:265)
emphasizes that income (including negative income, aka debt) catalyzes relational work within
families, and changing family circumstances—such as would be prompted by the decision to
marry or the need to plan for a child’s future education—similarly tend to reopen relatively
settled internal financial arrangements.
By focusing on when relational work becomes important in the borrowing and repayment
process, and how it is subjectively experienced by borrowers, we shed light on how borrowing
affects families. We suggest that relational work might be a moderator between debt and family
effects that can help explain variation across race, gender, or socioeconomic background. More
generally, attention to relational work shows how borrowing is not only a constraint on family
formation but restructures the very fabric of family life, even for economically privileged
families.

Research Design
This study draws on in-depth, semi-structured interviews about student loan borrowing and

7

repayment with 60 currently practicing lawyers under the age of 45 in the northeastern United
States. Interviews were chosen as the appropriate method because the study was intended to
explore subjective experience, to allow respondents the opportunity to discuss the issues most
important to them, and to provide a forum in which they could show “the framings that shape
[their] thinking” (Pugh 2013). In addition, given the reliance of the literature on quantitative
survey and administrative data, interviews provided the potential for preliminary identification of
impacts on borrowers’ lives that might be less evident in other kinds of data.
While holders of professional degrees are often seen as not part of the student loan
problem, as they typically have high earning capacity despite their greater borrowing (Baum
2016; Dynarski 2015; Akers and Chingos 2016), this study focuses on lawyers specifically for
several reasons. First, lawyers do have both high rates and high levels of borrowing. The
American Bar Association reported that almost 90% borrowed to pay for law school in 2012;
that year, private law schools averaged $127,000 of debt among graduates, and public schools
$88,000 (ABA 2015).1 Income among law school graduates, however, tends to be bifurcated.
Graduates hired by “BigLaw” firms in major markets—a group that makes up about 14% of the
total—now commonly start at salaries of $180,000, while as of 2011, more than half of new
graduates—often those working in public interest law, criminal defense, or in temporary contract
positions—earned $60,000 or less (Dinovitzer, Garth, and Sterling 2013; Lat 2017). Thus,
practicing lawyers include both a group that should be able to manage high debt levels
reasonably well, and a group more likely to struggle with repayment. This should provide greater

1

The National Center for Education Statistics (2019) produces somewhat different estimates of borrowing rates and

debt levels, reporting that only 69% of 2015-16 law degree completers had student loans, and that average balances
were $145,500 among those with loans.

8

internal variation in responses than other professional-degree borrowers, like physicians or
MBAs.
At the same time, however, lawyers are quite unlikely to stop paying their student loans,
with only 2% defaulting within two years of graduation (ABA 2015). While this may be because
they are in income-based repayment or Public Service Loan Forgiveness programs, rather than
because they are successfully repaying principal, it does suggest that most lawyers are at least
managing their debt. Thus, at some level lawyers are a “least-likely” case (George and Bennett
2005) for seeing intense relational work: if it is happening among these respondents, who have
an unusually high capacity to manage their debt, we should certainly expect to see it among less
economically advantaged groups. Given their very low rates of default, lawyers are also a
particularly useful group for exploring how borrowing may affect family life even when
borrowers are not obviously struggling to manage repayment.
Interviews, conducted in 2015-16 by the first author, were limited to practicing lawyers
under the age of 45: none was born prior to 1970. This cutoff was chosen to include respondents
who had a range of time in which to pay off student loans, but limiting the focus to age groups
most affected by student loan borrowing. The oldest respondents graduated from law school in
1997; the youngest was born in 1991 and graduated from law school in 2016. Borrowing levels
were high and increasing throughout most of this period, with the National Center for Education
Statistics reporting average cumulative loan balances among law degree completers rising from
$82,400 in 1999-2000 to a peak of $149,700 in 2011-12, after which they decreased by about 3%
(NCES 2018; inflation-adjusted figures in 2016-17 dollars).
Interviewees were recruited through snowball sampling and by advertising the study on
LinkedIn and the popular blog Above the Law; all interviews were conducted by phone. 38

9

interviewees were women and 22 were men; race was not asked, although three respondents
spontaneously mentioned that they were African-American and three others that they were
Asian-American. Respondents ranged in age from 26 to 44, with half being 30, 31, or 32 years of
age. 58% took on debt to finance their undergraduate degree, and 93% borrowed to pay for law
school, a figure similar to the roughly 60% of undergraduates and 90% of law school graduates
who borrow overall (Baum et al. 2017; ABA 2015).
Though representativeness was not a core concern of the study, the sample was selected
to ensure representation of graduates of law schools from a range of status levels. U.S. News and
World Report divides law schools into four tiers, with Tier 1 graduates much more likely to be
employed in BigLaw and with much higher average incomes upon graduation, relative to other
tiers’ graduates (see, e.g., Rivera 2016). 19 respondents graduated from a Tier 1 school, 13
attended Tier 2 schools, and the remaining 38 were from either Tier 3 or Tier 4 law programs.
Interviews lasted for about an hour, depending on respondents’ time constraints; most
respondents were quite busy. They were scheduled at respondents’ convenience and were held
on weekends, during lunch breaks, after work, or during the day. Many were rescheduled
multiple times due to schedule changes and a few were cut short when something more pressing
for the respondent took precedent. Interviews were subsequently transcribed and inductively
coded in order to identify emerging themes (Luker 2008). Family relationships were not an
initial focus of the interviews, although questions about undergraduate borrowing decisions and
current financial situation, which tended to bring up discussion of family, were included.
However, the effect of borrowing decisions on family relations, and the effort associated with
managing those relations, emerged relatively early as an important theme. Because the topic was
not systematically covered in the very earliest interviews, some numerical totals (for example, on

10

whether a respondent’s parents paid for college attendance) do not add up to 60, the total number
of interviews conducted. Upon reexamining portions of interviews that touched on issues around
family and relational work, three moments in which such decisions became important were
identified.
Beyond ensuring respondents from a range of law school tiers were included, no effort
was made to seek a representative sample. Respondents may have been unusually concerned
with the topic of debt, although many did not exhibit obvious anxiety about their borrowing. The
interviews did not systematically ask about loan amounts, due to many respondents’ discomfort
with providing such numbers, although a number of respondents volunteered how much they
borrowed or still owed. Discussion covered undergraduate as well as graduate borrowing;
relational work with parents and internal relational work with (future) children was more
typically around undergraduate, rather than graduate, borrowing, given the stronger cultural
assumption that parents will assist children with the cost of undergraduate education. While we
do not have space here to fully unpack the differences in how respondents discussed
undergraduate versus graduate borrowing, the fact that there was a difference reinforces the point
that relational work around borrowing is shaped not only by the amount borrowed but by
expectations about who is financially responsible for what.
The interviews did ask about parents’ occupation as a proxy for socio-economic status;
these borrowers are almost certainly different from undergraduate borrowers, not only in their
earning capacity but in their origins in relatively well-off families. We make no claims that their
experience is typical of either law school graduates or student borrowers more generally.
However, that does not make it less useful for generating insights into the way borrowing can

11

trigger relational work, and what kinds of relational work people do as they manage their
borrowing.

The Relational Work of Student Loan Borrowing
Though scholars are beginning to recognize the extent to which student loan borrowing decisions
are shaped by family needs and relationships (Goldrick-Rab 2016; Cottom 2017; SallieMae
2019; Zaloom 2019), much of the literature still rests, implicitly or explicitly, on a human capital
model in which students make individual, more-or-less rational decisions about borrowing and
repayment based on expected future earnings (e.g. Avery and Turner 2012). Yet one theme that
quickly emerges from interview data is the extent to which borrowing and repayment are
intensely relational activities—and tied up not only with the actual income and wealth of
parents, partners, and children, but with optimistic plans for the future, promises made and
broken, expectations about mutual obligations, and adjustments to evolving family situations.
While situations in which student loans create immediate financial difficulties obviously create
the potential for stress, borrowing and managing the repayment of student loans nearly always
requires relational work—even among borrowers who find their debt relatively manageable.
This relational work is ongoing and can come to the fore in a variety of contexts. In
interviews, however, it was particularly salient at three moments in the process of borrowing and
repayment. First, it takes place with students and their parents during decision-making over
whether and how much to borrow. Second, it becomes important as people find partners and
spouses and negotiate over obligations to and strategies for managing student loan debt. Finally,
relational work again intensifies around consideration of obligations to provide for the education
of existing or potential children. The intensity of relational work is not completely detached from

12

the quantity of debt at stake or the financial challenge of repaying it. But it is also deeply shaped
by mutual expectations around obligations: between children and parents over expectations
around who will pay for education, of partners to take on responsibility for each other’s debt, and
of parents and their balancing of obligations to children, to existing debt, and to retirement.
Mismatches in expectations, reneging on (perceived) promises, or the need to renegotiate in face
of changing realities all produce such work, even in the absence of intense financial pressure.

Parents, Plans and Promises: Relational Work at the Moment of Borrowing
Discussions of financial aid and student borrowing have typically assumed that parents have an
obligation to pay what they can for children’s higher education, at least at the undergraduate
level. Interviewees’ accounts of parental contributions to their undergraduate education mostly
reflected this expectation that parents will at least try to pay: 21 said their parents paid entirely,
21 said their parents helped to pay, and only 10 said that their parents did not pay for college.2
Yet even parents who expect to contribute substantially may do so with the expectation that
children will attend schools that parents approve of or that are financially affordable. When a
mismatch occurs between parental expectations and children’s preferences, relational work takes
place to negotiate the gap.
Michael’s parents, for example, had a plan for how they would finance his education.
Because of his father’s location and job, he could attend a specific set of schools at near-free
tuition levels. Michael, however, had worked hard in high school and set career aspirations for
himself that he felt this “approved” list of schools could not help him achieve. He tried one of

2

Responses to the direct question of whether parents paid for college did not always align precisely with other

information provided in the interview. Some respondents, for example, mentioned having taken on small loans but
also maintained that their parents had fully paid for their college education.

13

them for a year, hated it, and transferred to a private liberal arts college in a major city. To pay
for the new school, he started taking out both federal and private student loans. Michael was
unhappy that he had to borrow because his expectations of his parents’ obligations diverged from
theirs:
I was mostly annoyed because my parents they were like, “Oh you know we were
not expecting to get a big tuition bill and as it turns out we did not save a bunch of
money for you to go to college we thought you were going to take the free ride”
and ugh and I was annoyed by that.
This led to relational work to negotiate that mismatch. In Michael’s case, this meant that his
father agreed to help repay Michael’s undergraduate loans, even though Michael had taken an
educational path that did not accord with his parents’ expectations:
My family income was such that I didn’t really quality for need based
fellowships, and because we did not have the cash on hand we went ahead and
borrowed…and we did so with the understanding that he would help pay on the
back end of things. And that is kind of the way it has worked out.
The relational work that took place in reaction to the expectations mismatch helped repair the
annoyance Michael felt at his parents for not being able to pay outright for his education after (in
Michael’s words) “all did not go according to plan.”
While in Michael’s family, relational work was relatively successful in managing the
divergence between parental and child expectations, this was less so when children sensed not
only a mismatch in expectations but a reneging on promises. Jessica, for example, perceived her
parents as telling her she should choose a college without consideration of cost:
My whole life my dad told me you can go to school wherever you want to go to
school and you can do whatever you want to do and you can be whoever you want
to be….All I had heard for my whole childhood is that you go wherever you want
to go.

14

When she chose to attend “the best school that [she] got into”—a small private liberal arts school
in New England—her family was pleased:
My grandfather was just so excited to have a grandkid that was going to a
prestigious school in the Northeast and was looking at going to law school and so
was just encouraging me to get all the education that I could.
Her parents did not have a clear plan, however, for how to pay for her expensive education. Her
father agreed to pay for half the cost, but failed to keep his end of the bargain, with the result that
Jessica took on substantial public and private loans:
I remember my dad saying…“I am not sure, let’s figure out if we can make this
work,” and…he ended up saying, “Well, you will finance half and I will finance
half,” and then he just didn’t pay for his half. And by the time I realized he was
not going to hold up his end of the deal I was at the end of my junior year.
This produced a great deal of stress and anxiety for Jessica. The anxiety was not only because of
her lack of understanding of borrowing (“I didn’t understand that they were growing. I didn’t
understand what a good interest rate was versus a bad interest rate”) or because of the size of the
loans, though both of these were an issue. It was also because she felt her family’s high
educational expectations, paired with a failure to follow through on promises to help pay for her
education, had negative consequences for her:
No one was really stopping to think how this was going to affect…that this was
going to affect my life.
In this case, relational work was a necessary response to the unkept promise but not enough to
repair Jessica’s feeling that her father had broken her trust.
Finally, changing family circumstances can also prompt relational work even when
children and parents have previously shared expectations about their mutual obligations to pay
for college. Sarah’s parents, for example, divorced while she was in high school, introducing

15

complications into family negotiations about who would be responsible for paying what part of
her higher education. Her parents covered most of her first two years, in part due to their divorce
settlement:
My first year my dad was court ordered to pay $5,000 cash and my mom ended
up taking out whatever the parent loan was that [the school] told her she had to
take out….Then second year my mom paid the family cash contribution, whatever
the Parent PLUS loan was, and then this whole time I was taking out whatever
[the school] told me I had to take out.
Changing financial realities, though, meant that her parents were not able and willing to continue
this level of support. Sarah’s father “was upset that [she] didn’t go to the state school,” despite
the fact that “their financial aid package [was] worse,” and her mother was unwilling to continue
a high level of borrowing:
My parents were like, okay, you are an adult now and we are done. My mom was
tapped out and felt nervous about taking out more debt and taking out more Parent
PLUS loans and my dad was just not going to help me at all….It’s not that my
mom wasn’t sympathetic, but she didn’t have anything, she couldn’t help me. My
sister was still in high school and she was pretty much a single mom. She didn’t
have child support, so she was like, “You are just going to have to work with
[your private college].”
Sarah did not feel animosity towards her mother, despite having to borrow enough to cover the
remaining two years of private college. Her mom performed relational work first by pushing for
the divorce settlement to require her dad to contribute, and later by helping Sarah come to terms
with her decision to borrow substantially:
My mom had helped to reassure me, like, here is the form that you sign for your
loan. And she would say, “This is what we do. I am taking out a loan, you are
taking out a loan, it will be fine.”

16

The change in family circumstances prompted the need for relational work, but Sarah’s
relationship with her mother, at least, remained solid as a result of that work. While relational
work between parents and children may continue after the moment of borrowing, particularly if
parents later fail to follow through on promises to help with repayment, it is the immediate
negotiation over who will pay, how much they will pay, and how much borrowing will be
required that prompts the most relational work between borrowers and their parents.

(Possible) Partners: Relational Work with Potential and Actual Spouses
While nontraditional students may already have a partner by the time they are taking on student
loan debt, the lawyers in this study had typically made major borrowing decisions before they
were seriously considering long-term partnership or marriage. 31 respondents were married at
the time of their interview; 10 had a partner who lived with them, shared household expenses,
and with whom they planned their financial future; and the remaining 14 were single or were in a
relationship that did not involve shared financial decision-making. Both the process of seeking a
spouse or partner as well as coming to agreement about how to manage student loan debt
required substantial relational work.
At the front end, this was tied to anxiety about the impact of debt upon one’s
marriageability. All respondents who held large amounts of debt reported stress around finding a
partner or spouse while holding the debt. Respondents worried that no one would want to marry
a person with so much debt and felt guilty about bringing debt to the relationship. As Laura
observed,
[The debt] is part of what you will be marrying. This absurd debt that will be ours.
And yeah, I am really lucky that my partner does not have any undergrad debt,
and it’s more reasonable for two of us to have $127,000.

17

When the debt did not immediately lead to a lucrative career it was perceived as stigmatizing,
and telling a potential partner about it was something to be carefully managed, as Laura
continued:
At a certain point it is like disclosing to people that you have a sexually
transmitted disease.
Both the stigma and the actual financial burden prompted relational work between borrowers and
potential partners before any long-term commitment to one another could be made.
Once such a commitment took place, however, relational work continued as partners
negotiated over expectations about shared responsibility to the debt and about collective
strategies for managing it. James and his wife each brought student loan debt to their marriage,
him from law school and her from a master’s degree. They negotiated a strategy of aggressively
paying off their student loans, a process that James found relatively smooth:
We have been together for a while and we approach decisions very much as a
team…We have a really good understanding of one another and our goals are
aligned which always helps in our marriage. As a result, financial decisions have
been easy for us and not difficult.
Shared values and successful relational work—along with an earning capacity that made it
possible—led to rapid repayment. James and his wife paid off his law school loans “in three
years and two months,” and reported a sense of satisfaction that the loans had been worth it.
Yet while the relational work of establishing a shared strategy toward managing student
loan debt and paying it down may be relatively straightforward for some couples, for others the
challenge may be substantially greater. This is particularly the case when borrowing levels are
very high, or debt is difficult to repay.
John, for example, accumulated $300,000 worth of student loans during undergraduate
and law school. Although his salary was $160,000 a year (after one year of lower pay due to the
18

2008 recession), budgeting was difficult, and he was frustrated with how little money he actually
took home each month. His wife, who he met while in law school, had no student loan debt of
her own, but when they married John’s student loans came with him.
Dealing with the gap between his salary on paper and his paycheck size after student loan
repayments was difficult for John:
$4,800 a month was coming out of my $6,600 I was earning after taxes. Imagine
that. You are working so hard, you have this big job and your take home is like
what my wife’s take home was. It was, you know, making $30,000 a year. That is
crazy…I had 13 or 15 different loans and so I was making payments on all of
them. Some were automatically coming out of my paycheck, some weren’t, it was
just like coordinating them was a headache. And all of them had the different
payment dates. There are some of them on the first, some on the 15th, and that was
stressful.
Managing the loans put pressure on his relationship with his wife:
I remember we got in so many arguments. Some of the nights I would get home
from a long day of work, I would have to call the student loan company, wait on
hold forever because too much money was taken out, too little money was taken
you, the records were not right, and I just never wanted to have a late payment.
Their solution was for her to take over practical management of the loans for the sake of
preserving their relationship:
My wife said, “Look, I will manage all of your student loan debt and I will make
sure all these payments come on time.” Because it was also stressful for me to see
my paycheck and then to be obsessing over the fact that in my biweekly paycheck
we had zero money left over because the loans were coming out of it all in one
paycheck….So my wife said she’d take over and she’s really organized and so she
took over making all the payments and created an elaborate spreadsheet to
manage them.

19

Though John’s wife did not come to the marriage with student loan debt, she had to manage both
the debt itself and John’s anxiety about it. The extent of this relational work was amplified by the
size of the loans relative to John’s paycheck, even though John’s earning power made them
financially capable of paying down the debt in a timely manner. While the debt’s economic
burden was now shared between partners, its emotional burden grew as two people, not one, now
shared the experience.
Thus, while the relational work of managing student loan debt with potential or existing
partners was ongoing, it tended to be particularly visible early in relationships: as borrowers
looked for long-term partners who might come to share responsibility for their debt, and as they
worked with new partners or spouses to develop shared strategies for managing and repaying the
debt. This work was particularly onerous when debts were large or difficult to repay, but it was
visible in every relationship.

Parenting Plans: Relational Work and the Decision to Have Children
Student loan borrowing decisions not only prompted relational work between borrowers, their
parents, and their existing or potential partners, but became newly salient as borrowers began
thinking about children of their own. Of the 60 respondents in this study, 16 already had children
(all younger than college age) and many others were considering becoming parents. Because
their children were young, respondents did not report a great deal of active relational work with
those children, who typically were not near the age of making college decisions. Instead,
relational work was internal, and involved articulating a sense of one’s financial obligation to
one’s children’s higher education, and then to reconciling that duty with competing
responsibilities to student loan debt and to one’s own financial future, and particularly to saving

20

for retirement. This relational work of dealing with the costs of college often began even before
respondents had children.
For many interviewees, the core issue was managing competing financial obligations to
one’s children, one’s student loan debt, and one’s future self, and finding a way to be at peace
with the choices one made about their relative priority. Amy, the mother of a two-year-old, was a
participant in the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program. Program participants commit to ten
years of public service employment, during which they make income-adjusted loan repayments,
and after which their remaining debt is to be forgiven. The income adjustment meant that
respondents’ monthly payments were often less than the interest on their loans, which meant
their loan balances were growing while they were in the program. Amy was considering leaving
the program for higher-paying employment in the private sector, despite having put in five years
already.3 She noted the tensions between meeting the competing needs of her child, her
retirement, and paying off her loans:
The immediate concerns of paying for childcare, putting money in college
accounts, putting money in retirement accounts right now, all of those things are
things that more time is helpful for and so waiting five years before you can start
loading accounts that are interest bearing or interest producing is kind of a
question…I obviously have not found another job yet…but I am leaning in the
direction, yes. This is really crappy for this loan situation but better for all of these
other reasons, so, I feel stupid, actually. That sounds kind of awful but I feel like
an idiot because…when it comes down to bare numbers I will be paying so much
more doing it that way, right? But the problem is time, and time is going to keep
3

The Public Service Loan Forgiveness program has become a hot-button issue, as almost no loans have actually

been forgiven at the end of ten years of service, and it is likely that participants today would exhibit much more
distress about their situation. At the time of the interviews, however, respondents generally assumed that the
forgiveness would likely happen after ten years, but were concerned that participating might be a bad financial
decision for other reasons, and unhappy about their loss of options after having committed to it.

21

ticking no matter what I do, so I have to also be addressing these other things that
require time as well.
Amy was performing internal work to manage her sense of obligation to these competing
demands. She was leaning toward taking the financial penalty on her student loan balance that
would result from returning to the higher-paid private sector so that she could meet her own
responsibilities to her child’s well-being:
I don’t know. I feel really frustrated that no matter what I am going to take a
financial hit one way or another but that, as it relates to my child’s welfare,
clock’s a-ticking. That sort of freaks me out.
Other parents, however, did not feel the same obligation to save for their children’s education,
making different internal calculations about what should be the priority in the short term. When
Justin, father of two, was asked whose responsibility it would be to pay for college, he replied,
“Theirs,” without hesitation. He continued,
Would we hope to be able to be in a position where we could say we will help you
out with some? Sure. But, as people have always said, you can take loans out for
school, but you can’t take loans out for retirement. So, it is better to get in shape
for that, for retirement, and then whatever we can help out with on top for their
school is great.
Justin has also done the relational work of articulating his financial responsibility to his children
but landed in a different place. For him, the decision to prioritize retirement is the responsible
one for his whole family, because “you can’t take out loans for retirement.” He seems satisfied,
for now—but future relational work may be needed if his children do not share his sense that
they should bear primary financial responsibility for their higher education.
The relational work of articulating financial responsibilities to one’s children takes place
within the context of what borrowers have learned from their own parents about interfamilial

22

obligations. Borrowers typically draw on what their parents did as a model for their own
behavior. Kristen, whose parents paid for her undergraduate degree, felt a sense of responsibility
to pay for her own (future) children’s college despite the fact that she had a modest-paying job in
the federal government and was married to a taxi driver. Her parents’ behavior shaped her own
expectations:
I felt that I was very lucky. So, I would like to be able to pass that same thing on.
I think because I was able to graduate from undergrad with no debt I think that
opened up many doors for me and actually allowed me to live the kind of crazy
adventure that I got to go to Senegal and then came to the conclusion that I
wanted to go to law school. I think that it gave me a lot of flexibility that I
definitely would not have had otherwise. It was a gift in a way, so I would like to
give that gift to my hypothetical children.
The language of a “gift”—a word that came up in fourteen interviewees—was common among
respondents who hoped to pay for their children’s college, reflecting a sense that it was desirable,
but above and beyond what was expected.
Others, who expected to share the cost of college with their children, similarly drew on
their parents’ model as they did the relational work of developing their own sense of financial
obligation to their children. James’ parents had split the cost with him, and he was able to make
enough money working summer and winter breaks to pay half the bill. He reflected that he and
his wife
don’t have a goal of funding 100% out of our pockets. We both found it healthy to
have a personal involvement and financial stake in our undergraduate and
graduate education. I think we both got more out of it. We don’t really look to
them to fund it completely but then we probably would not do it completely for
them. We will probably have something like a 50-50 split.

23

Again, for James being a good parent meant not providing the “gift” of a free education, but
assisting children as needed, even as they had a “financial stake” in their own education.
Justin, by contrast, thought his children would benefit from being responsible for the cost
of college, even though his parents helped pay for his. Even if he and his wife were in a position
to “help out”,
It is still up to the kids to pay for their school and then if they can show that they
can budget properly and stuff like that, once they have learned that then we will
help cover things.
Here, the primary obligation to one’s children is to teach them to “budget properly”, not to give
them a “gift”.
While current and potential parents drew on the model of their family of origin as they
did the relational work of sorting out obligations to their (future) children, their spouses were, of
course, drawing on different family models. When asked whose responsibility it was to pay for
college, Jason replied,
We actually have kind of different opinions about that, my wife and I, and it is
obviously because of the way that our parents handled it. My parents didn’t put
anything aside for us for college. My wife doesn’t have any student loans at all.
Her parents had saved enough to cover all of her undergrad and then there are not
student loans from grad school. So, my gut reaction is, well, it is an extremely
daunting task of saving up enough to cover an entire college tuition, especially
considering how rates might be in 18 years. At the same time, I don’t want my
kids to be in my position where I am stuck with six figures of debt for eternity
basically, so I definitely want to save up for them. How much, and how will we
do it? Not sure yet, but then she is 100% we have to save as much as we can for
their college education.
Thus, the relational work around financial obligations to one’s own children involves not only
sorting out one’s own sense of responsibilities but negotiating different positions regarding those
24

responsibilities with one’s partner. Student loan borrowing has the potential to produce relational
work at any moment, but is particularly salient for borrowers at particular moments: when one
decides with (or in response to) one’s parents to borrow; when one is seeking a partner and then
negotiating shared responsibilities to student loan debt and a shared strategy for managing it; and
when one begins to balance obligations to one’s own debt with obligations to the education of
one’s (future) children.

Discussion
The growing literature on student loan debt has begun to look at its impact on family formation,
finding effects on marriage, cohabitation, and childbearing. But the paucity of qualitative
research on borrowing means that we have a limited sense of how student loan borrowing is
experienced within families, and why similar levels of debt seem to affect different groups very
differently. The literature also implicitly assumes that it is the financial difficulty of managing
student loans that produces the family effects it has identified.
By drawing on interviews with lawyers—a relatively privileged population with high
levels of borrowing, widely varying incomes, and low rates of student loan default—we
highlight the importance of relational work in shaping how student loan borrowing and
repayment is experienced within families. While very few of these respondents struggled with
making payments month-to-month, negotiating the borrowing and repayment process
nevertheless required extensive relational work—both interpersonal and internal. While this
work is ongoing, it tends to come to the fore at three particular moments of family transition:
when borrowing becomes necessary, when relationships with partners begin and then stabilize,
and when children come into the picture. Relational work may be prompted by difficulty with

25

repayment, whether because loans are large relative to income or because of competing financial
obligations. But it can also result from mismatched expectations between parents, partners, and
children over who is responsible for paying (and repaying) what, as well as from changed family
circumstances tied to partnership, divorce, job loss, or having a child.
Shining a light on the importance of relational work complicates existing research on
how student debt affects families, while also pointing to possible explanations for puzzling
results. Relational work is most obviously produced when repayment is difficult to manage in the
face of competing obligations. But these interviews challenge the assumption that student debt is
only relevant for borrowers who struggle financially to repay, and that impacts on professionaldegree borrowers are minimal. Debt also weighs heavily on many borrowers who are repaying
successfully, and meaningfully shapes their experience of family life. These respondents are
among the most fortunate of student loan borrowers: all hold a valuable professional degree, and
while not all had parents who helped them pay for college, very few came from families that
needed their financial assistance as they reached early adulthood, in contrast with many
undergraduate borrowers (e.g. Goldrick-Rab 2016). Yet even among this largely privileged
group, borrowing produced intense and ongoing relational work to manage it.
The nature of the relational work these respondents describe also suggests possible
explanations for why debt seems to affect the family decisions of different groups differently.
The experience of student loan debt is heavily shaped by cultural expectations around whose
obligation it is to pay for higher education and/or repay student debt, and whether those
perceived obligations are met or not. Borrowers’ feelings about debt—its reasonableness, its
manageability, its value as an investment—are tied not only to its amount relative to their own
earning capacity, but to the circumstances under which they borrowed, their feelings about what

26

obligation their parents had to financially assist them and whether that obligation was met, their
partner’s relationship to the debt, and their sense of whether debt is preventing them from
meeting responsibilities to their own children. Unhappiness with debt results from mismatches in
expectations—feelings that obligations went unfulfilled, or disagreement about what those
obligations were—as well as with actual difficulty with repayment.
Our respondents’ experience of relational work around undergraduate versus graduate
borrowing highlights the importance of cultural expectations. While some had parents who paid
for law school, and others had parents who did not contribute to their undergraduate education,
the most common expectation was that parents were obligated to help with college but not
graduate school. Relational work was produced when borrowers’ expectations of
(undergraduate) financial assistance were not met, or when they worried they would not be able
to meet them for their own children. Little work took place around law school assistance that was
never expected.
We speculate that gender, race, and socioeconomic background are also likely to shape
relational work around debt in ways that can help explain why it seems to have different effects
on family formation for different populations. Men and women are still commonly expected to
take different financial roles within the family, for example, as well as to do different kinds of
emotional work around money management. This may produce different kinds of relational work
and thus different family effects.
Expectations over who is obligated to pay are also likely to vary with socioeconomic
background. Our lawyers, who typically came from relative privilege, most commonly expected
their parents to contribute financially to their own college education, and in turn expected to
contribute financially to that of their own children, in keeping with Zaloom’s (2019) study of

27

middle- and upper-middle-class families. Relational work was produced when that contribution
didn’t or couldn’t happen. Many also had class-specific expectations about what it meant to be
financially responsible that produced a sort of existential dread around their student debt, even if
it was manageable month-to-month.
Early qualitative work focused on less financially privileged undergraduate borrowers,
however, suggests less stigma around student loan debt (in a population of mostly black women)4
and less expectation that parents should contribute to the cost of college (in a population of
borrowers at two non-flagship public universities; Mazelis and Kuperberg 2019). Identifying the
patterns in how student loan debt is actually experienced in family contexts—experience shaped
not only by borrowers’ financial situations but their economic expectations of family members—
can help explain variation in the measurable effects of student debt on family formation.
More broadly, this research suggests we take a wider lens on how student loan borrowing
is affecting family life. While difficulty repaying and delaying of marriage or childbearing are
clear and important impacts of student loan borrowing, this paper suggests a whole range of
interpersonal effects that must be managed through relational work, even when borrowers are
repaying successfully. It suggests that borrowing is actually reshaping the experience of family
life. As public debate heats up over the role of student loans in the portfolio of higher education
financing, and over the question of student loan forgiveness, it becomes ever more important to
examine the full range of effects of borrowing on borrowers’ lives. This includes not only their
progress on repayment, but the relational work required to manage such debt over the long run.
While much of the debate over student loans has assumed that making regular repayments
implies a lack of negative consequences, student loan debt also has real effects on subjective

4

Conversation with Jason Houle on research in progress with Fenaba Addo, September 2019.

28

experience and interpersonal relations—even for relatively privileged borrowers, and even when
borrowers have the capacity to repay.

29

Bibliography
Addo, Fenaba R. 2014. “Debt, Cohabitation, and Marriage in Young Adulthood.” Demography
51 (5): 1677–1701. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-014-0333-6.
Addo, Fenaba R., Jason N. Houle, and Sharon Sassler. 2019. “The Changing Nature of the
Association Between Student Loan Debt and Marital Behavior in Young Adulthood.”
Journal of Family and Economic Issues 40 (1): 86–101. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10834018-9591-6.
Addo, Fenaba R., Jason N. Houle, and Daniel Simon. 2016. “Young, Black, and (Still) in the
Red: Parental Wealth, Race, and Student Loan Debt.” Race and Social Problems 8 (1):
64–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12552-016-9162-0.
Akers, Beth, and Matthew M. Chingos. 2016. Game of Loans: The Rhetoric and Reality of
Student Debt. Princeton University Press.
American Bar Association Task Force on the Financing of Legal Education. 2015. “Report.”
American Bar Association.
https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/administrative/legal_education_and_admi
ssions_to_the_bar/reports/2015_june_report_of_the_aba_task_force_on_the_financing_o
f_legal_education.authcheckdam.pdf.
Avery, Christopher, and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too
Much--Or Not Enough?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (1): 165–92.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.26.1.165.
Baker, Amanda R., Benjamin D. Andrews, and Anne McDaniel. 2017. “The Impact of Student
Loans on College Access, Completion, and Returns.” Sociology Compass 11 (6): e12480.
https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12480.
Baker, Dominique. 2019. “A Case Study of Undergraduate Debt, Repayment Plans, and
Postbaccalaureate Decision-Making among Black Students at HBCUs.” Journal of
Student Financial Aid 48 (2). https://ir.library.louisville.edu/jsfa/vol48/iss2/1.
Bandelj, Nina. 2012. “Relational Work and Economic Sociology.” Politics & Society 40 (2):
175–201. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032329212441597.
Baum, Sandy. 2016. Student Debt: Rhetoric and Realities of Higher Education Financing.
Springer.

30

Baum, Sandy, Jennifer Ma, Matea Pender, and Meredith Welch. 2017. “Trends in Student Aid Trends in Higher Education - The College Board.” 2017.
https://trends.collegeboard.org/student-aid.
Bozick, Robert, and Angela Estacion. 2014. “Do Student Loans Delay Marriage? Debt
Repayment and Family Formation in Young Adulthood.” Demographic Research 30
(69): 1865–91. https://doi.org/10.4054/DemRes.2014.30.69.
Cottom, Tressie McMillan. 2017. Lower Ed: The Troubling Rise of For-Profit Colleges in the
New Economy. The New Press.
Dew, Jeffrey. 2007. “Two Sides of the Same Coin? The Differing Roles of Assets and Consumer
Debt in Marriage.” Journal of Family and Economic Issues 28 (1): 89–104.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10834-006-9051-6.
Dinovitzer, Ronit, Bryant G. Garth, and Joyce S. Sterling. 2013. “Buyers’ Remorse? An
Empirical Assessment of the Desirability of a Lawyer Career.” Journal of Legal
Education 63 (2): 211–34.
Dwyer, Rachel E. 2018. “Credit, Debt, and Inequality.” Annual Review of Sociology 44 (1): 237–
61. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-060116-053420.
Dwyer, Rachel E., Randy Hodson, and Laura McCloud. 2013. “Gender, Debt, and Dropping Out
of College.” Gender & Society 27 (1): 30–55.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243212464906.
Dwyer, Rachel E., Laura McCloud, and Randy Hodson. 2012. “Debt and Graduation from
American Universities.” Social Forces 90 (4): 1133–55.
https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/sos072.
Dynarski, Susan M. 2015. “An Economist’s Perspective on Student Loans in the United States.”
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2694441. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2694441.
Elliott, William, and Melinda Lewis. 2015. “Student Debt Effects on Financial Well-Being:
Research and Policy Implications.” Journal of Economic Surveys 29 (4): 614–36.
https://doi.org/10.1111/joes.12124.
Fry, Richard. 2014. “Young Adults, Student Debt and Economic Well-Being.” Washington, DC:
Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/3/2014/05/ST_2014.05.14_student-debt_complete-report.pdf.

31

Gayardon, Ariane de, Claire Callendar, KC Deane, and Stephen DesJardins. 2018. “Graduate
Indebtedness: Its Perceived Effects on Behaviour and Life Choices.” Working Paper No.
38. Centre for Global Higher Education. https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resourcefiles/2018/06/apo-nid178931-1186926.pdf.
George, Alexander L., and Andrew Bennett. 2005. Case Studies and Theory Development in the
Social Sciences. MIT Press.
Gicheva, Dora. 2016. “Student Loans or Marriage? A Look at the Highly Educated.” Economics
of Education Review 53 (August): 207–16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2016.04.006.
Goldrick-Rab, Sara. 2016. Paying the Price: College Costs, Financial Aid, and the Betrayal of
the American Dream. University of Chicago Press.
Henager, Robin, and Melissa J. Wilmarth. 2018. “The Relationship Between Student Loan Debt
and Financial Wellness.” Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal 46 (4): 381–
95. https://doi.org/10.1111/fcsr.12263.
Hillman, Nicholas W. 2015. “Borrowing and Repaying Federal Student Loans.” Journal of
Student Financial Aid 45 (3): 35–48.
Houle, Jason N., and Lawrence Berger. 2015. “Is Student Loan Debt Discouraging
Homeownership among Young Adults?” Social Service Review 89 (4): 589–621.
https://doi.org/10.1086/684587.
Houle, Jason N., and Cody Warner. 2017. “Into the Red and Back to the Nest? Student Debt,
College Completion, and Returning to the Parental Home among Young Adults.”
Sociology of Education 90 (1): 89–108. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038040716685873.
Jackson, Brandon A., and John R. Reynolds. 2013. “The Price of Opportunity: Race, Student
Loan Debt, and College Achievement.” Sociological Inquiry 83 (3): 335–68.
https://doi.org/10.1111/soin.12012.
Lat, David. 2017. “Stats Of The Week: The Great Associate Pay Raise Of 2016 | Above the
Law.” 2017. https://abovethelaw.com/2017/08/stats-of-the-week-the-great-associate-payraise-of-2016/.
Luker, Kristin. 2008. Salsa Dancing into the Social Sciences. Harvard University Press.

32

Mazelis, Joan Maya, and Arielle Kuperberg. 2019. “Student Loan Debt, Family Support, and
Reciprocity in the Transition to Adulthood.” presented at the American Sociological
Association, New York, August.
Mezza, Alvaro, Daniel Ringo, Shane Sherlund, and Kamila Sommer. 2019. “Student Loans and
Homeownership.” Journal of Labor Economics, May. https://doi.org/10.1086/704609.
Min, Stella, and Miles G. Taylor. 2018. “Racial and Ethnic Variation in the Relationship
Between Student Loan Debt and the Transition to First Birth.” Demography 55 (1): 165–
88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-017-0643-6.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2018. “Trends in Student Loan Debt for Graduate
School Completers.” National Center for Education Statistics. 2018.
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_tub.asp.
Nau, Michael, Rachel E. Dwyer, and Randy Hodson. 2015. “Can’t Afford a Baby? Debt and
Young Americans.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 42 (December): 114–
22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2015.05.003.
Pugh, Allison J. 2013. “What Good Are Interviews for Thinking about Culture? Demystifying
Interpretive Analysis.” American Journal of Cultural Sociology 1 (1): 42–68.
https://doi.org/10.1057/ajcs.2012.4.
Rivera, Lauren A. 2016. Pedigree: How Elite Students Get Elite Jobs. Princeton University
Press.
SallieMae. 2019. “How America Pays for College 2019.” Sallie Mae. 2019.
https://www.salliemae.com/about/leading-research/how-america-pays-for-college/.
Sieg, Holger, and Yu Wang. 2018. “The Impact of Student Debt on Education, Career, and
Marriage Choices of Female Lawyers.” European Economic Review, Gender Differences
in the Labor Market, 109 (October): 124–47.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2017.05.009.
Tevington, Patricia, Laura Napolitano, and Frank F. Furstenberg. 2017. “Financing Children’s
Futures: Economic Strategies for Postsecondary Education Among Middle-Income
Families.” Sociological Forum 32 (4): 726–47. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12373.
Velez, Erin, Melissa Cominole, and Alexander Bentz. 2019. “Debt Burden after College: The
Effect of Student Loan Debt on Graduates’ Employment, Additional Schooling, Family

33

Formation, and Home Ownership.” Education Economics 27 (2): 186–206.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09645292.2018.1541167.
Walsemann, Katrina M., Jennifer A. Ailshire, and Gilbert C. Gee. 2016. “Student Loans and
Racial Disparities in Self-Reported Sleep Duration: Evidence from a Nationally
Representative Sample of US Young Adults.” J Epidemiol Community Health 70 (1): 42–
48. https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2015-205583.
Walsemann, Katrina M., Gilbert C. Gee, and Danielle Gentile. 2015. “Sick of Our Loans:
Student Borrowing and the Mental Health of Young Adults in the United States.” Social
Science & Medicine 124 (January): 85–93.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.11.027.
Wherry, Frederick F, Kristin S Seefeldt, and Anthony S Alvarez. 2019. “To Lend or Not to Lend
to Friends and Kin: Awkwardness, Obfuscation, and Negative Reciprocity.” Social
Forces, February. https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/soy127.
Zaloom, Caitlin. 2019. Indebted: How Families Make College Work at Any Cost. Princeton
University Press.
Zelizer, Viviana A. 2005. The Purchase of Intimacy. Princeton University Press.
———. 2012. “How I Became a Relational Economic Sociologist and What Does That Mean?”
Politics & Society 40 (2): 145–74. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032329212441591.
Zelizer, Viviana A., Nina Bandelj, and Frederick F Wherry. 2012. “Talking about Relational
Work with Viviana Zelizer.” Orgtheory.Net (blog). September 6, 2012.
https://orgtheory.wordpress.com/2012/09/06/talking-about-relational-work-with-vivianazelizer/.
Zerquera, Desiree D., Brian L. McGowan, and Tomika L. Ferguson. 2016. “Yes, No, Maybe So:
College Students’ Attitudes Regarding Debt.” Journal of College Student Development
57 (5): 609–13. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2016.0067.

34

