Arab World English Journal (January 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.228

Theses ID 228

Pp. 1-18

Wide Sargasso Sea: Antoinette’s Living Spaces as a Case Study

Fann Oudah Aljohani
Northern Border University, Arar, Saudi Arabia
Author: Fann Oudah Aljohani
Thesis Title: Wide Sargasso Sea: Antoinette’s Living Spaces as a Case Study
Subject/major: Literature
Institution: Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, College of Languages and
Translation, Saudi Arabia.
Degree: MA in Literature
Year of award: 2016
Supervisor: Dr. Farhadiba Hashmatullah Khan
Keywords: Spaces, Schizophrenic behavior, Madness, Identity, Black, White
Abstract:
This study explores the identity formation and mobility of the role of Antoinette in the novel "Wide
Sargasso Sea" from the perspective of the cultural and human geography. In general, it is a space
and place study. The thesis suggests that, Antoinette has some conditions and circumstances that
she developed in an autonomic manner with different experiences in order to navigate and
recognize the dangerous and safe spaces around her. Wide Sargasso Sea, by Jean Rhys, elaborates a
self-sacrifice experience that the protagonist went through in her search for identity, which she lost
due to the circumstances around her. In this research, a psychological analysis of Antoinette's
personality will be taken, moreover; an attempt is made to find out the reasons for her
schizophrenic behavior. The research focuses on Antoinette's shattered identity and the specters she
faced in her life, which ultimately played a huge role in her madness. Also, the visible opposite
aspects of black/white, rationality/unconsciousness, male/female, and sanity/madness are conceived
by her conscious mind, and it causes the frantic thoughts of insanity, womanhood, and blackness.
Also, it sheds light on Antoinette's journey in life to figure out where she belongs and her struggle
in this search. Antoinette's personality and identity crisis as a Creole girl will be discussed in depth.
There are different areas that are explored in this paper; such as the interpretation of how the
surrounding spaces affect Antoinette and the reasons behind the absence of a loving mother in Wide
Sargasso Sea. Furthermore, Rochester's character is also examined to find out how the masculine
space differs from feminine space, and to what extent Mr. Rochester's cruelty harms Antoinette.
Another important thing that is discussed in the paper is the effect of family relationships on a
person's identity, and how it becomes a reason of mental disorder.
Cite as: Aljohani, F. O. (2016). Wide Sargasso Sea: Antoinette’s Living Spaces as a Case Study.
Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, College of Languages and Translation, Saudi
Arabia. (Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab World English Journal (ID Number: 228. January
2019, 1-18. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.228
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

Aljohani 1

Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
College of Languages and Translation
Department of English Language and Literature

Wide Sargasso Sea: Antoinette’s Living Spaces as a Case Study
By
Fann Oudah Aljohani

A Non-thesis Paper Submitted to the Department of English
at the College of Languages and Translation in partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
for the Degree of Master of Arts in Literature

Advisor
Dr. Farhadiba Hashmatullah Khan

A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master’s Degree in
English Literature.
I declare that this dissertation is my own work and that where thematerial is obtained from
published or unpublished works, this has been fully acknowledged in the references.

December 2016

Aljohani 2

22-03-1438
21-Dec-2016
This non-thesis research paper entitled:
Wide Sargasso Sea: Antoinette's Living Spaces as a Case Study
Written by Fann Oudah Aljohani
Has been approved for the Department of English Language and its Literature

Dr. Farhadiba Hashmatullah Khan (Supervisor)
Dr. Naela Hamed Danish (Examiner)
Dr. Samah Thabet (Examiner)

21-Dec-2016
The final copy of this paper has been examined by the signatories, and we find that both
the content and the form meet the acceptable presentation standards of scholarly work
in the above mentioned discipline.

Aljohani 3

Abstract
This study explores the identity formation and mobility of the role of Antoinette in the novel
"Wide Sargasso Sea" from the perspective of the cultural and human geography. In general, it
is a space and place study. The thesis suggests that, Antoinette has some conditions and
circumstances that she developed in an autonomic manner with different experiences in order
to navigate and recognize the dangerous and safe spaces around her. Wide Sargasso Sea, by
Jean Rhys, elaborates a self-sacrifice experience that the protagonist went through in her
search for identity, which she lost due to the circumstances around her. In this research, a
psychological analysis of Antoinette's personality will be taken, moreover; an attempt is
made to find out the reasons for her schizophrenic behavior. The research focuses on
Antoinette's shattered identity and the specters she faced in her life, which ultimately played a
huge role in her madness. Also, the visible opposite aspects of black/white,
rationality/unconsciousness, male/female, and sanity/madness are conceived by her conscious
mind, and it causes the frantic thoughts of insanity, womanhood, and blackness. Also, it
sheds light on Antoinette's journey in life to figure out where she belongs and her struggle in
this search. Antoinette's personality and identity crisis as a Creole girl will be discussed in
depth. There are different areas that are explored in this paper; such as the interpretation of
how the surrounding spaces affect Antoinette and the reasons behind the absence of a loving
mother in Wide Sargasso Sea. Furthermore, Rochester's character is also examined to find out
how the masculine space differs from feminine space, and to what extent Mr. Rochester's
cruelty harms Antoinette. Another important thing that is discussed in the paper is the effect
of family relationships on a person's identity, and how it becomes a reason of mental
disorder.
Key words: Spaces, Schizophrenic behavior, Madness, Identity, Black, White.

Aljohani 4

Introduction
Wide Sargasso Sea (1966) is a novel by Jean Rhys. It is written in postcolonial era and is
a prequel to a famous novel "Jane Eyre" (1847) by Charlotte Brontë. The novel is focused on
the reinvention of Rochester's wife Bertha Mason's identity. The motivation to write the
novel was to clear some misrepresentations in the novel as Rhys thought Bronte showed a
wrong image of both Creole women and of West Indies. In fact, Rhys wanted to write the
story of the Creole girls lost to England, the young Creole women who were married off to
Europeans, torn from the people and the land they loved, and reduced to mere property. In
1966, Rhys wrote to a friend, Diana Athill, regarding this portrayal of the world Bronte, in
her novel, presents: “Of course Charlotte Bronte makes her own world, of course, she
convinces you, and that makes the poor Creole lunatic all the more dreadful. I remember
being quite shocked, and when I re-read [Jane Eyre] rather annoyed. “That’s only one sidethe English side” sort of thing” (296).
The novel attempts to create a history of Antoinette, showing the causes for her crazy
behavior that is presented in Jane Eyre. The novel claims subjectivity and voice for the
character in order to address the assumptions that were made in the previously written text.
Rhys showed the tragic condition of Bertha to understand the reasons behind Antoinette’s
anguish.
The novel is about a number of significant areas of discussion like feminism, race, gender
and post-colonialism. The central focus is the female character, with a shattered psychology
which is a consequence of having lost her identity and life because of the circumstances
around her. According to Olaussen, the main theme of the novel is “The fate of a woman,
belonging to a group, which no longer has a place” (66). The sufferings of Antoinette in the
novel are great and are the reason why she lost her identity in the two worlds; she is a Creole,
a person of European descent born in the Caribbean.
In the whole novel, Antoinette’s relationships with other people are marked by exclusion,
alienation, and brutality. As a result, she undergoes an inconsistent search for peace in the
surrounding circumstances. As a young girl, she tried her best to find peace under the care of
her mother, but the rejection, especially from the person closest to her, made her a silent and
lonely person. Moreover, she saw her home burned to the ground by a group of previously

Aljohani 5

disenfranchised slaves and witnessed her mother going crazy as a consequence. Antoinette,
failed to find a safe haven to protect her from the discrimination she faced in her life. She was
excluded and treated as an outsider, which made her choose the wrong man to spend the rest
of her life with. She married an English man, a complete stranger, who married her only for
financial advantage. From initial conditions like facing troubles at her honeymoon to later
being locked by her husband in the attic affected her mental and emotional health, which
leaves suicide as her only escape.
Surrounded by such devastated spaces in her life Antoinette fights to be safe, however; all
her attempts fail and eventually, she falls apart. In this research, I have divided her
surrounding spaces into two spaces: outside space and inside space. The outside space
includes her sufferings with the outside world; the emancipation act and its effect on her and
her family, the rage of the blacks which leads them to burn Antoinette's house, her friendship
with Tia and her rejection of Antoinette, and finally, the English law that gave the husband
the right to take all the properties of his wife. The inside space, on the other hand, contains
the inside world (home): a child who grew up without a loving mother, the injustice of a
mother preferring one child over another, and finally, a relative who tells a previous history
of mental illness to her husband. These were the spaces that affected her mental and physical
health and eventually led to her madness.
Moreover, the novel is an excellent reflection of a hybrid person, "Antoinette" who is of
European descent but born in the Caribbean. In her community, she is considered neither
black nor white, she is a stranger, who has no right to live in the black society and is not even
recognized as a white European. In fact, she is in-between two worlds and two cultures which
culminated in the struggle of all her life. Homi Bhabha discusses this in-between situation,
“We find ourselves in the moment of transit where space and time cross to produce complex
figures of difference and identity, past and present, inside and outside, inclusion and
exclusion” (Bhabha 1). This kind of living, in-between multiple identities, leads to a form of
hybridity, an ambivalent state of mind where there is no longer a particular place or home,
but mixed feelings over the fact that nothing is stable anymore. This hybridity in the novel
makes it the most problematic novel by Jean Rhys. It unfolds intense passions and fears; it
also reveals the psychological complications of the author. In fact, it shows the inner,
disturbing conflicts of the author which is extended in all of her heroines i.e. Julia Martin,
Anna Morgan, and Sasha Jansen. Antoinette, as the protagonist of this novel, has some
similarities with Rhys; they both face racial discrimination based on their mixed race.

Aljohani 6

Antoinette is discriminated against because her mother is of Martinique ethnicity, and her
father was a white slave-owning Englishman. Rhys, on the other hand, was born to a Welsh
father and a Creole mother, a white native of the West Indies. The author’s experiences with
discrimination are discussed in her short story "The Day They Burned the Books," in which
she states, “My relations with the few ‘real' English boys and girls I had met were awkward. I
had discovered that if I called myself English they would snub me haughtily: ‘You're not
English; you're a horrid colonial” (39). It is exactly this discrimination that resulted in
Antoinette's mental conflict and personality split, which she faces and attempts to solve.
Thus, the parallels between the author and the protagonist are quite detailed in the novel
which include: a troubled childhood, spatial sensitivity, and a struggle to search for their
identity in the society. The haunting memories of these past experiences disturb the mental
health of the protagonist.
The novel is mainly divided into three main sections that are narrated by Antoinette
(twice) and Rochester. These parts, with two different narrators, give the protagonists the
chance to express their own views and ideas in the novel. Consequently, the facts are
presented from both perspectives.
Nevertheless, much space in the novel is given to the negative characters which show
Rochester also had complications in his personality. Rochester's behavior and attitudes all
along with other complications made him an interesting character. This can be seen through
his unsent letters to his father. Likewise, his description of his wife at the very beginning of
their marriage reflects his complex character:
She never blinks at all, it seems to me. Long, sad, dark alien eyes. Creole of pure
English descent she maybe, but they are not English or European either. And when
did I begin to notice all this about my wife Antoinette? After we left Spanish Town, I
suppose. Or did I notice it before and refuse to admit what I saw? Not that I had much
time to notice anything. I was married a month after I arrived in Jamaica and for
nearly three weeks of that time I was in bed with fever. (Rhys 61).
Rochester's description of his wife makes us, as readers, not only suspect his love for her,
but also notice his uncertainty, from the beginning of their marriage, about her origin “Creole
of pure English descent she maybe, but…” (Rhys 61). In addition to this, the author is
successful in portraying the view that both of the genders were equally suppressed. On one
hand, we have Antoinette, who tired of enduring racial discrimination, ends up marrying a

Aljohani 7

total stranger just to escape from what she faced early in her life. On the other hand, we have
Rochester, who was forced into this marriage by his father in order to own a fortune as
dowry.
In the novel, there are conflicts shown between men and women, whites and blacks, and
colonized and colonists. The reasons behind them are traced to the conflict of the two main
opposite forces: emotion and reason. Sentimentality and rationality have always been trying
to knock each other down but without result. These forces are shown in the context of
different images and themes in the novel, so the problems of gender suppression also show
other abstract problems. Reason and emotion are on the battle lines that clash with the brain
of Antoinette, so the importance of outer stress indicates the impact on the mental condition
of the protagonist. Antoinette carries two contrasting worlds and aspects in her personality;
more precisely, it can be said that her mind and thoughts are stuck between the two opposite
worlds, and she belongs to neither of them completely.
It was a song about a white cockroach. That’s me. That’s what they call all of us who
were here before their own people in Africa sold them to the slave traders. And I have
heard English women call us white niggers. So between you I often wonder who I am
and where is my country and where do I belong and why was I ever born at all. (Rhys
93)
Her response to what Amelie sang in front of Rochester was severe. Consequently,
Antoinette is stuck in her memories, and she keeps recalling all the bad things that happened
to her. Even when she is trying her best to find a suitable place in either of the cultures, she is
rejected by both these worlds, and realizes that she actually belongs nowhere. This is because
her personality imbibed a mixture of ideas; about the blacks and their life and her imaginary
ideas about the whites. However, these ideas are not recognized by any of the nations she was
willing to fit in.
In fact, the title of the novel suggests the situation of the protagonist, i.e. drowning in the
sea of identity and not being able to reach either of the shores on the two sides of the sea
(Shapiro 686). The Sargasso Sea, present between the Europe and the Caribbean, is too wide
for the protagonist to cross, so she remains stuck in the middle, just as a ship gets stuck in the
shallow water. In the novel, much attention is given to the eternal issues of gender, race, and
colonial politics. In this research, focus is given to the psychological relevance of these
matters, including the reasons behind the protagonist's torments. However, to bring out the
miseries and sufferings of Antoinette, a contrast is made with the character of Rochester, who

Aljohani 8

also had factors that complicated many things for him and became the reasons for his
paranoid behavior.
Rhys voices up for the Creole woman in Wide Sargasso Sea, and actually creolizes Jane
Eyre and tells Jane's story from a different racial context. Rhys provides a comprehensive
background to Antoinette's portrayal as the protagonist of the novel having a history and a
voice. The story of Wide Sargasso Sea interprets the character of Bertha from Jane Eyre with
a different lens.
The narration of the protagonist's childhood experiences, as well as the experience of her
unhappy marriage with Rochester, give an explanation of her final act of rebellion in the
novel Jane Eyre. Wide Sargasso Sea didn't simply negate Jane Eyre, but it also overly
directed the reader's mind to the present text in every scene and event. The discriminations,
rejection, and struggle with identity that Antoinette faces in her life resulted in the production
of the isolated and raving mad woman called Bertha in Jane Eyre.

Aljohani 9

Identity Crisis of the Creole Woman
In the first part of the novel, Antoinette thinks of the idea of having a socially acceptable
personality and identity as she put her brother into bed. She is plagued with the desire to
create her own personality and identity in the face of racial and cultural rejection. As a Creole
lady residing in the English community of Jamaica, she learns English quickly, but the
Caribbean community considers her a foreigner. She faces disgrace from both societies and is
rejected by both cultures. According to Settineri, there is social ostracism, negative verbal
labeling, and many restrictions by law for Creole women (49). Furthermore, the society is
dominated by male colonizers who don’t recognize the identity of Creole women. This
creates a complete class of people that is superior but is also a threat to cultural norms of
gender and race as posed by individuals like Antoinette who don’t have any defined identity.
Overall, Rhys’s portrayal of the protagonist is the classic way of showing how a woman
descends into madness to escape a male dominated society. Therefore, the novel is normally
defined as a reconceptualization of every notion of identity. There is a conversation between
Antoinette and Rochester where she said, “So between you, I often wonder who I am and
where is my country and where do I belong and why was I ever born at all” (Rhys 93). She
hereby in the conversation shows the uncertainty of the cultural identity and the feeling of
being a stranger or foreigner. According to Loomba, this is the feeling that is generally felt by
West Indians (195). Hence, the novel gives the reader an understanding of the complex and
mostly conflicting characters that are imposed on the Creoles and especially the Creole
women by the communities where they belong and the resulting split personality. In the
novel, there is a great male imperialist struggling to remove all the areas of identity in
Antoinette, but the author created a new idea of self-realization in the protagonist as she
accepts her complex personality.
According to Sylive Maurel's article, “Across the ‘Wide Sargasso Sea’: Jean Rhys’s
Revision of Charlotte Brontë’s Eurocentric Gothic”, Antoinette is classified as a Creole. Her
classification as a mixed person of European white and Caribbean black race shows a major
aspect of her personality as she gets a complex social idea and impact with regards to her
identity. Antoinette lives with her family in a black community in Jamaica, but they have
faced racial discrimination and are disgraced by the black people who are in the majority

Aljohani 10

after Britain’s Act of Emancipation gave freedom to the colonial slaves. The Cosways
previously depended on the labor of slaves, and it was a source of wealth that vanished after
the slaves were freed. Their reputation vanished, and the social status also was affected
negatively, which created the main problem of the racial discrimination and revenge.
Antoinette faced a number of incidents of violence and black slander against the family,
where they were called “white niggers and white cockroaches” by the black mobs that burned
the estate at Coulibri. The protagonist has been rejected by the culture in which she was
raised, and she started suspecting her right to claim the island that was the only home she
ever had and was the only identity she had. She also conveyed these feelings of desperation
and doubts to Rochester: “I loved [the island] because I had nothing else to love, but it is as
indifferent as this God you call on so often” (Rhys 78).
This is the way in which the Creole experience rejection by the black community where
they belong, and are treated as foreigners by the white European part of the community,
which they are also part of. Moreover, the European people have the wealth and political
power over the Caribbean society. The white colonizers are not able to comprehend the
culture and way of life of Creoles, and a discriminated stereotype was created for the people
with mixed racial identity. They are treated inferiorly than other people of pure race on both
sides. An instance of this extreme culture limitation between the Creole and whites is present
in their attitude toward the native black people on the island. For example, Rochester’s
response of anger at the time of Antoinette’s display of physical affection for the black
people like Christophine shows the persuasive European brain of seeing these races as just
objects and not like human beings. Rochester narrates this part: “Why do you hug and kiss
Christophine?” I'd say, “Why not?”. “I wouldn’t hug and kiss them.” I'd say, I couldn’t.” At
this, she'd laugh for a long time and never tell me why she laughed” (Rhys 83).
Antoinette was raised like a number of black people, and she regards Christophine as a
member of her family. It is very obvious for her to kiss and hug her with no regards to her
race. At the end, she was imprisoned in the dark at Thornfield hall, and during this time, she
received the effects of her island, and Christophine's preaching with feminist ideas provided
her the much needed strength. It is evident in Christophine’s words to her: “Have spunks and
do battle for yourself” (Rhys 105). According to Sakina Elouardi, Christophine was a model
and idol of female independence and freedom for Antoinette as she was self-sufficient and
devoted to her independent self, which gave her a deep sense of self-reliance (32). Social

Aljohani 11

discrimination like this also makes Antoinette feel rejected by the white people and hence
stopped her from feeling like a part of that race. When she is rejected as a Creole, from the
white and black colonizers, she faces a complex realization of her personality that impacts
her own sense of building her personality. An extreme social influence can be seen in
Antoinette’s first words from her narrative “They Say,” which shows the society and her lack
of self can grow with no independence in society’s idea of Creole people.
The protagonist is highly desperate and upset. To get socially accepted, she went from
trying to fit in the society in the role of a Caribbean native and then as an English white girl.
She also adapts the characters of the people she has a relationship with, like her black friend,
Tia, where she adopted different black characteristics during the friendship. She is called a
“white nigger,” which makes her mother realize how she is constantly trying to associate with
the whites. This leads to her mother's engagement to a white man known as Mr. Mason.
When Mr. Mason becomes her stepfather, Antoinette tries to reclaim her black identity and
calls him the white puppy, which is a term that black slaves of Jamaican society use to refer
to their masters. This attempt shows Antoinette’s desire to be recognized as black. It also
shows the idea of bondage under the white patriarchal system as symbolized by the character
of Mr. Mason. This is not the only incident where Antoinette tries to reclaim other identity.
Like her mother, Antoinette tries to claim a white identity but fails as she never gains the
acceptance of the white society.
When she gets married to a white Englishman, Mr. Rochester, she starts feeling love
towards him. She acquires more and more English characteristics like her dependence on men
and her reluctance to leave Mr. Rochester as she says: “But I cannot go. He is my husband
after all” (Rhys 99). Kaitlin Gangl illustrates Antoinette’s dependence on Rochester:
“Antoinette is financially, physically, and emotionally dependent on Rochester and she is
somewhat insecure with this dependence because since he provides it, he also has the power
to take it away” (Gangl 60). Antoinette also reveals her deep love and desire for Rochester to
Christophine, and she wanted him to accept her. This desire made her ask her black nurse to
make her wish come true even with the help of an Obeah magic potion.
Antoinette wanted to use the magic to complete her identity with England and whiteness.
In fact, she wanted to earn the identity this way by making her husband desire her. However,
the magic failed at creating the desired effects, so Antoinette was left with no other option

Aljohani 12

than recognizing her non-blackness and non-whiteness. She figured out that she has to accept
her personality that doesn’t belong to either world she knows.
According to Tennholt, the community affects the development of the protagonist’s
identity and personality, and that is in Rochester’s cruel treatment of Antoinette. All he
wanted was control over her. When Rochester reached Jamaica, he found the island to be a
beautiful but alien place, and thus does he describe Antoinette. However, this creates a
feeling of uneasiness in him. He gets the idea of powerlessness in an alien land that hurts his
dominant white man’s feelings (16). So, he feels threatened by the wild nature of the place
and also by Antoinette’s nature and thus wants to control them. He gets a reminder that white
men are not the ultimate masters of the world, and that is why he wants to embody them in a
form that he can easily handle. He wants to make Antoinette resemble an English woman and
hides her Creole personality by giving her a new name, Bertha. In this way, Rochester gives
himself the right to remove her identity, and this is the first spark that leads to her
schizophrenic behavior.
Rochester wants to have control over her and calls her a ghost, a doll, a witch, hysteric,
and temptress, etc. He does this to overcome his own insecurities, as he feels threatened by
the unfamiliar culture of the Caribbean. Antoinette resists British society’s attempt to remove
her identity as a Creole woman and finally finds a safe sense of self at the end of the story.
She frees herself from the limiting labels and the rejection of society that she has had to deal
with all her life. The author used a number of images in the story to show the protagonist’s
internal efforts and changes, which help her to realize her own self with no regard to gender
and cultural stereotypes. For instance, the looking glass motif is the most important motif of
all in the novel. This motif can be seen at different points in the novel and shows different
situations of the protagonist and her family. As a matter of fact, Antoinette inherited from her
mother the habit of looking in the mirror. She noticed her mother look to the looking glass
every now and then. She narrates this in the first part: “But my mother still planned and
hoped perhaps she had to hope every time she passed a looking glass” (Rhys 16). Antoinette,
also, misses this looking glass in her dormitory. “We have no looking-glass in the dormitory,
once I saw the new young nun from Ireland looking at herself in a cask of water” (Rhys 50).
Finally, in the cold attic, she longs to see how she looks “There is no looking glass here and I
don’t know what I am like now.” (Rhys 162).

Aljohani 13

Women were successfully subjugated by the European patriarchal society by controlling
the way in which they were viewed. This also helped to maintain the status quo. Similar idea
is used in showing the image of Annette by Rhys. She was also a Creole, and despite the
continuous attempts to abide by the standards of white society, she became enslaved to the
system of white supremacy and patriarchy. In the start, as stated by Phelps regarding
Antoinette and the position of her family, “This label of her family being crazy, that is
justified by her mother's actions, eventually destroys the only happiness Antoinette obtains in
her life, her marriage” (7). However, Antoinette describes her mother as a person who hopes
and plans to have a better life, and this is emphasized when Annette sees a looking glass as it
shows the norm of the society in which she must depend on men for her identity and
personality recognition. Annette keeps on seeking a mirror that can decide her secure future,
and she tries to reintegrate into the society with the help of marriage to an English man, Mr.
Mason. Annette had a split personality, and with the reflection of the mirror, she could realize
what her real persona was like.
Annette behaved quite relentlessly with her daughter, and when Antoinette grew older
and faced the same system, she realized the catastrophe that her mother underwent. She
encounters the same restrictions and cruel system of patriarchy; in particular, her experience
of an arranged marriage and the loss of her inheritance traumatizes her. Nonetheless, unlike
her mother, she is brave and deals with the issue with the intent to solve the enigma of her
personality. She doesn’t just give in to what society wants to impose on her. This becomes a
threat to her husband, who views her as totally alien and aggravates her hostility by imposing
a completely opposite persona on her. He wants her to reside in a world which was never
hers, a society that always pushes her away.
In a scene that again involves a mirror, Antoinette’s feelings about her own image and
rejection by society are displayed. This scene shows Antoinette wandering along the corridor
of the hall in Thornfield, and she comes across a mirror in which she finds her reflection as
an alien to her. She narrates it to be a ghost that looks nothing like her. “The ghost, the
woman with the streaming hair. She was surrounded by a gilt frame but I knew her.” (Rhys
169). She was rumored to have haunted the mansion. Nevertheless, the reflection showed
how her identity was tarnished by the patriarchal oppression. This is the point where she is
negating her apparent personality and is ready to accept what she really is. Antoinette claims
that she is familiar with the woman in the mirror who has been labeled by the society, and

Aljohani 14

this situation is very similar to how her mother was labeled by the society. This is because the
mirror in the novel is symbolic of how a man defines a woman's identity. The protagonist
realizes that she has been labeled and branded by the dominant men in her life around her,
Richard Mason first and then Rochester. Rochester labeled Antoinette as a lunatic just like
Mason had labeled her mother. Her mother accepted this label and tried her best all her life to
be the person she never was. Antoinette, on the other hand, tried to resist and didn’t believe in
the label that she was given. She rejected it and called Christophine for help. She then
realized her own character with the failed attempts to get what never belonged to her. Her
own personality and identity are shaped by those incidents, and she realizes for the first time
that this is not the life she wanted to live. She has to live with a false identity when she is
actually unique in her own way, whether society accepted her or not. She destroys the control
that colonization, patriarchal society, and men around her had over her life and becomes a
real, free person.
Christophine tried to convince Rochester about the charm of Antoinette’s personality, and
she comments, “She is a Creole girl, and she has the sun in her” (Rhys 143). This association
of her character with the sun shows a deep link with the Caribbean atmosphere and associates
her charming personality with the unique colors of the island and its environment. In the
same way, the audience can see her strong recognition with the Caribbean culture with the
help of some symbols like the red dress and fire that had the fragrance of the native flora.
Antoinette found herself to have an association with this amazingly colored fabric. She feels
more alive while surrounded by these colors. On the other hand, in the cold attic, she feels
restless and almost dies because of the dark around her. In her letter to her stepbrother,
Richard, she writes: “Dear Richard please take me away from this place where I am dying
because it is so cold and dark.” (Rhys 164).
Furthermore, apart from her identity, another important thing for Antoinette is the heat
and beauty of fire which makes her recall something that she thinks she has to do and appeals
to her to act in a certain way that shows her real personality. These acts were performed in a
dream and when she woke up had a fire in them, which shows her own jumbled and complex
yet newly discovered personality. This fire was meant to burn the cardboard house that, for
her, is equal to Thornfield Hall. This is like some psychological trick that the society uses to
make the Creole lady realize that she has no real identity, and the cardboard house that is

Aljohani 15

burnt mirrors her resistance to the demand that she actually denies being the person everyone
thinks she is.
The author has developed the character of Antoinette in a way that persuades the audience
to be involved more deeply in her role and identity. Her unique personality gives her the label
of neither white nor black, and also, she cannot be recognized as colonized or colonizer. In
fact, the Creole woman is a blend of socially acquired characters that deny themselves and
have the feminist behavior that she felt in the character of Christophine. Spivak elaborates
Christophine's bravery in confronting Rochester: “Most important, it is Christophine alone
whom Rhys allows to offer a hard analysis of Rochester's action, to challenge him in a faceto-face encounter” (253). Most of the critics define the success of Antoinette at the end of the
story as her gaining the identity and personality that was snatched away by the cultural
imperialism. However, the writer didn’t show a character that gets self-realization from the
cruel society, but she discovers herself in the socially restrictive culture that is being imposed
on her.
In the third part of the novel, Antoinette associates her personality with her name as when
Rochester stopped calling her Antoinette. She felt like Antoinette, and her whole personality
was drifting away from a window, and all her charm vanished just like her name. Not only
did Antoinette’s personality vanish but also the things that were associated with her, like her
looking glass. This shows that names also matter, as they are part of a person’s personality,
and they give her/him an identity, and with the help of this name, a person gets recognition in
society. So, the cruelest thing on the part of Rochester was to steal away the name of
Antoinette. The colonial power of Mr. Rochester is also exhibited by him when he removes
his wife’s identity. As a colonizer, he attempts to impose a British personality and identity on
her. This is a patriarchal obsession of Mr. Rochester that makes him take these extreme steps
when he tries to convert her to a Victorian Englishwoman, which she hates as she could never
become one. She saw her mother trying to be an English and turn lunatic after failing at those
attempts. This makes her hate the English disposition that her husband wants her to adopt.
Even when Antoinette accepts her fate as inevitable and dies emotionally wrecked, she
never becomes Bertha or that perfect fake person her husband wants her to be. She keeps her
stance that Bertha is not her name, and she cannot be someone other than Antoinette. Giving
her another name means stealing her identity and integrity away. Rochester believes his
masculine power empowers him to control his wife and even change her name. He thinks he

Aljohani 16

can make her any person he wants and could actually create a woman that he could possess,
control, and dominate.
In fact, Antoinette is much like the “subaltern” in Spivak's famous essay, “Can the
Subaltern Speak?” She has a desire to protest against the society that has captivated her but at
the same time has devalued her own identity, and also against the husband who has driven
her to madness. Antoinette is silenced by these factors and seems to have given up in
submission. Her whole struggle is now inside her own head, and she keeps on struggling
against the impositions on her, making her another person rather than her real self. She
doesn’t want to be the English girl that her husband wants her to be; hence, she becomes just
like her mother.
Near the end of the second part when Antoinette is to leave for Britain with her husband,
Mr. Rochester realizes that she has given up her vitality and she is totally submissive. This, in
actuality, is the direct result of her getting continuous disappointments in her husband’s
treatment. Antoinette has become like a zombie, a person without a soul. According to some
critics, the lunatic women in Wide Sargasso Sea keep their madness hidden. The alienation
and destruction of her real identity have made her mad, and her husband accepts her madness
without ever trying to find out what the problem is. He even tries more to destroy her
emotionally by removing every part of her personality, and this is because he attempts to
control her mind and body (Nurminen 50). He has his own reasons for behaving like an
oppressive Englishman. He has faced fear and oppression all his life because of his father.
Later, Antoinette’s strange behavior makes Rochester feel like an alien who is afraid of this
hostile behavior. He tries to turn her into a more familiar person, one that he can deal with.
Antoinette is turned into an aphasic object when Rochester destroys the last spark of life in
her. He steals everything she owns, even the place where she feels happy, and she is left with
nothing of her identity. She says, “But I love this place and you have made it into a place I
hate. I used to think that if everything else went out of my life I would still have this, and now
you have spoilt it. It's just somewhere else where I have been unhappy” (Rhys 95).

Aljohani 17

Work Cited
Abbas, Rabea Tahir. “Humanities 201 July 8, 2014. Antoinette’s portrayal as a victim of silence
in Wide Sargasso Sea.”
Adams, Melanie J. “The Intoxicating Exotic: An Ecocritical Analysis of Jean Rhys’ Wide
Sargasso Sea” (2013).
Bhabha, Homi K. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge, 1994. Print.
Bülow, Monica. “The emotional dialogue between Wide Sargasso Sea and Jane Eyre: How hate
comes alive in Wide Sargasso Sea and love comes alive in Jane Eyre.” (2012).
Drake, Sandra. “Race and Caribbean Culture as Thematics of Liberation in Jean Rhys’s Wide
Sargasso Sea.” A Norton Critical Edition: Wide Sargasso Sea. Ed. Judith L. Raiskin. New
York: Norton, 1999. 193-206. Rpt. of “All That Foolishness/ All That Foolishness: Race
and Caribbean Culture as Thematics of Liberation in Jean Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea.”
Critica 2, no. 2 (Fall 1990): 193-206.
El Ouardi, Sakina. Impossibility of creating identity in Jane Rhys’ Wide Sargasso Sea” (2013).
Gangl, Kaitlin M. “Women Making Progress?: a Study of Wide Sargasso Sea as a Response to
Jane Eyre.” (2007).
Gilbert, Sandra, and Susan Gubar. “The Madwoman in the Attic”: “The Woman Writer and the
Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination.” 2nd Ed. New Haven: Yale U P, 2000.
Gilchrist, Jennifer. “Women, slavery, and the problem of freedom in Wide Sargasso Sea.”
Twentieth Century Literature 58.3 (2012): 462.
Gordon, April A. Transforming Capitalism and Patriarchy: Gender and Development in Africa.
Boulder, Col.: Lynne Rienner, 1996. Print
Günenç, Mesut. “Against society: women's language, body and madness in Wide Sargasso Sea
and Sula.” Journal of International Social Research 8.38 (2015): 208-214.
Hermansson, Anna. “The Concept of Pastoral in Wide Sargasso Sea: An analysis of identity,
displacement, return and escape in Wide Sargasso Sea by Jean Rhys.” (2013).
Hulme, Peter. “The locked heart: the creole family romance of Wide Sargasso Sea.” Colonial
discourse/postcolonial theory (1994): 72-88.
Jean Rhys, 'Letters 1931-66' ed. Francis Wyndham and Diana Melly, Penguin books, 1985.
Lee, Hsiao-chien. “And the Woman Is a Stranger”: The Double-Voiced Discourse in Jean Rhys's
Wide Sargasso Sea and Voyage in the Dark.” (1993).
Loomba, Ania. “Colonialism/Postcolonialism: The New Critical Idiom.” (2005).

Aljohani 18

Maurel, Sylvie.“Across the Wide Sargasso Sea': Jean Rhys's Revision of Charlotte Bronte's
Eurocentric Gothic.” COMMONWEALTH-MONT SAINT AIGNAN THEN DIJON24.2 (2002): 107-118.
Mezei, Kathy. "'And it Kept its Secret': Narration, Memory, and Madness in Jean Rhys' Wide
Sargasso Sea." Critique Summer (1987): 195- 209.
Nurminen, Laura. “Postcolonial Cultural Identity and the Caribbean White Creole in Jean Rhys’s
Wide Sargasso Sea and Phyllis Shand Allfrey’s The Orchid House.” (2012).
Olaussen, Maria. Jean Rhys's Construction of Blackness as Escape from White Femininity in
“Wide Sargasso Sea”. Ariel: A Review of International English Literature April 1993: 6582. Web.
Olaussen, Maria. Three Types of Feminist Criticism and Jean Rhys's Wide Sargasso Sea. Abo:
Institute of Women's Studies at Abo Akademi U, 1992. Web.
Phelps, Valarie L. “The Mother Daughter Bond and History in Wide Sargasso Sea.” (2011).
Postemsky, Diana. “Through the looking-glass: reading and reflecting from Wide Sargasso Sea to
Jane Eyre.” (2003).
Rhys, Jean. Wide Sargasso Sea. New York: Norton, 1992. Print.
Rhys, Jean. Tigers are Better-Looking. Harmodsworth: Penguin, 1972.
Said, Edward W. Culture and Imperialism. New York: Knopf, 1993. Print.
Sabri, Helena Ryan. “Conflicts in a Marriage: Antoinette and Mr. Rochester in Wide Sargasso
Sea.” (2011).
Settineri, Cecilia. “The Supernatural in Caribbean Literature: A Feminist Perspective. Jean Rhys
and Rosario Ferré.” (2013).
Shapiro, Arnold. “In Defense of Jane Eyre.” Studies in English Literature, 1500-1900 (1968):
681-698.

