"x"
"1" "R unning Head = PROFILING PUBLIC ATTENTION TO MASS SHOOTINGS"
"2" "Fighting  National Amnesia :   Profiling Public Attention to Mass Shootings  in T he United States *"
"3" "Miles Leland Selfa Chandler"
"4" "Skidmore College"
"5" "Word Count =  8, 796"
"6" "*Direct all inquiries to Miles Chandler, 815 N. Broadway, Saratoga Springs NY, 12866. Email:  mchandle@skidmore.edu .  Thanks to Professors  Andrew Lindner,  Amon Emeka ,   and  Catherine Berheide  for th eir assistance in this project ."
"7" "Fighting National Amnesia: Profiling Public Attention to Mass Shootings  in T he United States"
"8" "ABSTRACT"
"9" "This study aims to identify factors that shape public perception and emotional response to mass shootings in the United States. I suggest that  patterns of  media  coverage inform  public consciousness  and collective emotion . Newsworthiness and gatekeeping theories  assert that  s chool or prejudicial shootings  and those with more victims  are reported on  at higher rates.  Literature on racial and immigrant bias in media demonstrates  that non-white shooters al so generate more discourse. The directed  construction of shootings and the affective public responses they generate align well with the  concept of a  “moral panic.” Using  all valid cases from the  Mother Jones Mass  Shootings:1982-2019 dataset which align temporally with  Google Trends data, I analyze the volume and decay rate of search topics “mass shooting,” “gun control,” and “open carry,” following US  mass shootings from 2004-2019. Shootings with more victims predict   a  higher volume of searches for “mass shooting,” and shorter search periods for “gun control” and “open carry.” Shootings with educational and religious targets had no significant effects on search patterns. Workplace shootings result in longer search periods for “mass shooting,” and shorter periods for “gun control.” Non-white shooters generate shorter search decay for “open carry.” The results support   theories of  media gatekeeping ,  suggesting events with more casualties  generate  more  intense  public attention.  The consistent negative correlation between search volume and decay length suggests that sensational responses to shootings are not sustainable over long periods of time and prohibit pragmatic ally addressing mass shootings."
"10" "O ver the past thirty years, mass shootings have become a  fixture of public attention; a particular  trend in  violent crime that has come to define  American  public conscience as political assassinations did the 1960s, serial  killings  did the 1970 s, and racialized accounts of urban violence did in the 1980s.  In comparison to national homicide panics of the past ,  public outcry  following mass shootings  is relatively short-lived, and  efforts to address  the issue quickly  dissipate  after each new tragedy . Though this fact is disheartening, a ssuming that this mass amnesia is the product of generalized apathy is simplistic: it is hard to imagine  a society  in which people simply  do  not care about repeated random firearm massacres. Instead,  the way Americans react to  these events provoke s  several important sociological questions. Does the  gravity of a shooting a ffect public outcry? Which shootings receive the most prolonged attention?  When a shooting happens, d o people tend to respond with their heads or with their hearts? What are the  material  ramifications of these responses? These questions can be addressed through an application of media sociology, theories of social integration ,  and the social construction of knowledge."
"11" "Rationale"
"12" "Current  discourse on mass shootings is deeply emotional, political, and divisive. This has turned a  problem  that could be addressed like a public health crisis (as has happened in Australia and New Zealand,) into a cyclical zero-sum game. This project has t he potential to provide useful  details about mass shootings , not to mention a  much-needed  epistemological counterpoint to the myopic coverage the se crimes  typically receive . Clarifying the relationship between the particular attributes of a mass shooting and perpetrator, patterns of media-uptake and interest,  and public  response  will  provide insight into why some shootings receive prolonged attention, some are momentarily sensationalized, and others go almost unnoticed."
"13" "T his  study   unite s  several  bodies of theory on  mass shootings.  Media sociologists have theorized  the existence of gatekeeping and agenda-setting effects in the way stories are selected  and reported on,  based on perceived public interest. (Schildkraut, Elsass and Meredith 2018 ;   Silva and Capellan 2019 ;   Gruszczynski and Wagner 2017).   Other  research explores  moral panics   and  the relationship  between media coverage of  violent crime and public emotional response. ( Turchan, Zeoli and Kwiatkowski 2017 ;   Cohen 2011 ;   Wallace 2015).  This  research  implicates  patterns in public concern  surrounding mass shootings ,  and the deeply personal, emotional effects they generate .  Uniting the  literature on media  selection  effects and moral panics  is  the  theoretical goal  of this study."
"14" "The general research question \"What types of mass shootings result in the most public interest?” can be broken into three hypotheses .   More violent events are known to generate more public attention   and are more newsworthy.  Therefore , I hypothesize that the more  total victims  an event has , the more  Google search volume , and the shorter decay periods   it will  generate .   Shootings which target vulnerable populations will more likely incite highly emotional responses .  I hypothesize that events in schools or religious settings will generate a high volume , short duration  spike in Google searches .   Finally, w orkplace shootings, which are more common and less emotionally charged than school or religious shootings,  are not expected to  generate responses that are as sensational.  I hypothesize that workplace shootings will generate low-volume , sustained  Google searches."
"15" "THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK"
"16" "Mass shootings repeatedly demonstrate their ability to provoke short - term mass hysteria in the United States. The theoretical literature on moral panics is instructive in understanding the various actors at play in constructing  these  shootings as a form of social deviance which  can predictably illicit such responses . Theorist Stanley Cohen first applied the concept of moral panics to the study of deviance and the social construction of knowledge in his 1972 text  Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of the Mods and Rockers.  A moral panic is most succinctly defined as “a condition, episode, person, or group of persons which emerges to become defined as a threat to societal values and interests; its (the panic) nature is presented in a stylized and stereotypical fashion by the mass media…” (Cohen 1972:9). The coverage of mass shootings privileges those events with greater emotional charge—school shootings, prejudicial attacks, and shootings with more victims .  This is consistent with how moral panics  surrounding violent crime  tend to be constructed (Burns and Crawford 1999)."
"17" "A second element of the theory of moral panics focuses on the institutions that are responsible for constructing issues as particularly deleterious to society. Cohen (2011 :237 ) asserts that there are “agendas which lie behind the strategies and rhetoric of moral panics ,”  and that once an event or phenomenon  has the ingredients of a moral panic , primary definers such as politicians and the media use specific rhetorical tools  and practices   in its construction. Cohen’s theory  is impractically broad for empirical testing; it  aims to unveil the implicit reactionism which accompanies the moralizing (or more accurately, marking as immoral) of social phenomena. Examples of moral panics include such “crimes without victims” as homosexuality, pornography, drug use, and abortion, which captured public attention throughout the twentieth century ( Cohen 2011:238 ). While the conservative underpinnings of hysterias constructed  around these older topics are fairly evident, the proliferation of cases which currently qualify as  moral  panics has begun to obscure their ideological impetus.  Instead of forwarding an argument about the political ends  served by the moral panic of shootings , this project   explores the means—those “specific tools and practices” that have fixed firearm massacr es in public conscience—and their material ramifications."
"18" "BACKGROUND"
"19" "T he literature linking mass shootings, media  coverage,  and  collective  emotion  fall s i nto t wo  thematic categories.  The first  theme centers newsworthiness, and the patterns in media coverage that arbitrate how, and if the public learns about mass shootings. This primarily refers to media studies research on “agenda-setting,” and discusses gatekeeping and media distortion. This literature examines the effects of shooter’s race,  number of victims , and other descriptive characteristics of shootings on their media representation.  The  second   concerns the relationship between media reporting on mass shootings and public affective response. This group of literature is based in theories of morality and social integration and aims to gauge fear   and  defensiveness  following shootings."
"20" "Newsworthiness and Agenda Setting"
"21" "An essential first step in the process of understanding patterns of attention and response to mass shootings is characterizing which events the public is exposed to. In order to productively  conceptualize  the problem , one must first account for the particular selectivity with which the  conventional mass shooting is  defined. This   process is almost exclusively conducted through media coverage.   Two dynamics inform the ways in which media distributes information on mass shootings to the public .   Issue g atekeeping characterize s  the thresholds of topic coverage,  newsworthiness,  and what elements of a potential news story  are  likely to be picked up.  A genda  setting characterizes the flow of influence between the institutions of media and the  public and  help s  explain why the annals of mass media are invested in newsworthy topics, how these topics are established, and how they change. If theories of newsworthiness and gatekeeping explain the ‘what’ of coverage, the study of agenda setting provides a ‘why.’"
"22" "N ewsworthiness .   In the case of mass shootings, newsworthiness is defined by the gravity and  exceptionality  of a particular incident.  The blithe industry aphorism; “if it bleeds, it leads,”  (Maguire, Weatherby and Mathers 2002 :468 )  captures the  general way  newsworthiness is defined in crime reporting. More violent events, or those which do not fit the standard profile of a mass shooting   make for more compelling stories, which generate a wider readership for a news source. Generally speaking, the worse and more abnormal a crime, the better it is for business . ( Gruszczynski and Wagner 2017;   Schildkraut  et al.  2018 ;   Silva and Capellan 2019 ;   Vuori, Oksanen, and Räsänen 2013 )."
"23" "T he race of a  shooter   also affects the way that mass shootings are covered. It has been demonstrated that reporting on shootings with non-white perpetrators plays into pre-existing media troupes of otherness, and often conflates ethnic identity with immigrant status (Chuang 2012 ). Reporting on these  shootings is more likely to emphasize the race and class of the perpetrator than will coverage of shootings  carried out  by whites (Leavy and Maloney 2009). Reporting on race, ethnic background, and place of origin play into a post-9/11   discourse that pairs immigrant identity with perceived threat of terrorism  (Chuang and Roemer 2013).  Therefore, non-white shooters could be expected to result in more coverage   and generate strong emotional responses."
"24" "B ecause the public pays more attention to reporting on more violent events, media outlets are incentivized to play out the coverage on graver mass shootings . T hose  events involving   non- white shooters are more newsworthy because they deviate from the standard narrative, which centers a white, male shooter  (Schildkraut et al. 2018). A  fifty-year content analysis of New York Times reporting on mass shootings   corroborates the heightened newsworthiness of more atrocious or abnormal mass shootings  by demonstrating  that the number of casualties and the race of the shooter are significant predictors of coverage (Silva and Capellan 2019). By  selectively covering relatively more violent or abnormal shootings, news and media institutions distort public perceptions of the overall gravity and profile of mass shootings  (Park, Holody and Zhang 2012)."
"25" "A genda setting .   Conventionally, the flow of agenda influence has been seen as a unidirectional phenomenon;  what the  media  chooses to report on  bear s  strongly on public opinion, and consequently plays a  role in deciding the significance of social dysfunction  and the a genda of  change  (Weeks and Southwell 2010).  In addition to orienting a public’s moral center— directing  the perception that ‘something must be done’— some scholars argue that  medi a   can  unintentional ly  glorif y and perpetuate   deviance.  The literature on c opycat killings   argues that the high-profile, sensational nature of mass shooting reporting pushes potential shooters who feel they lack social recognition towards perpetrating copy-cat killings   (Lankford and Madfis 2018 ;  Meindl  and Ivy 2017) .   Perhaps unintentionally, the somewhat alarmist literature on copycat effects highlights the  complex symbiosis of incentives between the public and mass media, in which the public is influenced by media coverage just as public agenda influences what the media chooses to report on ."
"26" "Moral Panics and Public Affect"
"27" "To understand public response to sensationalized media events, I apply moral panic theory to organize several subsidiary theories on affective, emotional , and  ir rational  responses to mass  shootings. Moral panic theory posits that social deviance can be publicized in such a way that it incites a general feeling of panic and dis-ease in the normative public  (Cohen 2011).  This amplification of non-normative behaviors result s  in a generalized atmosphere of attack on a society’s  moral order . Mass shootings are constructed as an epidemic of moral dysfunction, rather than  a  problem that  could be addressed  through  public health,  gun control , or another concrete domain  (Duxbury, Frizzell and Lindsay 2018 ; Morin 2016) .   When applied to the topic of violent crime reporting on mass shootings, moral panic theory demonstrates  that media framing effects can result in the collective perception of  moral  crisis , and  that  these panics  have  negative effects on social integration  (Cohen 2011) ."
"28" "E motional responses .  Though a mass shooting can elicit any number of emotional responses from an individual, only a few of these result in quantifiable social effects. Fear ,  distrust , and defensiveness  rank highly among these.  Highly sensationalized mass shootings,  which tend to be  relatively   worse ,  can  create a fear of repeat events  and even generalized mistrust  of other people  ( Kaminski  et al.  2010 ;   Schildkraut, Elsass and Stafford 2015) . Fear following mass shootings leads to the perceived need for defense (Turchan et al. 2017;   Wallace 2015)."
"29" "Social integration  is a sociological concept that encapsulates the common conception of trust and mutual reliance that characterizes a ‘healthy public.’  Research conducted in the aftermath of the 2007 Jokela and 2008 Kauhajoki mass shootings in Finland gauges the  effects of mass shootings on perceptions of safety from collective violent crime ,  and community integration   (Vuori, Oksanen, and Räsänen 2013a;   Vuori, Oksanen, and Räsänen 2013b ) .  B oth the Finnish mass shootings  examined in these studies  resulted in generalized fear  of  repeated  tragedies  in the public, and a decline in  community trust, even long after the shootings took place  ( Hawdon, Oksanen and Räsänen 2012)."
"30" "Defensiveness is a natural emotional response to fear and distrust . Unlike in Finland,  t he idea of self-defense is integrally tied to  gun ownership in the United States  ( Kwon and Cabrera 2019).  When combined with the perception that the normative ‘order of law’ in society is declining, as is the case with mass shootings, this perceived need for self-protection paradoxically results in higher levels of gun purchase s . The pro-gun axiom that “the only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun,” (Turchan et al.  2017 : 380),  captures  this sentiment  all too well .  If  an  individual believes  moral order  is  in decline, the idea of a citizen enforcer is a n   attractive,  logical  way to keep the wolves from the door.  T he defensive response  incited by sensational coverage of shooting s  is therefore linked  to  perceived need for  firearm  ownersh ip. Interest in open-carry and handgun purchases  can be used to  operationalize  the  moral  response to mass shootings  (Turchan et al. 2017)."
"31" "Interest in gun ownership  is a quantifiable  expression of the United States’ narrative of self-defense and the everyman’s enforcement of the nation’s moral order.   Th e literature on moral panics and emotional responses to mass shootings  demonstrates  that  mass shootings   resul t  in lower social integration and  nationally increase a statistically  improbable  expectation that such an event  will  occur locally. For some, declining social trust and the perceived threat of a mass shooting are good enough rationale to purchase a weapon in self-defense. This paradoxically results in a positive correlation between the occurrence of well-covered mass shootings and rates of firearm purchase."
"32" "At the surface level, the manner in which the U.S. public responds to mass shootings is irrational, chaotic, and short lived.  Our   repeat ed  cycle of outcry and silence appears amnesic at  best and   apathetic at  worst. Upon closer inspection , a complex set of  selection  factors in the institutions of  news  media can be seen to warp the public perception of  these shootings.  Gatekeeping and newsworthiness effects tend to selectively cover   and amplify the affective content of relatively worse mass shootings. Agenda setting  theory shows  that  the predictable patronage of  trauma  ensures that the bounds of this  gatekeeping  do not change ;   n ews is ultimately a business and is equally reliant on and influential in public opinion. The disproportionate coverage of grislier mass sho otings propels this particular subset  of gun violence away from rational remediation and into the realm of moral panics; a zone of collective conscience governed by sensation and fear, instead of reason. In this way, mass shootings have mutated from a problem that might be addressed through material means (gun control, education, etc.),  in to a national anxiety complex ."
"33" "METHODS"
"34" "Population"
"35" "This study  analyzes existing   data , and its  unit of analysis is   U . S .   mass shootings.  The  independent variable s , which  are the characteristics of a mass shooting event, are   from  “US M ass Shootings, 1982-2019: Data f rom Mother Jones’s Investigation,” an online opensource database of mass shootings in the United States.  It bears noting that  Mother Jones is a   news nonprofit ,  with a  strong progressive lean . They publish a periodical, in addition to considerable online content.  T heir  mass shootings  database   is regularly update d,  and provides  the nominal (race of shooter,  location of event ,) and interva l  predictors  ( total victims , )   here  analyzed.  This database focuses on cataloguing  “indiscriminate rampages in public places resulting in four or more victims killed by the attacker” ( Mother  Jones 2019). It excludes shootings with more conventional criminal motivations, such as armed robbery, domestic disputes, or gang violence.  This reduces the case s in the database significantly   but  allows for the inclusion of more information about each case. Because this study aims to characterize those mass shootings which result in more public attention   and is less concerned with longitudinal trends in these crimes, this reduced , yet  in - depth data is adequate."
"36" "The outcome  variable  in this study  is public  affective attention to the  topic of mass shootings. I operationalize this concept using Google Trends search data for t hree  topics . I first analyze searches for “mass shooting” as a general measure of public awareness to each shooting.   Second, I attempt to account for the nation’s interest in resolving mass shootings by analyzing search patterns for “gun control.” Finally, following previous studies (Turchan et al.; Wallace 2015), that have used public interest in handgun purchase as a way to quantify defensiveness, I analyze search patterns for  “open-carry in the United States ”.  Because Google only displays search data from 2004 to the present, this dependent variable defines the population as all mass shootings that occurred between January 2004 and August 2019.  This  excludes 35  cases  of the 116 cases in the Mother Jones  database  for which there is not Google data, and leaves a  population of  81  shootings  ( N   =   81 ).  I downloaded  Csv files  with search data directly  from the Trends webpage .  For more information on Google Trends data, visit  ( https://trends.google.com/trends/?geo=US )."
"37" "Using online search activity to gauge public attention is a re latively new, but powerful method  ( Gruszczynski and Wagner 2017; Wallace 2015;   Weeks and Southwell 2010). Trends is a tool which Google uses to organize and present search volume to the public. Trends data is presented either as ‘search terms,’ which  gives  the volume for verbatim Google searches, or as ‘search topics,’ which creates a composite of twenty-five search terms which cluster around an  idea. I use ‘topics’ because they assess interest in a broad concept, rather than a specific phrase.   I only include Google searches from within the United States."
"38" "For a project of this scale, Google Search data provides adequate measures of public affective responses to mass shootings,  while capturing  a greater breadth of respondents than conventional  survey   data . Because online searches are voluntary and not prompted by the researcher,  a secondary analysis of Google Trends data  carr ies  virtually no sampling error or selection effects."
"39" "Measurement"
"40" "The predictors in this study are the location of a shooting and the total number of victims. Total victims is a measure of how many reported fatalities and injuries a shooting caused. As news reporting takes into consideration both deaths and injured victims,  the total number of victims is  a useful way to operationalize  how bad a mass shooting was . Each unit increase in total victims represents an additional death or injury that resulted from the shooting. Deaths and non-fatal injuries are weighted the same way."
"41" "Shootings that target vulnerable populations, such as religious groups or school children, are of special interest because they can be predicted to generate strong emotional responses and play into preexisting   moral panics , such as terrorism, discrimination, and child safety.  Workplace shootings represent a n opposite trend in coverage; while they comprise nearly thirty percent of the population  of shootings analyzed , they are rarely covered and occupy a small portion of the public moral agenda.  Using the nominal location variable from the Mother Jones data, two dummy variables are created for regression. In  the first dichotomous location variable,  shootings in places of worship  or schools receive a score of one and all others receive a zero . A second dummy variable  is used to operationalize workplace shootings. Workplace shootin gs receive a score of one  and  all other shootings receive a zero."
"42" "Previous research demonstrates that mass shootings perpetrated by racial minorities incite more complicated, intense responses. These events trigger discussion in the broader topics of race, immigration, and inequality generally in a way white-perpetrated shootings do not. Therefore, non-white perpetrated shootings are of greater interest to this study. Race is constructed as ’non-white,’ which is a binary dum my that codes non-white shooters  (the group highligh ted for observation) as a one,   and white shootings as a zero.  Though the racia l  composition of mass shooters is more varied than this binary, the functional perception of whiteness  as normal  and non-whiteness  as  ‘o ther ’   is the important concept to highlight."
"43" "Dependent  m easures.  As I am interested in characterizing  how media coverage affects the volume and  sustain of interest in an event, it will be useful to here introduce the measures for  these concepts .  Moral responses to mass shootings are based in intense emotion, which is less sustainable over long periods of time. The events that are more sensational and are covered more attentively can be expected to  incite  intense  but  short-lived discourse on mass shootings. Conversely, mass shootings which  do not meet the criteria for sensational  coverage do not aggravate a corresponding moral panic, and have  longer term, but  less  intense effects  on people’s interest in the issue. To operationalize these expected patterns, I  analyze the shape and volume of thirty days of search volume  beginning with  the day of each shooting event, to  assess  the  amount and duration of public interest in a shooting .  In all  cases ,  reporting and  search activity  di ssipated with in thirty days."
"44" "Search  v olume and  d ecay.  Rather than  an exact  count of all searches, Google provides a proportional scale of search volume within the designated time frame (in this case thirty days,) relative to the  modal  spike within that frame.  To roughly judge the rate of decay in volume, I take an average of the total search volume  percentages for the 30 days  following each shooting. A low monthly score captures responses typical of a sensational event. A sharp spike in search volume right after a shooting and comparatively low volume for the rest of the  thirty-day  period results in a low average monthly score.  Events that receive prolonged attention have higher proportional volume for more days in a month, which  results in a higher monthly average. In this way, the average d monthly proportions (AMP s ) of volume  for thirty days following a mas s shooting offers a measure of  decay rate.  The AMP s   measure  is an imperfect way to operationalize public interest through search volume. In cases with  consistently low  search volume, baseline variation appears much more pronounced because the normalizing effect of an early-month outlier is absent.  This can result in a high AMP and the illusion of long term sustained search volume. Conversely, some shootings generated a negligible amount of search interest, resulting in an AMP s  that looks similar to those generate d by sensational, short spikes."
"45" "To counter this,  I  analyze  the  volume  of each search term, per month, relative to the  all-time mode  for this term.  The  shooting event  with the lowest  search  volume receives a score of zero   and the highest day receives a  100.    In this way, the terms that receive the most aggregate attention  overall  ( “ gun control ” ),  do not  outweigh the data for less-searched terms ( “ mass shootings, ”  and  “ open carry. ” )  More importantly, this fixed scale also allows for intra-group comparison of h ow much online search activity each  shooting generated.  This is an approximate measure of the absolute search volume that a mass shooting generates.  F or each of the three mentioned search topics, the decay rate in public attention is measured using the  AMP s , and the amount of attention following each shooting is  given  as a proportion of the m odal event for the search topic. I require a consistent negative correlation between AMPs and volume if they are to  be considered a valid measure of sensational search patterns."
"46" "Analytic Strategy"
"47" "I  use Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression to test the relationship between total victims and Google search volume. The slope of this regression equation  approximates  how much more interest each additional casualty creates. The correlation coefficient measures the strength of this relationship.  OLS regression of workplace shootings on the AMPs and total volu me for the three search topics  is used to test the prediction that workplace shootings result in low volume, sustained searches.  S ignificant positive coefficients for AMPs measures and significant negative coefficients for total volume   will support  the hypothesis that workplace shootings generate low volume sustained coverage.   OLS regression of vulnerable populations  o n AMPs and volume for the three search topics is used to  test the prediction that shootings targeting  schools or religious venues  will generate  sensational, short- lived responses. Significant negative coefficients for AMPs measures and significant positive coefficients for total volume will  suggest that mass shootings  with prejudicial or educational targets generate sensational,  short-lived  responses."
"48" "FINDINGS"
"49" "Table 1  displays the means, medians and standard deviations  for all  variables. The mean for  total victims  is 23 , with a standard deviation of  68 . The median is 10, which suggests the distribution of all victims of a mass shooting is skewed strongly in the direction of fewer victims.  The high standard deviation is the product of  a few distant outliers, such as the Las Vegas Harvest music festival shooting, at which 604 people were either killed or injured,  (excluded from Figure 1 for ease of interpretation),  and the Pulse nightclub shooting in Orlando Florida, which resulted in 102 total victims. However,  on average, the shootings analyzed had around 22  victims. The mean for  race  shows that  49  percent of mass shootings were perpetrated by white shooters.   Figure 2  shows that African Americans perpetrated about 15 percent of shootings, Asian Americans around 7 percent, and Native Americans about 5 percent.  27  percent of mass shootings were workplace-related incidents, and  20  percent of mass shootings targeted either schools or places of worship.  Figure 3  shows the remaining 53 percent of shootings are coded “other.” These events are primarily “spree” shootings with a mobile shooter who moved through a public place, but this category also includes several events in airports or on military bases."
"50" "**Insert Table 1   about here**"
"51" "***Insert Figure 1 about here***"
"52" "***Insert Figure 2  about here***"
"53" "***Insert Figure 3  about here***"
"54" "For the measures of decay and volume in Google searches for topics related to mass shootings, the intelligibility of descriptive statistics is limited.  Standard deviations are not of much use, though means and medians help discern the center and skew of each AMP s  distribution.   The di splay  of AMPs for the search topic ‘open carry’  has a mean of 33 and a median of 30.  Figure 4  shows that t his  distribution   is skewed  toward lower AMPs , which means that a greater number of shootings resulted in shorter bursts of search interest in handgun carry permits, sidearms, and other analogous concepts."
"55" "***Insert Figure  4  about here***"
"56" "The distribution of AMPs  for ‘mass shootings’  has a mean of 26 and a median of 17.  As indicat ed in Figure 5 , the distribution  is  skewed toward the low er  AMP s , indicating that there is  a slight  tendency toward short patterns of search interest for this topic following mass shootings. The AMP s  distribution for ‘gun control’  has a mean of 52 and a median of 51. Although it is fairly evenly distributed,  Figure  6  skews   slightly toward higher AMPs , indicating that searches for gun control were prolonged after more shootings within the population."
"57" "***Insert Figure  5  about here***"
"58" "***Insert Figure  6  about here***"
"59" "Bivariate Results"
"60" "Table 2 displays the bivariate correlations between all variables.   Correlations show the strength of a relationship betwe en two measures, the direction,  and the statistical power of these associations. Significance is of no real use to the current project, as I account for the entire population of cases  for which there is data available from both Mother Jones and Google . However,  future studies might attempt to   generaliz e  to the greater body of U . S .  mass shootings not catalogued in the Mother Jones dataset,  so measures of significance are noted . A level of  p   <   .05 is sufficient for a study conducted on 81 cases, but  p   <   .01 signi ficances are displayed to distinguish their statistical power."
"61" "There is no significant relationship between the AMP s  and volumetric measures for “mass shooting.” There is a moderate, positive, and significant relationship between search volume for  “mass shooting” and “gun  control, ”  signifying that swell in volume for one tends to correspond to more search for the other. There is a negative, moderately strong, statistically significant correlation ( r   =   -.57) between volume for “mass shooting” and the AMP s  shape measure for  “ gun control. ”  As search volume for “mass shooting ”  increases, the monthly average drops in “gun control,” which suggests that moments where the first term was highly searched, the second showed a sensational spike-drop pattern in interest."
"62" "Table 2 shows that this pattern repeats itself significantly   for both shape and volumetric measures on the search t opic  “open carry.” There is a moderate, positive relationship ( r   =   .36) between search volume for “mass shooting” and the volume for “open carry,” and a slightly weaker, negative correlation ( r   =   -.33) between “mass shooting” volume and “open carry”   AMP s . There are moderate, positive, significant correlations between the AMP s  for “mass shootings” and the volume and AMP s  for “open carry.” Events that generated shorter search patterns for “mass shooting” generated lower volume and longer search decay for “open carry.” Th e correlations between  search volume for “gun control” and the AMP s  measures for “open carry” ( r   =   .22 ) and “mass shooting”   ( r   =   .38 ). are weak and moderate   (respectively), negative, and significant. There is a weak, positive correlation between volume for “open carry” and “gun control.” A weak, positive and significant relationship exists between the measure of shape and volume for “open carry.”"
"63" "Workplace shootings are significantly and positively correlated to the AMP s  for “mass shootings,” indicating that workplace shootings generally have result in less intense interest in “mass shootings.” However, workplace shootings are weakly,  negatively  correlated with the AMP s  for  “ gun control, ”  which indicates the opposite trend in decay of searches for this t opic . There is a strong, positive and statistically significant correlation between the AMP s  for “gun control” and “open carry.” This means that search patterns for these two t opics  are similar in decay.  There is no statistically significant relationship between vulnerable populations shootings and any variable except workplace shooting. These are correlated weakly, negatively, and significantly, signifying that workplace shootings are less likely to be religious or school shootings."
"64" "There is a weak, positive and significant correlation between volume for “mass shooting” and total victims. This means that shootings with more victims generated more searches for “mass shooting.” The relationship between total victims and the measure of decay for “gun  control” is weak and negative—more  victims create  lower averages, which signifies  sensational search patterns for this term."
"65" "There are no statistically significant relationships between  any variables and  the race of the shooter, except the AMP s  measure for  “ open carry. ”  There is a weak, negative, and statistically significant relationship between the race of the shooter and the dec ay in searches for “open carry.”  Events with non-white shooters generated  sensational search patterns for this t opic."
"66" "**Insert Table 2 here**"
"67" "Multivariate Analysis"
"68" "The outcomes of O rdinary Least Squares (OLS)  linear regression between all variables is shown in Table 3. A separate regression was conducted for each of the dependent measures .  Standardized coefficients ( ) are displayed for each  equation. They display the magnitude of each variable’s effect   in standard deviations, instead of its natural units,  for ease  of comparison across equations.  Significant results are displayed at the  p   <   .05 and  p   <   .01 levels.  F  statistics show the statistical significance of each regression equation."
"69" "**Insert Table 3 about here**"
"70" "The regression of all variables on the volume of  searches for  “mass shootings” is significant at the  p   <   .01 level and explains about 22 percent of the variation ( R 2   =   .229) in this dependent measure.   Total  victims is the only significant predictor of search  volume for  “ mass shootings ”  (   =   .507). This suggests that shootings with more victims generate greater search volume for “mass shootings.” A separate equation of all predictors on the AMPs measure for “mass shootings” is significant at the  p   <   .05 level and accounts for  nine  percent of the variation in this variable.  Workplace shootings is the only significant predictor of this shape measure for the  topic  “mass shootings” (    =   .28). This positive, moderate coefficient shows that workplace shootings result in longer,  less intense  interest in the term.  It is the only positive coefficient in the equation."
"71" "The regression equation of all independent variables on the volume for “gun control” is significant at the  p   <   .05  level  and explains nine  percent of variation in this variable .  The only significant predictor in this equation is total victims,  (    =  .303 ) . This means that each additional victim of a shooting caused an increase in Google searches for the search topic."
"72" "The equation for the AMPs of “gun control” is significant at the  p   <   .01 level, and accounts for about a quarter of the variation in this dependent measure ( R 2   =   .241). This  equation demonstrates the most predictive power  of any  in this study. There are strong, negative, and significant coefficients for total victims (  =   -.396) and workplace shootings (   =   -.408). This suggests that shootings with more victims, and those that occurred in workplace environments generate shorter, more sensational search patterns for the topic “gun control.”"
"73" "The regression equation for the volume of Google searches for “open carry” is not significant.  The equation for the AMPs decay measure on this te rm is significant at the  p   <   .05 level  and explains   si x teen percent of the  variation in this dependent variable.  There are moderate, negative , and significant coefficients for total victims (   =   -.341) and non-white shooters (   =   -.251). This indicates that events with more victims and non-white shooters generated more sensational patterns in Google search volume for “open carry” policies."
"74" "DISCUSSION"
"75" "The results of the bivariate correlations can be grouped into two areas of interest. First, the majority of significant correlations are the result of interactional effects between the search term measures. These coefficients uncover some counterintuitive, but important relationships."
"76" "In general, the higher a term’s search volume, the lower its  averaged monthly proportion of search volume .  T h is pattern suggests that low   averages are usually not just a function of sustained, low search volume , but rather a sharp spike with a precipitous drop.  This  inverse relationship  between volume and AMPs  validates the use of thirty- day volume averages as a measure of sensational  search  pattern s."
"77" "The strong, positive correlation between  decay  patterns for the two search terms “open carry” and “gun control” indicates that the sensational knee-jerk response to mass shootings is felt similarly  across the public  but finds two different expressions in competing  political responses to the issue .  This supports the theoretical literature on moral panics, which  says that the sensation of hysteria   implicates the whole  public during the construction of a panic, regardless of political orientation  (C ohen 2011 ) .   Interest in “gun control” and “open carry” can be seen as two contrasting expressions of the same emotional response to shootings."
"78" "The significant relationship between non-white shooters and AMPs for “open carry” poses several compelling interpretations. First,  this relationship could be a  function of regional race relations. States with open carry policies   are concentrated in  south eastern and mid-southern  regions, and carry a historical legacy of more overt, violent racial conflict.   Perhaps non-white mass shooters frighten potential open-carry permit owners in a way that whites do not, and this causes  s hort sprees   in searches for  “ open carry. ”   Alternatively,   the  newsw orthiness lens offers that   coverage  of non-white shootings  is more likely to highlight negative narratives of race, immigration, and to frame shootings as terrorist events (Aysel 2016;   Chuang 2012;   Chuang and Roemer 2013;   Park et al. 2012).  Given these framing effects, it is not difficult to imagine shootings perpetrated by people of color inciting a defensive response among those Americans who believe person al weapon ownership is a   rational way to protect themselves  in times of generalized vulnerability."
"79" "M u ltivariate Discussion"
"80" "The  effects of total victims on the regression equations provokes two conclusions . Total  victims significantly predicts   an increase  in the volumetric measure for “gun con trol,” and “mass shooting , ” and shorter decays  for both “gun control” and “open carry.”    This  provides evidence for the existence of gatekeeping and newsworthiness effects. That more casualties significantly predict a greater amount of search volume  shows that mass media, which is the primary  avenue of public awareness towards mass shootings, prefer entially  report s   on graver mass shootings.  If a shooting becomes a fixture of news reporting,  the volume of  public interest in the event would increase.  The rapid decay patterns for the proscriptive search topics “open carry,” and “gun control” demonstrate that, in instances of intense news coverage of massacres, public attention to the more commonly discussed remedies to the shooting epidemic is much shorter."
"81" "Of course, t he  co nverse conclusion can also be drawn:   hysterical responses  could be a  precursor to  greater  reporting on worse shootings.  There are strong incentives to report on topics in which a public is alr eady invested, as outrage molds  predictable,  profitable  customer s  (Burns and Crawford 1999).   A genda setting  suggests that  news media companies are opportunistic content creators  and compete for readers , just as the  consumers of this content are swayed by what they read.  These two related phenomena construct a durable and unhealthy relationship between the public and media. Regardless of the direction of the agenda-setting relationship, t hese findings support my first hypothesis, that shootings with more victims  generate greater search volume and shorter decay patterns."
"82" "The results offer conflicting interpretations with regard to the second hypothesis , which predicts  that  workplace shootings will generate low  search  volume and  longer decay periods .  The significant, positive effect of workplace  shootings on the  decay  measure for  “ mass shootings ”  partially  supports th e  pre diction  that  workplace  mass shoo tings will result in lower search volume and longer  decline in attention.  Howeve r, workplace shootings predict   shorter decay periods  for the search term “gun control,”  at a more rigorous level of significance  and with greater magnitude.  This suggests that the  character  of  public responses to mass shootings  differs by topic.  That workplace shootings display sensational decay patterns for “gun control” but not “mass shooting s ” indicates  th at   discourse on  addressing   mass shootings is more emotionally charged and sensational than  the general discussion of shootings.  However, given the inconclusive results, I reject the workplace shootings hypothesis."
"83" "The significant, negative effect of non-white shooters on the  decay rate of  “open carry”   indicates  th at people are more likely to  look into  self-armament in response to mass shootings perpetrated by nonwhite killers.  The results of this regression are consist ent with the bivariate analysis  and  support   the literature on  media  stereotyping of  nonwhite  mass shooters . B ecause reporting on these shootings perpetuate racist and xenophobic narratives , t hey construct these shooters as the proverbial ‘bad guys’—immoral actors that only the well-armed and morally   galvanized among us are equipped to fend off.  Although no media sources are analyz ed in the current project, the significant regression  results corroborate the findings of a content analysis of New York Times articles (Silva and Capellan 2012), which notes that both the race of a shooter and the number of victims were significant predictors of more intensive news coverage."
"84" "Vulnerable populations shootings had no significant effects on  either volume or decay of  any Google search topics. I reject the hypothesis that mass shootings which occurred in schools or places of worship generate more search volume, and shorter  periods  of interest.  Events like the  2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting ,  2018 Marjorie Stoneman Douglass  shooting,  and Charlottesville church massacre define the public imagination on the topic, but these events and comparable ones seemingly yield no  empirical  effects on public curiosity.  Naturally, online search behavior is not a perfect measure of all discourse on mass shootings. It may be that these high profile, devastating events provoke discussion in other arenas, and therefore do not have any effects on Google searches.  Additionally,  the small and exclusive population of events is unlikely to represent the majority of workplace shootings faithfully. Because Mother Jones excluded more garden-variety shooting events from their dataset, the workplace shootings that did make the cut are likely more notable, contentious events than the average."
"85" "CONCLUSION"
"86" "This research   proposes some ways  in which public attention and emotional investment in mass sh ootings are  mediated by the institutions of mass media.  I  attempt to unite  theories of  m edia selection effects and  those that concern  emotional  responses to violent crime ,  using  Google  Trends  data to  measure public affect and data from a Mother Jones database to assess the  characteristics  of  mass  shootings. The population of 81 cases for which there was data from both sources was used.  The newsworthiness of mass shootings depends on characteristics of  the event, including the total victims , the race of the shooter, and the location in which it took place. Literature shows that events  with more victims consistently  receive  significantly  more reporting. The results of this study demonstrate that the total number of reported victims predicts  greater  online search activity for  “mass shootings,” “gun control,” and “open carry . ”"
"87" "Previous research shows that mass shootings incite generalized feelings of defensiveness and are correlated to higher rates of handgun purchase in open-carry states. Coverage of shootings perpetrated by non-whites  is known to emphasize  immigrant and racial identities. The refore, the  significant effects of non-white shooters on search activity for “open carry” indicates that interest  in   armed  self-defense  increases after shootings perpetrated by non-whites .  I offer the conclusion that media coverage is a powerful factor in how much Ameri cans care about mass shootings, and  the form their responses take."
"88" "The infusion of morality into reporting on violent crimes like mass shootings aggravates emotions of distrust and defensiveness and is more likely to result in hasty, hysterical responses to these events.  The results of this investigat ion demonstrate that mass shootings  which  generate higher  immediate  search volume also generally display shorter decay patterns. I argue that these sensational spike-drop patterns in online search activity are characteristic of a moral panic."
"89" "Limitations"
"90" "Because of the limited time and resources available, this project relies on theory and logical conjecture to  form  an argument about the relationship linking particular characteristics of mass shootings, news reporting, and public panic. The validity of using Google search data  to quantify  the  interests and  emotional state of  the nation has not been tested. Though adequate for a pilot study such as this, Trends data i s  a proxy measure. Future research into the topic of shooting-inspired panics should consider using  survey data to explicitly measure individuals’ emotional reactions to shootings.  Averaged Monthly Proportions are a promising tool for simple analysis of decay rate in Trends data, but replicate applications of this method are required to validate their further use. The number of Google search topics should also be expanded: other search topics could be used to approximate the same concepts as “gun control, “mass shootings,” and “open carry” but might yield different patterns. Therefore, additional testing is necessary to determine the fidelity of Google Trends methodology."
"91" "For any research attempting to truly characterize the breadth of public responses to mass shootings in the United States, the Mother Jones data on mass shootings has some drawbacks. First, the shootings available for analysis are a narrow subset and not at all representative of the majority of shooting events in the  United States.  Because the dataset is compiled from news stories and excludes shootings resulting from so-called “conventionally motivated crimes” (Mother Jones 2019), it falls prey to the same selection effects that I attempt to obviate in this study. Broader and more representative data might be obtained from sources such as the Gun Violence Archive ( https://www.gunviolencearchive.org/ ). However, the scant number of variables attributed to each case in the data therein provided is prohibitive of a characteristic-based analysis such as that performed in this study. Therefore, a functional compromise between depth and breadth of data type will need to be reached."
"92" "Any expansion on the current project should  also  operationalize the mediating variable, which is media coverage. Being able to correlate shootings with the volume of media coverage in addition to Google searches would fortify the theoretical linkage between selection effects and public  panic . The web tool MediaCloud Explorer (explorer.mediacloud. org) is a free online resource which allows users to view and download trends in coverage volume for specific search terms. Its interface and data display are similar to Google Trends, and they offer highly compatible data."
"93" "The findings of this study offer two notable insights  for  the process of addressing mass shootings. First, c onstructed hysterias draw on affective rather than pragmatic responses to  firearm massacres , which are not conducive to long-term attempts at reform. While the potent emotional content of mass shootings should be acknowledged, it should not drive the agenda of change: paradoxically, the moralizing of mass shootings seems to result in gr eater interest in owning guns. Though the number of people who die in mass shootings each year is dishearteningly large, these events constitute only a small proportion of firearm-related deaths. A mericans are thus left agonizing over a molehill, while the mountain of accidental shootings, suicides, and other firearm-enable d deaths grows steadily larger.  The challenge of reassessing our national treatment of mass shootings falls on consumers and producers of media alike; changing the public perception of mass shootings will require reframing the  perceptions, and subsequent agendas,  of both groups."
"94" "Second, this  study presents some pertinent  information for the challenge of resolving the partisan divide  in discourse on gun violence. Open carry or other c ivilian armament policies and gun control are polar ideological opposites, but search interest for these topics is expressed very similarly. This suggests that Americans are  grappling with the same emotional  r esponse to shootings through very different logics. Achieving some political consensus on the topic of gun ownership will be  essential to r esolving the issue of mass shootings, and this new insight could prove  useful in this reconciliation.  Ending  mass shootings in the United States is a tall order. Despite  earnest  convincing politic al arguments to the contrary, no   one  tactic proposed to tackle our   firearm  epidemic will fully resolve it.  No r can  one research project untangle the myriad social, political, and material factors that have precipit ated the rise of mass shootings .   However, beginning  to remove the lenses that con dition our reactions  into anger, panic, and disillusionment is a  good  first step."
"95" "REFERENCES"
"96" "Burns, Ronald, and Charles Crawford. 1999. \"School Shootings, the Media, and Public Fear:"
"97" "Ingredients for  a Mor a l Panic.\"  Crime, Law and Social Change  32 ( 2):147-168."
"98" "Chuang, Angie. 2012. \"Representations of Foreign Versus (Asian) American Identity in a   Mass - S h ooting Case: Newspaper Coverage of the 2009 Binghamton Massacre.\"  Journalism &"
"99" "Mass Communication Quarterly  89(2):244-260."
"100" "Chuang, Angie, and Robin C. Roemer. 2013. \"The Immigrant Muslim American at the Boundary"
"101" "of Insider and Outsider: Representations of Faisal Shahzad as “ H omegrown” Terrorist.\"  Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly  90(1):89-107."
"102" "Cohen, Stanley. 2011. \"Whose Side Were We On? The Undeclared Politics of Moral Panic"
"103" "Theory.\"  Crime, Media, Culture  7(3):237-243."
"104" "Cohen, Stanley. 1972.  Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of the Mods and Rockers."
"105" "London: MacGibbon and Kee."
"106" "Duxbury, Scott W., Laura C. Frizzell and Sadé L. Lindsay. 2018. \"Mental Illness,  t he Media,"
"107" "and  t he Moral Politics of Mass Violence.\"  Journal of Research in Crime & Delinquency  55(6):766-797."
"108" "Gruszczynski, Mike, and Michael W. Wagner. 2017. \"Information Flow in  t he 21st Century:"
"109" "The Dynamics of Agenda-Uptake.\"  Mass Communication & Society  20(3):378-402."
"110" "Google Trends.  Retrieved October 23, 2019.  ( https://trends.google.com/trends/?geo=US )"
"111" "Hawdon, James, Atte Oksanen and Pekka Räsänen. 2012. \"Media Coverage and Solidarity After"
"112" "Tragedies: The Reporting of School Shootings in Two Nations.\"  Comparative Sociology  11(6):845-874."
"113" "Kaminski, Robert J., Barbara A. Koons-Witt, Norma S. Thompson and Douglas Weiss. 2010."
"114" "\"The Impacts of The Virginia Tech and Northern Illinois University Shootings  o n Fear of Crime  o n Campus.\"  Journal of Criminal Justice  38(1):88-98."
"115" "Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera. 2019. \"Social Integration and Mass Shootings in U.S."
"116" "Counties.\"  Journal of Crime & Justice  42(2):121-139. "
"117" "Lankford, Adam, and Eric Madfis. 2018. \"Don’t Name  T hem, Don’t  S how  T hem,  b ut Report"
"118" "Everything Else: A Pragmatic Proposal for Denying Mass Killers  t he Attention  T hey  Seek and Deterring Future Offenders.\"  American Behavioral Scientist  62(2):260-279."
"119" "Leavy, Pa tricia, and Kathryn P. Maloney.  2009.  \"American Reporting of School Violence and"
"120" "‘ People Like Us': A Comparison of Newspaper Coverage of the Columbine and Red Lake School Shootings.\"  Critical Sociology  35 ( 2 ): 273-292."
"121" "Maguire, Brendan, Georgie A. Weatherby and Richard A. Mathers. 2002. \"Network News"
"122" "Coverage of School Shootings.\"  The Social Science Journal  39(3):465-470 ."
"123" "Meindl, James N., and Jonathan W. Ivy. 2017. \"Mass Shootings: The Role of the Media in"
"124" "Promoting Generalized Imitation.\"  American Journal of Public Health  107(3):368-370 ."
"125" "Mother Jones. \"A Guide to Mass Shootings in America.\", Retrieved October 23, 2019."
"126" "( https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/07/mass-shootings-map/ )."
"127" "Morin, Aysel. 2016. \"Framing Terror: The Strategies Newspapers  U se  t o Frame  a n Act  a s"
"128" "Terror o r Crime.\"  Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly  93(4):986-1005."
"129" "Park, Sung-Yeon, Kyle J. Holody and Xiaoqun Zhang. 2012. \"Race in Media Coverage of"
"130" "School Shootings: A Parallel Application of Framing Theory and Attribute Agenda"
"131" "Setting.\"  Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly  89(3):475-494."
"132" "Rocque, Michael. 2012. \"Exploring School Rampage Shootings: Research, Theory, and"
"133" "Policy.\"  The Social Science Journal  49(3):304-313. "
"134" "Schildkraut, Jaclyn, H. J. Elsass and Kimberly Meredith. 2018. \"Mass Shootings and  t he Media:"
"135" "Wh y Al l Events Are Not Created Equal.\"  Journal of Crime & Justice  41(3):223-243."
"136" "Schildkraut, Jaclyn, H. J. Elsass and Mark C. Stafford. 2015. \"Could  I t Happen H ere? Moral"
"137" "Panic, School Shootings, and Fear of Crime among College Students.\"  Crime, Law and"
"138" "Social Change  63(1-2):91-110."
"139" "Silva, Jason R., and Joel A. Capellan. 2019. \"The Media’s Coverage of Mass Public Shootings in"
"140" "America: Fifty Years of Newsworthiness.\"  International Journal of Comparative and"
"141" "Applied Criminal Justice  43(1):77-97."
"142" "Turchan, Brandon, April M. Zeoli and Christin e Kwiatkowski. 2017. \"Reacting t o  t he"
"143" "Improbable: Handgun Carrying Permit Application Rates in  t he Wake of High-Profile"
"144" "Mass Shootings.\"  Homicide Studies  21(4):267-286."
"145" "Vuori, Miika, Atte Oksanen and Pekka Räsänen. 2013a. \"Fear of Crime in Local Communities"
"146" "After School Shootings.\"  Journal of Scandinavian Studies in Criminology & Crime"
"147" "Prevention  14(2):154-171."
"148" "------. 2013b. \"Local Responses to Collective and Personal Crime After School"
"149" "Shootings.\"  Crime, Law & Social Change  59(2):225-242 ."
"150" "Walla ce, Lacey N. 2015. \"Responding t o Violence with Guns: Mass Shootings and Gun"
"151" "Acquisition.\"  Social Science Journal  52(2):156-167."
"152" "Weeks, Brian, and Brian Southwell. 2010. \"The Symbiosis of News Coverage and Aggregate"
"153" "Online Search Behavior: Obama, Rumors, and Presidential Politics.\"  Mass"
"154" "Communication & Society  13(4):341-360 ."
"155" "Table 1.  Means, Medians and Standard Deviations for Variables"
"156" "Variable"
"157" "Mean"
"158" "Median"
"159" "S D"
"160" "Race"
"161" "0.51"
"162" "4.00"
"163" "1.15"
"164" "Total Victims"
"165" "22.8 0"
"166" "10.0 0"
"167" "67.52"
"168" "Location"
"169" "Workplace"
"170" "0.27"
"171" "0.00"
"172" "0.45"
"173" "Vulnerable populations"
"174" "0.19"
"175" "0.00"
"176" "0.40"
"177" "AMP “gun control”"
"178" "51.62"
"179" "51.19"
"180" "28.54"
"181" "AMP “open carry”"
"182" "32.64"
"183" "30.45"
"184" "20.06"
"185" "AMP “mass shooting”"
"186" "25.36"
"187" "17.07"
"188" "24.28"
"189" "Volume “gun control”"
"190" "Volume “open carry”"
"191" "14.53"
"192" "26.72"
"193" "10.00"
"194" "26.00"
"195" "12.19"
"196" "18.66"
"197" "Volume “mass shooting”"
"198" "11.55"
"199" "4.00"
"200" "20.98"
"201" "Table 3.   Regression Outcomes of All Variables"
"202" "“Mass Shooting”"
"203" "“Gun Control”"
"204" "“Open Carry”"
"205" "Volume"
"206" "β"
"207" "AMP"
"208" "β"
"209" "Volume"
"210" "β"
"211" "AMP"
"212" "β"
"213" "Volume"
"214" "β"
"215" "AMP"
"216" "β"
"217" "Total Victims"
"218" ".507**"
"219" "-.061"
"220" ".303**"
"221" "-.396**"
"222" ".128"
"223" "-.341**"
"224" "Vulnerable Populations"
"225" "-.118"
"226" "-.059"
"227" ".150"
"228" "-.024"
"229" "-.102"
"230" "-.115"
"231" "Workplace"
"232" ".115"
"233" ".280*"
"234" "-.006"
"235" "-.408**"
"236" ".045"
"237" "-.140"
"238" "Non-White"
"239" ".135"
"240" "-.131"
"241" "-.023"
"242" "-.171"
"243" "-.165"
"244" "-.251*"
"245" "R 2"
"246" ".229"
"247" ".086"
"248" ".084"
"249" ".241"
"250" ".013"
"251" ".162"
"252" "F (4,75)"
"253" "6.87**"
"254" "2.86*"
"255" "2.81*"
"256" "7.28**"
"257" "1.26"
"258" "4.81*"
"259" "* p   <   .05 , ** p  < .01"
"260" "Figure  1 .  Total Victims of U.S. Mass Shootings"
"261" "Figure  2 .  Distribution of AMPs for search topic \"mass shooting\""
"262" "Figure 3. Distribution of Race of Shooters"
"263" "Figure  4 .  Distribution of AMPs for search topic \"open carr y”"
"264" "Figure 5. Distribution of Locations of Mass Shootings"
"265" "Figure  6 .  Distribution of AMPs for search term \"gun control\""
