Decolonising the Commons:
Fugitivity and Future Planning in End Times
Kenji Jalal Khozoei

a thesis submitted to the School of the Arts and Media
Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, University of New South Wales
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for
the degree of Bachelor of Media (Honours)

November 2018

I hereby declare that this submission is my own work and, to the best of my knowledge, it contains
no material previously published or written by another person, nor material which to a substantial extent
has been accepted for the award of any other degree or diploma at UNSW or any other educational
institution, except where due acknowledgment is made in the thesis. Any contribution made to the research
by others, with whom I have worked at UNSW or elsewhere, is explicitly acknowledged in the thesis.
I also declare that the intellectual content of this thesis is the product of my own work, even though
I may have received assistance from others on style, presentation and linguistic expression.

Signed:

Kenji Jalal Khozoei

Date: 02/11/18

Decolonising the Commons: Fugitivity and Future Planning in End Times
They say the global proliferation of colonial and neoliberal (ir)rationalities and the technomanagerial enclosure of the ‘commons’ (Hardt & Negri 2000; Harvey 2004) has resulted in a ‘foreclosure of
politics’, prompting calls for a renewed technocultural hegemony for a post-capitalist future (Srnicek &
Williams 2015) or a return to the revolutionary party (Dean 2012). Departing instead from (fugitive)
theories and practices of (under)commoning from peoples (presumed to be) excluded from ‘modernity’
suggests however there is much more and less to the picture than is often presented, and perhaps,
following Benjamin (2001[1940]), it’s the past to (and from) which we should look in our efforts of and for
futurity. Cautious against the often totalising and universalising accounts that constitute much of ‘radical
left’ (or whatever) thought, this thesis instead recognises those insurgent and inventive intensities that
remain elusive(ly everywhere), fugitive and excess yet never forgotten despite the serial efforts of (the)
settlement. By centring the unsettling and unsettled, this thesis hopes (against hope) to offer a decolonial
intervention in left discourses of the commons, media communication technologies, and futurity—namely
via the examples of Cooperation Jackson, Open Source Gender Hacking, and Indigenous Ranger programs—
emphasising the insurgent generativity of diverse local contexts in (de)forming and (un)settling fugitive
modernities from the 'bottom-up' (Mignolo 2009; Smith 2012; Moreton-Robinson 2015; Moten 2018).
Moving with and from Stefano Harney and Fred Moten’s (2013:28) visionary call to “inhabit the ruptural
and enraptured disclosure of the commons that fugitive enlightenment enacts”, this research suggests
ultimately ‘a way forward’ is not only (im)possible but (always) already everywhere underway.

acknowledgements
I'd like to first acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of this Land whose Sovereignty has never
been ceded and the many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and Elders, past and present, who
fought and fight and survive and thrive to maintain the ongoing omnipresence of Indigenous Sovereignty
on and of this Country. This Land remains Indigenous/Aboriginal Land and the University is built upon and
within the illegal occupation/settler-colony known as Australia, established in contravention of not only the
international law of the time but also the imperial instructions given to those settlers. I'd like to honour the
Bedegal people on whose land the University is built, as well as the Gadigal and Bidjigal peoples on whose
lands I study and sleep, and every other clan/band/tribe of the Eora Nation who were the first to resist and
refuse this violent incursion of the European imperial frontier. Their insurgent inventiveness remains the
condition of possibility of (un)settlement, therefore making this thesis (and just about all else) possible.
I'd similarly like to thank the countless Black and First Nations artists, activists and academics who
inherit that decolonial horizon to pass it on, to maintain and elaborate it to keep alive a hope that exceeds
the here-and-now, a hope before and beyond hope, refusing 'freedom' because it never asked to be named.
There are too many to acknowledge individually and many have been referenced throughout, and it is in
any case impossible to sufficiently express my gratitude and their sacrifice, which is to say this mutual debt
of the undercommons that we share and elaborate together, belonging to everybody and no one.
I could not have written this thesis without the support, patience, guidance and encouragement of
my supervisor, Michael Richardson. Above all I want to say thanks for believing in something that ~12
months ago I could barely see the outlines of, and for allowing me the space to think through this thing that
always felt almost unmanageable. Your encouragement kept me moving and focused on the task when I had
otherwise convinced myself that it was pointless and/or impossible. Thank you also for proving in practice
the reality of the undercommons, that the institution is never equal to or greater than the sum of its parts as
there remains very real and human things like hope and humour within the poverty of the university. I also
want to thank Sean Pryor, Chris Oakey, and Paul Dawson for being similarly supportive and understanding,
for helping me to believe in the worth of not only this thesis but also myself as a student and person. Thank
you for ensuring this thesis got past the line and for helping me feel capable of doing that.
This thesis represents the culmination of my undergraduate studies and so I want to also thank
every teacher who ever saw something beyond the institution and who helped nudge me in that direction,
because all of that ultimately became this. Thanks to Andrew Murphie for showing me how exciting and
explosive theory could be, and for telling me to read Fred Moten/the Undercommons ~3 years before I
knew how; and Ben Kelly for connecting Internet discourse to the weight and thrust of theory, and for
helping me to really start taking seriously race and identity and colonialism. Ramaswami Harindranath,
Sarah Keech, Leah Lui-Chivizhe, Johanna Perheentupa, Prudence Ann Gibson, Laura Lotti, Anne Brewster,
among others… Thank you all for bringing such expansive passion, generosity and vision to your teaching.
Finally, endless thanks to Sniz, Rosie, Mum & Dad and everyone else, all the friends in and of the
undercommons, the underground commoners and all our kin. This is for and from all of us.

contents
((noun.) ‘things contained’ in something (a stomach, a document, etc), from early 15c. Latin continere
‘to hold together, enclose’, from com ‘with, together’ + tenere ‘to hold’ (from root *ten- ‘to stretch’))

p1

-

The Common(s) Story (As It Might Be Told)

p9

-

The Other (Black) Thing(s) Inher(it)ed in the Hold

p16

-

Modernity’s End(s) & the Messianic Present(/Presence)

p19

-

(Un)Settling History: The Ongoing (De)Colonial

p23

-

Indigenous Sovereignty & the Black Before/Beyond

p28

-

The Decolonial Horizon(s): Refusing the World (for the Earth)

p32

-

Politics of (Mis)Recognition (or: Abolish Everything)

p35

-

(Im)Possibilities of Escape

p39

-

'Cooperation Jackson': Solidarity Economies and Black Self-Determination

p48

-

'Open Source Gender’: Hacking the Human (For) and (From) the Trans Sublime

p54

-

‘Country Needs People’: Indigenous Rangers and Refusing (the) Settlement

p62

-

Follow(ing) the Fugitive Public (Forever)

p64

-

References

page 1 of 78

The Common(s) Story (As It Might Be Told)
A machine is eating the planet. Seated at the helm and in the furnace, humanity
seems besieged, seized and sick, inflated with incomplete memories of conquest and
contradiction. The machine ploughs the dirt and disturbs the life therein, creating an
illusion of movement, distorting sound and light. In the torn earth that it claims and claims
to see, the machine sees nothing but atoms of individual value, relating and exchanging with
ever growing but never unmanageable complexity. The machine feeds on this process as it
encloses it, staggering across the earth with a fitful urgency, every step heavy, absolute,
lacerating. Factories and institutions are forged in the open wounds, networks of capture
and conversion stitched into and across trauma, and agents of the machine are dispatched
to stimulate growth and goodwill. Having almost exhausted extraction, the agents—the
knowers and fixers, the fixed and faithful—reap the harrowed fields of affect and cognition,
seeking and seizing fugitive meaning to regurgitate it as policy and profit, labouring the
thick, analeptic, effervescent feculence of raw life itself, its dregs, its deaths, its data.
We1 tell stories sometimes of another time, but over time the racket becomes
unbearable and the haze makes us drowsy, and in the overbearing revelation of the
machine—a revelation of reason that revels nonetheless in a virulent irreverence for
existing reality, ravaging every known history and horizon to revive this unholy procession
it calls progress—all we can hear is this story. Seemingly surrounded2 and forced to forget
otherwise, we retreat to “pockets of resistance” to collect ourselves, and then to politics to

The ‘we’ here is, as much as we feel and follow it, the ‘we’ of the undercommons, that (non)place of refusal
and refuge, the always already commonunderground of and with the broken, black, poor, and improper.
2 Harney & Moten (2013 18-19): “The hard materiality of the unreal convinces us that we are surrounded, that
we must take possession of ourselves… In the trick of politics we are insufficient, scarce, waiting in pockets of
resistance… so that one day, which is only never to come, we will be more than what we are. But we already
are. We’re already here, moving. We’ve been around.”
1

page 2 of 78

correct ourselves, determined to discern a position against encroaching enclosure—
endorsing, often absent consent or intent, the exerted incursion of imperialism’s exhaustive
and exhausted empiricism, modernity’s mantled and etiolated episteme ensnaring us and
all in the frenetic, feverish stasis of the here-and-now.3
Armed with the incisive yet nonetheless imprecise language of critique, we say the
machine must be something called capitalism, because look: Capitalism really is eating the
planet, enclosing all that was ever common4 and polluting every horizon5, privatising the
ocean to sustainably retain it, every field razed and readied for extractive investment and
prison labour.6 Rotting and revolting, the university reconstructs itself as a knowledge
factory, the artist and the activist and the intellectual and the innovator all converting
earnest exuberance to the exhilaration of enterprise, everyone always in pursuit of the

Moving with Michel Foucault’s (1972) archaeology of power/knowledge, Edward Said’s (1978) pointed
elaboration of said discursive (de)formations to reveal the Orient(/Occident) relation, and Stuart Hall’s (1992)
subtle yet pressing slant to the ‘West and the Rest’, Linda Tuhiwai Smith (2012 32) recognises the
representational regimes of ‘the modern world’ as (having been constructed through)"research through
imperial eyes”; Sylvia Wynter (2003) employs similar methodologies to (un)cover a (historically,
epistemologically, theologically, …) deeper and longer story, the "present ethnoclass (i.e., Western Bourgeois)
conception of the human, Man, which overrepresents itself as if it were the human itself" (260), which appears
(dis)continuously through its reconfigurations, all of which "remain inscribed within the frame-work of a
specific secularizing reformulation of that matrix Judeo-Christian Grand Narrative" (318).
4 From the Parliamentary seizure of common lands in 15 th-19thC England for private benefit (Marx
1867[1999]; Monbiot 1995) to the contemporary privatisation and corporatization of environmental,
intellectual, cultural and other ‘commons’ via what David Harvey (2004) calls ‘the new imperialism:
accumulation by dispossession’; Ian Shaw (2017 883-889) takes us to the clouds/Cloud, recognising the
increasingly “atmospheric” and “technospheric” spatialities of enclosure, whereby (police, commercial,
military, private, …) drones enable "new regimes of state power, capital accumulation, and violence...
materialising intimate and pervasive colonisations of local, national and international airspace”.
5 The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports only a dozen years to keep warming
under 1.5C, beyond which “will significantly worsen the risks of drought, floods, extreme heat and poverty for
hundreds of millions of people”, and that “urgent and unprecedented changes” are requisite (Watts 2018);
Mayer Hillman (2018) follows countless in reading between the lines of the IPCC report: “fossil-fuel
dependent economic growth is the prime cause” and “we must lead our lives within the planet’s means”.
6 In 2016 the NSW Corrective Service Industries had revenues of $113 million and profits of $45.6 million with
almost 85% of inmates working (Brook 2017); Love and Das (2017) report the (US) Federal Prison Industries
programme “pays inmates under one dollar an hour… [generating] $500m in sales in 2016 with little of that
cash being passed down to prison workers”; see Justice Action 2016 for an analysis of prison privatisation and
corporatisation on this continent, and Liburd 2017 for US context.
3

page 3 of 78

latest and greatest solution.7 The profit motive has long been the only motive, industrial
extractivism just one of its ugliest masks, but today’s market is smarter and faster, evolving
with its technologies and publics to claim and capitalise every relation and identity,
claiming itself as the mediator of all things material or otherwise. Neoliberalism emerges as
contemporary counter-insurgency, eviscerating every public institution and intuition to
redistribute resources upwards for private enterprise, every subject and relation reduced
to pure economics.8 The hospital is slashed to its most basic, industrial, alienating processes
of exchange, with endless hierarchies of management hooked on pharmaceutical money, all
addicted to the audit.9 Buckling under its immense power and prestige, the university
likewise does deals with the devil, foreclosing the future to throw faith instead to the
council of fossilised stakeholders, the whole place infected with an unholy kind of
urgency.10 These examples are intentional, the university promising study and the hospital

Edu-Factory Collective (2009) roughly follows autonomous (post) Marxism (Hardt and Negri 2000; 2009) in
recognising diverse self-education initiatives as forms of “struggle for cognitive workers in contemporary
capitalism… [involving] conflict over knowledge production and the construction of the common, the struggles
of precarious workers, and the organisation of autonomous institutions" (2), suggesting the contemporary
"double crisis" (of knowledge production and global economic (dis)order) presents opportunities for
autonomous organisation (15); Harney and Moten (2013 26) further (un)settle the story, (ap)posing its terms:
“Worry about the university. This is the injunction today in the United States, one with a long history. Call for
its restoration like Harold Bloom or Stanley Fish or Gerald Graf. Call for its reform like Derek Bok or Bill
Readings or Cary Nelson. Call out to it as it calls to you.” With(in) and against the disciplined discourse that
“goes on upstairs, among the rational men”, the “subversive intellectual” evades enclosure, refusing to be
reasonable, “and on top of all that, she disappears… into the underground, the downlow lowdown maroon
community of the university, into the undercommons of enlightenment, where the work gets done, where the
work gets subverted, where the revolution is still black, still strong.”
8 Ong (2007 5) cautions against overly deterministic or structural conceptualisations, privileging an “analytics
of assemblage” to frame neoliberalism as a “migratory technology of governing that interacts with situated
sets of elements and circumstances”, united by a common goal to induce enterprising and calculative
subjectivities and tendencies in the context of a “fast-expanding information industry”.
9 Amy Corderoy (2016) recognises the outsourcing and privatisation of public health as an insidious
imposition of a "profit motive to the operation of hospitals that are already expected to provide more than
they can afford", resulting in reduced quality of care, neglect and abuse (of workers and patients alike), and
harm and death, from considerable evidence including Duckett 2013; Baum et. al’s 2016 study of neoliberal
reforms on Australian primary health care services found "considerable uncertainty, more directive
managerial control, budget reductions and competitive tendering and an emphasis on outputs rather than
health outcomes"; see also Mayes et. al 2016.
10 This year 32 Australian universities are participating in the Defence Science Partnerships program and last
year the "Department of Defence partnered with the US Department of Defence on the Multidisciplinary
University Research Initiative... [providing] grant funding to Australian universities willing to produce”
7

page 4 of 78

promising care. If even these—immaterial, affective, social—commons are not safe, is
anything?
Art and academia, philosophy and physics, land and life; all that was once common
falls prey to this now global machine, which everywhere appears irresistible in its reach,
reconfiguring and replicating in response to whatever input. As medium and method,
process and product, capital certainly seems a technology in its own right, its uncanny array
of increasingly automated appendages advancing across and through every surface, every
screen and sensor a tentacle, accumulating all under its algorithms, its endless abstractions
of extraction.11 Programmed primarily to produce profit, the machine pursues and
consumes every viable site of resistance or recourse, revising crisis to then thrive in crisis,
reviving it thereafter indefinitely.12 Once upon a time, power was checked and balanced by
institutions like the university and the library, the gallery and the coffee house, abstract
publics brought together by a radio broadcast or literary journal—supposed intermediaries
between the political system proper and the private lifeworld of the citizenry, public arenas
to push ‘common concerns’ “from the periphery into the centre of the political system”.13
But the public sphere had always already been compromised by the market, the free flow of
information and ideas inescapably inhibited by economic imperatives and other a priori

designated research with potential defence outcomes (Edney-Browne and Ruff 2018); see also Furze and Lim
2017; consider also the Fossil Free Unis 2017 campaign’s exposure and pressuring of Australian universities
to divest from dirty energy.
11 Wendy Hui Kyong Chun (2004) frames software as (mimicking) ideology (and its critique), recognising the
“obscenity” of “seeing through transparency” (44) assumed by the interface, which, far from transparently
representing reality, arbitrarily (un)veils (im)material abstractions of the actual machinery that it obfuscates
as it also reveals, circulating and perpetuating gendered/colonial “notions of seeing as knowing, of reading
and readability… conflating executable with execution, program with process, order with action…
[disciplining] its programmers and users, creating an invisible system of visibility… a compensatory mastery
built on hiding the machine” (27-28).
12 Brian Massumi (2011) on Naomi Klein’s ‘disaster capitalism’: a vicious cycle of “draconian and ill-advised”
responses to “a threat environment whose dangers the response only contributes to intensifying”; see Klein
2017.
13 Habermas 1997 255, 284-285.

page 5 of 78

exclusions.14 Mass media is not only mediated but also mandated by the market, by policies
and presumptions of scale and scarcity, competition and convention, depoliticising
discourse and diminishing public communication and sociality more generally.15 Cultural
production anticipates and reflects this decline, the expressions of the imagination
dissolved into their dialectical relation with reasonable debate and sensible economics,
captured by the culture industry to be processed and consumed, finally and forever, as
cultural commodities.16 Determining everything from livelihood to leisure, ensnaring
education in entertainment and preservation in politics, the machine nestles itself and all
else in the "well-worn grooves of association"17 of commodity fetishism, insulating
everything from the imaginary and fantastical, the hope or possibility of otherwise.
Postmodernism blows its triumphant horn as all the old borders, whether imperial or
epistemological, biological or ethical, dissolve into the incessantly de/reterritorializing,
global techno-capitalist sovereignty of Empire18, ushering in the end of (the end of) history
as we know it.
The hegemony of the machine—the global scale of its extensions and intensities, its
disturbing propensity for indifference and adaptability, its non-consensual conquest of
consent and consciousness, of community and the commons—has never felt so palpable
than in the contemporary context, never so difficult to navigate and resist than when facing
this dizzying ubiquity of information and data, networks of abstractions manifesting
momentarily as interface, everything enmeshed in endlessly expanding and increasingly

Habermas 1997 286-287; see Fraser's (1990 77) feminist critique of the Habermasian public sphere,
recognised as not only historically illusory and exclusionary but also conceptually inadequate for "the critique
of the limits of actually existing democracy in late capitalist societies”.
15 Habermas 1997 287.
16 Jameson 1991 3-9.
17 Adorno and Horkheimer 2002[1947] 124.
18 Hardt and Negri 2000.
14

page 6 of 78

integrated global circulations of culture/politics/communication/content-as-commodity,
production and consumption unfolding as and in circulation all at once, everywhere and
always.19 Communicative capitalism says this is a good thing, that we’ve never been more
connected and have never had more access, and if we all just had more of all of it then we’d
all be better off. Democratic values like “access, inclusion, discussion and participation”20
are subsumed by the machine, then spat back out for the public to execute only ever
through the intensification and circulation of the network, through more content and
contributions, more conversation and innovation, more access and affordability—through
an investment, that is, in the utopian promises of technological salvation of luxuryautomated-communism and Silicon-Valley-singularity alike.21 Sensing discontent,
communicative capitalism captures communication and promises democracy (at the end) of
information, relieving “top-level actors” of whatever remnants of responsibility to respond
they might remember.22 Politics on the ground is finally foreclosed in finality, the hyperindividualised, deeply depoliticized, flat and fragmented companions of communicative
capitalism handed to the cold and spooky grasp of the algorithm23, subjects biopolitically
reconfigured in situ by neoliberalism’s ever-present enterprising project, everything
circulating seamlessly, a stable connection ensuring steady transmission. Feeling out of
options, we opt out of feeling, scrolling endlessly until the sky inevitably falls, resigning the

This “strange merging of democracy and capitalism” is what Jodi Dean (2013 53-55) calls ‘communicative
capitalism’, naming the current configuration of global capital wherein technology promises communication
and democracy, but “the proliferation, distribution, acceleration and intensification of communicative access
and opportunity, far from enhancing democratic governance or resistance, results in precisely the opposite.”
20 Dean 2013 89.
21 For an idea of the stakes/scope, consider Bartlett 2017 on crypto-anarchism; Baldwin 2018 on
decentralized network fetishism and "how ultra-modern digital networks conceal very traditional
consolidation of power and capital"; and Swartz's 2017 in Castells 2017 incisive interruption of the dreams of
futurity, decentralisation and disintermediation, and autonomy and automation that sustain such
digital/network fetishm; and Galloway's 2014 similarly irruptive critique of ‘Brometheanism’.
22 Dean 2013 89.
23 The hold of algorithms, Mackenzie
19

page 7 of 78

future to anyone brave or powerful enough to carry it. “Driven by a tremendous faith in
speed, volume and connectivity”,24 the successful self-as-brand and the entrepreneur-asinfluencer emerge as the privileged subjects, the ideal neoliberal self25 of the ‘cool
capitalist’, agentive and future-facing, oriented to the immediacy, abundance, and openness
of the (market) network of the new knowledge/information society.
Sensing defeat and fearing the worst, some still dream of the communist horizon,
calling for a return to the party, a unified front to loosen the fantasies of capital.26 They say
the communicative circuits are too powerful and capital has got us captured, that the
freedom we thought we saw in the digital was just another delusion, and the only way we’ll
find the collectivism that we (think we) lost is to collect ourselves as comrades. Others see
such resignation as weakness, just the latest defeat in a series of accepted failures and
assumed folk-politics, a fetish for the familiar that keeps us frozen (in the fracture).
Throwing faith, ironically perhaps, to (modernity’s) resurrection, this new breed of
champions of the future suggest diving into the contemporary chaos of cyberspace, to
strategically accelerate some of its processes while obstructing others, to excavate the
buried potentials of our exploited (digital and material) labour.27 We just need better
technology, they say, better theories and better subjects—and what better time than now,
with all this information in our grasp, all this technology at our disposal? From the
privileged position thrust upon us by history, everything is at hand, and so—in the face of
fragmentation and fracture, flooded in ecologies of fear28 and fabricated facts, flattened and
exhausted of all imagination and intuition, left inescapably to induce ethics from politics—
Dean 2013 89.
McGuigan 2014.
26 Dean 2016.
27 Srnicek & Williams (2015 85): “Modernity presents both a narrative for popular mobilisation and a
philosophical framework for understanding the arc of history… Modernity must be contested, not rejected.”
28 Davis 1999.
24
25

page 8 of 78

surely there is still hope? Tracing the 19th Century shift from machine-as-tool (“which the
worker animates and makes into his organ with his skill and strength”) to machine-assystem (“which possesses skill and strength in place of the worker… with a soul of its own
in the mechanical laws acting through it”), Karl Marx also saw some other thing in the
machine, a spark or splinter perhaps of another dream, some labour that escaped as
(im)possibility “under the total process of the machinery itself… which confronts [the
workers and their] individual, insignificant doings as a mighty organism”.[F] As ‘fixed
capital’, Marx saw that productive machinery was the realization of not only capital’s dream
but the workers’ as well, released at last from the trouble of labour, free to “idle time and
time for higher activity”. In the frenzy of the here-and-now, surrounded by such speed and
dynamism, the promise of automation and post-work democracy (always) just around the
corner, that communist dream that Marx told us all so much about… We strain ourselves to
stay determined, to stay facing forward and fixed on our feet, claiming to see everything—
convinced if we don’t we might miss something.
Eyes closed for a moment and we feel the stillness seep (out)—an a priori
indeterminacy that was always already everything other than silence, holding us in this
unsettling embrace, unsettling the dark ground that could never be settled anyway—
shimmering with splinters of otherwise and all the dreams we’ve (yet) seen. Eyes open and
blinded by the light again, every sound distorted by the force of a former forgetting, we find
a way somehow to stop and wonder (away): why has the future never worked?29

Srnicek & Williams (2015 85) follow (the inherited) history in looking forward, declaring “the future isn’t
working”. As we will (have) see(n) however, it is always the past that guides us and to which we aught to
remain allegiant—which is anything but a dismissal of the future, for it is the past that gives us futurity.
29

page 9 of 78

The Other (Black) Thing(s) Inher(it)ed in the Hold
“What if,” asks scholar and poet Fred Moten, “there remains that facticity of
blackness which cannot be understood within the context of this genesis?”30 Certainly,
(critique of) hegemony construed in the totalising terms elaborated thus far appears
uncertain, if not for its epistemic insularity then for its analytical impotence—dissent often
articulated at the same, absolute altitude that it ascertains in what it takes for granted as its
enemy, resolved to meet it on its (impossible and incoherent) terms, fated therefore to
dissolve into a dialectic of inescapable immanence, even if inflected with a treacherous kind
of intersectionality that assumes all too much of its subjects and terms, their positions and
borders, the empty and universal plane in and with which they engage. The impulse to
refuse, to resist and dissent suggests however that there is something always already there,
(a trace or track of) an “affirmation in and through negation, situated mobility, and
diﬀerentiated presence”31, something that is not nothing nor a thing—yet from and against
this becomes discernible a “movement of escape, the stealth of the stolen that can be said,
since it inheres in every closed circle, to break every enclosure”32. If we follow Moten in
thinking refusal—the always already existing “runaway anarchic ground of unpayable debt
and untold wealth”33 from which it emerges—alongside blackness—as and in its “paraontological distinction from those given (to) a privileged understanding of it”34—then its
facticity irrefutably remains (irrefutably fugitive). “The corresponding task”, Moten
continues, inher(it)ing the insurgent “tradition of no-traditions” that is the Black Radical

Moten 2018 20.
Ibid xii.
32 Moten 2008 179.
33 Harney & Moten 2013 47.
34 Ibid mayb.
30
31

page 10 of 78

tradition35, “entails not only a consideration of that remainder, not only a critique of that
origin and of origin in general, but also a disruption of the regulative methodological
hegemony of understanding.”36 Refusing reduction to the rhetorical while remaining
with(in) its reach, writing with(in) and against the hold(s) of modernity, of empiricism and
idealism, of language and labour and law, Moten gestures to the hold(s) of the world as we
(un)know it, those by which we hold the world and those by which the world is held.
Refusing, however, the imposed compulsion to contain that which remains
(elusively, fugitively, (ante-)anti-essentially37 uncontainable), the hold (and its incalculable
excess) unsettles the category of the concept and the concept of the category. “Indeed, what
if regulative, regulated understanding is that indelibly modern institution that responds to a
condition that not only precedes it but also calls it into existence?”38 The generalised
deployment of the hold’s irreducible specificity across differently specified holds over space
and time—from the hold of the Transatlantic slave ship to the holds of the plantation and
the colony, from the hold of the patrollers and protectors to the ministers and managers,
the director and the dean, the holds of law and administration and the academy and the
economy,39 those that hold and are held by every place touched by colonial governance,

This thesis owes much to this etc
Moten 2018 20.
37 Sexton 2012.
38 Moten 2018 20.
39 Writing with(in) and against what Saidiya Hartman (2008 6) calls "the afterlife of slavery", Assata Shakur
(1978) refuses to forget her “great great grandmothers who were slaves and... Cherokee Indians trapped on
reservations”, recognising the hold(s) of incarceration as extending the colonising violence co-constitutive of
"amerikan government and amerkian capitalism" (14), where "the cells are not much different from the
tenements, the shooting galleries and the welfare hotels… locking us into the futility and decay of pissy
hallways that lead nowhere”; Stephen Dillion 2012 follows Shakur's theorising of the "relationship between
the carceral, the market, the population, and the body", framing the market "as a powerful extension of
various technologies of capture: chains, shackles, bars, prisons, and ships... an expansive grid of captivity
engendered by race and commodification”, suggesting therefore the ghosts of slavery have “intensified,
seduced, enveloped, and animated" contemporary technologies of power, particularly those of the 'neoliberal
carceral state'; see also Hadden 2003 for a history of US police’s emergence from antebellum slave patrols and
white private militias aka Ku Klux Klan knight riders; for Australian context see Moses 2000, Nettelbeck 2014,
and Nettelbeck et. al 2016.
35
36

page 11 of 78

capital, neoliberal or soviet statism, Britishness, the individuated possessiveness of
whiteness and its innumerable imperial frontiers and fossils, resonances and
resurrections—suggests that the common(s) story (as it might be told) remains inescapably
framed with(in) another frame, held in the hold(s) of whiteness and modernity, commonly
compelled to claim there(after and there)fore to have transcended a (pre)history that
nonetheless remains forcefully and urgently in the present. "Seized from home, sold in the
market, and severed from kin," writes Hartman, "the slave was for all intents and purposes
dead" and yet “slavery persists as an issue in [black] political life... because black lives are
still imperiled and devalued by a racial calculus and a political arithmetic that were
entrenched centuries ago.”40 By ignoring or obscuring this history, much work aspiring
towards radicalism and concerning itself with power, struggle, freedom and futurity,
labours considerably only to pose problems and postulates that have long involved—in
ways that unsettle and exceed “the context of this genesis”—those communities and
knowledges that remain elusively and fugitively on (and as) the (eternal and internal)
outside,41 the prophecies of self-preservation for those practising an ongoing planning to be
possessed “beyond the settlements, out beyond the redevelopment, where black night is

Hartman 2008 16.
This Fanonian formulation is elaborated in Mbembe’s (2007 11-13) recognition of (blackness/the black as)
“the Remainder—the ultimate sign of the dissimilar, of difference and the pure power of the negative… in
excess of all signs” therefore unsettling every theory and function of representation or reason, and that to read
Fanon today is to continue his project (161) and (pre)serve that thing “in every human subject… something
indomitable and fundamentally intangible that no domination… can eliminate, contain, or suppress” (170);
and by Moten’s 2018 gesturing from and to “the immanence of a radical informality that precedes” (and
unsettles) every form and distinction, (ap)positioning (blackness as) “dangerous internal difference…
domesticated by way of a cycle of projection and importation; exoticized and eroticized as an object of
irreducible difference, attraction, incorporation, and exilic hope; or theorized as an interdicted and invisible
view” (5), resonating with the interminability of Fanonian (im)possibility, “the shudder/shadow of death held
in the struggle where reciprocal recognition is staged, as it were, with and by an irreversible reluctance…
[which] doesn’t mean that struggle (and its accompanying modes of organization) is unnecessary; [just that] it
is neither sufficient nor originary” (13).
40
41

page 12 of 78

falling, where we hate to be alone… as the common embrace, right inside, and around, in the
surround."42
And so while recognising blackness—remembering, listening to and departing from
its (an)originary generativity—amply generates critique of something like ‘contemporary
radical left politics and its inherited terms, traditions, and technologies (of whiteness)’,
critique alone is not (necessarily or primarily) the aim of this thesis, which is offered in a
spirit of mutuality and study. “You have to step to it in a different way.”43 Indeed, the
inherent sociality of innovation and the incessant intellectuality of ecological living initiates
and is initiated by our irreducible commonality, our inescapably common concerns and
shared stories, our mutual debt to each other, to life and all—unsettling any uncomplicated
assumption of an a priori (white and/or anthropocentric) wholeness or omnipresence of
opposition, its supposed productive primacy, and the (im)position(s) stipulated by all this.
“What’s at stake,” writes Moten,” is the possibility of a general movement that then gets
fostered when we recognize these... independent irruptions of a certain kind of radical
social action and thinking.”44 Moving with and against critique, to which much of this is
indebted, this thesis (that is to say the debt that sticks to it and that it sticks to) might be
most generatively construed as an interdisciplinary and (ante-)anti-disciplinary elaboration
of this most unmanageable of matters, the mutating matter of our mutual and mutant debt,
the “tradition of no traditions”, which is not but nothing other than blackness (and its
unbearable costs and incalculable gifts). Recognising this is to recognise the hold, how we
Harney & Moten 2013 19.
Refusing to disavow a kind of disciplinary debt collection while yet recognising the broader project of black
radicalism, Moten says in conversation (study) with co-author Stefano Harney and comrade Stevphen
Shukaitis, reflecting on the absence of black voices in theorisations of freedom, struggle, and futurity: “You
start to feel pity for his ignorant butt, but then you also understand the deep structural connections between
ignorance and arrogance, so then you get mad again... But this is not a personal injury. You have to step to it in
a different way.”
44 Ibid 153
42
43

page 13 of 78

hold it and how it holds us, framing and forcing (un)certain (im)possibilities of the hereand-now. But this is not to destroy or escape it—but what if this was not our goal? What if
escape really was (im)possible?
Following theorist and filmmaker Frank B. Wilderson III (who follows those who
remained before him) Moten asks not only what it might mean to recognise and refuse the
hold but also what imaginative and improvisatory (im)possibilities might be found—felt,
forged, formed and/or de-formed—by “remaining in the supposedly viewless confines of
the hold”.45 Moten throws his thinking to the sorrow songs and soul songs, the stealth of the
stolen ones who refused to move when moved on, who moved in refusal of stillness, stolen
to and from the New World as they forged and formed its (fugitive) wealth, stealing (away)
to not only (or always) survive imposed deprivation but also (always) to move, sing, plan,
dance and dream in ways that escaped (without escaping) the hold, finding and (de)forming
life in (social) death.46 Denied the sociality they generated that nonetheless demands, in and
as its radical mutuality, to be shared, the echoing evidence of this excessive and incalculable
debt (of untold and unimaginable wealth) resonates in every memory (of itself), the (black)
debt at a distance that is always already ours, this debt that cannot be paid but only
(for)ever elaborated, in, and as, love and togetherness and futurity, or, following Moten and
co-author and comrade Stefano Harney, what we might just call study.47 This bad debt that
we seek and that seeks us, that moves (through) this thesis as its generative “anarchic

Moten 2018 200.
Sexton 2011.
47 Harney & Moten (2013 47): “These other ones have a passion to tell you what they have found, and they are
surprised you want to listen, even though they’ve been expecting you. Sometimes the story is not clear, or it
starts in a whisper. It goes around again but listen, it is funny again, every time. This knowledge has been
degraded, and the research rejected… But if you listen to them they will tell you: we will not handle credit, and
we cannot handle debt, debt flows through us, and there’s no time to tell you everything, so much bad debt, so
much to forget and remember again. But if we listen to them they will say: come let’s plan something together.
And that’s what we’re going to do. We’re telling all of you but we’re not telling anyone else.”
45
46

page 14 of 78

ground”,48 but also that which makes possible “knowledge of freedom”,49 that which made
(and makes) modernity and (the) settlement and therefore the present, the past and the
future possible. What must be recognised, writes Moten, is “not just that there are flights of
fantasy in the ship’s hold but also that such fantasy calls into more refined and brutal
existence every regulatory structure through which we identify the modernity of the
world”.50 The assumed primacy, centrality, and originality of whiteness, its colonies and
stories and strategies, is effectively turned upside-down and inside out. Gramsci’s
narratives of the oppressed suddenly seem oppressive, offering the ‘marginalised victims’
no option other than resistance or recourse, reform or revolution, history disarticulating
forcefully to reveal its eternal, internal black heart.51
Recognising this debt is, in other words, to recognise and affirm the primacy and
generativity of that insurgent and inventive refusal, which, as Spivak reminds us, is the first
right.52 “This openness, this dissonance, this residual informality, this refusal to coalesce,
this differential resistance to enclosure, this sounded animateriality, this breaking vessel
and broken flesh,” writes Moten, “is poetry, one of whose other names, but not just one
name among others, is blackness.”53
“Brushing history against the grain”54, against and beyond the “hard materiality of
the unreal"55 that claims every day to surround us, might indeed sound mad, infected with a
dangerous kind of optimism. From the settled position of those seeking to settle, this would
Harney & Moten 2013 47.
Moten 2018 1; also the title of the essay.
50 Moten 2018 200.
51 Fanon 2008 [1952] 164: “European civilization is characterized by the presence, at the heart of what Jung
calls the collective unconscious, of an archetype: an expression of bad instincts, of the darkness inherent in
every ego, of the uncivilized savage and the black man who slumbers in every white man.”
52 Paulson & Spivak 2016.
53 Moten 2015
54 This formulation is from Walter Benjamin, whose historiography will be studied in the following section.
55 Harney & Moten 2013 18.
48
49

page 15 of 78

not be inaccurate—depending on how we think of ‘madness’ or ‘danger’, this is hardly an
inaccurate reading at all. Settlers and insurgents alike know of the generativity of
blackness—the incendiary inventiveness of its imaginative and improvisatory intensities,
“the lawless freedom of the melodramatic imagination, its constant irruptive and disruptive
escape from the system it engenders”56—even if, of course, they know of it differently,
incongruently and incalculably. What is irrefutable for both and for all is that it is refusal—
(in and as) fugitivity: fantasy, futurity, flight—that generates, then and now, the imposed
necessity of regulative structures and technologies of governance, from the slave(r)s’ chains
to the badge of the cop, from Christ (in)to Capital, of the plantation to (the) settlement to
cyberspace. Holding at once the non-linearity and (a)historicism of the hold and letting it
hold us, and avowing the ante-anti-normativity of its fugitive generation and flights of
fantasy, unsettles not only the history we are presumed to inherit but also every coconstituting concept and category: subjectivity, statehood, struggle, politics, recognition,
knowledge, truth, identity, law, language; everything is on the table.

56

Moten 2018 28.

page 16 of 78

Modernity’s End(s) & the Messianic Present(/Presence)
Writing in 1940—in a short essay that was to be his last, figuring freedom months
before taking his own life, fleeing the holds of war and Nazi capture, dying (and living) at
the border(s) and relaying stories in (and of) exile and transit57—Jewish German
philosopher Walter Benjamin imparts a history and historiography that refuses the “empty
and homogenous time” assumed by modernity, calling instead for “a procedure of empathy”
grounded in “the heaviness at heart, the acedia, which despairs of mastering the genuine
historical picture”.58 Exploding the flat, fractured fragility that held his present, Benjamin
invokes theology and allegory through the Angel of History, who sees the past and wants to
stay, “to awaken the dead” and make amends, but the storm of progress is “blowing from
Paradise" and caught itself in the Angel’s wings, forcing them with their back turned
“irresistibly into the future”. Benjamin is gesturing from and towards something else,
something framed imprecisely as the “fine and spiritual”, the metaphysical, affective,
immaterial—but never less real, however, for we can never deny the ceaseless tides that
flow through and from the past and present, like “tradition”, a “secret protocol” that carries
and claims us in “the here-and-now, in which splinters of messianic time are shot through.”
We inherit the dreams and dispositions of the past “as confidence, as courage, as humor, as
cunning, as steadfastness in this struggle”, and through these splinters the music and
madness spills into (and as) the present(/presence) felt and followed in the here-and-now,
given and taken in what Moten recognises as “the cultivated nature of this situated
volatility, this emergent poetics of the emergency in which the poor trouble the proper”59.
For Benjamin, the traces and tracks of that fugitive sociality similarly reach “far back into
Benjamin’s life.
Benjamin [1940]2001; unless noted otherwise all citations are from Dennis Redmond’s 2001 translation.
59 Moten 2018 155.
57
58

page 17 of 78

the mists of time”, emanating as the sparks of hope from the past and calling into question
every victory that has ever been won by the rulers”. Every enraptured refusal is a rupture.
Benjamin’s historiography, taken as a complication rather than a repudiation of
historical materialism,60 unsettles any easy, linear, causal relation of ‘the past’ and ‘the
present’, refusing also the assumed primacy of production in the great play of life and living.
Benjamin refutes the secularised, materialist, Hegelian historicism that infuses modernity
and Marxism alike, refusing (non-theological) determinism to recognise history as “the
object of a construction… which is fulfilled by the here-and-now”. The “zero-hour” of the
present, Benjamin’s antithesis to the “empty and homogenous time of positivism”61, reveals
"rupture[s] between messianic redemption and the ideology of progress” that move (us)
“from a time of necessity to a time of possibilities”62. Frustrated by the sclerotic
‘professional intellectuals’ and the cowardice of the Social Democrats by whom he and his
contemporaries were betrayed, Benjamin denounces the “vulgar-Marxist concept” of labour
that “recognizes only the progress in the mastery of nature, not the retrogression of
society”, requiring as “its logical complement” a profoundly devalued concept of nature that
is ‘there for the taking’. Not only do such materialist economic preconceptions “[bear] the
technocratic traces which would later be found in Fascism”, they also efface the possibilities
of otherwise, alternative theorisations and manifestations of labour or value, perhaps even
something like what Marx, describing wealth, envisioned as “the thing realized in things…
the universality of individual needs, capacities, pleasures, productive forces, etc., created
through universal exchange”,63 what Moten and Harney call “the massive and incalculable

Fritsch 2005 13-30.
This note is from Dennis Redmond:
62 Löwy 2005 102.
63 Marx 1973 487–88.
60
61

page 18 of 78

range of laboured living”64—or, for Benjamin, “a labour which, far from exploiting nature, is
instead capable of delivering creations whose possibility slumbers in her womb.”
The task of the Benjaminian historian—hacker and artist, designer and dreamer,
planner and programmer—is to redeem (“a revolutionary chance in”) the suppressed past,
to rescue (and be rescued by) “a memory, as it flashes in a moment of danger”. That is to
say, following Benjamin, that we must wrest ‘the past’—its untold and/or veiled traditions
and technologies and dreams and designs, honouring the messianic splinters that pierce the
here-and-now, claiming and guiding us—from those who sought and seek to settle it. For
indeed, warns Benjamin, “even the dead will not be safe from the enemy if he wins.” Held in
and holding this fractured and fateful relation of the past and the here-and-now, torn as
“constellations overflowing with tensions”, we take our task to fall through and with the
splinters of an otherwise, to find and follow the feeling, the futurity of the fugitive public
that refused to conform and instead turned, by what Benjamin calls a “secret kind of
heliotropism”—a kind of insurgent and inventive refusal—towards what he denotes as “the
sun which is dawning in the sky of history”—in the sky, we’ll say, of the decolonial
horizon(s), where ‘freedom’ really was always just a funny, forgotten story.

64

Harney & Moten 2013 47.

page 19 of 78

(Un)Settling History: The Ongoing (De)Colonial
While Marxist, feminist, poststructuralist and other ‘modern’ critiques fruitfully
interpret and interrupt history and its present(s), such discussions are not new or
unfamiliar to Indigenous (and/or Black) people who remain present, then and now, as their
(presence as and in their present) histories are erased, “dismissed as irrelevant, ignored or
rendered as the lunatic ravings of drunken old people”.65 Recognising the primacy of
Indigenous erasure to the ongoing and historical colonisation (of ‘the rest’ by ‘the West’66),
Māori (Ngāti Awa and Ngāti Porou) professor of education Linda Tuhiwai Smith discloses
coloniality’s stories and structures and their co-constitutive (mis)conception of time
“alongside imperial beliefs about the Other”67, a corrosive contraption composed from and
against an imposed, imaginary b(l)ackdrop of non-white savagery, indolence, abjection and
excess.68 Geonpul woman and scholar Aileen Moreton Robinson similarly attends to the
ongoing denial (of Indigenous sovereignty, of the violence of invasion, of the insecurity of
settlement) that constitutes the foundation and structure of Europe’s imperial project,
tracing a fractured nonetheless fixed continuity of the individuated and possessive (il)logics
“at the very heart of the white national imaginary and belonging”,69 from their gestation
within and emergence from Europe’s Dark Ages, through their crystallisation in the colonies
and plantations of the New World, to their 18th Century arrival upon and occupation of
Dharug, what is claimed as Sydney.70

Smith 2012 32.
Hall 1992.
67 Smith 2012 31.
68 The projection of imposed (white) meanings (onto/through the black body) has been thoroughly analysed
in critical race and identity discourses; see Smith 2012 x, Mbembe 2007 x, Mignolo 2012 x, Moten 2018 x.
69 Moreton-Robinson 2015 18.
70 Moreton-Robinson’s (2015 1-40) generative account is mostly localised to this continent; Wynter’s (2003)
scope is perhaps the broadest.
65
66

page 20 of 78

Indeed, as far as Smith and other First Nations (and/or Black) scholars, artists,
activists and communities everywhere are concerned, imperialism never stopped its march,
it “still hurts” and “still destroys and is reforming itself constantly”,71 throwing into stark
and blinding relief every claim to have transcended this suppressed nonetheless present
history, every unfounded presumption of the ‘new’ that fails at once to acknowledge any of
what has already been and continues to be, remaining underground and underfoot, making
the thought of the ‘new’ (im)possible. The imperial machinery of history employs
techniques and technologies distilled and concealed over centuries “to deny the validity of
indigenous peoples’ claim to existence”, obstructing “self-determination” via continued
dispossession and appropriation of Sovereign “land and territories”, “languages and forms
of cultural knowledge”, and “natural resources and systems for living” with(in) complex and
dynamic environments.72 It is through and from this genocidal agenda of accumulation that
modernity and (the) settlement come to (un)know themselves, that settlers come to assume
their status as subjects, that whiteness comes to convince itself of its universality. It looks
like dispossession and desecration for industry and investment,73 forced removals of
children and disruption of family and cultural life,74 political and economic
disenfranchisement and neglect,75 deaths in custody arising out of a total lack of justice or

Smith 2012 20.
Smith 2012 1.
73 See Barta 1987 on Australia's ~200 year history as "a genocidal society” and the economic imperative
driving its expansion as one concerning the land; see also Jabour 2013 for a contemporary example,
suggesting Barta’s (249) statement from 3 decades ago remains as true now as it did then: “the relations of
genocide are alive”; Goodall's 2008 critical history of the "invasion to embassy" of Indigenous insurgents is
also invaluable.
74 The Australian Human Rights Commission in their 1997 'Bringing them Home' report found significant
over-representation of Indigenous children in every welfare arrangement, urging for culturally-appropriate
Indigenous-run welfare services; "Twenty-one years on," Evershed and Allam (2018) report, "government
data shows Australia has failed to curb the rate of child removal from Indigenous families, and has gone
backwards on a commitment to place children in care that connects them with Indigenous family and culture”;
75 See Moreton-Robinson 2017 on 'Citizenship, Exclusion and the Denial of Indigenous Sovereign Rights’
71
72

page 21 of 78

compassion or even due process,76 and many other explicit or implicit forms of exclusion
and violence that irrefutably amount to state-sanctioned genocide.
This constitutional, continual unholy union of possessiveness and individualism—
the property contract/fantasy of ownership dictated almost entirely by disavowal and is
otherwise known as whiteness—is socio-discursively reconfigured (and re-centred) in the
wake of capital, the nation-state, globalisation, and other ‘contemporary’ circumstances of
the here-and-now, such as the emergence of neoliberalism, populist protest and identity
politics, worldwide information networks of circulation and surveillance, and much else.
Whiteness constitutes, then and now, (the thin, reflective surface of) the discursive and
ideological foundation of every institution and industry, every idea and innovation of the
modern world order. ‘History’ in this colonised form—totalising and universal, telling every
story absolutely, detached and disinterested yet coherent and containable, constructed
upon classifications, categories and collections of facts said to speak for themselves,
progressing chronologically with the self-actualisation and societal advancement of Man,
who is Himself foundationally and fatefully contingent on illusory binaries of
inside/outside, modern/primitive, white/black77—therefore emerges (and extends and
endures) as “the story of people who ‘were [and are] regarded as fully human’”,78 the
irruptive enlightenment of civilisation erupting from and against a time (imagined and
forgotten) before and outside of (colonised modern) time: the slow, black, unproductive
time of the pre-historic, the primitive and poor.

Much like the persistent stolen generations, the carceral system’s ongoing systematic failings seem only to
accumulate, with 407 Indigenous people dying in custody since the 1991 royal commission, most of which
were preventable and caused by lack of access to basic care or medical treatment, see Allam et al 2018,
Guardian 2018.
77 This is a summary of Smith’s summary of several scholars’ summaries of colonised history, see Smith 2012
31.
78 Smith 2012 20.
76

page 22 of 78

This co-constitutes a hostile social environment as institutions and organisations
such as schools, hospitals, businesses, broadcasters, governments, charities, churches, and
all their many and varied publics, implicitly inherent and elaborate this infective, exhausted,
and ultimately inhumane discourse of anti-blackness, good intentions notwithstanding—
which unequally nonetheless ultimately makes victims of us all, the corrupting (castration)
complex of whiteness corroding all from the inside in its caustic containment of us and all
things, a disarrayed display of (dis)advantage whose disparate discourses serially obscure
the blackness that remains their (un)ground and condition of (im)possibility. Whiteness
denies not only the historical formation of such poverty, which is to say the theft it
continues to commit, but also the historical formation of itself as a(n illegitimate)
legitimating discourse. Both are taken as confirming each other, normalised as the
underlying—unquestioned and unquestionable—fabric of settler psyche, the relation
between whiteness and coloniality in a nutshell. This constitutes a cardinal and continuous
denial, writes Smith, of Indigenous “claims to humanity, to having a history, and to all sense
of hope”,79 relegating this continent’s First Peoples to the status of the (white) settler’s
conceptual Other. The ‘progress’ of the latter is therefore irreducibly tied to the erasure of
the former, a process that keeps (the) settlement on high alert, surrounded by ghosts and
whispers, (n)ever ready to react and repress.

79

Smith 2012 4.

page 23 of 78

Indigenous Sovereignty & the Black Before/Beyond
Far from the story being settled, the ongoing omnipresence of Indigenous
Sovereignty—the plurality and diversity of its histories, stories, languages and knowledges,
its contextuality in culture and country, unfolding (from and with) a heterogeneity that is
nonetheless in harmony with ecology, a singular and eternal harmony embedded in a
deeply interwoven and interrelating eco-philosophy that affirms the primacy of land and its
language(s) in order not to make a claim to it but instead to recognise its claim on us and on
all80—presents a total alterity to the totality of whiteness, an unassimilable and
uncontainable reality that continually, indifferently yet inevitably, unsettles whiteness (and
its nation(s)), “haunting the house that Jack built, shaking its foundations and rattling the
picket fence”,81 calling into question every moment in its forceful, frenzied, nonetheless
fabricated history. “The past, our stories local and global, the present, our communities,
cultures, languages and social practices – all may be spaces of marginalization,” Smith
writes, “but they have also become spaces of resistance and hope.”82 This resistance, as
blackness, is a point of departure, as (an)originary refusal emerging from an always already
existing, universal and total ecology of life/Earth, which is, to put it imprecisely, the
ground(s) of Indigenous Sovereignty, a totality of ecology at the heart of diverse ontoepistemologies.83 Decolonising Methodologies would not be the magisterial and irrefutable

Moreton-Robinson 2015 11-17.
Moreton-Robinson 2015 31.
82 Smith 2012 4.
83 Moreton-Robinson 2015 11-12: “Indigenous people’s sense of belonging is derived from an ontological
relationship to country derived from the Dreaming, which provides the precedents for what is believed to
have occurred in the beginning in the original form of social living created by ancestral beings. During the
dreaming, ancestral beings created the land and life, and they are tied to particular tracks of country.
Knowledge and beliefs tied to the Dreaming inform the present and future. Within this system of beliefs, there
is scope for interpretation and change by individuals through dreams and their lived experiences… These
experiences illustrate the way in which the spiritual nature of the world is incorporated into one’s connection
to place, home, and country. The spiritual world is immediately experienced because it is synonymous with
80
81

page 24 of 78

interruption of the imperial that it is if Smith did not believe beyond belief what she does,
devoting the majority of the book to what she identifies (and celebrates) as “the greater
project [of] recentring indigenous identities on a larger scale”.84 In other words, recognising
the (im)position of the (colonial) centre is given and taken in refusal of the spatiodiscursive denomination of ‘the margins’, the numerically inaccurate (and innumerable
anyway) rank of ‘minority’, and the assumed primacy of ‘resistance’ (to an imposed order),
a refusal articulated with polemical nonetheless precise passion by Moreton-Robinson: “it
takes a great deal of work to maintain Canada, the United States, Hawai’i, New Zealand, and
Australia as white possessions.”85 Constantly called to reassert its illusory legitimacy, the
nation-state, their adherents and whiteness more generally, exerts considerable effort
“through a process of perpetual Indigenous dispossession” to reproduce itself and its (real
or imagined) borders, employing techniques and technologies that reproduce and reaffirm
“sets of meanings about ownership of the nation, as part of commonsense knowledge,
decision making, and socially produced conventions.”86
After (and before) all, Indigenous Sovereignty lives as and in its black, unsettled and
unsettling, decolonial and decolonising refusal(s)—which is to say, by any metric other than
the basest intensities of force, in the face of (80000+ years of) Indigenous Sovereignty, it’s
(~500 years of) whiteness that won’t go back to where it came from.
By unveiling the illegitimacy of the imperial narrative—its incoherence,
incompleteness, the tears in its fabric, its unholy origins (from) and (against) the other

the physiography of the land. In the life histories the reality of spirituality is a physical fact because it is
experienced as part of one’s life. Indigenous women perceive themselves as being an extension of the earth,
which is alive and unpredictable. Hence their understandings of themselves, their place and country, also
reflect this view”; see also Pascoe 2014 125-144.
84 Smith 2012 100.
85 Moreton-Robinson 2015 xi.
86 Moreton-Robinson 2015 xi-xii.

page 25 of 78

things that leaked and escaped, the excess left out or behind but nevertheless remained,
forgotten by some but remembered by so many others—the decolonial imperative also
discloses “messianic splinters” that cut the present moment(s), repressed but nevertheless
ever-present (im)possibilities that remain, perhaps only slightly out of frame, under and
around and sometimes within the hold(s) of the here-and-now. This suggests an explosive
immanence, an immanent explosive at the heart of (any) enclosure, the (im)possibility of
otherwise always already there, under and around, before and beyond the aberration of the
normative imposition and its assumed totality. Retelling the (present) history of New World
slavery, professor of African American literature and history Saidiya Hartman elaborates a
Benjaminian methodology to “brush history against the grain”,87 attending to “forms of
knowledge and practice not generally considered legitimate objects of historical inquiry or
appropriate or adequate sources for history making” and the urgency of “attending to the
cultivated silence, exclusions, relations of violence and domination that engender the
official accounts”. Her focus on “small acts of resistance” is not to simply reject ‘the big
narratives’ or avoid the difficult materiality of such histories. Rather, she continues, “these
pedestrian practices… illuminate inchoate and utopian expressions of freedom that are not
and perhaps cannot be actualized elsewhere”. These enraptured expressions and the
rupturing refusals they preserve and elaborate instead find improvised and incomplete
(dis)articulation “in quotidian acts labelled ‘fanciful’, ‘exorbitant’, ‘excessive’” primarily
because of their unsettling and unsettled excess (of “the frame of civil rights and political
emancipation”). Hartman departs from here “in pursuit of the sublime, struggling to repeat
the unrepeatable, to present the unpresentable” as indeed it is from and against such

87

Hartman 2010 11-14; unless noted otherwise all citations are from this source.

page 26 of 78

(im)possibilities that futurity emerges, as if from and as splinters of messianic time,
fugitively in excess of itself.
What’s revealed might be described as a totality of non-totalities that might indeed
be remembered finally as that (totality) of our (under)common and interconnected (nontotal) becoming(s) with (and as) the Earth and all its and our timeless, irreducible
interrelating. What’s taken (for granted) as crisis is not the totality often presumed—rather
the last ~500 years of ‘modernity’ disarticulates to appear as the greatest deviation thus far
from the always already existing cosmology of ecological living, omnipresent in and as
Indigenous Sovereignty and its continued presence on Country before and beyond any
human agency, therefore elaborating endlessly in every direction, in art and activism,
scholarship and study, poetry and story and political strategy and much else that remains
eternally elusive, felt yet in moments of scandalous commonality, elusively and fugitively in
evasion of enclosure. Recognising the primacy of life and preservation is to recognise the
totality of interrelational ecology as the order to honour, as the decolonial horizon(s) we
stay facing (from), therefore remembering struggle and resistance as contingency,
preservation and celebration as primary—often given and taken, of course, all at once.
If this sounds like madness then we must be moving. Following it we fall into some
elsewhere entirely, a place outside of history which is where we’ve always been, here and
everywhere, now and forever. Falling out of step with history is no accident and hardly a
choice. It seems often those with the luxury of choice choose to continue sleeping, to
continue dreaming of no dreams, waking up when the alarm rings and accepting the call
even if sometimes it disturbs us so deeply that we forget how to sleep, and we remember so
much that sometimes it becomes too much, so we accept our diagnosis as disordered, as
broken and restless and in need of some rest, some discipline and direction and hope.

page 27 of 78

Hoping to find hope where we last lost it, we fall back into the abstract to convince
ourselves that the answer is somewhere out there, somewhere out there always, something
always wrong out there and something always not quite right here, something always not
quite right with ourselves and ours, our unrest and uncertainty, our dreams of anotherwise,
and all our plans we keep putting off, for another day, for the day that never comes because
every day is another day, and another day means what it means so we do what we can with
what we have, finding and forming meaning if and when we have the means, always just not
quite enough means, meanwhile sometimes forgetting the ends, or that the ends sometimes
seem endless, sometimes endlessly distant, sometimes seemingly to no end.
In the end, at the end of the day, we end up asking: How did we end up here?
Another question with always endless but never enough answers.
This seems like another dead-end.

page 28 of 78

The Decolonial Horizon(s): Refusing the World (for the Earth)
Decolonisation refuses the world, which is to say the world as we (un)know it, the
hard materiality of this stark unreality that, at present, occupies us as we occupy it. We are
given (to) this general refusal specifically as and from the stealth of the stolen and the
wealth of the wretched, the inventive and insurgent refusal (of those) written (off) as black,
broken, incapable of and left behind by modernity. Theirs (and ours) was (and is) not only a
refusal to be 'left behind' but also a refusal of that colonial, colonising notion of progress
itself, the brutal illusion of a backwards and a forwards and the callousness that connects
them. Refusing the temporal and spatial anchors of white coloniality, the fugitivity of the
decolonial horizon(s) (came and) went running (from and) to an elsewhere and elsewhen
for and through which we are still looking, to and from which we are always already
running, trying to be with them, to see and feel (with) them, if only for a moment (of
forever). This undercommon refusal to be in common with the colonial and (un)conscious is
replenished as it is inherited, held as it holds us in this appositional embrace that must be
nothing other than a madness, a madness that inevitably but indifferently unsettles that
which is thought as fixed, whole, settled. Decolonisation is, in every sense, unsettling,
(re)surfacing as this disassembling ensemble of generative refusals given and taken as and
in fugitive movements through, around, under and over the frame(s) of the world as we
(un)know it, this world that must be (coming) undone.
Consider again the unsettling (ins)urgency of Smith’s unsettled methodologies,
offering something of the decolonial horizon when she tells us “the intellectual project of
decolonizing has to set out ways to proceed through a colonizing world.”88 Recognising the

88

Smith 2012 xii.

page 29 of 78

generative violence central to (de)colonisation and the primacy of life and its preservation,
Smith refuses the framing of the ‘sciences’ in which she writes, their foundations in
Enlightenment Rationality and that brutality of imperial history that forgets all but what it
wants to remember, only knowing how and what to remember as a function of what it
actively and violently forgets—which remains blackness, always already preceding and
prompting any (im)position of order. Smith tells this story, staying with “the vantage point
of the colonized”89 and so her refusal is not escape or total, refusing (to leave) the colonial
epistemology as it strains to contain this excess, to settle her terms and call her into its
order. Smith might be writing within those sciences, but her refusal is, perhaps more than
anything, to be of those sciences, co-constituting her celebration of all that she already
writes for and as and with—and this is what she really brings, what she receives and gives
and maintains, which indeed can never be contained, not by the world as we (un)know it.
Recognising imperialism’s historical, continual self-reinforcing across its institutions and
modalities, Smith’s refusal excavates those regulative, legitimating codes that structure—or
the structures that code—the here-and-now. Quoting Fanon, Smith reminds us that
decolonisation, intending to change the world order, is “obviously, a programme of
complete disorder.”90
Fostering an attunement to the fugitive spatialities—musicality, vitality,
hapticality91—of being and becoming (with) in and against, around and beyond (the)
settlement reminds us, with all the assurance of an inheritance that didn’t need to be
written down, that what might appear overwhelming in its totality is in fact an incoherent,
contingent assemblage, (dis)articulating into and onto, through and beyond the physicality

Smith 2012 1.
Fanon.
91 Harney & Moten
89
90

page 30 of 78

of our bodies—revealing innumerable sites of contestation and conflict, blindspots and
limits where refusal is given and taken in and as something other than silence. Colonisation
is ongoing and non-total, widespread yet incomplete,92 and so our decolonial and
decolonising thinking and action should similarly be humbled by a commitment to plurality
and play, fantasy and futurity—a commitment, that is, to a “radical compassion that reaches
out, that seeks collaboration, and that is open to possibilities that can only be imagined as
other things fall into place.”93 At stake, which is to say the task, is not only a refusal of (the)
settlement but also a refusal to settle or be settled, an ongoing decolonial refusal of
individuation and possessiveness and the ceaseless call to perform for and as the always
white, regulative figure of Man, unsettling his seat and his crown.
The fluidity and fugitive indeterminacy that we are given (to) is what we refuse to
forget, refusing to forget ourselves even as we remember each other, as we stay running
through and around and beyond the world of the here and now, that forever trails us,
straining to settle the terms we’re (so given to) unsettling. Refusing (the) settlement is to
celebrate all that always already surrounds it, our irreducible communality and
unmanageable difference in and as the interconnectedness and fluidity of all life, which
threatens (the) settlement, indeed has it besieged, constantly called to reassert an illusory
image of itself as whole, impermeable, fixed. Giving ourselves (to) this generative interplay
of refusal (of that which we aren’t and don’t want) and celebration (of that which we always
already are and have) is to remember ourselves in and as the surround, in and as that
“radical occupied-elsewhere, that utopic commonunderground of this dystopia”.94 It
follows, if we wish to fall into and with that Black optimism of, for, and as which Moten

Coloniosation is structure not event
Smith 2012 xii.
94 Harney & Moten 2013 51.
92
93

page 31 of 78

writes, that we persist “in thinking that we have what we need, that we can get there from
here, that there's nothing wrong with us or even, in this regard, with here.”95 Strained
against this world that strains itself to call us broken, a strange world that only knows itself
through (its reactive governance of) our brokenness, we delight in dwelling in the
brokenness of the surround, this stupendous study of and as statelessness that we stay
with, refusing, (an)originarily and finally and forever, to be fixed or fix.
Felt and heard, held and shared, given and received as and in the “voices of the
future in the past, the voices of the future in our present”,96 refusal elaborates the always
already existing reality of undercommon futurity, a decolonised and decolonial futurity for
the black, broken, poor and improper, daring to still dream and see the human beneath,
before and beyond Man. “In the absence of amenity, in exhaustion,” writes Moten, “there’s a
society of friends where everything can fold in dance to black, in being held and flown, in
what was never silence.”97 Refusing this world is to believe, (not so) simply, that we can and
must do better. Such optimism “always lives, which is to say escapes, in the assertion of a
right to refuse”,98 moving from and towards another place and time altogether that we
might not always remember but must never forget. If the improvisational imperative that
we find and follow in(to) undercommon refusal wants anything, it’s to see and be with each
other in love and study, to be not simply among our own but “among [our] own in
dispossession, to be among the ones who cannot own, the ones who have nothing and who,
in having nothing, have everything”.99 This is, for now, to ask how to be in this strange
world but not of it, within the world but for the Earth, for life and for each other, for futurity

Moten 2018 160.
Moten Case of Blackness/Black Op draft.
97 Harney & Moten 2013 97.
98 Moten 2018 160.
99 Harney & Moten 2013 96.
95
96

page 32 of 78

and fantasy from and of that world we still hope to see, that world we have always already
seen, before and beyond the long shadow of the hold.

Politics of (Mis)Recognition (or: Abolish Everything)
If politics suggests a move towards self-possession within the predetermined terms
of normative democratic struggle, then what might an alternative look, sound, feel or move
like? Not an alternative politics, but rather an alternative modality of moving, listening,
feeling, dancing, laughing, loving, and studying with and within, against and beyond the
political, the struggle for representation and recourse, even, the inherited notion of the
subject, of the individual, of the human? Having recognised as illusory the recognition
offered by these inherited grammars of colonial subjectivity, the state’s recognition in turn
appears unrecognizable, betraying an absolute inability to ever really recognise (us, itself,
or anything).100 We therefore refuse recognition and in doing so refuse the regulative
(il)logics that made possible such an arrogant assertion of authority at all. Indeed, the
imperative to make oneself intelligible holds (at least the trace of) a colonial and colonising
move, the imposed order assuming itself as an origin predicated on a disavowal of what was
already and always there—as if any person or thing did not matter until presented as (a)
matter that matters. We lean into and away from, moving through and around, bending and
breaking these inherited grammars, whether found in the classroom or the prison, the
boardroom or the bathroom, in an academic conference on radical Marxist utopias or a
panel of experts on the latest innovations in extractive economics, whether it’s the borders
drawn on the soil or the soul, those that define money or marriage, care from work, law

100

Coulthard 2014.

page 33 of 78

from lore, prescribing and proscribing what is considered appropriate and intelligible and
passable for the housewife and the sex worker, the trans hacker and the military man, the
artist and the audience, the doctor and the junkie, the cyborg and the human, the professor
and the student, the cop and the crim.
What would it mean, for us and ours, to refuse such calls? What would it mean to
accept instead the call to disorder, which quickly reveals itself to have always already been
there, circling and shadowing every scant statute of order, every arrogant assumption of
authority? What would it mean to recognise that we are always already in the wild and
unsettling, imaginative and improvisatory and irreducibly collective call (and response) of
undercommon (dis)order, that the call (and response) is always already within us?
Attendance to these non-spaces of transitivity and fugitivity that surround and unsettle the
frame, these wild and prophetic movements that produce the conditions of possibility for
the or any frame, is given not only in celebration and reclamation of ourselves and all of that
which was deemed excessive, disordered, or dissonant, but also in the timeless truth of that
most mundane but nonetheless vital cliché: “We cannot solve our problems with the same
thinking we used when we created them.” Put simply, whatever ‘the future’ means or looks
like, it’s not something we can ever picture or describe, and even if our utopian visions have
somehow covered all bases and can guarantee a good life for all, we’re certainly not going to
‘get there’ using the same tools, languages, stories, theories, or whatever else that got us
‘here’.
And so we must fall into this madness, these disordered and disordering, unsettling
and unsettled movements of the fugitive public, to trace and follow those movements and
join them, knowing that to do so is simply to believe in the world and to want to be in it, to
want to be in it all the way to the end of it because we believe in another world in this world

page 34 of 78

and we want to be in that.101 The world we believe in is maybe not ‘a world’ at all, but it
might have something to do with the Earth, with life, with love and imagination and
togetherness, and in any case it takes it cue from something quite old-new. This is the
decolonial horizon that we stay facing, that we stay running from and for, guided and
humbled by what we sometimes can’t remember but can never forget, which keeps us from
slipping into the meaninglessness of an anarchism with no regard for life or a liberalism
with no regard for history. Struggling against and beyond normativity has never not
involved a kind of madness, a madness that has never not had something to do with the
irrepressibility of the imagination, its insurgent inventiveness, which has never been and
can never be contained. The unsettlement given in and as refusal and fugitivity was and
continues to be the condition of possibility for modernity, for the world order, for resistance
and preservation and so much more that we don’t or can’t (yet) know, so let’s stay there,
which is here, which is everywhere and nowhere, in the hold, in the break, as if entering this
broken world again and again and again.102

101
102

Moten says in interview, Harney & Moten 2013 118.
Harney & Moten 2013 94.

page 35 of 78

(Im)Possibilities of Escape
But the weary watchmen of the unreal, never too far behind, (mis)hearing our wild
and weird, unsettled and unsettling dream(ing)s from and for the Earth, call us back into
line to remind us of the world, this unreal world that forgets the Earth and all of us in order
to (re)call itself, again and again and again, as and into a violent yet illusory whole,
populated by and assuming itself to be sovereign over numerous but never innumerable
individuals with interests. And of course, despite failing to see what's really (un)real, when
they tell us to get real, to get a real job and to get on with it, we know what they might be
trying to say. As Smith tells it, we must “proceed through” the unreality of the colonised
present. We must, however and whenever and wherever we can, live and love anyway,
finding and forging ways to survive and navigate this world that (de)values life differently
and prioritises the primacy of production over the preservation of the planet, of plurality
and play—the risk of death never far in a world afraid of itself. We cannot be naïve about
the hard materiality of (the) settlement and the violences it does to us, to ours, to all, nor
can we delude ourselves into believing exodus was ever viable, “as if there was a space you
could carve out of the terrorizing state apparatus in order to exist outside its clutches and
forge some autonomy”.103 We can’t help being with(in) capitalism or (the) settlement, the
university or the hospital or the city—we can’t avoid the hold(s) of language and subject, of
nation and skin and class and gender.
Escape in this absolute sense, for now, remains impossible, and so to live anyway,
not naïve to the brutality of the normative while refusing to acquiesce to it, refusing the
snare of recognition while noting its inevitability, is to live appositionally and impossibly, as

103

Hartman & Wilderson 2003.

page 36 of 78

if from and as a kind of internal outside, the irreducible fugitivity of flux and flight as it gives
and takes refuge in the under and around and beyond of the unreal of the here and now.
Fugitivity is therefore always a movement, in movement, this impossible yet constant
“movement of escape, the stealth of the stolen that can be said, since it inheres in every
closed circle, to break every enclosure”.104 Accepting this and insisting on that “fugitive
impulse to rely on the undercommons for protection, to rely on the honor, and to insist on
the honor of the fugitive community”105 is to hope against and beyond hope, where the
latter is that which is offered in the hold of state recognition, in the hold of an adequately
intelligible colonial subjecthood, in the hold, that is, of (the) settlement. Our refusal of that
hope is self-preservation, in so far as we understand that the ultimate hope of that hope is
total assimilation and integration, which is not but nothing other than the final notes of
genocidal conquest. We refuse to leave however also in self-preservation, where what is
being preserved is not just us and ours in the here and now but also that fugitive public, the
“general inheritance of the shipped, the impossible tradition of those without tradition.”106
We hope only to find and follow that fugitive public, moving through and around these
holds, reaching for and from that sublime otherwise that cuts through “the public and the
private, the state and the economy.”107
The refusal at stake here is therefore also a refusal of the thinking that frames such
wild and wide-eyed disavowal as unthinking or unserious, a refusal of that which frames
such refusal as inaction or exodus. When what is being refused so often relies on, finds
coherence around, is made possible by the fugitivity that is generated in and as that refusal,

Moten Case for Blackness?
Harney & Moten 2013 40.
106 Harney & Moten 2013 150.
107 Harney & Moten 2013 61.
104
105

page 37 of 78

and when that refusal is given and taken in and as the appositional movements of “that
internal outside, that unassimilated underground”108 then the question of disengagement
falls apart. As Aria Dean puts it, “the black is always already mutually co-constituting capital
and subjecthood simultaneously.”109 It follows then that the state that deems itself an
authority to grant us recognition in the form of “an illusory right to what we do not have”110
is itself illusory and permeable, finding coherence only ever when called to regulate away
the black plans and fugitive labour of the undercommons. The dichotomous proscription to
either reform the state or overthrow it, to restore the university or flee, to save the
institutions or burn them down, dissolves into a distraction as we come to see that
revolutionary thought and action, which would better be described, if at all, as decolonial
thought and action, or as fugitivity in and as decolonial futurity, is always already possible
in every place that has been touched by coloniality, which is seemingly almost every place,
including and perhaps especially ourselves, our own beings and becomings, our own
epistemological, ontological, political and other assumptions, the language(s) by which we
are able to say or know any of this and the grammar(s) by which such enunciations are able
to make any sense at all.
Refusing the world and not the Earth, refusing to acquiesce and refusing to leave—
surely this is (im)possible, just the absurd sermons of the pathologically optimistic? To be
sure, at stake are certain (im)possibilities at the heart of (the) settlement, the untold and
uncontainable, always already existing reality of “fugitive movement in and out of the
frame, bar, or whatever externally imposed social logic.”111 We feel and follow this fugitive

Harney & Moten 2013 31.
Dean 2018 ‘Blaccelerationism’.
110 Harney & Moten 2013 18.
111 Moten Case for Blackness?
108
109

page 38 of 78

poetics through the undercommons of the here-and-now, its constant and unmediated
escape from and unsettling of every imposed order to appear for a moment as something
called “social life”, whose “relation to law is reducible neither to simple interdiction nor
bare transgression”.112 What is that “fugitive art of social life” that is “practiced on and over
the edge of politics” and “beneath its ground” —how does it feel, how does it move? Of
course, the point is we already know, that we have always already known, that we practise
this every day that we can find and be with each other, every moment that we can
remember that there is nothing wrong with us or ours, every night we rest in the embrace
of our dreams that are as real as anything.

112

Moten Case for Blackness?

page 39 of 78

'Cooperation Jackson': Solidarity Economies
and Black Self-Determination
Returning to face the machine, which shifts and spreads ceaselessly across the globe,
accumulating and disposing (the disposables, which increasingly seems as a category to
increase), refusal seems a certain (im)possibility.113 Not naïve to the enemy, knowing its
illusory incoherence, reminded all too often of the hard materiality of its unreal impositions,
the decolonial insurgent refuses capitalism in service of a memory of something else,
refusing to forget the (im)possibility of autonomous and shared living—refusing to forget,
that is, what remains evident everywhere around them, the irrepressible interconnectivity
and cooperation that remains both before and beyond (always under and around)
enclosure (eternally as its condition of possibility, as that which enclosure follows to (fail
to) enclose). Illusive though the enemy might be, it persists with force and fabrications of
fatalism, false desires and fake stories that for some reason won’t fade away, foreclosing the
future for those who thought they saw it first, frozen forever in the hold(s) of the here-andnow, the flat and frenzied fever-dream of neoliberal techno-capital. Refusing capitalism and
the coerced and cursed containment it carries over all, the dominance it assumes over
seemingly every facet of life and living, the commodification and territorialisation of all
things it brings relentlessly—seems indeed to require more or less a step away (and
towards) the world as we (un)know it. No wonder (for) the West, as the critical histories

Mbembe 2017: “The potential fusion of capitalism and animism presents a further implication: the very
distinct possibility that human beings will be transformed into animate things made up of coded digital data.
Across early capitalism, the term “Black” referred only to the condition imposed on peoples of African origin
(different forms of depredation, dispossession of all power of self-determination, and, most of all,
dispossession of the future and of time, the two matrices of the possible). Now, for the first time in human
history, the term “Black” has been generalized. This new fungibility, this solubility, institutionalized as a new
norm of existence and expanded to the entire planet, is what I call the Becoming Black of the world.”
113

page 40 of 78

articulated at the outset assert irrefutably: no wonder. Denying before all else (the all but
lost wonders of) his own insurgent and imaginative interiority, Modernity’s weary Man
wandered out (from itself), emerging from Europe’s Dark Ages on an awakening predicated
primarily upon consumptive constructions of whiteness and purity, on virulent ideologies
of fungibility and flesh—that is, on anti-blackness—that came before and variously found
their ways into Marx’s early and magisterial but nonetheless narrowly-conceived
theorisations of capital, accumulation, labour and exploitation.
Put differently: if decolonisation remains our horizon, it is insufficient to refuse
capitalism only to affirm communism, leaving untouched and unthought the hold(s) by
which Marx was held, those by which our inherited Marxisms continue to hold even the idea
of communal or shared living at all. Marx got a lot right, but he didn’t discover the idea of
collectivism. Held by modernity, historical materialism, the universalist assumptions of
bourgeois Europe, and the dream for better, Marx remains one of the most incisive
observers of capital. His ideas have found widespread articulation, inspiring and
overlapping with the freedom struggles of ‘colonised’ and ‘oppressed’ peoples around the
world. However, his theories remain incomplete—worse, the exclusions at the heart of
Marxism remain invisible, the unthought spectre of the Black (slave), the primitive
accumulation of slavery that had kicked off years before the first capitalist.114
Forged through decades of radical Black organising and class struggle in the Deep
South, the Jackson-Kush Plan follows innumerable forerunners and forebears “from the
New Afrikan Independence Movement (NAIM) in particular and the BLM [Black Liberation
Wilderson 2003 unsettles the canonical ‘left’ works of Gramsci and Marx via the black/slave, “vital to civil
society’s political economy: s/he kick-starts capital at its genesis and rescues it from its over-accumulation
crisis at its end… Civil society’s subaltern, the worker, is coded as waged, and wages are white. But marxism
has no account of this phenomenal birth and life-saving role played by the black subject”; see also Robinson
2000.
114

page 41 of 78

Movement] in general”.115 The self-determined and collective efforts of the Malcolm X
Grassroots Movement (MXGM) were central in instigating the People’s Hurricane Relief
Fund in the face of total government neglect and indifference to the (predominantly Black)
death and loss following Hurricane Katrina.116 The insurgent invention of the Jackson
Human Rights Coalition in the 1980s117 was similarly pivotal in organising against police
terror, white segregationist politics, and the other violent signs of the “the plantation bloc's
restoration" in the contemporary South.118 Reflecting on Cooperation Jackson, the solidarity
economy component of the plan, co-founder and co-director Kali Akuno references "eclectic
sources of inspiration—Mondragon worker cooperatives in Spain, Zapatistas, cooperatives
in the South going back 200 years in the Black community, projects in the early days of
Tanzania, Algeria, Guyana.”119 The People’s Assembly, the model of democratic social
organization at the heart of the plan, follows its roots “from the spiritual or prayer circles”
of “enslaved Afrikans”, who (dis)organised in stealth to sustain and find each other and
themselves, (de)forming community and resistance from the brutal (im)possibilities of the
hold, an irruptive and eruptive refusal that evidently resonates today in the dreams and
designs of Jackson’s Black, working, and poor communities.120
The deep and dark cuts of such broad (an)origins—which to be clear, even staying
within the Black South, predates the birth of Karl Marx—gives the Jackson-Kush Plan not
only its vision, but the vision also to recognise that in order to achieve that dream of selfdetermining, radically democratic, autonomous living that moved Marx and Malcolm alike, a
“critical break with capitalism” would be essential but insufficient without “the dismantling
Akuno 2013.
Katrina .
117 Jackson HRC .
118 Clyde 1998 x.
119 Akuno and Day 2017.
120 Akuno 2013.
115
116

page 42 of 78

of the American settler colonial project”.121 This is not simply to reorient our political and
ethical focus, although indeed this is often necessary; rather, it is the Jackson-Kush Plan’s
explicit (ap)position with(in) and against the “American settler colonial project” that is of
most significance (to their organising, to this thesis, to all of us). The plan’s historical (and
ecological and spiritual) scope and all the struggles and memories and traditions that it
holds and is held by is key to its visionary, unsettled and unsettling demands as it affords to
the communities and individuals working from or towards the plan the fugitive standpoint
(of no and every standpoint).122 In other words, in recognising the illegitimacy and illusion
of (the) settlement, the Jackson-Kush Plan discloses the (im)possibilities that eternally
remain internal, under and around the hold(s) of (the) settlement, gesturing from and
towards the ruptures in (the past that fracture) the here-and-now, suppressed socialities
and runaway dreams of communal living that continue to pierce the present with splinters
of hope and (im)possibility, (in)complete plans of productive fugitivity and fugitive
productivity.
Self-described as a “vehicle for sustainable community development, economic
democracy, and community ownership”,123 Cooperation Jackson emerged in 2013 from the
vision(s) of the Jackson-Kush Plan to develop a (re)generative solidarity network in
Jackson, Mississippi (and everywhere else) across and through four interconnected and
interdependent institutions: a federation of local green worker cooperatives and mutual aid
networks, a cooperative incubator and sustainable development centre, a communal school
Akuno 2013.
Robinson 2000 121: “Marx had not realised fully that the cargoes of laborers also contained African
cultures, critical mixes and admixtures of language and thought, of cosmology and metaphysics, of habits,
beliefs, and morality... African labour brought the past with it, a past that had produced it... the embryo of the
demon that would be visited on the whole enterprise of primitive accumulation", forming the ground of slave
refusal/revolt.
121
122

123

Cooperation Jackson 2017.

page 43 of 78

and training facility, and a community-owned and controlled bank. The cooperative is
maintained democratically through a People’s Assembly, a model of participatory selfgovernance and Black (and brown and poor) self-determination, organised without
hierarchies via democratically determined agendas and working bodies.124 Linking with
already existing regional and national solidarity economy networks (like the Southern
Grassroots Economics Project and the US Solidarity Economy Network), and drawing on a
wealth of theory and praxis elaborated in struggle through the 1980s and 90s in Latin
America, Cooperation Jackson works for (and through and with) the multiplication of
solidarity networks of mutually reinforcing cooperative initiatives. It seeks “a regenerative
economy…. that not only restores and replenishes the resources it extracts from the earth,
but aids in the actual restoration of our earth's ecosystems”.125 What it might (and indeed in
places like Detroit, New York, and Atlanta is already beginning to126) look like is a
regenerative network of mutually reinforcing yet interdependent and localised eco-villages
self-sustaining via community production (of energy, food, life, and so on), enmeshed with
urban and regional farms, farmers markets and community land trusts held by and holding
communal financing and collective and ecologically-constrained enterprise, eventually
evolving an autonomous public sector providing communal health care, transportation,
education, housing, and whatever else the people themselves decide they want or need,
according to (democratically determined and ecologically constrained) ability and need—
elaborating and embodying an unsettling, dynamic, “all-embracing and class-oriented”
model of community and worker unionism, centring the need to “build genuine worker

Akuno 2017.
Akuno 2017.
126 Examples
124
125

page 44 of 78

power from the ground up… as the core transformative force to democratize the local
economy and society”.127
Not afraid to push the vision to its (im)possible limits,128 Cooperation Jackson has
already started towards what Akuno describes as “a critical initiative to own and control
the means of industrial production”, which are increasingly represented by digital and
automated—3D printing, quantum computing, procedural and artificially-intelligent—
production technologies that are distributed and decentralised yet collectively and
democratically owned and operated by “members of geographically and/or intentionally
defined communities”.129 These ideas—described broadly as Community Production—
serve as the foundation for Cooperation Jackson’s ultimate campaign to transform Jackson
into “an innovative hub of sustainable manufacturing and fabrication”, a kind of model “city
of the future”130 guided by “zero-emission and zero-waste”131 principles, a ‘Transition City’
anchored by not only cooperative 'fab(rication) labs'—able to produce "build-to-order, high
quality, high volume 3D-printed products... from toys to medical aids and tools” as well as
serving “essential production needs”132 of the community such as green housing or other
services—but also an education division to train local workers and community members in
distributed fabrication, open-source design and coding, and sustainable development. This
is all guided by a commitment to democratising technology in general but particularly those

Akuno 2017.
Akuno 2017.
129 Akuno 2017.
130 Cooperation Jackson Community Production Initiative 2017.
131 Akuno 2017.
132 Akuno 2017.
127
128

page 45 of 78

technologies that increasingly constitute means of production, (pre)figuring such collective
and visionary efforts as “a prelude towards the democratic transition to eco-socialism.”133
Indeed, this might sound like the communist dream, but it remains a dream, an
impressive but nonetheless impotent economic plan of reform so long as we remain held
“within a capitalist framework of social production governed by a bourgeois social
order”.134 Cooperation Jackson therefore recognises the strategic necessity of what they call
‘dual power’, differentiating between autonomous power—the collective efforts of building
solidarity power “outside of the state” primarily through People’s Assemblies and Solidarity
Economies—but also strategic and fugitive engagements with “electoral politics on a
limited scale” in refusal of its legitimacy and with the goal of subverting its logics and social
relations, diluting its strength, and containing “the dictatorial power and ideological
influence of monopoly capital”.135 In ‘dual power’ we see an unsettling and unsettled site of
contradictory and compromising movements, a fracture in the walls and halls of the state,
through and from which fugitivity flows, under and around the hold(s) of the here-and-now,
moving to and for a different kind of beat altogether.
Cooperation Jackson are certainly awake to not only the changes and challenges that
characterise the contemporary moment—the dominance of the tech giants and their unholy
union with the state and the police, their violent and impersonal imposition into every inch
of our lives—but also the fugitive potentials that such technologies disclose, revealing
contradictions that appear on the surface like splinters to be exploited and exploded. In its
unsettling embrace of what might be called ‘fugitive development’, given and taken in their
wild and wide-eyed plans for a future city amid a regenerative network of productive and
Akuno 2017.
Akuno 2013.
135 Akuno 2013; see also Akuno 2014.
133
134

page 46 of 78

cooperative local enterprises, Cooperation Jackson refuses capitalism as it unsettles it from
within, from underneath and around and beyond, strategically leaning in to the language
and (il)logics of the enterprising ‘developer’, however for goals explicitly opposed (and
apposed) to those of neoliberal extractive capitalism. By assuming this unsettling
(ap)position of the fugitive entrepreneur, the forerunners of the Jackson Kush Plan
recognised not only the productive potential of the working class population, but also the
‘untapped’ industries and interests in and through which they hoped to thrive. In the face of
the economic, industrial, and infrastructural neglect that characterises many cities of the
Deep South, Cooperation Jackson instead sees this as opportunity, the “relatively sparse
concentration of capital in Mississippi” affording a degree of “breathing room on the
margins and within the cracks of the capitalist system”, in which a radical and visionary
project of self-determination for Black and working-class people might manoeuvre,
experiment, and thrive, building upon “a tremendous degree of pent up social demand
waiting to be fulfilled”.136 The potential of ‘green energy’ and sustainable development is
similarly viewed, identified as an opportunity to “get ahead of the curve” amid an increasing
awareness of the viability of renewables.137 The explosions of the Internet and the digital
era more generally revealed certain (im)possibilities of connection and communication
with(in) the hold(s) of the here-and-now, the contradiction of feeling so alienated in a world
so connected, bringing fugitive communities together across distances previously
unimaginable—but the progression of (capital and its) technology notably also reveals, as it
did to Marx so many years ago, the very real possibility of working less, of working
differently, of working not at all or for or with or as something else entirely, “making a

136
137

Akuno 2017.
Akuno 2017.

page 47 of 78

dramatic new orientation to work and labor possible”.138 These are the contradictions
identified by Cooperation Jackson that they work to exploit, unsettling the circuits of capital
from within and against the hold(s) of (the) settlement, guided by a commitment first and
foremost to “regenerating the bounty of life on our planet, in all its diversity” but yet
nonetheless welcoming “non-extractive, patient capital to move on many fronts”,139 such as
by investing in the future of cooperative, ecologically-constrained solidarity initiatives. This
suggests the emergence of potentially unusual alliances and contradictory movements,
navigated strategically and dynamically with a view towards the decolonial horizon,
unsettling any coalitional interaction or exchange it moves with—the invocation of ‘patient
capital’, for example, suggests an interesting refusal and reconfiguration of taken-forgranted ideas about the role, value, and meaning of capital.

138
139

Akuno 2017; see also Weeks 2011.
Akuno 2017.

page 48 of 78

'Open Source Gender’:
Hacking the Human (For) and (From) the Trans Sublime
The fugitivity of queer and trans reality has refused and unsettled the imposed and
illusory heteronormative reproductive regime of colonial modernity since before Europe
even became Europe.140 Innumerable peoples around the world before (and after)
colonisation recognised and celebrated genders other than ‘male/female’, while many
others didn’t have a ‘gender system’ at all or lived and understood ‘gender’ in ways that
can’t be contained by our (or any) received grammars—countless continue to do so
everywhere, eroding away at the inflicted incoherence that is Man’s normativity.141 Much
can also be said about the weaponization of this binary in the context of the burgeoning
empires of modernity as well as the many historical and ongoing sites of struggle and
celebration that coalesce around notions of gendered being or becoming,142 suggesting
fugitive sites and (de)formations of strategic essentialism.143 In any case, before and beyond
all this, trans reality—the a priori indeterminacy and fluidity of all life that it reveals and
affirms and that reveals and affirms it—refuses neat and total categorisation into any label
or acronym, instead gesturing towards, from and as the uncontainable and “unimaginable
infinitude precipitated by transgender proliferative excess”,144 unsettling any assumption of
a heteronormative and/or deterministic gender order, which appears suddenly as the
insufficient auxiliary it always was, following and failing to frame the enraptured eruption

See C. Riley Snorton 2017 for a critical history of blackness and transness—rather, a “set of political
propositions, theories of history, and writerly experiments” organized around “occasions for bringing both
signs— blackness and transness—into the same frame”.
141 Pre colonial gender
142 Witch Frederici, see Lloyd 2005 13-53.
143 This is Spivak’s formulation, as elaborated by Lloyd 2005 55-71.
144 Singer 2011.
140

page 49 of 78

of representational failure, the excessive and proliferative rupture(s) that fugitively
(dis)appears in and as the “trans sublime”,145 splintering the here-and-now of the Man and
his modern world order.
Refusing to forget the boundless sublimity of trans being and becoming that predates and precipitates the colonial (im)position of gendered subjectivity, and recognising
therefore the ever-present (im)possibility of escape, trans and queer artists, workers,
stoners, hackers, planners, activists, dreamers and scholars continue to find and forge(t),
follow and (de)form fugitive ways through and beyond the hold(s) of the here-and-now, of
the institution(s) and language and representation, unsettling them from within and around
and moving always for and from the preservation of uncontained, uncontainable life. What
this means or looks like for those whose realities are strained against by the unreal of the
normative, who feel the brutality of cisheteropatriarchy straining against them and what
they know to be real and right, is a question with innumerable answers, each inevitably
inflected by the many intersections of race, language, class, family, religion, ability, and so
on, that are held by and that hold the context in question. The plurality of gendered (or
otherwise) ways of being and becoming also make these generalisations appear clumsy and
incomplete, and this is always to be expected. These holds that we call order, language,
theory, will always be playing catch-up—and so the acronym grows.
One possible question that departs from and is made possible by this queer and
trans refusal, that moves and imagines (for, from, as) the life and vitality generated by the
proliferative and transformative, uncontainable and unsettling excess of trans sublimity, is
the question that begins and fames the collaborative and interdisciplinary research

145

Singer 2011.

page 50 of 78

project—the fugitive plans, the queer, black, trans study—of Open Source Oestrogen: What
if it was possible to make estrogen in the kitchen?146 The assumed totality of the biomedicalindustrial complex and the colonial and colonising narratives of biological essentialism,
cisheteronormativity, and scientific mastery that sustain it and that it sustains might make
such a question seem unthinkable. Even many who recognise or celebrate or even embody
trans or queer reality might hesitate at the idea of anyone, regardless of identity or
whatever, attempting to synthesise biochemical products ‘in the kitchen’.147 At stake are the
‘black-boxes’ of scientific (bio/necropolitical) knowledge and of hormonal and biological
(re)production and their most precious and powerful of “politically assisted procreation
[technologies]”,148 that being cisheterosexuality and its co-constituting (binary)
imaginaries of (once) pristine and impermeable (white) bodies—which must yet be
remembered as the imposed (dis)order emerging from and against the a priori reality and
vitality of (gender)fluid indeterminacy.
Refusing all of this (that was refused to them), gender hackers and queer projects
like Open Source Oestrogen and Open Source Gender Codes149 embrace the always already
existing “toxicity” of the here-and-now, resonating with Donna Haraway’s 1990 refusal of
the human in way of the cyborg150, taken and given in (to) the untold and ever present
(im)possibilities of queer and trans being and becoming amid a “queering landscape… [and]
an increasingly alien world”. In their recognition of bodies as media(ted), mutable, and
unstable—in their refusal, that is, of the colonial (and colonised and colonising) figure of
Man grafted to the flesh of the body, straining endlessly to contain it—trans hackers, queer

Tsang 2017.
Pushback?
148 Preciado 2013 47.
149 Paul 2015; Open Source Gendercodes 2016; Hammond and Pivnik 2017.
150 Haraway 1985.
146
147

page 51 of 78

dreamers and gender insurgents of all or no inclinations disclose the incoherence of
(eco)heteronormativity to reveal its many violent materialities.151 The ‘black box’ of the
body itself is exploded open and unsettled to reveal its excess, its incoherence and
messiness, its irreducible (fugitive, trans, black) refusal to be a single being.152 This
similarly reveals the colonial, modern-scientific, technological, and bio/necropolitical
structures and agendas that continually “regulate and pollute” our bodies and the bodies of
nonhuman species and the Earth more generally, disturbing attempts to discipline the
disorderly and disturbed. It is however (im)precisely this always already existing
disturbance and the fugitive and generative ways that it disturbs us and all that remains the
condition of possibility for any (gender) expression or representation, and so in celebration
of the disturbed and in preservation of our mutual disturbance we refuse shame for “toxic
embrace” of all that we are, have been, are yet to be and forever will be.153 Elaborating the
molecular sense-making of semiosis, the inherent malleability and plasticity of the body
invites autopoietic interactions with “a queering landscape, because adapting, not
barricading, is how it [the unstable body] builds resilience for a toxic future”.154
To be clear, the promise of affordable and accessible hormonal products delivered
via distributed networks of open source design and production is of most significance to the
many for whom these products signify safety and wellbeing, for the many whose
multiplicitous realities and lives are trailed by the forceful imposition of the normative.
Access to hormone replacement therapy in the form of hormonal supplements or blockers
is often limited, expensive, and behind long waiting times.155 Such exclusions are imposed

Hormonal environmental toxicity.
Moten 2018.
153 Tsang 2017.
154 Tsang 2017.
155 Necati 2018; Metastasio et al. 2018; Rotondi et al. 2013.
151
152

page 52 of 78

alongside the exerted incursion of modern science and its coercive classification and
accounting (of genders, bodies, life(s) of all kinds), the medical industrial complex emerging
as overseer, evolving into and enmeshing with the contemporary convergence (amid what
some call the “pharmacopornographic era”156) of the psychiatric-carceral-industrialcomplex, biopolitically and necropolitically regulating, infecting and surveilling every body
it encloses, each relegated to a position of differential proximity to (the risk of) death and
disposability. This is all to say that the bio/necropolitical (re)production of the figure of
Man and his co-constituting codes of (eco)heteronormativity—like (the) settlement in
general—requires continual work and maintenance, persistent policing of its (im)position,
patrolling uncertain borders to protect an illusory sense of self as whole, a reactionary
violence of self-renovation at the expense of an elusive excess. Man, at base, relies on the
basest of senses, prioritising grasp if not his gaze; and so, out of reach, that which most
confounds his viciously narrow and violent view is, as it were, the most visible, threatening
in its vital and fugitive excess—which he moves with urgency to extinguish to settle himself
once more.
In other words: there is no time to be naïve—and certainly then such terrible and
totalising terms must be refused. Recognising this, the question that opens Open Source
Estrogen asks about much more than the fugitive production of hormonal products. What if
it was possible to make subjectivity in the kitchen? What if it was possible to make lifesaving medicine in the kitchen? What if it was possible to study and care (for and with),
preserve and create (our lives, our beings and becomings) in the kitchen? Given (to) such
unsettling and unsettled, (trans)generative questions, the fugitive potential in distributed
technologies of self-care and self-making—black and toxic technologies of hacking (away)
156

Preciado 2013.

page 53 of 78

the self—unseats the imposed order that prohibits the care and communication it can not
contain, the always already common underground of fugitive care, queer love and trans life.
Elaborating a tradition of “biotechnical civil disobedience” routed through the fugitive
potentials of crowdfunding and speculative design, distributed and decentralised in the
spirit of free software and ‘kitchen’/’workshop’ amateurism, the vision of distributed
networks of care cuts through that which ceaselessly circumscribes our study, our attempts
to see ourselves and each other as we could (and do), to dream and design and make plans
to preserve the life and vitality that we hold and that holds us. By “gaining access to and
appropriating tools of science for queer agendas”,157 stealing and sharing (as it was always
already all of ours anyway) the technical knowledge and material resources to produce
biochemical products of all kinds, such insurgent initiatives signal an ongoing preservation
and planning within and against the hold(s) of the institution, from the hospital to the
university, the lab to the library, following the fugitive queer public, the black
(trans)generativity from and through which emerges the messiness of our mutual and
queer, toxic, trans futurity.

157

Open Source Gendercodes 2016.

page 54 of 78

‘Country Needs People’: Indigenous Rangers
and Refusing (the) Settlement
As recognised and remembered by Moreton-Robinson, Smith, and so many others,
Indigenous Sovereignty remains, escaping its naming, living in and through the “presence of
Indigenous people and their land”, eternally unsettling and “haunting the house that Jack
built”.158 Indeed, the settlers built not only their homes but also their schools and churches
on grounds they fatally (mis)understood—grounds on which they claimed to see nothing,
failing therefore to see just about everything—sealing the fate of their endless
(un)settlement. For what they failed to see—and what was perhaps impossible for them to
see given how they saw (and continue to see)—was (and continues to be) the complex,
interrelating, (im)materially-embedded vitality of Country, the deep, ecological, spiritual
and cultural network of relations that the land holds and by which the land is held, holding
all of us and everything, every life and other thing, giving the lie to the colony and to all
categories of this kind.159 In attempting to settle all of this empty land, the settler is
endlessly and inescapably unsettled, ontologically disturbed by the omnipresence of
Indigenous Sovereignty,160 which eternally remains despite the settler’s serial efforts of
settlement, the persistence of his (im)position that strains to name and contain the
uncontainable in order to say something about himself—that is to say that Indigenous
Sovereignty remains the condition of (im)possibility for (the) settlement, refusing (the)
Moreton-Robinson 2015 31.
Deborah Bird Rose 2013 100: “[Country is] all sentient, communicative, relational and inter-active… the
way you live… the way your knowledge arises and is worked with… the context of life and the emergent result
of life being lived… through looped and tangled relationships. Country has a past, a present and a future, it
gives and receives life… a matrix of communicative inter-action… there is no outside place of knowledge, and
no outside place where one is exempt from participation… an entangled mix of multispecies situatedness.”
158
159

160

Moreton-Robinson 2015 46.

page 55 of 78

settlement, therefore generating (un)settlement. Always (an)originary, refusal in the view
of invasion is a decolonial refusal, taking the form of armed frontier resistance and guerrilla
warfare, strategic engagement with colonial politics and culture, protest and petition and
performance, art and activism and academia and much else—as Smith notes, refusal of
coloniality “is embedded in our political discourses, our humour, poetry, music, story telling
and other common sense ways of passing on both a narrative of history and an attitude
about history”, emerging from and expressed in “the lived experiences of imperialism and
colonialism”.161
‘Indigenous Sovereignty’, or rather that which this name strains to contain, exceeds
any such representation, gesturing to and from and as a decolonial and decolonising
fugitivity that eternally remains under and around every demand made from a
compromised, colonised, (im)possible (im)position. The demand for Indigenous
Sovereignty is, in other words, something of the sound of a decolonial and decolonising
demand made from within (and around and under and beyond) the hold(s) of (the)
settlement. Revealing the (im)possibilities of (de)colonisation, First Nations people refused
(the) settlement, the white lie of terra nullius that proclaimed their non-existence, then
ongoing generations of policy and practice circumscribing their incapacity for ownership or
anything—refusing to forget themselves and something quite otherwise to what the white
man thought (he saw) and thinks (he owns), refusing to forget responsibility and relation
and the tens of thousands of years of knowledges, stories, and practices by which they knew
this, by which they claim Sovereignty and by which Sovereignty claims them. This refusal,
then and now, given and taken in celebration and preservation, in strategy and struggle,
moves through and under and around every circuit of (the) settlement, in places that might
161

Smith 2012 20.

page 56 of 78

at first appear strange, such as in the government-funded, economically-oriented
Indigenous Ranger programs.
Emerging in 2007 through the now defunct Working on Country Program alongside
the older Indigenous Protected Areas federal funding framework, Indigenous ranger
programs are ‘officially’ mandated to “create meaningful employment, training and career
pathways for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in land and sea management…
[support] Indigenous people to combine traditional knowledge with conservation training…
[and develop] partnerships with research, education, philanthropic and commercial
organisations to share skills and knowledge, engage with schools, and generate additional
income and jobs in the environmental, biosecurity, heritage and other sectors.”162 The
overwhelming preoccupation with having a steady and respectable occupation in the
context of global neoliberal capital infects what otherwise might sound like an okay idea.
The highly compromised nature of the situation is reflected in the government’s official
2014-15 report on “How Indigenous Ranger and Indigenous Protected Areas programmes
are working on country”, which continues to grant primacy to technical and economic
outcomes, not failing to maintain the colonial and capitalist myth that country is something
to be ‘worked on’ and ‘managed’ (something wild to be tamed/made productive). The
foreword of the report—written by Minister of Indigenous Affairs Nigel Scullion, whose
commitment to the wellbeing of Indigenous communities remains to be seen163—concludes
by praising the programmes, “which strike a balance between providing jobs for Indigenous
people, environmental management and opportunities for commercial development”.164 In
the context of ongoing colonisation and dispossession, appropriation and commodification

Working on Country 2017.
See Hunter 2016 and Hutchens 2018.
164 Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet 2016.
162
163

page 57 of 78

of traditional knowledges and practices, privatisation and patenting of genetic and other
natural resources, and much else of concern to the health and wellbeing of First Nations
people (and all of us)—there are certainly many reasons to be suspicious.
Framed instead as “a contemporary expression of the unbroken and ancient
connection of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to this continent”,165 the
programs seem also to suggest certain (im)possibilities within “the house that Jack built”,166
(im)possible splinters through which we might find and follow Sovereignty (and its fugitive
excess) as it moves (through) the here-and-now. This description is given by the non-profit,
non-partisan campaign ‘Country Needs People’—a name that puts Country first while
recognising the vitality of its People, reversing and unsettling the official frame of ‘Working
on Country’. By centring the richness of First Nations "traditional knowledge" and the
primacy and generativity of "connection to country”, while not dismissing the technologies
and “techniques of modern science”, Country Needs People recognises first and foremost
that Indigenous rangers “represent the frontline of much of the necessary work to protect
nature across Australia”, citing as successes “the protection of biodiversity across vast areas
of Australia, turning around damaging trends in habitat degradation and species decline…
preventing wildlife extinctions, controlling wildfire and limiting the impact of feral animals
and invasive weeds”.167 Individual case studies are diverse and span the continent, each
responding to the unique challenges and opportunities of its local context by “providing
locally skilled teams of workers able to both remediate and prevent specific environmental
threats”. From the KJ Martu Rangers restoring the health and biodiversity of the western
deserts by combining sophisticated mosaic burning techniques developed over thousands

Country Needs People 2018.
Moreton-Robinson 2015 31.
167 O’Leary et al 2017.
165
166

page 58 of 78

of years with contemporary mapping and planning technologies like satellite imaging and
aerial ignition, to the Warddeken Daluk Rangers preserving and maintaining significant
cultural sites, working with the next generation to share and celebrate culture through song
and ceremony as well as motion sensor cameras and specifically designed databases—each
program moves relatively autonomously and independently, always “with consent, support
and active leadership of their local communities and senior Traditional Owners” and
therefore maintaining an unbroken line of Sovereignty. The programs emerged after all
through initiatives by Indigenous landholders in the 1980s to “re-establish themselves as
owners and managers of their traditional estates”.168 As the nation claims the ‘worldleading’ status and success of these programs, we aught never to forget where the real work
is (and has always been) happening.
The contextually-situated nature of these cases and their sensitivity to local
environments and communities, as well as the consequent ‘success’ of such strategies, all
speak to (and from and with) traditional knowledges that have been developed over tens of
thousands of years of evolving practice in and with local environments. This knowledge is
always contextual, spatially and temporally dynamic, interwoven and inseparable with
traditions of song and story that recognise the primacy of the land and the complex web of
interrelations that it holds and by which it is held, and so it is also the knowledge that is
centred and celebrated, inherited and maintained, through the work of Indigenous Rangers.
As Sovereignty moves (through, under and around) the work of Country Needs People
however, with(in) the compromised (im)position of modernity and (the) settlement and its
federally-funded and monitored programs of conservationist enclosure, potentially
unfamiliar and unsettling situations are engendered, (de)formed and (dis)figured. Not
168

O’Leary et al 2017.

page 59 of 78

forgetting the (an)originary, generative primacy of Indigenous Sovereignty demands first
and foremost the rejection of any attempt to contain it, which means among many things
the rejection of its relegation to a pristine, ‘natural’, ‘pre-modern’ past. While the specific
materiality of the contemporary unreal of capital is by several measures more intensely and
forcefully destructive than much if not all else the Earth has seen, it nonetheless pales into
insignificance against the (historical, ecological, spiritual) continuity of Indigenous
Sovereignty—which is also to recognise that First Nations peoples have been managing and
manipulating the environment for tens of thousands of years through spiritual and cultural
constellations of knowledges-as-stories-as-technologies-as-becomings. To recognise and
depart from this reality is not to reposition or re-essentialise First Nations people as
belonging to or having some inherent connection to the past and its assumed wildness; on
the contrary, this is to recognise the unreality of (the) settlement, which really was and
continues to be nothing other than an invasive force, having ‘won’ by quite literally no other
measure than this basest of barbarisms, that being the physical strength of the grasp, the
forceful edge of its violence.
Refusing to forget Sovereignty, the inter-relational multi-species entanglement that
holds and is held by Country, Country Needs People recognises the social and economic
benefits of the Ranger Programs in the context of this broader vision, a dynamic vision
towards and from the decolonial horizon that is not naïve to or dismissive of the materiality
of the here-and-now, a strategic vision that hasn’t forgotten history and so knows what
needs to be said and done to secure funding/futurity beyond the hold(s) of the here-andnow. The programs’ economic successes—which include high levels of employee retention,
increasing demand from Indigenous communities for more ranger positions, and consistent
educational and training outcomes—do not preclude the recognition of Indigenous

page 60 of 78

Sovereignty. What are reported as “spillover benefits”—which include improved health
outcomes and behaviours and determinants of health, strengthened family and community
relations, improved income security and financial independence, reduced alcohol and
substance abuse, reduced crime and incarceration, and therefore reduced government costs
from lower expenditure on public services—remind us that nothing is reducible to the
individual or to economics, that the past and its legacies are always with us in the here-andnow, and regardless these are all still successes worth celebrating. The programs,
representing a “contemporary story of opportunity and hope based on practical outcomes
and alleviation of economic and social disadvantage”, indeed seem to be successful “where
many other approaches have failed”, but the reasons for this are crucial: provision of
meaningful and flexible employment, focus on cultural heritage and environment, and
Indigenous ownership and leadership.169
The challenge is therefore always to remember, to refuse to forget, the historical and
ongoing imposition of that “economic and social disadvantage” that the Rangers’ work
alleviates, a forgetting that fails to fully articulate in the work of the Rangers but
nonetheless trails them in the hold(s) of representation and (the) settlement, in the policies
and institutions through which their work is channelled. In the documentation from both
Country Needs People and Working On Country, there is no such acknowledgement of the
ongoing legacies of colonisation and why seemingly so many Indigenous people struggle to
find meaningful employment or education—but comparing this absence in each example
might suggest a trace of fugitivity, a strategic absence in the former example, awake to its
compromised (ap)position as it moves so near the institutions of colonial governance and
capture, indeed relying directly on its funding and consent, perhaps choosing to stay quiet
169

Bueren et al 2015.

page 61 of 78

on the revolutionary rhetoric and deferring to the longer game of fugitive preservation and
refusal, throwing and finding faith in its excess, in all that which remains uncontainable and
so becomes elaborated in the great (ecological/spiritual) debt of Indigenous Sovereignty. In
the latter example of Working on Country, this blind spot might be in service of invoking
other colonial relics, like the ‘Noble Savage’ assumed to hold an inherent affinity with
nature, or the presumption that Indigenous people are passive and therefore more prone to
being manipulated by political or economic pressure, and the paternalism and distancing
that drives these and all racist representations. Similarly problematic is the funding
framework itself, which is "based on a competitive, criteria-based assessment”170 and
therefore presupposes something like a free market of exchange in which different claims
are made and valued against each other and the nation-state, which is of course interested
in itself and its heritage, its natural wonders and world image.
The many positive accounts from Indigenous Rangers suggest these worries might
be overexaggerated, and the decentralised and semi-autonomous nature of the programs
mean that the stated (economic, technical, normalising) "governmental aims are not neatly
transposed". In any case, such “contradictions”, “unstable relations” and “unusual alliances”
constitute much of what Indigenous scholar Martin Nakata has called the ‘cultural
interface’, and as Jon Altman writes of his long friendships and anthropological work with
the Kuninjku People, “living in an [IPA] is not as straightforward as some might think or
idealise; it is a form of being that is riven with contradictions, tensions, political conflicts
and difficult decisions.”

170

Bueren et al 2015.

page 62 of 78

Follow(ing) the Fugitive Public (Forever)
And so, it seems, the fugitive public moves through the hold(s) of the here-and-now
as an open secret that is always already ours, (dis)appearing momentarily in and as these
acts of refusal. Such movements, noises, imaginings, plans and dreams escape confinement
or description, existing in the underground and outer space of the institution, unsettling its
foundations and borders. The call to order, that call to an order that never seems able to
fully cohere, nonetheless recognises fugitivity, indeed is only made possible by its
(mis)recognition of the fugitivity that moves through and around it. They recognise each
other but in a way that doesn’t map out dialectically. Order follows fugitivity around like its
awkward and incomplete shadow, forever failing to fully cover its tracks. All of its
assumptions of order wouldn't (know how to) exist otherwise. Wherever we find or feel the
hold, we also always (fail to) find fugitivity, always already a step ahead, unsettling and
staying forever fugitive to even the fugitive.
And what about technology, the raw materials of the here-and-now? What might
other technologies of refusal look or feel like? How can other existing technologies be
strategically engaged, hacked and unsettled in service of the decolonial horizon? What
madnesses are invoked, what flights of fantasy and prophetic projects are hatching in light
of this scandal of fugitive innovation and development? If those questions are asking
something about the technologies of the undercommons, then what’s the undercommons of
technology, the wild beneath and beyond that gives form to the (un)real of technique and
tech? Techno-utopian fantasies aside, we must still at least consider the potentialities that
remain buried in the machines before us.[aa] What remains fugitive to the machine, in or
under the code, before the algorithm, before the archive, before the alpha?

page 63 of 78

A shared and ongoing commitment to the decolonial horizon, whatever or wherever
that might be—this is what must always be remembered. The fugitive landscapes
considered here share this commitment to life and living before and beyond the unreality of
the here-and-now, beyond and around the mediation of the market and the academy, the
hospital and the machine. Refusal is always irreducibly twinned with preservation, where
what is being preserved is also always something other than ourselves, a fugitive
remainder, an elusive and eternal excess. These fugitive visions and black plans move from
and towards and as that life and vitality that was (im)possible then and remains
(im)possible now, revealing itself in splinters and sparks of refusal, unsettling (the)
settlement. That decolonial horizon is where we always (hope to) walk, where we look for
and from, driven by a delirium that delights in disturbing the dignified and disciplined,
inevitably yet indifferently disclosing delivrance. This optimism is hope against and beyond
hope, cut with the harsh materiality of the unreal, which we will never forget is killing us,
even and especially in our mad and wild celebrations of the otherwise.
So the fugitive falls, again and again and again, out of step with history, refusing to be
settled, single, steady in space and time, refusing to forget the prayers she learned from
everybody. And she won’t stop singing, calling us in, dancing the “war of apposition” to the
rhythm of that antiphonal, broken, black beat, gesturing from and to and as that non-world
of ceaseless rupture and (im)possibility, “the common beyond and beneath—before and
before—enclosure”. We try only to trace her steps, then and now, here and forever, to
follow her into and with that fugitive public, that underground society of friends, the eternal
refuge of refusal that is given and taken in the undercommons of the institution, of the
modern order, of the brutal, beautiful, black here-and-now.
“Can’t you hear them whisper one another’s touch?”

page 64 of 78

references
"#TransformDH | Toward a Digital Humanities of Transformative Research, Pedagogy, and
Activism for Social Justice, Accessibility, and Inclusion." #TransformDH. N.p., 28 Oct.
2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer. "“Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass
Deception, The”." The SAGE Encyclopedia of Economics and Society(n.d.): n. pag. Web.
Akuno, Kali. The Jackson–Kush Plan: The Struggle for Black Self-Determination and Economic
Democracy. N.p.: Malcolm X Grassroots Movement & the New Afrikan People’s
Organization, 2013. Print.
Akuno, Kali. "People's Assembly's Overview: The Jackson People's Assembly
Model." Navigating the Storm. N.p., 17 Nov. 2014. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Akuno, Kali, and Ajamu Nangwaya. "Build and Fight: The Program and Strategy of
Cooperation Jackson." Jackson Rising: The Struggle for Economic Democracy and
Black Self Determination in Jackson, Mississippi. Montreal, Qué bec: Daraja, 2017. 3-41.
Print.
Akuno, Kali, and Gyasi Williams. "Countering The Fabrication Divide." Cooperation Jackson.
N.p., 2018. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Allam, Lorena, Calla Wahlquist, and Nick Evershed. "The 147 Dead: Terrible Toll of
Indigenous Deaths in Custody Spurs Calls for Reform." The Guardian. Guardian News
and Media, 27 Aug. 2018. Web.
Artist, American. "Black Gooey Universe." unbag - Issue 2: End. N.p., 2018. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Australia. Australian Human Rights Commission. Indigenous Deaths in Custody 1989 to 1996.
N.p.: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission, 1996. Web.
Australia. Australian Human Rights Commission. Bringing Them Home: Report of the
National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children
from Their Families. N.p.: Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, 1997.
Web.
Australian Army. "In Defence of Australian Sovereignty." Australian Army. Australian Army,
10 June 2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Baldwin, Jon. "In Digital We Trust: Bitcoin Discourse, Digital Currencies, and Decentralized
Network Fetishism." Nature News. Nature Publishing Group, 13 Feb. 2018. Web.
Barta, Tony. "Relations of Genocide : Land and Lives in the Colonization of Australia."
Genocide 2 (2008): 102-14. Print.

page 65 of 78

Bartlett, Jamie. "Forget Far-right Populism – Crypto-anarchists Are the New Masters." The
Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 04 June 2017. Web.
Baum, Fran, Toby Freeman, David Sanders, Ronald Labonté, Angela Lawless, and Sara
Javanparast. "Comprehensive Primary Health Care under Neo-liberalism in
Australia." Social Science & Medicine 168 (2016): 43-52. Web.
Bell, Myrtle P., Joy Leopold, Daphne Berry, and Alison V. Hall. "Diversity, Discrimination, and
Persistent Inequality: Hope for the Future through the Solidarity Economy
Movement." Journal of Social Issues74.2 (2018): 224-43. Web.
Bellacasa, Maria Puig De La. "Matters of Care in Technoscience: Assembling Neglected
Things." Social Studies of Science41.1 (2010): 85-106. Web.
Bellacasa, María Puig De La. "‘Nothing Comes Without Its World’: Thinking with Care." The
Sociological Review60.2 (2012): 197-216. Web.
Benjamin, Walter. "On the Concept of History." Frankfurt School: On the Concept of History
by Walter Benjamin. Trans. Dennis Redmond. N.p., 2001[1940]. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Benjamin, Walter, Howard Eiland, and Michael W. Jennings. Walter Benjamin | Selected
Writings, Volume 4: 1938-1940. Trans. Edmund Jephcott. Cambridge: Harvard UP,
2003. Print.
Bozelko, Chandra. "Think Prison Labor Is a Form of Slavery? Think Again." Los Angeles
Times. Los Angeles Times, 20 Oct. 2017. Web.
Brook, Benedict. "Bed Linen and Boomerangs — the Surprising Products Made by
Prisoners." News.Com.Au. N.p., 28 Mar. 2017. Web.
Bueren, Martin Van, Trish Worland, Alex Svanberg, and Jeff Lassen, comps. Working for Our
Country: A Review of the Economic and Social Benefits of Indigenous Land and Sea
Management. Rep. Country Needs People, Pew Charitable Trusts and Synergies
Economic Consulting, 1 Nov. 2015. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Burgess, Christopher P., Fay H. Johnston, Helen L. Berry, Joseph McDonnell, Dean Yibarbuk,
Charlie Gunabarra, Albert Mileran, and Ross S. Bailie. "Healthy Country, Healthy
People: The Relationship between Indigenous Health Status and “caring for
Country"." The Medical Journal of Australia190.10 (2009): 567-72. Web.
Cabinet, Prime Minister and. "Indigenous Rangers - Working on Country." Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet. N.p., 18 Mar. 2016. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Carraher, Seamas. "On a Day This Week... Walter Benjamin." Global Rights. N.p., 26 Sept.
2016. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. "Introduction: Race And/As Technology; Or, How To Do Things To
Race." Camera Obscura: Feminism, Culture, and Media Studies 24.1 (2009): 7-35. Web.

page 66 of 78

Commonwealth of Australia. Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,. Reporting
Back... 2014-15: How Indigenous Ranger and Indigenous Protected Area S Programmes
Are Working on Country. N.p., 2016. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
<https://www.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/2014-15-WOC-IPAReporting-back.pdf>.
Coulthard, Glen Sean. Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition.
N.p.: U of Minnesota, 2014. Print.
"Country Needs People." Country Needs People. N.p., 2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Davis, Mike. Ecology of Fear: Los Angeles and the Imagination of Disaster. N.p.: Vintage, 1999.
Print.
Day, Marissa A. "Black Power Takes Root in the Heart of Dixie." The Indypendent. N.p., 5 June
2017. Web.
Day, Iyko. "Being or Nothingness: Indigeneity, Antiblackness, and Settler Colonial
Critique." Critical Ethnic Studies1.2 (2015): 102. Web.
Dean, Aria. "On The Black Generic." NGV. N.p., 2017. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Dean, Aria, Eunsong Kim, and Gelare Khoshgozaran. "WILDING Continued: A Conversation
with Aria Dean." Contemptorary. N.p., 17 Jan. 2017. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Dean, Jodi. The Communist Horizon. London: Verso, 2012. Print.
Dean, Jodi. Crowds and Party. N.p.: Verso, 2016. Print.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Fé lix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia.
Minneapolis: U of Minnesota, 1987. Print.
Demos, T. J. "To Save a World: Geoengineering, Conflictual Futurisms, and the
Unthinkable." E-flux. N.p., Oct. 2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Dillon, S. "Possessed by Death: The Neoliberal-Carceral State, Black Feminism, and the
Afterlife of Slavery." Radical History Review 2012.112 (2012): 113-25. Web.
Duckett, Stephen. "Public-private Hospital Partnerships Are Risky Business." The
Conversation. N.p., 11 Oct. 2018. Web.
Edney-Browne, Alex, and Tilman Ruff. "Partnerships between Universities and Arms
Manufacturers Raise Thorny Ethical Questions." The Conversation. N.p., 16 Mar.
2018. Web.
Evershed, Nick, and Lorena Allam. "Indigenous Children's Removal on the Rise 21 Years
after Bringing Them Home." The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 25 May 2018.
Web.

page 67 of 78

Evershed, Nick, Lorena Allam, Calla Wahlquist, Andy Ball, and Miles Herbert. "Deaths Inside:
Every Indigenous Death in Custody since 2008 Tracked – Interactive." The Guardian.
Guardian News and Media, 31 Aug. 2018. Web.
Exposing the Ties between Australian Universities and the Fossil Fuel Industry. Publication.
Fossil Free Unis, 2017. Web.
Fisher, Mark. Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?Ropley: Zero, 2009. Print.
Fisher, Mark. "How to Kill a Zombie: Strategizing the End of
Neoliberalism." OpenDemocracy. N.p., 18 July 2013. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge: Michel Foucault. N.p.: Tavistock
Publications, 1972. Print.
Flaherty, Jordan. Floodlines: Community and Resistance from Katrina to the Jena Six. Chicago,
IL: Haymarket, 2010. Print.
Fraser, Nancy. "Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually
Existing Democracy." Social Text 25/26 (1990): 56. Web.
Fritsch, Matthias. The Promise of Memory: History and Politics in Marx, Benjamin and
Derrida. Albany: State U of New York, 2006. Print.
Furze, Anders, and Louisa Lim. "'Faustian Bargain': Defence Fears over Australian Uni's
$100m China Partnership." The Citizen. N.p., 19 Sept. 2017. Web.
Galloway, Alexander R. "Network Pessimism." Cultureandcommunication.org. N.p., 11 Nov.
2014. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Galloway, Alexander R. "The Black Box Of The World." Cultureandcommunication.org. N.p.,
2018. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Glick, Jennifer L., Katherine M. Andrinopoulos, Katherine P. Theall, and Carl Kendall.
"“Tiptoeing Around the System”: Alternative Healthcare Navigation Among Gender
Minorities in New Orleans." Transgender Health3.1 (2018): 118-26. Web.
Goodall, Heather. Invasion to Embassy: Land in Aboriginal Politics in New South Wales, 17701972. N.p.: Sydney UP, 2008. Print.
Gossett, Reina, Eric A. Stanley, and Johanna Burton. Trap Door: Trans Cultural Production
and the Politics of Visibilty. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2017. Print.
Gray, Paul Christopher. From the Streets to the State: Changing the World by Taking Power.
Albany: State U of New York, 2018. Print.
Greaves, Matthew. "The Rethinking of Technology in Class Struggle: Communicative
Affirmation and Foreclosure Politics." Rethinking Marxism27.2 (2015): 195-211.
Web. 1 Nov. 2018.

page 68 of 78

Haber, Benjamin. "The Queer Ontology of Digital Method." WSQ: Womens Studies
Quarterly44.3-4 (2016): 150-69. Web.
Habermas, Jü rgen, and William Rehg. Between Facts and Norms Contributions to a Discourse
Theory of Law and Democracy. N.p.: Polity, 2015. Print.
Hall, Stuart. "The West and the Rest: Discourse and Power." Race and Racialization, 2E:
Essential Readings. 2nd ed. N.p.: Canadian Scholars, 2018. 85-95. Print.
Hammond, Ryan. "Open Source Gendercodes." Interview by Lee Pivnik. Ecocore. Tumblr, 12
June 2017. Web.
Haraway, Donna Jeanne. A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-feminism in
the Late Twentieth Century. N.p.: ProQuest Ebook Central, 2009. Print.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. Commonwealth. N.p.: Belknap of Harvard UP, 2011. Print.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. Empire. N.p.: Harvard University Press, 2000. Print.
Harney, Stefano, and Fred Moten. The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning & Black Study.
Wivenhoe: Minor Compositions, 2013. Print.
Harney, Stefano, and Fred Moten. "From Cooperation To Black Operation - A Conversation
With Stefano Harney And Fred Moten On The Undercommons." transversal.at |
transversal texts. N.p., 2016. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Hartman, Saidiya V. Lose Your Mother: A Journey along the Atlantic Slove Route. N.p.: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 2008. Print.
Hartman, Saidiya V. Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and Self-making in Nineteenthcentury America. New York: Oxford UP, 2010. Print.
Hartman, Saidiya V., and Frank B. Wilderson. "The Position of the Unthought." Qui Parle13.2
(2003): 183-201. Web.
Harvey, David. "The 'New' Imperialism: Accumulation by Dispossession." Socialist Register
40 (2009): n. pag. Socialist Register. Web.
Hester, Helen. "After the Future: N Hypotheses of Post-Cyber Feminism." Res.N.p., Aug.
2017. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Hillman, Mayer. "There Are Three Options in Tackling Climate Change. Only One Will Work."
The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 30 Oct. 2018. Web.
Horne, Gerald. "The Apocalypse Of Settler Colonialism." Monthly Review. N.p., 2018. Web. 1
Nov. 2018.
Hunter, Fergus. "Previous Youth Abuse Revelations Didn't Pique My Interest: Nigel
Scullion." The Sydney Morning Herald. The Sydney Morning Herald, 26 July 2016.
Web. 01 Nov. 2018.

page 69 of 78

Hutchens, Gareth. "Nigel Scullion: No Indigenous Person Tells Me They Want Australia Day
Changed." The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 18 Jan. 2018. Web. 01 Nov.
2018.
Jabour, Bridie. "Mining Company Fined $150k for Desecrating Aboriginal Sacred Site." The
Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 02 Aug. 2013. Web.
Jameson, Frederic. Postmodernism, Or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. N.p.: Verso,
1993. Print.
Jeffries, Fiona. "Cyborg Resistance on the Digital Assembly Line: Global Connectivity as a
Terrain of Struggle for the Commons in Alex Rivera’s Sleep Dealer." Journal of
Communication Inquiry39.1 (2014): 21-37. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Johnston, Deborah, and Alfredo Saad-Filho. Neoliberalism: A Critical Reader. London: Pluto,
2005. Print.
Karp, Paul. "Australian Government Backs Coal in Defiance of IPCC Climate Warning." The
Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 08 Oct. 2018. Web.
Keeling, Kara. The Witchs Flight: The Cinematic, the Black Femme, and the Image of Common
Sense. Durham: Duke UP, 2007. Print.
Keller, Yelena. "Accessibility In The Age Of Technology @ “Open Score”." Topical Cream.
N.p., 2016. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Khatib, Sami. "Where The Past Was, There History Shall Be - Benjamin, Marx, And The
“Tradition Of The Oppressed”." Anthropology & Materialism Special Issue | I (2017):
n. pag. Web.
Kilvert, Nick, and Michael Slezak. "IPCC Issues Dire Climate Warning, Says Coal Must Go to
save Great Barrier Reef." ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 08 Oct.
2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
King, Brandon. "Building Power in a Frontline Community: The Cooperation Jackson
Model." Socialism and Democracy30.2 (2016): 219-24. Web.
Klein, Naomi. "Naomi Klein: How Power Profits from Disaster." The Guardian. Guardian
News and Media, 06 July 2017. Web.
Krishnan, Shuba. "Investigation into the NT's $20 Million Prison Business." ABC News. N.p.,
20 Feb. 2016. Web.
Liburd, David A. The New American Slavery: Capitalism and the Ghettoization of American
Prisons as a Profitable Corporate Business. Thesis. N.d. N.p.: City U of New York, 2017.
Print.
"Liquid Blackness - a Research Project on Blackness and Aesthetics." Liquid Blackness. N.p.,
19 Sept. 2017. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.

page 70 of 78

Lloyd, Moya. Beyond Identity Politics: Feminism, Power & Politics. London: Sage, 2005. Print.
Love, David A., and Vijay Das. "Slavery in the US Prison System." Prisons | Al Jazeera. Al
Jazeera, 09 Sept. 2017. Web.
Luft, Rachel E. "Beyond Disaster Exceptionalism: Social Movement Developments in New
Orleans after Hurricane Katrina." American Quarterly61.3 (2009): 499-527. Project
MUSE. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Maggic. "ESTROFEM LAB :: ESTROGEN GEEKING | RESEARCH WORKSHOPOLOGY FREAK
SCIENCE ON MICROCOLONIZATION OF ESTROGEN BIOMOLECULE." M.A.G.G.I.C.N.p.,
2016. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Mahood, Kim. "Country Needs People." The Monthly. N.p., 05 July 2017. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Marx, Karl. "Capital: A Critique of Political Economy | Volume 1." Marxists Internet Archive.
N.p., n.d. Web.
Marx, Karl, and David McLellan. Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy.
N.p.: Macmillan, 1980. Print.
Massumi, Brian. "The Half-life of Disaster." The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 15 Apr.
2011. Web.
Massumi, Brian. The Principle of Unrest: Activist Philosophy in the Expanded Field. London:
Open Humanities, 2017. Print.
Mayes, Christopher, Ian Kerridge, Roojin Habibi, and Wendy Lipworth. "Conflicts of Interest
in Neoliberal Times: Perspectives of Australian Medical Students." Health Sociology
Review 25.3 (2016): 256-71. Web.
Maynard, John. "Capturing the Lived History of the Aborigines Protection Board While We
Still Can." The Conversation. N.p., 04 Sept. 2015. Web.
McGuigan, Jim. "The Neoliberal Self." Culture Unbound: Journal of Current Cultural Research
6.1 (2014): 223-40. Web.
Mcqueen, Paddy. "Post-identity Politics and the Social Weightlessness of Radical Gender
Theory." Thesis Eleven134.1 (2016): 73-88. Web.
Merchant, Brian. "Fully Automated Luxury Communism." The Guardian. Guardian News and
Media, 18 Mar. 2015. Web.
Metastasio, Antonio et al. "Transitioning Bodies. The Case Of Self-Prescribing Sexual
Hormones In Gender Affirmation In Individuals Attending Psychiatric
Services." Brain Sciences 8.5 (2018): 88. Web.
Mignolo, Walter. Local Histories/global Designs: Coloniality, Subaltern Knowledges, and
Border Thinking. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 2012. Print.

page 71 of 78

Mitchell, Jessie, and Ann Curthoys. "How Different Was Victoria? Aboriginal ‘protection’ in a
Comparative Context." Settler Colonial Governance in Nineteenth-Century Victoria
(2015): n. pag. Web.
Moir, Cat. "The Time Is Now: Art Walter Benjamin." Red Wedge. N.p., 09 Sept. 2017. Web. 01
Nov. 2018.
Monibot, George. "A Land Reform Manifesto." The Guardian 22 Feb. 1995: n. pag. Print.
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen. "Citizenship, Exclusion and the Denial of Indigenous Sovereign
Rights." ABC Religion & Ethics. Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 30 May 2017.
Web.
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen. The White Possessive: Property, Power, and Indigenous
Sovereignty. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota, 2015. Print.
Moskowitz, Peter. "Meet the Radical Workers' Cooperative Growing in the Heart of the Deep
South." The Nation. N.p., 24 Apr. 2017. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Moten, Fred. "Black Op." PMLA123.5 (2008): 1743-747. Web.
Moten, Fred. "Blackness and Poetry." Evening Will Come 55 (2015): n. pag. The Volta. Web.
Moten, Fred. Stolen Life. Durham: Duke UP, 2018. Print. Consent Not to Be a Single Being.
Nakata, Martin. "The Cultural Interface." The Australian Journal of Indigenous
Education36.Supplement (2007): 7-14. Web.
Nardo, Pietro Di. "The Empire Does Not Exist - A Critique Of Toni Negri's Ideas." In Defence
of Marxism. N.p., 2003. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Necati, Yas. "'All That Was Wrong With Me Was A Bit Of Chemistry And A Boring Wardrobe':
Transgender People Share Their Experiences Of Getting Hormone Replacement
Therapy." The Independent. N.p., 2018. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Nembhard, Jessica Gordon. "The Legacy and Current Growth of Black Cooperatives." Food
First. N.p., 28 Oct. 2015. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
O'Leary, Patrick, and Sophia Walter, comps. Protecting Nature for All of Us: Environmental
Benefits of Australia’s Indigenous Protected Areas and Indigenous Rangers. Rep.
Country Needs People, 2017. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
O'Leary, Patrick, and Sophia Walter, comps. Strong Women on Country: The Success of
Women Caring for Country as Indigenous Rangers and on Indigenous Protected Areas.
Rep. Country Needs People, 2018. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Ong, Aihwa. "Neoliberalism as a Mobile Technology." Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers32.1 (2007): 3-8. Web.
"Online Etymology Dictionary." Online Etymology Dictionary. N.p., n.d. Web.

page 72 of 78

Ozich, Clare, Simon Copland, and Amanda Cahill. "Next Economy: An Interview With
Amanda Cahill." Green Agenda. N.p., 2016. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
Parr, Adrian. Hijacking Sustainability. London: MIT, 2009. Print.
Pascoe, Bruce. Dark Emu, Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident?Broome: Magabala, 2016.
Print.
Paul, Kari. "Queer Artist Launches DIY Gender Hormone Biohacking Project." Motherboard.
VICE, 30 Nov. 2015. Web.
Piper, Matthew. "Green City Diaries: Fab Lab And The Language Of Nature." Model D. N.p.,
2013. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.
"Prison Labour Is a Billion-dollar Industry, with Uncertain Returns for Inmates." The
Economist. The Economist Newspaper, 16 Mar. 2017. Web.
Privatisation of Prisons: Analysis. Rep. Justice Action, 21 Mar. 2016. Web.
Robinson, Cedric J. Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition. 2nd ed. Chapel
Hill and London: U of North Carolina, 2000. Print.
Rose, Deborah Bird. "Climate Change and the Question of Community." Deborah Bird Rose |
Love at the Edge of Extinction. N.p., 3 Jan. 2014. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Rotondi, Nooshin Khobzi, Greta R. Bauer, Kyle Scanlon, Matthias Kaay, Robb Travers, and
Anna Travers. "Nonprescribed Hormone Use and Self-Performed Surgeries: “Do-ItYourself” Transitions in Transgender Communities in Ontario, Canada." American
Journal of Public Health103.10 (2013): 1830-836. Web.
Russell, Sophie, and Eileen Baldry. "Three Charts On: Australia's Booming Prison
Population." The Conversation. N.p., 14 June 2017. Web.
Said, Edward W. Orientalism. N.p.: Routledge & Kegen Paul, 1978. Print.
Sexton, Jared. "The Social Life of Social Death: On Afro-Pessimism and Black Optimism."
InTensions 5 (2011): n. pag. York University. Web.
Sexton, Jared. "Ante-Anti-Blackness." Lateral 1.1 (2012): n. pag. Web.
Shakur, Assata, and Joanne Chesimard. "Women in Prison: How We Are." The Black Scholar
12.6 (1981): 50-57. Web.
Shaw, Ian G.r. "The Great War of Enclosure: Securing the Skies." Antipode49.4 (2017): 883906. Web.
Singer, Benjamin T. Towards a Transgender Sublime: The Politics of Excess in Trans-specific
Cultural Production. Thesis. Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 2011. New
Brunswick, New Jersey: n.p., 2011. Print.

page 73 of 78

Smith, Linda Tuhiwai. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. 2nd ed.
London: Zed, 2012. Print.
Snorton, C. Riley. Black on Both Sides: A Racial History of Trans Identity. Minneapolis, MN: U
of Minnesota, 2017. Print.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. "Critical Intimacy: An Interview with Gayatri Chakravorty
Spivak." Interview by Steve Paulson. Las Angeles Review of Books. N.p., 29 July 2016.
Web. 7 Nov. 2018.
Spruill, Larry H. "Slave Patrols, “Packs of Negro Dogs” and and Policing Black Communities."
Phylon (1960-) 3.1 (2016): 42-66. JSTOR. Web.
Srnicek, Nick, and Alex Williams. "Inventing the Future." The Disorder Of Things. N.p., 03
Nov. 2015. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Srnicek, Nick, and Artem Gureev. "Beyond Endless Winter: An Interview with Nick
Srnicek." &&& Journal. N.p., 20 Feb. 2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Stud1nt, and School for Poetic Computation. "Software as Ideology - Code Societies, Day 8
with American Artist." Medium. N.p., 23 July 2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Swartz, Lana. "Blockchain Dreams." Another Economy Is Possible: Culture and Economy in a
Time of Crisis. By Manuel Castells. N.p.: Polity, 2017. N. pag. Print.
"The Community Production Initiative." Cooperation Jackson. N.p., 2017. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Thorpe, Nakari. "'Australia's Dirty Little Secret': Grandmothers Urge Action on Child
Removals in Canberra." NITV. N.p., 23 May 2018. Web.
The Edu-Factory Collective. Toward a Global Autonomous University. N.p.: Autonomedia,
2009. Print.
Todd, Zoe. "Relationships." Cultural Anthropology. Theorizing the Contemporary, Jan. 2016.
Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Tsang, Mary. Open Source Estrogen: From Biomolecules to Biopolitics... Hormones with
Institutional Biopower!Thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2017. N.p.: n.p.,
2017. Print.
Vincent, Eve, and Timothy Neale, eds. Unstable Relations: Indigenous People and
Environmentalism in Contemporary Australia. Crawley, Western Australia: UWA,
2016. Print.
Wallis, Lynley, Bryce Barker, and Heather Burke. "How Unearthing Queensland's 'native
Police' Camps Gives Us a Window onto Colonial Violence." The Conversation. N.p., 05
Sept. 2018. Web.

page 74 of 78

Watts, Jonathan. "We Have 12 Years to Limit Climate Change Catastrophe, Warns UN." The
Guardian | Environment. Guardian News and Media, 08 Oct. 2018. Web.
Weeks, Kathi. The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork
Imaginaries. Durham: Duke UP, 2011. Print.
Wilderson, Frank, III. "Gramsci's Black Marx: Whither the Slave in Civil Society?" Social
Identities9.2 (2003): 225-40. Web.
Williams, Elliot. "Harmonic Analyzer Mechanical Fourier Computer." Hackaday. N.p., 18
Nov. 2014. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Wolfe, Patrick. "Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native." Journal of Genocide
Research 8.4 (2006): 387-409. Web.
Woods, Clyde Adrian. Development Arrested: The Blues and Plantation Power in the
Mississippi Delta. 1st ed. London: Verso, 1998. Print.
Wu, Danielle. "Do Androids Dream of Whiteness?" Unbag - Issue 3: Reverie. N.p., 24 Sept.
2018. Web. 01 Nov. 2018.
Wynter, Sylvia. "Unsettling The Coloniality Of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards The
Human, After Man, Its Overrepresentation--An Argument." CR: The New Centennial
Review 3.3 (2003): 257-337. Web. 1 Nov. 2018.

