Angry, anxious, and populist? – The affective dynamics of populist party support
Abstract: Is there a special relationship between emotions and populism? Academic and popular
discussions of populism frequently suggest that this is the case, and that anger and anxiety in
particular, are crucial explanatory factors for the continued appeal of populist parties. But despite
the often-posited link between negative emotions and populism, few studies have explored this
relationship empirically.
This paper aims to fill this gap and answer three related questions: Firstly, to what extent is the
relationship between negative affect and populist party support unique to these parties and do we
observe differences between left and right-wing populism? Secondly, what is the temporal
relationship between affect and populism? Do voters support populist parties because they are
anxious or does support for these parties create these negative emotions? And finally, are
populists angry, scared, or both? In other words, to what extent do we need to distinguish
between specific types of negative affect, such as anger and anxiety, when discussing the
emotional underpinnings of populism?
Comparing panel data from Austria and Germany, this paper investigates the relationship
between anger and anxiety on the one hand, and support for populist parties on the other. Using a
random-intercept, autoregressive cross-lagged design, the paper has three findings.
First of all, the reinforcing pattern of increased negative emotions and increased party support is
unique to (right-wing) populists. Secondly, this relationship is self-reinforcing. While negative
affect leads to greater support for right wing populist parties, the reverse relationship is more
consistent and of larger magnitude. Negative emotions trigger populist support, but they are
more important for maintaining it. Finally, it is important to distinguish between anger and
anxiety. While only anxiety is consistent in its ability to trigger populist support, subsequently
both anger and anxiety are increased.

INTRODUCTION
Emotions are at the heart of populism. As populist parties gain prominence across Western
Democracies, popular commentary and academic discourse alike have highlighted the affinity
between negative affect and populist politics. Voters’ anger at elites and outsiders for their real,
or imagined, loss of social and economic security is a powerful kindling for the resentmentfueled, anti-elite politics of populist parties. Moreover, the appeal of populism lies at least in part
in its ability to validate voters’ anxiety that they are economically and socially left behind by
distant elites and an increasingly heterogenous lifeworld (Bonikowski, 2017; Salmela and von
Scheve, 2017; Schmuck and Matthes, 2017).
Moreover, as populists have become more successful, questions have emerged to what extent
their emotional political style will influence the perception and behaviors of voters (Hameleers,
Bos and de Vreese, 2016; Hobolt and Tilley, 2016) and parties (Rydgren, 2005; Abou-Chadi and
Krause, 2018). Indeed, there is a growing concern that populist discourses either create or
amplify existing anxieties, which in turn is leveraged to stoke anger at elites and outsiders alike.
Understanding the link between populism and emotions could therefore provide not only
important insights into the activation of populist attitudes (Hawkins, Kaltwasser and Andreadis,
2018), it could also illuminate a crucial mechanism for the way in which populist parties
maintain support over time.
However, despite the often-asserted link between emotions and populism, there is surprisingly
little empirical research on the relationship between the two. To what extent is the link between
negative emotions and party support actually unique to populist parties? Moreover, with some
recent exceptions1 much of the literature on emotions and populism is limited in several
important ways. First of all, most studies treat all forms of negative affect as interchangeable.
However, insights from political and social psychology suggest that different negative emotions,
such as anger or anxiety, differ both in their antecedents and in their downstream cognitive
effects. Secondly, there are few studies that explicitly model the temporal dynamics of affect and

1

See for example Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza (2017) or Berning and Schlueter (2016)

populism. In other words, is it voters’ negative emotions that drive support for populists, does
support for populists increases negative emotions, or is there are a recursive feedback loop
between affect and populist support? Finally, there are no papers that simultaneously
differentiate between different forms of negative affect and consider the temporal dynamics.
This paper aims to fill these gaps. Using panel data from Austria and Germany, I investigate the
temporal dynamics between anger, anxiety, and support for populist parties. Using
autoregressive, cross-lagged panel models, the paper has two key findings. Firstly, support for
right-wing populists is uniquely associated with negative emotions. Unlike support for traditional
center-right parties, left-wing populist or far-right parties, only support for right-wing populists is
associated with higher levels of anger and anxiety in politics and in everyday life. Secondly,
although negative affect is associated with increased support for right-wing populist parties,
contrary to received wisdom, negative emotions are more important for the maintenance of
populist party support than for their initial activation.
As such, the paper makes two important contributions: First of all, by explicitly modeling the
dynamic relationship between negative emotions and populism, the paper offers a more
comprehensive account of how support for populists is activated and maintained overtime, and
how right-wing populists can mobilize spontaneous yet durable electoral support. Secondly, the
paper adds to the growing literature on emotions in politics more generally, and on the causes
and effects of anger and anxiety in particular.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section will briefly review the literature
on the meaning of populism and highlight how existing explanations of populist support can be
supplemented with a more explicit focus on emotional dynamics, especially with regards to the
activation and maintenance of populist attitudes. I then draw on affect-appraisal theory to
outline why distinguishing between anger and anxiety is both theoretically and empirically
necessary, particularly when discussing the relationship between emotions and populism.
Additionally, I combine the literature on determinants of populist support and populist
communication to show that closer attention needs to be paid to the temporal ordering of affect
and support for populist parties, since there are persuasive arguments to be made for both
possible directions. After introducing the logic and interpretation of cross-lagged, autoregressive

panel models, I present two studies that test the relationship between anger, anxiety, and support
for populists empirically. Study 1 uses Austrian election panel data (AUTNES) to model how
support for the Austrian Freedom Party (FPÖ) and respondents’ emotion interact with one
another over the course of the election, comparing it to support for the center-right Austrian
People’s Party (ÖVP). Study 2 expands this comparison using the German socio-economic panel
(SOEP) to also explore how the affective dynamics surrounding support for the right-wing
populist Alternative for Germany (AfD) differ from support for left-wing populist and extreme
far-right parties.

DETERMINANTS OF RIGHT-WING POPULISM
Populist parties have successfully established themselves in most Western and Central European
countries (Rydgren, 2005, 2007; Taggart, 2017), which has led not only to an ongoing debate
about the precise nature of populism, but also raised the question how this seemingly sudden
emergence can be explained. However, particularly on the demand side, most of the existing
work has focused on structural or attitudinal factors (Kehrberg, 2015; Niedermayer and
Hofrichter, 2016; Lengfeld, 2017; Van Hauwaert and Van Kessel, 2018), whose relative stability
make it difficult to explain their sudden political “activation” (Bonikowski, 2017; Hawkins,
Kaltwasser and Andreadis, 2018; Van Hauwaert and Van Kessel, 2018).
What exactly is populism? Although the label “populist” has been applied widely, its specific
meaning remains contested in the literature. However, most scholars now agree that populism
consists of an ideational element that presupposes the presence of a homogenous in-group of “a
common people” (Hawkins, 2009; Mudde and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2012, 2013; Taggart, 2017).
Moreover, the common people are placed in direct antagonism to a corrupt or removed elite,
which is either unwilling or unable to represent the interests of the ‘ordinary person on the
street’ (Grimm, 2015; Taggart, 2017).
While distrust of political elites and a focus on “the people” unifies all forms of populism,
scholars also distinguish between left and right-wing populism. Right-wing populism extends
this conflict to also include an out-group of “others” that threaten the unity of the people (Mudde

and Rovira Kaltwasser, 2013). In other words, the people are not only oppressed by an elite
“above them”, but also threatened, either economically or culturally, by a group of ‘impure’
outsiders, which in the European context often consists of immigrants and ethnic minorities
(Swank, 2003; Derks, 2004).
Which factors draw voters towards populist parties? At the individual level, explanations have
traditionally focused on socio-economic, and more recently on attitudinal drivers. Structurally,
supporters of populists are expected to be less educated, working class, male, and at greater risk
of unemployment (Kessler and Freeman, 2005; Oesch and Rennwald, 2018). Especially with
regards to supporters for right-wing populist parties, this “losers of globalization” thesis
implicitly argues voters channel their anxiety and anger over their disadvantaged position into a
rejection of cosmopolitan elites and immigration alike. While debates are ongoing whether this
backlash is primarily driven by economic insecurity, or simply a cultural backlash against the
perceived loss of privilege, the empirical support for the link between socioeconomic
disadvantage and populism remains mixed at best (Knigge, 1998; Ivarsflaten, 2005; Lengfeld,
2017; Rooduijn, 2017; Stockemer, Lentz and Mayer, 2018).
A more promising approach focuses on voters’ populist attitudes (Akkerman, Mudde and
Zaslove, 2014; Hawkins, Kaltwasser and Andreadis, 2018; Van Hauwaert and Van Kessel,
2018). This approach highlights that parts of the electorate are drawn to populist parties because
they have a fundamentally populist conception of democracy and politics. This set of populist
attitudes is orthogonal to the traditional left-right political spectrum and, when sufficiently
developed, may even lead voters to support parties at odds with their own policy preferences
(Van Hauwaert and Van Kessel, 2018). But while voters’ populist attitudes are clearly important,
they are also contingent on political and ideological context (Kessler and Freeman, 2005;
Rooduijn, 2017), and only become salient when political conditions (Hawkins, Kaltwasser, and
Andreadis 2018) or personal experiences (Agerberg, 2017) make them relevant. Taking into
account voters’ emotions in turn provides an important theoretical basis for understanding the
mechanisms that activate and sustains these attitudes in the first place (Banks, 2016; Magni,
2017; Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza, 2017).

ANGER, ANXIETY, AND THE ACTIVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF
POPULIST PARTY SUPPORT
Focusing on affect is therefore not only an important component of understanding political
behavior in general (Marcus, 2000; Redlawsk, 2006; Neuman et al., 2007), it also seems
inexorably linked to theories of populist support (Demertzis, 2006; Seawright, 2012; Spruyt,
Keppens and Van Droogenbroeck, 2016; Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza, 2017; Salmela and von
Scheve, 2017). But while a relationship between (negative) emotions and populism seems
almost self-evident, untangling the dynamic and potentially recursive relationship between affect
and populist support highlights three important questions: To what extent is the relationship
between negative affect and party support unique to populist parties, and similarly, do we see
differences between left-wing and right-wing populism? Secondly, to what extent do we need to
differentiate between different forms of negative affect? Are populist supporters primarily angry,
anxious, or both? And finally, what is the exact temporal ordering in the relationship of populism
and affect? In other words, do anger and anxiety increase the probability of subsequently
supporting populists, or is it the very support of these parties that makes citizens more anxious
and angry?

Anger, Anxiety, and the activation of (right-wing) populist support

Although the relationship between negative emotions and support for populist parties has
become part of received wisdom, there is growing evidence that not all forms of negative affect
matter equally. At its most basic, emotions matter because they change individuals' cognitive
processes, and thus the ways in which they interpret, remember, and react to social reality.2 In
political science, most research has focused on emotional valence and its associated cognitive
patterns (G. Marcus 2000; Neuman et al. 2007; Redlawsk 2006). However, more recent studies
have shown that different emotions do not only carry a positive or negative valence, they also

2

Although some scholars do differentiate between affect, mood, and emotion, I follow Neuman et al. ( 2007) and
use affect and emotion interchangeably.

correspond to different “appraisal tendencies”. These appraisal tendencies are ``relatively
automatic processes that guide subsequent perceptions and judgements" (Lerner et al., 2003)
(pg.489). Unlike the purely valence-oriented literature, affect appraisal theory contests that even
two emotions that carry a negative valence can be triggered for different reasons, may lead to
different appraisal tendencies, and thus influence cognition and judgement in divergent ways
(Ellsworth and Smith, 1988; Lerner and Tiedens, 2006; Petersen, 2010). The appraisal
tendencies of anger and anxiety, the two emotions most frequently associated with populism, are
particularly different, so distinguishing between them is especially important. Indeed, at least in
the context of left-wing populism and Spanish politics, it appears to be anger, rather than anxiety,
that drives populist attitudes and party support (Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza, 2017).
Anxiety evolved as an evolutionary response to novel threats (Marcus and MacKuen, 1993;
Petersen, 2010). As such, anxiety is associated with reduced certainty and prompts individuals
to seek out now information (Valentino et al., 2008). Thus prompted to reevaluate previously
held beliefs and habits (Weeks, 2015), anxiety can play an important role in triggering “political
awakenings” (Brader, Valentino and Suhay, 2008), since it provides an opening to change
previously held political attitudes and party preferences.
Indeed, there is growing evidence that connect anxiety and greater support of, particularly rightwing, populist parties. Gadarian and Albertson (2014), find that when primed with anxiety,
individuals are not only more likely to seek out more information in general, they are particularly
likely to consume more negative and fearful news about immigrants. It is therefore not
surprising that anxiety has also been linked to stronger anti-immigrant attitudes (Brader,
Valentino and Suhay, 2008). Similarly, anxiety is also associated with greater incidents of
conspiratorial thinking and anti-elite attitudes (Grzesiak-Feldman, 2013). Finally, anxiety may
be especially important for right-wing authoritarianism since it is also associated with an
increase in authoritarianism (Vasilopoulos, Marcus and Foucault, 2018). In short, anxiety not
only provides the cognitive context for a reevaluation of ones’ prior political beliefs, it can also
trigger more authoritarian, anti-elite, and anti-outsider attitudes, which in turn are precisely the
kind of attitudes that drive support for right-wing populists.

Anxieties association with greater uncertainty, however, could also lead to increased political
withdrawal and reduced responsibility attribution (Lerner and Keltner, 2000; Petersen, 2010;
Weeks, 2015). Mobilizing voters to support party-system outsiders, however, requires not only a
greater appetite for risk (Seawright, 2012), it also frequently involves the assignment of blame
(Lerner and Tiedens, 2006; Petersen, 2010). Anger has therefore been highlighted as an
important alternative source of populist support. The notion of the “Wutbürger ” or the “angry
white men” (Ford and Goodwin, 2010), citizens whose (excessive) anger drives them to reject
“politics as usual” have become a common trope in the description of populist voters. This is not
surprising, given how many of the appraisal patterns associated with anger could both increase
populist support, and be increased by populist messages.
Anger, unlike anxiety, evolved as a moral emotion that is primarily concerned with rendering
moral judgement (Petersen, 2010). Specifically, it plays an important role in managing violations
of social norms and is much more explicitly concerned with establishing responsibility and
culpability and generating an impetus to punish rule violators. As such, anger is associated with
perceptions of greater control, intentionality, and responsibility (Lerner and Keltner, 2001;
Lerner and Tiedens, 2006; Petersen, 2010). Once rule violations have been detected, anger also
provides the motivation to punish perpetrators, leading to a greater willingness to takes risks and
a greater willingness to rely on heuristics (Lerner et al., 2003; Lerner and Tiedens, 2006; Small
and Lerner, 2008; Weeks, 2015).
The appraisal patterns of anger, in turn, could play an important role in triggering and sustaining
support for populist parties. Most fundamentally, anger not only increases the perceived
responsibility of existing political elites, it also motivates voters to punish them, making antielite attitudes more salient. For example, in the context of Spanish left-wing populism, anger
over austerity and the financial crisis are the primary emotion associated with support for
Podemos (Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza, 2017).
However, right-wing populism may be even more closely associated with anger. As a moral
emotion, angers’ desire to punish rule violators also increases authoritarianism (Milburn, Niwa
and Patterson, 2014; Vasilopoulos, Marcus and Foucault, 2018), which in turn has been linked to
greater support for right-wing populists (Bakker, Rooduijn and Schumacher, 2016). The reduced

depth of processing associated with anger also increases reliance on group cues and heuristics
(Lerner and Tiedens, 2006; Valentino et al., 2008). As such, it is not surprising that anger has
been found to trigger more partisan processing of information(Weeks, 2015), and to activate
ethnocentrism and group-threat (Banks, 2016). Greater ethno-centrism and external-group threat
in turn are a key predictor of populist attitudes and support for populist parties (Dunn, 2015; Van
Hauwaert and Van Kessel, 2018)

From Populist Support to Negative Affect

While anxiety and anger might activate populist support for populist parties in general, and rightwing populists in particular, the downstream affective impact of this support could also play an
important role in sustaining support. Populist parties are particularly prone to employ
emotionalizing language, focused on stoking outrage over distant and corrupt elites (Jagers and
Walgrave, 2007; Hameleers, Bos and de Vreese, 2016). Additionally, right-wing populist party
positions are often deliberately targeted at excluding “outsiders” (Wirz et al., 2018). As voters
increase their support and become more receptive to party discourses and platforms, they are also
more likely to internalize both the affect and the political attitudes of populists. Taking a more
dynamic perspective therefore not only helps rule out potential reverse-causality, it also provides
a more comprehensive model for the ways in which populist support is maintained over time.
Greater support for populist parties also implies a greater receptiveness to their messages and
ideas. While I have defined populism as an ideational lens that separates the world into an “us”
and a “them”, such a worldview also corresponds to a particular, more emotional, style of
discourse and communication (Moffitt and Tormey, 2014). Populist communication is more
explicitly focused on “the people” (Hawkins, 2009), placing blame on political elites and, in the
case of right-wing populists, protecting against outside threat (Jagers and Walgrave, 2007). It is
also more simplistic and thus memorable (Bischof and Senninger, 2018), and amplified by
traditional media, tends to garner more attention (Koopmans and Muis, 2009).
Populist communication focuses on blame attribution, thus increasing voters’ anger, and threat,
which could further increase anxiety. In light of this focus on external treat and blame
attribution, it is not surprising that the effects of populist communication are associated with

increased negative affect (Wirz et al., 2018) in general, and higher levels of anger and anxiety in
particular. The emotionalized blame attribution of populist communication increases anger and
populist attitudes, especially for those voters who do not have strong prior attachments
(Hameleers, Bos and de Vreese, 2016, 2018). Similarly, right-wing populist communication
increases anxiety, especially with regards to immigrants (Schmuck and Matthes, 2017).
Beyond the direct effects of populist communication, closer association with populists could also
increase negative affect because of an alignment of ones’ own political attitudes with those of the
party, and because of greater interest and engagement with politics. Party affiliations, like other
forms of group attachment, often create an alignment effect, where group members adjust their
own perceptions and attitudes to be more in line with attitudes held in the group. Populists create
clear narratives and identities. But while this clarity can enhance engagement and interest in
politics (Marx and Nguyen, 2018), the dominant narrative of lacking responsiveness should also
trigger anger. Moreover, while support for one party also creates greater political interest and
engagement, higher engagement also leads to more emotional responses to politics (Miller,
2011).
In short, while anger and/or anxiety could drive voters to become more supportive of populists,
greater support could also lead them to be angrier and more anxious. Moreover, given the
particular association between negative affect and right-wing populism, I expect these
relationships to be stronger for right-wing populist parties.

METHOD – AUTOREGRESSIVE CROSS-LAGGED MODELS
I have argued that the relationship between emotions and populism is likely going to be dynamic.
Differentiating between the directional hypotheses outlined above therefore requires a model that
can estimate the sequential order of voters’ affect and their support for populist parties
simultaneously. To adequately model the possibility of a bidirectional relationship between
affect and populism, this paper uses a cross-lagged panel (CLP) model with respondent-level
random intercepts. CLP models use structural equation modeling to simultaneously estimate the
relationship between two or more variables over time, taking into account both the overtime
dynamics within each variable, and the relationship between them. While more common in
psychology, this approach has been used in political science to, among many other things, model

the relationship between media use and political interest (Strömbäck and Shehata, 2010), the
interaction between party preferences and party performance evaluations (Evans and Chzhen,
2016), and most pertinently for this study, the dynamics of support for radical-right political
parties and perceived group-threat of foreigners and immigrants (Berning and Schlueter, 2016).
Equation 1: Autoregressive, cross-lagged panel model for populist support, anger, and anxiety
populist support
anger
anxiety

η ∗ populist support ,

α ∗ anger ,
δ ∗ anxiety ,

β ∗ anxiety ,
γ ∗ anger ,

ϵ ∗ anger ,

ζ ∗ anxiety ,

ι ∗ populist support ,
κ ∗ populist support ,

v
u
ρ

The traditional CLP model, however, may exhibit bias in cross-lagged regression results if the
stability of the measured constructs is trait-like and time invariant (Hamaker, Kuiper and
Grasman, 2015). Given strong evidence that both emotional predispositions and support for
populist parties are, at least in part, based on largely stable personality traits (Bakker, Rooduijn
and Schumacher, 2016), this assumption is likely violated in the present study. To address this
issue, all models also include a random-intercept component, calculating the within-person mean
for each respondent’s level of anger, anxiety, and populist support. This approach introduces the
logic of multi-level modeling into the structural equation framework and allows for a more
explicit modeling of the variance at both the within-person and the between-person level.
An additional benefit of this technique is the added ease of interpreting the model results. Like
traditional CLP models, two types of coefficients are estimated: Stability effects (𝜂 , 𝛼 𝛿

and

cross-lagged effects (𝜖 , 𝜁 , 𝛽 ,, 𝜄 , 𝛾 , 𝜅 , demonstrated graphically in Figure 1 and
mathematically in Equation 1. Unlike traditional CLP approaches, however, coefficient in the
random-intercept models represent an individual’s temporal deviation from their expected mean
scores, rather than overall group means. This implies that coefficient estimates now represent
the within-person, carry-over effect, where a cross lagged parameter now indicates “the degree
by which deviations from an individuals expected score [on a given variable] can be predicted
from preceding deviations from ones expected score [of a different variable], also accounting for
individual-differences and wave-to-wave group differences (Hamaker, Kuiper and Grasman,

2015). Moreover, this approach is similar to a change score or within-effects pooled model, and
thus automatically controls for unobserved, invariant respondent traits.
Figure 1: Simplified cross-lagged, autoregressive model between anger, anxiety, and support for
populist parties.
T1
Anger

Populist
Support

Anxiety

T2
𝛼

𝜂

𝛿

Anger

Populist
Support

Anxiety

Note: Simplified generalized model of anger, anxiety and populist party support in a cross-lagged, autoregressive
panel setting. Covariances and paths between anger and anxiety have been omitted to improve legibility

In simpler terms: The cross-lagged coefficients can tell us, for example, how elevated levels of
anger at T1 increases a respondent’s support for populist parties at T2, while controlling for their
general propensity to be angry or support populist parties and the direct effect of an increase in
populist party support at time T1. If the cross-lagged coefficient between anger and populist
support 𝜖 is positive and significant, it implies that an individual who is angrier than they
normally are at time T1 will also subsequently evaluate populist parties more positively than they
normally would. Conversely, a positive and significant effect between populist support and anger
(ι ) indicates that becoming more supportive of a populist party at time T1 will correspond with
higher levels of anger at time T2. If both relationships are statistically significant, it is
additionally possible to compare effect sizes to assess their relative impact. To facilitate this
comparison, all variables have been standardized by mean-centering them and dividing them by
twice their standard deviation (Gelman, 2008)

STUDY 1: AUSTRIA
Right-wing populism has long, if intermittent, history of electoral success in Austria (Luther,
2003; Mcgann and Kitschelt, 2005). The 2017 national election is no expectation, with the rightwing populist Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ) gaining 26% of the vote. Moreover, the FPÖ
leveraged this electoral success to form a coalition with the center-right Austrian People’s Party
(ÖVP), serving as the junior partner in the current Austrian government. As such, Austria serves
as an important case for the study of affect and right-wing populist support. Given its relatively
established nature and its electoral success, FPÖ supporters should be less driven to be angry or
anxious because of (perceived) lack of political representation or electoral underperformance.
Moreover, since the ÖVP has mirrored many of the policy positions of the FPÖ (Wodak, 2018),
comparing the affective dynamics of FPÖ and ÖVP support reduces the confounding impact of
party platforms and policy positions, and instead focuses on the ideational differences between
the populist right and traditional conservative politics.

Data

Study 1 uses the Austrian National Election Study (AUTNES), a six-wave longitudinal panel
collected during the 2017 national election. The survey is representative panel of Austrian
citizens age 16 and above who were eligible to vote on election day. Quote-sampling was used to
create a closer overlap with Austrian census data. The relevant survey questions were collected
in four, bi-monthly waves from June 2017 (Wave 1) to October 2017 (Wave 4), creating a panel
structure with relatively short time-lags between waves. After accounting for item-nonresponse
and panel attrition, 2292 respondents remained in the study
Party support is measured through respondents’ self-reported probability of voting for a party in
the upcoming election on a scale of 0 (highly unlikely) to 10 (very likely). Support for rightwing populists is measured through support for the FPÖ, while support for the center-right ÖVP
serves as a reference category to establish to what extent this effect is unique to (right-wing)

populist parties.3 Unfortunately, since there is no competitive left-wing populist party in Austria,
a comparison to left-wing populism is not possible.
To measure voters’ negative affect, AUTNES asks respondents to what degree they feel anxious
or annoyed when thinking about the current political situation in Austria, ranging from 0 (not at
all) to 10 (very much). Although these items are linked to political evaluations, they provide
considerable leeway about the precise source of anxiety or the specific targets of respondents’
anger, allowing for a relatively general test of the relationship between populist party support
and respondent affect.4
RI-CLMP models automatically control for time-invariant respondent characteristics (Hamaker,
Kuiper and Grasman, 2015), such as age, gender, educational status, as well as stable personality
traits or political attitudes. Given the shorter timeframe of the panel, time variant in respondents’
employment status, income, or relationship status were relatively infrequent and were not
recorded across survey waves. However, insofar as they affect either respondents affect or
political preferences, the models will reflect them as exogenous shocks. All reported models
therefore only use respondents’ affect and party support.

Results

Is there a unique link between (right-wing) populist party support and affect? And if so, what are
the dynamics of this relationship? Do voters support right-wing populist parties because they are
angry and afraid? Or does support make it more likely to become angry and anxious
subsequently? Table 1 and Figure 2 report the results of the main autoregressive, cross-lagged
panel model that explore these questions empirically. Model fit indicators suggest that all models

3

The appendix also reports models for the Green party, the Social Democratic Party of Austria, and the liberal
NEOs. None of them show any association between party support and increased levels of anger or anxiety. Indeed,
for the social democrats and green party, support is associated with subsequent reductions in negative affect.
4
In the affect-appraisal literature, annoyance is generally considered as a sub-type of anger (Watson and Clark,
1994). Although a question that focused on explicit anger was also asked, it was asked in fewer waves. The
appendix reports alternative models that use the anger item instead of annoyance. Additionally, I also report models
that use worry instead of anxiety. These models do not change the findings of the paper.

fulfill standard model fit criteria5, and comparison to the baseline autoregressive model show that
the random-intercept model has significantly better model fit.6
As both the table and the figure show, most stability coefficients are significant. As expected,
even when baseline affect and support are taken into account, changes in one time period are
associated with a spill-over effect in subsequent waves. In other words, once voters’ begin to
support one party, their support will remain elevated above its “natural” baseline in subsequent
waves. Similarly, once voters display either anger or anxiety about the current state of Austrian
politics, their negative affect in subsequent waves will remain elevated.
But is there a uniquely emotional dynamic underpinning support for right-wing populists? Table
1 and Figure 2 strongly support this hypothesis. There is a clear and significant relationship
between negative affect and subsequent support for the FPÖ, as well as a significant relationship
between FPÖ support and subsequently higher levels of anger and anxiety. Moreover, this
relationship is unique to the populist FPÖ. Support for the ÖVP either has no association with
affect at all, or is associated with subsequent reductions in anger.
Support for right-wing populists is therefore uniquely associated with increases in negative
affect. But what are the specific temporal dynamics, and to what extent do we need to distinguish
between anger and anxiety? Comparing the standardized cross-lagged and stability coefficients
shows that the path from negative affect to support for the FPÖ is considerably less impactful
than the reverse path from increased support to subsequent affect. The effect of populist support
on anger, for example, is about 5.5 times larger than the reverse effect from anger to populist
support. Similarly, the relationship from anxiety to FPÖ support is roughly 2.5 times larger than
the link from anxiety to party support.
Support for right-wing populists is therefore uniquely associated with increases in negative
affect. But what are the specific temporal dynamics, and to what extent do we need to distinguish
between anger and anxiety? Comparing the standardized cross-lagged and stability coefficients

5

Following the criteria outlined by Hu & Bentler(1999) of

0.95 and residual mean squared error (RMSEA) <0.06.
6
𝜒 Difference test between models with p < 0.0001

5, Confirmatory fit index (CFI) >

shows that the path from negative affect to support for the FPÖ is considerably less impactful
than the reverse path from increased support to subsequent affect. The effect of populist support
on anger, for example, is about 5.5 times larger than the reverse effect from anger to populist
support. Similarly, the relationship from anxiety to FPÖ support is roughly 2.5 times larger than
the link from anxiety to party support.
Figure 2: Relationship between Anger, Anxiety, and FPÖ/ ÖVP Support
Anger

FPÖ
Support

Anxiety

0.041**

1.062***

0.066***

Anger

Anger

FPÖ
Support

ÖVP
Support

Anxiety

Anxiety

0.042**

1.207***

n.s

Anger

ÖVP
Support

Anxiety

*** p<0.001, **p <0.01, *p<0.05
Summary of cross-lagged, autoregressive panel model between party support and respondent affect. Covariances
and paths between anger and anxiety have been omitted to improve legibility. Table 1 provides more detail. Full
results can be found in the Appendix.

In other words, while high levels of anger and anxiety are associated with greater support of a
right-wing populist party, higher levels of negative affect among FPÖ supporters are an effect,
rather than a cause of, this support. Voters may become somewhat more supportive of right-wing
populist parties if they are angry and anxious. Once they have become more supportive,
however, they subsequently become considerably more angry and anxious. It is therefore
important to disentangle the temporal dynamics between negative affect and support for rightwing populist parties, since the common theory that anger and anxiety drive voters to support
them misses the role that support plays in shaping the emotions of their supporter. Conversely, at
least in the Austrian case, there is no evidence that anger and anxiety need to be empirically
distinguished.

Table 1: Cross-lagged Models of Party Support, Anger, and Anxiety in Austria
Model 1: FPÖ
Estimate
Party Support
Anger
Anxiety
Anger  Party Support
AnxietyParty Support
Party SupportAnger
Party SupportAnxiety
Chi-Square / D.of F.
RMSEA
CFI
N

Std. Er.

Model 2: ÖVP
P(>|z|)

Autoregressive Coefficients
1.062*** 0.017
0.001
**
0.041
0.018
0.018
0.057*** 0.017
0.001
Cross-Lagged Coefficients
0.045**
0.021
0.030
***
0.095
0.019
0.000
0.253*** 0.014
0.000
***
0.240
0.016
0.000
Model Fit
4.001
0.043
0.992
2098

Estimate

Std. Er P(>|z|)

1.207***
0.042**
0.025

0.027
0.017
0.016

0.000
0.013
0.125

0.006
-0.040
-0.067***
-0.038

0.029
0.028
0.025
0.027

0.840
0.147
0.007
0.154

4.540
0.046
0.988
2024

*** p<0.01, **p <0.05, *p<0.1
Note: Results of a cross-lagged, autoregressive panel model with random intercepts. Estimated using R3.4.3 and lavaan Version 0.6-2 and maximum likelihood estimation. Cross-lagged paths between anger
and anxiety and covariances were omitted for clarity. Full results can be found in the Appendix.

STUDY 2: GERMANY
Study 1 shows that the dynamics of right-wing populist support are uniquely emotional.
Compared to traditional conservative party support, right-wing populism is both driven by
negative affect, and more importantly, creates considerably higher subsequent levels of anger
and anxiety. However, several questions remain. First of all, potential vote choice and emotions
concerning politics are theoretically proximate, making a empirical connection likely. But to
what extent do these dynamics also apply over a longer time frame, and when considering less
immediately related measures of populist support and affect? Secondly, to what extent are these
emotional dynamics exclusive to supporters of right-wing populists? While Study 1 shows that
support for traditional, conservative-right parties is not associated with elevated anger or anxiety,
additional analyses are necessary to also distinguish supporters of right-wing populists from both

left-wing populists and supporters of more explicitly radical-right parties. Study 2 focuses on
Germany, which allows us to investigate these questions in greater detail.
Germany provides an important counterpoint to the Austrian case. While the FPÖ has a long and
relatively successful history in Austrian politics, Germany had long avoided the emergence of a
(nationally) successful right-wing populist party, while more extreme, far-right parties like the
National Democratic Party (NPD) have seen only limited electoral and societal success. This
changed, however, with the explosive emergence of the Alternative for Germany (AfD).
Although initially founded in 2013 to protest against bailouts in the Eurozone (Grimm, 2015),
increasing radicalization following a party split in 2014, and a close link to anti-immigration
protests in 2015 have seen them gaining increasing public prominence and electoral support
(Niedermayer and Hofrichter, 2016). They were the third strongest party in the 2018 national
election and will likely remain a fixture of an increasingly fragmented German political party
system (Schwarzbözl and Fatke, 2016). Despite its early technocratic and Eurosceptic roots, the
AfD has therefore become a firmly entrenched right-wing populist party. Indeed, even as early
as 2014, the AfD was already the party with the most anti-elite and populist positions in the
German political system (Lewandowsky, Giebler and Wagner, 2016; Marx and Nguyen, 2018),
and subsequent party-splits and electoral strategies have increased this trend further.
While the discussions about the drivers of AfD support are ongoing and mirror the discussion
over the economic and cultural roots of populist support more generally, themes of anxiety and
anger are persistent across these different explanations (Niedermayer and Hofrichter, 2016;
Lengfeld, 2017). As such, Germany and the growth of AfD support provide an important test
case for the relationship between anger, anxiety, and voters’ support for right-wing populism.
Moreover, unlike Austria, Germany does have an established, and electorally successful leftpopulist party, the Left (Die Linke) (Hough, Koss and Olsen, 2007; Olsen, 2007). The German
case therefore allows for an explicit comparison of the emotional dynamics among supporters of
right and left-populist parties respectively. A similar comparison is possible between support for
the AfD and the NPD, delineating the dynamics of right-wing populists support from even more
extreme, far-right party support. Finally, as the next section will describe in greater detail, the
data structure of the German case also expands on the findings of Study 1.

Data

Unfortunately, the relative recency of the AfD’s emergence on the German political landscape
limit the available survey waves. Since the AfD was only founded in 2013, items measuring
attitudes towards the AfD only become informative in the last three available waves, covering
the years of 2014,2015 and 2016. However, even given this relatively constricted timeframe, the
extensive coverage of the SOEP allows us to measure the relationship between affect and
populism among 19600 unique respondents. Moreover, the annual structure of the data makes it
possible to model affective dynamics over a much longer time-horizon than in Study 1.
Party support is measured through the combination of two variables: Feelings of party affiliation
and the strength of that affiliation. The SOEP asks respondents if they feel close to a specific
party, and if so, how strong this feeling of closeness is on a Likert-Scale ranging between 1 and
5. The dependent variables are built through a combination of those two variables, where 0
indicates no feelings of affiliation and 5 indicates a very strong sense of proximity. Compared to
the propensity to vote measure in Study 1, this measure is a much more conservative measure of
party support. While there is some debate about the stability of party identification (Bakker,
Hopmann and Persson, 2015), it is less frequently updated than voting intentions and it is less
likely that relatively ephemeral affective states are related to a more deeply ingrained form of
party support.
Support for right-wing populists is measured through feelings of affiliation with the AfD.
Following Study 1, support for conservative center-right parties is modeled through support for
the Christian Democratic Union and its Bavarian sister party (CDU/CSU). To expand on Study
1, Study 2 also compares the affective dynamics of right-wing populist support to support for
left-populist parties and far-right extremist parties. Support for these is measured through
feelings of affiliation with the Left party and the NPD respectively.7

7

Once more, the appendix also reports results for the social democratic SPD, the Green party, and the market-liberal
FDP. None of these parties show a relationship between increased support and higher levels of negative affect.

To measure respondent affect, the SOEP asks respondents how frequently they experience
different emotional states, ranging from 1 (very rarely) to 5 (very often). These items capture
general affect rather than their feelings towards a specific political actors or institution. However,
even generalized affect has been shown to influence political perceptions and decision-making
(Lerner and Tiedens, 2006; Small and Lerner, 2008; Seawright, 2012; Banks, 2016). More
importantly, much of the theoretical arguments that link affect and populism focus on the
transference of general resentment and anxiety into targeted blame and a subsequent shift in
political attitudes (Seawright, 2012; Bonikowski, 2017; Salmela and von Scheve, 2017).
Understanding the dynamics of affect and populism thus should focus not only on targeted
political emotions, but also on its roots in more general affective states. But while these measures
are theoretically important, they will nevertheless result in weaker and more noisy relationships
with political attitudes, increasing the conservativeness of Study 2.
Otherwise, the model specifications of Study 2 follow those of Study 1. As such, all models
control for time-invariant respondent characteristics such as age, gender, and educational status.
Similarly, stable personality traits or political attitudes are controlled for in the model. Given the
longer time frame of the survey, controlling for changes in respondents’ life, particularly changes
in employment status or income, could be important. However, including additional controls not
only reduces model fit considerably, it also does not change the main results of the paper. All
models therefore only use respondents’ affect and party support. 8

8

Models using additional control variables are reported in the appendix.

Results
Figure 3: Relationship between Anger, Anxiety, and AFD/ CDU Support
Anger

AFD
Support

Anxiety

0.015*

0.210***

0.044***

Anger

Anger

AFD
Support

CDU
Support

Anxiety

Anxiety

0.016**

0.035***

0.044***

Anger

CDU
Support

Anxiety

*** p<0.001, **p <0.01, *p<0.05
Summary of cross-lagged, autoregressive panel model between party support and respondent affect. Covariances
and paths between anger and anxiety have been omitted to improve legibility. Table 2 provides more detail. Full
results can be found in the Appendix.

Table 2 and Figure 3 mirror the design of Study 1 and compare the affective dynamics
surrounding support for right-wing populists and conservative center-right parties respectively.
To expand on Study 1, Table 3 and Figure 4 also report the affective dynamics surrounding
support for the left-populist Left party and the far-right NPD. Across all models, model
diagnostics suggest good model fit, and all stability coefficients are significant. Even when
controlling for baseline affect or party support, changes in one time period are associated with a
spill-over effect in subsequent waves. AfD support in particular displays this cross-wave
growth, which suggests that once voters begin to feel a sense of affiliation with “their AfD”, they
will begin to feel increasingly closer to the party over time.

Table 2: Cross-lagged Model of Party Support, Anger, and Anxiety for AfD and CDU
Model 3: AfD

Party Support
Anger
Anxiety
Anger  Party Support
AnxietyParty Support
Party SupportAnger
Party SupportAnxiety
Chi-Square / D.of F.
RMSEA
CFI
N

Estimate Std. Er. P(>|z|)
Autoregressive Coefficients
0.210*** 0.016
0
*
0.015
0.008
0.07
0.044*** 0.008
0
Cross-Lagged Coefficients
-0.003
0.007
0.729
0.013*
0.008
0.079
*
0.015
0.009
0.096
0.024*** 0.009
0.007
Model Fit
1.346
0.006
0.999
19600

Model 4: CDU/CSU
Estimate

Std. Er P(>|z|)

0.035***
0.016**
0.044***

0.006
0.008
0.008

0
0.046
0

-0.003
0.002
0.006
-0.001

0.005
0.005
0.007
0.007

0.463
0.674
0.334
0.905

1.930
0.007
0.999
19600

*** p<0.01, **p <0.05, *p<0.1
Note: Results of a cross-lagged, autoregressive panel model with random intercepts. Estimated using R3.4.3 and lavaan Version 0.6-2 and maximum likelihood estimation. Cross-lagged paths between anger
and anxiety and covariances were omitted for clarity. Full results can be found in the Appendix.

Moreover, as in Study 1, the relationship between higher negative affect and party support is
unique to right-wing populists. Neither support for the center-right CDU/CSU, nor for leftpopulist Left Party or far-right NPD, is associated with increases in negative affect. More
importantly, a comparison of the autoregressive and cross-lagged coefficients demonstrates that
this effect is substantively important. A one unit increase in AfD support is associated with a
subsequent increase in anger is comparable to simply becoming angrier in the previous time
period. In other words, becoming more supportive of the AfD has a large and significant effect
on respondents’ affect, making them both more afraid and considerably more angry than they
would have otherwise been.

Figure 4: Relationship between Anger, Anxiety, and Left Party / NPD Support
Anger

Left
Support

Anxiety

0.015*

0.061***

0.044***

Anger

Anger

Left
Support

NPD
Support

Anxiety

Anxiety

0.015*

0.145***

0.044***

Anger

NPD
Support

Anxiety

*** p<0.001, **p <0.01, *p<0.05
Summary of cross-lagged, autoregressive panel model between party support and respondent affect.
Covariances and paths between anger and anxiety have been omitted to improve legibility. Table 3 provides
more detail. Full results can be found in the Appendix.

Conversely, the impact of affect on support for the AfD is more nuanced. Although both anger
and anxiety are often invoked as explanatory factors for the emergence and support of populist
parties, only anxiety is significantly related to subsequent changes in support. Moreover, while
anxiety is significantly associated with both support for the AfD and for the Left party, only AfD
support is increased by anxiety. Becoming more anxious actually reduces the expected support
for the left-party.9 Similar to the findings of Study 1, there is stronger evidence that negative
affect is the result, rather than the cause of, support for right-wing populist parties.

9

The results for the Left party contradict the findings of Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza (2017), who find anger an
important driver of support for left-wing populism in Spain. However, their models use anger towards a specific
policy (austerity) rather than generalized affect.

Table 3: Cross-lagged Models of Party Support, Anger, and Anxiety in Germany
Model 5: Left Party
Estimate
Party Support
Anger
Anxiety
Anger  Party Support
AnxietyParty Support
Party SupportAnger
Party SupportAnxiety
Chi-Square / D.of F.
RMSEA
CFI
N

Std. Er.

P(>|z|)

Autoregressive Coefficients
0.061*** 0.007
0
*
0.015
0.008
0.067
0.044*** 0.008
0
Cross-Lagged Coefficients
0.001
0.005
0.844
*
-0.010
0.006
0.081
0.004
0.007
0.557
-0.005
0.007
0.475
Model Fit
1.036
0.003
1
19600

Model 6: NPD
Estimate

Std. Er P(>|z|)

0.145***
0.015*
0.044***

0.009
0.008
0.008

0
0.059
0

-0.002
-0.001
-0.011
-0.005

0.003
0.003
0.016
0.016

0.393
0.765
0.505
0.74

1.586
0.005
1
19600

*** p<0.01, **p <0.05, *p<0.1
Note: Results of a cross-lagged, autoregressive panel model with random intercepts. Estimated using R3.4.3 and lavaan Version 0.6-2 and maximum likelihood estimation. Cross-lagged paths between anger
and anxiety and covariances were omitted for clarity. Full results can be found in the Appendix.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Is there a special relationship between anger, anxiety, and support for right-wing populist
parties? And what do these dynamics look like? Is it anger, anxiety, or both emotions that
matter? And similarly, to what extent do these negative emotions cause support for populism,
and to what extent are they caused by it? Using data from Austria and Germany, I show that
support for right-wing populist parties is uniquely linked to negative emotions. Compared to
support for “traditional” parties, left-wing populists, and even far-right extremists, only rightwing populist party support is associated with increased negative affect.
Moreover, I show that the relationship between affect and right-wing populist support is more
nuanced than commonly discussed. While anxiety consistently increase subsequent support,
anger’s association is less certain. Moreover, the substantive impact is comparatively small.
However, once voters have become support of right-wing populist parties, they subsequently

become consistently and substantively more angry and anxious than they would have otherwise
been.
The paper thus contributes to the literature on emotions and populism by differentiating the
commonly held stereotype of the angry, anxious, right-wing populist. Although there is some
evidence that these negative emotions lead to support for right-wing populist parties, there is
stronger evidence that support for these parties amplifies negative affect. Indeed, while there is
some evidence that populist parties serve as an important vehicle for leveraging general anxieties
into targeted resentment and anger (Bonikowski, 2017; Salmela and von Scheve, 2017), the
results of this paper demonstrate that populist parties cannot “solve” voters’ anxiety, but rather
increase it further, supplementing it with greater anger and resentment as well. Negative
emotions may therefore be more important in sustaining support for right-wing populist parties
than in initially causing it.
By establishing a more complex relationship between anxiety, anger, and right-wing populist
support, the paper also opens up several interesting avenues of future research. While I have
focused here on generalized emotions and longer timeframes, the role of emotions in triggering
an activation of populist attitudes may require a more fine-grained and focused look on shortterm emotions and cognitive mechanisms. Similarly, although anger and anxiety have received
the largest attention, other emotions, such as disgust and optimism, may also be connected to
populism. Finally, this paper has focused predominantly on right-wing populism, since several of
the proposed mechanisms connect to its exclusionary nature. The results of the paper support this
focus. However, in light of the existing finding that anger over austerity politics did drive
support for left-wing populism in the Spanish case (Rico, Guinjoan and Anduiza, 2017), more
work is needed to distinguish the affective dynamics of left and right-wing populism. Indeed,
one under-appreciated difference between right and leftwing populism may lie in its affective
roots.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abou-Chadi, T. and Krause, W. (2018) ‘The Causal Effect of Radical Right Success on
Mainstream Parties’ Policy Positions: A Regression Discontinuity Approach’, British Journal of
Political Science, pp. 1–19.
Agerberg, M. (2017) ‘Failed expectations: Quality of government and support for populist
parties in Europe’, European Journal of Political Research, 56(3), pp. 578–600.
Akkerman, A., Mudde, C. and Zaslove, A. (2014) ‘How Populist Are the People? Measuring
Populist Attitudes in Voters’, Comparative Political Studies, 47(9), pp. 1324–1353.
Bakker, B. N., Hopmann, D. N. and Persson, M. (2015) ‘Personality traits and party
identification over time’, European Journal of Political Research. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
(10.1111), 54(2), pp. 197–215.
Bakker, B. N., Rooduijn, M. and Schumacher, G. (2016) ‘The psychological roots of populist
voting: Evidence from the United States, the Netherlands and Germany’, European Journal of
Political Research. Wiley/Blackwell (10.1111), 55(2), pp. 302–320.
Banks, A. J. (2016) ‘Are Group Cues Necessary? How Anger Makes Ethnocentrism Among
Whites a Stronger Predictor of Racial and Immigration Policy Opinions’, Political Behavior.
Springer US, 38(3), pp. 635–657.
Berning, C. C. and Schlueter, E. (2016) ‘The dynamics of radical right-wing populist party
preferences and perceived group threat: A comparative panel analysis of three competing
hypotheses in the Netherlands and Germany’, Social Science Research. Elsevier Ltd, 55, pp. 83–
93.
Bischof, D. and Senninger, R. (2018) ‘Simple politics for the people? Complexity in campaign
messages and political knowledge’, European Journal of Political Research, 57(2), pp. 473–495.
Bonikowski, B. (2017) ‘Ethno-nationalist populism and the mobilization of collective
resentment’, The British Journal of Sociology, 68(1).
Brader, T., Valentino, N. a and Suhay, E. (2008) ‘What Triggers Group Public Anxiety , to
Opposition Immigration ? Threat Cues , and Immigration Threat’, American Journal of Political
Science, 52(4), pp. 959–978.
Demertzis, N. (2006) ‘Emotions and Populism’, in Emotions, Politics and Society, pp. 103–122.
Derks, A. (2004) ‘Are the underprivileged really that economically “leftist”? Attitudes towards
economic redistribution and the welfare state in Flanders’, European Journal of Political
Research, 43, pp. 509–521.
Dunn, K. (2015) ‘Preference for radical right-wing populist parties among exclusive-nationalists
and authoritarians’, Party Politics. SAGE PublicationsSage UK: London, England, 21(3), pp.

367–380.
Ellsworth, P. C. and Smith, C. a. (1988) ‘From appraisal to emotion: Differences among
unpleasant feelings’, Motivation and Emotion, 12(3), pp. 271–302.
Evans, G. and Chzhen, K. (2016) ‘Re-evaluating the Valence Model of Political Choice’,
Political Science Research and Methods, 4(01), pp. 199–220.
Ford, R. and Goodwin, M. J. (2010) ‘Angry white men: Individual and contextual predictors of
support for the british national party’, Political Studies, 58(1), pp. 1–25.
Gadarian, S. K. and Albertson, B. (2014) ‘Anxiety, immigration, and the search for information’,
Political Psychology, 35(2), pp. 133–164.
Gelman, A. (2008) ‘Scaling regression inputs by dividing by two standard deviations’, Statistics
in Medicine, 27, pp. 2865–2873.
Grimm, R. (2015) ‘The rise of the German Eurosceptic party Alternative für Deutschland,
between ordoliberal critique and popular anxiety’, International Political Science Review, 36(3),
pp. 264–278.
Grzesiak-Feldman, M. (2013) ‘The Effect of High-Anxiety Situations on Conspiracy Thinking’,
Current Psychology, 32(1), pp. 100–118.
Hamaker, E. L., Kuiper, R. M. and Grasman, R. P. P. P. (2015) ‘A critique of the cross-lagged
panel model’, Psychological Methods, 20(1), pp. 102–116.
Hameleers, M., Bos, L. and de Vreese, C. (2018) ‘Framing blame: toward a better understanding
of the effects of populist communication on populist party preferences’, Journal of Elections,
Public Opinion and Parties. Taylor & Francis, 28(3), pp. 380–398.
Hameleers, M., Bos, L. and de Vreese, C. H. (2016) ‘“ They Did It”: The Effects of
Emotionalized Blame Attribution in Populist Communication’, Communication Research. SAGE
PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 44(6), p. 0093650216644026.
Van Hauwaert, S. M. and Van Kessel, S. (2018) ‘Beyond protest and discontent: A crossnational analysis of the effect of populist attitudes and issue positions on populist party support’,
European Journal of Political Research, 57(1), pp. 68–92.
Hawkins, K. A. (2009) ‘Is Chávez populist?: Measuring populist discourse in comparative
perspective’, Comparative Political Studies, 42(8), pp. 1040–1067.
Hawkins, K. A., Kaltwasser, C. and Andreadis, I. (2018) ‘The Activation of Populist Attitudes’,
Government and Opposition, pp. 1–25.
Hobolt, S. B. and Tilley, J. (2016) ‘Fleeing the centre: the rise of challenger parties in the
aftermath of the euro crisis’, West European Politics, 39(5), pp. 971–991.

Hough, D., Koss, M. and Olsen, J. (2007) Left Party in Contemporary German Politics. Palgrave
Macmillan.
Hu, L. T. and Bentler, P. M. (1999) ‘Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure
analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives’, Structural Equation Modeling, 6(1), pp.
1–55.
Ivarsflaten, E. (2005) ‘The vulnerable populist right parties: No economic realignment fuelling
their electoral success’, European Journal of Political Research. Wiley/Blackwell (10.1111), pp.
465–492.
Jagers, J. and Walgrave, S. (2007) ‘Populism as political communication style: An empirical
study of political parties’ discourse in Belgium’, European Journal of Political Research, 46(3),
pp. 319–345.
Kehrberg, J. E. (2015) ‘The demand side of support for radical right parties’, Comparative
European Politics. Nature Publishing Group, 13(5), pp. 553–576.
Kessler, A. E. and Freeman, G. P. (2005) ‘Support for Extreme Right-Wing Parties in Western
Europe: Individual Attributes, Political Attitudes, and National Context’, Comparative European
Politics. Palgrave Macmillan UK, 3(3), pp. 261–288.
Knigge, P. (1998) ‘The ecological correlates of right wing extremism in Western Europe’,
European Journal of Political Research, 34, pp. 249–279.
Koopmans, R. and Muis, J. (2009) ‘The rise of right-wing populist Pim Fortuyn in the
Netherlands: A discursive opportunity approach’, European Journal of Political Research, 48(5),
pp. 642–664.
Lengfeld, H. (2017) ‘Die „Alternative für Deutschland“: eine Partei für
Modernisierungsverlierer?’, Kolner Zeitschrift fur Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie, 69(2), pp.
209–232.
Lerner, J. et al. (2003) ‘Effects of fear and anger on perceived risks of terrorism: a national field
experiment.’, Psychological science, 14(2), pp. 144–50.
Lerner, J. and Keltner, D. (2000) ‘Beyond valence: Toward a model of emotion-specific
influences on judgement and choice’, Cognition & Emotion, 14(4), pp. 473–493.
Lerner, J. and Keltner, D. (2001) ‘Fear, Anger, and Risk’, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81(1), pp. 146–59.
Lerner, J. and Tiedens, L. (2006) ‘Portrait of the angry decision maker: how appraisal tendencies
shape anger’s influence on cognition’, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19(2), pp. 115–
137.
Lewandowsky, M., Giebler, H. and Wagner, A. (2016) ‘Rechtspopulismus in Deutschland. Eine
empirische Einordnung der Parteien zur Bundestagswahl 2013 unter besonderer

Ber??cksichtigung der AfD’, Politische Vierteljahresschrift, 57(2), pp. 247–275.
Luther, K. R. (2003) ‘The self-destruction of a right-wing populist party ? The Austrian
parliamentary election of 2002’, West European Politics, 26(2), pp. 136–152.
Magni, G. (2017) ‘It’s the emotions, Stupid! Anger about the economic crisis, low political
efficacy, and support for populist parties’, Electoral Studies. Elsevier Ltd, 50, pp. 91–102.
Marcus, G. (2000) ‘Emotions in politics’, Annual Review of Political Science.
Marcus, G. E. and MacKuen, M. B. (1993) ‘Anxiety, enthusiasm, and the vote: The emotional
underpinnings of learning and involvement during presidential campaigns’, The American
Political Science Review, 87(3), pp. 672–685.
Marx, P. and Nguyen, C. (2018) ‘Anti-elite parties and political inequality: How challenges to
the political mainstream reduce income gaps in internal efficacy’, European Journal of Political
Research, pp. 1–22.
Mcgann, A. J. and Kitschelt, H. (2005) ‘The Radical Right in The Alps: Evolution of Support for
the Swiss SVP and Austrian FPÖ’, Party Politics, 11(2), pp. 147–171.
Milburn, M. A., Niwa, M. and Patterson, M. D. (2014) ‘Authoritarianism, anger, and hostile
attribution bias: A test of affect displacement’, Political Psychology, 35(2), pp. 225–243.
Miller, P. R. (2011) ‘The Emotional Citizen: Emotion as a function of political sophistication’,
Political Psychology, 32(4), pp. 575–600.
Moffitt, B. and Tormey, S. (2014) ‘Rethinking populism: Politics, mediatisation and political
style’, Political Studies, 62(2), pp. 381–397.
Mudde, C. and Rovira Kaltwasser, C. (2012) ‘Populism and (liberal) democracy: a framework
for analysis’, in Populism in Europe and the Americas: Threat or Corrective for Democracy?,
pp. 1–26.
Mudde, C. and Rovira Kaltwasser, C. (2013) ‘Exclusionary vs. inclusionary populism:
comparing contemporary Europe and Latin America’, Government and Opposition, 48(2).
Neuman, W. R. et al. (2007) The Affect Effect. University of Chicago Press.
Niedermayer, O. and Hofrichter, J. (2016) ‘Die Wählerschaft der AfD: Wer ist sie, woher kommt
sie und wie weit rechts steht sie?’, Zeitschrift für Parlamentsfragen, 47(2), pp. 267–285.
Oesch, D. and Rennwald, L. (2018) ‘Electoral competition in Europe’s new tripolar political
space: Class voting for the left, centre-right and radical right’, European Journal of Political
Research, pp. 1–25.
Olsen, J. (2007) ‘The Merger of the PDS and WASG: From Eastern German Regional Party to
National Radical Left Party?’, German Politics, 16(2), pp. 205–221.

Petersen, M. (2010) ‘Distinct Emotions, Distinct Domains: Anger, Anxiety and Perceptions of
Intentionality’, The Journal of Politics, 72(02), p. 357.
Redlawsk, D. P. (2006) Feeling Politics. Palgrave MacMillan.
Rico, G., Guinjoan, M. and Anduiza, E. (2017) ‘The Emotional Underpinnings of Populism:
How Anger and Fear Affect Populist Attitudes’, Swiss Political Science Review, 23(4), pp. 444–
461.
Rooduijn, M. (2017) ‘What unites the voter bases of populist parties? Comparing the electorates
of 15 populist parties’, European Political Science Review, (May), pp. 1–18.
Rydgren, J. (2005) ‘Is extreme right-wing populism contagious? Explaining the emergence of a
new party family’, European Journal of Political Research, 44(3), pp. 413–437.
Rydgren, J. (2007) ‘The Sociology of the Radical Right’, Annual Review of Sociology, 33(1), pp.
241–262.
Salmela, M. and von Scheve, C. (2017) ‘Emotional roots of right-wing political populism’,
Social Science Information, 56(4), pp. 567–595.
Schmuck, D. and Matthes, J. (2017) ‘Effects of Economic and Symbolic Threat Appeals in
Right-Wing Populist Advertising on Anti-Immigrant Attitudes: The Impact of Textual and
Visual Appeals’, Political Communication. Routledge, 34(4), pp. 607–626.
Schwarzbözl, T. and Fatke, M. (2016) ‘Außer Protesten nichts gewesen? Das politische Potenzial
der AfD’, Politische Vierteljahresschrift, 57(2), pp. 276–299.
Seawright, J. (2012) Party-System Collapse: The Roots of Crisis in Peru and Venezuela.
Stanford University Press.
Small, D. and Lerner, J. (2008) ‘Emotional Policy: Personal Sadness and Anger Shape
Judgments about a Welfare Case’, Political Psychology, 29(2), pp. 149–168.
Spruyt, B., Keppens, G. and Van Droogenbroeck, F. (2016) ‘Who Supports Populism and What
Attracts People to It?’, Political Research Quarterly. SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles,
CA, 69(2), pp. 335–346.
Stockemer, D., Lentz, T. and Mayer, D. (2018) ‘Individual Predictors of the Radical Right-Wing
Vote in Europe: A Meta-Analysis of Articles in Peer-Reviewed Journals (1995–2016)’,
Government and Opposition, 53(03), pp. 569–593.
Strömbäck, J. and Shehata, A. (2010) ‘Media malaise or a virtuous circle? Exploring the causal
relationships between news media exposure, political news attention and political interest’,
European Journal of Political Research, 49(5), pp. 575–597.
Swank, D. (2003) ‘Globalization, the welfare state and right-wing populism in Western Europe’,
Socio-Economic Review. Oxford University Press, 1(2), pp. 215–245.

Taggart, P. (2017) ‘Populism in Western Europe’, in Rovira Kaltwasser, C. et al. (eds) The
Oxford Handbook of Populism, pp. 1–20.
Valentino, N. a et al. (2008) ‘Is a Worried Citizen a Good Citizen ? Emotions , Political
Information Seeking , and Learning via the Internet’, Political Psychology, 29(2), pp. 247–273.
Vasilopoulos, P., Marcus, G. E. and Foucault, M. (2018) ‘Emotional Responses to the Charlie
Hebdo Attacks: Addressing the Authoritarianism Puzzle’, Political Psychology, 39(3), pp. 557–
575.
Watson, D. and Clark, L. A. (1994) ‘T HE PANAS-X Manual for the Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule - Expanded Form’, Order A Journal On The Theory Of Ordered Sets And Its
Applications, 277(6), pp. 1–27.
Weeks, B. E. (2015) ‘Emotions, Partisanship, and Misperceptions: How Anger and Anxiety
Moderate the Effect of Partisan Bias on Susceptibility to Political Misinformation’, Journal of
Communication, 65(4), pp. 699–719.
Wirz, D. S. et al. (2018) ‘The Effects of Right-Wing Populist Communication on Emotions and
Cognitions toward Immigrants’, The International Journal of Press/Politics, 23(4), pp. 496–516.
Wodak, R. (2018) ‘Vom Rand in die Mitte – „Schamlose Normalisierung“’, Politische
Vierteljahresschrift, 59, pp. 323–335.

