Race, Ethnicity, and the Future of Work1
Pegah Moradi

A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
Degree of Bachelor of Arts with Honors as a College Scholar
Cornell University
December 2018

Under the advising of
Sergio Garcia-Rios, Government
Karen Levy, Information Science
Jamila Michener, Government

A
​ ll reproducible code and data for this study can be found at
https://github.com/pegahmoradi/pegahmoradi.github.io/tree/master/automation_race
1

Table of Contents
Abstract

3

Introduction

4

Race, Labor, and Automation: A History
How Work Created Whiteness
The First Machine Age
(1) What kind of work was automated?
(2) How did automation affect employment?
​(a) Black Labor
​(b) Chinese Immigration
​(c) Mexican Bracero Program
(3) How did workers react?

7
7
8
9
12
13
15
16
18

Automation Today: Trends and Frameworks
Definitions
Prevailing Frameworks

20
20
20

Data and Results
Limitations

24
30

Conclusion

32

Final Thoughts

33

Acknowledgements

35

References

36

2

Abstract
Leading up to and following the 2016 American presidential election, “White working class”
employment and political agency has become particularly salient. A simultaneous discussion on the
role of automation in unemployment complicates the political narrative; by one estimate, 47% of
American jobs are at risk of computerization (Frey and Osborne, 2013). This study analyzes how
occupational automation corresponds with racial and ethnic demographics within occupational
groups from both a historical and contemporary perspective. I find that throughout American
industrialization, non-White and immigrant workers shifted to low-wage, unskilled work because
of the political and social limitations imposed upon these groups. In the context of today’s AI-driven
automation, I find that White workers are more heavily affected by automatability than other racial
groups. Conversely, however, I found that the proportion of White workers in an occupation is
negatively correlated with an occupation’s automatability. I conclude with suggestions for a
susceptibility-based approach to predicting employment outcomes from AI-driven automation.

3

Introduction
“And I mean, I wrote down some numbers that are incredible, but the numbers of
manufacturing jobs that are lost, especially in the Rust Belt — and the Rust Belt is so
incredible. But we’re losing companies, it’s — it’s unbelievable, one after another, just
one after another.”
— ​Donald Trump, remarks at the Carrier factory in Indianapolis, Indiana on
December 1, 2016.
On December 1, 2016, then President-Elect Donald Trump addressed crowds at the Carrier
plant in Indianapolis after the air-conditioning company decided to keep up to 1,000 jobs in the
United States instead of moving them to Mexico ​(Schwartz, 2016)​. The speech, which framed the
Carrier decision as a result of Trump’s win, continued the protectionist rhetoric of the Trump
campaign, which was often coupled with anti-immigrant sentiment ​(Hoban, 2017)​.
Likewise, around the time of the 2016 election, popular media tended to narrativize work in
terms of race as well: The simplified narratives of the vulnerable “White manufacturing worker”
and the “service worker of color” seemed to become emblematic of a divided American working
class. In one ​Huffington Post​ op-ed, commentator and writer John Paul Brammer notes that the
narrative that Latinos are “the jobs Americans don’t want to do” is pervasive on both sides of the
political spectrum: He cites “Kelly Osbourne defending Latinos against Donald Trump on The View
by saying if Latinos all left the country, Trump would have no one to clean his toilet,” and “Ohio
governor and Republican presidential candidate John Kasich saying he supports Latinos by tipping
the maid at the hotel” as examples of this pervasive generalization ​(Brammer, 2015)​.
Trump seemingly attempted to win over Black voters when he famously asked at a
campaign event in Dimondale, Michigan, “You’re living in poverty, your schools are no good, you
have no jobs, 58% of your youth is unemployed — What the hell do you have to lose?” (​ LoBianco &
Killough, 2016)​. And, more recently, President Trump’s press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders
4

asserted that the Trump administration had created more jobs for Black workers than President
Obama’s, a false claim which she later corrected (​ Qiu, 2018)​.
This racialized strategy and the ensuing success of the Trump campaign likely fueled the
barrage of post-election popular press naming the aggrieved “White working class” as the primary
explanatory variable for Trump’s win. One ​New York Times​ article connected Donald Trump's
victories to areas experiencing major job loss, while ​The Washington Post’​ s “Wonkblog” cited job loss
and lowered wages for the "revenge" of the White working class during the election, notably
mentioning, "[the] workers increasingly came to see trade deals as the culprit" ​(Porter, 2016;
Tankersley, 2016)​.
A simultaneous and somewhat disparate discussion is taking place primarily among
technologists and economists: These scholars pinpoint automation—namely a new wave of
automation that is aided by the combined advances in artificial intelligence, big data, and
robotics—as the driving force for current and impending unemployment. The most recognized of
the literature on automation and employment comes from Frey and Osborne (2013) in an
authoritative study that calculated automation probabilities for American occupations and
determined that approximately 47% of U.S. jobs are “at risk of automation.” Frey and Osborne
(2013) and other studies of automation and employment tend to solely focus on technological
capability as the predictor of future employment (see Autor, 2003).
While these two discussions of work and race have been relatively disjoint, they have, at
times, converged. T
​ he Los Angeles Times​ columnist David Horsey began the connection of these two
disjointed conversations on employment, arguing that “Robots, not immigrants, are taking
American jobs” (​ 2017)​. A recent study by F
​ rey, Berger, & Chen (2018)​ found that robot adoption in
a given labor market was linked to significantly higher support for Donald Trump in 2016. The
5

automation literature is thus beginning to analyze the changes in political response and national
narrativization as a result of automation, but coverage continues to be minimal.
The automation literature remains particularly avoidant in discussing how
non-technological factors affect potential employment outcomes due to automation. This study
attempts to elucidate the importance of merging these two distinct narratives by describing the
historical inseparability of race and labor, and then by quantitatively considering how different
racial and ethnic groups are differently affected by their predicted occupational automatabilities in
an AI-driven future.

6

Race, Labor, and Automation: A History
Exploring the relationship between today’s AI-driven automation and racial demographics
requires an analysis of the history of race and labor throughout American history, from slave labor
to immigrant labor to the segregation and stratification of labor today. In this section, I first explore
how labor and race serve to create and reinforce one another. I then will consider a brief history of
industrialization, automation, and race in the 19th- and early 20th-century United States.
How Work Created Whiteness
In his seminal work T
​ he Wages of Whiteness​, David Roediger (​ 2007)​ asserts that changes in
labor hierarchies reinforced racial hierarchies, leading to the emergence of a distinct “White
working class.” Historically, colonial- and revolutionary-era Americans conflated a lack of political
freedom with slavery. Roediger (​ 2007)​ describes some of the rhetorical ways in which early
American political thinkers would use terms like “slavery” and “freeman” in the context of
consenting to laws as opposed to bondage and labor, and cites Benjamin Franklin’s 1770 definition
of slavery as one that is inclusive of not just Black slavery, but also indentured servitude and
apprenticeship. Franklin’s definition of slavery was therefore deliberately raceless; it allowed for
abstract ideas of tyranny, liberty, and freedom to concretize into a “physical reality that people were
willing to suffer and die for” ​(Roediger, 2007, p. 29)​.
In the 18th and early 19th century, White Americans were satisfied by simply existing in
contrast to Black slaves. White work — like apprenticeship and indentured servitude — was visibly
and semantically distinct from unfree Black labor until the late 19th century, when White workers
became increasingly dependent on wage labor ​(Roediger, 2007)​. The formal similarity between
Black and White workers—wage labor—thus served as the impetus for the creation and
reinforcement of Whiteness ​(Roediger, 2007)​. As Roediger (​ 2007)​ writes, one way for Whites to
7

reconcile dependence on hireling wage labor was to differentiate their labor sharply from slave
labor. Even the vocabulary of work was differentiated: After the increase of White wage labor,
Black domestic workers began to be known as “the help” or “hired hands,” and for white industrial
workers the Dutch term “boss” was used instead of “master,” despite the the translations being
identical (​ Roediger, 2007)​. Ultimately, following emancipation, White Americans could no longer
derive “satisfaction” from defining themselves as being non-slaves and non-Blacks, in some ways
suggesting that the greater strides made towards formal labor equality, the more Whiteness had to
distinguish and elevate itself (​ Roediger, 2007)​.
The construction of Whiteness in terms of labor is perhaps best demonstrated by the
“Whitening” of Irish immigrants to the United States. During the antebellum period, Black and
Irish workers were at first socioeconomically indistinguishable: both groups lived in the same
overcrowded slums, did the same kinds of difficult, low-paying jobs (“especially in domestic service
and the transportation industry”), and were similarly vilified by native-born White Americans
(Roediger, 2007, p. 134)​. As Noel Ignatiev writes in H
​ ow the Irish Became White,​ being Immigrants,
the Irish in the early 19th century began to differentiate themselves as White in order to obtain
naturalized citizenship along with other legal benefits and social powers, and were able to do so
largely through their political leverage as a distinct bloc of potential voters (​1995​).
The First Machine Age
Many contemporary narratives — both fictional and non-fictional — fear a future in which
today’s artificial intelligence and robotics technologies are completely replacing human labor.
Op-eds like a February 2018 piece in ​The Guardian​ titled “Robots will take our jobs. We’d better
plan now, before it’s too late,” or one from December 2017 titled “Will Robots Take our Children’s
Jobs?” in T
​ he New York Times​ paint a picture of a highly vulnerable workforce that will experience
8

dystopian outcomes if social or political action is not taken to curb the effects of automation.
Though scholars differ as to what these outcomes will realistically be, the new wave of automation
spurred by a combination of artificial intelligence, big data, and robotics (which I will refer to as
AI-driven automation​ throughout this paper) is reminiscent of American industrialization in the
late-19th century. In their authoritative work on AI-driven economies, Brynjolfsson and McAfee
suggest that digital technologies have jump-started a “second machine age”:
Now comes the second machine age. Computers and other digital advances are doing for mental power—the
ability to use our brains to understand and shape our environments—what the steam engine and its
descendants did for muscle power. They’re allowing us to blow past previous limitations and taking us into
new territory. ​(Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2016, p. 19)

While the technologies of the digital age are of course vastly different from those of the
industrial revolution, the industrialization period still had similarly high stakes in dramatically
shifting societal development. What lessons, then, can be learned from the first major wave of
automation in the United States? In this subsection, I will examine three questions on
industrialization in order to glean some insight into how the second machine age may alter
outcomes for different groups of workers today. First, I will consider w
​ hat kind of work was
automated,​ or what technologies replaced what tasks and altered what skills. Second, I will explore
how automation affected employment,​ both generally and across different demographics, focusing on
three historical vignettes: slavery and Black labor, Chinese immigration, and the Mexican Bracero
Program. Lastly, I will review some of the literature on ​how workers responded to automation​ during
the first industrial revolution.
(1) What kind of work was automated?
Driven by the development of James Watt’s steam engine, the American industrial
revolution (1790-1930) notably made large-scale energy production possible and, as a result, set off
a chain of innovation and rapid economic growth throughout many areas of the United States
9

(Cowan, 1997)​. The steam engine not only reduced the amount of manual labor needed to power
mills and other machinery, but it also allowed factories to be built in cities rather than attached to
rivers and in the countryside ​(Cowan, 1997)​.
Though artisans made up a small proportion of the workforce in the early 19th century, the
unique social circumstances of artisan workers were crucial to urban industrialization in the United
States, and as a result these workers bore many of the costs of industrialization ​(Cowan, 1997)​.
Colonial artisans like carpenters worked under a master-apprentice system where masters
maintained shops connected to the home and oversaw nearly all of the steps in the manufacturing
process, from purchasing the raw materials, to supervising apprentices and journeymen, to
purchasing tools made by other artisans (​ Cowan, 1997)​. The end of British mercantilist policy
meant that American colonies who were previously disincentivized from improving artisanal
productivity and encouraged to provide resources for manufacturing in Great Britain could now
invest in more productive manufacturing (Cowan, 1997). This policy change, coupled with
booming population growth around the globe and increased demand for manufactured goods led to
the proliferation of improved tools for artisan masters ​(Cowan, 1997)​. The proliferation of the
steam-engine (and later, electric power) allowed for the automation of the use of these tools, such as
automatic saws and power sanders in the case of carpenters (​ Cowan, 1997)​.
Artisans initially welcomed the use of these tools as they allowed for lower production cost
and greater economies of scale, allowing masters to lay off journeymen who no longer had to
laboriously use manual tools (​ Cowan, 1997)​. However, as improved mechanical tools deskilled the
work of masters, they were increasingly replaced by unskilled or semi-skilled laborers who could
simply do redundant operational work on the factory floor. As Ruth Schwartz Cowan writes in A
​
Social History of American Technology,​
10

What had once taken days of painstaking, careful work for a master to produce could now be run up in a few
minutes by a thirteen-year old operating a machine. If the average carpenter had once known how to carve a
complex molding out of a length of wood, he now only needed to know how to miter factory-carved pieces
together at the corners — and what was there to be proud of in that? (​ p. 184)

In the case of American artisans, then, automation deskilled previously skilled work that was costly,
repetitive, and impersonal: In the United States, wealthy builders began to pay for the services of
carpenters with little care or respect for the formalities of the guild system, like where the
journeymen involved in a construction were trained (​ Cowan, 1997)​.
In the context of farming, on the other hand, mechanization depended on the crop. Cowan
(1997)​ describes tobacco as an example of one of the most labor-intensive crops to cultivate and
harvest; no particularly effective mechanization process was found for it until the 1960s. The
majority of American farmers (particularly in the Midwest) during the 19th century, however, were
wheat growers, and nearly all steps of wheat production had been effectively mechanized by 1880
(Cowan, 1997)​. Much like in the artisan manufacturing context, different farmers experienced
different outcomes and a gradual shifting of attitudes regarding production. As Cowan (​ 1997)
argues, wealthier for-profit farms that could afford automated equipment benefitted from lower
labor costs, and farms that could not afford the equipment were often sold to those that could. Even
wealthy farmers who could afford new equipment experienced some harms of this mechanization:
Increased productivity lead to increased supply and therefore lower prices ​(Cowan, 1997)​. Whereas
in 1866 a bushel of wheat would cost $2.06, by 1874 the price had dropped to $0.95 per bushel
(Cowan, 1997)​.
Unlike the automation of skilled artisan labor, farming was mechanized largely due to issues
of demand and scale rather than skill. Though it is perhaps unclear whether a cause or effect of
industrialization, the global population boom and growth of the textile industry in Europe
ultimately made the demand for cheap cash crops skyrocket. Although much of the farmwork that
11

was automated was unskilled labor that needed little training, the automated work of both farm
laborers and artisans was typically repetitive and predictable, and tended to rely on manual rather
than cognitive skills.
(2) How did automation affect employment?
Although the American industrialization period brought about the displacement of many
farm workers and the deskilling of artisanal workers, the period is often cited as an example of scale
or p​ roductivity effects​ outweighing substitution​ o​ r d​ isplacement effects​ (​ Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2017;
see Vardi, 2017)​. In other words, the innovation and expansion spurred by cheaper cost of
production outweighs the effects of labor being replaced by technology ​(Autor, 2015)​.
In the case of artisans-turned-factory workers, the massive demand for manufactured
products lead to a correspondingly massive demand for laborers who would operate the machinery
in these industrialized factories. Cowan recounts that of all 10 million nonfarm manual workers in
the U.S. in 1900, one third were unskilled “operatives and kindred workers,” and another third were
considered simply as “laborers” ​(1997, p. 187)​. Both groups of workers were likely largely unskilled,
meaning that their labor could be easily replaced with little loss to “the quality or to the quantity of
what is being produced” ​(Cowan, 1997, p. 179)​. These low-wage workers, referred to as “factory
hands” or, more derogatorily, “wage slaves,” engaged in what Cowen refers to as “repetitive,
dangerous, oppressive, dead-end, low-paying, insecure jobs, the jobs that had been created when the
work of traditional craftsmen had been subdivided, automated, and mechanized” (​ 1997, p. 188)​.
While this work was initially taken up by the previous craftsmen and journeymen who were
typically native-born White Americans (typically of Germanic and British origin), the demand for
labor began to outpace the supply of these workers, and competition between factories meant low
wages and poor working conditions (​ Cowan, 1997)​. As a result, in most of the United States, the
12

demand for this labor was met with the labor of immigrants or non-White Americans. Here,
geography and sector also begin to play a role in where different demographics worked. As Cowan
recounts,
[T]he French Canadians and the Irish dominated the textile mills of Massachusetts; African American men and
women sweated in the steam laundries of almost every major city; Jewish women were employed as cigar
molders in Pennsylvania; Polish men were butchering cows and Polish women were stuffing sausages for the
Chicago meat-packers; Italian men were making cans in New York; Mexican women were packing tomatoes
in California. … In factories from one coast to another, the skilled and unskilled workers could thus be
distinguished from one another not just by the wages they were paid but also by the color of their skin and the
country of their birth. (​ p​ . 188-189​)

The stratification between native White wage laborers and non-White and immigrant wage
laborers thus comes to light and is reminiscent of Roediger’s arguments on the construction of
Whiteness. How, then, did automation and industrialization affect work for these varying
demographics? For the remainder of this subsection, I will focus on three historical vignettes:
Slavery and Black labor, Chinese immigrant labor, and the Mexican Bracero Program.
(a) Black Labor
In another quintessential example of scale effects outweighing substitution effects, the
invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s served to deskill one important task in particular (picking
cotton fiber from its seed) while simultaneously dramatically increasing cotton production, thus
increasing demand for labor to plant and pick cotton for the booming national and international
demand (​ Trotter, 2000)​. As Trotter writes, “More so than earlier agricultural practices, the cotton
gin placed African Americans’ labor power, rather than their technical knowledge, at the center of
agricultural production” (​2000​, p. 20). Plantation labor was expanding due to more efficient cotton
production, but there was also the beginning of some industrialized work in the south, or what
Trotter calls “growing use of unfree Black labor in rural- and urban-based industries” (​2000​, p. 20).

13

Though by the end of the industrialization period, Black men and women both
predominantly worked in agriculture, mining, domestic service, and other types of manual work,
the majority of Black men in several rustbelt and midwestern cities like Chicago and Detroit worked
in industry ​(Jones, 1998)​. Black labor in industrializing cities was often relegated to the most
menial, drudging tasks. Jones (1998) notes that “Blacks of both sexes remained at the lowest levels of
the labor force, effectively barred in many instances from achieving semi-skilled positions” ​(Jones,
1998, p. 306)​. Black workers regardless of gender thus had to take jobs in the “three Ds,” or dull,
dirty, and dangerous work that was dismissed by White workers who could find better employment
elsewhere. Black women were often relegated to manual field and kitchen labor in the south and
hand laundry work in industrial cities, while White women were able to work machines in
southern factories or work secretarial jobs in the factory offices (​ Jones, 1998)​.
As previously mentioned, though industrialization had led to booming demand for low-skill
labor, Black laborers in industrial contexts often either lacked any kind of upward mobility in their
work or were barred from being hired at all. While Black workers were disproportionately
represented in some kinds of jobs, Jones argues that Black industrial workers did not have
employment “niches” in the same way that immigrant laborers did during the same period of time,
and as such lacked the same potential upward mobility and capability for collective action (​1998​).
Moreover, hiring a Black worker over a White one — or placing a Black worker in a position of
superiority over a White worker — was seen as a moral failing (​Jones, 1998​). Likewise, low-wage
Black labor was often used as a means of wage discipline for White workers, and many employers
saw Black workers as being predisposed to be better at performing the more difficult and dirty tasks
at factories (​Jones, 1998​).

14

(b) Chinese Immigration
The same trends towards more difficult, gruelling work being given to non-White laborers
in the 19th and early 20th centuries is present amongst Chinese laborers. The first major wave of
Chinese immigration to the United States came during the gold rush in the mid-19th century, but as
profits from gold decreased, Chinese laborers began to look for other kinds of work (​ Takaki, 1989)​.
As with Black labor, Chinese workers tended to do jobs that were dull, dirty, or dangerous and
unwanted by White workers. Most famously, the mid-century railroad construction projects hired
large numbers Chinese workers: by 1867, 90 percent of the Central Pacific Railroad’s workforce was
Chinese, and the use of Chinese labor was encouraged due to a labor shortage following the Civil
War ​(Takaki, 1989)​.
The response to the wide Chinese labor by White capitalists was two-fold: Reliance on
Chinese labor was seen as a way to elevate the status of White workers whose skills were
considered above “three Ds” labor ​(Takaki, 1989)​. One railroad builder, Charles Crocker, described
how employing Chinese workers allowed White workers to become capitalists:
I think that every White man who is intelligent and able to work… who has the capacity of being something
else by the presence of Chinese labor easier than he could without it.… After we got Chinamen to work, we
took the more intelligent of the White laborers and made foremen of them. Several of them who never
expected, never had a dream that they were going to be anything but shovelers of dirt, hewers of wood and
drawers of water are now respectable farmers, owning farms. They got a start by controlling Chinese labor on
our railroad. (​ 1876)

Likewise, Chinese labor was used as a form of wage discipline, much like Black laborers were used
in industry ​(Takaki, 1989)​. Chinese workers were used as a bargaining chip in order to hold down
the wages of both White and Chinese workers, and as a result faced animus from predominantly
White labor unions, such as the 1867 Secret Order of the Knights of St. Crispin, established in
response to “labor-eliminating machines and low wages” (Takaki, 1989, p. 96). Ultimately, as Takaki
(1989) notes, “Capital used Chinese laborers as a transnational industrial reserve army to weigh

15

down White workers during periods of economic expansion and to hold White labor in check
during periods of overproduction” (​ p. 29)​.
The result of the racialized wage discipline was, expectedly, racial antagonism that helped to
reinforce a dominantly White employer class and a racialized, “divided working class” ​(Takaki,
1989, p. 29)​. As a result of this antagonism, Chinese workers had few employment options once the
major railroad projects were completed, and returned to the Chinatowns of major cities to rely on
the “ethnic economy,” or the employment “niches” that Jones (1998) references, like Chinese
laundries and restaurants (Takaki, 1989). Continuing low wages and a prevailing view that Chinese
immigrants would not be able to assimilate into American culture preceded the Chinese Exclusion
Act, which prohibited Chinese laborers from immigrating, and was later expanded to include all
Chinese individuals (Takaki, 1989). As Takaki (1989) notes,
In fact there was very little objective basis for the Congress to be worried about Chinese immigrants as a threat
to White labor. The Chinese constituted a mere .002 percent of the U.S population in 1880. … Congress was
responding to the stressful reality of class tensions and conflict within White society during an era of
economic crisis. (p. 110)

In the context of the Chinese, then, changes in labor patterns affected racial structure in Roediger’s
terms, and then in turn influenced immigration policy, further affecting the labor market
long-term.
(c) Mexican Bracero Program
Though occurring after the industrialization period, the Mexican Farm Labor Agreements
are demonstrative of further connections between race and labor, particularly in the American
southwest. The Mexican Farm Labor Agreements were a series of bilateral agreements between the
US and Mexico, mainly starting with the MFLA of 1942 (​ Scruggs, 1960)​. These agreements allowed
for millions of men from Mexico to enter the U.S. as short-term agricultural laborers, mainly to fill
labor shortages brought about by World War II, similar to the use of Chinese labor to fill labor
16

shortages following the Civil War. The program was not without backlash: Some organized labor
leaders in the US saw it as a way to keep wages low for all agricultural workers, while some farmers
saw it as a means of exercising bureaucratic controls over US farmers, as many of these contracts
had minimum wage agreements (​ Scruggs, 1960)​.
In the final years of this industrialization period, more native-born American laborers were
migrating to doing seasonal agricultural work. Thanks to cheap automobiles, the “victims of
technology and soil exhaustion” were able to escape the dust bowl attempt to find work in
agriculture (​ Scruggs, 1960, p. 140)​. Once the United States began involvement in World War II,
however, many White American laborers migrated to war plants and farmers were once again in
need of more laborers and ultimately lobby federal and state governments for permission to bring in
thousands of Mexican laborers (​ Scruggs, 1960)​. Mexican workers already in the U.S. were unable to
work in the slightly better conditions of the industrial war plants with their native-born
counterparts due to restrictions on employing immigrants in war industries (Scruggs, 1960). Much
like the Chinese immigration context, immigrant and non-White workers during this time period
once again faced limitations on how to respond to employment changes and economic shocks due
to legal and social barriers.
In sum, these three historical vignettes can be generalized into three main trends: (1)
Non-White and immigrant labor generally shifted into work that was low-skill or deskilled, as with
Black industrial workers ​(Cowan, 1997)​; (2) these laborers tended to work jobs in the “three Ds,” or
dull, dirty, a​ nd ​dangerous​ work, with Chinese workers being a predominant example (​ Brynjolfsson &
McAfee, 2016)​; and lastly, (3) the agency of their labor was more susceptible to control by the state,
as demonstrated by the Chinese Exclusion act and the limitations on Mexican braceros, who were
legally prevented from working in domestic wartime industry.
17

(3) How did workers react?
American workers reacted to and resisted aspects of industrialization, often taking the shape
of attempting to organize or revolt (​ Cowan, 1997)​. The years following the falling prices of
agricultural products were met with the Grange, the Farmers Alliance, the emergence of the
populist political party, and the lobbying of federal and state governments to enact economic policy
that would benefit farmers, like enacting protective tariffs (​Cowan, 1997​). The journeymen whose
work was becoming increasingly precarious during the industrialization period began to organize
with masters into guilds, which in turn worked to mainly benefit the interests of masters (​Cowan,
1997​). When these efforts failed, journeymen carpenters unsuccessfully went on strike 35 times
(​Cowan, 1997​). After most artisanal work had transitioned into factory work, unskilled factory
workers attempted to join trade unions, but were faced with opposition by the unions themselves,
which were actively antagonistic towards these workers perceived to be “a foreigner, a woman, a
barbarian, or a scab: someone who was being brought into the workplace to cut wages, break a
strike, or steal a job” (​Cassedy, 1997; Cowan, 1997​, p. 191).
At first, unskilled workers sought individual solutions to the lack of worker protections, like
taking vacation by feigning sickness, quickly changing factory jobs to alleviate boredom (and thus
leading to high turnover rates in factories), or deliberately slowing and sabotaging production
(​Cowan, 1997​). Workers would ostracize those who perhaps produced too much too quickly,
hiding materials, or temporarily breaking machines (​Cowan, 1997​). Industrial unions eventually
formalized the qualms of workers into collective bargaining, but not until the later decades of the
industrialization period, and they notably often discriminated against non-White workers (​Cowan,
1997​).

18

Automation Today: Trends and Frameworks
Definitions
In order to distinguish between technological capability for replacing work and social,
political, and economic likelihood of job replacement, I will draw semantic distinctions between
these two concepts. For the purposes of this analysis, I will use the term ​automatability​ to refer to the
extent to which a task can be accomplished by “adapting currently demonstrated technology”
(“Automation Potential and Wages for US Jobs,” 2018)​, and ​susceptibility to automation​ (or p​ roneness
to automation) as a variable that captures both technological capability and the social context of the
task and occupation to measure the likelihood of replacement due to automation. For the purposes
of referencing the results of Frey and Osborne (2013), I will use their terminology of the ​probability
of computerization​ to refer to predicted automatability.
Prevailing Frameworks
Much of the literature on workplace automation makes predictions principally based on
automatability, or the technological capabilities of workplace automation. At the cusp of the
computer age, but prior to recent developments in artificial intelligence and big data, the influential
task-biased model of technological change proposed by ​Autor, Levy, & Murnane​ (​ 2003)​ was the
paradigmatic view of automatability. Autor et al. (2003) argue that prior to the computer age,
automating physical and routine tasks would create complementary clerical, cognitive tasks in
which humans had a comparative advantage. Computing power, however, altered the standards for
automatability, as seen in Figure 1. This two-factor model is based off of the finding that technology
(“computer capital”) substitutes workers in both “cognitive and manual tasks that can be
accomplished by following explicit rules,” (i.e. that are abstractable and programmable), which the
authors label as “routine” ​(Autor et al., 2003)​. Repeatedly adding and subtracting a set of numbers,
19

for instance, is a ​routine​ ​cognitive​ task, while inserting screws into identical slots on identical pieces
of plywood is a ​routine​ ​manual​ task under this dichotomy.

Combined advances in artificial intelligence, big data, and robotics have complicated this
seminal model, allowing for greater automation of n​ on-routine​ cognitive and physical tasks. Many
tasks previously thought to be particularly non-routine are increasingly becoming converted into
abstractable, well-defined problems aided by the availability of large and complex datasets ​(Frey &
Osborne, 2013)​. For instance, though Autor et al. explicitly mentioned truck driving as a manual
non-routine task in their 2003 work, long-haul transport is expected to be an early adopter of
driverless technology, and several companies have set goals to develop fully autonomous vehicles
within the next half-decade ​(Muoio, 2017; Viscelli, 2018)​.

20

As a result, developing a model for predicting automatability now requires a periodic audit
of technological capability. This analysis in particular relies on the automatability predictions of
Frey and Osborne (​ 2013)​, based upon three primary “engineering bottlenecks”: perception and
manipulation, creative intelligence, and social intelligence. Frey and Osborne then selected
measurable variables that characterized these three bottlenecks, as demonstrated in Table 1.
Although the majority of research on employment and automation focuses primarily on
technological capability, some recent efforts have been made to quantify the effect of automation on
employment and wages while accounting for factors such as adjustments in other areas of the
economy that can absorb freed up labor or simply the cost of labor vs. technological capital in
certain sectors ​(Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2017)​. Acemoglu & Restrepo (2017) considered these factors
when developing a model for predicting the employment and wage effects of automation, finding
“large and robust negative effects of robots on employment and wages” (p. 36), but the broader
literature is still lacking in the consideration of social and political factors involved in predicting
employment and wage outcomes.
21

Table 1. O
​ ∗NET variables that serve as indicators of bottlenecks to computerisation, from
Frey & Osborne (2013, p. 31).

22

Data and Results
In order to begin to add cognizance of social and political context to existing predictions of
automation employment, I will build on the existing automatability-focused literature by
quantitatively considering w
​ ho​ the affected workers are. In other words: What races and ethnicities
are more likely to be affected by automation under existing models? To answer this question, I will
consider the demographic makeup of American occupations alongside their respective predicted
automatability in order to explore which racial and ethnic groups are most affected by
automatability.
The occupational demographic data for this analysis was taken from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) Labor Force Statistics from the 2016 Current Population Survey, a monthly survey
of employment patterns often referred to as the Household Survey. The particular dataset used in
this paper was the annual averages of employed persons by detailed occupation, sex, race, and
Hispanic or Latino ethnicity. BLS reports the the number of workers in an occupation alongside the
percentage of workers who report themselves as Asian, Black, and Hispanic/Latino. The percentage
of White workers is determined from subtracting the percentages of Asian and Black workers from
100. (Hispanic/Latino workers can be of any race and are therefore not included in the calculation.)
This data was then aligned with the computerisation probabilities determined by Frey and Osborne
(2013) by occupation. As previously mentioned, Frey and Osborne considered “Perception and
Manipulation,” “Creative Intelligence,” and “Social Intelligence” as three engineering bottlenecks
affecting automatability. The degree to which an occupation required skills in these three categories
corresponded to the probability that the occupation would be computerized.
Because the occupational data from Frey and Osborne was based on the O*NET
categorizations and the data from BLS was classified according to the Standard Occupational
23

Classification (SOC), the SOC codes provided in the Frey and Osborne data were used to match the
data sets. Notably, because this study could only consider the occupations that overlapped between
the Frey and Osborne set and the SOC dataset, the occupations analyzed were fewer in number than
the entire set of occupations for which the BLS provides demographic data. Furthermore, BLS does
not report demographic data for occupations with fewer than 50,000 employees, and as such the
dataset here contains only occupations with at least 50,000 workers.
After wrangling the data, some exploratory analysis was done on computerization and the
proportions of certain demographics in a given population and loess smoothing was applied, as seen
in Figure 3. Because of the large discrepancy between the proportion of White workers and
minority workers in each occupation, minority workers were also considered independently, as
seen in Figure 4.

Figure 3​. Exploratory analysis of probability of computerization based on
intra-occupational representation

24

Figure 4​. Exploratory analysis of probability of computerization for non-White and
Hispanic/Latino workers.

Figure 5​. Exploratory analysis of probability of computerization for by intra-occupational
representation of White workers.
25

Because the BLS only reports demographic data by proportion rather than by population,
estimates of the number of workers were generated by multiplying the proportions of individuals
with the total number of people employed in an occupation and rounding down to generate a
natural number. The probabilities of computerization were transformed into a categorical variable
by creating bins of size 0.1 (from 0.0 - 0.9), inclusive of the lower bound. Jitter was added to the
resulting values to mitigate the effects of categorizing the probabilities. The counts of workers in
each automatability group by race is graphically shown in Figure 6. The general U-shaped curve
suggests labor polarization trends as proposed by Autor (2015).

Figure 6.​ Number of workers in each automatability group by race and ethnicity.
In order to determine the total effect of computerization on each racial group, an Effect
Factor ( ) was created using the following formula:

where

is the number of individuals in a given demographic group. The aggregate effect

factor for each race ( ) was then:
26

The resulting δ values were considered for each demographic group. In order to further consider
the effects of automation on each racial group individually, the δ values were scaled by the
proportion of the total employed population each demographic group held. Accounting for
proportion, White workers are disproportionately affected by automatability under the Frey &
Osborne (2013) prediction, as demonstrated in Figure 7. Comparing the δ values suggests that
White workers are disproportionately affected by computerization even when accounting for the
larger population of White workers in the American workforce. Hispanic/Latino workers have the
second-highest effect, followed by Black and Asian workers.

Figure 7​. The aggregate effect of automatability on workers by racial and ethnic groups.

27

In addition to aggregate effect, I also considered intra-occupational representation. I applied
an OLS linear regression to the probability of computerization, controlling for interaction between
races. This was then used to calculate predicted values for each demographic based on the
proportion of workers for each racial/ethnic group within each occupation. A summary of this
model is found in Table 2, and the predicted values are graphically demonstrated in Figure 8.
Notably, as the proportion of Black and Hispanic workers increases within an occupation, the
occupational automatability is also higher, while the opposite is true White workers, seemingly
contradicting the aggregate effect, likely due to the population differences between various
occupations. While population is accounted for in the aggregate effect calculation, the predicted
values are based on intra-occupational representation.

Figure 8.​ Predicted values for probability of computerization for each racial and ethnic
demographic

28

Table 2. P
​ robability of automatability by intra-occupation demographics

Limitations
Because of the Frey and Osborne model’s prevalence and the availability of their data, I
make use of the prediction values from their seminal work. Still, the dataset is not without its
limitations: The paradigmatic view of automation and work tends to consider susceptibility to
automation mainly as a function of automatability. This kind of framework of work and
employment tends to consider capital as a perfect substitute for labor and ignore how the political
and social context affects the labor market. The prevailing economic models — including the Frey

29

and Osborne model applied in this analysis — are then often used to make conclusions about the
future of employment, despite assuming perfect labor-capital substitution and excluding
non-technological factors. The Obama administration, for instance, drew upon the Frey and
Osborne study’s automatability findings (namely that 47% of US jobs were at risk due to
automation) to write a report on the future of employment in the U.S. and to call for policy
solutions. Likewise, the Frey & Osborne (2013) data makes predictions broadly based on o​ ccupations
rather than ​tasks.​ Many predictive models are beginning to look to a task-based approach to
automation, as technologies tend to replace tasks rather than whole occupations, and may augment
or rearrange the labor of existing workers rather than replace them entirely (Autor, 2015).
Furthermore, the probabilities from the Frey and Osborne study were calculated partly
through a panel of machine learning researchers subjectively hand-labelling of 70 occupations as
either automatable or not, combined with the “objective” O*NET measures described above. Much
like the aforementioned automatability vs. susceptibility conflict, this method tends to see
occupations as solely a sum of several tasks, and leaves out the importance of humans to the very
nature of the work, leading to some intuitively odd conclusions. For instance, fashion models have a
0.98 probability of automation according to their task-based analysis, despite human celebrity and
sexuality being intuitively crucial to the occupation. (That said, some firms are already using virtual
models to market attire for e-commerce, which is seen as a much more cost-effective and versatile
means of displaying products, though not without pushback (​ see Grundberg & Molin, 2013)​.)

30

Conclusion
Labor and race in the United States have historically been and continue to be tightly linked
(Cowan, 1997; Roediger, 2007)​. As described by Roediger (2007), work serves to construct race and
reinforce systems of racial stratification, while racial and ethnic demographics can in turn affect the
kind of work an individual does. Other variables related to race, like social capital (or the “niches”
described in Jones (1998)), policy outcomes ​(Boswell, 1986)​, geography (​ Moretti, 2013)​, access to
education and training ​(Roscigno, 1998)​, and discrimination (Cowan, 1997) all affect and
complicate who does what work. In this section, I will apply the initial finding that White workers
are disproportionately automatable in order to present potential outcomes for race, employment,
and the greater social and political context of work.
Autor (2015) argues that workers respond to automation by separating into low-skill
non-routine service work and high-skill “abstract” professional work, with middle-skill tasks
(particularly involving information processing) being done by technology. Today, Black and
Hispanic workers already are disproportionately represented in these low-skill service occupations
(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016)​. As such, there are both sociological and political implications for
this shift when coupled with the quantitative findings of this study. Sociologically, as Roediger
(2007) argues, labor structures can rearrange racial stratification: The possibility of increased White
labor in the service sectors is thus a potential force for reinvigorating racial inequality. For instance,
in competition for the same low-wage service jobs, Black and Hispanic workers may be pushed out
due to other structural disadvantages like lower labor market power (​ Borowczyk-Martins, Bradley,
& Tarasonis, 2017)​. Despite White workers being much more affected by occupational
automatability in the aggregate, the difficulty of adjusting within the labor market may be much
more difficult for non-White workers.
31

Apart from the effects on racialized labor broadly, automation can have political outcomes.
Frey, Berger, & Chen (2018)​ found that labor markets that were more exposed to robot adoption
also experienced significantly higher support for Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election.
From a top-down perspective, disproportionate impact on a certain group of workers can affect
legislative outcomes. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the Trump Administration’s recent
suspension of the H1-B visa — which tends to bring in high volumes of tech workers from populous
countries like India and China — are perhaps two notable examples of policy enacted based on
purported job insecurity (​ Jan, 2017)​. The rearrangement of labor, then, can have various political
implications and policy outcomes that may in turn further susceptibility to automation.
Final Thoughts
The primary goal of this analysis is to elucidate the differing outcomes of automation on
different racial and ethnic groups both throughout American history and in the modern age of
AI-driven automation. As a result, this paper also aims to demonstrate the imperative of focusing
on the susceptibility of automation as an outcome of multiple different social, political, and
technological factors. As exemplified by the period of American industrialization, different groups
experience different occupational and employment outcomes depending on the social and political
context of automation. These two narratives — the broad predictions regarding economic outcomes
in the automation literature, and the analyses of the differing effects of labor displacement for
different demographics — must be synthesized in order to more accurately capture the effects of
AI-driven automation on different groups of workers.
Future research on automation and employment should consider these non-technical
factors both when creating these predictive models and when analyzing the implications of their
outcomes. For instance, the interaction between labor market power or wages of a certain group of
32

individuals and whether or not their work is automated is still to be explored, despite organized
labor historically having crucial negotiating power in the employment outcomes of various groups
(Cowan, 1997)​. Other variables like gender and geography are also worth investigating in order to
robustly understand the effects that AI-driven technologies will have on the diverse American
workforce. A real-world approach is ultimately necessary to truly bring studies of automation and
employment into the 21st century, and to make this urgent body of research more
multidimensional, robust, and accurate.

33

Acknowledgements
“My dear Miss Glory, Robots are not people. They are mechanically more
perfect than we are, they have an astounding intellectual capacity, but they
have no soul.”
— ​Karel Capek, R.U.R.
No robot could ever replicate the kindness, patience, and candor of Professors Sergio Garcia-Rios,
Karen Levy, and Jamila Michener, who served on the College Scholar committee for this project.
I am forever indebted to Professor Garcia-Rios not only for inspiring this project in his fun and
engaging research methods course, but also for keeping me on my toes, for his good humor, and for
his constant, tireless support. His vigilance and energy are utterly unmatched, and I can say with
certainty that this paper could not have been written without his help.
This project also would not have been possible without Professor Levy, who has served not only as
an inspiration to me, but also as a genuine friend and mentor in every sense. Much of this work was
inspired by her own prolific research, as well as her courses on surveillance & privacy and
technology & law. I sing her praises so often that my friends are starting to get annoyed. (But I will
never stop!)
From the day I joined the College Scholar program, Professor Michener has listened intently to my
ramblings on politics and technology and molded this paper into what it is today. I once told my
friends that I often feel most at peace after meeting with her. I owe so much of this project to
Professor Michener and her cool groundedness, and I am honored to have been able to learn from
her.
I would like to thank Professor Adam Seth Litwin for his advice and limitless knowledge on
technology and labor. His (award-winning!) course on technology and work was everything I could
have wanted and more. Thank you also to Professor Michael Osborne of Oxford University for
providing access to the data from his seminal 2013 work with Professor Carl Frey.
The College Scholar program has provided me with the education of my dreams, and for that I am
immensely grateful. Thank you to Dean James Finlay, Professor Michael Goldstein, and Anne
Birien for their advising. Thank you especially to my fellow College Scholars Claire Liu and Samuel
Barnett for reading and writing and getting distracted with me. I can’t wait to see the work they
produce.
Thank you to all of my friends who have made every moment of this whole college thing
worthwhile. Every day with them has been richer and funnier than the last. I’m not sure what I did
in a previous life to deserve them, but I’m glad I did it.
Lastly, thank you to my parents who have remained remarkably composed as I ran with my
education like a child holding scissors. I love them with all my heart, and I owe them the world.

34

References
Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2017). ​Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets​ (Working
Paper No. 23285). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23285
Agiesta, J., & Tseng, J. (2016, September 29). The anatomy of a white, working-class Trump voter.
Retrieved November 26, 2018, from
https://www.cnn.com/2016/09/19/politics/trump-supporters-working-class-white-kaiserfamily-foundation-infographic/index.html
Automation Potential and Wages for US Jobs. (2018, October 1). Retrieved December 3, 2018, from
https://public.tableau.com/profile/mckinsey.analytics#!/vizhome/AutomationandUSjobs/
USAutomationlandscape
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., & Murnane, R. J. (2003). The skill content of recent technological change:
An empirical exploration. ​The Quarterly Journal of Economics​, ​118(​ 4), 1279–1333.
Borowczyk-Martins, D., Bradley, J., & Tarasonis, L. (2017). Racial discrimination in the U.S. labor
market: Employment and wage differentials by skill. ​Labour Economics,​ ​49,​ 106–127.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2017.09.007
Boswell, T. E. (1986). A Split Labor Market Analysis of Discrimination Against Chinese
Immigrants, 1850-1882. A
​ merican Sociological Review​, 5​ 1​(3), 352–371.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2095307
Brammer, J. P. (2015, September 24). Latinos Are More Than “The Jobs Americans Don’t Want To
Do.” Retrieved December 5, 2018, from
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/john-paul-brammer/latinos-are-more-than-the_b_81897
24.html
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2016). ​The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a
Time of Brilliant Technologies.​ New York London: W.W. Norton & Company.
Card, D., & DiNardo, J. E. (2002). ​Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality: Some
Problems and Puzzles​ (Working Paper No. 8769). National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w8769
Carnes, N., & Lupu, N. (2017, June 5). It’s time to bust the myth: Most Trump voters were not
working class. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2017/06/05/its-time-to-bust-t
he-myth-most-trump-voters-were-not-working-class/
Cassedy, J. G. (1997, Summer). African Americans and the American Labor Movement. P​ rologue​,
29​(2). Retrieved from
https://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/1997/summer/american-labor-movemen
t.html
Chew, K., Leach, M., & Liu, J. M. (2009). The Revolving Door to Gold Mountain: How Chinese
Immigrants Got Around U.S. Exclusion and Replenished the Chinese American Labor Pool,
1900-1910. ​The International Migration Review​, ​43​(2), 410–430.
Chokshi, N. (2018, April 27). Trump Voters Driven by Fear of Losing Status, Not Economic
Anxiety, Study Finds. T
​ he New York Times.​ Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/24/us/politics/trump-economic-anxiety.html
Cowan, R. S. (1997). ​A social history of American technology.​ New York: Oxford University Press.
Cox, D., Lienesch, R., & Jones, R. P. (2017, May 9). Beyond Economics: Fears of Cultural
Displacement Pushed the White Working Class to Trump. Retrieved November 26, 2018,
from
35

https://www.prri.org/research/white-working-class-attitudes-economy-trade-immigration
-election-donald-trump/
Crocker, C. (1876-1877). "Testimony before Congress," Report of the Joint Special Committee to
Investigate Chinese Immigration, Senate Report No. 689, 44th Congress, 2nd sess.
Elliott, L. (2018, February 1). Robots will take our jobs. We’d better plan now, before it’s too late |
Larry Elliott. T
​ he Guardian.​ Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/feb/01/robots-take-our-jobs-amazongo-seattle
Frey, C. B., Berger, T., & Chen, C. (2018). Political machinery: did robots swing the 2016 US
presidential election? O
​ xford Review of Economic Policy​, ​34​(3), 418–442.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/gry007
Grundberg, S., & Molin, A. (2013, January 24). Retailers Conjure Virtual Models. W
​ all Street
Journal.​ Retrieved from
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887323468604578249752619254898
Hoban, B. (2017, August 24). Do immigrants “steal” jobs from American workers? Retrieved
December 5, 2018, from
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brookings-now/2017/08/24/do-immigrants-steal-jobs-fr
om-american-workers/
Horsey, D. (2017, March 31). Robots, not immigrants, are taking American jobs. L​ os Angeles Times.​
Retrieved from
http://www.latimes.com/opinion/topoftheticket/la-na-tt-robots-jobs-20170330-story.html
Ignatiev, N. (1995). ​How the Irish became White​. New York: Routledge.
Jan, T. (2017, April 3). This one group gets 70 percent of high-skilled foreign worker visas.
Retrieved December 5, 2018, from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/04/03/this-one-group-gets-70-p
ercent-of-high-skilled-foreign-worker-visas/
Jones, J. (1998). ​American work: four centuries of black and white labor​ (1st ed). New York: W.W.
Norton.
Linton, D. (1991). THE MAKING OF A PARIAH: The Case of the Luddites. ​ETC: A Review of
General Semantics,​ 4​ 8(​ 4), 404–413.
LoBianco, T., & Killough, A. (2016, August 19). Trump pitches black voters: “What the hell do you
have to lose?” Retrieved December 5, 2018, from
https://www.cnn.com/2016/08/19/politics/donald-trump-african-american-voters/index.
html
Moretti, E. (2013). T
​ he new geography of jobs​ (1. Mariner Books ed). Boston, Mass.: Mariner Books.
Muoio, D. (2017, September 17). RANKED: The 18 companies most likely to get self-driving cars
on the road first. Retrieved December 4, 2018, from
https://www.businessinsider.com/the-companies-most-likely-to-get-driverless-cars-on-the
-road-first-2017-4
Porter, E. (2018, January 20). Where Were Trump’s Votes? Where the Jobs Weren’t. T
​ he New York
Times.​ Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/business/economy/jobs-economy-voters.html
Qiu, L. (2018, October 31). White House Falsely Claims Trump Has Created More Jobs for Black
Americans Than Obama Did. T
​ he New York Times.​ Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/14/us/politics/fact-check-trump-jobs-black-americans
.html
36

Roediger, D. R. (2007). T
​ he wages of whiteness: race and the making of the American working class​ (Rev.
ed). London ; New York: Verso.
Roscigno, V. J. (1998). Race and the Reproduction of Educational Disadvantage. ​Social Forces​, ​76​(3),
1033–1061. https://doi.org/10.2307/3005702
Sabin, D. (n.d.). Amazon Scary New Robot Model Also Takes Selfies. Retrieved December 4, 2018,
from https://www.inverse.com/article/27007-amazon-robot-fashion-model-patent
Schwartz, N. D. (2016, November 29). Trump to Announce Carrier Plant Will Keep Jobs in U.S.
The New York Times.​ Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/business/trump-to-announce-carrier-plant-will-ke
ep-jobs-in-us.html
Scruggs, O. M. (1960). Evolution of the Mexican Farm Labor Agreement of 1942. ​Agricultural
History,​ 3​ 4(​ 3), 140–149.
Silver, N. (2016, November 22). Education, Not Income, Predicted Who Would Vote For Trump.
Retrieved November 26, 2018, from
https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/education-not-income-predicted-who-would-vote-for
-trump/
Takaki, R. T. (1989). ​Strangers from a different shore: a history of Asian Americans​ (1st ed). Boston:
Little, Brown.
Takayama, L., Ju, W., & Nass, C. (2008). Beyond dirty, dangerous and dull: What everyday people
think robots should do. In 2​ 008 3rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI)​ (pp. 25–32). https://doi.org/10.1145/1349822.1349827
Tankersley, J. (2016, November 9). How Trump won: The revenge of working-class whites.
Retrieved October 29, 2018, from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/11/09/how-trump-won-the-rev
enge-of-working-class-whites/
Trotter, J. W. (2000). African Americans and the Industrial Revolution. O
​ AH Magazine of History​,
15​(1), 19–23.
Vardi, M. Y. (2017, September 1). What the Industrial Revolution really tells us about the future of
automation and work. Retrieved December 3, 2018, from
http://theconversation.com/what-the-industrial-revolution-really-tells-us-about-the-futur
e-of-automation-and-work-82051
Viscelli, S. (2018). ​Driverless? Autonomous Trucks and the Future of the American Trucker​. Center for
Labor Research and Education, University of California, Berkeley, and Working
Partnerships USA.
Williams, A. (2018, January 20). Will Robots Take Our Children’s Jobs? ​The New York Times.​
Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/11/style/robots-jobs-children.html

37

