Title: The Dual Dependency of Natural-Resource-Rich Labor Markets in Contemporary Society
Author:
J. Tom Mueller, Assistant Professor of Sociology, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84321, E:
Tom.Mueller@usu.edu, P: 913-302-6180
Abstract:
This article presents an integrative theoretical framework of subnational natural resource
dependence. I argue that rural natural resource dependence represents a special case of the coreperiphery relationship, where rural, resource-rich labor markets form a dual dependency on both
the global capitalist economy and the local natural environment. This occurs because the
contradiction between spatially fixed natural resources and the mobility of capital prompts both
external interests and local power elites to use their power to pressure rural labor markets in
directions outside their best interest and to exploit rural labor. I argue that both extractive (e.g.,
mining, timber, agriculture) and non-extractive (e.g., tourism, real estate) forms of naturalresource development share this contradiction. Although pushing different uses of the resource
base, extractive and non-extractive development do not fundamentally vary in their exploitative
relationship with rural labor markets.
Key words:
Natural resources, Dependence, Uneven Development, Extraction, Tourism

Note: This is the accepted version of a forthcoming paper in Sociological Theory. Please cite in
the following manner:
Mueller, J. T. (Forthcoming). The Dual Dependency of Natural Resource Rich Labor Markets in
Contemporary Society. Sociological Theory.
Acknowledgments:
This article is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation Under Grant No.
1903924: Effects of Natural Resource Dependence. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation. I would like to thank Ann R. Tickamyer, Brian
Thiede, Kathy Brasier, Linda Lobao, and Leif Jensen for their insightful comments on earlier
versions of this manuscript.

Research shows that material hardship and economic stagnation is more common among
communities dependent on natural resources than among those dependent on manufacturing or
other sectors (Freudenburg 1992; James and Aadland 2011; James and James 2011; Matsuyama
1992). Sociologists and economists have studied the links between natural resource abundance,
dependence, and negative socioeconomic outcomes (Freudenburg 1992; Havranek, Horvath, and
Zeynalov 2016; James and Aadland 2011; Lobao et al. 2016; Sachs and Warner 1995), but the
field lacks a broader unifying conceptual framework. In this article, I fill this gap by developing
a theoretical framework of subnational patterns of natural resource dependence in contemporary
society.
Drawing on theories of dependency (Cardoso 1972; Frank [1969] 2007) and world systems
(Wallerstein [1979] 2015), I argue that rural natural resource dependence at the subnational level
represents a particularly troublesome form of dependency, wherein the rural labor market
develops a dual dependency on both the national and global capitalist systems, as well as the
resource-rich local environment. This dual dependency fosters exploitation of rural labor by
external interests and internal elites, leading to underdevelopment—that is, heightened levels of
material deprivation and economic stagnation faced by peripheral labor markets due to capitalist
exploitation by “developed” core labor markets (McMichael 2017).
I define natural resource development as any form of economic activity relying on the local
natural environment. Therefore, both extractive development—oil, gas, timber, mining,
agriculture—and non-extractive development—tourism, real estate, outdoor recreation—are
forms of natural resource development. Given that both of these sectors compete for the use of a
resource base and have overlapping, and frequently contradictory, interests, it is necessary to
conceptually ground them within the same integrative theoretical framework.

2

The unit of analysis throughout this article and within this theoretical framework is the rural
labor market. I select this unit, as opposed to something like the community, region, or local
economy, to ensure precision in the discussion. Drawing on Fowler and Jensen (2020:1399), I
define a labor market as an area where “the high density of commuting relationships among subunits suggests that changes in the supply or demand for labor in one sub-region would be felt
equally within other sub-units within the region.” This means a single labor market unit can
subsume multiple towns, communities, or even counties so long as labor changes in one sub-unit
affect changes in the others. This unit of analysis is not fixed in size. Instead, a labor market is
defined by the degree of economic linkage across sub-units. As such, a labor market is an
inherently material unit, defined by economic linkages over space and well-suited for the spatial
theory of capitalism presented here.
Finally, throughout this article I distinguish between natural resource dependence and dual
dependency. I define natural resource dependence as the economic overspecialization in the
sector of natural resources frequently discussed by sociologists. Dual dependency, in contrast,
represents the dependent economic relationships characteristic of natural resource dependence
that develop between peripheral and core labor markets, and between peripheral labor markets
and their resource-rich local environment.
The paper proceeds as follows: I first interrogate the existing literature on the impacts of
extractive and non-extractive natural resource development. I then summarize the theoretical
mechanisms prior scholars have highlighted behind these impacts, and illustrate the extant
inattention in the literature regarding the similarities between extractive and non-extractive forms
of natural resource development. Following this, I turn to critical perspectives surrounding
spatially uneven development, dependency, and world systems to articulate a holistic subnational
theory of rural natural resource dependence in the contemporary capitalist system, with a focus
3

on the case of the United States of America. I then conclude with a discussion of the ways
extractive and non-extractive development do and do not vary in their exploitive relationships
with rural labor markets.
Natural Resource Development and Economic Prosperity
The relationship between natural resource development and economic prosperity,
particularly in the case of extraction, has a long history in the academic literature. A hallmark of
this perspective is the “resource curse.” A touchstone from resource economics, the resource
curse is the unexpected finding that many economies with abundant natural resources have lower
and slower economic development than do areas without such resources, even though
neoclassical economic theory would suggest an advantage due to the increased wealth and
purchasing power that resource abundance should provide (James and Aadland 2011; Sachs and
Warner 1995). Although contested, researchers have found this unexpected inverse relationship
between resource abundance and economic growth at multiple geographic scales worldwide
(Douglas and Walker 2017; Gylfason 2001; Papyrakis and Gerlagh 2004, 2007; Sachs and
Warner 1995).
The resource curse is a popular academic touchstone, but its consistency, or even existence, is
frequently questioned (Cust and Poelhekke 2015; Papyrakis 2017), with a number of studies
finding evidence of the resource curse (Douglas and Walker 2017; Gylfason 2001; Papyrakis and
Gerlagh 2004; Sachs and Warner 1995), and others finding contrary results (Allcott and Keniston
2017; Brooks and Kurtz 2016; Brown 2014; Deller and Schreiber 2012; Havranek et al. 2016). In
their meta-analysis of econometric analyses of the resource curse, Havranek and colleagues
(2016) found that out of 43 studies, 40 percent found negative relationships between natural
resource development and economic growth, 40 percent found no statistically significant effect,
and 20 percent found a positive effect.
The resource curse literature has historically focused on the nation-state as the unit of
analysis. Although convenient for economic analyses, countries have notable internal
4

heterogeneity in terms of economic prosperity, exploitation, and resource abundance, which may
mask regional and local resource curse effects at smaller scales of geography, especially in large
and diverse countries. To address this discrepancy, recent studies have investigated the resource
curse at the subnational level in the United States (Allcott and Keniston 2017; Betz et al. 2015;
James and Aadland 2011; James and James 2011; Lobao et al. 2016; Mueller 2020b; Papyrakis
and Gerlagh 2007; Weber 2012). Results from these subnational efforts are similar to the nationstate research—meaning the findings have been mixed.
Whereas “resource curse” is the term used in the field of resource economics, “resource
dependence” is the catchword throughout natural resource sociology (Humphrey et al. 1993;
Krannich et al. 2014). Although associated with the resource curse tradition, this concept has
followed a different path. Rather than at the nation-state level, sociologists often explore natural
resource dependence through case studies of communities and regions, with a notable emphasis
on the United States and Canada (Deller and Schreiber 2012). This work repeatedly shows that at
the subnational level, labor markets dependent on the extraction of natural resources have higher
rates of poverty and material hardship compared to other labor markets (Krannich et al. 2014).
The relationship between resource dependence and negative socioeconomic outcomes,
although a consistent finding in research focused on the United States, varies by region and time
(Lobao et al. 2016; Nord and Luloff 1993). In a meta-analysis of mining dependence,
Freudenburg and Wilson (2002) found the majority of studies reported mining dependence
generated favorable outcomes for income but adverse outcomes for poverty and unemployment.
Their study focused exclusively on mining dependence, but research on forest dependence has
found similarly adverse outcomes for poverty and unemployment (Stedman, Parkins, and
Beckley 2005).

5

Findings regarding the relationship between natural resource development and economic
outcomes remain somewhat mixed, but one thing is consistent: the majority of research
conducted on natural resource dependence focuses on natural resource extraction as the only
form of natural resource dependence. However, extractive natural-resource development in
countries like the United States has been largely on the decline since the 1920s (Freudenburg and
Gramling 1994). Throughout this period, numerous labor markets have transitioned to natural
amenity-based economies (English, Marcouiller, and Cordell 2000), in the form of either second
home and bedroom communities (Sherman 2018; Winkler, Cheng, and Golding 2012) or rural
tourism (English et al. 2000).
Although direct comparisons between the effects of extractive and non-extractive naturalresource development on rural communities and their economies are lacking, researchers have
performed a number of studies on the economic and social effects of rural tourism as a form of
development. In the U.S. context, Deller (2010) reports that, from 1990 to 2000, tourism and
recreation played a small, and generally not statistically significant role, in either increasing or
decreasing rural poverty. Deller (2010) thus infers that increasing tourism and recreation in rural
areas does not necessarily lead to higher rates of poverty. Similar research using econometric
models heralds rural tourism as a boon for rural communities, citing the strength of natural
amenities in spurring economic growth (Deller, Lledo, and Marcouiller 2008; Deller et al. 2001).
However, Deller and colleagues (2008) note that natural amenities alone will not foster growth,
as communities must build resources such as campgrounds and amusement attractions to
capitalize on a resource base.
Although some scholars have found that non-extractive natural-resource development leads
to aggregate income growth, others argue that this economic growth is spatially autocorrelated
and met with a corresponding increase in cost of living, rendering the economic growth
6

irrelevant (Hunter, Boardman, and Onge 2005; Kim, Marcouiller, and Deller 2005). Furthermore,
recent in-depth qualitative work by Sherman (2018) and Ulrich-Schad (2018) indicates that
aggregate quantitative studies likely miss significant parts of the story concerning the loss of
local culture and conflict between new and old residents. In summary, there is not a strong
empirical consensus regarding the positive or negative effects of non-extractive natural-resource
development at the subnational level. Further, with the exception of recent work related to the
theory presented here (Mueller 2020b, 2020c), little work directly compares the differential
effects of extractive and non-extractive activities.
Mechanisms of Dependence
As we may expect given the volume of literature on natural resource development and
economic prosperity, numerous theoretical mechanisms for the oft-encountered negative
relationships between natural resource development and economic prosperity have been
advanced. However, similar to the empirical findings detailed above, this prior work rarely
discusses non-extractive uses of natural resources and has not, to my knowledge, brought
extractive and non-extractive uses of the natural environment together in an integrative
theoretical framework.
Related to the resource curse, Sachs and Warner (1995) present a popular rationale for the
inverse relationship between natural resource abundance and economic growth. They focus on
the crowding out effect that a natural resource boom has on manufacturing, and the lack of
positive externalities generated by natural resource extraction relative to those generated by
manufacturing. Sachs and Warner (1995) describe a model with three sectors: tradeable natural
resources, tradeable manufacturing, and a non-tradeable sector. As tradeable natural resources
increase, demand for non-tradeable goods (e.g., services, local consumables) also increases.
However, because the tradeable natural-resource sector is large, the demand for production of
7

manufactured goods for trade is low. Thus, during a resource boom, capital and labor become
concentrated in the natural resource sector. From a purely economic perspective, this
concentration in natural resources is not an inherently problematic phenomenon. However, it
becomes harmful if the economic linkages and externalities align in certain ways. For example,
in the case of education, returns to investment in education are often higher in manufacturing
than in natural resources (Gylfason 2001; Sachs and Warner). Gylfason (2001) views this as
problematic due to education being a prerequisite for economic growth worldwide.
Further theoretical explanations from the resource curse literature include rent-seeking, overconfidence, and institutions (Frankel 2012; Gylfason 2001). First, rent-seeking, in which
producers attempt to generate additional wealth through manipulation of the social or political
environment, is a common behavior by producers in resource-abundant economies (e.g., tariff
protection, tax breaks). This behavior is often associated with corruption and perverse incentives
and can cause stagnation in an economy. Second, the over-confidence thesis posits the
abundance of natural resources leads governments and institutions to feel a false sense of
security, causing them to lose sight of broader economic and institutional needs, which
ultimately leads to a lack of reinvestment and slower overall economic growth (Gylfason 2001).
Third, economists suggest poor institutions are both a symptom of the resource curse and an
alternative cause of the curse itself (Brunnschweiler and Bulte 2008; Frankel 2012; Havranek et
al. 2016).
The proposed mechanisms from the resource dependence literature are many, and I only
discuss a select few here (for a more comprehensive summary, see Mueller 2020a). A prominent
theoretical frame is that of addictive economies, proposed by Freudenburg (1992). Under this
framework, rural economies have become dependent on, or addicted to, extraction due to market
volatility (e.g., boom and bust cycles), ambiguity in what constitutes a good or desirable job in
8

the locality, ambiguity in what it means for a remote location to develop, and the low likelihood
of resource depletion. These “addicted” communities fail to break the cycle of dependence and
continue to experience negative economic outcomes, due to limited opportunities for realistic
economic diversification, geographic isolation, and power imbalances with the extractive
industries (Freudenburg 1992). Furthermore, Freudenburg (1992) argues that whether an area
benefits from resource extraction likely hinges on the time frame under examination. In the short
run, an economy may experience a brief “high,” but in the long run the consequences will be
negative, hence the addiction metaphor. This variation of highs and lows is especially prevalent
for the types of resource extraction associated with oil and gas boomtowns (Jacquet and Kay
2014; Kinchy et al. 2014).
As part of the Rural Sociological Society Task Force on Persistent Rural Poverty, Humphrey
and colleagues (1993) outlined four dominant theoretical perspectives surrounding the
phenomenon. The first is the rational underinvestment in human capital that may occur in
natural-resource-dependent communities. Under this framework, rural residents and communities
rationally underinvest in human capital. For example, an individual might choose to drop out of
high school or not pursue secondary education, or a community might choose to contribute less
tax revenue to schools. Communities and individuals make these decisions due to the lack of
return that investments in human capital bring, given local labor demands and returns to
education over an individual’s life in the area. This framework is similar to Gylfason’s (2001)
discussion of over-confidence and underinvestment in education. However, Humphrey and
colleagues (1993) present this underinvestment not as an act of over-confidence, but as rational
decision-making when considering community needs and individual returns to education.
The second framework presented by Humphrey and colleagues (1993) is that of power,
domination, and the natural resource bureaucracy. This framework, further advanced by West
9

(1994), positions the relationship between natural resource dependence and poverty as largely a
product of who is in control of the resource base—either large corporations or government
bureaucracies. This perspective focuses on how powerful outside groups, through either direct
exercise of power or general alignment of interests, come to dominate decisions pertaining to
natural resources in rural areas (West 1994). These agency decisions, which are subject to
external influence, often prevent rural areas from developing in a way that would reduce poverty.
The third perspective outlined by Humphrey and colleagues (1993) is the social construction
of nature and the process of moral exclusion. This framework argues the environmental
movement is at fault for advocating against many poverty-reducing forms of rural development
in its pursuit of environmental preservation. The movement provides a “moral exclusion” in rural
areas for actors who are interested in exploiting the local environment for financial gain. Under
this moral exclusion, environmental movement actors ignore concerns of social injustice related
to poverty of rural people as they pursue environmental preservation.
Finally, Humphrey and colleagues (1993) describe the fourth dominant framework as the
structural perspective and rural restructuring. This framework—similar to theories discussed by
Bunker (2003)—relies on dependency and world systems theory to highlight rural communities’
position within the global capitalist economy (Frank [1969] 2007; Wallerstein [1979] 2015). Due
to their peripheral position in the world system and their geographic isolation, rural areas are
subject to high levels of exploitation and systemic underdevelopment. In line with this
perspective, but outside the U.S. context, Bunker (2003) highlights the importance that space and
matter play in understanding the dependency that develops between resource-rich regions and
core industrial regions. Focusing on globalization and the Amazon, Bunker (2003) argues there is
a conflict between the economies of scale in contemporary capitalism and the increasing distance
capitalists must transport materials for production. Known as the contradiction between
10

economies of scale and diseconomies of space (Ciccantell 2020), this contradiction results in the
development of cheaper and faster technologies for transport of commodities, the pursuit of
technological innovation to replace raw materials, and the overall spatial expansion of
commodity markets, to the detriment of local people and their economic prosperity.
Research on the non-extractive side is more limited. Economists’ studies of the relationship
between non-extractive natural-resource development and economic prosperity generally argue
that non-extractive development will be a net gain, or at least not a loss, for rural labor markets.
When formulating this argument, they often approach their work from either an atheoretical
empirical basis (Deller 2010; Kim et al. 2005; Winkler, Deller, and Marcouiller 2015) or within
the framework of neoclassical economic growth (Deller et al. 2008; Deller et al. 2001). In the
neoclassical growth model, natural amenities serve as inputs for the production of local goods
and services and prompt economic growth through job creation, tourism, and migration
(Marcouiller, Kim, and Deller 2004). Although the neoclassical growth model is often advanced,
research just as frequently finds it empirically lacking (Hunter et al. 2005; Kim et al. 2005;
Marcouiller et al. 2004; Winkler et al. 2015).
Scholars arguing that the benefits of non-extractive development may not be what they seem
have challenged these optimistic theoretical viewpoints. One significant mechanism behind
possible negative outcomes from this form of development are the increases in unaffordable
housing that come with non-extractive development (Sherman 2018). The growing literature on
the acceleration of rural gentrification processes, particularly within the Inter-Mountain West,
documents these changes in housing markets (Ghose 2004; Hines 2010; Nelson and Hines 2018).
Due to these gentrification processes, residents cannot capitalize on the economic potential of
non-extractive development and are forced to either move or struggle to make ends meet. This

11

inability to advance economically leads to animosity between new amenity migrants and
established residents (Sherman 2018).
A final mechanism relevant to both extractive and non-extractive resource development in
rural America is the gendered nature of labor markets. Both extractive and non-extractive
activities are associated with gendered labor: extraction tends to be masculinized, and nonextractive work tends to be feminized (Green 2017; Sherman 2009a; Tallichet 2000). Due to this,
when a labor market is specialized in just one of these sectors, it leads to as much as half of the
workforce having difficulty finding “suitable” work and unemployment higher than that in a less
specialized labor market context.
As highlighted earlier, many theoretical mechanisms drive the deleterious outcomes from
natural resource extraction. However, it is also clear that the theoretical backing for the positive
or negative effects of non-extractive natural-resource development are lacking, with much of the
optimistic work relying on sparsely supported neoclassical economic arguments, and the
pessimistic work generally relying on more proximate explanations, such as housing costs and
gendered labor markets. Given that we can apply many of the mechanisms previously advanced
for extractive development—particularly those that focus on more ultimate causes stemming
from contradictions within capitalism—to the non-extractive context, this lack of explicit
theorizing is somewhat surprising. From this review, it is clear a more integrative theoretical
framework for understanding how extractive and non-extractive natural-resource-dependent rural
labor markets fit into, and are affected by, national and global economic forces, is needed. This
article fulfills this need.
A Subnational Theory of the Dual Dependency of Natural-Resource-Rich Rural Labor
Markets
The Need for an Integrated Subnational Theory
12

The literature reviewed has illustrated the dominant research traditions concerning the
relationship between natural-resource economic development, dependence, and economic wellbeing. There currently exists a need for a more integrated theoretical framework at the
subnational scale concerning these topics. A more cohesive theoretical perspective is necessary
for three main reasons.
1. First, the existing frameworks do not factor in extractive and non-extractive naturalresource development side-by-side. Although a significant body of research explores both
forms of natural resource use, comparative empirical analyses and theoretical development
regarding their relationship remain limited. The perspectives that do exist, such as the
resource curse explanations (Havranek et al. 2016), Freudenburg’s (1992) addictive
economies, Bunker’s (2003) notion of spatio-material concerns in the world system,
neoclassical economic growth frameworks (Deller et al. 2008), or the various perspectives
presented by Humphrey and colleagues (1993), focus on only one side of this—likely false—
dichotomy.
2. Second, many of the theoretical perspectives only address nation-state or global
economies. Resource curse explanations often take a macroeconomic focus, utilizing
benchmarks of GDP per capita and explaining effects through national indicators such as
overvalued currency and national policies (Matsuyama 1992). This poses significant problems
for understanding the intra-country heterogeneity of resource dependence, a problem
articulated by Lobao (2016) in her discussion of the need for subnational research. This
problem is especially severe in federalist countries such as the United States, where many
states are the size of other nation-states across the world. Although states may be large
relative to many nation-states, there are not the same restrictions on the interstate flow of
capital within the United States or other federalist countries as found between nations.
13

3. Third, many of the theoretical perspectives available on this subject are now dated and
were developed before the most recent explosion of neoliberal policy and the transnational
capitalist class (Harvey 2006, 2007; Sklair 2002). The updated theory presented here, which
places a larger emphasis on the spatial linkages that characterize our current phase of
capitalism, will help guide future empirical investigation.
Given these reasons, it is clear that a critical theory of subnational natural resource
dependence is necessary. This integrative framework must account for both extractive and nonextractive natural resource use while nesting within-country dynamics within the global system.
The framework I present has global application, but I tailor my discussion to the case of the
United States, for two primary reasons. First, the existing literature has a notable emphasis on the
United States, meaning the evidence supporting this theory is on its best footing when applied to
this case. Thus, although the theoretical mechanisms undergirding this framework are likely
broadly applicable, it will be up to future work to fully establish the level of transferability.
Second, the emphasis on the case of a single large nation-state fosters a more precise
presentation of the subnational theory. This framework is particularly applicable to other
federalist countries with large natural resource endowments. Future work will need to apply the
framework of dual dependency in a comparative manner to continue the development of the
approach.
The First Form: Dependency on the National and Global Capitalist Economy
Argument 1: Uneven development under capitalism is exacerbated at the subnational scale within the
United States due to the unique considerations posed by the political structure of federalism in
contemporary capitalism. This places rural labor markets at a structural disadvantage to urban labor
markets, resulting in their dependency on the national and global capitalist systems, regardless of natural
resource endowment.

To begin, rural labor markets in the contemporary era are not independent of the broader
economy, but are nested within a series of generally open and free markets at the national and
14

global levels (Frank [1969] 2007; Sklair 2002; Wallerstein [1979] 2015). One cannot discuss a
rural labor market in isolation; a “dual” society of separate rural and urban domains does not
truly exist. However, the various labor markets do occupy varying positions within this single
economic system (Sklair 2002; Smith 1984; Wallerstein [1979] 2015). Different labor markets
are structurally positioned along a spectrum ranging from the core to the periphery (Wallerstein
[1979] 2015). The core labor markets, often urban, exploit the periphery, often rural, for their
resources and labor. This continuum, driven by capitalists within the core labor markets, creates
an internal, and ever-shifting, mosaic of underdevelopment across the world and within countries
(Smith 1984).
Where a labor market falls along this continuum of core to periphery is contingent on
numerous criteria, including the specific history, physical characteristics, transport infrastructure
available, mobility of labor, and rate of profit available to capital (Harvey [1982] 2018). The
level of development that occurs among peripheral labor markets often follows a dialectical, seesaw pattern, wherein development of the periphery by core capitalists necessarily leads to crises
of overaccumulation, improves conditions for labor, and decreases surplus value to capital
(Harvey [1982] 2018; Smith 1984). Thus, the rate of profit decreases and capital exits the market
for a less-developed peripheral labor market—what Harvey ([1982] 2018) calls the spatial fix.
After capital exits, the labor market begins to decline. Once the initial peripheral labor market
declines sufficiently, capital, and therefore development, may return (Smith 1984, 2011).
Importantly, this continuum of exploitation does not develop alongside capitalism, or due to a
few bad actors, but is built into the very structure of industrial capitalism and the actions
capitalists must take to remain successful (Cardoso 1972; Harvey [1982] 2018; Smith 1984).
Thus, as long as ownership of the means of production is concentrated in core capitalist
markets—which it is and will be for the foreseeable future—internal sustainable economic
15

development within peripheral labor markets is impeded, and in some cases impossible, due to
capital’s necessary flow from the periphery to the core (Cardoso 1972).
Furthermore, due to the increase in neoliberalism—a view of political economy proposing
“human well-being can best be advanced by liberating individual entrepreneurial freedoms and
skills within an institutional framework characterized by strong private property rights, free
markets, and free trade” (Harvey 2007:2)—as well as continued globalization and the rise of the
transnational capitalist class, the uneven development embedded into capitalism may only be
accelerating (Harvey 2006; Robinson 2015). The transnational capitalist class represents a global
power elite who direct the flow of capital with little regard for national borders (Sklair 2002,
2007). This class consists of a constellation of four non-mutually exclusive groups: “(1) those
who own and control major transnational corporations and their local affiliates (the corporate
fraction), (2) the globalizing bureaucrats and politicians (the state fraction), (3) globalizing
professionals (the technical fraction), and (4) merchants and media (the consumerist fraction)”
(Sklair 2002:145). These groups, with deep ties to free markets and neoliberal ideals, work
together to control the world’s economic and political structures to ensure the accumulation of
private profit. The rise of this transnational capitalist class and its actions obscures the state’s
role in regulating trade policy and has likely exacerbated historic patterns of uneven
development.
Scholars often discuss the world-system of uneven development at the level of nation-states
(Harvey 1982; Smith 1984; Wallerstein [1979] 2015) or the global economy (Robinson 2015;
Sklair 2002). This is certainly appropriate, but this system has, nested within it, a multitude of
smaller, within-country, core-periphery systems of equal importance (Frank [1969] 2007). Thus,
unlike the majority of work adopting a world systems theory perspective, I do not focus on the
entire world system, but instead examine the U.S. system and its core-periphery networks. These
16

subnational patterns of dependency reflect similar global exploitative networks, with the
exception that the movement of capital is even less restrained. Global deregulation has run
rampant in the era of neoliberalism (Harvey 2006), globalization (Robinson 2005, 2006; Sklair
2002), and the policies and loan requirements pushed by the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank (McMichael 2017), but barriers still exist to the flow of money and resources
between nations. However, these legal and geographic barriers are significantly weaker, and
practically nonexistent, when considering the movement of capital within and between states in a
federalist country such as the United States, where the constitution prohibits interstate trade
regulation.
This unrestricted flow of capital has only accelerated following the 1994 Riegel-Neal Act,
which opened up interstate U.S. banking and led to significant market concentration in the
banking sector (Corbae and D’Erasmo 2020). Large national and transnational corporations now
have a heightened ability to steer subnational rural labor markets into specific forms of economic
development. Due to this microcosm of free markets and neoliberal trade within the United
States, I argue that the expected uneven patterns of development of industrial capitalism will be
heightened at the subnational scale: the ability for wealth and financial capital to flow freely and
quickly across great distances exacerbates extra-local control of the rural labor market.
Local elites work in tandem with these external interests to achieve the highest rate of profit
possible at the point of production. This structure creates a multi-layered exploitative system,
where exploitation exists in the unequal exchange relationships between core capitalists and rural
labor, suggested by dependency theory (Frank [1969] 2007), and within the local creation of
surplus value, discussed by Marx (1990:1867). In short, both local and external capitalists
produce surplus value off of local labor, and then a significant portion of that value leaves the
labor market due to unequal exchange relationships. The local elite capture what profit does
17

remain and do not distribute it to labor, ultimately creating a general state of underdevelopment
in the market (Billings and Blee 2000; Duncan 2014).
Within this framework, I view the state as playing a role complementary to capitalist interests
(and thus give it limited attention here): the transnational capitalist class, along with national
capitalist interests, dominates the political structure at the local and global levels to maximize
their private profit (Sklair 2002, 2012). This view hinges on Marxist formulations of the state as
an agent of the interests of capital (Das 1996). The interests of members of the state and
corporate factions of the transnational capitalist class generally align, so the interests of the
capitalist and private profit will drive development. Elements of the state will push against
specific capitalist interests, and there will always be exceptions (Sklair 2012), but this framework
places the ultimate power in contemporary society with the transnational capitalist class and the
interests of capital, not with the state (Sklair 2002). This view of the state is especially
appropriate in the case of natural resource dependence due to the historical way natural resource
interests frequently capture the political apparatus, resulting in detrimental outcomes to both
rural economic prosperity and the environment (Singleton 2000; West 1994).
In this theoretical framework, I focus on the outcomes that accrue to residents in a labor
market, thus representing local labor. Local labor refers here to the people who live and work in
the labor market. As discussed by Harvey ([1982] 2018), labor under capitalism must be
geographically mobile to facilitate the accumulation of capital. However, this results in an
inherent contradiction wherein labor must be free to move to where work is offered but also
geographically stable enough to ensure the maintenance of a reserve labor army. As Harvey
([1982] 2018:381) notes, to address this contradiction the “escape routes must be blocked off by
legal requirements or other social mechanisms.” This means labor in rural America is mobile.
However, not everyone shares this mobility. Many residents face significant barriers to moving
18

to a new labor market for work (Lyson et al. 1993). Although many people, particularly the
young and well-educated (Carr and Kefalas 2009), continue to leave rural America for
opportunity, many stay behind. Reasons for this lack of mobility range from attachment to a
home and community (Harvey [1982] 2018; Lyson et al. 1993), to racial discrimination (Duncan
2014), identity subversion (Bell and York 2010), preferential education (Carr and Kefalas 2009),
and cycles of predatory debt (Billings and Blee 2000; Duncan 2014). Thus, although labor is
mobile in rural America, a particularly vulnerable group of immobile laborers remain who bear
the brunt of the negative effects wrought by this first form of dependency.
The Second Form: Dependency on the Local Resource-Rich Natural Environment
Argument 2: Rural labor markets with rich natural resource endowments incur exceptionally high levels
of underdevelopment and negative economic outcomes due to the perverse incentives stemming from the
contradiction between the static nature of natural resources and the mobility of capital needed to ensure a
steady rate of profit. This leads to a second form of dependency on the resource-rich local environment.

The multi-layered exploitative subnational structure of contemporary capitalism and
dependency I have presented exists across rural America, regardless of natural resource
endowment. However, when coupled with a resource-rich local natural environment, this
dependency becomes particularly intractable. Drawing on research surrounding the negative
effects of natural resource dependence on poverty (Lobao et al. 2016), income growth (James
and Aadland 2011), and other indicators of well-being, I argue that rural natural resource
dependence is a special case of the core-periphery relationship. This special case produces a dual
dependency: dependency on both the national and global capitalist economies and the resourcerich local environment.
When a rural labor market is rich in natural resources, it is likely to become overly dependent
on the local environment for its economic production. This dependency will be exacerbated due
to the existing dependency on the national and global economies and external interests’ ease of
19

access in affecting local decision-making through capital investment. In this framework,
“external interests” refer to actors residing outside the peripheral labor market who either own or
invest in the corporations developing natural resources in the market. The transnational capitalist
class identified by Sklair (2002) comprise many of these external interests. This influence will
ultimately result in underdevelopment characterized by higher levels of inequality, poverty, and
economic growth relative to non-natural-resource-dependent rural labor markets.
This dual dependency pushes the natural-resource-dependent labor market to the furthest
edges of the periphery in terms of the level of economic exploitation of labor. When the natural
resources within a labor market are sufficiently rich, the direction of interest among global
capitalists becomes obvious, and the consequences more adverse. Thus, the resource-rich local
environment fosters the dual dependency that allows extra-local control by national and
transnational corporations to pressure rural labor markets to stay in a constant state of relative
deprivation, boom and bust cycles, and low-quality jobs.
The ultimate reason extra-local interests promote this constant state of underdevelopment
unique to peripheral natural-resource-rich labor markets is due to the contradiction—which I
term the spatial contradiction—between two factors: the spatially fixed nature of the resource
base and the spatially unbound nature of capital. Natural resources, unlike a factory, cannot be
torn down and rebuilt where labor is cheaper. Thus, external interests face increased friction
related to the flow of capital, relative to other industrial sectors (e.g., manufacturing) where
capital can more easily exit the labor market when profits fall due to agglomeration, increases in
labor power, heightened market diversity, or overaccumulation (Harvey [1982] 2018; Smith
1984).
To fully understand this notion, it is helpful to consider capital investment on a spectrum
from completely fixed to completely mobile, where capital is ever-marching toward greater
20

mobility. A key example of this move to greater mobility is the speeding up of trade and
development via the annihilation of space through time initially described by Marx and further
expounded upon by Harvey (2006). This push toward greater mobility ensures trade can happen
faster, reinvestment can occur instantly, and greater surplus value can be created, all while
avoiding the crises of overaccumulation posed by capital remaining in place (Harvey 2006).
Natural resources, due to their static nature, pull capital toward the fixed end of this spectrum
and create friction for increasingly mobile capital. To make up for this friction, natural-resource
capitalists must pursue greater levels of exploitation. Because the current U.S. political apparatus
supports a great deal of external control and domination of rural labor markets by naturalresource capitalists, this greater exploitation of rural labor can produce enough profit to make the
immobile investment worthwhile. It is only when these more exploitive means of ensuring high
rates of profit fail that we see the full disinvestment and relocation of the natural-resource
capitalist. Thus, it is true that when profit falls enough, we will likely see capital simply disinvest
from the labor market and the resource, as happened when market forces became particularly
strong in the case of coal and old-growth timber. However, in the current political economic
system, when faced with the friction imposed by the spatial contradiction, it is far more prudent
for natural-resource capitalists to double-down in a labor market via exploitive means as opposed
to disinvesting and relocating (Billings and Blee 2000; Duncan 2014).
The extra-local, often transnational, corporations driving this exploitation have little interest
in the labor market and will see no direct benefit from real local economic growth. If capitalists
were located within the market, as they often were before heightened globalization and the rise
of the transnational capitalist class, they might have an interest in broad economic development.
However, they themselves are spatially unbound and unattached to the labor market. Thus, extra-

21

local interests prevent the progression of holistic economic development to ensure long-term
access and profitability of their specific interest in the resource-dependent labor market.
Due to the perverse incentives inspired by the contradiction between the mobility of capital
and the static nature of the resource base, natural-resource capitalists intentionally prevent
agglomeration effects—that is, the positive externalities that lead to economic growth generated
when firms concentrate in geographic proximity (Melo, Graham, and Noland 2009). Some
agglomeration related to natural resource development, such as processing, may be limited due to
remoteness of the region and the need for economically feasible supply chains (Bunker 2003),
but I argue the majority of agglomeration and market diversity is inhibited due to the
contradiction between the static nature of resources and the need for capital to move across
space. Natural-resource capitalists directly inhibit agglomeration to ensure steady rates of profit
and continued access to the resource base, at least until it is depleted. To retain these necessary
conditions, cooperating local elites and external interests pressure forms of economic
development outside the natural resource sector out of the labor market.
Exploitation and the exclusion of other industries from the labor market are dominant
strategies within this framework, but capitalists can pursue other strategies to combat the falling
profit rates inherent in a spatially fixed resource base. These strategies include technological
innovation to reduce costs associated with the cost-price squeeze identified by Freudenburg
(1992), as well as pursuit of substitutes for the resource, which can then mold the industry into a
more conventional and mobile sector (e.g., the case of synthetic rubber [see Bunker 2003]).
Importantly, even if technological innovation reduces the absolute number of employees required
for resource extraction, the industry may still pursue strategies to dominate the labor market so as
to keep other interests antithetical to their profit out. The decline of coal employment in
Appalachia due to technological change, and the persistent effort to create a regional economic
22

identity out of line with the employment realities of the area, provides evidence of this strategy
(Bell and York 2010; Lewin 2017).
Ultimately, the external natural resource interests and their local allies have a vested interest
in keeping rural labor markets underdeveloped to ensure a steady rate of capital accumulation.
This vested interest fosters lower levels of market diversity—meaning there are few industries in
the region—and increased levels of monopsony and oligopsony—meaning the few industries
also have few firms. The natural resource sector, and its few firms, thus end up being the only
game in town. These firms, through concentrated landownership and wage-stagnation due to a
lack of competition, direct the local economy and foster underdevelopment in the region
(Falkinger and Grossmann 2013). The suppression of wages in the concentrated labor market
prevents the accumulation of wealth among the majority of the population and prohibits diverse
local economic development, entrepreneurship, and a transition to a non-dependent economy.
Although market concentration is generally higher in rural labor markets regardless of natural
resources (Azar, Marinescu, and Steinbaum 2017), I argue the problem of oligopsony will be
more severe in natural-resource-dependent labor markets due to extra-local actors’ vested interest
in keeping the conditions of the region largely the same, as well as the economies of scale
required to be successful in the sector.
The Alignment of Extractive and Non-extractive Natural-Resource Development
Argument 3: Because extractive and non-extractive natural-resource development are both located at the
spatial contradiction between static natural resources and mobile capital, they both foster dual dependency
and have fundamentally exploitive relationships with rural labor.

The arguments up to now have likely been unsurprising, even if not clearly articulated in
prior work. However, they were essential to clearly lay the groundwork for Argument 3, the
principal contribution of this article. The framework of dual dependency I present moves social

23

theory beyond the prior frameworks of natural resource dependence by arguing that the pattern
of exploitation caused by the spatial contradiction occurs not just for extractive natural resource
development, but also in the case of non-extractive natural resource development, such as
tourism, real estate, and outdoor recreation. This is because actors who generate profit from
natural amenity development and tourism have a similarly vested interest in using the spatially
fixed resource base in exclusively one general manner to accumulate capital, while having
limited interest in real and diverse local economic growth due to their extra-local nature. Thus,
non-extractive capital seeks to keep other economic interests out of rural labor markets via
manipulation of the political economy, resulting in non-extractive interests fulfilling a function
similar to extractive interests.
Non-extractive natural resource interests, like extractive interests, face constrained mobility
relative to other forms of industry. Non-extractive interests also require the labor market, and its
resource base, to remain in a relatively steady state to ensure a stable rate of profit and access to
a cheap reserve labor army. The current level of development in a resource-rich labor market is
what will have attracted non-extractive interests: the “rustic” character is bedrock to profit. Thus,
non-extractive capital will intentionally inhibit development in any other direction (e.g.,
manufacturing) because it contradicts their interests and is in conflict with future profit.
Given that extra-local national and transnational firms can penetrate labor markets regardless
of their placement on the extractive to non-extractive continuum, all the negative aspects
associated with extra-local control described for extractive development also hold for nonextractive development. We can find evidence of external interests’ ability to drive nonextractive development in rural labor markets in several contemporary examples. For instance,
Vail Resorts—a company traded on the New York Stock Exchange that has seen its stock price
rise from $38.30 in January 2012 to $246.29 in January 2020—has applied economies of scale to
24

the ski and tourism industry and now owns 34 mountain ski resorts across the United States, the
majority of which were once locally owned and operated (Yannon 2019). In the northern Rocky
Mountains, property speculation for vacation rentals and second homes has driven rural
gentrification and restructured regional economies around the service industry while making
housing difficult to afford for long-term residents (Ghose 2004; Hines 2010; Nelson and Hines
2018). And Delaware North—a global company reporting a revenue of $3.3 billion in 2018 and
the 140th largest private company in the United States (Murphy 2019)—now owns the rights to
gift shops within numerous national and state parks, as well as local resorts in many amenity-rich
areas; once again applying economies of scale to nature-based tourism in rural settings (Fuller
2016). These examples highlight how contemporary capitalists external to the rural context can
penetrate labor markets and steer non-extractive natural resource development.
Now that I have made the alignment between extractive and non-extractive development
clear, we can see that a non-extractive natural-resource-dependent labor market still represents a
dual dependency on both the resource-rich natural environment and the global capitalist system.
In this case, instead of extracting physical resources, the core is extracting experiences and the
capital those experiences create. Researchers have observed labor markets transitioning from a
historically extractive economy to a non-extractive, often tourism-based economy in a number of
places, including Arizona (Davis and Morais 2004), Wisconsin (Freudenburg, Frickel, and
Gramling 1995), Washington (Sherman 2018), and Appalachia (Taylor, Hufford, and Bilbrey
2017).
Where Are Extractive and Non-extractive Development Not Aligned?
Although the extractive and non-extractive sectors have an overlapping interest in the shared
resource base, and are mutually aligned at the spatial contradiction between a static natural
resource base and the need for capital to be in motion, they are not fully equivalent. My goal here
25

is to organize extractive and non-extractive development within an integrated theoretical
framework. That said, there will be significant diversity within and between both sectors.
First, extractive and non-extractive natural-resource development do not have the same
effects on residents’ physical health, the physical environment, or even the local culture.
Externalities associated with each form of development are very different in this regard. Second,
price is handled differently in the two sectors. The price an extractive industry can charge for a
given commodity is pinned to global commodity markets (Freudenburg 1992). At the raw
material stage, a given firm is generally unable to charge more for their specific commodity than
any other firm: crude oil is priced as crude oil.
This is not to say there will be no variability within extraction. The type of resource, whether
timber, coal, oil, wheat, or soy, will present specific considerations that affect how that form of
development navigates the spatial contradiction and the pursuit of profit (Bunker 2003).
However, non-extractive development will see more variability in price within the same sector.
Depending on the specific natural amenities available, the level of regional development, and the
size of the market, among other things, different firms will be able to sell their very similar
product (e.g., the tourism experience or real estate) for different prices. This variability makes it
likely that the outcomes of this form of development are more subject to the agency of both
investors and local residents than in the case of extraction.
Furthermore, jobs in the two sectors are a major point of variation. Unlike many jobs in
extraction, where the risk of layoffs is high but the jobs themselves can be of high economic
quality, the quality of jobs provided by non-extractive development is often low. Work in the
non-extractive sector is often seasonal, provides low wages, offers limited benefits, and presents
little room for promotion (Green 2017). These low-quality jobs, when combined with the rising
cost of land and living spurred by this form of development (Hunter et al. 2005), can price locals
26

out of their own communities. In some cases where tourism has been successful in boosting rural
labor markets, it has been through the use of “ticky-tacky” tourism dominated by external
transnational corporations (e.g., Branson, MO, and Pigeon-Forge, TN [Deller et al. 2008]). One
can easily argue the radical change in these places constitutes a loss of local culture and placechange, a type of transition difficult to measure in dollars and cents.
A further point of difference between the two sectors is the level of temporal variation. Both
extractive and non-extractive natural-resource development suffer from deep troughs in
economic activity. However, the types of troughs they experience vary. Extraction has a long
history of wide variation due to the boomtown effect, wherein labor markets face rapid spikes in
economic activity followed by deep troughs of unequally distributed material hardship due to the
oscillation of global commodity markets (Freudenburg 1992; Jacquet and Kay 2014; Kinchy et
al. 2014; Schafft et al. 2018). Non-extractive natural-resource development also faces temporal
variation, although it is far narrower and more reliable. Due to the seasonality of the tourism and
recreation industries, individuals working in non-extractive labor markets often face regular
layoffs and find large swaths of the year provide limited economic opportunity. This makes it
difficult to find year-round employment, generate savings, and fulfill goals like owning a home
(Sherman 2018).
Natural Resource Dependence Is a Process
We should not view natural resource dependence as a steady state a labor market enters into,
but a process characterized by the ebb and flow of dual dependency. Given dual dependency’s
conceptual footing in a contradiction of capitalism, we should expect it to have a dialectical
nature always in a state of flux. Although it is a dynamic process, the theory presented here does
suggest some general patterns. As labor markets increase their economic specialization in the
natural resource sectors—extractive, non-extractive, or both—they are more likely to tip into
27

natural resource dependence and develop dual dependency. The precise level of specialization
where this occurs will vary, due to factors such as local political economy, the broader labor
market, historical patterns of development, the quality of the resource base, and geography.
Thus, two labor markets can have similar levels of extractive or non-extractive natural-resource
development and one be specialized—meaning they do not experience negative outcomes from
development—and the other be dependent—meaning they reach over-specialization and
experience negative outcomes. However, although the level at which this develops will not be
constant across all labor markets, we should expect that, on average, higher levels of
specialization will result in diminishing economic benefit in both the extractive and nonextractive natural-resource sectors.
Because it is a process, labor markets can exit, and possibly reenter, different forms of natural
resource dependence. For example, a labor market could be dependent on extraction, transition
into a hybrid dependence on extractive and non-extractive activities, and then transition to solely
non-extractive dependence. Importantly, if a labor market reduces its dependence on the local
environment, and therefore its dual dependency, the first form of dependency on the national and
global economies will remain and likely be more severe than if dual dependency had never
occurred, due to the formation of path dependencies. The peripheral location of the labor market
in the national and global systems is unlikely to change, and the former industries will have
shaped the existing political economy. All that is severed is the dependency on the local
resource-rich environment. Labor markets that transition out of natural resource dependence may
still experience negative effects for generations to come. Much like people who owned timber
land have been able to convert their interests into real estate (e.g., Plumb Creek Timber) and thus
pivot from extractive to non-extractive activities as markets warranted, actors who gain power
over, and within, labor markets before economic dependency on the local environment ends will
28

likely retain their power in any new economy. Prior historical work by sociologists describes this
process of dependency formation, dissolution, and transition (Billings and Blee 2000;
Freudenburg and Frickel 1994; Freudenburg et al. 1995; Wilson 2004).
Finally, it is important to acknowledge that while the presented theory operates at the level of
the labor market, the negative effects of dual dependency are not felt equally throughout the
population. For example, it is not that all of an urban labor market exploits a rural labor market,
but rather that urban or transnational capitalists exploit rural labor. This distinction is paramount
due to the long list of social inequalities that exist within nations (Bailey et al. 2017; Bell and
Owens-Young 2020; Chetty et al. 2014; Lobao 2016; Manduca 2019; Williams 2017). These
inequalities do fall along spatial lines of rural/urban and capitalist/labor, but they are more
pronounced along lines of race, gender, and ethnicity. As Dunaway (2001) notes, to ignore these
persistent inequalities in a discussion of world or national systems is to erase how women and
members of traditionally oppressed groups are forced to subsidize the capitalist system in
exploitative ways; this ignores a primary mechanism by which the exploitative pathways of
capitalism are reproduced—the production of people.
As extractive-dependent rural labor markets transition to non-extractive resource dependence,
the majority of jobs switch from historically male-dominant physical labor to historically femaledominated service-sector work. As previous research shows, this switch does not necessarily
correspond to a reduction in housework and time caring for children (Sherman 2009a, 2009b), so
this dependence will likely have more pronounced effects for women than for men. Similarly,
although the picture of American rurality is often one of white families, this has never really
been true and becomes less so every year (Lichter 2012). In the case of natural resource
dependence, American Indians are of particular concern, as they have often faced, and continue
to face, the lion’s share of the “development” of the United States. Individuals at the margins of
29

society will feel the negative outcomes of dual dependency first, and strongest. In rural areas,
this likely means exacerbated inequality as it relates to women, people of color, American
Indians, and sexual minorities. Importantly, people at the intersections of these historically
oppressed groups will feel these negative effects the most (Collins 2015).
The Path Forward
In this article, I presented a new integrative theoretical framework for understanding natural
resource dependence at the subnational level. This theoretical perspective emphasizes nesting
extractive and non-extractive forms of natural resource development within the internal
dynamics of the United States. Although I focused on the case of the United States due to the
state of existing scholarship and the need for a focused discussion, this framework—and
particularly the spatial contradiction—has broad carryover across the world. Future work should
apply this framework to cases inside and outside the United States.
In concert with this global application, much work remains in relating this framework to
other key concepts discussed by critical theorists. For example, although I do not spend time on
it here, the concept of rents discussed by Marx and further developed by Coronil (1997) in the
context of Venezuelan oil has significant carryover to this work. In natural resource
development, the concept of rents and rentier capitalism, as well as the political implications of
rentiership, have important implications and points of departure in the United States due to the
dominance of federal public lands. Understanding how rentier capitalism might affect the
outcomes of the spatial contradiction in the United States is an important future step. Beyond the
notion of rents, other important concepts to explore and more fully relate to this framework
include environmentally unequal exchange (Givens, Huang, and Jorgenson 2019), the metabolic
rift (Foster 1999), environmental justice (Brulle and Pellow 2006), and the existence or absence
of social movements and labor unions in the natural resource context.
30

Ultimately, rural resource-dependent labor markets are stuck between a rock and a hard
place: they need to break their dependence on the resource base to allow for more sustainable
and diverse economic development, but the resource base is generally their only “comparative
advantage” in national and global economies. Furthermore, although this framework casts doubt
on the economic benefits of transitions from extractive to non-extractive natural-resource
development in rural labor markets, transitioning away from extractive activities is essential for
curbing global climate change. Therefore, we must reach a delicate balancing act. To accomplish
this, we need intentional planning, procedural justice, and attention to the actual needs and
interests of rural labor markets, not the needs and interests of those seeking to foster extractive or
non-extractive natural-resource economic development.
The power of extractive industries in rural labor markets, as outlined here, has long been an
issue of concern for social scientists (Freudenburg 1992; Humphrey et al. 1993; Krannich et al.
2014). However, the power of the outdoor recreation and tourism industries and other
“environmental interests” in rural labor markets has received less attention and should be of
growing concern. The outdoor recreation industry has increasingly advocated for large-scale
environmental preservation while gaining political offices and lobbying power (Outdoor Industry
Association 2018). When we consider that these efforts largely increase awareness of outdoor
recreation among the public, and set aside land where consumers may use the products the
industry is selling, it is clear these efforts may not be purely environmentally-conscious and
magnanimous as often perceived.
The apparent good of environmental protection makes critiquing the initiatives put forward
by the non-extractive natural-resource sector uncomfortable for many scholars and activists.
However, as Humphrey and colleagues (1993) discussed 25 years ago, the moral exclusion of
individuals who live in rural areas by environmental interests masks and exacerbates rural
31

material hardship. We cannot ignore the negative social and economic effects that environmental
protection and non-extractive natural-resource development have on rural labor markets simply
because these labor markets have often extracted from, and desire to continue extracting from,
their resource-rich local environment for economic growth. In fact, as outlined here, extraction is
often the only economic activity in these labor markets that receives significant capital
investment and support. As many countries continue shifting toward an experience economy
(Pine et al. 1998), researchers and activists need to advocate for the interests of rural people and
places if we are to avoid further alienation of rural segments of society. Relegating rural
landscapes as preserves for outdoor recreation and tourism for the elite will only perpetuate, and
likely exacerbate, the problems of dual dependency discussed here.

32

REFERENCES
Allcott, Hunt, and Daniel Keniston. 2017. “Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The Local
Economic Effects of Natural Resource Booms in Modern America.” The Review of Economic
Studies 85(2):695–731.
Azar, Jose, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I. Steinbaum. 2020. “Labor Market Concentration.”
Journal of Human Resources. 1218-9914R1.
Bailey, Zinzi D., Nancy Krieger, Madina Ag´enor, Jasmine Graves, Natalia Linos, and Mary T.
Bassett. 2017. “Structural Racism and Health Inequities in the USA: Evidence and
Interventions.” The Lancet 389(10077):1453–1463.
Bell, Caryn N. and Jessica L. Owens-Young. 2020. “Self-rated Health and Structural Racism
Indicated by County-Level Racial Inequalities in Socioeconomic Status: The Role of UrbanRural Classification.” Journal of Urban Health 97(1):52–61.
Bell, Shannon E. and Richard York. 2010. “Community Economic Identity: The Coal Industry
and Ideology Construction in West Virginia.” Rural Sociology 75(1):111–143.
Betz, Michael R., Mark D. Partridge, Michael Farren, and Linda Lobao. 2015. “Coal Mining,
Economic Development, and the Natural Resources Curse.” Energy Economics 50(C):105–
116.
Billings, Dwight B. and Kathleen M. Blee. 2000. The Road to Poverty: The Making of Wealth
and Hardship in Appalachia. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Brooks, Sarah M. and Marcus J. Kurtz. 2016. “Oil and Democracy: Endogenous Natural
Resources and the Political 'Resource Curse.’” International Organization 70(2):279–311.
Brown, Jason P. 2014. “Production of Natural Gas from Shale in Local Economies: A Resource
Blessing or Curse?” Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Q1:5–33.

33

Brulle, Robert J. and David N. Pellow. 2006. “Environmental Justice: Human Health and
Environmental Inequalities.” Annual Review of Public Health 27:103–124.
Brunnschweiler, Christa N. and Erwin H. Bulte. 2008. “The Resource Curse Revisited and
Revised: A Tale of Paradoxes and Red Herrings.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 55(3):248–264.
Bunker, Stephen G. (2003). “Matter, Space, Energy, and Political Economy: The Amazon in the
World-System.” Journal of World-Systems Research 9(2):219–258.
Cardoso, Fernando H. 1982:1972. “Dependency and Development in Latin America.” Pp. 112127 in Introduction to the Sociology of “Developing Societies,” edited by H. Alavi and T.
Shanin. New York: Springer.
Carr, Patrick J. and Maria J. Kefalas. 2009. Hollowing Out the Middle: The Rural Brain Drain
and What It Means for America. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4):1553–1623.
Ciccantell, Paul. S. 2020. “Liquefied Natural Gas: Redefining Nature, Restructuring Geopolitics,
Returning to the Periphery?” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 79(1):265–300.
Collins, Patricia H. 2015. “Intersectionality’s Definitional Dilemmas.” Annual Review of
Sociology 41:1–20.
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D’Erasmo. 2020. “Rising Bank Concentration.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 115. doi:10.1016/j.jedc.2020.103877.
Coronil, Fernando. 1997. The Magical State: Nature, Money, and Modernity in Venezuela.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cust, James and Steven Poelhekke. 2015. “The Local Economic Impacts of Natural Resource
Extraction.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 7(1):251–268.
34

Das, Raju. J. 1996. “State Theories: A Critical Analysis.” Science & Society 60(1):27–57.
Davis, Jeffrey S. and Duarte B. Morais. 2004. “Factions and Enclaves: Small Towns and Socially
Unsustainable Tourism Development.” Journal of Travel Research 43(1):3–10.
Deller, Steven C. 2010. “Rural Poverty, Tourism and Spatial Heterogeneity.” Annals of Tourism
Research 37(1):180–205.
Deller, Steven. C., Victor Lledo, and David W. Marcouiller. 2008. “Modeling Regional
Economic Growth with a Focus on Amenities.” Review of Urban & Regional Development
Studies: Journal of the Applied Regional Science Conference 20(1):1–21.
Deller, Steven C. and Andrew Schreiber. 2012. “Mining and Community Economic Growth.”
Review of Regional Studies 42(2):121-141.
Deller, Steven C., Tsung-Hsiu Tsai, David W. Marcouiller, and Donald B. English. 2001. “The
Role of Amenities and Quality of Life in Rural Economic Growth.” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 83(2):352–365.
Douglas, Stratford and Anne Walker. 2017. “Coal Mining and the Resource Curse in the Eastern
United States.” Journal of Regional Science 57(4):568–590.
Dunaway, Wilma A. 2001. “The Double Register of History: Situating the Forgotten Woman and
her Household in Capitalist Commodity Chains.” Journal of World-Systems Research 7(1):2–
29.
Duncan, Cynthia M. 2014. Worlds Apart: Poverty and Politics in Rural America, Second
Edition. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
English, Donald B., David W. Marcouiller, and H. Ken Cordell. 2000. “Tourism Dependence in
Rural America: Estimates and Effects.” Society & Natural Resources 13(3):185–202.
Falkinger, Josef and Volker Grossmann. 2013. “Oligarchic Land Ownership, Entrepreneurship,
and Economic Development.” Journal of Development Economics 101(C):206–215.
35

Foster, John B. 1999. “Marx's Theory of Metabolic Rift: Classical Foundations for
Environmental Sociology.” American Journal of Sociology 105(2):366-405.
Fowler, Christopher S. and Leif Jensen. 2020. “Bridging the Gap between Geographic Concept
and the Data We Have: The Case of Labor Markets in the USA.” Environment and Planning
A: Economy and Space 52(7):1395-1414.
Frank, Andre G. [1969] 2007. “The Development of Underdevelopment.” Pp. 105-114 in The
Globalization and Development Reader: Perspectives on Development and Global Change,
edited by J. T. Roberts and A. B. Hite. Malden, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 2012. “The Natural Resource Curse: A Survey of Diagnoses and Some
Prescriptions.” NBER Working Paper No. 15836.
Freudenburg, William R. 1992. “Addictive Economies: Extractive Industries and Vulnerable
Localities in a Changing World Economy.” Rural Sociology 57(3):305–332.
Freudenburg, William R. and Scott Frickel. 1994. “Digging Deeper: Mining-Dependent Regions
in Historical Perspective.” Rural Sociology 59(2):266–288.
Freudenburg, William R., Scott Frickel, and Robert Gramling. 1995. “Beyond the Nature/Society
Divide: Learning to Think about a Mountain.” Sociological Forum 10(3):361–392.
Freudenburg, William R. and Robert Gramling. 1994. “Natural Resources and Rural Poverty: A
Closer Look.” Society & Natural Resources 7(1):5–22.
Freudenburg, William R. and Lisa J. Wilson. 2002. “Mining the Data: Analyzing the Economic
Implications of Mining for Nonmetropolitan Regions.” Sociological Inquiry 72(4):549–575.
Fuller, Thomas. 2016. “Bitter Contract Dispute Extends to Who Owns Yosemite Names.” The
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/02/us/bitter-contract-dispute-extends-towho-owns-yosemite-national-park-names.html.
Ghose, Rina. 2004. “Big Sky or Big Sprawl? Rural Gentrification and the Changing Cultural
Landscape of Missoula, Montana.” Urban Geography 25(6):528–549.
36

Givens, Jennifer E., Xiaorui Huang, and Andrew K. Jorgenson. 2019. “Ecologically Unequal
Exchange: A Theory of Global Environmental Injustice.” Sociology Compass 13(5):e12693.
Green, Gary P. 2017. “The Opportunities and Limits of Economic Growth.” Pp. 416–438 in
Rural Poverty in the United States, edited by A. R. Tickamyer, J. Sherman, and J. Warlick.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur. 2001. “Natural Resources, Education, and Economic Development.”
European Economic Review 45(4-6):847–859.
Harvey, David. [1982] 2018. The Limits to Capital. New York: Verso Books.
Harvey, David. 2006. Spaces of Global Capitalism. New York: Verso.
Harvey, David. 2007. A brief history of neoliberalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Havranek, Tomas, Roman Horvath, Ayaz and Zeynalov. 2016. “Natural Resources and
Economic Growth: A Meta-Analysis.” World Development 88(C):134–151.
Hines, J. Dwight. 2010. “Rural Gentrification as Permanent Tourism: The Creation of the ‘New’
West Archipelago as Postindustrial Cultural Space. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space 28(3):509–525.
Humphrey, Craig R., Gigi Berardi, Matthew S. Carroll, Sally Fairfax, Louise Fortmann,
Charles Geisler, Thomas G. Johnson, Jonathan Kusel, Robert G. Lee, Seth Macinko, Michael
D. Shulman, Patrick C. West. 1993. “Theories in the Study of Natural Resource-Dependent
Communities and Persistent Rural Poverty in the United States.” Pp. 136–172 in Persistent
Poverty in Rural America, edited by G. Summers. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Hunter, Lori M., Jason D. Boardman, and Jarron M. Saint Onge. 2005. “The Association
between Natural Amenities, Rural Population Growth, and Long-Term Residents’ Economic
Well-being.” Rural Sociology 70(4):452–469.

37

Jacquet, Jeffrey and David L. Kay. 2014. “The Unconventional Boomtown: Updating the Impact
Model to Fit New Spatial and Temporal Scales.” Journal of Rural and Community
Development 9(1):1–23.
James, Alex and David Aadland. 2011. “The Curse of Natural Resources: An Empirical
Investigation of US Counties.” Resource and Energy Economics 33(2):440–453.
James, Alexander G. and Robert G. James. 2011. “Do Resource Dependent Regions Grow
Slower than they Should?” Economics Letters 111(3):194–196.
Kim, Kwang-koo, David W. Marcouiller, and Steven C. Deller. 2005. “Natural Amenities and
Rural Development: Understanding Spatial and Distributional Attributes.” Growth and
Change 36(2):273–297.
Kinchy, Abby, Simona Perry, Danielle Rhubart, Richard Stedman, Kathryn Brasier, and Jeffrey
Jacquet. 2014. “New Natural Gas Development and Rural Communities: Key Issues and
Research Priorities.” Pp. 260–278 in Rural America in a Globalizing World, edited by C.
Bailey, L. Jensen, and E. Ransom. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press.
Krannich, Richard S., Brian Gentry, A. E. Luloff, and Peter G. Robertson. 2014. “Resource
Dependency in Rural America: Continuities and Change.” Pp. 208–225 in Rural America in a
Globalizing World, edited by C. Bailey, L. Jensen, and E. Ransom. Morgantown: West
Virginia University Press.
Lewin, Philip G. 2017. “‘Coal is Not Just a Job, It’s a Way of Life’: The Cultural Politics of Coal
Production in Central Appalachia.” Social Problems 66(1):51–68.
Lichter, Daniel T. 2012. “Immigration and the New Racial Diversity in Rural America.” Rural
Sociology 77(1):3–35.

38

Lobao, Linda. 2016. “The Sociology of Subnational Development.” Pp. 265–292 in The
Sociology of Development Handbook, edited by G. Hooks. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Lobao, Linda, Minyu Zhou, Mark Partridge, and Michael Betz. 2016. “Poverty, Place, and Coal
Employment Across Appalachia and the United States in a New Economic Era.” Rural
Sociology 81(3):343–386.
Lyson, Thomas A., William W. Falk, Mark Henry, JoAnn Hickey, and Mildred Warner. 1993.
“Spatial Location of Economic Activities, Uneven Development, and Rural Poverty.” Pp.
106–135 in Persistent Poverty in Rural America, edited by G. Summers. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Manduca, Robert A. 2019. “The Contribution of National Income Inequality to Regional
Economic Divergence.” Social Forces 98(2):622–648.
Marcouiller, David W., Kwang-Koo Kim, and Steven C. Deller. 2004. “Natural Amenities,
Tourism and Income Distribution.” Annals of Tourism Research 31(4):1031-1050.
Marx, Karl. [1867] 1990. Capital: Volume I. London, UK: Penguin.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1992. “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic
Growth.” Journal of Economic Theory 58(2):317–334.
McMichael, Philip. 2017. Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective. Sixth Edition.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Melo, Patricia C., Daniel J. Graham, and Robert B. Noland. 2009. “A Meta-analysis of Estimates
of Urban Agglomeration Economies.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 39(3):332–
342.

39

Mueller, J. Tom. 2020a. The Effect of Natural Resource Dependence on Economic Prosperity.
PhD Dissertation, Department of Agricultural Economics, Sociology, and Education, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
Mueller, J. Tom. 2020b. “Defining Dependence: The Natural Resource Community
Typology.” Rural Sociology, Online First. https://doi.org/10.1111/ruso.12357.
Mueller, J. Tom. 2020c. “Natural Resource Dependence and Rural American Economic
Prosperity from 2000 to 2015.” Economic Development Quarterly, Online First.
https://doi.org/10.25384/SAGE.c.5254318.v1.
Murphy, Andrea. 2019. “America’s Largest Private Companies 2019.” Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/andreamurphy/2019/12/17/americas-largest-private-companies2019/#7437925f5261.
Nelson, Peter B. and J. Dwight Hines. 2018. “Rural Gentrification and Networks of Capital
Accumulation—A Case Study of Jackson, Wyoming.” Environment and Planning A:
Economy and Space 50(7):1473–1495.
Nord, Mark and Albert E. Luloff. 1993. “Socioeconomic Heterogeneity of Mining-dependent
Counties.” Rural Sociology 58(3):492–500.
Outdoor Industry Association. 2018. “State Offices of Outdoor Recreation.” Technical Report,
Outdoor Industry Association. https://outdoorindustry.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/stateoffices-infographic.pdf.
Papyrakis, Elissaios. 2017. “The Resource Curse-What Have we Learned from Two Decades of
Intensive Research: Introduction to the Special Issue.” The Journal of Development Studies
53(2):175–185.
Papyrakis, Elissaios and Reyer Gerlagh. 2004. “The Resource Curse Hypothesis and its
Transmission Channels.” Journal of Comparative Economics 32(1):181–193.

40

Papyrakis, Elissaios and Reyer Gerlagh. 2007. Resource Abundance and Economic Growth in
the United States.” European Economic Review 51(4):1011–1039.
Pine, B. Joseph, and James Gilmore. 1998. “Welcome to the Experience Economy.” Harvard
Business Review 76(4):97–105.
Robinson, William I. 2005. “Gramsci and Globalisation: From Nation-state to Transnational
Hegemony.” Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 8(4):559–574.
Robinson, William I. 2006. “Beyond the Theory of Imperialism: Global Capitalism and the
Transnational State.” Societies Without Borders 2(1):5–26.
Robinson, William I. 2015. “The Transnational State and the BRICS: A Global Capitalism
Perspective.” Third World Quarterly 36(1):1–21.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner. 1995. “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic
Growth.” Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Schafft, Kai A., Erin McHenry‐Sorber, Daniella Hall, and Ian Burfoot‐Rochford. 2018. “Busted
Amidst the Boom: The Creation of New Insecurities and Inequalities within Pennsylvania's
Shale Gas Boomtowns.” Rural Sociology 83(3):503-531.
Sherman, Jennifer. 2009a. “Bend to Avoid Breaking: Job Loss, Gender Norms, and Family
Stability in Rural America.” Social Problems 56(4):599–620.
Sherman, Jennifer. 2009b. Those Who Work, Those Who Don’t: Poverty, Morality, and Family in
Rural America. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Sherman, Jennifer. 2018. “Not Allowed to Inherit My Kingdom: Amenity Development and
Social Inequality in the Rural West.” Rural Sociology 83(1):174–207.
Singleton, Sara. 2000. “Co-operation or Capture? The Paradox of Co-management and
Community Participation in Natural Resource Management and Environmental Policymaking.” Environmental Politics 9(2):1–21.

41

Sklair, Leslie. 2002. “Democracy and the Transnational Capitalist Class.” The Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 581(1):144–157.
Sklair, Leslie. 2007. “Achilles has Two Heels: Crises of Capitalist Globalization.” Pp. 21–32 in
Thinker, Faker, Spinner, Spy: Corporate PR and the Assault on Democracy, edited by D.
Miller and W. Dinan. London, UK: Pluto Press.
Sklair, Leslie. 2012. “Transnational Capitalist Class.” The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of
Globalization. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Smith, Neil. 1984. Uneven Development: Nature, Capital, and the Production of Space. New
York: Basil Blackwell.
Smith, Neil. 2011. “Uneven Development Redux.” New Political Economy 16(2):261–265.
Stedman, Richard C., John R. Parkins, and Thomas M. Beckley. 2005. “Forest Dependence and
Community Well-being in Rural Canada: Variation by Forest Sector and Region.” Canadian
Journal of Forest Research 35(1):215–220.
Tallichet, Suzanne E. 2000. “Barriers to Women's Advancement in Underground Coal
Mining.” Rural Sociology 65(2):234-252.
Taylor, Betsy, Mary Hufford, and Kendall Bilbrey. 2017. “A Green New Deal for Appalachia:
Economic Transition, Coal Reclamation Costs, Bottom-up Policymaking (Part 1).” Journal of
Appalachian Studies 23(1):8–28.
Ulrich-Schad, Jessica D. 2018. “‘We Didn’t Move Here to Move to Aspen’: Community Making
and Community Development in an Emerging Rural Amenity Destination.” Journal of Rural
and Community Development 13(4):43-66.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. [1979] 2015. “The Rise and Future Demise of the World Capitalist
System: Concepts for Comparative Analysis. Pp. 126–146 in The Globalization and
Development Reader: Perspectives on Development and Global Change, Second Edition,

42

edited by J. T. Roberts, A. Bellone Hite, and N. Chorev. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd.
Weber, Jeremy G. 2012. “The Effects of a Natural Gas Boom on Employment and Income in
Colorado, Texas, and Wyoming.” Energy Economics 34(5):1580–1588.
West, Patrick C. 1994. “Natural Resources and the Persistence of Rural Poverty in America: A
Weberian Perspective on the Role of Power, Domination, and Natural Resource Bureaucracy.”
Society & Natural Resources 7(5):415–427.
Williams, Robert B. 2017. “Wealth Privilege and the Racial Wealth Gap: A Case Study in
Economic Stratification.” The Review of Black Political Economy 44(3-4):303–325.
Wilson, Lisa J. 2004. “Riding the Resource Roller Coaster: Understanding Socioeconomic
Differences between Mining Communities.” Rural Sociology 69(2):261–281.
Winkler, Richelle, Cheng Cheng, and Shaun Golding. 2012. “Boom or Bust? Population
Dynamics in Natural Resource-dependent Counties.” Pp. 349–367 in International Handbook
of Rural Demography, edited by L. J. Kulcsár and K. J. Curtis. New York, NY: Springer.
Winkler, Richelle, Steven Deller, and David Marcouiller. 2015. “Recreational Housing and
Community Development: A Triple Bottom Line Approach.” Growth and Change 46(3):481500.
Yannon, Tessa. 2019. “Vail Resorts is Buying 17 More U.S. Ski Resorts.” Boston Magazine.
https://www.bostonmagazine.com/health/2019/07/23/vail-resorts-merger-peak-resorts/.

43

