Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.18

Pp.209 -217

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar: A Literature Review
Nur Syafiqah Yaccob
Faculty of Education
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Malaysia
Melor Md Yunus
Department of Innovation in Teaching and Learning
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Malaysia
Abstract
Traditional teaching and learning process referring to chalk-and-talk has become outdated in
lessons. Teachers and learners are exposed to various task-based process to encourage a better
participation among learners throughout the lesson. One of the most common and preferred
teaching strategies is the use of language games to aid the teaching of various skills. The growth
of digital learning tools and web applications being used in lessons taking the use of language
games to a modern and advanced platform for learners to engage in lessons. The use of interesting
and suitable materials along with the various approaches when conducting language games during
lessons helps to cater to learners' needs and interests on the subject-matter especially in learning
grammar in context. Many researches have used various language games to show its effects on
learners ' knowledge, competency and motivation in learning a language, focusing on different
targeted language areas and skills such as grammar. Therefore, this paper, based on reviews of
past literature, will explore the use of language games in teaching and learning grammar, with
reference to second language (ESL) learners. The findings indicate the beneficial usage of
language games to teaching and learning of grammar in for ESL learners. This study is useful to
prove the importance of language games as a teaching strategy to help enhance learners ' English
grammar acquisition.
Keywords: ESL, grammar games, language games, learning grammar
Cite as: Yaccob, N.S., & Yunus, M.M. (2019). Language Games in Teaching and Learning
English Grammar: A Literature Review. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1) 209 -217.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.18

209

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

1. Introduction
The importance of grammar in the English language cannot be ignored (Savignon, 2017) as it
is relatively an essential language form (Alijanian, 2012) that learners need to master in order to
create meaningful sentences. Grammar is defined as the study of words operating together to form
meaningful sentences (Thekes, 2011; Goodman & Goodman, 2014). It is important for ESL
learners to construct sentences and confidently express their ideas since some might feel shy
because they are scared of making grammar mistakes resulting in a misunderstanding of the
original ideas. Similarly, some find grammar rules to be challenging to grasp (Baharudin & Yunus,
2018) thus suggesting the use of technology tool as an effective teaching aid. It reflects the
advantage of language games to improve the teaching and learning of grammar and importantly
assist learners to work on their grammar proficiency. This fun approach to the teaching and
learning of English grammar is accommodating and efficient especially when dealing with young
and teenage ESL learners. In Malaysia, grammar or Language Awareness acts as pillar in ESL and
is a skill that must be taught during English lesson with textbooks and workbooks presenting the
key grammar rules that learners have to master by the end of their secondary school years.
The introduction of Task-Based Language Teaching (TBLT) and Communicative Language
Teaching (CLT) approaches since the past years has brought a more effective style of language
teaching and learning. According to Ngoc and Iwashita (2012), “CLT is a language teaching
approach that emphasises the communication of meaning rather than the practice of grammatical
forms in isolation'' (p.26). In the 21st century second and foreign language acquisition, a CLT
approach is able to shape a classroom practice that allows learners to be communicatively
competent according to the contexts in which English is taught (Savignon, 2017). Language games
are part of CLT approach for its characteristics that include learner-centredness, meaningful
collaborative and interactive activities, the use of relevant and authentic materials, the focus of
meaning and linguistic forms in context and also the roles of teachers as facilitators (Richards &
Rodgers, 2001, as cited in Ngoc & Iwashita, 2012). It encourages learners to use language
creatively and communicatively other than offering relaxation and enjoyment to them as the
participants (Adeng & Shah, 2012). In definition, language games are language learning through
gameplay (Godwin-Jones, 2014) which involves the communicative aspects of learning (Willis &
Willis, 2013; Adeng & Shah, 2012). Therefore, it brings about the sentiment that teaching and
learning of grammar should not be done in isolation but in a proper context and authentically.
There are two types of language games; digital and non-digital or physical games with both being
widely used to aid language lessons. Non-digital language games such as board games; Snake and
Ladders and Grammar Monopoly, Dominoes and Wheel of Grammar (WOG) are still relevant
among teachers and learners. Whereas Quizlet, Edmodo, Frogplay and Massively Multiplayer
Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPG) are among the choices for schools which are equipped
with proper facilities for digital language games to take place.
Hall (2017) explains that “typically, communicative and interaction-based approaches to
English language teaching (ELT) have suggested that teacher talk should be minimised, providing
the opportunities for learners to talk, practise and produce language’’ (p.23). Naturally, this fulfils
the requirements of a 21st-century teaching and learning approach where learners dominate their
learning (Hall, 2017) as well as integrating the Higher Order Thinking Skills (HOTS) elements in
grammar lessons. Language games in CLT also plays a vital role to ensure ESL learners’ ability
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

210

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

and confidence to use grammar correctly in performing all language skills including when solving
riddles and problems. The educational environment is fast evolving to challenge and adapting
learners to a VUCA (volatility, uncertainty, complexity, ambiguity) environment (Meng, 2014) in
which learners’ thinking and problem-solving skills are developed. In regards to the English
language syllabus, the current Malaysian English textbooks introduce functions and practices for
the intended grammar items, however, do not reflect CLT principles. Chambers & Yunus (2017)
have similar opinion that “the Subject-Verb Agreement (SVA) and Verb-To-Be (VTB) introduced
in textbooks in primary and secondary schools are usually in the form of tables which can slow
down the learning process as most learners find it distasteful” (p.1642). The design for layout and
the presentation of the grammar rules in textbooks and workbooks are considered important as
they play a role to attract learners’ interest. When grammar teaching is concerned, language games
become a medium to teach ESL learners both grammar structures and the use in communicative
and real-life context. As assured by Savignon (2017), “learners seem to focus best on grammar
when it relates to their communicative needs and experiences” (p.4-5). This sums up the
effectiveness of teaching grammar through various independent and communicative approaches.
In keeping abreast with the recent technological advancement, education needs to be meaningful
and effective for the development of skills. Hence, ESL learners should learn the basic of grammar
to use it in communication instead of merely on the purpose of examination. They should be
exposed to not only the technical aspects of the language namely the grammar and forms but also,
the structural and functional aspects of it. Both should not be differentiated but to be adapted and
assimilated in order to create a link for meaningful use. This paper reviews past literature for the
use and advantages of language games in teaching and learning of grammar with particular
reference to ESL learners particularly on fluency, interest and motivation.
2. Literature Review
Adhering to various communicative approaches, language games in teaching and learning
holds numerous advantages in enhancing ESL learners’ fluency and language skills. It creates an
enjoyable environment for an effective learning process. Goodman & Goodman (2014) state that
“children learn language best in an environment rich with opportunities to explore interesting
objects and ideas” (p.197). Language games provide a platform for learners to communicate using
the target grammar forms in a more interesting and authentic manner as supported by Ellis (2006,
as cited in Alijanian, 2012) that “grammar is no more considered as meaningless, a contextindependent set of rules prescribed about language forms but it is regarded with respect to
communication'' (p.415). It should be taught with the willingness to engage learners in interaction
using the targeted grammar items and by providing them the freedom to use the target language
(Willis & Willis, 2013). Likewise, according to Krashen (1988), in second language performance,
there are two independent systems named as ‘the acquired system' and 'the learned system’. The
acquired system (acquisition) requires a natural communication or meaningful interaction in the
target language, while the learned system (learning) is the product of a conscious process which
resulted in knowledge of the language, such as grammar rules (Krashen, 1988). Learners play an
active role (Thirusanku & Melor, 2014) and the active involvement from the learners when
accomplishing language games creates consciousness on the importance of practicing the grammar
forms in their interaction freely. The real-life situations act as a platform to enrich ESL learners’
language skills and confidence when facing various and common events.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

211

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

However, a study done by Alijanian (2012) shows that “CLT and direct grammar teaching
were both favored by the teachers” (p.416). Another opinion regarding ESL learners is that, there
is a need for them to first grasp the basic knowledge of grammar by doing structural practices
(Chambers & Yunus, 2017) before being given the communicative task which is supported by the
findings in Alijanian (2012) in her study that “learners became distracted if the rule was not
explained first” (p.417). The study explores teachers’ beliefs about the teaching of grammar. It
investigates how teachers view the traditional grammar teaching and also through games, hence
taking another study on Iranian EFL learners, by Taheri (2014) which firmly assured that “games
are beneficial in language learning, while traditional form-focused is not that most effective
because they lack some features of the game'' (p.548). According to Willis & Willis (2013), “many
traditional methodologies begin by teaching grammatical forms before going on to set
communicative activities for learners to use those forms” (p.18). Adding to that, Thekes (2011)
says “the constant explanation of grammar rules and decontextualizing grammar are quick ways
for teachers to demotivate their learners and some English as a Foreign Language (EFL) teachers
still fall into the comfortable trap of presenting grammar through rules” (p.1). Hence, there are the
demands of variation in the teaching and learning of grammar to escape the traditional ways which
often be used in grammar lessons (Briewin, Naidu & Mohamed, 2013; Taheri, 2014). TBLT is
said to be an approach that encourages learners to engage in meaning (Willis & Willis, 2013) rather
than learning the language skills in isolation. Similarly, this reflects the use of language games to
help ESL learners develop their language skills, confidence and communicative skills.
In a wider context, when games are integrated with language lessons, it supports higher-order
learning and thinking skills (HOTS) which are very important for learners to develop themselves
as future professionals (Rahman & Bakar, 2018; Thirusanku & Yunus, 2014). Nevertheless, there
are different views being discussed in Alijanian (2012) on “the separate treatment on grammar
which fails to produce language knowledge and that learners learn grammar best if it is presented
within a text'' (p.417). The differences of ideas show the differences in teachers' perceptions
towards approaches in teaching grammar. Language games as a task-based language teaching
(TBLT) approach is designed to produce ESL learners who are able to use English in the real
world, using the learned grammar forms in real-life communication (Willis & Willis, 2013) and to
participate effectively in society (Richards & Rodgers, 2014). Although it is argued that this
learning approach is not structured and learners are required to take initiatives with the use of an
authentic target in fostering autonomy and competency (Benson, 2011, as cited in Chik, 2012),
once learners are motivated and interested in the language, they are able to be responsible in their
own learning. Language fluency or competency is enhanced due to ESL learners’ willingness to
use the language at all times.
2.1 Language Games To Stimulate Interest On Learning
Adeng & Shah (2012) state that “grammar teaching that is too dependent on rules and
memorisation makes learners lose their interest and motivation'' and add that “games are the most
suitable to learn the grammar of a second language'' (p.23). It comes to terms that learning grammar
in different communicative settings through active games is more interesting rather than doing
grammar practices with workbooks. ESL learners are more interested to learn particular grammar
through authentic language games with a widened repertoire of tasks related to real-life contexts.
Also, the application of different classroom activities and learning strategies is crucial to assist
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

212

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

learners with various needs (Chambers & Yunus, 2017) as these can encourage learners to
participate and engage in grammar lessons. Undoubtedly, language games have activities to suit
ESL learners’ language needs and for them to learn in an effective and encouraging environment.
Godwin-Jones (2014) claims that “games can offer an immersive environment in which extensive
use is made of the target language” (p.10) which is similar to digital games as stated by Chik
(2012) that, “learners can practise foreign language learning and use autonomously through
activities they were passionate about, and moved the learning process beyond classroom” (p.96).
Both non-digital or physical and digital language games arouse ESL learners’ interests to
participate in the usually boring grammar lessons other than it can be applied in lessons even
though the classroom is not equipped with modern technological tools. The context given to suit
the targeted grammar items permits ESL learners to learn effectively as it brings about the
authentic time and places used. As highlighted by Briewin et al. (2013) on providing context to
present targeted grammar items, “it can arouse interest, stimulate interaction and help them to
understand places, people and events as well as simplify situations which would otherwise be
abstract and difficult to explain in words'' (p.250). They are informed on which tenses to use given
the situations. Apart from that, through language games, learners have a greater autonomy in
learning grammar (Baharudin & Yunus, 2018) as they are able to make sensible connection of the
knowledge and its usage, also fit in Butler’ (2017) statement on game-like materials “that allow
individualised learning and encourage autonomy in order to cater to the genuine interests of
learners” (p.735).
Interestingly, based on a study on Iranian EFL teachers’ beliefs on grammar teaching,
Alijanian (2012) says:
the experienced teachers were aware of the fact that grammar classes are boring and the
need for them to use a variety of teaching styles and extra activities to keep the learners
interested and motivated through working out tasks and grammar games (p.418)
Whereas Nedomova (2007, as cited in Adeng & Shah, 2012) agrees that “it makes the lesson more
attractive and protect them from being bored” (p. 575). Teenage ESL learners are at the age where
they are keen and eager to play and explore thus, attracting them to focus and involve actively in
the grammar games throughout the lesson. Similarly, Mubaslat (2011/2012) expresses that “games
ought to be at the heart of teaching foreign languages and that games should be used at all stages
of lesson” (p.4). It is, therefore, appropriate to conclude that using interactive games to teach
grammar helps to stimulate learners ' interests. In fact, this is agreed by Godwin-Jones (2014) that
“the strong motivational factors involved, game playing can be a powerful agent for learner
autonomy, a potential resource for long-term language maintenance, and an entry-point for gaining
interest in learning new languages” (p.11). Learners who are interested in learning will be
emotionally involved in the lesson and fully appreciate it. In the long run, this element helps
learners to understand and remember the lesson especially the targeted grammar items. Learning
through language games is an enjoyable retreat from a boring grammar lesson for ESL teachers
who are looking for ways to keep learners interested and motivated in acquiring the English skills
(Thirusanku & Yunus, 2014) since the innovative materials will appeal to them (Briewin et al.,
2013; Mubaslat, 2011/2012).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

213

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

2.2 Language Games To Develop Fluency
Developing ESL learners’ fluency in the target language, English is a highlight to a successful
language lesson. Learning grammar provides learners with proper and deeper understanding of the
English language especially when it is learned unconsciously through practices (Chambers &
Yunus, 2017). Equally, ESL learners must use the language actively through communication with
others in order to progress in a game (Godwin-Jones 2014; Chambers & Yunus, 2017; Adeng &
Shah, 2012) providing a room for improvement in fluency and proficiency. Godwin-Jones (2014)
further explains that “learners are using language in real and meaningful ways to accomplish a task
through games” and it is great that “they are exposed to cultural and linguistic knowledge that they
are unlikely to have encountered in a textbook or in the classroom” (p.10). A research conducted
by Chambers & Yunus (2017) has found out that Wheel of Grammar (WOG) has helped Form
Five learners from a school in Sarawak to construct simple sentences and apply correct basic rules
of Subject-Verb Agreement (SVA). Equally, Adeng & Shah (2012) from their research on the use
of games in teaching grammar has resulted in the revelation that “grammar games encourage,
entertain and promote fluency” (p.28). It is opposed to traditional language learning that stresses
grammar drill and limits the overall practice of using the English language through interaction.
Language games also allow ESL learners to work with partners and in groups, giving them
more opportunities to use the language themselves (Willis & Willis, 2013) and progressively
improving fluency. A clear example of a game is role-playing which needs learners to be creative
and spontaneous. In addition, ESL learners experiment, explore and cooperate through playing
games (Mubaslat, 2011/2012). They develop their language skills by interacting with others and
learning from mistakes. Based on these studies, it implies that language games which constitute of
learner-centredness and 21st-century teaching and learning styles, focusing on learners'
independent learning are highly recommended to replace the traditional teaching method as to
promote and develop ESL learners' fluency (Adeng & Shah, 2012) in using the target language.
Learners are able to lessen anxiety, build self-confidence and portray positive emotions and
behaviours as they are unafraid of using the target language interactively (Adeng & Shah, 2012).
2.3 Language Games To Motivate Learners
Motivation needs to be instilled for ESL learners to have the drive to learn the grammar of a
second language or a foreign language. Briewin et al. (2013) claim that some learners “are
motivated because they know the importance of grammar in constructing sentences” (p.252).
Therefore, most of the time, they are aware of the needs to improve their grammar abilities to be
fluent in English, however not necessarily prepared to directly learn the rules. As teaching and
learning strategies are among factors that influence learners' perseverance to learn grammar,
language games as TBLT will fit in the scenario perfectly. The motivating elements in language
games can be connected with Flow Theory that is a motivational theory developed by Mihaly
Csikszentmihaly in 1975 (Oppland, 2016). It refers to a mental state experienced when doing
challenging activities in a comfortable zone between boredom and anxiety, as well as find pleasure
while completing the task, ensuring the activity is not too difficult or easy to avoid frustration and
boredom (Franciosi, 2011). When learners are learning using language games, the Flow Theory is
established because they receive a motivation boost to concentrate on finishing the games. As
those games are based on particular grammar aspects, learners would learn to solve the grammar
problems in order to complete the games and compete with others. The hands-on learning will not
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

214

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

only enable them to explore and delve into the rules but also, act as a motivation to understand the
language better (Chambers & Yunus, 2017) and improve language skills (Chik, 2012). In other
words, they are given the platform to be critical and active when learning English (Baharudin &
Yunus, 2018).
Adeng & Shah (2012) also agree that “games are motivating and entertaining way of teaching
grammar” (p.28) and “learners are entertained and get involved in acquiring it” (Thekes, 2011,
p.2). It consists of activities that challenge learners yet still can be accomplished which involve
optimal emotional, motivational experiences and learning (Oppland, 2016). To further explain, the
Flow Theory addresses how one experiences educational contexts and how it influences learning
and motivation (Oppland, 2016). Hence, the extrinsic and intrinsic motivations gained by learners
participating in language games are the reasons language games would work very well in grammar
lessons which is supported by Godwin-Jones (2014) that “self-generated and self-directed
discovery can further the kind of intrinsic motivation that commits users to learn more” (p.13).
Namely, as games enhance classroom environment, it motivates learners who play certain games
to learn, more than learners who use traditional learning methods (Mubaslat, 2011/2012). It
diminishes the fear of learning a grammar form of another language, of which ESL learners
become less anxious when games are employed (Franciosi, 2011). Baharudin & Yunus (2018)
assert that “games promote an independent learning among the learners consequently, motivating
them to be more confident in learning” (p.107) as they are in charge of the situations and not vice
versa. Besides, participation, cooperation and interaction with others are among the sole reasons
for successful language learning through games (Adeng & Shah, 2012) and group tasks (Savignon,
2017).
3. Discussion
The paper explores the teaching and learning of grammar using language games by
highlighting the advantages and related past studies on learners’ fluency, interest and motivation.
The main concern for ESL learners’ lack of interest, fluency and motivation is due to difficult,
boring and traditional methods of learning grammar. Hence, this paper points the need to expose
learners to the use of language games; both digital and non-digital or physical games when learning
grammar. Although, there have been debates comparing the effectiveness of traditional grammar
learning and the ones using games. It draws a conclusion that language games are an effective and
advantageous option when learners are not cooperative or interested in grammar lessons because
games create engagement, connection and in-context learning. It also saves more time as learners
are directly exposed to using grammar in context and developing fluency in creating sentences.
Language games are fun (Adeng & Shah, 2012) and learners are motivated to learn grammar
whenever fun and exciting elements are included (Mihaly Csikszentmihaly, 1975 in Oppland,
2016). Gradually, ESL learners are able to improve their grammar fluency as they practise through
playing games (Briewin et al., 2013).
4. Conclusion
This paper has shown that teachers’ used of language games as an approach to enhance ESL
learners’ grammar understanding and acquisition as it directly develops their interest, fluency and
motivation in the learning process. Mastering grammar is important to digital generations today as
it shows competency and is useful in daily interaction with people. Similarly, the proficiency in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

215

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

using grammar in context builds better confidence. Hence, grammar should not be taught or learnt
in isolation but through meaningful methods where ESL learners can relate easily to its usage. Last
but not least, it is believed that language games will help educators to create fun learning materials
to arouse learners’ interest, fluency and motivation as well as to suit their proficiency level and
learning styles. It definitely makes learning grammar easier and more relatable for ESL learners.
About the authors:
Nur Syafiqah Yaccob is a teacher in Malaysia and is currently pursuing her Master in TESL in
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. She previously completed her Degree in TESL in
Canterbury Christ Church University (CCCU), United Kingdom (a twinning program with
the International Teacher Trainees Institute).
Dr. Melor Md Yunus is an Associate Professor and Deputy Dean of Research and Innovation at
the Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. She is best known for establishing the
integration of ICT in teaching and learning ESL research. She is active in scholarly journal writing
and publishing and has currently published more than 150 papers in various Citation-Indexed
journals particularly SCOPUS.

Reference
Adeng, L. A. & Shah, P. M. (2012). Teachers beliefs and attitudes toward the use of language
games in teaching grammar to young learners. Proceedings: International Seminar on
Educational Comparative in Competency Based Curriculum between Indonesia and
Malaysia, 572-582.
Alijanian, E. (2012). An investigation of Iranian EFL teachers’ beliefs about grammar.
Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences 3(3), 415-420. Retrieved May 13, 2018 from
10.5901/mjss.2012.v3n3p415
Baharudin, N. A. A. & Yunus, M. M. (2018). GRAMMODO: a platform in learning
grammar among ESL learners in Malaysia. Innovation for Sustainable Growth,
106-108. Langkawi: International Invention and Innovative Competition (InIIC).
Briewin, M., Naidu, B. & Embi, M. A. (2013). Learners of English as foreign language preference
for grammar strategies in learning grammar. International Journal of English and
Literature 4(5): 249-253.
Butler, Y. G. (2017). Motivational elements of digital instructional games: a study of young L2
learners’ games designs. SAGE Journals, 21(6), 735-750. Retrieved May 13, 2018 from
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168816683560
Chambers, G. J. & Yunus, M. M. (2017). Enhancing learners’ sentence constructionvia ‘Wheel of
Grammar’. Pertanika Journal of Social Sciences & Humanities, 25(4),1641-1650.
Chik, A. (2012). Digital gameplay for autonomous foreign language learning: gamers’ and
language teachers’ perspectives. In: Reinders H. (Eds.). Digital Games in Language
Learning and Teaching, 95-114. Palgrave Macmillan: London. Retrieved May 13, 2018
from http://doi.org/10.1057/9781137005267_6
Franciosi, S. J. (2011). A comparison of computer games and language learning task
design
using Flow Theory. CALL-EJ, 12(1), 11-25.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

216

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Language Games in Teaching and Learning English Grammar

Yaccob & Yunus

Godwin-Jones, R. (2014). Games in language learning: opportunities and challenges.
Language Learning & Technology 18(2), 9-19. Retrieved from
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/emerging.pdf
Goodman, Y. M. & Goodman, K. S. (2014). Making sense of learners making sense of written
language: The selected works of Kenneth S. Goodman and Yetta M.Goodman. USA:
Routledge.
Hall, G. (2017). Exploring English language teaching: language in action. UK: Routledge.
Krashen, S. D. (1988). Second language acquisition and second language learning.USA:
Prentice-Hall International.
Mubaslat, M. M. (2011/2012). The effect of using educational games on students' achievement
in the English language for the primary stage. Amman-Jordan.
Retrieved June 13,
2018 from https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED529467.pdf
Meng, L. J. (2014). Applied learning programme (ALP): a possible enactment of achieving
authentic learning in Singapore schools. Retrieved August 15, 2018from
http://www.iaea.info/documents/paper_371f25129.pdf
Ngoc, K. M. & Iwashita, N. (2012). A comparison of learners’ and teachers’ attitudes towards
communicative language teaching at two universities in Vietnam. University of Sydney
Papers in TESOL 7, 25-49.
Oppland, M. (2016). Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi: all about flow & positive psychology. Positive
Psychology Program. Retrieved May 13, 2018 from
https://positivepsychologyprogram.com/mihaly-csikszentmihalyi-father-of-flow/
Rahman, A. A. I. A. & Bakar, N. A. (2018). Identifying the varieties of English language
in
videogames. Persada2018. Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia: Fakulti Sains Sosial &
Kemanusiaan,.
Richards, J. C. & Rodgers, T. S. (2014). Approaches and methods in language teaching. UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Savignon, S. J. (2017). Communicative competence. The TESOL Encyclopedia of English
Language Teaching. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Retrieved January 12, 2018 from doi:
10.1002/9781118784235.eelt0047
Taheri, M. (2014). The effect of using language games on vocabulary retention of Iranian
elementary EFL learners. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, 5(3), 554-549.
Retrieved May 17, 2018 from doi:10.4304/jltr.5.3.544-549
Thekes, J. I. (2011). Grammar games with students’ total physical involvement. International
House Journal in Education and Development 33. Retrieved July 13, 2018from
http://ihjournal.com
Thirusanku, J. & Yunus, M. M. (2014.) Status of English in Malaysia. Asian Social
Science, 10(14). Retrieved July 13, 2018 from
http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ass.v10n14p254
Willis, J. & Willis, D. (2013). Doing task-based teaching - Oxford handbooks for language
teachers. UK: Oxford University Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

217

