AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.3

Pp.37-50

An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones: The case of Darfur
region in Sudan

Holi Ibrahim Holi Ali
Dept. of English Language & Literature, Rustaq College of Education, Oman
Awad Alhassan
Department of Languages & Translation, Dhofar University, Oman
Ishaq Burma
UNAMID, Nyla, Darfur, Sudan
Abstract
The study is aimed to investigate and shed light on some of the challenges encountered by local
interpreters and language assistants working for UN peace-keeping missions, operating in conflict
zones, namely in Darfur region, western Sudan. The study addresses the following research
questions: what are the linguistic, social-cultural, mistrust and communication-related barriers that
are encountered by interpreters and language assistants in conflict zones, how do they cope with
these challenges, and what could be done to train them to handle such challenges and difficulties.
The study adopted a qualitative methodology with semi-structured interviews being the main
method of data collection. Twenty participants agreed to voluntarily take part in the investigation
by allowing face-to-face interviews. Interview data was transcribed, coded and analyzed
thematically. The results of data analysis showed that participants faced a range of challenges that
negatively affected their job. They reported difficulties understanding and dealing with some social
and cultural issues specific to the region. They also reported some serious life-threatening incidents
ranging from physical and verbal attacks. For example, interpreters encountered hostilities from
their fellow citizens accusing them of siding with enemy parties involved in the conflicts.
Additionally, communication barriers were reported by participants as being the most salient
challenge they experienced even when they interpreted accurately, as they would still encounter
communication breakdowns caused by the inherent differences in the indigenous languages and
varieties in addition to some cultural barriers. The paper offers some insights and implications for
the conflict zones’ interpreters’ training and professional development.
Keywords: challenges, conflict zones, interpreter training, professional development, Sudan
Cites as: Ali, H. I. H., Alhassan, A.m & Burma, I. (2019). An investigation into the
interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones: The case of Darfur region in Sudan. Arab World
English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 37-50.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.3
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

37

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

1. Introduction
There is a paucity in studies addressing the issues of interpreting in conflict zones. Baker (2010)
highlights the infancy of the research in this area calling for more research to be conducted. Indeed,
interpreting in conflict zones is an under-researched area, and to the best of our knowledge, there
have been no studies on this topic in the region in general and in Sudan in particular. Interpreting
in the conflict zones is a complicated and multi-faceted task involving a range of risks, challenges
and difficulties. Interpreters often encounter difficult situations where they need a range of skills
and specific training to deal with such situations. For example, remaining impartial is the most
difficult barrier that an interpreter operating in conflict zones would face. Locally recruited
interpreters are the key figures in conflict zones as they also function as cultural informants through
giving advice on how to behave in certain situations, especially when religion and other sensitive
cultural issues are involved in the interpreting process. Interpreters and translators working in
conflict and war zones and very sensitive areas usually experience a number of risks and serious
life-threatening incidents while going about their job. For example, they encounter hostilities from
their fellow citizens amounting to fatalities in some extreme cases due to the job they handle. Being
an interpreter or translator requires many professional, ethical and communication skills. One of
the main tasks of the interpreter is to create new spaces for interaction between the two parties,
whose languages and cultures are totally different, arrange meetings and offer linguistic mediation
and assistance. These skills, tasks and requirements seem particularly indispensable for interpreters
operating in war and conflict zones. Focusing on the Sundanese Darfur region, the overarching
aim of this study is to investigate the challenges and barriers encountered by interpreters and
language assistants operating in the conflict and war zones. Given the scarcity of research in this
area and the lack of and need for specific training for interpreters operating in conflict zones, the
study attempts to provide insights and implications that could inform the design, development and
delivery of training programmes for conflict zone interpreters and language mediators.
2. Contextual background
Darfur is a vast area situated in the western part of the Republic of the Sudan. The region has
witnessed an armed and brutal conflict and violence involving the central government in Khartoum
and a number of armed factions from the region who revolted against the central government,
making several demands. The conflict escalated dramatically in 2003, which later led to an
international community intervention. The UN Security Council issued resolution number 1769
on 31st July 2007 to bring stability and peace to the war-torn region of Darfur. The resolution led
to the formation of the United Nations and the African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) with
the purpose of providing humanitarian assistance, peace-making and peace-keeping. The core
mandate of UNAMID is the protection of civilians, contributing to security for humanitarian
assistance, monitoring and verifying implementation of agreements, assisting an inclusive political
process, contributing to the promotion of human rights and the rule of law, as well as monitoring
and reporting on the situation along the borders with Chad and the Central African Republic. The
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

38

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

mission is formed of civil international personnel and military personnel. English is used as the
official language of communication among the members of the mission.
Darfur is one of the biggest geographical regions in the country with an area of about
493,180km2 and a population of approximately nine million.
The region is inhabited by a diverse range of ethnic groups, speaking a range of
indigenous languages, along with Arabic spoken as the predominate language of communication
(Lingua Franca) among these groups. These groups are broadly divided into two main divisions:
Arab and non-Arab ethnic groups. UNAMID has recruited national and local interpreters and
language assistants to facilitate their mission in the region. The main role of interpreters is to
facilitate communication between the multiple parties involved in the conflict. Although most of
these interpreters and language mediators are professionally qualified, they would still encounter
a range of cultural, linguistic and social challenges which hinder them performing their role
effectively. The aim of this backdrop is to contextualize the study and to generally help readers
understand and interpret the study findings and implications.
3. Theoretical background
This section offers a brief review of the key challenges reported in the literature about interpreting
within the conflict zones. The purpose of this background is to contextualize the current study
within the existing literature and to help in understanding and interpreting its findings. Although
interpreting in conflict zones has played a vital role in the history of war, there is, however, a
scarcity in research on translators and interpreters operating in conflict zones (Baker, 2010).
Having surveyed the relevant literature, it was found that there is still a paucity in research on this
area, particularly in the context of the present study. The challenges encountered by interpreters in
conflict zones vary from linguistic, cross-cultural, cognitive, training-related and some other
extralinguistic-related challenges. Interpreting as a profession is often associated with a range of
challenges and difficulties regardless of whether it is conducted within conflict or non-conflict
zones. There are a number of challenges reported in the literature (e.g., Amich, 2013; Baker, 2010;
Bello, 2014; Dragovic-Drouet, 2007; Moser-Mercer et al., 2014; Valero-Garcés, 2003).
Moreover, the challenges encountered in the field of interpreting can broadly be classified
into three categories: language and culture-related challenges, role-related challenges, and
cognitive and emotional challenges. Concerning role-related challenges where interpreters are
unable to resolve contradictions between the perceived needs of the interlocutors, and what they
have understood from what is being said. They are unsure how to address contradictions between
the humanitarian principles governing the organization they work for and their own understanding
and perception of the expected role (Moser-Mercer et al., 2014).
In contrast, interpreters and translators working in conflict zones operate in difficult
conditions which inevitably has an impact on their role, the quality of their work, their experience
of the war and how they are viewed by the conflicting parties (Baker, 2010). Translators and
interpreters recruited locally and ethnically who belong to the ‘enemy’ group are generally not
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

39

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

viewed by the other parties as trustworthy and reliable interlocutors (Baker, 2010, p. 210). The
reason for distrusting the locally hired interpreters who belong to the ‘enemy’ community is
because of their exposure to the public narratives which disfavour and depict them negatively.
Moreover, mistrust of translators and interpreters in the conflict zones is often based on their
ethnicity. The lack of mistrust in native wartime interpreters, including those who belong to the
same ethnic group as the enemy, means their activities need to be closely watched and they should
not be allowed to work independently. Some of the translators and interpreters who operate in the
conflict zones also engage in a multitude of vital other tasks that have little to do with the type of
linguistic mediation which they are hired for (Baker, 2010).
Furthermore, culture plays a significant role in interpreting as well as the consideration of
other different attitudes within the society and its institutions (Valero-Garcés, 2003). Interpreters
who work within community settings with participants of diverse cultural backgrounds may
encounter challenges in conveying the target messages accurately due to cross-cultural differences.
These cross-cultural differences range from pragmalinguistic and sociopragmatic differences
which go beyond the utterances (Hale, 2014). Cross-linguistic and cross-cultural conflict zone
interpreters are often seen as an important strategic resource (Guo, 2015). Valero-Garcés (2003)
mentions a range of difficulties encountered by linguistic and interlinguistic mediators such as
problems in understanding dialects and specific accents. Moreover, there are also problems in
understanding technical and semi-technical words when working with medical doctors and
international forces. Additionally, interpreters faced some other extralinguistic and emotional
challenges such as feeling uncomfortable with the topic of conversation; positionality problems
such as which position to adopt when; being compliant with the clients or the providers; or
remaining neutral and impartial. In addition, lack of familiarity with the context in which they
operate and its people with whom they were working. Indeed, interpreters operating in high-risk
environments are extremely vulnerable and require special protection. This vulnerability is not
only due to risks and dangers involved but it is also due to the ambiguous positions they assume
in such dichotomized conflict environments (Bello, 2014).
Although interpreting has become highly professionalized from the second half of the
twentieth century, it has still, however, remained unregulated job in the conflict zones and often
pursued by untrained interpreters (Ruiz, 2016). Finding trained interpreters who are able to speak
and understand indigenous languages in conflict zones is sometimes extremely difficult, and the
solution is usually hiring civilians in the deployment territories (Amich, 2013). This kind of
recruitment can result in language services mediated by local interpreters which can lead to divided
loyalties (Dragovic-Drouet, 2007). These interpreters are often recruited not because they have
been trained as translators or interpreters, but because they know the local languages/dialects as
well as English, which is the dominant language in international relief operations (Amich, 2013).
Therefore, having untrained interpreters is currently a sensitive topic.
Yet, another challenge peculiar to interpreters in conflict zones, is the lack of training in
essential professional skills, professional ethics, crisis management skills and adequate cultural
awareness to perform their tasks adequately. Interpreters and translators need to be impartial and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

40

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

invisible to effectively function in the conflict settings. Additionally, interpreters are expected to
have multi-lingual communication and professional skills on the ground to help provide
humanitarian assistance, peace-making and peace-building (Amich, 2013). Interpreters without
training cannot meet the needs of multi-lingual communication scenarios and parties (MoserMercer et al., 2014).
Moreover, language and cultural competence in at least two languages constitute the
bedrock of good interpretation. Interpreters must be able to analyze the communication scenarios,
identify the intention of the parties and formulate statements without adding or subtracting
anything, unless to bridge a cultural gap and to transfer the messages more successfully. The
professional ethics of translators and interpreters require them to adhere to strict confidentiality of
what they are interpreting. Breaching any of the principles of professional ethics has the potential
of creating mistrust (Baker & Maier, 2011; Moser-Mercer et al., 2014). One of the important things
which must be taken into consideration when designing translator and interpreter training
programmes is the emphasis on accountability which is the key area of work in the professional
world (Baker & Maier, 2011). To conclude, these challenges do not predominately exist in conflict
zones only but some of them can be encountered within non-conflict zones due to the nature of the
interpreting profession.
4. Methodology
The aim of this study is to investigate the barriers and challenges experienced by interpreters in
conflict zones, namely, in the Darfur region in Sudan. The study seeks to answer the following
questions: What are the linguistic, social-cultural, mistrust and communication-related barriers that
are encountered by these interpreters and language assistants in these areas? How did they cope
with these challenges, and what could be done to help them to train to cope with and handle such
challenges and difficulties?
The study adopts a qualitative methodology with semi-structured interviews being as the
principal method of data collection. Twenty interpreters and language mediators took part in the
investigation. All of them are Sudanese nationals with substantial interpreting and translation
experience. The purpose is to identify the issues and challenges from the perspectives of the
participants and to understand the meanings and their lived experiences regarding such barriers
and challenges within the context in which they operate (Mason, 2002). The study attempts to
investigate the participants’ views and experiences to enable the researchers to gain a thorough
understanding of participants’ views, perspectives and experiences in a natural context (Kvale,
1996). The study also attempts to make a significant contribution to the research on interpreting in
conflict zones. The rationale for choosing this sample is simply for practical reasons related to the
difficulties in accessing the context as well as the limited number of the available interpreters in
the context in question. The interview schedule consists of questions ranging from questions on
interpreting challenges, coping strategies, memorable and funny experiences, to what could be
done to help interpreters in the conflict zones to carry out tasks and duties more successfully.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

41

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

The data was coded and analyzed thematically and inductively using the salient themes
which were guided by the study’s prior research questions and objectives (Miles & Huberman,
1994). One of the researchers was immersed in the setting of the study and he was able to have
access to conduct the interviews with the study participants.
5. Results and discussion
In this section, the main results will be reported based on the study research questions. The most
salient themes resulting from the coding of the data will be reported and the findings will be
discussed and connected with the findings of the relevant studies in the literature.
5.1 Mistrust and linguistic challenges
Participants reported the challenge of being mistrusted by some parties in the conflict:
The first challenge in translation field in conflict zones is the absence of trust
from the conflicting parties, that is to say the translator faces accusations of
supporting another party of the conflict.
In addition to mistrust, linguistic challenges were also reported as another challenge:
We are mainly recruited to translate from Arabic to English and vice versa.
However, in Darfur, there are many local dialects that encounter the translator
even in one language (Arabic). Arab nomadic tribes speak different forms of
Arabic and African tribes have their own local languages that is apart from Arabic
and we [interpreters] need to deal with and accommodate all these languages and
varieties.
Along the same line, the linguistic challenges in turn seem to cause communication barriers as
echoed by one of the interpreters: “Sometimes people cannot express themselves clearly and that
may result in communication breakdowns”.
Another interpreter stated:
Well, actually there are cultural and linguistic barriers that have to do with the
local tribes together with dialects and local languages. The style of the language
used by people. Another difficulty is the English dialects used by foreigners who
are coming from different cultural and linguistic backgrounds can be a barrier.
One of the challenges that I had encountered with interpreting in conflict zones
is that I feel there is no security. In non-conflict zones you feel safe, secure and
calm.
Echoing Baker’s (2010) study, it is clear from the above quotes that interpreters face a number of
challenges and difficulties with regard to the issue of trust when operating in conflict zones. This
kind of mistrust is likely to make them feel uncomfortable while doing their job and hence
negatively affect their performance and professional identities.
The failure to understand the cultural and linguistic variations in the region could result in
dissatisfaction with the quality of the interpreting provided:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

42

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

The challenges that I faced were the violent and emotional reactions from the
audience when they were not satisfied with my interpreting, claiming that I did
not convey the message clearly.
These findings suggest that interpreters and language assistants faced both severe violence and
unexpected emotional reactions from both the conflict parties when completing their interpreting
task. It was noticeable that whenever one of the two parties was not satisfied with what was being
conveyed, they would react immediately against the interpreter and this reaction could take any
form of violence or verbal abuse.
Evidence from participants suggests that the cultural barriers are considered one of the
salient challenges encountered by interpreters and language assistants working in Darfur region.
As the tribes have their own dialects and languages which are not always understandable to the
interpreters who have no background information on these ethnic groups and their languages, it
can be noted from the extracts that the kind of English dialects and accents used by foreign troops
who come from diverse countries and backgrounds was also a challenge for interpreters in
understanding them. Evidence from data shows that the lack of safety and security which
interpreters experienced was a significant challenge for them. The situation made it even more
difficult for them to do their job in a safe and friendly environment.
Findings on interpreters’ linguistic barriers in conflict zones also resonate with the findings
of some previous studies (e.g., Bello, 2014; Valero-Garcés, 2003) in that it is not uncommon to
find problems with understanding the local dialects spoken by different groups who inhabit the
conflict areas. In an interesting contrast with the previous studies, in the case of the present study,
although all the interpreters in the conflict zone are Sudanese, they still find it difficult to
understand and communicate with local people as the vast majority of them are from non-Arab
backgrounds and they speak hybrid and simplified forms of Arabic, which are full of jargon and
local vernaculars that interpreters need to master and accommodate.
Furthermore, participants also reported that the challenge of mistrust can sometimes be
triggered by the interpreters’ ethnic and social class affiliation. Interpreters are repeatedly accused
of being spies for one of the conflicting parties of the region – either the government or military
groups – depending on their appearance and ethnicity. They are crudely labelled according to their
colour or complexion. Light-skinned interpreters are likely to be labelled “Janjaweed”, one of the
conflicting groups who mostly support the government. Dark-skinned interpreters are likely to be
labelled as “Torabora”, who mostly considered as pro-rebelling armed groups:
One of the challenges is the way that conflicting parties treat the interpreters. They look at
them as spies to each other. In other words, every party accuses you as working for the
other side. In Darfur as an interpreter you are treated according to your colour of your
complexion. If you are a light-skinned person, you are likely to be considered and labelled
as “Janjaweed” government militants or if you are dark-skinned you will be considered as
“Torabora” which is mostly the rebel supporting group. For example, the first day for me
in Darfur in my first interpreting session, one of the rebel leaders did not allow me to
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

43

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

interpret requesting the Head of UNAMID “don’t allow this light-skinned guy to do the
interpreting”.
Mistrusting and targeting interpreters based on their ethnicity is evident in the extract
below. This clearly suggests that interpreters’ affiliation to ethnic groups and tribes can
constitute a risk for them if they become identified by the two conflicting parties. What
can be inferred here is that if interpreters disclose their identity, ethnic group or tribe, they
are likely to put themselves in danger and at risk and they may even lose their lives:
One of the challenges that I will never forget was that during a tribe conflict in
the region unfortunately my tribe was one of those involved in that conflict, I had
to translate the meeting in the UNAMID office mission leader and a head of other
tribe, they told the mission officer that I am from their enemy tribe and that they
did not want me to interpret the meeting. The argument caused the meeting to be
delayed for more than one hour as the mission leader insisted that no one else
would do the interpreting but me.
Along the same line, participants also reported concerns when encountered by security
forces enquiring about their identities and roles:
It was a challenge for me when travelling with the UNAMID teams and convoys
visiting places and camps across the region. We would often get interrupted by
security forces and most often they would check on us and ask questions and the
like. The atmosphere in most cases was tense.
These findings echo Baker’s (2010) findings in that interpreters in conflict zones could encounter
challenges due to their ethnic backgrounds and the association with some parties of the conflict.
The findings clearly suggest the need for incorporation of a specific kind of training and guidelines
to be used and followed by both interpreters and interpreters’ employers in conflict zones where
ethnic tension is high and there is a lot at stake.
5.2 Interpreting in conflict zones as a high-risk career
Participants reported safety and security concerns and hazards often associated with the
interpreters’ operations in conflict zones. These concerns were reported to have a potentially
negative impact on the interpreters’ professional work as well as their own lives due to the lifethreatening incidents they are exposed to.
An interpreter stated:
The work environment in conflict zones has negative consequences upon interpreters’ and
translators’ output. Whereas, non-conflict zones comparatively far better – but most of the
time there are no computers or designated offices for the interpreters. Being under the
supervision of the police or military compartments is a great problem because of the
different mentality of both the civilian and military uniformed personnel. We encountered
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

44

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

technical and psychological barriers but serving as an interpreter or language assistant or
even translator in conflict zones is an extraordinary career choice as it is not an easy job as
we work in a high-risk environment. It was difficult sometimes to facilitate interaction
between parties while you are vulnerable to attacks. Translators, language assistants and
interpreters in conflict zones place their lives at risk and there are many instances where
some of them were kidnapped, threatened and tortured and even killed.
This clearly illustrates how dangerous interpreting in the conflict zones is. It is quite evident that
interpreters expose themselves to risks such as kidnapping, torture and even losing their lives due
to the risk associated with such demanding, challenging and risky job. This suggests that
interpreters in the war and conflict zones need special kind of training that can enable them to carry
out their tasks and responsibilities more effectively and professionally due to the specific
challenges that their job presents to them. These findings, unsurprisingly, resonate with the
findings reported by Bello’s (2014) study in that interpreters’ lives are at increased risk when
operating in conflict zones. Interpreters in the present study, however, experienced unique kinds
of threats due to the different nature and the multiple parties involved in the conflict, which makes
it particularly different to the other types of conflict reported in previous studies, including Bello’s
study which predominantly reported on conflicts characterized by dichotomous conflict
environments.
Furthermore, interpreters are sometimes reportedly faced with direct risks and lifethreatening incidents:
I remember I was working as language assistant with the UNAMID in Darfur back in 2005
and one day we were patrolling some places and towns to meet and interact with the
conflict’s internally displaced people. As soon as we went to some camps, we saw
everybody there holding traditional weapons such as stones, sticks and hammers, knives,
swords, spears, etc. We saw them running towards us. But our commander gave
instructions to soldiers to drive back quickly and he contacted the police to know the
reason. The answer was that people were targeting the UNAMID personnel believing that
they brokered an unfair agreement mediated by a number of African leaders and the
displaced people were not happy with the outcome of that agreement.
This suggests the dissatisfaction expressed by some of the local people with some agreements
reached to end the conflict and they expressed their anger through attacking the international troops
as well as their local assistants, including interpreters. This is a clear life-threatening incident that
interpreters can experience in conflict zones. They could have been murdered if they had not had
the chance to escape.
5.3 Lack of cultural awareness
Furthermore, participants reported the lack of cultural awareness about the Darfur region and its
ethnic groups, social fabric and tribes as a challenge for interpreters working in the region.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

45

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

Tribalism was one of the most dominant phenomena in that particular region. The region is
inhabited by a diverse range of ethnic groups and they have been in conflict with each other for a
long time. This conflict seems to have negatively impacted the interpreting process and sometimes
interpreters are accused of being unfair and dishonest when interpreting between parties. This kind
of accusation may lead to fatal consequences where interpreters can be subjected to torture, verbal
abuse and even death in some extreme cases:
The lack of cultural awareness, tribalism and the local authorities in terms of their abuses.
In non-conflict zones the situation is completely different where the interpreters feel calm
and confident which has a positive reflection on the translation process and the quality of
the output.
In a similar vein, some interpreters reported difficulties understanding culture-specific proverbs
and sayings:
I remember a case in which I was involved in an oral interpretation between UN personnel
and Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) where the UN personnel was asking the IDPs if
they could voluntarily return to their places of origin. One IDP replied with a simple
proverb (You couldn’t put a sandal on donkey’s back when it sees the wolf). I have faced
so many challenges and difficulties due to the fact that I am working with two conflicting
parties and each one wanting me to convey his message the way they wished.
What can be inferred from the above quote is that interpreters experienced cultural barriers in
understanding and translating some of the cultural-specific proverbs such as “You couldn’t put a
sandal on donkey’s back when it sees the wolf”. Moreover, the conflicting parties put pressure on
interpreters to convey their messages in the way they liked which is impossible at some points in
time. Interpreters working in conflict zones encounter a number of challenges which can be
cultural, social, linguistic, political, etc.
These findings corroborate Valero-Garcés’ (2003) findings in that cultural awareness of
the interpreters in conflict zones plays an essential role in effective interpreting and thus the lack
of such awareness, as we have seen in the findings of the present study, could cause challenges to
interpreters. Such findings suggest that any training intended for interpreters working in conflict
zones should attend to these cultural issues. Moreover, interpreters are sometimes faced with
increased difficulties in conveying meaning due to the nature of the technicality of register or the
jargon being used. For example, participants reported challenges when mediating between medical
doctors and local medical care seekers in conflict zones:
I started my work as interpreter in 2005 in “X Camp” for refugees and other refugee
camps in Darfur. My interpreting work was mostly in the medical field and I worked as
a language mediator between the medical doctors and refugees. The most obvious
challenge was to interpret between the people being affected by wars and a doctor who
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

46

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

needed an answer for his questions. Consequently, I had to read on sociology and
psychology in order to convey people’s messages who were psychologically affected.
Interpreting discipline-specific terminologies seems to cause significant challenges due to the high
technicality of terms, conventions and genres of certain disciplines. The findings suggest that
conflict zones’ interpreters encountered exceptional difficulties when mediating between medical
doctors and patients who are psychologically affected and traumatized by wars and conflicts. Such
situations are likely to create highly emotional and complicated atmosphere with potential negative
implications on the quality and the outcomes of interpreting.
5.4 Coping strategies
Participants reported a range of coping strategies that they would use to survive and perform their
job effectively. They employ a number of coping strategies according to the type and nature of the
barriers they experience. For example, concerning cultural challenges, they seek induction and
advice from colleagues and other people from the local areas where they operate:
There were unknown cultural and linguistic barriers I encounter; I usually depend on
those who are around the areas where interpreting is going to try and overcome them. To
deal with such challenges, I had induction courses related to certain environments,
whether cultural background or security related to avoid catastrophes. I searched for more
consultations with my colleagues and others in the mission. To do your best to cope with
the barriers and familiarise myself with the elements of that given culture.
I did my best to be close to the community and it did not take long to be familiar with
these barriers. I think effective induction and briefing could save the day. In our
organization we have Arabic speakers who do not understand the local Arabic which
means that I have to interpret from Arabic into formal and standard Arabic. I use the
community itself to help with some areas, I learn from my previous experience and fight
for the best.
This suggests the importance of having an induction or training prior to interpreting assignment.
It is clear that asking for advice from locals and colleagues to help deal with cultural and linguistic
difficulties seems to be an important survival strategy used by interpreters in conflict zones.
Indeed, being close to the local community could also help interpreters to immerse themselves into
the community and understand them in a better way. Interestingly, the findings suggest that not all
Arabic speakers can understand the dialectal Arabic that exists in some parts of Darfur due to the
variations between Arabic dialects. This in turn suggests that the mastering of standard Arabic
alone by interpreters is not enough to effectively interpret in conflict zones. As an interpreter it is
important to understand the local dialects in order to interpret effectively and efficiently.
Developing good listening and comprehension skills was also reported among the coping
strategies:
The most important thing is to develop your listening skills to understand both parties
carefully in order to create conducive atmosphere of communication. This needs good
translation techniques and awareness. You should listen carefully to the parties of
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
47
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

communication and understand the messages perfectly before the translation process, i.e.
don’t translate unless you make sure that you understood the message.
It is noticeable that interpreters’ listening skills are crucial in doing the job successfully.
Developing listening and comprehension skills would be the most successful factors in helping the
translation and interpreting processes. Limited understanding of the messages of the two parties
can drastically affect the quality of interpreting.
5.5 Supporting interpreters in the conflict zones
When asked about what can be done to help them operate effectively in the conflict zones,
participants reported a range of potential training needs and requirements:
The interpreters/translators should be patient, ambitious and hard-working in order to
familiarize themselves with the work atmosphere. Training, raising cultural awareness
and exposing yourself to similar situations. What could be done to overcome such
challenges is good training related to how to handle these barriers and challenges and
continuing learning local and indigenous languages. For the psychological barriers, taking
rest from time to time and exercising could reduce the stress.
This illustrates that some of the interpreters were aware of the importance of training in helping
them to do their job successfully. It is apparent that training and enculturating translators and
interpreters on how to deal with unexpected cultural-specific, social and linguistic challenges can
have potential positive impact on the interpreting process. Learning to speak indigenous languages
could also facilitate the interpreting process and help interpreters survive in their jobs and avoid
dangers.
Along the same line, participants also stressed the importance of both linguistic and cultural
training, and they called for the recruiters to provide such training for their staff who work in the
conflict zones including training on local cultures, traditions, values and languages to avoid
unnecessary misinterpretations. Indeed, familiarity with local everyday linguistic terms could ease
the interpreting process and save time and effort. Cultural and linguistic awareness should be a
fundamental component of any training intended for interpreters in conflict zones:
The UNAMID should provide intensive courses to the staff in the field of local culture
and languages to avoid conflict that can appear as the result of misinterpretation. You
should keep in touch with the locals as much as you can to be familiar with local terms
and languages to carry out your job well.
In a similar vein, participants also suggested the role of individual efforts and initiatives to help
interpreters operate effectively in the conflict zones.
An interpreter reported his coping strategies:
For the language and cultural barriers, you have to acquaint yourself with the local
languages especially in the region like Darfur with 80 different ethnic groups. But the
good thing is that all of these groups have many people who can speak Arabic, so you
have to find someone to link you with the community. I remained calm and focused in
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

48

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

order to avoid any kind of misinterpretation. Speakers have to simplify their message to
match the intended audience.
Once again, this suggests that interpreters could take the initiative and acquaint themselves with
the local culture, languages and dialects to be able to carry out their interpreting tasks and duties.
These findings also show that Darfur is a linguistically diverse region, but most of the Darfuris
speak Arabic, whether standard or dialectical Arabic, which sometimes requires some sort of
simplification of the intended message to accommodate and cater for the local audience who are
mostly uneducated.
6. Conclusions and recommendations
This was a small-scale qualitative study intended to investigate the interpreters’ and language
mediators’ challenges and barriers in conflict zones in Darfur region, Sudan. Interpreters
reportedly experienced numerous challenges and difficulties that impacted on their performance.
Certainly, there are some limitations with this study which merit consideration. The most obvious
limitation is the number of participants who took part in this study which was only 20, and this
could impede any attempts for generalization. The study also used only interviews for data
collection while the use of other additional methods such as field observations and follow-up
questionnaires might have offered more analytical perspectives. However, we believe that the
insights gained from the study are illuminating and could be transferable to other similar contexts
and could also help inform the design and development of training programmes for interpreters
operating in conflict zones. In the light of the study findings, some recommendations can be
offered. First, interpreters and translators in conflict zones need to be more diplomatic and mindful
of the contexts in which they are doing the job to avoid any potential negative consequences.
Second, in addition to the generic and professional skills necessary for interpreting, any
interpreting training programmes intended for interpreters operating within conflict zones should
incorporate aspects on cross- and inter-cultural communication to help interpreters to be more
culturally cognizant. Third, training should take into consideration context-specific needs and
realities in order to successfully suit the context and cater for interpreters. Fourth, interpreters
themselves need to be proactive and take the initiative to enculturate and familiarize themselves
with the domestic cultural, linguistic, social, religious and historical realities. Fifth, employers of
interpreters in conflict zones should organize pre- and in-service induction and training sessions
covering all these issues. Sixth, employers should consider taking precautions against the potential
risks of employing locals who might belong to either of the conflicting parties and whose identity
identification, during their assignment, might result in fatal consequences. To minimize the risks,
interpreters could conceal their identities in certain cases or could work invisibly behind the scenes
to avoid dangers. Finally, training courses should also emphasize the professional ethics in
interpreting and other issues such as maintaining neutrality, impartiality, confidentiality and
context-sensitivity for interpreting in war and conflict zones.
About the authors:
Dr. Holi Ibrahim Holi Ali is an assistant professor of applied and TESOL. He has an M.A in ELT
and another M.A in translation. He has a PhD in applied linguistics from the University of
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

49

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

Huddersfield, UK. His teaching and research interests include translation and interpreting. He has
presented widely at national and international conferences and published extensively.
ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0608-6146
Dr. Awad Alhasssan is an Assistant professor of applied linguistics & TESOL in Dhofar
University, Oman. He is also affiliated to Khartoum University in Sudan. His teaching and research
interests include EAP, translation & translator education, and EMI in higher education. He has
presented at national and international conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals.
ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1147-0919
Ishaq Burma is a translator, interpreter and foreign language teacher. He has an MA in translation.
He worked as a translator and interpreter for UN mission in Darfur (UNAMID) for a number of
years. His teaching and research interests include translation and interpreting.
References
Amich, M. G. (2013). The vital role of conflict interpreters. Nawa Journal of Language and
Communication 7 (2), 15-26.
Baker, M. (2010). Interpreters and translators in the war zones. The Translator, 16 (2), 197-222.
DOI: 10.1080/13556509.2010.10799469
Baker, M. & Maier, C. (2011). Ethics in interpreter and translator training. The Interpreter and
Translator Training, 5 (1), .1-14
Bello, Y. M. (2014). The war interpreter: Needs and challenges of interpreting in conflict zones.
ResearchGate, 65-71.
Dragovic-Drouet, M. (2007). The practice of translation and interpreting during the conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia (1991-1999). In M. Salma-Carr (Ed.), Translating and interpreting
conflict (pp. 29-40). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Guo, T. (2015). Interpreting for the enemy: Chinese interpreters in the second Sino-Japanese War
(1931-1945). Translation Studies, 8(1), pp. 1-15. DOI: 10.1080/14791700.2014.881302.
Hale, S. (2014). Interpreting culture. Dealing with cross-cultural issues in court interpreting.
Perspectives, (22)3, pp. 321-331, DOI: 10.1080/0907676X.2013.827226
Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews: An introduction to Qualitative Research interviewing. Thousand
Oaks, CA: London: SAGE publications.
Mason, J. (2002). Qualitative researching (2nd ed.). London: SAGE Publications.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook
(2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.
Moser-Mercer, B. et al. (2014). Interpreting conflict: Training challenges in humanitarian field
interpreting. Journal of Human Rights Practice, 6 (1), 140-158.
Ruiz, L. (2016). Interpreters and interpreting in conflict zones and scenarios: A historical
perspective. Themes in Translation Studies, 15, 1-35.
Valero-Garcés, C. (2003). Responding to communication needs: Current issues and challenges in
community interpreting and translating in Spain. In L. Brunette, G. Bastin, I. Hemlin, &
H. Clarke (Eds.), The Critical Link 3. Interpreters in the Community (pp. 177–92).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

50

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
An investigation into the interpreters’ challenges in conflict zones

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

Ali, Alhassan & Burma

51

