This is the accepted manuscript (post-print version) of the article. As regards to
content, the post-print version is identical to the final published version, but there
may be differences in typography, layout, and copy editing.
Please cite the published version:
Liebst, L. S., Heinskou, M. B., & Ejbye-Ernst, P. (2018). On the actual risk of
bystander intervention: A statistical study based on naturally occurring violent
emergencies. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 55(1), 27-50.
doi.org/10.1177/0022427817710776

On the Actual Risk of Bystander Intervention: A Statistical Study Based on
Naturally Occurring Violent Emergencies
Lasse Suonperä Liebst1, Marie Bruvik Heinskou2, and Peter Ejbye-Ernst3

Abstract
Objectives: Bystander studies have rarely considered the victimization risk associated
with intervention into violent, dangerous emergencies. To address this gap, we aim to
identify factors that influence bystanders’ risk of being physically victimized. Methods:
We observed bystander behavior from video surveillance footage of naturally occurring
violence in night-time economy settings, and data was analyzed with a logistic regression
model. Results: Data shows that approximately one out of six interventions results in
some type of victimization, typically with a relatively low degree of severity. The
bystander’s social group membership, the setting of the emergency, and the bystander’s
intervention type are estimated as risk factors for victimization. Conclusions: Previous
research suggests that a bystander’s social group membership with victims promotes
intervention behavior. Our results expand the role of social group membership as being a
factor that also influences whether the intervening bystander is victimized.

1

Corresponding author: Lasse Suonperä Liebst, Department of Sociology, University of Copenhagen,
Øster Farimagsgade 5, Bld. 16, 1014 Copenhagen K, Denmark. email: lsl@soc.ku.dk
2
Marie Bruvik Heinskou, Department of Sociology and Social Work, Aalborg University, Kroghstræde
7, 9220 Aalborg Øst, Denmark. email: mheinskou@socsci.aau.dk
3
Peter Ejbye-Ernst, Netherlands Institute for the Study of Crime and Law Enforcement (NSCR), De
Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pEjbyeErnst@nscr.nl

1

Introduction
Recent evidence suggests that bystanders are more likely to intervene in emergencies they
perceive as dangerous (Fischer et al. 2011). In these situations, the presence of others is
not a source of responsibility diffusion, as the well-established bystander effect predicts
(Darley and Latané 1968). Rather, additional bystanders are perceived as a potential
resource of physical support which can facilitate intervention (Levine, Taylor, and Best
2011; Fischer and Greitemeyer 2013). The present study raises a question that might
appear obvious in the light of these recent findings, but which so far has received scant
attention. Given that the perceived dangerousness of the situation influences the
likelihood of intervention, what, then, is the actual risk associated with bystander
involvement in such high-danger emergencies?
We examine this question in the context of violent assaults in public places, that is, the
type of high-danger emergency that motivated earlier scholars to study helping behavior
and the impact of the bystander effect. Thus, Darley and Latané’s (1968) pioneering
bystander research was prompted by the report of the brutal murder of a young woman,
Kitty Genovese, on a public street where 38 bystanders allegedly failed to intervene (note
that the accuracy of this report is questionable, see Manning, Levine, and Collins 2007).
However, although instigated by a real-life assault, bystander research has almost
exclusively been carried out in laboratory-based, experimental settings. Because of this,
bystander intervention and the associated victimization risk has rarely been studied in the
context of actual violent behavior (Cherry 1995; Baumeister, Vohs, and Funder 2007).
Sheleff and Shichor’s (1980) decades-old call for research on the victimological aspects
of bystander involvement has thus not been met, as reflected in Osswald et al.’s
(2010:150) recent argument that “very little research has referred to prosocial behavior
with high (social) costs for the actor (i.e., the person who helps). The reason for this seems
obvious, as high-cost prosocial behavior is difficult to examine in a laboratory.”
Recently, however, scholars across the fields of social psychology and the
criminological study of guardianship have suggested how the ecological validity of the
bystander field could be improved by a wider use of observational methods (Reynald
2009), including video-based observations (Levine et al. 2011). In this study, we follow
these developments and explore video footage of bystander behavior in natural settings
as a promising method to systematically observe the actual risk of bystander intervention.

2

While the reliability of self-reported accounts by offenders, victims, and witnesses of
crime is known to be poor (Vrij, Hope, and Fisher 2014), the advantage of using video
footage to study criminal and violent behaviors is that the researchers can unobtrusively
observe and record real-life behaviors as they occur (Collins 2008; Lindegaard and Copes
2017). To our knowledge, this study is the first of its kind to apply video observational
data to systematically examine the actual risk associated with bystander intervention.
Video observational data, while having a high ecological validity, also has a number
of limitations. These include that CCTV data on criminal events can be biased towards
positive (e.g., violently escalated) cases, given that the footage is only filed if part of a
crime is reported to the police. Moreover, verbal sound is rarely recorded and the footage
offers only limited information on the social sequence of events leading to the violent
interaction. We will discuss the issue of sample-selection bias later, but here we would
like to highlight that a methodological innovation of the current study is that we
compensate for the two latter limitations by triangulating the video footage with police
case file data. As illustrated by Weenink (2014), police case files offer insight into social
aspects of violent encounters (e.g., verbal exchanges, social group ties), which is not
easily caught on camera. Specifically, we draw on a sample of surveillance camera
footage of naturally occurring violent crime that involves intervening bystanders, and
each of these recordings is matched with a police case file.
The prevalence of bystander victimization in violent crime has rarely been examined.
One exception is Planty (2002) who—based on data from the American National Crime
Victimization Survey—concludes that bystanders present in violent incidents are in
general not likely to be harmed or robbed. Furthermore, studies on bystanders with formal
guardianship roles, like police officers and bouncers, have identified a number of risk
factors for victimization.
First, higher risks have been linked with alcohol intoxication of the unruly persons that
the guardian is attempting to control (Bierie 2015). Second, the bystander’s gender might
shape the risk, given Monaghan’s (2003:22) observation that female bouncers “are less
likely to attenuate violent situations.” Belknap and Shelley (1992) offer a similar view in
the context of female police officers, yet recent evidence questions the existence of such
gender-difference in victimization among police officers (Rabe-Hemp and Schuck 2007).
Finally, studies suggest that the type of intervention act influences the victimization risk.

3

Among police officers, van Reemst, Fischer and Zwirs (2015) show that aggressive types
of involvement enhance the victimization risk, and studies on bouncers suggest that ruleenforcing behavior, where the bouncer enters into a direct conflict with an unruly bar
patron, is riskier than situations where the bouncer intervenes in order to stop a conflict
between bar patrons (Graham and Homel 2012; Geoffrion et al. 2015).
While the studies cited above have identified some of the risk factors for bystanders
with a formal guardianship role, the factors shaping the victimization risk of bystanders
enacting informal guardianship roles is much more understudied. Among the few
exceptions are Hamby et al. (2016), who show that a bystander is more likely to be
harmed or threatened in situations where the victim suffers a higher rate of injury. Further,
a handful of studies have examined the negative consequences for children defending
other children against bullies. For example, Pöyhönen, Juvonen, and Salmivalli (2010)
suggest that a bystander’s social status in the peer group may protect them from the
possible negative consequences of defending behavior (e.g., revenge from the bully) (see
also Meter and Card 2015).
This latter argument is line with the growing body of evidence that stresses the
importance of relationship ties in bystander behavior—that is, in contrast to the early
bystander literature where this aspect was neglected (Levine 2003). Thus, recent
criminological research stresses the bystanders’ social relationship as a factor influencing
the willingness to intervene (Cook and Reynald 2016). This view is consistent with
Levine and colleagues (e.g., Levine et al. 2002; Levine et al. 2005; Slater et al. 2013),
who show that when a bystander shares group membership with the victim, the
probability of intervention is enhanced. Further, Black and colleagues provide evidence
pointing in the same direction (Phillips and Cooney 2005), and—what is of particular
importance for our study—they offer a theoretical consideration of bystander
victimization as a group-mediated process: “In any conflict, one side’s supporter is the
other side’s opponent.” (Black and Baumgartner 1983:100). While the above studies
consistently demonstrate group membership as an important predictor of bystander
invention (for review, see Levine and Manning 2013), it remains to be systematically
examined whether group membership plays a similarly influential role in bystander
victimization.

4

The purpose of the current study is to identify some of the factors that influence the
likelihood of bystander victimization. We advance two hypotheses, both formulated a
priori for our explanatory statistical analysis (see Popper 1959; Kerr 1998). The first
hypothesis considers whether a higher level of violence in the situation is associated with
an elevated victimization risk. H1: Bystanders intervening in situations with a high level
of violence have a higher victimization risk than bystanders who intervene in less violent
situations. With this hypothesis we assume a spillover-like effect by which situations
where victims are exposed to high levels of violence increase the likelihood that some
violent acts, so to speak, spill over to the intervening bystanders.
This hypothesis is plausible given the aforementioned evidence suggesting that
bystanders are more at risk in situations with higher rates of victim injuries (Hamby et al.
2016). That violence can spill over to a bystander is, moreover, illustrated by situations
where a random bystander is hit by a bullet intended for someone else, e.g., as part of a
gang-related drive-by shooting (Hutson, Anglin, and Eckstein 1996). In theoretical terms,
victimization as a spillover process is to be expected on the basis of Collins’ (2008) view
that excessively violent situations arise from a perpetrator’s elevated emotions of tension
and fear being released into an unstoppable, frenzied attack (Weenink 2014). This
dynamic, described as forward panic, unfolds in a temporarily uncontrolled manner and
can thus lead to a “spillover of forward panic” (Collins 2008: 95), entailing attacks on
uninvolved, random or, we hypothesize, intervening third parties.
A theoretical counter-argument to this spillover argument is found in Kemper (2011),
who criticizes Collins for neglecting the fact that even excessively frenzied violence is
socially focused and thus rarely spills over to random individuals. In this view, consistent
with the cited research highlighting social relationships as a key factor in bystander
behavior, bystander victimization is expected to be structured along conflictual intergroup
relations.
On this basis, we suggest the following hypothesis: H2: Social group membership with
victims of violence increases the likelihood of bystander victimization. With this
hypothesis we assume that a process of out-group aggression influences the victimization
risk (Hewstone, Rubin, and Willis 2002). Research shows that when intergroup conflict
is heightened, identifying with one’s in-group can lead to out-group derogation and
aggression. The resulting out-group aggression is intended to harm another person

5

because of his or her membership of the opponent out-group (Brewer 2001). The concept
of out-group aggression thus attributes the risk of victimization to the bystander’s social
group relationship with the victim. From the perspective of the perpetrator, a bystander
with a social relationship with the victim is a member of the opponent out-group and
hence an eligible target for physical aggression.
In this connection, we would like to specify the concept of social groups that we imply
with this proposition. Analytically considered, an individual’s belonging to a social group
may be defined with reference to shared categorical (e.g., being “American”) or relational
ties (e.g., close-knit friend group) (Tajfel and Turner 1979; Swann et al. 2012). We focus
on the latter aspect, i.e., the relational group tie established in frequent and focused faceto-face interactions. This focus reflects, first, that bystander behavior in public settings
typically is linked with conflicting friendship groups (Levine et al. 2012), and second,
that our data provides insight into this relational aspect of the social group structure.

Methods
Data and sample
For the empirical analysis, we used video surveillance footage (i.e., CCTV) obtained from
the Copenhagen Police Department. The sampling frame was incidents of violence (i.e.,
Sections 244-246 and 237 in the Danish Criminal Code) reported in the central police
districts of Copenhagen between 2010 and 2012. Access was provided to all cases where
sentence had been passed, comprising 933 cases. There exists no catalog of the case files
that include CCTV footage, and all of the paper-based police case files have accordingly
been audited to identify the cases including this footage. After this process, our raw
sample comprised 164 cases containing video clips of varying quality and character. Only
clips that conformed to two criteria were included in the final sample: the recording
involved at least one bystander who intervened in an ongoing conflict, and the footage
had a quality that allowed systematic coding of the action sequences and individual
characteristics of bystanders. Our final sample comprises 69 cases containing video clips.

Coding procedure
We started coding the video clips by identifying the conflicting parties, in most cases two
individuals, between whom the conflict was initiated. This moment was defined as the

6

point at which the situation manifested itself as a conflict for the first time, e.g., with
threatening gestures or physical force. In this coding process, we benefited from the fact
that emotions and even verbal articulations of dominance and aggression have equivalent
expressions in well-described, nonverbal cues (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979; Hall, Coats, and
LeBeau 2005; Dael, Mortillaro, and Scherer 2012). After the initial conflict axis had been
identified, all other individuals who entered into the ongoing conflict with consolatory or
escalatory behaviors were defined as intervening bystanders. As our research interest was
in bystanders’ risk of being victimized during intervention, we did not conduct an
individual-level coding of the non-intervening bystanders. In total, 233 intervening
bystanders were coded across the 69 video contexts.
Data was coded by four trained student assistants in accordance with a list of detailed
variable definitions, which were developed in several iterative steps. Our theoretical
expectations (cf. the hypotheses of the study) were operationalized into an initial variable
list that subsequently was specified and expanded in dialogue with qualitative
observations of the video material. On the basis of these validations, we then tested the
quantitative applicability of the revised variable list to additional video cases. This
iterative process was repeated until the variable definitions balanced the considerations
of quantitative stringency and qualitative sensitivity. Next, to test the reliability of the
coded variables, we selected 20 (29%) of the video contexts and 35 (15%) of the
intervening bystanders for double coding (see Riffe, Lacy, and Fico 2005). All the
measures included in the further analysis reached a Krippendorff’s alpha value of at least
0.8, indicating a good interrater reliability (Krippendorff 2004). Disagreements between
the coders were resolved through discussion prior to analysis. Note that not all coded
variables reached an acceptable interrater agreement, and these variables (e.g.,
bystander’s age) were excluded from further analysis.
It should be noted that the nature of our data offers varying preconditions for coding
aspects of the situations. While gender, for example, has a culturally and biologically
well-defined visual appearance, social group memberships are not signaled in a similarly
unambiguous manner. Perhaps because of this coding issue, observational studies on
bystander behavior do not typically include measures of social group membership. In this
study, as mentioned above, we have utilized the fact that all our video clips are linked to
police case files that often describe which of the others involved the bystanders have

7

personal relationship ties with. If the visual material was unclear or ambiguous, the coders
were instructed to validate the video-based coding of the bystander’s social group
membership against the police case files. In cases of divergence at this point, the police
file data took precedence.

Measures
Dependent variable. Bystanders who were physically victimized after their intervention
were captured with a binary measure where 1 = bystanders who are violently victimized,
and 0 = non-victimized bystanders. Incidents of victimization included 39 cases where
the bystander was subjected to one or more of the following behaviors: punching, kicking,
shoving, hauling, falling to the ground, kicking to the head, or weapon use. Reflecting
our research interest in the interaction sequences that lead to victimization, we only
recorded incidents if they occurred after the bystander had intervened in the situation.
Independent variables. The situation’s potentially violent conflict level was captured
with a binary measure where 1 = at least one serious act or consequence of violence had
occurred before the point of the bystander’s intervention, and 0 = no serious acts or
consequences of violence had taken place (reference category). Serious acts and
consequences of violence included violence against a person on the ground, kicking to
the head, an unconscious person, and multiple perpetrators against a single person. The
reason that the measure only includes acts and consequences that have occurred before
the point of intervention is that this allows us to measure the level of violent conflict in
the situation and the individual bystanders’ violent (i.e., escalating) interventions as
separate phenomena.
The bystander’s social group membership was captured with a dummy variable where
1 = the bystander has a social group membership with an individual who is exposed to
violence in the situation, and 0 = the bystander does not share such membership with a
harmed individual (reference group). Social groups were defined as friendship or
acquaintance groups, and the bystander’s group membership was assessed by combining
video and police file data. In theoretical terms, bystanders with a social group membership
with a victim of violence are considered out-group for the perpetrators, and these
bystanders are therefore, as hypothesized, potential targets of out-group aggressions when
they intervene.

8

Covariates. Based on our review of risk factors of bystander victimization identified
in the literature, we included a number of covariates to account for and explore other
associations than the ones hypothesized. The bystander’s gender was measured as a
binary variable where 1 = female and 0 = male (reference). The bystander’s gender should
be accounted for because men, in general, have a higher risk than women of being victims
of a violent crime in a public place (Pedersen, Kyvsgaard and Balvig 2016). Further,
evidence suggests that the number of female bystanders in violent situations attenuates
the bystander effect to a lesser degree than the number of male bystanders present,
possibly because men (due to their greater physical strength) are perceived as being more
helpful than women in confronting a perpetrator (Fischer et al. 2011). It seems plausible
that perpetrators similarly perceive men as more confronting bystanders and thus as a
greater threat to be countered with violence. Note, however, as mentioned earlier, that the
empirical evidence is mixed concerning gender-differences in bystander victimization
(Monaghan 2003; Rabe-Hemp and Schuck 2007).
The bystander’s intervention type was captured with a dummy variable where 1 =
bystander who used at least one escalatory intervention act, and 0 = bystander who only
used conciliatory behaviors. The behavioral distinction between escalatory and
conciliatory interventions is in accordance with previous bystander research (Levine et
al. 2011; Parks et al. 2012), and is included in our model in view of evidence suggesting
that the type of intervention act, in particular aggressive and confronting behaviors,
shapes the victimization risk (van Reemst et al. 2015). Escalatory behaviors included
threatening gestures, hauling, punching, kicking, shoving, and weapon use. Conciliatory
behaviors included making open-handed gestures, non-aggressive touching, blocking
contact, holding a person back, and pushing and pulling antagonists apart.
Furthermore, two covariates operationalize properties of the conflict situation: the
situation’s type of setting was measured as binary variables where 1 = night-time
economy contexts, and 0 = all other type of everyday contexts, e.g., shopping malls and
public transportation settings (reference category). Night-time economy contexts were
defined as situations occurring inside or in front of a public drinking place (e.g., bar,
nightclub) in the time span between 10 p.m. and 8. a.m. The inclusion of this covariate
reflects the finding that the alcohol intoxication of the conflict parties is a risk factor of
bystander victimization (Bierie 2015), and is, more broadly, in line with research

9

associating violent crime with night-time economy drinking settings (Toomey et al.
2012).
The number of individuals in the situation was recorded by counting all persons
present. This covariate was included on the premise that the presence of other bystanders
makes the intervention less risky because additional bystanders may potentially provide
physical support to the intervening bystanders. This is what Fisher et al. (2010) suggest
that bystanders expect to be the case, but with the inclusion of this covariate we account
for whether the presence of other bystanders actually makes interventions safer.

Table 1. Descriptive statistics
Mean
0.18
0.26
0.45
0.15
0.31
0.92
15.82

Bystander victimization
Violent conflic level
Out-group membership
Female
Escalatory intervention
Night-time economy
Number of bystanders
Note. n=217.

SD
0.38
0.44
0.50
0.36
0.46
0.28
12.37

Estimation
Given the aim of this study, to identify factors influencing bystander victimization, and
because this variable is binary in nature, a logistic regression tool was applied for the data
analysis. Specifically, we used Stata’s “logistic” procedure. One challenge in estimating
our data is its clustered data structure (i.e., individual bystanders nested into situations),
which potentially violates the regression assumption of independence of observations.
We calculated an intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.09, suggesting that data shows a
limited degree of dependence on observations (Pituch and Stevens 2016). Yet, given that
even small levels of clustering in data can lead to underestimated standard errors, we
decided to compute data with cluster-corrected standard errors (i.e., using Stata’s
“cluster” option), which relaxes the assumption of independence (Mehmetoglu and
Jakobsen 2017).

Results
From table 1, it can be established that approximately one out of six (18.0%) cases of
bystander interventions results in some kind of victimization. The majority of these cases

10

involve situations where the bystander is punched at least once (59.0%) during
intervention. Other common victimization types are being kicked at least once (26.3%)
and shoving or hauling (41.0%). The more severe cases of victimization involving
weapon use (2.6%), kicking to the head (10.5%), or violence against a bystander who has
fallen to the ground (13.2%) account for only a smaller proportion of the victimized cases
(note that the percentages do not sum up to 100 because the categories overlap). Taken
together, these descriptive figures suggest that bystanders in violent emergencies do
indeed run a risk of actual victimization. However, we also note that the majority of
bystanders suffer no physical harm when intervening, and those who are victimized are
typically exposed to violence with a relatively low rate of severity.
Table 2 presents the results of our logistic regression estimation of data. Model 1
includes the explanatory variables that operationalize the hypothesized effect of spillover
from the situation’s level of violence to the bystander (H1) and the direct out-group
aggression against the bystander (H2). In this table, it can be established that the
bystander’s out-group membership with a victim of physical aggression is a strong and
significant predictor of bystander victimization. This association remains significant after
including covariates in model 2. All other things being equal, being an out-group member
increases the risk of victimization approximately seven times. By comparison, the violent
conflict level prior to intervention proves to be insignificant across the three estimated
models.

Table 2. Logistic regression analysis of bystander victimization

Variables
Intercept
Violent conflict level
Out-group membership
Female
Escalatory intervention
Night-time economy
Number of bystanders
AIC

Model 1
Hypothesized
B (SE)
OR
-2.62 (0.39)***
NA
-0.48 (0.51)
0.62
1.96 (0.50)***
7.08

Model 2
Covariates
B (SE)
-4.78 (0.95)***
-0.48 (0.55)
2.03 (0.56)***
-0.42 (0.65)
0.71 (0.40)*
1.88 (0.89)**
0.01 (0.01)

OR
NA
0.62
7.58
0.66
2.03
6.54
1.01

182.234
179.014
Note. *p<.10; **p<.05; ***p<.01 (two tailed). NA = not applicable. n=217.

Model 3
Final
B (SE)
-4.78 (0.99)***
-0.52 (0.54)
2.00 (0.53)***

OR
NA
0.59
7.40

0.74 (0.40)*
1.97 (0.88)**

2.10
7.20

176.032

From model 2 it can, further, be established that the bystander’s gender and the number
of bystanders present in the situation are not significantly associated with victimization.
11

Two covariates are, however, associated with our outcome. First, bystanders who
intervene in an escalatory manner are more at risk than bystanders who only intervene
with consolatory acts, although this result is only significant at the 10 percent level.
Second, interventions in night-time economy contexts are more likely to result in
bystander victimization. The relatively large effect size should, however, be interpreted
with the reservation that this covariate almost completely separates the zeroes and ones
in the outcome variable—i.e., with only one exception, bystanders are solely victimized
in night-time economy contexts. This issue (known as quasi-separation) may produce
inflated parameter estimates in logistic regression models (Menard 2009). Nevertheless,
it is safe to say that bystander victimization is a phenomenon linked with the night-time
economy. Finally, in model 3, we remove the insignificant covariates. This largely leaves
the remaining variables unchanged. Furthermore, model 3 is selected as our final model
because it has the best overall model fit, as indicated by the lowest AIC value across the
three estimated models.

Discussion
Evidence suggests that the bystander effect is attenuated if the emergency situation is
perceived as being dangerous (Fischer et al. 2011). In this study, we have examined the
correspondence between the perceived and actual risk associated with intervention in
violent, dangerous situations. Our analysis suggests that intervening bystanders do expose
themselves to some actual risk. The majority of bystanders, however, are not victimized
during their intervention, and if they are, then primarily with a relatively low degree of
severity. These descriptive results are in line with previous research suggesting that
bystanders in general are not exposed to a high victimization risk (Planty 2002; Hamby
et al. 2016).
We hypothesized that the risk of victimization is influenced by two different
mechanisms: a spillover effect (H1) and out-group aggression (H2). Data rejects the
former and confirms the latter hypothesis, and the large effect size of the social group
membership variable suggests that out-group aggression plays a considerable role in
shaping the victimization risk. That is to say, rather than being a spillover of violence
targeted at the victim, bystander victimization is an aggression where the bystander is
directly targeted because of his or her group membership with the victim. In these

12

theoretical terms, bystander victimization can be described as unfolding through the
following steps (Fiske and Neuberg 1990; Brewer 2001). Before the bystander intervenes,
an intergroup antagonism has begun. This entails that perpetrators categorize their
opponents as out-group and associate negative emotions of aggression with out-group
members. When the bystander intervenes on behalf of his or her in-group, the perpetrator
categorizes the bystander as an out-group member. This triggers the aggressive emotions
that the perpetrator already feels towards the out-group category, and the bystander thus,
in turn, becomes a target of physical aggression.
These theoretical considerations are in line with the growing body of evidence across
sociology (Phillips and Cooney 2005), bullying studies (Pöyhönen et al. 2010), social
psychology (Levine and Manning 2013), and criminology (Cook and Reynald 2016), all
of which highlight social relationship ties as a key factor in bystander behavior. Our study,
however, adds to this research by suggesting that social group membership influences not
only the likelihood of bystander intervention, as previously documented, but also the risk
of bystander victimization.
The victimization of bystanders has received little attention in the literature, especially
as a risk shaped by social group processes. This is probably due to difficulties in obtaining
the fine-grained naturally occurring data, both behavioral and group-relational, which is
needed for an examination of this issue. Bystander intervention but not bystander
victimization can be ethically examined in laboratory experiments (Osswald et al. 2010),
and self-reported accounts, e.g. investigative interviews that form part of police case files,
provide an often unreliable and coarse-grained source of data on the interactional
sequences of violence (Collins 2008; Vrij et al. 2014). By contrast, CCTV footage
provides a way to capture the micro-details of real-life bystander victimizations, and it is
on this basis, as we discuss further below, that we here offer the first systematic evidence
of social group relationships as a risk factor for bystander victimization.
In addition to finding support for the effect of intergroup processes in bystander
victimization, our analysis suggests that the victimization risk is influenced by the
intervention type and type of setting of the conflict situation. First, data indicates that
escalatory interventions are more likely than consolatory behaviors to lead to
victimization. This result is in line with van Reemst et al.’s (2015) finding that bystander
victimization is promoted by aggressive types of involvement, and Levine et al. (2012)

13

who suggest that the duty to back up one’s friends with force leads to conflict escalation.
Second, we found that night-time economy contexts are associated with a higher
victimization risk. Given that the night-time economy is closely linked to alcohol-led
entertainment (Levine et al. 2012), this result is in agreement with studies that link alcohol
intoxication with bystander victimization (Bierie 2015) and, more broadly, alcohol
establishments with violent crime (Toomey et al. 2012).
The bystander’s gender was not found to influence the victimization risk. The existing
research is mixed concerning gender-differences of the victimization risk (Monaghan
2003; Rabe-Hemp and Schuck 2007), and our result lends support to the view that female
bystanders are not less at risk than males. Finally, we found that the number of bystanders
present did not predict the victimization risk. Given Fischer et al.’s (2011) argument that
other bystanders are perceived as a source of physical support, our data suggests that there
might be a gap between the expected and actual safety provided by other bystanders. The
presence of other bystanders does not necessarily provide the safety in numbers assumed
by the bystanders who intervene in dangerous emergencies.
After having established that bystanders in violent emergencies can pay a personal
cost, we now consider the potentially beneficial aspects of intervention behavior. In
considering this, we must emphasize that the experience of costs and benefits depends on
the perspective taken, because what might be favorable for some could very well be
detrimental to others. First, from the perspective of victims, one possible immediate
benefit of being defended is that consolatory acts, as documented by Levine et al. (2011),
are often successful in deescalating conflicts and thus limiting the aggression against
victims. Besides mitigating the physical harm inflicted, consolatory helping behavior may
also limit the psychological consequences experienced by victims. Sainio et al. (2011)
show that defended victims of bullying are less depressed and anxious, and have higher
self-esteem. The generalizability of this observation to other types and contexts of
violence (e.g., street violence, robberies) is an interesting question to be examined in
future research.
Second, as pointed out by Levine et al. (2011:411), an important question is why
bystanders intervene at all, especially given that this behavior can be costly and of little
personal benefit. With regards to those bystanders exposing themselves to the highest
risk, i.e., the victim’s friends, Swann et al. (2012) suggest that individuals who engage in

14

such costly pro-group action are motivated by visceral and family-like feeling of oneness
with their in-group. This feeling promotes a self-sacrificing willingness to act, fight, or
even die for the group, as illustrated by Levine et al.’s (2012:927) description of
intergroup violence between friend “groups who are fully immersed in their group
identities (‘instead of single people, it’s gangs of lads’).” Also in our case, it seems
plausible that this kind of personally costly, pro-group helping of one’s friends is linked
with positive feelings of being fused with one’s in-group.
A methodological innovation of this study was the combination of video observation
with data on group relations coded from police case files. As mentioned above, this
contrasts with existing bystander research where data on naturally occurring behavior and
group relations is rarely combined. Thus, for example, Levine and colleagues (2005)
highlight group relations as a key factor in bystander behavior, yet this factor is not
included as an explanatory variable in their pioneering video-based study of bystander
intervention in real-life settings (Levine et al. 2011). Presumably, this discrepancy reflects
the fact that the latter study was based on CCTV footage without associated police cases
or other available data to establish the group memberships of participants.
Here, however, we should add that our video-based assessment of relationship ties
rarely had to be corrected when compared to the police case file descriptions. This stresses
the validity of our group measure and is, furthermore, encouraging for scholars who have
an interest in bystanders’ social relationships but no access to other data sources to
validate their video-based assessment. In our experience—and consistent with evidence
suggesting that social group characteristics can be accurately inferred from nonverbal
cues (Ge, Collins, and Ruback 2012; Murphy 2016)—relationship ties can be reliably
coded from video recordings of natural conflicts.
While it thus seems probable that scholars with a research interest in bystander
behavior and the bystanders’ social relationships can rely on video observational data, on
the other hand relying solely on police case files does not seem a feasible approach.
Compared to the video data, the descriptions in the case files lack detailed information on
the behavioral micro-sequences, especially because such micro-behaviors have a
nonverbal and subconscious expression that rarely finds its way to self-reported accounts
of the situation (Collins 2004:65-78; Laney and Takarangi 2013). Further, this issue is
accentuated by the fact that police case files contain only few detailed behavioral

15

descriptions of the bystanders/witnesses, reflecting the interest of the police in clarifying
the question of guilt among alleged perpetrators and victims.
Although the results of this study extend previous bystander research with novel
insight into the actual risk associated with bystander interventions, we also acknowledge
the limitations of our work and suggest some directions for future research. A first issue
concerns the fact that our sampling frame is limited to police-reported violent events.
Although this feature of our data made it possible for us to validate the bystander’s social
group membership, our reliance on police cases implies that data, in part, is selected on
the dependent variable (Geddes 1990). Our sampling frame thus only includes cases that
involve physical violence, and in some cases it is because of the violence against the
intervening bystander that the case is reported to the police and hence enters our sampling
frame. By comparison, the situations where bystanders are successful in preventing
conflicts from escalating to violence are not part of our sampling frame (see Levine et al.
2011).
It is therefore probable that our data overestimates the risk associated with intervention
because too many positive cases with violence and victimized bystanders are selected into
our sample. Thus, compared tentatively with our descriptive findings on the rate of
bystander victimization, Hamby et al.’s (2016) survey-based estimate suggests that a
substantially lower proportion than one in six are victimized across several types of
aggressive encounters. Although it can be argued that our main objective, to test
theoretical hypotheses, is less affected by sample-selection bias (Collins 1983:195),
future video-based research should prioritize probability sampling of naturally occurring
bystander interventions and victimizations (for exemplary designs, see Dabney,
Hollinger, and Dugan 2004; Levine et al. 2011).
Another issue concerns our very broad definition of the bystander role, encompassing
any individual entering the situation after the conflict axis between the initial antagonistic
parties has been established. The line between the initial conflict parties and the adjoining
bystanders could, however, have been drawn elsewhere, and one could argue that our
broad bystander criterion confuses those who are bystanders to the conflict and those who
are parties to the conflict. This issue might suggest that victimization is not related to the
intervention as such, but to the fact that the victimized individuals are an integral part of
the group conflict. In fact, we think that our main finding regarding the role of out-group

16

membership in victimization suggests that something like this is at stake. However, this
should not be attributed to our, perhaps fuzzy, distinction between bystanders and conflict
parties but rather to the fact that the perpetrator’s group perception transcends these role
distinctions; from the perpetrator’s perspective, the hostility is directed against an outgroup, not its distinct “bystander” and “opponent” roles.
The absence of verbal sound on the CCTV footage is a limitation that should be
acknowledged but not exaggerated. First, a substantial part of meaning in human
interaction is derived from nonverbal cues (Burgoon, Guerrero, and Manusov 2011).
Second, certain verbal and nonverbal behaviors can substitute as functional equivalents
for one another (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979; Darwin 2009). This renders it plausible to infer
part of the social meaning of verbal expressions from video observed, nonverbal
equivalents—as we e.g. did when the onset of a verbal conflict was determined from
agonistic gestures between participants.
Next, we would like to add that although video observation is considered an
unobtrusive technique for recording natural behavior (Collins 2008; Lindegaard and
Copes 2017), it has to be stressed that in situ cameras might influence the recoded
behavior. For example, van Bommel et al. (2014) show that the presence of a camera
plays a role in attenuating the bystander effect. However, the fact, that this result was
obtained by deliberately making the bystanders aware of the camera by visually exposing
its presence (e.g., with a poster sign) questions whether this is likely to have influenced
our data. First, the presence of video cameras in public places in Denmark is rarely
signaled with a “CCTV in operation” sign; and second, the dim and often fairly hectic
night-time economy settings, where most of our data is recorded, offers the involved
persons a difficult condition for noticing the camera.
An interesting direction for future research would be to examine how the out-group
aggression process relates to subtypes of aggressive behavior, especially with respect to
the well-described reactive–proactive axis (Dodge and Coie 1987; Vitaro and Brendgen
2012). A hint of this is found in the observation that the period from the bystander’s first
intervention to the point of victimization varies substantially across the positive cases
(i.e., from seconds to several minutes). This varying reaction time might suggest that outgroup aggression could potentially be subdivided along the proactive-reactive axis. The
cases of immediate victimization might indicate that the perpetrator feels provoked to use

17

violence (i.e., a reactive “I hit the person because I felt angry”), while the cases with a
delayed reaction might suggest a more premediated use of violence, aimed at revenge or
dominance (i.e., a proactive “I had to fight to show who was on top”).
A final suggestion for further research relates to the relevance of applying video data.
As this study has hopefully demonstrated, video data analysis offers an applicable and
much-needed approach, not merely for bystander scholars but also, more broadly, for
scholars in violent crime to directly observe the behavioral raw material of their field of
study. The larger prospect of doing so is perhaps best illustrated by the major role that
observational data plays within many natural sciences, especially biology and the
ethological study of animal behavior. Thus, we agree with both the sociologists Lieberson
and Lynn (2002) and Tinbergen (1963), a pioneering animal ethologist and Nobel Prize
laureate, that the analytical success of the biological sciences offers the social sciences an
important reminder of the benefits of relying on naturally occurring observational data in
the advancement and evaluation of behavioral theory.

References
Baumeister, Roy. F., Kathleen. D. Vohs, and David. C. Funder. 2007. “Psychology as the
Science of Self-Reports and Finger Movements: Whatever Happened to Actual
Behavior?” Perspectives on Psychological Science 2(4):396-403.
Belknap, J., and J. K Shelley. 1992. “The New Lone Ranger: Policewomen on Patrol.”
American Journal of Police 12(2):47-75.
Bierie, David M. 2015. “Assault of police.” Crime & Delinquency. First published date:
March-12-2015.
Black, Donald and Mary Pat Baumgartner. 1983. “Toward a Theory of the Third Party.”
Pp. 84–114 in Empirical Theories about Courts, edited by K. O. Boyum and L. Mather.
New York: Longman
Brewer, Marilynn. B. 2001. “Ingroup Identification and Intergroup Conflict: When Does
Ingroup Love Become Outgroup Hate?” Pp. 17-41 in Social Identity, Intergroup Conflict,
and Conflict Reduction, edited by R. Ashmore, L. Jussim, and D. Wilder. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

18

Burgoon, Judee K., Laura K. Guerrero, Valerie Manusov 2011. “Nonverbal Signals.” in
The SAGE Handbook of Interpersonal Communication, edited by M. L. Knapp and J. A.
Daly. London: Sage Publications.
Cherry, Frances. 1995. The Stubborn Particulars of Social Psychology. London:
Routledge.
Collins, Randall. 1983. “Micromethods as a Basis for Macrosociology.” Journal of
Contemporary Ethnography 12(2):184-202.
Collins, Randall. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Collins, Randall. 2008. Violence. A Micro-Sociological Theory. Princeton. Princeton
University Press.
Cook, Alana and Danielle Reynald. 2016. “Guardianship Against Sexual Offenses:
Exploring the Role of Gender in Intervention.” International Criminal Justice Review
26(2):98-114.
Dabney, Dean, Richard C. Hollinger, and Laura Dugan. 2004. “Who Actually Steals? A
Study of Covertly Observed Shoplifters.” Justice Quarterly 21(4):693-728.
Dael, Nele., Marcello Mortillaro, and Klaus. R. Scherer. 2012. “Emotion Expression in
Body Action and Posture.” Emotion 12(5):1085-1101.
Dodge, Kenneth. A. and John D. Coie. 1987. “Social-Information-Processing Factors in
Reactive and Proactive Aggression in Children’s Peer Groups.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 53(6):1146-1158.
Darley, John. M. and Bibb Latané. 1968. “Bystander Intervention in Emergencies:
Diffusion of Responsibility.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 8(4/1):377383.
Darwin, Charles F. 2009. The Expression of the Emotions in Man Animals. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. [first published London: John Murray, 1872].
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus. 1979. “Human Ethology: Methods and Limits.” Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 2(01):50-57.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus. 1989. Human Ethology. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

19

Fischer, Peter., Joachim I. Krueger, Tobias Greitemeyer, Claudia Vogrincic, Andreas
Kastenmüller, Dieter Frey, Moritz Heene, Magdalena Wicher, and Martina Kainbacher.
2011. “The Bystander-Effect: A Meta-Analytic Review on Bystander Intervention in
Dangerous and Non-Dangerous Emergencies.” Psychological Bulletin 137(4):517-537.
Fischer, Peter and Tobias Greitemeyer. 2013. “The Positive Bystander Effect: Passive
Bystanders Increase Helping in Situations with High Expected Negative Consequences
for the Helper.” The Journal of Social Psychology 153:1-5.
Fiske, Susan T., and Steven. L. Neuberg 1990. “A Continuum of Impression Formation,
From Category-Based to Individuating Processes: Influences of Information and
Motivation on Attention and Interpretation.” Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 23:1-74.
Ge, Weina, Robert T. Collins, and R. Barry Ruback. 2012. “Vision-Based Analysis of
Small Groups in Pedestrian Crowds.” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 34(5):1003-1016.
Geddes, Barbara. 1990. “How the Cases You Choose Affect the Answers You Get:
Selection Bias in Comparative Politics.” Political analysis 2(1):131-150.
Geoffrion, Steve, Josette Sader, Frederic Ouellet, and Remi Boivin. 2015. “Aggressive
Incidents Inside a Montreal Barroom Involving Patrons, Barmaids and Bouncers: A
Micro Level Examination of Routine Activity Theory.” Crime science 4(1):1-10.
Graham, Kathryn and Ross Homel. 2012. Raising the Bar: Preventing Aggression in and
Around Bars, Pubs and Clubs. Devon: Willan Publishing.
Hall, Judith. A., Erik J. Coats, and Lavonia S. LeBeau. 2005. “Nonverbal Behavior and
the Vertical Dimension of Social Relations: A Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin
131(6): 898-924.
Hamby, Sherry, Marcela C. Weber, John H. Grych, and Victoria Banyard. 2016. “What
Difference do Bystanders Make? The Association of Bystander Involvement With Victim
Outcomes in a Community Sample.” Psychology of violence 6(1):91-102.
Hewstone, Miles, Mark Rubin, and Hazel Willis. 2002. “Intergroup Bias.” Annual Review
of Psychology 53(1):575-604.

20

Hutson, H. Range, Deirdre Anglin, and Marc Eckstein 1996. “Drive-by Shootings by
Violent Street Gangs in Los Angeles: A Five–year Review from 1989 to 1993.” Academic
Emergency Medicine 3(4):300-303.
Kemper, Theodore D. 2011. Status, Power and Ritual interaction. A relational Reading
of Durkheim, Goffman and Collins. Farnham: Ashgate.
Kerr, Norbert L. 1998. “HARKing: Hypothesizing After the Results are Known.”
Personality and Social Psychology Review 2(3):196-217.
Krippendorff, Klaus. 2004. “Reliability in Content Analysis.” Human Communication
Research 30(3):411-433.
Laney, Cara and Melanie K. Takarangi. 2013. “False Memories for Aggressive Acts.”
Acta Psychologica 143(2):227-234.
Levine, Mark. 2003. “Researching Violence: Power, Social Relations and the Virtues of
the Experimental Method.” Pp. 125-135 in Researching Violence: Methodology and
Measurement, edited by Raymond E. Lee, and Elizabeth Stanko. London: Routledge.
Levine, Mark, Clare Cassidy, Gemma Brazier, and Stephen Reicher. 2002. “SelfCategorization and Bystander Non-intervention: Two Experimental Studies.” Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 32(7):1452-1463.
Levine, Mark, Amy Prosser, David Evans, and Stephen Reicher. 2005. “Identity and
Emergency Intervention: How Social group Membership and Inclusiveness of Group
Boundaries Shape Helping Behavior.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
31(4):443-453.
Levine, Mark, Paul J. Taylor, and Rachel Best. 2011. “Third Parties, Violence, and
Conflict Resolution the Role of Group Size and Collective Action in the Microregulation
of Violence.” Psychological Science 22(3):406-412.
Levine, Mark, Robert Lowe, Rachel Best, and Derek Heim. 2012. “‘We Police It
Ourselves’: Group Processes in the Escalation and Regulation of Violence in the NightTime Economy.” European Journal of Social Psychology 42(7):924-932.
Levine, Mark, and Rachel Manning. 2013. “Social Identity, Group Processes, and
Helping in Emergencies.” European Review of Social Psychology 24(1): 225-251.

21

Lieberson, Stanley and Freda. B. Lynn. 2002. “Barking Up the Wrong Branch: Scientific
Alternatives to the Current Model of Sociological Science.” Annual Review of Sociology
28:1-19.
Lindegaard, Marie R. and Heith Copes (2017). “Observational methods of offender
decision making” in Oxford Handbook of Offender Decision Making, edited by W.
Bernasco, H. Elffers, and J-L Van Gelder. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Manning, Rachel, Mark Levine, and Alan Collins. 2007. “The Kitty Genovese Murder
and the Social Psychology of Helping: the Parable of the 38 Witnesses.” American
Psychologist 62(6):555-562.
Mehmetoglu, Mehmet and Tor G. Jakobsen. 2017. Applied Statistics Using Stata: A
Guide for the Social Sciences. Sage Publications.
Menard, Scott. 2009. Logistic Regression: From Introductory to Advanced Concepts and
Applications. Sage Publications.
Meter, D. J. and Card, N. A. 2015. “Defenders of Victims of Peer Aggression:
Interdependence Theory and an Exploration of Individual, Interpersonal, and Contextual
Effects on the Defender Participant Role.” Developmental Review 38:222-240.
Monaghan, Lee. 2003. “Danger on the Doors: Bodily Risk in a Demonised Occupation.”
Health, Risk & Society 5(1):11-31.
Murphy, Nora. A. 2016. “What we Know and the Future of Accuracy Research.” Pp. 404424 in The Social Psychology of Perceiving Others Accurately, edited by J. A. Hall, M.
Schmid Mast, and T. V. West. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Osswald, Silvia, Tobias Greitemeyer, Peter Fischer, and Dieter Frey. 2010. “What is
Moral Courage? Definition, Explication, and Classification of a Complex Construct.” Pp.
149-164 in The Psychology of Courage: Modern Research on an Ancient Virtue, edited
by C. L. S. Pury and S. J. Lopez. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Parks, Michael. J., D. Wayne Osgood, Richard B. Felson, Samantha Wells, and Kathryn
Graham. 2013. “Third Party Involvement in Barroom Conflicts. Aggressive Behavior
39(4):257-268.

22

Pedersen, Anne-Julie Boesen, Britta Kyvsgaard, and Flemming Balvig. 2015. Udsathed
for vold og andre former for kriminalitet. Offerundersøgelserne 2005-2014 med særligt
afsnit om vold og reviktimisering. Justitsministeriet, Københavns Universitet, Det
Kriminalpræventive Råd, Rigspolitiet.
Phillips, Scott & Mark Cooney. 2005. “Aiding Peace, Abetting Violence: Third Parties
and the Management of Conflict.” American Sociological Review 70(2):334-354.
Pituch, Keenan. A. and James. P. Stevens. 2016. Applied Multivariate Statistics for the
Social Sciences: Analyses with SAS and IBM’s SPSS. Routledge.
Planty, Mike 2002.Third-Party Involvement in Violent Crime, 1993-99. US Department
of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Popper, Karl. 1959. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: Basic Books.
Pöyhönen, Virpi, Jaana Juvonen, and Christina Salmivalli. 2010. “What Does It Take to
Stand Up for the Victim Of Bullying?: The Interplay Between Personal and Social
Factors.” Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 56(2):143-163.
Rabe-Hemp, Cara E., and Amie M. Schuck .2007. “Violence Against Police Officers:
Are Female Officers at Greater Risk?” Police Quarterly 10(4):411-428.
Reynald, Danielle. M. 2009. “Guardianship in Action: Developing a New Tool for
Measurement.” Crime Prevention & Community Safety 11(1):1-20.
Riffe, Daniel., Stephen Lacy, and Frederick Fico. 2005. Analyzing Media Messages:
Using Quantitative Content Analysis in Research. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sainio, Miia, René Veenstra, Gijs Huitsing, and Christina Salmivalli. 2011. “Victims and
Their Defenders: A Dyadic Approach.” International Journal of Behavioral Development
35(2):144-151.
Sheleff, Leon S. and David Shichor. 1980. “Victimological Aspects of Bystander
Involvement.” NPPA Journal 26(2):193-201.
Slater, Mel, Aitor Rovira, Richard Southern, David Swapp, Jian J. Zhang, Claire
Campbell, and Mark Levine. 2013. “Bystander Responses to a Violent Incident In An
Immersive Virtual Environment.” PLOS ONE 8(1):e52766.

23

Swann Jr., William B., Ángel Gómez, Jolanda Jetten, Harvey Whitehouse, and Brock
Bastian. 2012. “When Group Membership Gets Personal: A Theory of Identity Fusion.”
Psychological Review 119(3):441-456.
Tajfel, Henri and Turner, John C. 1979. “An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflict.”
Pp 33-47 in The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, edited by W.G. Austin and
S. Worchel Monterey: Brooks/Cole.
Tinbergen, Niko. 1963. “On Aims and Methods of Ethology.” Zeitschrift für
Tierpsychologie, 20(4):410-433.
Toomey, Traci. Darin J. Erickson, Bradley P. Carlin, Kathleen M. Lenk, Harrison S.
Quick, Alexis M. Jones, and Eileen M. Harwood. 2012. “The Association Between
Density of Alcohol Establishments and Violent Crime Within Urban Neighborhoods.”
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 36(8):1468-1473.
van Bommel, Marco, Marco van Prooijen, Jan-Willem van Prooijen, Henk Elffers, and
Paul A. M. van Lange. 2014. “Intervene to be Seen: The Power of a Camera in
Attenuating the Bystander Effect.” Social Psychological and Personality Science
5(4):459-466.
van Reemst, Lisa, Tamar F. C. Fischer, and Barbara W. C. Zwirs. 2015. “Response
Decision, Emotions, and Victimization of Police Officers. European Journal of
Criminology 12(6):635-657.
Vitaro, Frank. and Mara Brendgen. 2012. “Subtypes of Aggressive Behavior: Etiologies,
Development, and Consequences.” Pp. 17-38 in Antisocial Behavior and Crime:
Contributions of Developmental and Evaluation Research to Prevention and
Intervention, edited by T. Bliesener, A. Beelmann, and M. Stemmler. Cambridge:
Hogrefe Publishing.
Vrij, Aldert, Lorraine Hope, and Ronald P. Fisher. 2014. “Eliciting Reliable Information
in Investigative Interviews.” Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences
1(1):129-136.
Weenink, Don. 2014. “Frenzied Attacks. A Micro-Sociological Analysis of the Emotional
Dynamics of Extreme Youth Violence.” The British Journal of Sociology, 65(3):411-433.

24

