Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.32

Pp.420-430

Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes: Epenthesis and Deletion in
Mostaganem Spoken Arabic
Radia Benyoucef
Department of English
Faculty of Foreign Languages
Mohamed Ben Ahmed University-Oran 2, Oran, Algeria

Abstract
The study at hand explores the crucial position that the syllable holds in phonological analysis and
theorizing by highlighting the analytical issues that might follow the exclusion of the syllable from
phonological study. Effectively, the present study attempts to answer three main research
questions, namely 1. Can rule-based phonology provide a satisfactory account of non-assimilatory
processes such as epenthesis and deletion in Mostaganem Spoken Arabic? 2. Can a syllabledevoid account of epenthesis and deletion in Mostaganem Spoken Arabic be satisfactory? 3. Is the
syllable indispensable in accounting for epenthesis and deletion in Mostaganem Spoken Arabic?
Indeed, the present study demonstrates that a syllable-devoid analysis provides unsatisfactory
accounts of certain phonological epenthesis and deletion. In order to attain the aim of this study,
instances of epenthesis and deletion in the Mostaganem spoken variety of Algerian Arabic are
analysed. Such instances of epenthesis and deletion were obtained from the recorded speech of a
randomly selected sample of fifty native speakers of Mostaganem Spoken Arabic. The findings of
this study reveal the indispensability of the syllable in describing and explaining epenthesis and
deletion in MTG by comparing a syllable-devoid account and a syllable-based account of such
processes. Effectively, syllable-devoid account pertaining to The Sound Pattern of English
(Chomsky & Halle, 1968) tradition proved short of explanations as to why epenthesis and deletion
take place in Mostaganem spoken Arabic as contrasted to a syllable-based account which provides
adequate and convincing explanations of those processes.
Keywords: Account, deletion, epenthesis, Mostaganem Spoken Arabic, phonological processes,
syllable, The Sound Pattern of English
Cite as: Benyoucef, R. (2019) Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes:
Epenthesis and Deletion in Mostaganem Spoken Arabic. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2)
420-430.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.32

420

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

Introduction
The modular nature of language divides linguistics into a set of sub-disciplines each one of which
emphasizes a certain aspect or else constituent unit of language. Effectively, while branches like
syntax and morphology study units like sentences and words respectively, phonology has the
segment or else the phoneme as its centre of concern. The elementariness of the phoneme can be
traced back to the earliest instances of phonological theorizing within generative phonology,
notably in The Sound Pattern of English (SPE) as set by Chomsky and Halle (1968). In this book,
which introduced a quite influential approach in phonological analysis known as rule-based
phonology or linear phonology, the phoneme is the basic unit of phonological analysis. Indeed,
account of quite common phonological phenomena as sound change, addition or omission which
are all enclosed under the umbrella term phonological processes, was achieved in reference to the
phoneme and its constituents without further concern to other sound units. Thus, the phoneme was
the sole unit of analysis in SPE. Hence, the aim of the present study is to prove that the syllable is
an indispensable unit for explaining epenthesis and deletion in MTG and to demonstrate that a
syllable-devoid analysis fails to account for those processes. Moreover, this study attempts to
answer the following research questions:
1. Can rule-based phonology provide a satisfactory account of non-assimilatory processes
such as epenthesis and deletion in Mostaganem spoken Arabic (MTG)?
2. Can a syllable-devoid account of epenthesis and deletion in MTG be satisfactory?
3. Is the syllable indispensable in accounting for epenthesis and deletion in MTG?
The following hypotheses result from the abovementioned research questions:
•
•
•

Rule-based phonology provides an unsatisfactory account of non-assimilatory processes
such as epenthesis and deletion in MTG since it neglects the unit of the syllable.
A syllable-devoid account fails to provide a satisfactory description and explanation of
non-assimilatory processes such as epenthesis and deletion in MTG.
The syllable is an indispensable unit in accounting for non-assimilatory processes such as
epenthesis and deletion in MTG.

Phonological Processes and a Phoneme-centred Analysis
Chomsky & Halle (1968) indicated the possibility of a phoneme-centred analysis by developing a
distinctive feature theory which was inspired from Jakobson’s theory (1952). Such a theory
pinpointed the possibility of accounting for phonological processes like assimilation by analysing
the constituent features of phonemes solely without having recourse to another sound unit. Thus,
account of assimilatory processes like nasalization in French could be achieved in terms of the
distinctive features of the vowel that is target to nasalization and the features of its adjacent
phonemes without having recourse to any other sound unit. The instance of nasalization in French
involves the change of an oral vowel like /a/ in /an/ ‘year’ to a nasal vowel [a] yielding the output
form [an] (Katamba, 1993, p. 121). Such a change is explained as being the result of a change of
the feature [-nasal] which constitutes the vowel /a/ in /an/ to the feature [+nasal] which yields the
vowel [a] in the output [an]. The reason behind nasalization of /a/ is the [+nasal] /n/ which follows

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

421

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

/a/. Rule-based account of SPE uses a rule to represent and describe processes as nasalization as
illustrated in figure 1.
[+consonantal][+consonantal] /
[+consonantal]
[-nasal]
[+nasal]
[+nasal]
Figure 1. Rule-based account of nasalization in French (Katamba, 1993, p. 123)
Obviously, Chomsky & Halle (1968) focused only on the phoneme or the segment in their
account of different types of phonological processes, especially assimilatory process and discarded
any other sound unit. At first, their focus was embraced and welcomed by phonologists as no
analytical problem was encountered in the case of assimilatory processes. Indeed, phonemecentred account proved to be a reliable and useful method of analysis for describing assimilatory
processes. However, soon after another type of phonological processes was discovered and the
necessity for other sound units to account for them became obvious. Such a type of processes is
known as non-assimilatory processes as they do not involve a featural change, so that a sound
becomes more like an adjacent sound. In contrary, non-assimilatory processes involve the insertion
or deletion of certain sounds in order to serve some principle of phonology (Sloat et al, 1978, p.
117).
The most common types of non-asssimilatory processes are insertion or epenthesis which
involves the addition of a sound and deletion or syncope which involves the omission of a sound
(Shane, 1973, pp. 53-54). Account of this type of processes requires appeal to another sound unit
in addition to the phoneme as indicated by Khan (1968), Vennemann (1974), Hooper (1976) and
Féry &Vijver (2003). This other sound unit is the syllable and its significance in phonological
analysis became quite obvious because of various reasons. We outline in this paper the most
relevant reasons.
The Syllable as a Significant Unit in Phonological Analysis
The syllable as defined by Kahn (1968) is a “unit of perception and production larger than the
segment and smaller than the word” (p. 20) . The syllable is thus a group of segments or phonemes
each one of which occupies a certain position in the syllable. Vowels are the central part of the
syllable and are accordingly called peaks or nuclei, whereas consonants are optional and are found
on the margins of the syllables; either preceding or following the vowel (Katamba, 1993, p. 154).
As indicated by Katamba (1993) a word like bats /bts/ consists of one syllable which is / bts/
with vowel // as its nucleus, the consonant /b/ as its margin called the onset and the consonants
/t/ and /s/ as its other margins called coda.
Representation of syllable constituents or structure is achieved by using a tree diagram that
is reminiscent of the tree diagram of sentences structure in syntax (Spencer 1996, p. 73). Such a
tree diagram involves more than one level and is thus in clash with SPE’s linear representation
which assembles all phonological elements in one line that is referred to as a rule (Spencer, 1996).
The tree diagram for the syllable / bts/ can be represented as follows:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

422

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

σ

Onset

Rhyme

Nucleus

b



Coda

t

s

Figure 2. Tree diagram of / bts/ (Katamba, 1993, p. 154)
The importance of the syllable relates to different aspects of phonological analysis. Among those
aspects is the role it plays in formulating those conditions on sound combination and distribution
which are dubbed phonotactic constraints (Spencer, 1996, p. 73). Indeed, syllable structure
facilitates the formulation of phonotactic constraints of the sort the sounds /k/ and /n/ cannot
combine at the beginning of words. Using syllable structure helps us understand why such a
sequence is prohibited in cases as ‘know’ (/n/ not */kn/), but is allowed in others like
/knlid/ ‘acknowledge’. Including syllable structure in the phonotactic constraint concerning
the sequence /kn/ indicates that the sequence /kn/ is disallowed when /k/ and /n/ are tautosyllabic
or when they occur as onset of one single syllable. This explains why the sequence /kn/ is allowed
in acknowledge. In fact, /k/ and /n/ are part of different syllables in this case with /k/ syllabifying
as coda to the first syllable /k/ and /n/ as onset of the second syllable. /n/.
The relevance of the syllable is also noted in the case of voiceless stops aspiration in
English as indicated by Kahn (1968, p. 68) and Spencer (1996, p. 207). The classical phonotactics
of voiceless stops aspiration is that /p,t,k/ are aspirated at the beginning or middle of English words
like pacific, tomorrow, collide, appear, attempt and account, but not after /s/ as in spin, stem and
skin (Kahn, 1968, p. 70). Nevertheless, other forms do not follow this classical version of the
aspiration phonotactics. In fact, in words like ‘acknowledge’ /k/ is not aspirated even though it
occurs in the same position as in ‘account’ which is word-medial. In order to overcome such a
problem, phonologists like Kahn (1968) proposed to include syllable boundaries in the
phonotactics of aspiration. Hence, rather than using word boundaries like beginning and middle of
the word, syllable boundaries, namely onset of the syllable are more adequate in this case. As a
matter of fact, /k/ of acknowledge /k-n-lid/ is a coda of the syllable /k/ which explains the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

423

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

failure of applying aspiration in this case unlike in ‘account’ /-khant/ in which /k/ is the onset of
the syllable /kant/ an d is thus aspirated. Furthermore, word boundaries cause a representational
problem since the boundary middle of the word is difficult to represent in a rule-based form and
may correspond to two different syllable boundaries, namely onset and coda. Thus, rather than
using word boundaries in rule-based representations, it is more adequate and simple to use syllable
boundaries. The rule of English aspiration is represented as follows in Spencer (1996, p. 205):
/p, t, k/  [+spread glottis] / σ[
Figure 3. Rule of English aspiration
The rule indicates that /p, t, k/ are aspirated or acquire the feature [spread glottis], which represents
aspiration, when they are in syllable-initial position or else in onset position.
The relevance of the syllable does not only relate to phonotactics of allophonic
distribution as in the case of aspirated and unaspirated allophones of /p,t,k/ in English. The syllable
is also an essential unit in accounting for a number of phonological processes which have been
assumed by some phonologists, as Shane (1973), Kahn (1968), Katamba (1993), Spencer (1996),
Archangelli (1997), Kager (1999) and Féry&Vijver (2003) among others, to apply in order to
obey some principles of syllable structure. Indeed, Katamba (1993, p. 167) demonstrates that the
process of obstruent devoicing which is observed in German can be better explained if syllable
structure is included. The devoicing of German obstruents in cases like /rak/ ‘day’ /tag/ ‘days’
was traditionally represented by the following rule as indicated in Katamba (199, p. 167):
[-sonorant][-voice] /
{C
}
Figure 4. Devoicing in German
The rule above indicates that voiced obstruents in German are devoiced when they occur either
before a consonant or word-finally. The environment before a consonant (C) and word-finally ()
both indicate the same syllable boundary which is coda position or syllable-final position. Indeed,
in both cases the obstruent which is object to devoicing is part of a coda be it with another
consonant or alone. Thus, using syllable structure rather than the traditional (C or ) assures a
more economical and general reformulation of rule (4). Hence, reformulation of rule (5) including
syllable boundaries can be written as follows:
[-sonorant][-voice] /
]σ
Figure 5. Reformulation of devoicing in German rule
The significance of syllable structure is also observed in French in cases of vowel nasalization in
cases like /bon/ ‘good’ [bon] and /anfle/ ‘swell/swollen’ [anfle]. These instances of vowel
nasalization in French are represented by the following rule as indicated in Katamba (1993167):
V[+nasal] /
N{C
}
Figure 6. Vowel nasalization in French
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

424

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

The rule implies that a vowel changes from oral to nasal in French when it is followed by a nasal
consonant like /n/ before a consonant or in word-final position. It seems like the same problem
that is encountered in the case of German obstruent devoicing is encountered here. Effectively, in
both instances of nasalization, namely [bon] and [anfle], the vowel is nasalized if it is followed by
a nasal consonant in coda position. As demonstrated earlier both C and represent coda position.
Thus, rule (6) can be reformulated as follows including syllable structure:
V[+nasal] /
N] σ
Figure 7. Reformulation of vowel nasalization in French rule
Obviously, syllable-based rules of both German obstruent devoicing and French nasalization
provide more adequate, economical and general representations both processes. Furthermore, the
fact of using syllable structure in these rules provides a common environment, which is coda
position, for all instances of obstruent devoicing in German and all those of nasalization in French.
As a result, all instances of obstruent devoicing occur because the targeted obstruent occurs in
coda position. Similarly, all instances of vowel nasalization take place because the vowel is
followed by a nasal occurring in coda position.
The Significance of the Syllable in Accounting for MTG’s Epenthesis and Deletion
In addition to the relevance of the syllable in providing an economical and general account of
processes like obstruent devoicing and nasalization as demonstrated above, the syllable is also
significant in accounting for other processes, namely epenthesis and deletion. The present study
analyses the relevance of the syllable in accounting for epenthesis and deletion in the Algerian
dialect spoken in Mostaganem and known as Mostaganem Spoken Arabic (MTG).
Method
The corpus of the present study consists of the recordings of the speech of fifty native speakers of
the Mostaganem spoken dialect of Algerian Arabic. The settings of the recording sessions include
the supermarket, the beach, taxi, and the researcher’s home. The sample of the study was randomly
selected from the surrounding of the researcher and the age range of the participants is diversified
combining children, adolescents and adults. Furthermore, both males and females were recorded.
The participants are all inhabitants of the city of Mostaganem, and thus speak the urban accent of
Mostaganem spoken Arabic.
After the recording sessions were completed, the speech was transcribed using IPA
symbols. Then, the transcription was analyzed by the researcher in order to identify the recurrent
instances of epenthesis and deletion. After epenthesis and deletion were identified, analysis of
these processes was accomplished by comparing between a syllable-devoid account and a syllablebased account. The results and interpretations of such an analysis are outlined in the subsequent
section.
Analysis of Epenthesis and Deletion in MTG
Epenthesis
The findings of the study revealed the existence of a type of epenthesis in MTG called glide
insertion. Glide insertion involves the insertion of the glide /j/ between two vowels in MTG as in
Arab World English Journal
425
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

/  ’I know’ [ . Such process happens as when the vowel-initial personal
pronoun ‘’ (I) follows a word that ends with a vowel such as ‘’ (I know). The following
sample which is extracted from the findings of our study illustrates glide insertion in MTG:
Table 1. Glide Insertion in MTG
Input

Output

Word
translation
    Know I
Buy I
 
 
   
Just I
 
 
She told I
 
 
    They do I
    They leave I
    They bail I

Gloss

Ill-formed forms

I know’
‘he buys me’
‘oh my God’
‘just me’
‘she told me’
‘they do me’
‘they leave me’
‘they bail on me’

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

This case of epenthesis is the result of a common principle in phonological analysis which is
avoidance of vowel hiatus. Most languages of the world disallow vowels to occur in a sequence
without any intervening consonant in between (Spencer 1996, p. 234). Thus, if a vowel hiatus
emerges as the outcome of affixation or at word boundaries, a remedy strategy is adopted in the
language in question. In the case of MTG, the remedy is to insert the glide /j/ between the two
vowels /i/ and /a/ in /  The glide /j/ is inserted and not any other consonant since, as
indicated by Uffmann (2007, p. 465) /j/ is the most suitable consonant in this case as /j/ shares the
feature [+high] with the vowel /i/ in [ 


Account of glide insertion in MTG from SPE’s rule-based perspective can be formulated as
follows:
∅j / V
V
Figure 8. Rule-based account of glide in MTG
Such a rule is satisfactory as far as formal description and representation are concerned. Yet, when
one seeks explanation of the process, the rule is not sufficient on its own. Indeed, vowel hiatus is
disallowed because of a quite clear reason in this case and such reason is impossible to formulate
unless syllable structure is taken into account. In fact, different types of syllables exist in MTG or
in any other dialect of any other language. However, one type of syllables is found in all languages
of the world, comprehending Arabic and its dialects. This type of syllables has been dubbed the
unmarked type of syllables since it is favoured by all languages of the world and is the type of
syllables which start with a consonant and ends with a vowel (Féry & De Vijver 2003, p. 6). Such
type of syllables is known as the CV-type or open onsetful syllable and vowel hiatus is disallowed
because it results in a syllable that has no onset. Thus, when /ana/ follows /  the syllable
/a/ of the word /ana/ is of a V-type which lacks an onset and is thus in clash with the preferred CVArab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

426

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

type. In order to turn the V-type syllable /a/ into the unmarked CV-type, the glide /j/ inserted before
/a/ yielding /ja/ which has an onset and is of a CV-type. Obviously, syllable structure is necessary
for explaining glide insertion in MTG. In addition, to epenthesis, MTG also displays some
instances of deletion. The following section examines deletion in MTG.


Deletion in MTG
MTG displays a case of deletion in instances of affixation like /     ‘ready’. In
such cases, the vowel // of the adjective   ‘ready, masculine’ is deleted after the feminine
suffix ‘a-’ is added to it in order to form the feminine form of [     The
following sample which is extracted from the findings of our study illustrates deletion in MTG:
Table 2. Vowel deletion in MTG
Input


 
 

 
 
 
 


 
 

Output


 


 
 
 

 

 

Gloss
‘ready’
‘wise’
‘carrying’
‘kind’
‘absent’
‘bringing’
‘killed’
‘mistaken’
‘grabbing’
‘doing’

Ill-formed forms


  

 
 
 

 

 


It appears from the above sample that whenever the feminine suffix ‘a-’ is added to an adjective
or participle, the // of the root is deleted. Having recourse to rule-based phonology to account for
this case of deletion would be in vain since rule-based phonology cannot provide the environment
that conditions deletion in this case. On the other hand, if syllable structure is included in the
account, deletion in MTG can be explained and adequately described. Indeed, // is deleted in
/ which is realized like [ ] since it occurs in an open unstressed syllable which is

As indicated by Btoosh (2006) “weak nuclei cannot stand in open syllables in most Arabic
varieties” (p. 201). After the feminine suffix ‘a- ‘is added to / the resulting form is
    syllabifying as the onset of the new syllable which is formed by the suffix /a/
yielding the syllables /wa/, / and /da/. Such syllabification satisfies the preferred CV-type.
Indeed, syllabifying /d/ as coda to  would yield the output [  the syllable /a/
lacking an onset. Such syllabification is in clash with the unmarked CV-type which requires
syllables to have onsets. As a result, the vowel // is no longer nucleus of a closed syllable as in
the masculine form  Given that // is the weakest vowel in any language and is never
stressed (Ryu & Hong, 2013, p. 317), it cannot occur in open syllables as indicated by Btoosh
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

427

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

(2006). Thus, // is deleted and // resyllabifies as the coda of the first syllable /wa/ yielding the
final output  Such cases of deletion are common in most dialects of Arabic since weak
nuclei as // are disfavoured by most dialects of Arabic (Kabrah, 2011, p. 36).
It is clear from the above analysis that syllable structure is essential in accounting for
deletion in MTG. To further prove this point, let us compare between a classical rule-based account
in which syllable structure is disregarded and another which takes syllable structure into account.
The two accounts are presented in the following rules:
V∅ /
?
Figure 9. Rule-based account of vowel deletion in MTG
[-stress] ∅ / σ [C
Figure 10. Rule-based account of vowel deletion in MTG including syllable structure
The first rule which discards the syllable fails to provide the environment that conditions deletion,
whereas the second rule which tales syllable structure into account succeeds to account for deletion
in MTG and to provide the conditioning environment which is open syllable and is symbolized by
σ [C
. Rule (10) is then read; weak vowels [-stress] are deleted when they occur in open
syllables (σ [C
).
Conclusion
As demonstrated in the analysis of the findings of our study, the syllable is indispensable in
accounting for the most common types of non-assimilatory processes, viz epenthesis and deletion.
Indeed, as indicated for MTG’s epenthesis and deletion, those processes cannot be satisfactorily
described and explained if syllable structure is discarded. For this particular reason, rule-based
accounts of epenthesis and deletion which were syllable-devoid were short of explanations for the
occurrence of those processes. Effectively, epenthesis and deletion often apply in order to obey
some principle of syllable structure such as the necessity of an onset. This link between syllable
structure and epenthesis and deletion led to the labeling of epenthesis and deletion ‘syllable
structure processes’ by some phonologists as Shane (1973, p. 52).
It is doubtless now that the syllable is an integral part of speech and is as significant to
phonological analysis as the individual sounds. This resolution was to influence a number of
phonologists who developed approaches and theories that recognized the importance of the
syllable in phonological analysis in addition to the individual sound of course. Among those
approaches and theories, one may cite autosegmental phonology set forth by Goldsmith (1976)
and optimality theory introduced by Prince & Smolensky (1993) and McCarthy & Prince (1995).
These two waves of phonological theorizing preserve the basic foundations of generative
phonology and of SPE. Yet, each one of them brought some useful additions to phonological
analysis one of which is the significance of the syllable in phonological analysis.
Interestingly, by demonstrating that the fact of including the syllable in accounting for
non-assimilatory processes such as epenthesis and deletion in MTG is indispensable, this study
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

428

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

calls for future studies that will take into account the syllable in their account of other nonassimilatory processes in MTG or for epenthesis and deletion in other varieties of the Arabic
language. Such a consideration for the unit of the syllable would further prove the import of the
syllable in phonological theorizing and analysis. Besides, such a consideration would justify the
necessity for the representational shifts that were established by both autosegmental phonology
and optimality theory from phonological rules to multi-tiered representation and to constraints
respectively.
About the Author
Benyoucef Radia is a Full-time lecturer at Abdelhamid Ibn Basis University, Mostaganem,
Algeria. She has an MA degree in Linguistics, and her main areas of interest include phonology,
phonetics, sociolinguistics, linguistics, morphology and syntax. Benyoucef Radia is currently
preparing a PhD degree in linguistics at Mohamed Ben Ahmed University, Oran 2, Algeria.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8015-2340

References
Archangeli, D. (1997), Optimality Theory: An Introduction to Linguistics in the 1990s. In: D.
Archangeli, &D. T. Langendoen (Eds), Optimality Theory: An Overview. (pp.1-32).
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Btoosh, M. (2006), Constraint Phonotactics: An Optimality Theoretic Approach. Journal of
Language and Linguistics, 5 (2), 192-221.
Chomsky, N., & Halle, M. (1968). The Sound Pattern of English. New York: Harper & Row.
Féry, C., & De Vijver, R. V. (2003). The Syllable in Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Goldsmith, J. (1976). Autosegmental Phonology. PhD dissertation, MIT. (published in 1979, New
York: Garland).
Hooper, J. B. (1976). An introduction to natural generative phonology. New York: Academic
Press.
Kabrah, R. (2011), Regressive Voicing Assimilation in Cairene Arabic. Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics: Papers from Annual Symposia on Arabic Linguistics, 25, 21-33.
Kager, R. (1999). Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katamba, F. (1989). An Introduction to Phonology. New York: Longman Inc.
Kahn, D. (1968). Syllable-based Generalizations in English Phonology. Unpublished PhD thesis.
MIT. Cambridge. USA.
McCarthy, J. and Prince, A. (1995), Faithfulness and Reduplicative Identity. In J. Beckman, L. W.
Dickey & S. Urbanczyk (Eds), Papers in Optimality Theory (pp. 249-384), Amherst:
GLSA Publications.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993). Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in Generative
Grammar. New Brunswick, Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science Technical
Report 2.
Ryu, N, Y., & Hong, S, H. (2013). Schwa Deletion in the Conversational Speech of English: The
Role of Linguistic Factors. Linguistic Research 30 (2), 131-333.
Shane, S. (1973). Generative Phonology. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall Inc.
Sloat, C, Taylor, S. & Hoard, J. (1978). Introduction to Phonology. New York: Prentice Hall.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

429

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Proposing a Syllable-based Account of Phonological Processes

Benyoucef

Spencer, A. (1996). Phonology: Theory and Description. Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers
Ltd.
Uffmann, C. (2007), Intrusive [r] and Optimal Epenthetic Consonants. Language Sciences,29,
451- 476.
Vennemann, T. (1974). Words and Syllables in Natural Generative Grammar. In: A. Bruck et al
(Eds), Papers from the Parasession on Natural Phonology, Chicago: CLS.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

430

