Rediscovering the 1%:
Knowledge Infrastructures and the Stylized Facts of Inequality
Daniel Hirschman
Brown University
daniel_hirschman@brown.edu
Abstract
In the 2000s, newly-analyzed tax data revealed that top incomes in the United States had begun a
dramatic upward climb in the early 1980s, summarized as the rise of “the 1%.” This article explains
why it took two decades for this increase to become salient. Drawing on insights from the history
and sociology of science, I argue that the social sciences rely on knowledge infrastructures to
monitor trends and identify stylized facts. These infrastructures collect, process, and distribute data
in ways that channel sustained attention to particular problems while rendering other potential
observations out of focus. Knowledge infrastructures, like other infrastructures, have significant
inertia: initial design choices that followed from particular theoretical, political, and practical
priorities become locked in and shape the kinds of data readily available to future researchers.
Using this framework, I show how the dominant economic knowledge infrastructures constructed
in the mid-20th century were incapable of tracking top incomes, creating the conditions under
which experts, policymakers, and the public alike could be surprised by the rediscovery of the 1%.
Keywords
Knowledge Infrastructures, Inequality, Top Incomes, Stylized Facts, Economics
Acknowledgments
Funding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation (grant #1229894), the
Rackham Graduate School at the University of Michigan, and the Program in Business,
Entrepreneurship and Organizations at Brown University. Vanessa Garcia and Jime Gonzalez
provided excellent research assistance. I thank audiences at the University of Michigan, Brown,
Harvard, Notre Dame, and Yale for helpful comments on previous drafts. Many other readers have
provided generous feedback. I thank especially Beth Popp Berman, Jamie Budnick, Zach Griffen,
and Greta Krippner for offering extraordinary advice and feedback over the entire life course of
this project.

1

An Unexpected Finding
In 2003, economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez published a surprising finding:
the top 1% of income earners in the United States were now receiving about 15% of all income,
almost twice as large a share as they had 30 years earlier. Perhaps even more surprisingly, top
income earners were now receiving their largest share since the Great Depression. Even before the
finding appeared in the prestigious Quarterly Journal of Economics, columnist and noted
economist Paul Krugman had already written it up in The New York Times Magazine.1 Although
scholars had observed an increase in income inequality in the 1980s and 1990s, Krugman argued
that Piketty and Saez’s research reframed the debate by offering a new characterization of
inequality that did not fit easily into existing theories about the role of education, globalization,
race, or gender. Over the next decade, the growth of the top 1% spurred new research programs in
economics, political science, and sociology. Beyond the walls of the academy, “the 1%” entered
into mainstream political discourse, and even helped to frame a new political identity as the
Occupy Wall Street movement declared, “We are the 99%!” (Gould-Wartofsky 2014).
How was it possible that Piketty and Saez’s finding was so surprising? The trend of growth
in the top 1% of incomes began in the mid-1980s and was at least potentially visible in publiclyavailable annual IRS tax data. Piketty and Saez did not invent any fancy new statistical techniques,
but rather updated an analysis published by Simon Kuznets half a century earlier (see Figures 1
and 2).2 What was it about the way scholars studied inequality that made it possible for them to
miss the growth of the 1%? To answer this specific empirical question, I develop a framework for
addressing a more general one: how do past research priorities shape future knowledge production?

Krugman (2002), and other commenters, relied on Piketty and Saez’s NBER working paper, released in 2001.
Throughout this article, I emphasize Piketty and Saez’s early work on top income inequality rather than Piketty’s
later research on wealth inequality, made famous in Piketty (2014). See McGoey (2017) for an excellent discussion
of the history of that project with a similar theoretical interest in evidence, absence, and ignorance.
1
2

2

I argue that these priorities become institutionalized in knowledge infrastructures — “robust
networks of people, artifacts, and institutions that generate, share, and maintain specific knowledge
about the human and natural worlds” (Edwards 2010:17) — which enable certain kinds of
knowledge production, but channel researcher attention away from questions that are not readily
answerable within the framework of that infrastructure.

Figure 1: Piketty and Saez’s (2003:12) famous chart showing the growth of top incomes in the
1980s–1990s.

3

Figure 2: Kuznets’ (1953:33) less famous chart showing the downward trend of top incomes in
the 1930s–1940s.

Drawing on the history of macroeconomics and labor economics, I show how mid-20th
century economic theory and policy priorities shaped the creation of two knowledge infrastructures
that made visible certain aspects of income inequality but that, as a result of the decisions made
during their development, these infrastructures were incapable of tracking movements in top
incomes. In particular, I show how certain modes of observation that had been common in the
1920s–1950s were left out of the prevailing knowledge infrastructures in the 1970s–1990s, which
in turn rendered top incomes “out-of-focus” (Peterson 2017) for inequality scholars.

4

To make sense of this case, I draw on and expand interdisciplinary theorizing about
knowledge infrastructures and how they shape the trajectory of scientific fields (Edwards 2010;
Edwards et al. 2013; Ribes and Polk 2015; Boyce 2016; Edwards 2019). I focus here on knowledge
infrastructures built to monitor trends (such as weather stations or national censuses) in contrast to
experimental systems typically deployed in laboratories and designed to uncover features of the
human and natural worlds that are believed to be stable phenomena (Hacking 1983; Rheinberger
1994). I argue that the social sciences rely heavily on monitoring infrastructures because they make
possible the identification of stylized facts, empirical regularities that substitute for phenomena
(Hirschman 2016).
I offer an account of how knowledge infrastructures collect, process, and distribute data
and, in so doing, facilitate specific forms of knowledge production. Not all research is undergirded
by an existing knowledge infrastructure, but research that works with and through such
infrastructure benefits from all of the upfront investments made in gathering and cleaning the data,
and from the work infrastructures do to facilitate widespread understanding and use of the data.
The construction of knowledge infrastructures, like that of physical infrastructures, is a complex,
political process that must resolve competing theoretical, political, and practical demands. Once
constructed, knowledge infrastructures acquire significant inertia: in order to monitor trends, this
infrastructure must measure the same things over time at the cost of lost flexibility. As a result,
past priorities shape existing knowledge infrastructures which in turn channel researcher attention
towards some problems and away from others. Attending to the dynamics of knowledge
infrastructures identifies a novel route by which the history of a field is institutionalized in ways
that shape future knowledge production.

5

The remainder of this article proceeds as follows. First, I offer a novel synthetic
theorization of the dynamics of knowledge infrastructures. Second, I outline an analytical strategy
for approaching the rise of the 1% in inequality debates, arguing that it can be usefully understood
as an example of the emergence of a new stylized fact. Third, I turn to the case itself. I follow the
intertwined histories of macroeconomics, labor economics, and the production of official statistics
to show how the construction of knowledge infrastructures shaped inequality research. The case is
divided into three periods: the 1920s–1970s, when both labor economics and macroeconomics
take shape and develop specific knowledge infrastructures; the 1980s–2000, when we can see the
effects of those infrastructures in rendering the growth of top incomes largely invisible; and 2001–
2020, when the 1% is rediscovered. In the middle period, I rely on a partial counterexample — a
brief moment when top income inequality became a matter of public concern — to theorize the
importance of knowledge infrastructures for both observing economic life and for providing
sustained attention to particular features. In the discussion, I offer suggestions for how studying
knowledge infrastructures can help make sense of other features of the development of inequality
knowledge, such as persistently ignored calls for research integrating organizational perspectives.
Knowledge Infrastructures
Historians and sociologists of science refer to systems of observation and measurement as
knowledge infrastructures. Edwards (2010) focuses on the knowledge infrastructures that make
possible claims about global climate through the integration of heterogeneous forms of data, from
contemporary observatories making CO2 measurements to 19th century naval logs with
measurements of ocean surface temperatures. In American social science, central knowledge
infrastructures include the decennial Census, the National Income and Product Accounts, and a
handful of long-running surveys like the Current Population Survey, the American National

6

Election Studies, and the Panel Study on Income Dynamics. Identifying these systems as
infrastructures highlights several features, in particular that they are “routine, reliable, and widely
shared” (Edwards 2017:36). These knowledge infrastructures enable the observation of social and
economic life over time, and thus the identification of trends concerning fertility, economic
growth, gender inequality, and so on. 3
To facilitate research, knowledge infrastructures perform three main tasks: they collect,
process, and distribute data. At each step of this process, the designers and maintainers of the
infrastructure must make consequential choices about what data to collect, how to process it, and
how to distribute it. Each step also requires resources, most notably funding, which is typically
provided by foundations or the government (either directly for knowledge infrastructures housed
inside state agencies, or in the form of grants). If successful, knowledge infrastructures facilitate
knowledge claims by lending legitimacy, cultivating familiarity, and thus increasing the
“doability” (Fujimura 1987) of research that builds on their capacities.
Perhaps the most central aspect of knowledge infrastructures are their mechanisms for
collecting and recording information. The architects of a knowledge infrastructure must make
choices about what kinds of information to collect and how to collect it. These choices are
informed by research agendas, professional values, and political priorities. The theoretical and
empirical debates that are prominent at the time the infrastructure is constructed may weigh
especially heavily on design choices. These choices are about the basic ontology of the
infrastructure—the categories studied, the units of analysis—as well as the scope and scale (global,

3

Here, I focus on infrastructures designed for monitoring rather than experimental systems. That is, I am interested in
the dynamics of knowledge infrastructures built to track the social or natural world “out there” as it changes rather
than experimental systems built in laboratories to detect and isolate specific, seemingly immutable, features of the
natural (or, less frequently, social or psychological) world (on experimental systems see Hacking 1984; Rheinberger
1994). While the two kinds of systems share many features (such as the need to make choices about collecting and
processing data), monitoring infrastructures face specific, additional pressures towards inertia that are theoretically
important for understanding how they shape the trajectory of research.

7

national, local, etc.), and emphasis or focus (Peterson 2017). All of these choices are constrained
by the practical difficulties of data collection. For example, Bowker and Star (1999:46) note that
the original International Classification of Diseases was limited to “200 diseases not because of
the nature of the human body and its problems but because this was the maximum number that
would fit on the large census sheets then in use.”
Knowledge infrastructures are typically built around a “kernel,” a relatively stable center
to the infrastructure that embeds core parts of the initial research agenda (Ribes and Polk 2015).
The design of the “kernel renders certain objects easily inspected; others are a greater challenge,
and still others cannot be inspected at all.” (Ribes and Polk 2015:236; see also Peterson 2017). For
example, the Panel Study on Income Dynamics (PSID) included a larger-than-representative
sample of Black households in its kernel (the initial panel of respondents) because the study
emerged out of the 1960s War on Poverty and oversampled poor, non-white households
(McGonagle et al. 2012). Thus the PSID was better suited to tracking trends in Black-white
disparities than many other national surveys.
Kernels are not completely fixed; they may be extended or elaborated, but doing so may
be costly, and the infrastructure is not infinitely flexible (Ribes and Polk 2015). In the case of the
PSID, attempts to extend this kernel to better track other groups have met with mixed success. For
example, in 1990, the PSID added a new sample of households with heads from Mexico, Cuba,
and Puerto Rico, but this subsample was expensive to construct and maintain, and was dropped in
1995. Many other national surveys have similar limitations rooted in their existing designs
(Clemens and Garvey 2020). Similarly, as I will discuss at length below, most household surveys
include a very small percentage of very rich people because they are not designed to track income

8

and wealth at the very top of the distribution, and such individuals form a small part of a nationallyrepresentative sample.
Because knowledge infrastructures require substantial investments to build and maintain,
academics typically must also secure buy-in from foundations or the state and thus must justify
their research according to the logics of those actors. The National Institutes of Health, for
example, have played a major role in funding large-scale public health surveys, but also famously
refused to fund research on topics perceived to be controversial like sexuality, including revoking
funding for what became the National Health and Social Life Survey (Laumann et al. 1994;
Budnick 2020). Alternatively, academics may build “second-order” knowledge infrastructures
(Boyce 2016) which rely on “first-order” data collected for other purposes (and thus may require
fewer new resources), but in so doing they inherit whatever priorities and limitations are present
in those first-order infrastructures. For example, as discussed below, before World War II, scholars
studying the personal distribution of income using tax data were limited in their ability to see the
whole distribution because the majority of Americans did not pay income taxes.
After collecting data, knowledge infrastructures typically process the data, producing
“clean” datasets (Plantin 2019). This processing may meet multiple objectives, from improving
data quality by weeding out errors in the data collection process and interpolating missing values
(Bokulich 2020), to protecting respondent privacy by removing identifying information and
collapsing small cells together, and simplifying the data to make it more user-friendly by re-coding
response categories (Budnick 2020). These choices may make the data more useful for some
purposes, but they simultaneously require discarding or filtering out information and thus
necessarily limit certain avenues of research (Bowker and Star 1999). Downstream researchers
may be unaware of the choices made in processes of cleaning and thus unaware of such practices

9

may affect their results or interpretations (Borgman et al. 2014). In the context of research on
income inequality, as I discuss more below, surveys frequently “top code” high incomes, reporting
such incomes as “above X” rather than reporting the exact value, which renders changes in the top
of the income distribution invisible.
Finally, after collecting and processing the data, knowledge infrastructures also make that
data available and usable to the broader community. In addition to sharing the data (itself not a
trivial task, especially before the advent of the internet), knowledge infrastructures also typically
provide various forms of metadata, such as codebooks, questionnaires, and other documentation
needed to put the data to use (Downey et al. 2019). Some knowledge infrastructures do much more,
offering dedicated classes on how to use and interpret the data and thus cultivating the research
community’s expertise and familiarity with the data (Shankar et al. 2016). For example, in addition
to teaching classes on a range of generic statistical methods, the Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan also offers regular workshops
to train users of the PSID.4 Funding agencies like the National Science Foundation often provide
resources specifically to support such activities as part of large grants for collecting or maintaining
large-scale survey data (Solovey 2020). These activities build a community of users which in turn
increases the usefulness of the data – other scholars already understand what the data can do, they
may share standardized code to construct new variables or aid analysis of interest to researchers,
and they are qualified to review papers that make use of it, all of which reduces barriers to using
such data while increasing its legitimacy. In turn, the increased use of the data helps to justify
continued funding support, as advocates for the knowledge infrastructure can point to the growing
list of papers as evidence of influence and importance.

4

https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/pages/sumprog/schedule.html#!workshops, accessed October 29, 2020.

10

At each stage of this process – collection, processing, and distribution – architects and
maintainers of knowledge infrastructures make choices that are potentially consequential for the
kinds of knowledge produced by a research community. I note four main consequences of this
work.
First, knowledge infrastructures are productive of particular forms of knowledge. They
enable research communities to produce knowledge more easily, to achieve greater consensus, and
especially to identify and monitor trends over time. The capacity to monitor trends is particularly
important because of how the social sciences rely on identifying and theorizing stylized facts
(Hirschman 2016). Stylized facts take a variety of forms, including correlations, rates of incidence,
or trends. Since the 1960s, economists (and some sociologists and political scientists) have
explicitly discussed their theoretical models in terms of the stylized facts they are designed to
explain. Prominent economic stylized facts include labor’s relatively constant share of national
income (one of the original stylized facts identified by Kaldor [1961], who coined the term), the
increasing returns to a college degree, the gender pay gap, the racial wealth gap, and, as I will
argue below, the rise of the 1%. These facts are understood as stable enough to merit theorizing,
but also mutable enough to merit systems of observations and measurement designed to track their
stability.
Second, the capacity of a knowledge infrastructure to measure change over time entails a
certain level of stability: to measure a trend, the same features of the social or natural world must
be measured in the same way over the period of interest. Knowledge infrastructures make this
possible. But this need for stability simultaneous generates a “tyranny of inertia” (Bowker and Star
1999). Even as researchers recognize limits in existing knowledge infrastructure, perhaps related
to novel empirical or theoretical questions, that infrastructure is difficult and expensive to reorient,

11

and doing so may break the perceived continuity of the measures. National income accountants
point to these tensions when they justify continuing to omit estimates of the market value of unpaid
housework from Gross Domestic Product (GDP) calculations (DeRock 2019). This tension is
particularly heightened in domains where the terrain itself is shifting rapidly. Researchers tracking
attitudinal changes over time rely on surveys asking identical questions over many years, yet the
wording of questions may itself become outmoded. For example, Bonilla-Silva (2017) argues that
questions designed to measure racial attitudes in the 1960s no longer accurately capture
contemporary forms of racism, and Budnick (2020) tracks the persistence of outdated categories
in questions about attitudes towards non-heterosexuality. As a result of this strong tendency
towards inertia combined with changes in the social world itself, knowledge infrastructures may,
over time, experience a growing “concept-measurement gap” (Mügge and Linsi 2020).
Third, this inertia implies that the choices made at the initial construction of a knowledge
infrastructure may have especially enduring consequences. The theoretical, empirical, and political
interests that motivate the construction of the knowledge infrastructure, and the political bargains
required to secure the resources to establish the infrastructure, are worked into the decisions about
data collection, processing, and distribution. These “quiet victories of infrastructure builders
inscribing their politics into the systems” (Bowker and Star 1999:50) occur in part through settling
debates over processes of classification required to build the infrastructure. Similarly, choices
made about the kernel are very difficult to change. As a result, old theories and priorities may
structure present understandings even if the research community no longer accepts those theories.
For example, as I discuss below, 20th century national income statistics were developed and
standardized along explicitly Keynesian lines, and the choices made in this process structured
debates in macroeconomics even after Keynes’ ideas were rejected or amended.

12

Fourth, and finally, knowledge infrastructures produce ignorance as well as knowledge.
Because knowledge infrastructures facilitate some forms of research, enhancing its “doability”
(Fujimura 1987) and channeling resources and attention towards it, they simultaneously render
other aspects of the world “out-of-focus” (Peterson 2017) and other research “undone” (Frickel et
al. 2010). This process creates ignorance, with ignorance understood here not as an individual
cognitive state but rather as a “domain-based absence of knowledge” (Frickel and Edwards 2014).
Research priorities at the time an infrastructure is constructed shape what data are not collected,
in turn, the absence of data about particular phenomena may lead researchers to avoid studying it,
which then reinforces the lack of theoretical interest in the topic, and in turn justifies not spending
scarce resources to modify the infrastructure to collect that data. In short, knowledge
infrastructures are prone to ignorance loops, “iterative cycle[s] of non-knowledge” (Durant
2020:1) caused by gaps in a knowledge infrastructure which obscure patterns that might motivate
changes in that infrastructure to further understand those patterns.
In the following sections, I showcase how these dynamics make sense of the initial
empirical puzzle about the rediscovery of the 1%, and then I use insights from that case to suggest
how attending to knowledge infrastructures can make sense of other patterns in the history of
inequality knowledge.
Analytical Strategy
Restated in the language developed in the preceding section, my argument is as follows: in
the early 2000s, economists identified the rise of the 1% as a new stylized fact. This trend was
invisible to the knowledge infrastructures established by macroeconomists and labor economists
in the mid-20th century. These knowledge infrastructures made possible the identification of other

13

stylized facts about inequality, including trends related to education, race, and gender, but rendered
top incomes out-of-focus. My historical analysis shows how and why this omission came to be.
To motivate this analysis, I first establish that there has been a surge of scholarly and public
interest in top incomes since 2001. Here, I draw on an original hand-coded dataset of newspaper
articles about income inequality along with academic journal citation data. This analysis
establishes that scholars and public discourse detected increased inequality in the mid-1980s but
did not attend to increasing top incomes until the 2000s.
Having established this transformation in inequality discourse, I then go back to the early
20th century to trace the development of the knowledge infrastructures operating in the 1980s–
1990s. I trace the histories of labor economics, macroeconomics, and the production of official
economic statistics in the United States over three periods (1920s–1970s, 1980s–2000, and 2001–
2020). I draw on a variety of sources, including published articles in prominent academic journals,
conference proceedings, and edited volumes, as well as publications from the Department of
Commerce, Congressional Hearing transcripts, and archival sources collected as part of a larger
project on the history of macroeconomics (see [Author Citation] for details). I use these documents
to show how, in the first period (1920s–1970s), the acceptance of particular economic theories
(primarily Keynesian approaches to macroeconomics and human capital theory in labor
economics) alongside political imperatives (the War on Poverty) shaped the kinds of data that
economists collected and analyzed (national income accounts and household surveys,
respectively), and the stylized facts that economists identified. Other kinds of data were not
entirely excluded, but they were sent to the background, less clearly connected to major theoretical
debates, and thus capable of being ignored. In the second period (1980s–2000), I add to these
sources an analysis of public debate around income inequality, and in particular, an important

14

event in 1992 where top incomes briefly became a subject of political contention before receding
into the background. Finally, I move to the most recent period (2001–2020) and ask what we can
learn from the rediscovery of the 1% through the reception of Piketty and Saez’s work. This section
showcases the ongoing efforts to solidify the knowledge infrastructure developed by Piketty and
Saez to measure top incomes as well as the development of new academic research programs and
new social movements which emphasized top incomes as a central facet of income inequality.
Establishing the Phenomenon
Before explaining how we were collectively capable of being surprised by the rise of top
incomes, I first document that we were surprised. In this section, I draw on a hand-coded analysis
of income inequality discourse and citation data from economics to establish the following
empirical claims:
1. Scholars and the media recognized that income inequality was increasing in the 1980s–
1990s.
2. Scholars and the media did not recognize the particular growth of top incomes in the
1980s–1990s.
3. In the 2000s, economists and other social scientists increasingly recognized the growth of
top incomes and began to theorize both its causes and consequences.
4. In 2010–2013, public discussions of inequality increasingly recognized the growth of top
incomes. In particular, discussions of inequality began to center on the rise of “the 1%.”
For claims 1, 2, and 4, I rely on an analysis of inequality discourse from three national
newspapers: The New York Times, The Washington Post, and The Wall Street Journal. Working
with two research assistants, I constructed and analyzed a corpus of 1,960 articles5 published
between 1980 and 2013. This corpus includes every article in each publication that contained the
phrase “income inequality” or “income distribution” anywhere in the text of the article. I use this
corpus to ask how inequality was discussed within the set of articles explicitly discussing the

5

The corpus here includes editorials and book reviews as well as traditional news articles. For simplicity, I refer to
all of these as “articles.”

15

concept. This analysis thus complements McCall’s (2013) analysis of news magazines, which
looks at inequality-related conversations in a broad sample of articles about economic topics and
which will be discussed further below.
I draw on this data to show how newspapers talked about inequality in the United States as
an explicit topic. Of the 1,960 articles identified, 405 were eliminated from the sample because
they only discussed inequality outside of the U.S. (n=316) or because they were otherwise deemed
irrelevant (n=89), for example because they used the phrase “income distribution” in the context
of companies determining stock dividends and not in reference to the personal distribution of
incomes. The remaining 1,555 articles were coded for how they discussed income inequality,
including whether the article included a claim that inequality was increasing, stable, decreasing,
or without a trend; what kinds of inequality were mentioned (gender, race, top incomes), and what
specific measures of the income distribution were invoked (median income, top quintile, top 1%). 6
In what follows, I focus on three trends: the overall prevalence of inequality discourse, the
recognition that inequality was increasing, and the timing of discussions of “the 1%” in comparison
to other measures of inequality.

6

The coded dataset and codebook are available on request.

16

Figure 3: Counts of newspaper articles mentioning income inequality and those that specifically
describe inequality as increasing.

Figure 3 displays the distribution of the sample over time, that is, the number of articles
mentioning “income inequality” or “income distribution” between 1980 and 2013, and the number
of those articles which describe inequality as increasing. This figure shows a dramatic rise in
explicit discussions of income inequality in 2010–2013, but also show substantial discussion in
early years, with articles appearing approximately once per week in the 1990s. Figure 3 also shows
that, in the early 1980s, most articles about inequality did not identify inequality as increasing.
That is, measures of income distribution were discussed without an associated claim that inequality
was increasing, stable, or decreasing. Of the 19 articles in the corpus in 1980, just one includes a
claim that inequality is increasing, while 18 do not mention a trend. By the mid-1980s, articles
begin to routinely identify inequality as increasing. For example, a 1986 NYT story titled
”Warnings Over Widening Income Gaps” cites a Congressional Research Service study

17

highlighting the declining share of income received by middle 60% of income earners, and the
increasing share of income received by the top 20%. Articles including a claim that inequality was
stable or decreasing, in contrast, are virtually absent throughout the sample period. In sum, Figure
3 shows that increasing income inequality was recognized in the mid-to-late 1980s.

Figure 4: Counts of newspaper articles mentioning top incomes.

In contrast, Figure 4 looks at how inequality was talked about in the corpus. This chart
shows the number of articles that include a measure of the income of the top quintile (like the 1986
NYT article cited above), a measure of the incomes of the top 1%, or a mention of the top 1% (with
or without a particular measure of their income). Before the publication of Piketty and Saez’s
work, the 1% is mentioned less often than top quintile measures (the main measure of higher
incomes, when any are mentioned), and substantially less in most years (including many years of
zero or close to zero). Figure 4 shows how “the 1%” takes off as a framing in the second half of
the 2000s. Figure 4 also shows how, after 2010, “the 1%” comes to be used on its own when
18

previously it was almost always associated with a particular measure of income inequality. In the
1980s–1990s, “the 1%” is not yet a thing, neither a stylized fact about changes in inequality, nor
an object of explicit political claimsmaking. By 2011, it is. In Hallett et al.’s (2019) terminology,
“the 1%” becomes a public idea, discussed both as an object of interest (e.g., in debates about
exactly how much top incomes have grown) and an interpretant (a tool for making sense of other
events, such as the fallout of the financial crisis). A partial exception to this chronology appears in
1992, when discourse about top incomes briefly spikes before receding. This exception, related to
a particular debate in the 1992 presidential election, is discussed extensively below.

Figure 5: Citations per year to Piketty and Saez 2003 in Google Scholar.

Together, Figures 3 and 4 show that public discourse about inequality recognized
increasing inequality in the mid-1980s, but that discussions of top incomes were minimal until the
2000s, and that discussions of “the 1%” accelerate in the mid-2000s and especially post-2010. To
showcase how academic discourse changed, Figure 5 displays annual citations to Piketty and
Saez’s 2003 article (including citations in 2001 and 2002 to the working paper version of the
article) from Google Scholar. These figures show the rapid uptake of Piketty and Saez’s central
19

descriptive finding: that top incomes had risen dramatically. Analysis using Web of Science data
(which captures a smaller set of citing documents but with higher quality metadata) showcases that
Piketty and Saez’s work has been influential across fields. Of the 1,217 citations tracked there,
46% were from publications in economics, 9% from sociology, 8% from political science, and the
rest from an assortment of other fields. In the final section of the case, below, I offer a more detailed
discussion of how this finding influenced research programs in political science, sociology, and
especially economics.
The preceding analysis establishes the puzzle to be explained: despite recognizing
increasing income inequality since the mid-1980s, scholars and the media did not see the rise of
“the 1%” until the 2000s. Why not? To answer this question, I return to the early 20th century to
trace how economists developed the knowledge infrastructures that were in place in the 1980s.
Building Knowledge Infrastructures
Before the 1920s, the United States produced none of the aggregate economic statistics we
now take for granted. Data — official or privately produced — on employment, inflation, income
distribution, and growth were largely unavailable throughout the 1800s, and only became available
at the state or local level in the 1890s–1910s (Stapleford 2009; Card 2011). In the 1920s–1940s,
the United States government began to produce consistent series of national data on inflation (the
Consumer Price Index), unemployment (via the Current Population Survey), and economic growth
(in the National Income and Product Accounts).
In 1920, a group of economists founded the National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER) with the explicit goal of producing timely, objective data about the economic system for
use by policymakers, businesses, and academics alike (Rutherford 2011). NBER’s first study
(NBER 1921) used newly available income tax data to examine both national income and income

20

distribution. Somewhat ironically in retrospect, this study focused heavily on top income earners
precisely because only top incomes were well-covered by tax data (see Figure 3 for an example of
their findings).7 In the 1930s, work on national income was transferred from NBER to the
Department of Commerce, and distributional issues would take a backseat to better, timelier
measurement of total national income.

Figure 6: A 1921 estimate of the income received by the top 5% of income earners based on tax
data (NBER 1921:116).
7

In the early 1910s, approximately the top 4% of earners made more than $2,000 per year and thus paid income tax
(NBER 1921:113). The income tax did not become a “mass tax” until World War II (Jones 1988).

21

National, survey-based statistics began in earnest with efforts to measure prices and
expenditures during World War I (the beginnings of the Consumer Expenditure Survey, used to
calculate the Consumer Price Index; see Stapleford 2009), but did not become widespread until
the 1940s. Survey-based measurement of employment and unemployment, for example, began late
in the Great Depression; for most of the 1930s, there were no nationally representative data on
unemployment. In the post-war period, the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ unemployment survey was
transformed into the modern Current Population Survey (CPS), which also began to collect income
data.
In the same period that official statistical productions took off, the academic field of
economics was itself transformed (Fourcade 2009). Just as there was little of what we now
recognize as economic data before the 1900s, there was also little “empirical” work in economics,
at least in the sense of analysis of large-scale datasets. Inspired by the German Historical School,
the American institutionalists began to produce and analyze such data in the 1900s–1920s. Wesley
Mitchell was both a central figure in the institutional movement and the first research director of
the NBER. Institutionalists would play an important role in integrating private and public data
collection efforts, in part through the influence of Herbert Hoover who advocated such efforts
strongly as both Secretary of Commerce and President as a means for government to coordinate
economic activity without the need for regulation or direct control (Alchon 1985; Barber 1985;
Rutherford 2011). The institutionalists’ direct influence was relatively short-lived, however. The
modern divide of macroeconomics and microeconomics emerged in the 1930s, alongside the terms
themselves. Institutional economics faded away in the immediate post-war era, replaced by the
synthesis

of

increasingly

mathematical

neoclassical

microeconomics

and

Keynesian

macroeconomics (Yonay 1998; Rutherford 2011). While the institutionalists had been heavily

22

involved in the initial creation of official economic statistics, it would be the Keynesians and
neoclassicals who would take charge of finalizing the knowledge infrastructures built around
collecting and analyzing those data.
In the following sections, I explore in greater detail how macroeconomists and labor
economists came to theorize and measure inequality. Although inequality never acquired a single
iconic statistical representation analogous to GDP for growth, macro and labor economists did pay
attention to inequality, and built tools for observing it into their knowledge infrastructures.
Macroeconomists focused on the traditional question of factor shares, and drew on the national
accounts to track labor and capital’s relative shares of the total economic pie. Personal income
distribution was outside of the scope of most macroeconomic research. Labor economists, in turn,
relied on survey-based measures to track “gaps” between different kinds of workers, with a special
focus on the gaps between college-educated and less-educated workers. Income inequality was
thus an important topic for labor economics, but understood primarily through the lens of the
differential productivity of different kinds of workers. Although tax data had formed the basis for
early studies of income distribution, by the 1960s, both macroeconomists and labor economists
had built infrastructures that relied on other data observing inequality. The Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA)8 did produce tax data–based statistics on income distribution, but these statistics
were ignored — they were not capable of answering the questions economists were interested in
— and eventually the statistics were defunded. Thus, by the 1970s, the two dominant knowledge
infrastructures for studying income inequality were practically incapable of seeing changes in the
top of the personal income distribution.
Factor Shares in Macroeconomics

8

For much of this period, the BEA was known as the Office of Business Economics, and before that the Bureau of
Foreign and Domestic Commerce. For simplicity, I refer to it as the BEA throughout.

23

Macroeconomics, as such, did not exist before the 1930s. Macroeconomics emerged in the
1930s and 1940s at the meeting point of monetary theory and business cycle theory, joined by a
novel interest in economic growth (De Vroey 2016). Here, I focus particularly on how
macroeconomics came to largely ignore the personal distribution of income in favor of continued
analysis of labor’s share of national income.
The distribution of income between the three great classes was arguably the central
question of classical political economy (Sandmo 2014). Starting with the writings of the
physiocrats in the mid-18th century, political economists divided the economic system into
roughly three groups: landlords (who earned rents), employers (who earned profits), and laborers
(who earned wages). Quesnay’s famous 18th century tableau economique modeled the flow of
goods (or money) from landowners to agricultural workers to artisans and merchants. Although
Adam Smith focused less sharply on questions of distribution, David Ricardo (1817:2–3, see also
McNulty 1980:64) went so far as to claim that: “in different stages of society, the proportions of
the whole produce of the earth which will be allotted to each of these classes, under the names of
rent, profit, and wages, will be essentially different... To determine the laws which regulate this
distribution, is the principal problem in Political Economy.” Twentieth-century macroeconomics
was not nearly so focused on distributional questions as Ricardo or his 19th-century successors,
but when macroeconomists looked at inequality they did so through a Ricardian lens.
Although Ricardo and his followers theorized about the distribution of income between the
classes — what we now call “factor shares” or “the functional distribution of income” as opposed
to the personal distribution of income — they did so without much recourse to economic statistics.
Estimating the distribution of income between the great classes became a primary motivation for
the construction of national income statistics. This motivation is visible in the first national income

24

statistics published by the Department of Commerce in 1934. The 1934 estimates were produced
in response to a 1932 Senate resolution authored by Senator Robert M. LaFollette Jr. of
Wisconsin.9 LaFollette was an outspoken proponent of the need for better economic measurement
in general. In an interview given in March of 1932, LaFollette connected his push for better
measurement of national income to debates about wage cuts in the Great Depression:
Likewise, with all the talk we have heard from bankers and others about the need
for cutting wages and with all the actual wage-cutting that has taken place, we are
woefully lacking in any adequate wage statistics. Also, while we are discussing the
wages of labor, it is startling that we have no accurate information on the wages
which capital is taking in the form of net profits from the point of view of industry
as a whole. Furthermore, do you know that we have never had any official estimate
of the total national income of the United States and the only authoritative
information we have to go on is the estimate of an unofficial agency in 1929? 10
LaFollette’s language echoes Ricardo; the “wages of labor” and the profits of capital are at
issue, not the wages of individual laborers or the incomes of particular capitalists. This focus on
factor shares was reflected in the presentation of the 1934 report to the Senate, usually
characterized as the first official publication of national income statistics in the United States. 11 To
estimate the sum total of income payments, Simon Kuznets (who led the team that produced the
1934 national income estimates) separated incomes first into “labor incomes” (wages), “property
incomes” (rents), and “entrepreneurial incomes” (profits) before dividing them into finer
subcategories (Kuznets 1934:2). The report’s first chart breaks down total national income by type
of payment — rents, interest, dividends, salaries, wages — operationalizing the three primary
divisions of income into slightly more tractable subdivisions (Kuznets 1934:15). Interestingly,
although the 1934 report did not attempt to estimate the personal distribution of income, Kuznets

9

Senate Resolution 220, 72nd Congress.
“Radio interview between Mr. Charles Ross and Senator Robert M. LaFollette, Jr., over N.B.C., March 15, 1932, 8
p.m.” LaFollette Family Collection, Box I:C557, Library of Congress.
11
This framing ignores an uninfluential and often-forgotten 1926 report by the Federal Trade Commission, see Carson
(1971) for details.
10

25

noted the importance of such estimates for evaluating national income as a measure of well-being:
“Economic welfare cannot be adequately measured, unless the personal distribution of income is
known” (Kuznets 1934:6). Kuznets’ later work, discussed below, made great strides in estimating
that personal distribution, but such efforts were not integrated into the production or analysis of
national income statistics.
Between the 1934 estimates and the end of World War II, national income statistics took
on a decidedly Keynesian character. In part due to the influence of Keynes himself, who oversaw
the production of the first official national income statistics in the UK in the early 1940s, national
income statistics became increasingly interwoven with macroeconomic theory (Tily 2009). Rather
than emphasizing factor shares of income, the national income accounts would increasingly focus
on consumption, investment, and government production, leading to the famous formula Y = C +
I + G (+ NX) (gross national product equals consumption plus investment plus government
spending [plus net exports]). This formulation also fit with the novel political uses of national
income statistics as devices for managing the wartime economy (Lacey 2011) and, later, for
tracking economic growth (Collins 2000), rather than as devices for seeing inequality of any sort.
To the extent that post-war macroeconomists, and national income statisticians, did care
about the distribution of income, they continued to focus on the role of factor shares. For example,
macroeconomist Nicholas Kaldor (1961) identified the stability of labor’s share of national income
as one of six “stylized facts” about macroeconomics that later models would attempt to explain.
The influential research program of Cobb-Douglas regressions looked at the relationship, in the
aggregate, between labor’s productivity and labor’s share of income (McNulty 1980:180; Biddle
2012). Similarly, the dominant macroeconomic forecasting models of the 1950s and 1960s
included an analysis of labor’s share of national income, but did not include measures of the

26

distribution of personal income (Metcalf 1969).12 In this sense, the knowledge infrastructure and
theoretical priorities reinforced each other over time: econometricians and macroeconomists
theorized factor shares, which were conveniently already measured in the national accounts, which
in turn had been shaped by macroeconomic theorists.
The path from the rise of Keynesianism to the exclusion of personal income data from
macroeconomics was not entirely straightforward. One of the central contributions of Keynes’
(1936) General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money was the concept of the “marginal
propensity to consume.” Keynes argued that many dynamics, including perhaps most importantly
the “multiplier” that related increases in government spending to increases in total output,
depended on how much consumers would change their spending in response to receiving an
additional dollar of income. If the marginal propensity to consume were high, then a bit of extra
income created by government spending would multiply many times. Conversely, if the propensity
were low, then extra government spending would do little to stimulate the economy. From the very
beginning, macroeconomists theorized that the marginal propensity to consume was a function of
personal income — individuals who made a lot of money were more likely to save additional
income, while poorer individuals would likely spend almost all of it. Such theorizing suggested
that the personal distribution of income might be relevant to Keynesian models, and there were
some investigations along those lines (e.g., Stone and Stone 1938; see Fixler and Johnson 2012:26
for details). These early efforts revealed small differences between models including and excluding

Metcalf’s own work represents a partial exception; his dissertation attempted to integrate personal distribution of
income into standard forecasting models. As Metcalf (1969:657) notes, “The Brookings model, for instance, limits its
consideration of the income distribution to a determination of factor shares. Issues relating directly to how families or
income units are distributed by size of income were never raised.”
12

27

the distribution of income, and macroeconomists largely abandoned the study of the relationship
between personal income distribution and the multiplier (Thomas 1992). 13
Gaps in Labor Economics
Like macroeconomics, labor economics emerged as a recognizable subfield in the first half
of the 20th century. As McNulty (1980:2) notes, in the early 19th century, less than 15% of
American income earners were employees; by 1980, 90% of income earners were employees. The
field of labor economics thus grew as the phenomenon of wage labor itself became dominant.
When a recognizable subfield of labor economics did emerge in the late 19th and early 20th
century, it remained outside of the mainstream. Labor markets were seen as something other than
the idealized competitive market, dominated by regulations and unions (McNulty 1980).
Unsurprisingly, institutionalist economists studied labor markets extensively in the first half of the
20th century, while neoclassical economists largely left the field unexamined. In the 1950s, as the
institutionalist movement faded away, a new generation of neoclassical economists turned their
attentions to the problems of labor.
Neoclassical economists turned the determination of individual wages into a central
question of labor economics. Why did some people earn more money in the labor market than
others? The answer developed in the 1960s was “human capital,” differential productivity resulting
from formal education and on-the-job training. Human capital theories displaced older approaches
that either treated the personal distribution of income as resulting from largely random forces, or
from inherited ability (Blaug 1976; Teixeira 2007; Sandmo 2014). In this section, I trace the history
of human capital theory and how it came to study incomes through large-scale surveys focused on

13

Fixler and Johnson (2012) present a recent exception that ultimately supports this claim; for prior studies on the
effect of the personal distribution of income on the marginal propensity to consume, they cite only a handful of papers
from the 1950s. See also Auclert and Rognlie (2020).

28

measuring wages, work experience, and education. This history points to a deep irony: in the
1920s–1950s, research on the distribution of income focused on top incomes because there was
good tax data that measured them. In the 1960s–1990s, studies of income distribution ignored top
incomes because there was no good survey data capable of measuring them.
To understand the rise of human capital theory, we must first trace two earlier
developments: the first statistical studies of the personal distribution of income and the
development of the marginal productivity theory of distribution. Although the personal distribution
of income was not a central topic to economics in the 19th and early 20th century, a small body of
statistical work on the subject accumulated. In 1897, Vilfredo Pareto (most famous for the concept
of “Pareto optimality”) identified a statistical pattern in the distribution of incomes now known as
the Pareto distribution, a particular functional form that seemed to match the shape of the income
distribution and in particular its heavy right-tail (see discussion in Champernowne 1952). Later
works attempted to estimate the parameters for that distribution, and others, which best fit the
observed distribution of income. For example, Champernowne (1952:598) fit a modified Pareto
distribution to distribution of income data from the U.S. in 1918, while Rutherford (1955) fit a
probit distribution to the log of income. To the extent that personal incomes seemed to follow
particular statistical patterns, economists sought to explain those patterns with random or
“stochastic” models. For example, Champernowne (1973)14 and Wold and Whittle (1957) both
develop stochastic models of income determination that reproduced the stylized fact that incomes
follow a Pareto distribution. Notably, this whole research program eschewed analysis of the
characteristics of particular individuals, but focused instead on producing a model that matched
the observed shape of the whole distribution.

This book was based on Champernowne’s undergraduate research completed in 1936, updated and republished as
a book and thus reflects this older approach to the question of the distribution of income.
14

29

In the same period that statistical research on the distribution of income took off (1890–
1960), mainstream economic theory became increasingly dominated by an approach to
understanding wages and productivity known as the “marginal productivity theory of distribution”
(Pullen 2009). In general, “marginalism” refers to an understanding of economic decision-making
in terms of the “margin” — how much is one more unit of a good worth? How much more could
a business produce if it hired one more worker (or paid for one more hour of work)? The marginal
revolution dates to the 1870s with nearly simultaneous publication of works in England (by
Jevons), France (by Walras), and Austria (by Menger) espousing some form of marginalist analysis
(Mirowski 1984). Although these authors differed dramatically in their methodological approaches
and substantive conclusions, their insights were eventually unified into a seemingly coherent
school of economics called marginalism (Blaug 1972).
One of the most important substantive conclusions derived from marginalist analysis was
the marginal productivity theory of distribution, developed by the American economist John Bates
Clark. Clark, writing at the end of the 19th century, used calculus to conceptualize the marginal
product of labor in terms of its partial derivative (Pullen 2009). In the context of the distribution
of personal income, and assuming a competitive market economy, marginal productivity suggests
that an individual’s wage will be a function solely of their productivity. This theoretical link
between wages and productivity persists into the present, and forms the backbone of most
neoclassical analysis of wages and labor markets. In macroeconomics, such approaches were
linked to the Cobb-Douglas regressions discussed in the previous section. In microeconomics, the
marginal productivity theory was transformed in the mid-20th century with the development of
human capital theory. Rather than explaining the statistical distribution of all incomes in terms of

30

some underlying law, human capital theories would seek to explain differential productivity
between groups of workers based on their education and work experience.
In 1958, Jacob Mincer published an article based on his doctoral dissertation, titled
“Investment in Human Capital.” This article is widely regarded as launching the human capital
turn in labor economics (McNulty 1980; Teixeira 2007). In it, Mincer explicitly frames his
research against the older, statistical models of personal income distribution:
Economists have long theorized about the nature or causes of inequality in personal
incomes. In contrast, the vigorous development of empirical research in the field of
personal income distribution is of recent origin. Moreover, the emphasis of
contemporary research has been almost completely shifted from the study of the
causes of inequality to the study of the facts and of their consequences for various
aspects of economic activity, particularly consumer behavior. (Mincer 1958:281)
By “study of the facts,” Mincer refers to the empirical estimation of the distribution of
incomes associated with Pareto and Champernowne. Research on the “consequences for...
consumer behavior” includes the short-lived line of research in macroeconomics connecting the
personal distribution of income to the marginal propensity to consume. Mincer argued that
economists needed to focus more attention on the causes of the distribution of income, and to
connect such research to the paradigm of rational choice and marginal productivity. In other words,
Mincer argued that economics could understand the distribution of income as a consequence of
the choices individuals make about how to invest in their own productivity, especially by seeking
formal education or on-the-job training. In a 1997 retrospective, Mincer also connected the rise of
human capital theory to the inability of 1950s macroeconomics to adequately account for the
sources of economic growth (Mincer 1997, quoted in Teixeira 2007:17).
Soon, Mincer was joined by Theodore Schultz and Gary Becker in leading the charge for
human capital theory. In 1962, they produced a special issue of Journal of Political Economy,

31

which brought human capital theory squarely into the limelight. 15 Blaug (1976:827) documented
the dramatic takeoff of human capital theory studies in the 1960s and 1970s, finding 800 articles
on human capital theory published by 1966, and 2000 articles by 1976. Blaug characterized the
dominant form of research in the human capital approach in terms of its exploration of the
“earnings function”:
The [human capital research] program adds up to an almost total explanation of the
determinants of earnings from employment, predicting declining investment in
human-capital with increasing age, and hence lifetime earnings profiles that are
concave from below. No wonder the bulk of empirical work inspired by the humancapital framework has taken the form of regressing the earnings of individuals on
such variables as native ability, family background, place of residence, years of
schooling, years of work experience, occupational status, and the like — the socalled “earnings function.” (Blaug 1976:832)
Several important observations follow for our story. First, human capital theory was
interested in earnings or wages, not in all sources of income. Second, human capital research was
interested in explaining variation in individual earnings in terms of a small set of important
covariates, including especially education. Third, the human capital approach virtually invented
the idea of “earnings regressions.” As strange as it may seem in retrospect, before the 1960s,
economists did not run — and were largely not capable of running — regression models predicting
individuals’ earnings with individual-level covariates. In part, economists avoided earnings
regressions because the variations in individual earnings were not seen as an important theoretical
topic (as opposed to, say, the aggregate labor share). But economists were also limited by the
relative paucity of data. Fortunately, just as the human capital revolution was underway in
economic theory, the microdata revolution was taking place.

15

There is a bit of a priority dispute over which of Mincer and Schultz should receive more credit for human capital
theory. Some of Schultz’s work in the 1950s makes similar conceptual moves to Mincer’s dissertation (e.g., Schultz
1950). That said, commenters agree that the 1962 special issue marked the widespread takeoff of the approach.

32

The rise of the large-scale representative survey is a relatively recent phenomenon (Igo
2007). The first major representative surveys took place during the Great Depression, such as the
famous Gallup Poll predicting Roosevelt’s 1936 electoral victory over Landon. The technique
expanded dramatically in the 1940s, including the 1940 launch of the “Monthly Report of
Unemployment,” which became the influential Current Population Survey in 1948 (Bureau of
Labor Statistics 1984:8). Although the CPS was born as part of the macroeconomic knowledge
infrastructure (and remains the key tool for tracking unemployment), its structure and kernel (i.e.,
a large, nationally-representative household sample) were relatively easy to extend to
accommodate the needs of human capital researchers. The CPS, along with a handful of other
large-scale, government-funded, representative surveys like the PSID (launched in 1968), would
become the tools of choice for labor economists interested in understanding not just the overall
shape of the income distribution, but also the covariates that predicted income (age, education,
gender, and race). The availability of individual-level “microdata” contributed to the shift in the
field of labor from studies of the demand for labor (firms) to studies of the supply of labor
(individual laborers), and especially to the success of human capital theory and its earnings
regressions. According to Stafford (1986:388), in the 1970s, “about two-thirds of labor articles in
major journals were on the broad subjects of labor supply and wage determination,” and by the
early 1980s, about two-thirds of empirical labor economics articles in top journals used individuallevel microdata, and half of those drew on just three surveys (CPS, PSID and the National
Longitudinal Surveys) (Stafford 1986:395).
Surveys fit the research program of human capital theory nicely. Surveys were less
effective than tax data at capturing financial income and profits, but were relatively good at
measuring earnings from labor. And large-scale demographic surveys like the CPS had the

33

significant advantage of including all the covariates a researcher could want, especially education
variables. As human capital theory increased in influence, its interests became even better reflected
in the data collection practices of government surveys:
Prior to the advent of human capital models of lifetime earnings, most sets of
microdata did not have much information on work histories of individuals. Early
work on earnings functions was commonly based on years of potential labor market
experience, defined in terms of age and years of formal schooling. Because the
theory emphasized the importance of on-the-job training through various types of
job market experience, new and on-going data collection efforts obtained extensive
information on job market experience. Variables such as years of full time
experience, years of part time experience, and years in military service became
widely available in cross-sectional data. (Stafford 1986:398)
Conversely, because advances in survey-based microdata were driven by pressure from labor
economists, and labor economists did not particularly care about non-wage income, improving
measurement of such income was not a priority. Similarly, labor economists interested in the
returns to a college degree or on-the-job training were satisfied with surveys that captured the
middle 90% of the population accurately at the expense of known problems with income reporting
at both the top and bottom of the distribution. Top incomes were especially poorly captured due to
the problem of top coding. Thus, for researchers relying on the CPS, incomes at or above the 97%
(approximately) were simply unobservable, and researchers either ignored these incomes or made
static imputations about their size (i.e., assuming that there was no trend in top incomes, as in Katz
and Autor 1999:1471).
By the late 1970s, then, the modern knowledge infrastructure for labor economics had been
assembled. Routinely conducted, large-scale, government-led or government-funded surveys
produced individual-level microdata that provided good measurements of labor earnings and
theoretically important covariates, but poor coverage of top incomes. These data were analyzed
with the goal of understanding how individuals chose to invest in education and job training over

34

the life course, and to measure the returns to a college degree, along with other predictors of
individual earnings.16 That surveys were technically incapable of measuring top incomes was
simply not seen as a pressing problem.
From First Priority to Orphan Estimates
Contemporary discussions of the microdata revolution in empirical economics sharply
contrast microdata with older, aggregate statistics, including national income accounts.
Historically, the situation is a bit messier. As discussed in this section, during the 1950s to 1970s,
government statisticians worked hard to integrate microdata and the national accounts in order to
produce comprehensive statistics on the distribution of income that would be more useful than
either on their own. Economists in government in the 1940s considered these statistics to be their
number one statistical priority. Yet, when the BEA began to publish such data in the 1950s, they
were barely noticed. When funds to update and maintain the data could not be secured, the BEA
ended the estimates, again, to little fanfare. What happened? This section traces one possible way
that the personal distribution of income could have been incorporated into macroeconomists’
knowledge infrastructure in a way that would have made changes in top incomes more visible, and
connects the previous discussions of theoretical trends in macroeconomics and labor economics to
the failure of this incorporation.
Following World War II, Congress’s newly established Joint Committee on the Economic
Report (later renamed the Joint Economic Committee, or JEC) laid out a series of “statistical gaps”
that federal statistical agencies were charged with filling. Number one on this list was information
on the personal distribution of income (JEC 1949:86). In the 1950s, the BEA turned its resources
to this task. In 1953, the BEA published estimates for the distribution of income in the United

16

These data were also well suited to other questions of policy concern including those asked by sociologists studying
racial and gender gaps in earnings (Leicht 2008).

35

States from 1944–1950 (see Figure 7 for a graphical presentation of the 1950 estimate). By this
time, national income data were published quarterly, and each of these quarterly reports received
news coverage, much as they still do today. In contrast, of the 71 stories that referenced the “Office
of Business Economics” (the BEA’s name in this period) in The New York Times in 1953 and
1954, just one mentioned the income distribution study. The story, “Family Income Up $850 in
Six Years,” emphasized the gains in average income, discussing the distribution of income in just
a few sentences at the end. 17 The BEA report itself argued for the importance of distribution data
in “market analysis,” with little mention of academic or policy implications.

17

The New York Times, 1953, October 12.

36

Figure 7: A graphical representation of the distribution of pre-tax income in the United States in
1950 (BEA 1953:4).

Later efforts by the BEA to produce data on the distribution of income would meet with
similarly little interest. The BEA produced annual estimates of income distribution from 1955 to
1964. The BEA sought funds from Congress to update the series, and better integrate survey data
from the Census and Federal Reserve, but the funds were not forthcoming. Despite being deemed
the most accurate and comprehensive available measurements of the distribution of income by a

37

report to the JEC (Schultz 1964), and despite personal income distribution having been the number
one statistical priority as recently as 1949, Congress denied a request for $60,000 per year to fund
four permanent positions dedicated to the income distribution data. The BEA tried to link its
research to the newly prominent “war on poverty,” but failed to sway skeptical representatives of
the need for the data, following the typical pattern of research on poverty being kept intentionally
separate from discussions of inequality to avoid political blowback (O’Connor 2002).18 The BEA
would have been hard-pressed to point to massive interest from outside; for example, The New
York Times makes no mention of the BEA’s 1963 or 1964 publications estimating the distribution
of income. The series then stopped abruptly.
In 1974, the BEA once more restarted its work on income distribution. Unlike Piketty and
Saez (2003), the BEA’s estimates included some sociodemographic variables, as they combined
data from the Current Population Survey alongside tax data and other sources (Radner and
Hinrichs 1974). Thus, in some sense, these data could have been useful to labor economists
interested in “gap research.” It is difficult to speculate exactly why labor economists did not draw
on these data, but we can see how their priorities were already better served by survey data – the
BEA had a few demographic covariates, but no detailed work histories, and the BEA’s major
accomplishment was to reconcile survey-based measures of income with the national accounts’
particular definition of income. But labor economists, interested primarily in earnings and not total
income, would have little to gain from these reconciled measurements. Once again, the BEA’s
estimates received little to no public reaction (e.g., no mention in the Times). The 1974 estimates
were not repeated in the following year, and the BEA did not publish further estimates of the
distribution of income again until 2020, as discussed more below.

18

Congressional Hearing Transcripts, Budget Hearings for the Department of Commerce, 1965; see also Lebergott
(1971:117).

38

By the end of the 1970s, the Federal Government had flirted with producing income
distribution estimates compatible with the National Income and Product Accounts but these efforts
met with little interest from scholars and the public and were discontinued. What remained were
survey-based measures derived from the Census’s Current Population Survey, and similar surveys
conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Federal Reserve to measure prices and
consumption. These surveys captured the bulk of income — although with recognized problems
of underreporting at the top and bottom19 — and they were ideally suited to the research agendas
of those interested in sociodemographic forms of inequality. These statistics did not, however,
accurately measure all forms of income (such as capital gains), and they suffered from the problem
of top coding, thus making them largely incapable of tracking movements at the top of the income
distribution. In terms of data, economic growth and income inequality were unlinked — no dataset
tracked both in comparable ways. This disconnect in the data used to study inequality and growth
came just as a thirty-year span of decreasing inequality would itself come to an end.
The Stylized Facts of Inequality
Having traced the construction of two disjoint knowledge infrastructures used to study
incomes, we are now better positioned to understand how economists knew what they knew about
inequality in the 1980s–1990s, and how they were capable of missing new trends in top incomes.
In the 1980s and 1990s, labor economists both noticed and attempted to explain increases
in inequality in the United States. The dominant characterization of this increase focused on the
growing gap between the wages of college-educated and non-college educated workers. One
influential, and reasonably representative, example is Bound and Johnson (1992). They document

19

The BEA argued before Congress that the Census surveys only captured about 90% of all income, due to problems
of underreporting, top-coding, and some categories that were simply not measured. Congressional Hearing
Transcripts, Budget Hearings for the Department of Commerce, 1965.

39

the stagnation of average wages in the 1980s, as well as dramatic shifts in the relative wages of
individuals. Examining CPS data, Bound and Johnson (1992) measure changes in the relative
wages of individuals based on years of work experience, education, and sex. In the end, they
conclude that “skill-biased technological change” drove major increases in the wage gap between
college and non-college educated workers. The emphasis here, as in much of the literature, is
specifically on wage inequality, understood as an indicator of productivity (following from the
marginal productivity theory of distribution and human capital theory).
Later work in the 1990s would debate the relative influence of international trade and
globalization as alternatives to technological change as explanations for the observed gaps, as well
as the persistence of race and gender gaps (see Card and DiNardo 2002 for one summary of the
literature). While labor economists in the 1990s recognized the increasing right skew in the income
distribution, they did not link it specifically to the growth of incomes at the very top, nor did they
marshal data capable of explaining — or even seeing — movement at the very top.
Similarly, work by sociologists interested in inequality would focus on persistent wage
gaps. Leicht (2008) summarizes sociological research on inequality in the 1990s as “dominated by
studies of racial and gender gaps,” in contrast with economists’ focus on education, technology,
and trade. While sociologists’ empirical focus and theoretical interests differed somewhat from
labor economists’, they relied on the same knowledge infrastructure, especially large-scale
household surveys. An influential and representative example is Morris and Western (1999) that,
like much work by economists, relies primarily on the CPS. For labor economists and sociologists
interested in inequality, the growth of top incomes was almost invisible because the main
knowledge infrastructure they relied on did not measure it.

40

The focus of inequality researchers on “gaps” was mirrored in popular coverage of
inequality during the 1980s–1990s. McCall (2013:53–95) analyzed news coverage of inequality
in prominent news magazines during this period and found it to be very fragmented. Explicit
discussions of economic inequality or the overall distribution of income are largely absent. Instead,
like labor economists, public discourse focused on earnings disparities and education:
[The] earliest debates about income inequality seeped into the media as researchers
began to notice the increase in the 1980s. Because earnings are the main component
of income, and earnings disparities appeared to be rising in the 1980s, researchers
focused at the outset more on the widening disparity in hourly earnings between
high-skilled and low-skilled workers in the labor market than on disparities in
incomes between rich and poor families. (McCall 2013:59, emphasis in the original)
McCall did not find an increase in discussions of inequality in the popular press as
inequality itself increased throughout the 1980s–2000s. Her findings are consistent with my
analysis of newspaper articles (see figure 3 above), which showed that discussions of income
inequality were roughly stable in the late 1980s to early 2000s. Rather than an increase in the
amount of inequality discourse, McCall document a shifts in the nature of the inequality discussion
in the early 2000s. McCall (2013:59) finds that inequality debates shift from a focus on earnings
and the labor market to a focus on incomes and tax policy: “Remarkably, the role of tax policies
in affecting top incomes did not emerge as a focal part of the academic story until the early 2000s,
when new ‘facts’ about income inequality became available.” Popular discussion here followed
the trends in academic research. In the 1980s–1990s, labor economists identified earnings
disparities as the novel stylized fact of interest, and public discourse focused on issues like the
minimum wage, trade, and education. In the 2000s, the identification of the stylized fact of
increasing top income inequality would alter the landscape of public debate about inequality.
Macroeconomists, for their part, mostly ignored the personal distribution of income in
favor of continued debate about the stability of labor’s share of national income and discussions

41

of the big three macroeconomic variables: growth, inflation, and unemployment. Dominant
macroeconomics textbooks, for example, included lengthy discussion of labor and capital’s share
of income, but no discussion of income inequality. Mankiw’s (2003, 5th edition) intermediate
textbook is an influential exemplar: the entire book contains just one reference to economic
inequality, and it is in the context of unemployment (Mankiw 2003:173). Labor’s share, on the
other hand, is discussed and even modeled prominently in the contexts of the Cobb-Douglas
production function (Mankiw 2003:72–73) and growth accounting models (Mankiw 2003:229–
231). Labor’s share was also a continued object of research, from debates about how best to
measure it (Krueger 1999) to empirical observations of its decline starting in the 1980s (Gordon
1988).
Some heterodox economists devoted more space to income inequality in their textbooks,
but they too relied on the knowledge infrastructures developed by mainstream economists and thus
inherited its priorities and omissions. For example, heterodox economist Edward Wolff (1997)
published an entire textbook titled Economics of Poverty, Inequality and Discrimination.
Strikingly, Wolff’s chapter on historical trends in inequality begins by reporting top income shares
from the 1910s to 1950 (citing data from Kuznets and the Commerce Department), but then
switches to over to Gini coefficient measurements from the CPS starting with the 1950s without
mentioning the dearth of available information on top incomes in the 1960s–1990s (Wolff
1997:70–74). The 2008 revision of the textbook, titled Poverty and Income Distribution, added an
extensive discussion of Piketty and Saez’s work on top income shares.
In sum, the stylized facts of inequality in the 1980s and 1990s included an impressive and
important list of findings: the widening gulf between highly educated and less educated workers,
the persistence of race and gender gaps, and the overall decline in labor’s share of national income.

42

But, in general, the two largest groups of economists potentially interested in income inequality
relied on knowledge infrastructures that were built for other theoretical and empirical purposes,
and were thus incapable of seeing changes in top incomes. Other scholars, including heterodox
economists and sociologists, made use of those same infrastructures, albeit for different theoretical
purposes, and thus were also constrained by their limitations.
Krugman and the 1992 Presidential Election
Although most sociologists and economists conceptualized and analyzed inequality in
ways that left the growth of top incomes of the 1% invisible, there were notable exceptions.
Economists specifically interested in taxation paid attention to the IRS’s Statistics of Income.
Drawing on these data, Feenberg and Poterba (1993) noted the growth of incomes of the top 0.25%.
This paper appears to have attracted some notice from fellow tax scholars in the 1990s, and later
from Piketty and Saez who cite the paper as a precursor, but had little resonance in the broader
economics literature. Feenberg and Poterba would repeat their argument that inequality scholars
failed to pay sufficient attention to the very top incomes through the 1990s, and explicitly noted
the problem of top-coded survey data as an impediment to studies of this income group (Feenberg
and Poterba 2000).
More surprising than this academic outlier is Paul Krugman’s highly public 1992
calculation of the income gains of the top 1%. In the early 1990s, Paul Krugman was a noted
international trade theorist in the process of transitioning to his current status as a leading public
intellectual. His first major book for popular audiences, The Age of Diminished Expectations, was
published in 1990 and included a very short chapter on income distribution, noting the growing
wage gap between more and less educated workers, and a brief analysis of the increased incomes
of the top 10% (Krugman 1990:19–25). In an interview, Krugman (1998) later noted that his

43

editors objected to this chapter’s inclusion: “For complicated reasons, that book was initially a
Washington Post project. And my editors at the Post tried to pressure me into taking the income
distribution chapter out, saying that nobody cared about that issue.”
Two years later, Krugman published a more surprising finding. Based on a Congressional
Budget Office (CBO) publication with information derived from tax data, Krugman argued that
between 1977 and 1989, 60% of the income gained by the country went to the top 1% of income
earners. This finding was popularized in The New York Times, criticized by The Wall Street
Journal and the Bush Treasury Department, and featured in stump speeches by then presidential
candidate Bill Clinton. The CBO eventually responded to the critiques with a study of its own,
supporting Krugman’s overall finding, with a caveat that the number dropped a bit when adjusted
for the size of families (a common practice at the CBO, though not common in many other income
datasets).
One Times summary of the debate is particularly revealing:
One reason that the issue remained relatively invisible for so long – in spite of broad
agreement among academic economists that income and wealth have grown more
unequal – is that statistics on distribution are among the mushiest and murkiest in
economics. There are literally dozens of ways to slice and dice the data, not to
mention hundreds of different data series. Confronted by Republican legislators
after Governor Clinton started peppering his speeches with the statistic on the top
1 percent, the budget office was called upon to assess the Krugman calculation.
Several weeks later, it issued a report that gave a number of alternate measures of
the gains by the top 1 percent. Every measure showed that the top 1 percent of
families reaped an outsized share of the gains. By one calculation 70 percent of the
rise in average after-tax family income went to the top 1 percent, rather than the 60
percent figure that Mr. Krugman had initially estimated and that Governor Clinton
has been using.20 [Emphasis added.]
Krugman’s 1992 calculation represents a significant challenge to the initial premise of this article
— that the growth of the top 1% was a surprising finding in the early 2000s. Clearly, there was

20

“Richest Getting Richer Now Top Political Issue.” The New York Times. 1992. May 11.

44

some political awareness in 1992 that the incomes of the top 1% had grown dramatically. Yet,
despite the political salience of Krugman’s calculation during the 1992 election, the stylized fact
that the top 1% had captured most of the income gains of the 1980s and grown to historically
unprecedented levels did not capture sustained attention. Without a recognized place among
academics, or a tight connection to a particular knowledge infrastructure, it became just one more
talking point bandied about in a presidential election. One piece of evidence for this claim is
Krugman’s own later academic work. In 1995, Krugman published a foray into the debate about
the role of trade in increasing inequality. Krugman (1995) makes no mention of the growth of the
top 1%, instead sticking to the mainstream academic debate about the increasing education wage
gap and concluding that increased world trade was not then responsible for growing income
inequality. Finally, Krugman’s calculation also focused on a very narrow time-window — 1977–
1989, corresponding to the period covered by the CBO. It would be Piketty and Saez who would
go back to the IRS data and construct a new knowledge infrastructure that put contemporary top
incomes into a much longer historical and comparative perspective.
Rediscovering the 1%
In 2001, Piketty and Saez published a working paper containing estimates of the share of
income accruing to the top 5% and 1% of income earners in the United States from 1913 to 1998.
Their working paper relied heavily on tax data, combined with national income accounts data to
determine some of the relevant denominators (e.g., total wage income). Their estimates differed
from Feenberg and Poterba (1993; 2000) in four interesting respects. First, Piketty and Saez
estimated a consistent series back to 1913, several decades earlier than Feenberg and Poterba.
Second, in order to extend their series back further, Piketty and Saez used a slightly more
complicated method to generate their denominators, in order to take into account the much smaller

45

percentage of income that was reported on tax returns in earlier periods. Third, Piketty and Saez
built on Piketty’s recently completed work on top incomes in France. In France, top income shares
had stayed flat in the 1980s and 1990s, and the comparison thus suggested that the U.S. story was
explainable by factors specific to American political economy, and not an universal feature of late20th century economies. Finally, Piketty and Saez noted that the top 1% increasingly derived their
incomes from wages and salary, and not simply from capital gains, thus rejecting a sharp division
between their work on overall income inequality and the work of labor economists focused solely
on wage income. All told, Piketty and Saez produced a dataset capable of making the provocative
claim that the share of income accruing to the top 1% in the United States had returned to levels
not seen since the Great Depression.
It is hard to say why Piketty and Saez’s research had such a large and sustained impact (as
depicted back in figure 5). That their data series extended back to the Great Depression may have
played a large role in capturing attention. Additionally, the early 2000s saw researchers interested
in more conventional wage inequality (the labor economists above) casting about for new
explanations. Katz and Autor’s (1999) review of the literature on changes in inequality in the
United States noted some evidence that the top incomes had grown dramatically (even as their own
quantitative evidence, relying on the CPS, analyzed only incomes up to the 97th percentile).
Specifically, Katz and Autor (1999:1468) cited growing evidence on the tremendous growth of
CEO and athlete pay (e.g., Hall and Liebman 1998). It is possible that Piketty and Saez’s work
caught on academically because it helped make sense of increasing evidence from the labor
economics literature that something interesting was happening at the top of the income distribution
which had not previously been fully measured, and which did not easily fit within the framework
of human capital theory.

46

Piketty and Saez also benefitted from early and positive attention from the media. 21
Specifically, Paul Krugman, by then a columnist at The New York Times, wrote up an extensive
magazine piece drawing heavily on their research. Krugman (2002) argued that the U.S. had
entered a “new Gilded Age.” Krugman rehearsed 15 years of CPS-based studies that showed
increases in income in the top 5%, starting in the late 1970s.22 But Krugman then went on to claim
that studies that relied on categories as big as the top 10% or 5% missed the big change in the new
Gilded Age:
Most of the gains in the share of the top 10 percent of taxpayers over the past 30
years were actually gains to the top 1 percent, rather than the next 9 percent. In
1998 the top 1 percent started at $230,000. In turn, 60 percent of the gains of that
top 1 percent went to the top 0.1 percent, those with incomes of more than
$790,000. And almost half of those gains went to a mere 13,000 taxpayers, the top
0.01 percent, who had an income of at least $3.6 million and an average income of
$17 million. (Krugman 2002)
Krugman continued on to say that the three main arguments (globalization, skill-biased
technological change, and the so-called “superstar” hypothesis) economists had generated to try to
understand growing income inequality in the 1980s–1990s seemed inadequate in the face of the
Piketty and Saez data:
Globalization can explain part of the relative decline in blue-collar wages, but it
can’t explain the 2,500 percent rise in C.E.O. incomes. Technology may explain
why the salary premium associated with a college education has risen, but it’s hard
to match up with the huge increase in inequality among the college-educated, with
little progress for many but gigantic gains at the top. The superstar theory works
for Jay Leno, but not for the thousands of people who have become awesomely rich
without going on TV. (Krugman 2002)

Critic Alan Reynolds (2007:2) claimed: “After 35 years of writing on economic issues, I do not recall any other
private and unofficial estimates that were as widely and uncritically repeated as the Piketty-Saez estimates on income
shares of the top 1 percent... Searching Google for “Emmanuel Saez” in early October turned up 51,700 entries,
including 871 that also involved the The New York Times. Similar searches yielded 814 joint references to Saez and
the Washington Post, 568 for The Wall Street Journal, 375 for the Financial Times, and 319 for USA Today.”
22
Krugman makes no mention of his own earlier 1992 calculations on the growth of the top 1%, showing just how
tangential they had been to the larger conversation on inequality in this period.
21

47

Instead, economists would need to bring in social and political factors, like social norms,
to make sense in the massive increases in executive pay that helped to drive the incomes of the
1%. Other economists, sociologists, and political scientists would build off of Piketty and Saez's
findings to make claims for the importance of politics (Hacker and Pierson 2010), financialization
(Kaplan and Rauh 2007), the rise of agency theory, the death of unions, and more. New social
movements, especially Occupy Wall Street, began to frame their demands in the statistical
language of top income shares, proclaiming “We are the 99%” (Gould-Wartofsky 2014). Piketty
(2014) himself would write a bestselling work connecting the growth of top incomes to newlydiscovered “fundamental laws of capitalism” relating the returns on capital, the rate of economic
growth, and concentration of income at the very top, and a sequel focused on the role of ideology
in justifying inequality across time and societies (Piketty 2020). The stylized fact of the growth of
the top 1% had entered into academic debates in force and gave force to new and different theories.
Not all economists bought into Piketty and Saez's findings uncritically. Conservative think
tanks continued their war on all findings of increased income inequality, much as they contested
Krug- man’s 1992 calculation. Reynolds (2007) published a critique in the Cato Institute’s journal
Policy Analysis. Reynolds claimed that Piketty and Saez dramatically overstated the rise of the top
1% by misusing tax data, and that their estimates were very inconsistent with the story told by
survey data: “If the Piketty and Saez estimates actually demonstrated a continuous and credible
upward trend toward greater inequality since the late-1980s, all other estimates of income
distribution would have to be wrong — including those of the Census Bureau, the CBO, and the
Federal Reserve Board.” (Reynolds 2007:18)
Piketty and Saez showed a change in recorded, taxable income accruing to the top 1%, but
Reynolds argued that this observation was consistent with a shift in how the 1% earned their money

48

rather than the total amount the top 1% earned: top-earners responded to changes in the tax law
(lower top marginal tax rates) by shifting income from corporate tax filings to individual tax
filings. Reynolds (2007:1) summarized his findings:
[S]tudies based on tax return data provide highly misleading comparisons of
changes to the U.S. income distribution because of dramatic changes in tax rules
and tax reporting in recent decades. Aside from stock option windfalls during the
late-1990s stock-market boom, there is little evidence of a significant or sustained
increase in the inequality of U.S. incomes, wages, consumption, or wealth over the
past 20 years.
Piketty and Saez responded to Reynolds point-by-point (Piketty and Saez 2006), noting that the
discrepancies between their findings and survey-based measures are completely logical, and in
fact, the main novelty of their study:
The reason for the discrepancy is that the Census Bureau estimates are based on
survey data which are not suitable to study high incomes because of small sample
size and top coding of very high incomes. In contrast, tax return data provide a very
accurate picture of reported incomes at the top. Our key contribution was precisely
to use those tax data to construct better inequality estimates.
My point here is not to claim that Piketty and Saez are right and Reynolds is wrong, or vice versa.
Rather, I aim to document just how much was still up in the air in the mid-2000s in terms of the
measurement of inequality (and indeed, even now, see e.g., Auten and Splinter 2019; Kopczuk and
Zwick 2020; Saez and Zucman 2020). Although extensive debates still exist about the
measurement of unemployment, inflation, and economic growth, the existence of widely accepted,
bureaucratically produced, official, and timely measures institutionalized in devices forestalls
many of the sorts of challenges present in both the 1990s “Krugman calculation” debate and in the
critical reception of Piketty and Saez. Basic definitional issues — what kinds of income should
be studied (wage, capital gains, non-monetary remuneration, before tax or after tax and transfer,
etc.), the units of analysis (families, households, individuals, “tax units”), and the relevant metrics

49

for comparison (top 1% or 0.1% income shares, 90/50 or 90/10 ratios, Gini coefficients) — are all
still live controversies in the study of income inequality.
Inequality is not unknown, nor unknowable. Piketty, Saez, and more than 100 collaborators
continue working to construct new knowledge infrastructures in the form of the World Inequality
Database that aims to produce standardized measures of top incomes for different countries
(Alvaredo et al. 2018), and Distributional National Accounts that would harmonize data on the
personal distribution of income with the data used to measure GDP (Piketty et al. 2018). These
efforts are explicitly aimed at pressuring governments to take over the production of official
inequality statistics (Saez and Zucman 2020:54). At the same time, the Washington for Center for
Equitable Growth (WCEG) has been working to bring inequality back into the theoretical center
of economics by funding and promoting research, including revisiting the role of the distribution
of income in shaping the marginal propensity to consume (Fisher et al. 2018), a central question
in macroeconomics. WCEG has also been instrumental in pushing the BEA to produce new
measures of income distribution (Boushey 2018; Harrison 2019). In early 2020, the BEA published
provisional data on the distribution of personal income based on surveys, administrative records,
and tax records. These data include breakdowns for the share of income going to the top quintile,
top 5%, and top 1%, although these statistics currently only cover 2007–2016.23 These efforts
could transform calculations of top income from a contentious topic to be debated and pondered
into a routine production of an established knowledge infrastructure.
Discussion and Conclusion
How do past research priorities shape future knowledge production? Knowledge
infrastructures are one important site where the “tyranny of inertia” (Bowker and Star 1999)

23

https://www.bea.gov/data/special-topics/distribution-of-personal-income, accessed November 8, 2020.

50

manifests, channeling and limiting the attention of researchers. Theoretical, empirical, and political
priorities are built into knowledge infrastructures, and continue to shape the kinds of data that are
collected, processed, and distributed, which in turn makes some research more “doable” (Fujimura
1988) while rendering other topics “out-of-focus” (Peterson 2017). Knowledge infrastructures are
productive of knowledge, making it possible to monitor changes and identify trends. But
knowledge infrastructures are also productive of ignorance.
As the case of the rediscovery of the 1% shows, making observations outside of a
knowledge infrastructure is difficult and such observations are more easily dismissed. The NIPA
and surveys like the CPS make even small movements in GDP growth, unemployment, the gender
wage gap, or the returns to a college degree impossible to miss. Monthly or quarterly reports track
the main aggregates, and researchers constantly pore over the details, analyzing the causes of any
changes. When income inequality began to grow in the 1980s, researchers spotted it very quickly,
and public discourse reflected this rapid awareness. In contrast, top incomes fell outside of the
dominant knowledge infrastructures of the 20th century and thus researchers were capable of
missing their growth. Public discourse mirrored this omission. In order to establish trends in top
incomes, scholars in the 2000s and 2010s constructed a secondary knowledge infrastructure,
building on existing data sources while simultaneously drawing attention to their limitations and
pressuring the state for resources to expand its efforts to track inequality and prioritize the routine
collection of data on top incomes.
Extant knowledge infrastructures do not completely determine the direction of research –
as Piketty and Saez’s work itself shows. Yet this case offers several demonstrations of how existing
knowledge infrastructures can lower or raise the costs of pursuing a given line of research. Here,
I highlight two: debates in macroeconomics over the link between inequality and the fiscal

51

spending multiplier, and the influence of mainstream economics on heterodox economics. After
some interest in the 1930s–1940s, macroeconomists abandoned the question, determining that
differences in spending behavior across the income distribution were not important enough to be
worth including in their models, and in turn, that it was not worth the trouble to collect data on the
distribution of income that was compatible with other macroeconomic aggregates like GDP. These
decisions were locked in to macroeconomic knowledge infrastructures, making it difficult for
scholars to revisit these assumptions, even as the underlying distribution of income changed and
as macroeconomic models grew increasingly complex. Macroeconomists only returned to the
question after Piketty and Saez’s work had drawn attention back to the distribution of income, and
after the wave of Keynesian stimulus spending following the 2008–2009 crisis (see Auclert and
Rognlie 2020). Not until 2020 did the BEA begin publishing data that integrated the distribution
of personal income with other macroeconomic aggregates.
Perhaps more surprisingly, the case also shows how dominant knowledge infrastructures
can shape research trajectories of subordinate fields. The NIPA and large surveys like the PSID
and CPS were designed in large part by and for mainstream economists. Yet their decisions
influenced research trajectories in heterodox economics and in sociology. These fields relied on
the same infrastructures, and thus were constrained by their limitations. For example, the 1997
edition of heterodox economist Wolff’s textbook on income distribution included measures of top
incomes for the first half of the 20th century, but omitted them starting in the 1950s, relying instead
on calculations based on the CPS. The textbook was updated in light of Piketty and Saez’s (2003),
drawing on the knowledge infrastructure they had begun to construct. Even those scholars whose
theoretical inclinations led them to focus very explicitly on the distribution of income and income
inequality outside of a human capital or macroeconomic framework still relied on well-resourced,

52

legitimated, mainstream knowledge infrastructures, and thus incorporated some of their
assumptions and limitations.
Beyond reinforcing existing theoretical claims that knowledge infrastructures are sites
where the past shapes the present, I identify two further insights from this case in particular: the
possibility for knowledge infrastructures to decay and the importance of sustained attention rather
than isolated observations. The methods that economists used to track top incomes via tax data in
the 1920s–1950s were systematically abandoned. These methods were then rediscovered in the
2000s. This pattern suggests that knowledge infrastructures do not necessarily follow a trajectory
of monotonic improvement (much like science itself). Rather, knowledge infrastructures can be
abandoned or forgotten, making it possible for trends that would have been visible to become hard
to see. Knowledge infrastructures can also suffer from a lack of maintenance or become less useful
due to changes in the trends they are trying to monitor. In his newer work, Piketty (2020:672) notes
that wealth data across Europe and the United States have grown less useful because of the
increased use of tax havens to hide wealth, and the declines in the estate tax which produced much
of the data.
This potential for decay is particularly important because knowledge infrastructures shape
sustained attention and this case suggests that patterns of sustained attention may be as important
as flashes of insight for the trajectory of a field. Despite its absence in dominant infrastructures,
the rise of top incomes was not completely impossible to spot – Krugman’s 1992 calculation and
work by Feenberg and Poterba (1993) offer two examples of economists who did notice the
change. But even these calculations came a decade after increases in top incomes had begun, and
these results had little immediate impact. They did not fit into a broader theoretical framework for
making sense of labor markets or macroeconomies, and they were not the outcome of knowledge

53

infrastructures that provided sustained attention to the topic. Those aspects of the world that are
left out of existing knowledge infrastructures – that do not receive sustained attention – are more
capable of being ignored, and require substantial infrastructural work to bring to collective
attention. As an isolated finding, Krugman’s calculation was a political claim useful for criticizing
the economic legacy of President Ronald Reagan. In contrast, Piketty and Saez framed their
calculation in the long sweep of the past century, and published their findings in academic journals
and continued calculating the top 1% income share as part of a comparative and collaborative
research program (Alvaredo et al. 2018). In short, Piketty and Saez built a new knowledge
infrastructure for top incomes that both analyzed data and interpreted it (at least enough to new
produce stylized facts), and thus provided sustained attention that made it impossible for top
incomes to simply recede into the background as they did after the 1992 presidential election.
Moving beyond the case of the 1%, the history of inequality knowledge infrastructures
presented here may also offer insights into other patterns in the history of inequality research. Here,
I focus on persistently ignored calls for research integrating organizational perspectives (Baron
and Bielby 1980; Tomaskovic-Devey and Avent-Holt 2019). In their recent book, TomaskovicDevey and Avent-Holt (2019) reiterate Baron and Bielby’s 40-year-old call for inequality research
to integrates organizational perspectives, as organizations are the main sites where resources are
accumulated and distributed. They argue that Baron and Bielby’s program floundered for data
reasons: “the critical new structuralist literature on dual and segmented labor markets foundered
on the scarcity of quantitative workplace data… nearly the only data anyone had at the time were
national, and sometimes local, surveys of individuals” (Tomaskovic-Devey and Avent-Holt
2019:23). This absence of employer-employee matched data has severely constrained research
efforts. For example, the stylized fact of the gender wage gap – the “80 cents on the dollar” figure

54

that circulates widely – is derived from aggregate statistics from household surveys, and does not
measure same-job, different-pay discrimination, though it is often misinterpreted as doing so,
creating confusion in public and political debates ([Author Citation]). Smith-Doerr et al. (2019)
note that only five quantitative papers on the gender wage gap in the United States (including their
own) can actually compare men and women working in the same jobs at the same employer
because of a lack of data, and none of these papers have nationally-representative samples. Instead,
researchers focus on special cases where data are available (like their study of federal science
agencies). My account suggests an approach for understanding how it came to be that surveys
dominated our inequality knowledge infrastructure, and how this dominance may have created an
“ignorance loop” (Durant 2020) where the absence of employer-employee matched data made it
difficult for certain kinds of research to be conducted, shaping theories of inequality which
deemphasized organizations, which in turn reinforced the non-collection of organizational data
relevant for inequality research.
This approach to understanding the dynamics of knowledge infrastructures and ignorance
loops should also be useful for understanding the trajectories of scientific research beyond
questions of income inequality. For example, sociologists have long noted a dearth of research in
sociology on Native Americans across subfields (Snipp 1992; Huyser et al. 2010; Walter and
Anderson 2013; Brayboy and Chin 2020). Although there are many reasons for this historical
exclusion, including the centrality to settler colonial ideology of ignoring the continued existence
of indigenous peoples (McKay et al. 2019), this pattern is exacerbated by sociology’s heavy
reliance on household surveys which typically have very small samples of Native respondents.
Researchers can overcome these problems, for example by gaining access to large-N
administrative data (e.g., Akee et al. 2019), but doing so represents an additional barrier, and much

55

research has instead simply left Native Americans out or collapsed Native respondents into an
undifferentiated “other” racial category. This process in turn reinforces the ignorance loop: gaps
in the infrastructure shape what research is done, the research that is done shapes priorities for
maintaining and creating the infrastructure.
So far, I have drawn on examples that highlight the consequences of the design and
implementation of survey-based knowledge infrastructure and, given the centrality of surveys to
contemporary social science, these examples are not exhaustive. One could offer a similar reading
of Pettit’s (2012) analysis of how survey-based knowledge infrastructures overstated the economic
progress of Black men in the 1990s because most surveys do not sample incarcerated people, and
racialized mass incarceration sufficiently altered the denominators of many surveys as to induce
the appearance of significant progress. But these dynamics are not limited to knowledge
infrastructures rooted in surveys; future research would benefit from comparing examples from
diverse infrastructures including censuses (e.g., Smith and Gates [2001] on the undercounting of
same-sex couples in the 2000 Census), and natural science contexts like climatology (e.g., Edwards
[2010] on the relative absence of weather stations in Africa). Each of these empirical cases would
require their own detailed analysis, but the framework laid out here – focusing on how knowledge
infrastructures collect, process, and distribute data and how that enables the production of
knowledge (and especially of trends and stylized facts), but also produces a tyranny of inertia
where consequential initial decisions flowing from particular political and theoretical priorities
shape the production of ignorance – should be helpful for teasing out the process.
Throughout this analysis I have focused on how knowledge infrastructures shape the
trajectory of academic research by channeling and limiting attention, producing both knowledge
and ignorance. Knowledge infrastructures may be just as important, though, for how they shape

56

politics. Just as political priorities shape what kinds of data are collected, and what kinds of
knowledge infrastructures are built and maintained, knowledge infrastructures may in turn shape
democratic politics. Piketty and Saez’s work resonated throughout the social sciences, but also in
the form of mass mobilizations like Occupy Wall Street and elite political rhetoric. Piketty’s (2014;
2020) blockbuster books have combined calls for new kinds of taxes with calls for new kinds of
data – that is, one upside of a wealth tax would be the creation of new, high-quality wealth data.
Even if the wealth tax were too small to dramatically alter inequality, Piketty argues that having
the knowledge infrastructure such a tax would help to create would provide fuel for anti-plutocratic
politics and policies, much as the rediscovery of the 1% altered the course of debates around
income inequality.
References
Akee, Randall, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. 2019. “Race Matters: Income Shares,
Income Inequality, and Income Mobility for All Races.” Demography 56(3):999–1021.
Alchon, Guy. 1985. The Invisible Hand of Planning. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emannuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman.
2018. World Inequality Report. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Auclert, Adrien, and Matthew Rognlie. 2020. “Inequality and Aggregate Demand.” Working
paper available at https://web.stanford.edu/~aauclert/inequad.pdf
Auten, Gerald, and David Splinter. 2019. “Top 1 Percent Income Shares: Comparing Estimates
Using Tax Data.” Pp. 307–11 in AEA Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 109.
Barber, William J. 1985. From New Era to New Deal: Herbert Hoover, the Economists, and
American Economic Policy, 1921–1933. Cambridge University Press.
Baron, James, and William Bielby. 1980. “Bringing the Firms Back In and Stratiﬁcation,
Segmentation, and the Organization of Work.” American Sociological Review 45:737–65.
BEA (Office of Business Economics). 1953. Size Distributions of Income in the U.S. 1944–1950.
Biddle, Jeff. 2012. “The Cobb–Douglas Regression and the Measurement of Economic Growth
and its Causes.” Working paper.

57

Blaug, Mark. 1976. “The Empirical Status of Human Capital Theory: A Slightly Jaundiced
Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature 14(3):827–55.
Bokulich, Alisa. 2020. “Towards a Taxonomy of the Model-Ladenness of Data.” Philosophy of
Science.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2017. Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence
of Racial Inequality in America. 5th edition. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Borgman, Christine L., Peter T. Darch, Ashley E. Sands, Jillian C. Wallis, and Sharon Traweek.
2014. “The Ups and Downs of Knowledge Infrastructures in Science: Implications for
Data Management.” Pp. 257–266 in IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on Digital Libraries.
IEEE.
Bound, John, and George Johnson. 1992. “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980’s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review 82(3):371–92.
Boushey, Heather. 2018. “Testimony by Heather Boushey before the Joint Economic
Committee.” Available at https://equitablegrowth.org/testimony-by-heather-bousheybefore-the-joint-economic-committee/
Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. 1999. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its
Consequences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boyce, Angie M. 2016. “Outbreaks and the Management of ‘Second-Order Friction’:
Repurposing Materials and Data from the Health Care and Food Systems for Public
Health Surveillance.” Science & Technology Studies.
Brayboy, Bryan Mckinley Jones, and Jeremiah Chin. 2020. “‘On the Development of
Terrortory.’” Contexts 19(3):22–7.
Budnick, Jamie. 2020. The New Gay Science: Sexuality Knowledge, Demography, and the
Politics of Population Measurement. Doctoral Thesis, University of Michigan.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1984. “The Current Population Survey: a historical perspective and
BLS’s role.” Monthly Labor Review June:8–14.
Card, David. 2011. “Origins of the Unemployment Rate: The Lasting Legacy of Measurement
without Theory.” American Economic Review 101(3):552–57.
Card, David, and John E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skill Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carson, Carol. 1971. “The History of the United States Income and Product Accounts: The
Development of an Analytical Tool.” Doctoral Thesis, George Washington University.
Champernowne, D. G. 1952. “The Graduation of Income Distributions.” Econometrica
20(4):591–615.

58

Champernowne, David Gawen. 1973. The Distribution of Income Between Persons. Cambridge
University Press.
Clemens, Austin and Michael Garvey. 2020. “Structural racism and the coronavirus recession
highlight why more and better U.S. data need to be widely disaggregated by race and
ethnicity.” Washington Center for Equitable Growth. Available at
https://equitablegrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/092520-oversampling-racialdata-ib.pdf
Collins, Robert M. 2000. More: The Politics of Economic Growth in Postwar America. Oxford
University Press, USA.
De Vroey, Michel. 2016. A History of Macroeconomics from Keynes to Lucas and Beyond.
Cambridge University Press.
DeRock, Daniel. 2019. “Hidden in Plain Sight: Unpaid Household Services and the Politics of
GDP Measurement.” New Political Economy.
Downey, Greg, Kristin R. Eschenfelder, and Kalpana Shankar. 2019. “Talking About Metadata
Labor: Social Science Data Archives, Professional Data Librarians, and the Founding of
IASSIST.” Pp. 83–113 in Historical Studies in Computing, Information, and Society:
Insights from the Flatiron Lectures, History of Computing, edited by W. Aspray. Springer
International Publishing.
Durant, Jennie L. 2020. “Ignorance Loops: How Non-Knowledge about Bee-Toxic
Agrochemicals Is Iteratively Produced.” Social Studies of Science.
Edwards, Paul N. 2010. A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data, and the Politics of
Global Warming. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edwards, Paul N. 2017. “Knowledge Infrastructures for the Anthropocene.” The Anthropocene
Review 4(1):34–43.
Edwards, Paul N. 2019. “Knowledge Infrastructures Under Siege.” Pp 21–42 in Data Politics
edited by Didier Bigo, Engin Isin, and Evelyn Ruppert. Routledge.
Edwards, P. N., Jackson, S. J., Chalmers, M. K., Bowker, G. C., Borgman, C. L., Ribes, D.,
Burton, M., and Calvert, S. 2013. Knowledge Infrastructures: Intellectual Frameworks
and Research Challenges. Ann Arbor: Deep Blue. http://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/97552
Feenberg, Daniel. R., and James M. Poterba. 1993. “Income inequality and the incomes of very
high–income taxpayers: evidence from tax returns.” in Tax Policy and the Economy,
NBER.
Feenberg, Daniel R., and James M. Poterba. 2000. “The Income and Tax Share of Very High–
Income Households, 1960–1995.” American Economic Review 90(2):264–70.

59

Fisher, Jonathan, David Johnson, Jonathan Latner, Timothy Smeeding, and Jeffrey Thompson.
2018. “Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume Using the Distributions of
Income, Consumption, and Wealth.” Available at https://equitablegrowth.org/workingpapers/marginal-propensity-consume/
Fixler, Dennis and David Johnson. 2012. “Accounting for the Distribution of Income in the U.S.
National Accounts.” Paper presented at NBER Conference on Research in Income and
Wealth, September, 2012.
Frickel, Scott, Sahra Gibbon, Jeff Howard, Joanna Kempner, Gwen Ottinger, and David J. Hess.
2010. “Undone Science: Charting Social Movement and Civil Society Challenges to
Research Agenda Setting.” Science, Technology & Human Values 35(4):444–73.
Frickel, Scott and Michelle Edwards. 2014. “Untangling Ignorance in Environmental Risk
Assessment.” Pp. 215–233 in Powerless Science? Science and Politics in a Toxic World
edited by Soraya Boudia and Nathalie Jas. Berghan Books.
Fourcade, Marion. 2009. Economists and Societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Fujimura, Joan H. 1987. “Constructing ‘Do-Able’ Problems in Cancer Research: Articulating
Alignment.” Social Studies of Science 17(2):257–93.
Gordon, Robert J. 1988. “U.S. Inflation, Labor’s Share, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gould-Wartofsky, Michael. 2014. “The Invention of the ‘99 Percent’: New Evidence on the
Origins and Development of a Political Imaginary.” Working paper.
Hacker, J. S, and P. Pierson. 2010. “Winner–Take–All Politics: Public Policy, Political
Organization, and the Precipitous Rise of Top Incomes in the United States.” Politics &
Society 38(2):1–52.
Hacking, Ian. 1983. Representing and Intervening. Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Brian J., and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(3):653–91.
Hallett, Tim, Orla Stapleton, and Michael Sauder. 2019. “Public Ideas: Their Varieties and
Careers.” American Sociological Review 84(3):545–76.
Harrison, David. 2019. “Government to Measure Who Gets What Share of the Economic Pie.”
The Wall Street Journal, April 16.
Hirschman, Daniel. 2016. “Stylized Facts in the Social Sciences.” Sociological Science 3:604–
26.

60

Huyser, Kimberly R., Arthur Sakamoto, and Isao Takei. 2010. “The Persistence of Racial
Disadvantage: The Socioeconomic Attainments of Single-Race and Multi-Race Native
Americans.” Population Research and Policy Review 29(4):541–68.
Igo, Sarah E. 2007. The Averaged American: Surveys, Citizens, and the Making of a Mass
Public. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Joint Committee on the Economic Report (JEC). 1949. Joint Economic Report. Senate Report
No. 88.
Jones, Carolyn C. 1988. “Class Tax to Mass Tax: The Role of Propaganda in the Expansion of
the Income Tax during World War II.” Buffalo Law Review 37:685.
Kaldor, Nicholas. 1961. Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth. Macmillan.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh. 2007. “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to
the Rise in the Highest Incomes?” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor. 1999. “Changes in the wage structure and earnings
inequality.” Pp. 1463–1555 in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Part A.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
Palgrave Macmillan.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Eric Zwick. 2020. “Business Incomes at the Top.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 34(4):27–51.
Krueger, Alan. 1999. “Measuring Labor’s Share.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krugman, Paul. 1990. Age of Diminished Expectations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Krugman, Paul. 1995. “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1:327–77.
Krugman, Paul. 1998. Interview in Soundings. Available at
http://www.pkarchive.org/others/krugmit.html
Krugman, Paul. 2002. “For Richer.” The New York Times Magazine, October 20.
Kuznets, Simon. 1934. National Income, 1929–32. U.S. Congress.
Kuznets, Simon. 1953. Shares of Upper Income Groups in Income and Savings. National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Lacey, Jim. 2011. Keep from All Thoughtful Men: How U.S. Economists Won World War II.
Naval Institute Press.
Laumann, Edward O., Robert T. Michael, and John H. Gagnon. 1994. “A Political History of the
National Sex Survey of Adults.” Family Planning Perspectives 26(1):34–8.
61

Lebergott, Stanley. 1971. “Better Bricks for OBE’s Structures.” Survey of Current Business 51(7
part 2):117–8.
Leicht, Kevin T. 2008. “Broken Down by Race and Gender? Sociological Explanations of New
Sources of Earnings Inequality.” Annual Review of Sociology 34(1):237–55.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 2003. Macroeconomics. 5th edition. Worth Publishers.
McCall, Leslie. 2013. The Undeserving Rich. Cambridge University Press.
McGoey, Linsey. 2017. “The Elusive Rentier Rich: Piketty’s Data Battles and the Power of
Absent Evidence.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 42(2):257–79.
McGonagle, Katherine A., Robert F. Schoeni, Narayan Sastry, and Vicki A. Freedman. 2012.
“The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Overview, Recent Innovations, and Potential for
Life Course Research.” Longitudinal and Life Course Studies 3(2).
McKay, Dwanna L., Kirsten Vinyeta, and Kari Marie Norgaard. 2020. “Theorizing Race and
Settler Colonialism within U.S. Sociology.” Sociology Compass.
McNulty, Paul J. 1980. The Origins and Development of Labor Economics. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Metcalf, Charles E. 1969. “The Size Distribution of Personal Income During the Business
Cycle.” The American Economic Review 59(4):657–68.
Mincer, Jacob. 1958. “Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution.” Journal
of Political Economy 66(4):281–302.
Mirowski, Philip. 1984. “Physics and the marginalist revolution.”’ Cambridge Journal of
Economics 8(4):361–79.
Morris, Martina, and Bruce Western. 1999. “Inequality in Earnings at the Close of the Twentieth
Century.” Annual Review of Sociology 25:623–57.
Mügge, Daniel, and Lukas Linsi. 2020. “The National Accounting Paradox: How Statistical
Norms Corrode International Economic Data:” European Journal of International
Relations.
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). 1921. Income in the United States, Its Amount
and Distribution, 1909–1919. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace and Company.
O’Connor, Alice. 2002. Poverty Knowledge: Social Science, Social Policy, and the Poor in
Twentieth-Century U.S. History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Peterson, David. 2017. “The Depth of Fields: Managing Focus in the Epistemic Subcultures of
Mind and Brain Science.” Social Studies of Science 47(1):53–74.

62

Pettit, Becky. 2012. Invisible Men: Mass Incarceration and the Myth of Black Progress. Russell
Sage Foundation.
Piketty, T., and E. Saez. 2001. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–1998.” National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–
1998.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):1–41.
Piketty, T., and E. Saez. 2006. “Response to: The top 1%... of What? By Alan Reynolds.”
Available at http://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/answer-WSJreynolds.pdf
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Piketty, Thomas. 2020. Capital and Ideology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “Distributional National
Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 133(2):553–609.
Plantin, Jean-Christophe. 2019. “Data Cleaners for Pristine Datasets: Visibility and Invisibility of
Data Processors in Social Science.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 44(1):52–73.
Pullen, John. 2009. The Marginal Productivity Theory of Distribution: A Critical History.
Routledge.
Radner, Daniel and John Hinrichs. 1974. “Size Distribution of Income in 1964, 1970, and 1971.”
Survey of Current Business, October:19–31.
Reynolds, A. 2007. “Has U.S. Income Inequality Really Increased?” Cato Institute Policy
Analysis Series (586).
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg. 1994. “Experimental Systems: Historiality, Narration, and
Deconstruction.” Science in Context 7(1):65–81.
Ribes, David, and Jessica Beth Polk. 2015. “Organizing for Ontological Change: The Kernel of
an AIDS Research Infrastructure.” Social Studies of Science 45(2):214–41.
Ricardo, David. 1817 [1996]. Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. Prometheus Books.
Rutherford, R. S. G. 1955. “Income Distributions: A New Model.” Econometrica 23(3):277–94.
Rutherford, Malcolm. 2011. The Institutionalist Movement in American Economics, 1918–1947:
Science and Social Control. Cambridge University Press.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2020. “The Rise of Income and Wealth Inequality in
America: Evidence from Distributional Macroeconomic Accounts.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 34(4):3–26.

63

Sandmo, Agnar. 2014. “The principal problem in political economy: income distribution in the
history of economic thought.” Pp. 3–62 Handbook of Income Distribution, Volume 2a.
Schultz, Theodore W. 1950. “Reflections on poverty within agriculture.” The Journal of Political
Economy 58(1):1–15.
Schultz, T. Paul. 1964. The Distribution of Personal Income: A Study of Statistics on the Size
Distribution of Personal Income in the United States. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off.
Shankar, Kalpana, Kristin R. Eschenfelder, and Greg Downey. 2016. “Studying the History of
Social Science Data Archives as Knowledge Infrastructure.” Science & Technology
Studies.
Smith, David M., and Gary J. Gates. 2001. Gay and Lesbian Families in the United States:
Same-Sex Unmarried Partner Households. A Preliminary Analysis of 2000 United States
Census Data. Human Rights Campaign.
Smith-Doerr, Laurel, Sharla Alegria, Kaye Husbands Fealing, Debra Fitzpatrick, and Donald
Tomaskovic-Devey. 2019. “Gender Pay Gaps in U.S. Federal Science Agencies: An
Organizational Approach.” American Journal of Sociology 125(2):534–76.
Snipp, C. Matthew. 1992. “Sociological Perspectives on American Indians.” Annual Review of
Sociology 18:351–71.
Solovey, Mark. 2020. Social Science for What?: Battles over Public Funding for the “Other
Sciences” at the National Science Foundation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stafford, Frank. 1986. “Forestalling the demise of empirical economics: The role of microdata in
labor economics research.” Pp. 387–423 in Handbook of Labor Economics edited by
Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Elsevier.
Stapleford, Thomas A. 2009. The Cost of Living in America: A Political History of Economic
Statistics, 1880–2000. Cambridge University Press.
Stone, Richard, and W. M. Stone. 1938. “The Marginal Propensity to Consume and the
Multiplier: A Statistical Investigation.” The Review of Economic Studies 6(1):1–24.
Teixeira, Pedro N. 2007. Jacob Mincer: The Founding Father of Modern Labor Economics.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Thomas, J. J. 1992. “Income Distribution and the Estimation of the Consumption Function: A
Historical Analysis of the Early Arguments.” History of Political Economy 24(1):153–81.
Tily, Geoff. 2009. “John Maynard Keynes and the Development of National Accounts in Britain,
1895–1941.” Review of Income and Wealth 55(2):331–59.
Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald, and Dustin Avent-Holt. 2019. Relational Inequalities: An
Organizational Approach. Oxford University Press.

64

Walter, Maggie, and Chris Andersen. 2013. Indigenous Statistics: A Quantitative Research
Methodology. Taylor & Francis Group.
Wold, H. O. A., and P. Whittle. 1957. “A Model Explaining the Pareto Distribution of Wealth.”
Econometrica 25(4):591–95.
Wolff, Edward N. 1997. Economics of Poverty Inequality and Discrimination. South-Western
College Pub.
Wolff, Edward N. 2008. Poverty and Income Distribution. 2nd edition. Malden, MA: WileyBlackwell.
Yonay, Yuval P. 1998. The Struggle over the Soul of Economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

65

