Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019.

Pp.51-64

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.5
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development of Action Research
Skills among Master’s Students in Oman

Abdelkader Mohamed Abdelkader Elsayed
College of Arts and Applied Science, Dhofar University, Oman
&
College of Education, Benha University, Egypt
Abstract
The study aimed to prepare a program in action research based on Project-Web Learning
Approach, and investigate the effectiveness of this program to develop the action research skills
for master's students at Dhofar University in Oman. The study was based on the semi-experimental
design of one group (pre-post application). The study sample comprised (27) master’s students of
Education Department in College of Arts and Applied Science of Dhofar University. Data were
collected via the test of action research skills for the sample in the courses of educational research
and seminar in curriculum & instruction. The study was carried out during 13 weeks. Data were
analyzed using means, standard divisions, and T test. The study concluded that there was a
significant difference at (0.01) between the mean grades of students in the pre- test of action
research and that of the post-test in favor of the post-test. In light of the results, the study
recommended preparing the content of all courses to master's students in accordance with the
Project-web learning Approach, and improving the instructors’ performance to develop action
research skills for their students.
Keywords: action Research, electronic learning, project learning, project-web learning, masters
students, Oman.
Cite as: Elsayed, A. M. A. (2019). Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the
Development of Action Research Skills among Master’s Students in Oman. Arab World English
Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5). 51-64 DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.5

51

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

1. Introduction
Educational research is very important for both developed and developing countries and societies,
and it is the basis for development in all educational fields, as it keeps educational institutions
away from arbitrary actions that may happen to be right in some cases but wrong in others.
Action research is one of the types of educational research that has recently emerged in
educational institutions that offer distinguished professional work. It has become one of the styles
of professional development of the teachers, as it encourages them to think about their practices,
examine their performance and specify the problems that face them to solve them using an
appropriate scientific methodology (Al-Maziny &Al-Mazroua, 2010).
Action research depends on the researcher’s pondering at the practices of the educational
field, in order to make a better understanding of the educational process. Then, it makes positive
changes in the teacher’ level, and school administration.
Due to the importance of action research in the professional development of teachers, many
conferences were held, including three consecutive international conferences about action research
in United Kingdom at 1990, 1992, and 1994 (Obeidi, 2010). College of Education in Qatar
University also organized four consecutive conferences to discuss the concepts and skills of action
research at 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2012 ( Elsayed & Al-Amri, 2015).
Arab Thought Foundation in Lebanon also presented several projects that aimed at
developing teachers' skills in the use of action research such as: Tammam Project (1) and Tammam
Project (2). These projects have been implemented in Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan
(Arab Thought Institute, 2013).
Ministry of Education in Oman focused on promoting action research skills for Omani
teachers and staff in the field of education through educational symposiums, educational meetings,
and educational versions. As the Ministry of Education in Oman agreed with the International
Reading Association to implement a training programto develop the research skills of the senior
teachers, supervisors, and specialists training in the ministry was carried out during the period from
26/2/2011 to 03/03/2011 (Al-Baluchi, 2011).
In light of the development of modern technologies, there is a need for modern educational
techniques that guide the preparation of students and teachers in the knowledge society so that
there would be an opportunity to publish courses online to be available to students at any time and
from any place (Zawaidi, 2014).
Project-Web Learning Approach is one of the most appropriate approaches that can be used
to train and prepare students and teachers. It is possible to employ and use electronic web-based
tools to collaborate and engage students in the implementation of these projects and to make use
of all electronic resources available through the web to access information and exchange them
electronically among students (Arif, 2015).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

52

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

Project-based learning across the web is one of the educational approaches that have
emerged in recent years as a result of the integration of e-learning and project-based learning,
which is seen as an integrated, interactive and influential learning process (Saraya, 2012).
Project-based learning across the web is based on constructional learning approaches, which
emphasize that learning is an active, constructive, contemplative process achieved in a realistic
social context by practicing social negotiation skills within real learning environments rich in
multiple learning resources. These approaches include several strategies and educational systems,
the most important of which are problem-based learning, collaborative learning, situational
learning, deep learning, discovery learning (Ching, 2016).
Mohamed (2018) believes that training students in the development and implementation of
action research through Project-Web Learning Approach may contribute to developing awareness
of action research and reducing their teaching anxiety.
Therefore, the present study is trying to use the Project-Web Learning Approach to develop
the action research skills among Masters Students in Oman.
2.

Problem Statement
It was clear to the researcher through his long practical experience in teaching the courses
of educational research, educational statistics, scientific seminar in curriculum & instruction and
general teaching theory and strategies- advance level that most of the master's students at Dhofar
University have a low level of action research skills. This is confirmed by the results of the tests,
where the results of these students were lower in the questions related to the action research skills
compared to the other questions in the tests.
This coincided with the results of several studies, including (Al-Shanfari, 2012), (Elsayed
& Al-Amry, 2015), (Al-Hussaini, 2018), which indicated a low level of action research skills
among individuals in various educational disciplines in the Sultanate of Oman.
Several studies, including (Stozhko, et al., 2015), (Pilten & Pilten, 2017), (Mohamed, 2018)
have recommended the need to develop students' action research skills and the need to use new
approaches and strategies based on web applications, especially project-based learning through the
web, for their great importance and educational benefits and it is also the most appropriate
approach to the development of procedural research skills.
So the present study attempts to answer the following research questions:
1. What is the proposed program based on Project-Web Learning Approach in the development
of action research skills among Masters Students in Oman?
2. What is the effectiveness of the proposed program based on Project-Web Learning Approach
in the development of action research skills among Masters Students in Oman?
3. Study Limit
The limits of the study were as follows:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

53

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

3.1 The following action research skills: selecting the research problem, reviewing the literature
and writing the hypotheses, preparing the proposal of the research, carrying out the research
procedures, and writing the research report.
3.2 The approach of learning based on collaborative projects across the web.
3.3 Master students in education department in college of arts and applied science at Dhofar
University.
3.4 The study was carried out during the academic years (2106/2017 and 2017/2018).
4. Terminology of Study
4.1 Proposed Program
A set of targeted and planned educational modules and their objectives, procedures,
activities, and evaluation methods) based on project-based learning across the web to develop the
research skills of master students in education department at Dhofar University.
4.2 Project-Web learning
Learning based on a set of organized procedures and activities, which enables the master
student in education department at Dhofar University to conduct a participatory action research
based on tools and techniques of interaction in a variety of electronic learning environment under
the supervision and guidance of the researcher in order to develop their action research skills.
4.3 Action Research:
An organized intellectual process based on specific scientific procedures carried out by the
master student in education department at Dhofar University for the treatment of a problem facing
him or the development of his professional performance.
4.4 Action Research Skills:
The ability of the master student in education department at Dhofar University to conduct
action research with precision and proficiency, through the exercise of skills (selecting the research
problem, reviewing the literature and writing the hypotheses, preparing the proposal of the
research, carrying out the research procedures, and writing the research report). It is measured by
the degree obtained by the student in action research skills test prepared for this purpose.
5. Study Hypothesis
1. There is a significant difference at (0.01) between the pre and post application of action
research skills test on the study sample in favor of the post application.
6. Literature Review
6.1 Project-Web Learning Approach:
Project-based learning across the web is an e-learning approach that employs all the potential
of the web, enabling students to gain experience, communicate purposefully, engage, interact and
collaborate with their peers electronically to achieve learning goals through clear steps and specific
tasks for each individual in the work group.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

54

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

The learning of projects through the web is based on scientific principles based on the
principles of constructivism theory as it is a learning strategy centered on the learner who builds
his own knowledge by practice and addresses real problems (Mubarez, 2014).
It is defined as a typical educational process for practicing social negotiation skills among
students when implementing the educational project plan through the use of synchronous and
asynchronous electronic communication tools such as e-mail and discussion forums (Shadiev &
Huany, 2015, 124).
Mohammed (2013, p. 357) defines it as an instructional model focused on learner-centered
learning that allows him or her to work independently or in small collaborative groups to build
their own learning. It is used to provide subjects that require research and inquiry, to enhance
collaborative work and decision-making skills.
In this regard, Mohammed (2018) explains that project-based learning across the web allows
students to participate positively in the educational situation through their research, application
and employment of the knowledge and skills acquired in real situations under teacher supervision
and guidance. So it provides students with a deeper knowledge of the curriculum, and it is an
effective way to integrate technology into the educational process to build positive communication
and collaborative relationships among students.
There are two types of project-based learning across the web. The first is learning based on
individual projects across the web, where students work individually, meaning that each student
prepares a project different from other projects or is the same project but each student is working
individually. The second is learning based on collaborative projects across the web, where projects
are implemented in groups. Each group assigned a specific project to be implemented, and the
work is divided into one group so that each student has a specific role to complete the work of the
rest of the group (Albritton, 2016).
Projects are implemented across the web in a series of stages (Tilchin & Kittany, 2016;
Riyanti, 2017; Mohamed, 2018):
▪
▪

▪
▪

Project Selection Phase, taking into account that the project is suitable for the students'
tendencies and abilities. It is implementable, achieves the objectives of the educational material
and returns educational benefit to the student.
Project planning stage. Students will develop the project implementation plan under the
supervision of the teacher. The students will be given the freedom to distribute their roles and
responsibilities in collecting information, designing the project plan and its stages. The plan
will be presented to the teacher for approval.
Project implementation stage: Each student will implement the relevant part of the plan, record
the results reached by the team and identify the problems encountered to overcome them under
the supervision of the teacher, with continuous guidance from the teacher.
Project follow-up and evaluation stage: The students present their projects, and the teacher and
peers evaluate each project so that each student sees the outcome of his effort within the group

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

55

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

effort. At this stage, each group also provides a report on the educational benefits of the project,
the problems encountered and how it was resolved.
It is clear from the above that it is important to introduce project-based learning in the educational
process, and learning based on collaborative projects across the web is also distinguished from
learning based on individual projects across the web in many aspects such as providing cooperation
among students, benefiting from each other, and quality in the final product. Therefore, the current
study focuses on collaborative projects across the web to develop action research skills among
master students at Dhofar University.
6.2 Action Research Skills
There are several names for action research in theoretical literature, some of them are
called the situational research, and some of them are called the work research or the action
research, and it is also called the research performance or research for improvement.
Johnson (1993, p. 25) defines action research as "athoughtful and directed investigation
towards solving a problem, and can be done by an individual or a group". This type is
characterized by forming helical rings each one of which includes (identifying the problem,
collecting organized data, thinking, analysis, taking action in the light of the data and finally
redefine the problem)
Yousef (2014, p.102) indicates that it is "a participatory activity of teachers to develop their
performances and educational practices or solve problems in the educational process by reflecting
on their teaching practices to make the desired change in the educational process".
Elsayed & Al-Amry (2015, p.197) define action research as "a kind of investigation
conducted by teachers, and requires them to use self-reflection of their teaching practices, ways of
their students' learning, and problems about these aspects, to find scientific solutions to these
problems in order to improve the educational process, and raise the efficiency of students".
There are three types of action research depending on the number of individuals involved.
The first is the individual procedural research, which addresses a particular problem facing a
teacher within the classroom and tries to reach a solution to that problem. The second is the
cooperative procedural research, which deals with a common problem among a number of
teachers, and there is an exchange of experiences and communication between them to solve this
problem. The third is the procedural research at the level of the educational institution, and this
research is shared by all teachers in the educational institution in order to solve a problem to
improve their performance, and thus improve the overall performance of the institution (Morales,
2016).
Through the analysis of several studies, such as: Fernandez & Adelina (2014), Elsayed &
Al-Amry (2015), Miller (2017), the skills of action research can be identified in the following
figure:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

56

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

Action Research Skills

5

1

Writing the research report

4

Carrying out the research
procedures

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

The preparation
of the preliminary
pages.
Sequence of
research parts.
Write the
recommendations.
Write the suggest
researches.
Write the
references
according APA
style

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

2

3

Selecting the research problem

Reviewing the literature and
writing the hypotheses

Preparing the proposal of
the research

1.
2.
3.

1.
2.

Write the research title.
Write the limits of
research.
3. Write research Terms.
4. Write research objectives.
5. Write the importance of
research.
6. Determine the research
community.
7. Determine the research
sample.
8. Determine the research
methodology.
9. Write the research
variables.
10. Determine the appropriate
statistical methods.

4.

1.

2.

3.
4.

Sense of the
problem.
Identify the
problem field.
Write the research
problem.
Write the research
questions.

Identify the sources
of the literature
review.
Employ the sources
of the literature
review.
Writ the literature
review.
Write the research
hypotheses.

Use
appropriate
research tools
Data collection
Data
organization
Data analysis
Determine the
experimental
design of the
research.
Interpretation
of the results.

Figure 1Action Research Skills
(Elsayed& Al-Amry, 2015)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

57

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

It is clear from the above that project-based learning steps across the web are highly
compatible with the steps of the preparation and implementation of action research.
7. Methodology
In this part the researcher describes the method and procedures that were followed in the
current study, as he deals with a description of the study sample, tools, and procedures to ensure
validity and reliability. Moreover, he discusses the statistical treatments used in the data analysis.
7.1 Sample of the Study
The study sample comprised (27) master’s students of Education Department in College of
Arts and Applied Sciences at Dhofar University.
7.2 Study materials and tools
7.2.1 Proposed program based on Project-Web learning
The proposed program has been prepared according to the following steps:
▪ Analysis Stage: This stage included an analysis of the educational needs of the master
students, which was the lack of students' research skills. And then analyze the characteristics
of the students, which consisted in the acquisition of students' e-learning skills. And finally the
analysis of the characteristics of the educational environment, which was the availability of elearning requirements in the classroom.
▪ Design Stage: This stage included the following steps:
1. Defining the objectives of the program: The overall objective of the program is to develop the
action research skills of the Master's students at Dhofar University. The procedural objectives
of each of the program's modules have been determined, as well as the specific objectives for
each session of the program.
2. Identifying and organizing the content of the program: The content of the program was
determined in light of its educational objectives. It included five educational modules related
to the research skills that were previously devised in figure (1), which consisted in selecting
the research problem, reviewing the literature and writing the hypotheses, preparing the
proposal of the research, carrying out the research procedures and writing the research
report.The content is organized in the form of educational modules, and each module includes
a number of training sessions that depend on self-learning.
3. Identifying Media and Educational Activities: A number of multimedia and learning resources
have been identified for the contents of the program, represented by presentations, pdf text
files, video clips, synchronous virtual chapters, and thematic enrichment sites.
4. Identifying learning methods and strategies: The proposed program included the following
learning strategies and styles: electronic discussion, e-learning platforms, online learning,
electronic brainstorming, electronic lecture, self-learning, collaborative learning, and training
workshops.
5. Identifying training phases using project-based learning across the web: This step has been
implemented through selecting the title of action research project, planning for the preparation
of action research project, implementation of the action research project and evaluation of
action research project.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

58

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

▪

Development stage:This stage included preparing multimedia and learning resources for each
topic in the content of the program, creating an educational forum to allow for dialogue and
discussion among students, and using virtual classes to communicate between groups and
provide educational content, preparing working paper questions for each program topic as a
construction evaluation and preparing the final test in the action research skills as a final
evaluation.

▪

Evaluation stage: This stage was carried out through the construction evaluation which was
carried out at each stage of the project preparation, and the final evaluation which was carried
out at the end of the project by comparing the post-application and the pre- application of
action research skills on the study sample.

▪

Preparing the program in the final image: To check the validity of the program, this
program was presented to five faculty members specialized in curriculum, teaching methods
and technology and it was modified according to their suggestions, so that the program in its
final form is a component of the training manual, and the working papers.

7.2.2 Action Research Skills Test
The researcher built a test in order to measure the students' action research skills. This test
consisted of twenty-five questions related to the five skills of action research skills,depending on
the relative weight of each skill and the number of sub-skills. Therefore, four questions were
assigned to the skills of selecting the research problem, reviewing the literature and writing the
hypotheses, and writing the research report. Other seven questions were assigned to the skill of
preparing the proposal of the research, and six questions were assigned to the skill of carrying out
the research procedure. To ensure the validity, this test was presented to six faculty members
specialized in curriculum, teaching methods and technology and some items were modified based
on their suggestions. The degree of agreement was found to be at (89%). To check the reliability,
the researcher carried out the test as a pilot study on (20) master students in college of commerce
and business administration. Reliability coefficient was calculated for the test using the Cronbach’
s Alpha equation and was found to be at (0.92). One or two marks were given for correct answer
and zero mark for the wrong answer. Thus, the maximum score for the test is (50) marks, while
the minimum is (0), taking into account that the time of the exam was (120) minutes.
7.3 Variables
Study variables are defined in the proposed program based on project learning across the web as
an independent variable, and action research skills as a dependent variable.
7.4 Study Design
X1
O
X2
X1: Performance on the pre-test of action research skills.
O: Treatment for the sample (proposed program).
X2: Performance on the post-test of action research skills.
7.5 Experimental Treatment:
After selecting the study sample, they were divided into groups of five students per group. Each
group prepares an action research to address a particular problem in a participatory manner. The
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

59

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

sample was pre-tested by applying action research skills test prior to their training on the proposed
program, followed by an introductory meeting with them to give a comprehensive idea of the
proposed training program and train them. After the completion of the training program, each
group of students was assigned the task of conducting a participatory action research on one of the
problems in their field of specialization. In the end, the test of action research skills was applied to
the study sample.
7.6 Statistical Treatment:
Data were analyzed using mean, standard division, T test, and η2 using SPSS version 22.
8. Results
8.1 Results related to the first question
The first question is: What is the proposed program based on Project-Web Learning
Approach in the development of action research skills among Masters Students in Oman? This
question was answered within the literature review of the current study (P. 8), where the
researcher prepared a proposed program based on Project-Web learning approach in a scientific
method according to five basic steps, namely: analysis stage, design stage, development stage,
evaluation stage, and preparing the program in the final image.
8.2 Results related to the second question
The second question is:What is the effectiveness of the proposed program based on ProjectWeb Learning Approach in the development of action research skills among Masters Students in
Oman?
The hypothesis below emerged from the above question:
There is a significant difference at (0.01) between the pre and post application of action
research skills test on the study sample in favor of the post application.
To verify the validity of the above hypothesis, the researcher found the significance of the
differences between the degrees of pre and post application to the test of action research skills on
the study sample, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Significance of differences between the pre- posttest using T test
Action Research Skills
Test
1. Selecting the research
problem
2. Reviewing the
literature and writing the
hypotheses
3. Preparing the proposal
of the research
4. Carrying out the
research procedure
5. Writing the research
report
Total

N
27

Pre- Test
Mean
Std. Div. N
3.33
1.18
27

Post- Test
Mean Std. Div.
7.23
1.47

T test
11.27

η2

Sig.
0.001

0.19

27

3.67

1.18

27

7.67

0.84

15.06

0.000

0.23

27

9.80

1.50

27

13.50

1.60

9.21

0.001

0.20

27

7.50

1.48

27

11.40

0.94

12.30

0.001

0.21

27

2.60

1.67

27

6.87

1.14

11.55

0.000

0.21

27

19.97

4.33

27

43.53

3.39

23.39

0.000

0.39

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

60

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

The table 1 shows the following:
- There are substantial differences in the mean grades of the pretest and the posttest for action
research skills test in favor of the pretest at each skill separately and the test as a whole.
- There are significant differences at (0.01) between the mean grades of the pretest and the
posttest for action research skills test in favor of the pretest at each skill separately and the test
as a whole.
- The effect size (η2) of the proposed program based on Project-Web Learning Approach on
action research skills was high at each skill of action research skills separately and the skills as
a whole. So it can be said that the proposed program based on Project-Web Learning Approach
led to the development of action research skills for the participants of the study. Therefore, the
study hypothesis is accepted.
9. Discussion
The results of this study can be attributed to:
- The continuous and varied training offered to students through electronic participation groups
made the discussions rich, and the students benefited from each other and their teacher,
resulting in an improvement in the level of their research skills.
- The proposed program offered a variety of knowledge and skills to students about action
research through a variety of interesting electronic resources, thus encouraging them to do
more to learn all about action researches.
- Various training activities and multiple models of action research provided students with a
broad understanding of different research approaches to action research, and the right criteria
for performing each skill.
- Intensive electronic training of students on the skills of action research skills, and the
continuous evaluation by the researcher led to the students' knowledge of weaknesses in the
implementation of research skills one by one, and then enhancement and improvement of these
skills continuously. Therefore, all their research skills improved without exception.
However, many studies have found that the Project-Web Learning Approach has been effectivein
developing many different professional, cognitive and skills aspects of students and teachers,
especially action research skills, such as: (Mohamed, 2018; Risnani, 2017; Kapenieks, 2016).
10. Conclusion
The researcher in the current study has built a program in action research based on learning
projects across the web for the master students at Dhofar University according to the following
steps: analysis stage, design stage, development stage, evaluation stage, and preparing the
program in the final image.This program led to the development of action research skills for the
participants of the study. Action research skills that have been developed are: selecting the
research problem, reviewing the literature and writing the hypotheses, preparing the proposal of
the research, carrying out the research procedures, and writing the research report.The effect size
(η2) was high for all skills.
11. Recommendations
Based on the results of this study the researcher recommends the need to expand the use of the
Project-Web Learning Approach in the teaching of all the courses of the master's students, because
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

61

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

it has a positive effect to improve the motivation of students towards learning, and develop their
academic skills. It is also necessary to provide material and moral support and training appropriate
for Master's Students to encourage them to conduct action researches in the field of specialization,
in order to solve their practical problems by a scientific method. More research should be
conducted to identify the effect of usingProject-Web Learning Approach to develop other
variables, and prepare a comparative study on the effect of using Project-Web Learning Approach
and other Approaches on development action research in other educational stages other than the
one examined in this study.
About the Author:
Prof. Abdelkader Elsayed is a full Professor in Education at Benha University, Egypt, and Assoc.
Professor at Dhofar University in Salalah, Oman. He conducted 50 researches and 6 books in the
field of education, and participated in 74 international and local conferences. Abdelkader has been
an external examiner for 25Master and Ph.D. theses, and supervised 80 Master theses, Ph. D theses,
and Project. He conducted 32 training programs and workshops and got 25 training programs and
workshops in the field of education. He is a member of 15Scientific and professional associations
and participated in many scientific projects such as: Timss, and FOEEP.
ORCid ID https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6882-4100
References
Arab Thought Institute (2013). Tamam for Educational Development. Lebanon: Author.Retrieved
from: http://arabthought.org in 06/26/2013.
Al-Maziny, T. A. & Al-Mazroua, H. M. (2010). Effectiveness of a Proposed Training Program on
Action Research Skills and Science Teaching Conceptions Among in Service Science
Teachers. Journal of King Saud University, 24(2), 585-618.
Arif, A. D. (2015). The effectiveness of web-based project-based learning (individual /
participatory) in developing e-books development skills of female students and their
attitudes towards learning strategies. Journal of Arab Studies in Education and
Psychology, 2(59), 69-118.
Albritton, S. (2016). Implementing a Project- Based Learning Model in a Pre-Service Leadership
Program.International Journal of Educational Leadership Preparation, 11(1), 28.
Al-Baluchi, A. R. (2011). Education implemented a training program in action research. Retrieved
from: http://home.moe.gov.om/arabic/showtopic.php?ID=266 in 18/05/2012.
Al-Hussaini, S. S. (2018). The areas of teacher research in the Sultanate of Oman and the reality
of benefiting from it: a qualitative study. Journal of Educational and Psychological
Studies, College of Education, Sultan Qaboos University, 12(3), 465-483.
Ching, H. (2016). Peer Feedback to Facilitate Project-Based Learning in an Online Environment.
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 14(5), 258-276.
Elsayed, A. M. & Al-Amry, T. A. (2015). The availability of action research skills among the
senior teachers in basic education schools in Dhofar Governorate, Sultanate of Oman.
College of Education Journal, Benha University, 26(103), 139-162.
Fernández, C. & Adelina, R. (2014). Towards a collaborative action research in Spain to improve
teaching practice. Educational Action Research, 22(3), 397-410.
Johnson, B. (1993). Teacher-as- researcher. Retrieved from ERIC (ED355205) in 19/5/2013.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

62

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

Kapenieks, J. (2016). Educational Action Research to Achieve the Essential Competencies of the
Future. Journal of Teacher Education for Sustainability, 18(1), 95-110.
Miller, N. (2017). Teaching Inquiry to High School Teachers Through the Use of Mathematics
Action Research Projects, Problems, Resources, and Issues in Mathematics
Undergraduate Studies. Philadelphia, 27(1), 33-46.
Mohamed, N. E. (2013). Designing an electronic bag based on project-based learning to develop
problem solving skills for students of educational technology. College of Education
Journal, Benha University, 42(96), 353-408.
Mohamed, R. H. (2018). A proposed program in action research based on learning through projects
through the web to develop research awareness and reduce teaching anxiety among
students of mathematics teachers. Mathematics Education Journal, 21(4), 168-223.
Morales, M. E. (2016). Participatory Action Research (PAR) cum Action Research (AR) in
Teacher Professional Development: A Literature Review. International Journal
of Research in Education and Science, 2(1), 156-165.
Mubarez, M. A. (2014). The difference between the type of performance-based evaluation and the
learning strategy of web-based projects and its impact on the development of problemsolving skills according to cognitive control in the computer and information technology
course at the students in the preparatory stage. Journal of Educational Technology, 24(1),
239-279.
Obeidi, K. K. (2010). The reality of using Arabic language teachers of the action research practices
in the development of linguistic performance of their students. Reading and Knowledge
Journal, 108, 22-55.
Pilten, P. &Pilten, S. (2017). The Effect of ICT Assisted Project Based Learning Approach on
Prospective ICT Integration Skills of Teacher Candidates. Journal of Education and
Training Studies, 5(3), 135-147.
Risnani, S. A. (2017). Implementation of Project-Based Learning (PJBL) through One Man One
Tree to Improve Students' Attitude and Behavior to Support "Sekolah Adiwiyata".
International Education Studies, 10(3), 134-141.
Riyanti, T. E. (2017). Implemental Project Based Learning Approach to Graphic Design Course.
Journal of Education and Practice, 8(15), 173-177.
Saraya, A. E. (2012). Designing a training strategy for e-learning based on projects and their
effectiveness in developing the skills of designing the training bags and the related
cognitive aspects at the specialist of the educational resources centers in the teacher’s
college in Riyadh. Journal of Educational Technology, 22(1), 45-86.
Shadiev, H. & Huany, Y. (2015). A Pilot Study: Facilitating Cross-Cultural Understanding with
Project-Based Collaborative Learning in an Online Environment. Australasian Journal
of Educational Technology, 31(2), 123-139.
Al-Shanfari, A. A. (2012). The skills of applying educational research in management practices
and the degree of availability for the public school principals and their assistants in the
Sultanate of Oman. MA Thesis, Sultan Qaboos University, Sultanate of Oman.
Stozhko, A.; Bortnik, B.; James; M.& Mironova, A. (2015), Interdisciplinary Project-Based
Learning: Technology for Improving Student. Cognition Research in Learning
Technology, 23(13), 13.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

63

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Effectiveness of Project-Web Learning Approach in the Development

Elsayed

Tilchin, O. & Kittany, M. (2016). An Adaptive Approach to Managing Knowledge Development
in a Project-Based Learning Environment.Journal of Education and Training Studies,
4(10), 42-53.
Yousef, M. M. (2014). Preparing Palestinian reflective English language teachers through
classroom based action research. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 40(3), 12-31.
Zawaidi, H. A. (20114). Employment of social networking software in accordance with the
project-based learning strategy and its impact on the high and low achievement
motivation and the trend towards learning. World of Education Journal, 15(46), 129-173.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

64

