Problems with a Causal Interpretation of Polygenic Score Differences between
Jewish and non-Jewish Respondents in the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study
Jeremy Freese, Ben Domingue, Kamil Sicinski, Sam Trejo, Pam Herd1
Abstract
Dunkel et al. (2019) observe higher MTAG polygenic scores for educational attainment
among the 53 Jewish respondents with available genomic data in the Wisconsin
Longitudinal Study. They interpret their ensuing analysis as evidence that genetic
differences "mediate" the association between being Jewish and higher cognitive test
scores and higher educational attainment. We demonstrate instead--and perhaps
counterintuitively--that the difference between Jewish and non-Jewish polygenic scores are
much too large for their analysis to offer any evidentiary value for this conclusion. Instead,
the data show clear evidence of the problems with comparing polygenic scores across
ethnic groups that others have noted.

Affiliations: Freese, Domingue, and Trejo are at Stanford University; Sicinski is at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison; Herd is at Georgetown University. We thank Michael Nivard for comments on
a previous draft.
1

By design, polygenic scores for educational attainment are associated with educational
attainment (Lee et al. 2018), and they are also associated with cognitive test scores (Plomin
and von Stumm 2018). Recently, a study using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study
(WLS) observed that Jewish respondents have a higher average value on a polygenic score
for educational attainment than do non-Jewish respondents (Dunkel et al. 2019).
Consistent with other data, Jewish respondents in WLS also have higher average cognitive
test scores and educational attainment. This leads Dunkel et al. (2019) to report that the
polygenic score "mediates" the relationship between being Jewish and the study's cognitive
and educational outcomes.
The investigators' discussion invites the interpretation of these results as evidence of
causal mediation: that is, that the study provides evidence that the genetic differences
responsible for the polygenic score difference between Jewish and non-Jewish respondents
cause the group differences in cognition and education. An obvious limitation of this study
is that the sample includes only 53 Jewish respondents (less than 1% of WLS respondents).
What we wish to clarify here, however, is that other differences between the Jewish and
non-Jewish respondents in WLS provide further reasons to consider any causal
interpretation of the study's results unfounded.
Martin et al. (2017) provide a compelling demonstration of the problems with drawing
causal conclusions from polygenic score differences between ancestral groups. In one of
their examples, polygenic score differences would predict that people of West African
descent to be much shorter than people of European descent, even though we have robust
anthropometric evidence of no such differences. The same inferential problem lurks in a
more pernicious way when a phenotypic difference between groups does exist, because
then the genetic differences might be mistakenly inferred to cause the phenotypic
differences even when closer scrutiny reveals similar problems to those that Martin et al.
(2017) highlight.
Figure 1 shows how this problem manifests for the results reported by Dunkel et al. (2019).
We use the cognitive test that WLS respondents took in high school. The figure divides the
non-Jewish respondents into two groups: those with test scores above the mean and those
with test scores below the mean. We can see that the scores are approximately normally
distributed in both groups, but that the distribution is shifted modestly upward for those
with cognition scores above the mean, reflecting the plain but hardly overwhelming
association between the polygenic score and cognition.
For Jewish respondents, however, the center of the polygenic score distribution is much
higher. The difference between Jewish and non-Jewish respondents is several times larger
than the difference in scores between those above and below the mean for non-Jewish
1

respondents. Notably, WLS Jewish respondents do have a higher cognitive test score than
the overall mean (z = .66), it is lower than the mean test score among above-average WLS
respondents (z = .87).
Figure 1. Histograms of MTAG polygenic score among WLS Jewish respondents and nonJewish WLS respondents with European ancestry whose cognitive test scores are above vs.
below the mean.

A different visualization of this point is provided as Figure 2. For non-Jewish respondents,
the plot provides information about the distribution of MTAG scores and the mean
cognitive score by the cognitive score decile. The top panel of the graph shows the
monotonic increase in median MTAG score in successive deciles of the cognitive test score.
The difference in the medians between the top decile and middle deciles, however, is still
less than the difference between the median of the top decile for non-Jewish respondents
and the median for Jewish respondents. (Indeed, one can show that Jewish respondents in
WLS have a much higher average polygenic score than even the top cognitive percentile of

2

non-Jewish WLS respondents.) A naïve causal interpretation of the polygenic score
difference might therefore lead one to anticipate that cognitive test scores for Jewish
respondents would be not just above the mean for non-Jewish respondents, but routinely
at genius levels. Instead, as noted, the average for Jewish respondents is only about twothirds of an SD above the mean (or about 110 in the IQ metric), and even this shrinks to just
below half an SD when we look at all respondents for whom we have 1975/7 survey data in
WLS, as opposed to only those for whom we have genetic data.

Figure 2. MTAG values and cognitive score values by cognitive score decile among nonJewish respondents, with comparison to Jewish respondents.

In other words, while the large difference in the polygenic score for educational attainment
between Jewish and non-Jewish respondents might look like evidence for genetic
differences driving the higher test scores and educational attainment of Jews, it is better
understood as exemplifying the sort of wonky, implausible result that is why researchers

3

have been repeatedly warned against interpreting group differences in polygenic scores in
the first place.
Dunkel et al. (2019) try to dismiss the plausibility of such differences by citing work
indicating that Ashkenazi Jews and non-Jewish persons with European ancestry have
"relatively low levels of genetic differentiation." Yet other studies, notably Price et al.
(2008), have identified Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry as a main source of systematic genomic
variation among those with European ancestry (see also Need et al. 2009).
In any event, whatever might be said about subpopulations in general, the few dozen
Jewish respondents in WLS can be readily distinguished using genomic information from
the rest of the WLS sample. WLS provides information on the first ten principal
components from the genome-data, which are intended to reflect the primary ancestryrelated ways in which members of the sample differ.2 Jewish and non-Jewish respondents
differ significantly on nine of the ten principal components (p < .05; seven of ten at p <
.001). Several combinations of just two components are sufficient to produce nearcomplete separation of these two groups in the data (for one example see Figure 3).3
Separation like this between groups fundamentally contradicts any premise the polygenic
scores between groups can be directly compared. The ancestry-related differences in gene
frequencies effectively overwhelm the causal differences between individuals that
polygenic scores hope to capture. That Jewish respondents have an average polygenic
score so different from even those non-Jewish respondents with the highest test scores or
most education is evidence of that problem.

Typically studies of individual variation would statistically adjust for these components, but the
combination of the clear separation of groups and the small sample of Jewish respondents involved
would make that approach unviable in WLS even apart from other issues with comparing polygenic
scores across groups.
3 The numbering of principal components in the released WLS polygenic score data are shuffled to
allay identifiability of respondents; here we refer to the two components we use simply as A and B.
2

4

Figure 3. Distinctness of Jewish and non-Jewish WLS respondents on two of the first ten
principal components of genome-wide data.

In sum, researchers have been warning against using polygenic scores for comparisons
across race/ethnic groups for some time now, and a closer look at the data behind Dunkel
et al.'s (2019) results provides another illustration of why. The obvious danger of naive
efforts to use polygenic scores is that the influence of various sorts of social differences will
be misidentified as genetic influences. For example, even though graduates from over 400
high schools are included in WLS, most Jewish respondents in WLS graduated from just
two high schools. The non-Jewish respondents from those two schools were also much
more likely to attend college than the overall proportion in WLS (89% and 57% vs. 42%).
Similarly, even though more than 20% of WLS respondents grew up on farms, virtually no

5

Jewish respondents did (0%).4 Respondents from farms in WLS are less likely to have
attended college than other non-Jewish respondents, net of either polygenic score or
cognitive test scores in adolescence. In these and other ways, the Jewish respondents in
WLS are not just distinct from the bulk of the study's non-Jewish respondents, but these
differences are plainly germane to understanding differences in educational attainment.

References
Dunkel, Curtis S., Michael A. Woodley of Menie, Jonatan Pallesen, Emil O. W. Kirkegaard.
2019. Polygenic scores mediate the Jewish phenotypic advantage in educational
attainment and cognitive ability compared with Catholics and Lutherans. Evolutionary
Behavioral Sciences.
Lee, J.J., Wedow, R., Okbay, A., Kong, E., Maghzian, O., Zacher, M., Nguyen-Viet, T.A., Bowers,
P., Sidorenko, J., Linnér, R.K. and Fontana, M.A., 2018. Gene discovery and polygenic
prediction from a genome-wide association study of educational attainment in 1.1 million
individuals. Nature Genetics, 50(8), p.1112.
Martin, Alicia R., Christopher R. Gignoux, Raymond K. Walters, Genevieve L. Wojcik,
Benjamin M. Neal, Simon Gravel, Mark J. Daly, Carlos D. Bustamante, Eimear E. Kenny.
2017. Human Demographic History Impacts Genetic Risk Prediction across Diverse
Populations. American Journal of Human Genetics 100: 635-649.
Need Anna C., Dalia Kasperavičiūtė , Elizabeth T. Cirulli E.T. & David B. Goldstein. 2009. A
Genome-Wide Genetic Signature of Jewish Ancestry Perfectly Separates Individuals with
and without Full Jewish Ancestry in a Large Random Sample of European Americans.
Genome Biology 10(1): R7.
Plomin, R., & von Stumm, S. (2018). The new genetics of intelligence. Nature reviews.
Genetics, 19(3), 148-159.
Price A.L., Butler J., Patterson N., Capelli C., Pascali V.L., Scarnicci F., RuizLinares A., Groop
L., Saetta A.A., Korkolopoulou P., Seligsohn U., Waliszewska A., Schirmer C., Ardlie K., Ramos
A., Nemesh J., Arbeitman L., Goldstein D.B., Reich D., Hirschhorn J.N. 2009. Discerning the
ancestry of European Americans in genetic association studies. PLoS Genetics 4:e236.

Given that the small sample size of Jewish respondents prompts concerns about identifiability,
percentages for Jewish respondents are rounded to the nearest multiple of 5.
4

6

