Instability in Care and Living Arrangements:
Putting Foster Youth in Context
Youngmin Yi1
Department of Sociology
Department of Policy Analysis & Management
Cornell University
yy567@cornell.edu

Abstract
Family instability is a key dimension of social inequality in the United States. However, the
association between family instability and child outcomes may be moderated by the quality of
family bonds and life prior to change or disruption. Child maltreatment is one context in which
changes to a child’s care and living arrangements, introduced when a child is placed in foster
care, could actively improve a child’s wellbeing. However, to date, this possibility has not been
tested. In this study, I analyze a nationally representative sample of child welfare-involved youth
to examine whether the association between foster care and instability in care and living
arrangements is driven by children’s placement in foster care or by the selectivity of foster youth.
I find that compared to children who do not enter foster care, those who do are more likely to
experience change in their primary caregiver, availability of a secondary caregiver, and their
living arrangement. When I treat the initial transition into foster care as necessary, excluding it
from my measures of change, foster care appears to stabilize the structures of children’s care
arrangements, while their constitutive relationships remain substantially less so. In addition to
answering an important question about the experiences of child welfare-involved youth, this
study contributes to the more central situation of “institutionalized” family life—including that
shaped by the child welfare system—in broader scholarship and dialogue on childhood and
family diversity, instability, and inequality.
1

The author would like to thank Megan Doherty Bea, John Eckenrode, Matthew Hall, Holly Larabee, Daniel
Lichter, Christopher Wildeman and participants of the Children and Youth roundtable at the 2018 American
Sociological Association meetings for their comments on earlier versions of this work. Please address all
correspondence to: Youngmin Yi, 323 Uris Hall, Department of Sociology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853,
yy567@cornell.edu.

1

Family instability is a key dimension of social inequality in the United States (Cherlin and
Seltzer 2014; McLanahan 2004; Raley and Wildsmith 2004; Roberts 2003; Wildeman 2009).
Children’s exposure to family change has been linked to higher levels of socioemotional and
behavioral problems and delinquency (Cavanagh and Huston 2005; Crosnoe et al. 2014; Fomby
and Cherlin 2007), poor mental health (Brown 2006), lower levels of school engagement and
educational attainment (Aquilino 1996; Brown 2006), and instability in their own families as
adults (McLanahan and Bumpass 1988; McLanahan and Percheski 2008). Further, these
experiences are unequally distributed across the population, with children of color and those who
are socioeconomically disadvantaged at higher risk of experiencing family instability (Berger et
al. 2016; McLanahan and Percheski 2008; Perkins 2017; Turney 2014).
Although research has come to the consensus that family change has negative average
consequences for children’s wellbeing, the quality of the bonds that constitute these families may
moderate those associations. For instance, in the case of divorce, an extensive literature suggests
that parental divorce has detrimental consequences for children’s wellbeing (Amato 2010;
Seltzer 1994). However, this conclusion has been interrogated by analyses taking a closer look at
the conditions surrounding this type of family change. In contexts of high marital conflict and
domestic violence, for example, children whose parents separate have better psychological health
and relationships with family and friends, in childhood and beyond, than those whose parents
remain married (e.g. Amato, Loomis, and Booth 1995; Yu et al. 2010).
To date, scholarship on these heterogeneous associations between family instability and
child outcomes has largely focused on relationships between parents and their partners. Yet it is
likely that the consequences of instability in other family relationships—such as those between
caregivers and children—are, too, contingent upon the quality of family life (Fomby and
2

Mollborn 2017; Mollborn, Fomby, and Dennis 2012; Perkins 2017; Turney and Wildeman 2013;
Turney 2015). In extreme situations such as children’s maltreatment, for example, we might
expect that family disruption would have minimally negative or even positive impacts on child
wellbeing. In the most high-risk cases of maltreatment, children may be removed from the home
and placed in foster care. The foster care system’s primary goals include keeping children
perceived to be in danger safe and facilitating their prompt transitions into nurturing and
permanent family settings. As such, the instability introduced by foster care placement is
intended to be short-term and beneficial (Children’s Bureau 2013). However, many children in
the foster care system experience multiple transitions in their care arrangements and fare quite
poorly across all domains of wellbeing (e.g. Church, Gross, and Baldwin 2005; Courtney et al.
2005; Harris and Courtney 2003; Roberts 2001).
But does foster care cause these higher levels of instability in children’s care and living
arrangements? And if so, does it cause instability beyond that which is necessary to ensure a
child’s safety? These questions are empirically difficult to answer. Foster-involved children face
multifaceted and disproportionately high levels of hardship and marginalization, making it
difficult to determine whether instability in their care and living arrangements is due to foster
care entry or other factors (Berger et al. 2009; Turney and Wildeman 2017). To disentangle these
processes, analyses of the effects of foster care must compare children ever in care to similar
children with no history of foster care, something that few studies have accomplished to date
(Doyle and Aizer 2018, Yi and Wildeman 2018; for key exceptions, see Berger et al. 2009;
Berzin 2008; Doyle 2007, 2008, 2013; Johnson-Reid and Barth 2000). Absent a randomized
experiment, the ideal study of the effect of foster care on instability in children’s care and living
arrangements requires data that meet four conditions: first, the data must include children who

3

enter foster care and children who do not, for comparison. Second, as the question of instability
is one of change, the data must observe these children over time. Third, the data must provide
information about children’s pre-placement characteristics and factors predictive of foster care
placement to account for the selectivity of children for whom removal from the home is deemed
necessary. Finally, the data must provide information that allows for descriptions of care and
living arrangements that apply to children in both foster and non-foster settings.
This study uses the National Survey of Child and Adolescent Wellbeing (NSCAW), the
first and only nationally representative longitudinal survey of child welfare-involved youth,
which meets all of these conditions (Research Triangle Institute 2008; RTI International 2014).
The NSCAW allows me to examine whether foster care is likely to be the cause of foster youths’
higher likelihoods and rates of instability in their care and living arrangements, measured as
changes in their primary caregiver, availability of a secondary caregiver, and their living
arrangement. I use inverse probability weighted regression models to compare the experiences of
children ever in foster care to those of an appropriate comparison group: children who are also
subjects of child maltreatment investigations and differ only in that they have never been placed
in foster care. I first answer this question using measures that include any change in children’s
caregiving and living arrangements as instability. I then estimate the same models using
measures that treat foster youth’s initial entry into out-of-home care as necessary to their
protection, excluding that first change from measures of instability in their care and living
arrangements. By using these two sets of measures, these analyses remain agnostic in the
important and contentious debate over the frequency with which foster care placement is invoked
as a response to confirmed maltreatment (e.g. Bartholet 1999, 2000, 2015; Guggenheim 2000;
Roberts 2001; Wald, Carlsmith, and Leiderman 1988; Waldfogel 1998).

4

In treating any change in children’s care and living arrangements as “excess” instability, I
find that compared to children who do not enter foster care, those who do are more likely to
experience any change in their primary caregiver (46 percentage points), the availability of a
secondary caregiver (8 percentage points), and their living arrangement (20 percentage points).
Further, children who enter foster care are likely to experience more changes. When I treat the
initial transition into foster care as necessary, excluding it from my measures of change, foster
care appears to stabilize or have no effect on some dimensions of children’s care settings in the
short- to medium-term. Foster youth are 7 percentage points less likely to experience a change in
the presence of a secondary caregiver and statistically indistinguishable from non-foster youth in
their likelihood of experiencing a change in their living arrangement. However, children placed
in foster care continue to have a 30 percentage-point higher probability of change and more
changes in their primary caregiver than those who are not. Taken together, these results show
that although the structures of children’s care arrangements may be more stable after entering the
foster system, their constitutive relationships remain substantially less so. In addition to
answering an important question about the experiences of child welfare-involved youth, this
study aims to contribute to the more central situation of “institutionalized” family life—including
that shaped by the child welfare system—in broader scholarship and dialogue on childhood and
family diversity, instability, and inequality.

BACKGROUND
Family Instability and Child Wellbeing
Children who experience higher levels of familial and household “churn” appear to have
poorer outcomes over the life course than those who experience comparatively more stability in
family life (Cherlin 2009; Fomby and Cherlin 2007; McLanahan and Percheski 2008). The
5

consequences of family instability coupled with its unequal distribution across the population
have made family instability a major component of social inequality in the U.S. (Brown 2006;
Cherlin and Seltzer 2014; McLanahan and Percheski 2008; Roberts 2003; Wildeman 2009).
Although research has consistently found negative consequences of family instability for
children’s outcomes, on average, these associations are moderated by the quality of family life
prior to the family change event in question.
For example, an extensive body of work concerned with the average effects of parental
separation on children previously centered on evidence that this disruption were detrimental for
children’s risk of delinquency (Matsueda and Heimer 1987), and their likelihood of dropping out
of school before completing a high school education (McLanahan and Sandefur 1994), among
other negative outcomes. However, analyses that further detail the circumstances proximal to the
separation have found that the wellbeing of children following a divorce is contingent upon the
quality of parent-child relationships before and after separation (Yu et al. 2010) and the intensity
of prior parental conflict (Amato, Loomis, and Booth 1995; Booth and Amato 1994, 2001).
Child maltreatment is yet another context in which family change or disruption may serve
to benefit a child’s wellbeing. Child maltreatment—generally defined as abuse and/or neglect—
is associated with an extensive array of poor outcomes, including homelessness and criminal
justice involvement (Doyle and Aizer 2018), poor socioemotional and cognitive developmental
outcomes (Font and Berger 2015), and poor mental and physical health both in childhood and
into adulthood (Jonson-Reid, Kohl, and Drake 2012). Therefore, in the most extreme cases of
substantiated maltreatment, in which a child is deemed to be at high or imminent risk of further
maltreatment if left in their current care setting, decisions to remove a child from the home and
place them in foster care may, in fact, be beneficial.

6

Foster Care as Family Instability
Foster care placement, is indeed, a type of family disruption, but one that is intended to
be protective and short-term. In fact, the success of the foster care system is defined, in part, by
its success in supporting children’s “permanency,” or their (re)integration into nurturing and
stable family settings (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2014). Permanency
outcomes can range from the child’s placement back with their family of origin, perhaps with
additional in-home services to support and ensure the child and their family’s wellbeing, to
termination of parental rights and placement with an adoptive family. Theoretically, this means
that a child’s placement in foster care could decrease instability or, ideally at the very least, have
no effect on children’s exposure to family instability beyond an initial disruption for the purpose
of keeping them safe.
However, not all children in the foster care system achieve permanency, and their
likelihood of doing so and the rapidity with which they do are both linked to their wellbeing.
Those who churn through multiple foster placements fare significantly worse than those who
land in stable placements early in their involvement with the foster care system (e.g. Oosterman
et al. 2007; Rubin et al. 2007; Ryan and Testa 2005). These patterns echo our knowledge of the
risk factors associated with family instability identified in the broader literature on family
demography and change: compared to White foster youth, Black, Hispanic, and Native American
children are likely to be in the system for longer, less likely to transition into permanent family
settings, and more likely to experience multiple placements (Burns et al. 2004; Garcia and
Courtney 2011; Harris and Courtney 2003; Osgood, Foster, and Courtney 2010).
The degree to which foster care itself is the reason for this heightened risk of instability
remains an empirical challenge for two reasons. First, the social, demographic, and economic

7

selectivity of children placed in foster care makes it difficult to disentangle foster care effects
from effects related to other dimensions of disadvantage on foster youths’ exposure to care and
living arrangement instability (Courtney 2000; DeGue and Widom 2009; Goemans et al. 2016;
Turney and Wildeman 2014; Wildeman and Waldfogel 2014). In addition to suffering from the
physical, emotional, and mental trauma of likelchild maltreatment (abuse and/or neglect), many
of these children demonstrate elevated levels of developmental and behavioral problems and are
disproportionately likely to come from homes and communities that are stressed by economic
hardship, mental and physical health challenges, and neighborhood and/or domestic violence,
among other acute stressors (e.g. Dong et al. 2004; Leloux-Opmeer et al. 2016), which are also
correlates of family instability (Fomby and Cherlin 2007; McLanahan and Percheski 2008).
Second, interpretation of whether change in care and living arrangements among child
welfare-involved youth is beneficial or detrimental for children’s wellbeing is contingent upon
one’s assessment of current practices and decisions to place children in foster care at all. Some
argue that child welfare systems are overly punitive and unequally so across social groups,
dissolving and traumatizing families in ways that reverberate through social structure (e.g.
Roberts 2003), and that child welfare responses to maltreatment should seek to reduce removal
from the home through alternative approaches (e.g. Waldfogel 1998). Others argue that we are
not removing enough children from potentially dangerous living situations and that foster care
placement, termination of parental rights, and adoption should follow more frequently as system
responses to confirmed maltreatment (e.g. Bartholet 1999, 2000).
The Current Study
In this study, I focus on two key questions: first, are children placed in out-of-home or
foster care more likely to experience instability in their care and living arrangements than those

8

who are not? Second, if there are indeed differences, does foster care introduce “excess”
instability into children’s family life beyond that which is necessary to protect them from what is
suspected to elevated risks of harm? To answer these questions, I use data from the National
Survey of Child and Adolescent Wellbeing, a nationally representative longitudinal survey of
child welfare-involved youth, to examine the association between foster care entry and children’s
likelihoods and rates of instability in their care and living arrangements. My analysis expands
our understanding of family inequality and the consequences of child welfare system
involvement in three key ways. First, I am able to directly compare the experiences of foster and
non-foster youth, which is difficult due to the exclusion of one of these groups in most data
sources available to study child welfare-involved youth or general patterns of family instability
(Courtney 2000). Second, the rich detail of the NSCAW allows me to account for the selectivity
of foster youth with respect to a comprehensive array of observed sociodemographic, economic,
and system involvement-related characteristics. Finally, by bringing core family demographic
questions of family change and instability to the realm of child welfare, I contribute to the
burgeoning scholarship that aims to more centrally situate the experience of a non-negligible and
vulnerable but relatively understudied population in research on family diversity and inequality.
I anticipate that those who are ever placed in foster care will be more likely to experience
changes in their care and living arrangements than children who are not, but that these
differentials will be less pronounced among children of color, who have been found in family
demographic research to be more likely to experience family and household complexity and
instability (e.g. Cherlin 2010). My expectations for comparisons of children who are similarly
likely to enter foster care (as opposed to unadjusted estimates) are less clear. Should observed
differences in foster and non-foster youths’ likelihoods of experiencing changes in care and

9

living arrangements truly be consequences of foster care placement, I would expect these
differences to persist even after accounting for children’s differential risks of foster care
placement. However, if these differences are instead functions of systematic between-group
differences that are independently predictive of care and living arrangement changes, such as
poverty or parents’ marital status, these differences should diminish with the strategies I use to
account for children’s selection into foster care.

DATA, MEASURES, AND METHODS
The National Survey of Child and Adolescent Wellbeing (NSCAW)
The National Survey of Child and Adolescent Wellbeing (NSCAW), the first and only
nationally representative survey of child welfare-involved children, is a longitudinal survey of
children who were subjects of maltreatment investigations but were not necessarily confirmed as
victims or placed in foster care. This sampling design allows for a comparison of children who
are more similarly at risk for foster care placement than a comparison between children who
enter the foster care system and those in the general child population that may or may not have
had any contact with child protective services. The NSCAW data also contain detailed
information about the characteristics and experiences of child welfare-involved youth, their
caregivers, and their living arrangements over time (Dowd et al. 2008). These data come from
multiple reporters, collected through child, caregiver, teacher, and investigative and service
caseworker survey instruments, with the support of computer-assisted technology when inquiring
about sensitive topics.

10

The NSCAW data consist of two panels, of which I use the earlier for the core analyses,
the NSCAW I.2 The NSCAW I sample consists of 5,501 children whose child welfare
investigations closed between October 1999 and December 2000 when the children were
between 0 and 14 years old. Follow-up waves 2-5 were collected 12, 18, 36, and 59-97 months
after the close of the initial investigation, respectively, and continued to survey sample members
and caregivers even after their exit from the child welfare system (meaning no further services,
reports/investigations, or foster care placement) (Dowd et al. 2008). To ensure that any
differences in likelihoods of experiencing caregiver and household instability between non-foster
and foster youth can be plausibly attributed to foster care placement, I restrict the sample in two
key ways. First, I restrict the sample to children whose first foster care placement is observed
after the baseline interview (after Wave 1). This constraint allows me to ensure that the models
are accounting for selection into foster care placement. To do so, I restrict the analysis to
children who (a) were not in foster care prior to Wave 1, captured via retrospective questions
about foster care placement and (b) were observed in-home with a permanent caregiver rather
than in foster care at the Wave 1 interview. This ensures temporally that any association between
out-of-home care entry and social instability estimated in these analyses is identified off of an
observed first entry into foster care and not a pre-existing trajectory of living arrangements that
may be related to foster care placements that are not captured in these data.
I restrict the sample further to those who provide enough caregiver/household
information over the three waves to pick up at least one potential transition in caregivers and
living arrangements after Wave 1 and who provide information on their racial/ethnic

2

I use the NSCAW I because of its longer survey period (5 vs. 3 waves), which allows for an analyses of
rates/frequency of social contextual instability rather than a single change measure. Analysis of the NSCAW II
yields substantively similar results, as discussed later.

11

identification. This leaves an analytic sample of 1,644 children: 716 non-Hispanic white
children, 515 non-Hispanic Black children, 303 Hispanic children, and 110 children who are
non-Hispanic and Native American or of another racial group. A comparison of the analytic
sample and the full NSCAW I sample is presented in Appendix Table 1. On average, the children
included in these analyses are likely to have been observed for longer (4.6 vs. 4.3 waves) than
those excluded, and are more likely to have had a baseline caregiver that was younger (31 vs. 37
years old), a biological or stepparent (94% vs. 59%), unemployed (14% vs. 9%), ever arrested
(33% vs. 29%), and to have had prior child welfare system involvement. The children in the
analytic sample had also been living with their baseline caregivers for longer than those excluded
from these analyses (62 vs. 44 months). I preserve cases with missing covariate information
(items other than the child’s race/ethnicity, foster care history, and outcome measures of change)
by using multiply-imputed data (n=5) estimated through chained imputation using the mi
procedures in Stata 14.2 (StataCorp 2015; Graham 2009; Rubin 1987).
The analytic sample is described in detail in Table 1 and Appendix Table 1. Children in
the analytic sample were observed for 4 to 5 waves of the NSCAW I. At the time of the baseline
survey, these children had been living with their primary caregivers for an average of just over
five years. Children ever and never placed in foster care were relatively similar in their
racial/ethnic composition. Their caregivers also had histories of institutional contact: one-third
had ever been arrested and 30 percent and 37 percent had previously been previously involved as
a caregiver in a substantiated case of maltreatment and received child welfare services,
respectively. There are a few notable differences when comparing the unweighted characteristics
of children ever and never placed in foster care over the study period. Foster youth had been
living with their caregivers for less time by the time of the baseline survey. They were also more

12

likely to have caregivers who had been previously involved with the child welfare system,
including a higher likelihood of having a caregiver who had themselves been a victim of
maltreatment in childhood (38% vs. 26%). Children placed in foster care were also more likely
to have had abandonment noted as one of the maltreatment types for which they were being
investigated (5% vs. 2%, and were more likely to come from families described by investigative
caseworkers as having low social support (51% vs. 41%) or high levels of stress (74% vs. 66%).
[Table 1 about here]
Measures
Instability in Care and Living Arrangements
In the current study, I focus on three measures of change and (in)stability in the
relationships and structures that define children’s care and living arrangements, taking care to
use descriptions that translate across foster and non-foster settings. These measures identify
changes in a child’s primary caregiver, availability of a secondary caregiver, and living
arrangement. Together, these measures describe both relational as well as structural descriptors
of their arrangements. Instability in each of these aspects of caregiving and household context
are operationalized in two ways: as dichotomous measures of change (0 = no change, 1 =
change) as well as count measures of the number of waves in which a change in each dimension
is observed (e.g. 0 = no change, 4 = change in every NSCAW wave after the baseline interview).
Children’s baseline care and living arrangements are described in the bottom panel of Table 1. A
change in primary caregiver is identified as a between-wave change in the person named as the
child’s primary caregiver. Measurement of change in availability of a secondary caregiver
indicates whether there is an acquisition or loss in availability of a regular secondary caregiver.

13

Finally, the child’s living arrangement is assessed using information from the child’s
household roster, which enumerates the child’s relationship to each household member.
Members of the child’s household are categorized as one of the following mutually-exclusive
relationship types: parent figure (biological, step, adoptive, or foster parent), grandparent,
sibling, other family member, or other non-family member. If the relationship was undisclosed or
unknown, information on that household member’s relationship to the child was coded as
missing. Using these household member-specific relationships, I construct binary descriptive
indicators of whether the child is observed at any wave living in each of the following household
types/living arrangements: single parent figure, two parent-figure, extended family (non-sibling,
non-parent figure family members), and extended non-family households (non-siblings, nonparent figures). A household could fit into more than one of the above categories; for example, a
household including a focal child, their biological mother, stepfather, and their maternal
grandmother, would be coded as “1” for the measures indicating that the child was in a twoparent figure household and an extended family household. Using this information, I again
construct two sets of measures of household type instability: a dichotomous indicator that
indicates whether a child experienced a change from “0” to “1” or vice versa on at least one of
the above measures of living arrangement type at any wave over the study period and a count
measure that indicates how many times a child experiences a change along this dimensions over
the course of the four waves following the baseline survey. For each of the three outcome
measures, a child could experience from 0 to 4 changes over the course of the study.
For children who are observed in group home settings at any wave, all of the measures
above are adjusted accordingly using the Group Home module, which was administered to a
caregiver of the child in the group home in which she or he was placed. Children observed in

14

group home settings are coded as follows: the child is noted as having a “non-family” caregiver,
as having a secondary caregiver if the respondent stated that more than one adult was responsible
for the care of the child, and as living in a household/living arrangement type described as an
extended non-family “household.” The child is also noted as living with family if the caregiver
reports that the child had at least one sibling living in the same facility. For all the above
measures, if a child is missing information on whether a household member type is present or not
in a particular wave, the between-wave periods including that wave (as start or end) are recorded
as periods of stability. Using these measures, the analyses at the core of this study are able to
examine both foster and non-foster youths’ experiences of any change as well as the number of
changed experienced in the structures of their care and living arrangements as well as the
primary relationships that comprise them.
Foster Care Placement
The key predictor of interest in these analyses is a summary indicator of whether a child
is ever placed in foster care at any point after the baseline survey, either in response to the
maltreatment investigation that resulted in their sampling into the NSCAW or to a subsequent
investigation. This indicator is based on a combination of retrospective and point-in-time
measures collected at each wave of the NSCAW. At each wave, the NSCAW reports whether the
child is in foster care at the time of the survey and also asks about any foster care placements
since the last date of interview. In the baseline interview, measures ask about any previous foster
care placements since the child was born. Data processing by the NSCAW data custodians have
resolved discrepancies across child, caregiver, and caseworker reports about this information
(Dowd et al. 2008b). Using these data, I construct a summary measure that captures whether the
child has been in out-of-home care at any point after Wave 1. Throughout the study, I

15

occasionally describe the children who do meet this condition as “foster youth” (515 or 31% of
the 1,644 children in the analytic sample) and those who do not as “non-foster youth.” The
detailed characteristics of the analytic sample and these two subgroups are presented in Table 1.
Socioeconomic, Demographic, and Maltreatment Investigation Characteristics
The NSCAW also includes extensive measures of the child’s sociodemographic,
economic, health, and behavioral characteristics; similar information about their primary
caregiver; as well as extensive details about the nature of the maltreatment investigation that
resulted in the child’s inclusion in the NSCAW, including a risk assessment conducted by the
investigative caseworker. I draw on different subsets of this information in two different stages
of the analysis. First, to estimate predicted probabilities of foster care placement for my
calculation of the inverse probability weights, discussed in further detail below, I use 43
measures of child and caregiver characteristics and information about the maltreatment
investigation and risk assessment that prior research indicates would be correlated with
children’s likelihood of foster care placement. The full list of these predictors is available in
Appendix Table 2 and includes such measures as: child race/ethnicity, whether the child has a
cognitive disability, a standardized score of the child’s social skills and behavior, caregiver
race/ethnicity, caregiver educational attainment, whether the caregiver has a physical disability,
scores reporting the caregiver’s alcohol and drug dependency, whether the caregiver and family
had any prior child welfare system involvement, the types of abuse or neglect alleged on the
baseline maltreatment investigation report, an indicator of whether the alleged maltreatment was
substantiated, and whether the investigative caseworker assessed the primary caregiver to have
poor parenting skills, among others.

16

I also draw on the rich detail of the NSCAW for regression adjustment in the final models
estimating the association between foster care placement and care and living arrangement change
and instability. To reflect and retain the national representativeness of the NSCAW baseline
sample in my analyses, which are based on a subset of the children in the original study, I use
covariate adjustment to control explicitly for characteristics along which the analytic sample
differs statistically (p<0.05) from the NSCAW baseline sample members who are excluded from
these analyses (see Appendix Table 1). The covariates used in the regression analyses are a
measure of the child’s relationship to their baseline caregiver (bio/step parent vs. other); the
number of waves for which the child was observed in the NSCAW; several measures of the
baseline primary caregiver’s characteristics (number of months living with child, age in years,
sex, physical disability status, unemployment status, history of arrest, cohabitation/marital status,
prior maltreatment substantiation, previous receipt of child welfare services, and previous foster
care placement of a child); characteristics of the baseline maltreatment investigation (whether
abandonment was one of the alleged maltreatment types, whether the alleged perpetrator was a
parent, whether the maltreatment was confirmed, whether the family had low social support,
whether the family was under a great deal of stress, and whether the investigation took place in
Illinois, Texas, or one of the states in the residual stratum); and descriptors of the child’s baseline
living arrangement (whether a secondary caregiver was available, whether they lived in a single
adult-headed household, with any extended family and/or non-family). A description of all of the
measures used to adjust the regression models is presented in Table 1.
Analytic Strategy
My capacity to determine whether foster care placement explains differences between
foster and non-foster youths’ differential risks of instability in their care and living arrangements

17

relies on the degree to which my analyses can adequately account for their other characteristics.
To this end, I use a propensity-based strategy that proceeds in three stages. Although propensitybased methods are considered quasi-experimental strategies that can be useful for estimation of
causal effects (Morgan and Harding 2006; Wooldridge 2010), in this study, I use this method,
combined with the careful definition of the analytic sample and outcome measures, to provide a
more robust comparison of non-foster and foster youth and their exposure to social instability,
rather than to estimate a causal or “treatment” effect of foster care placement. As such, these
results should be understood as important to our understanding of causal processes with contact
with the child welfare and foster care systems, but descriptive in nature.
First, I estimate the inverse probability weights (IPWs) using a multivariate probit
regression model that estimates a child’s probability of out-of-home care placement as a function
of a comprehensive array of pre-placement factors that may be associated with a child’s
likelihood of being removed from the home, including characteristics of their initial alleged
maltreatment report (Morgan and Harding 2006; Robins 1986; Thoemmes and Ong 2016). This
“treatment” model includes a comprehensive set of social, demographic, and maltreatment
measures that account for baseline child, caregiver, family, and maltreatment investigation
characteristics, 𝑋. As described above, a subset of these measures are also included as covariates
in the regression analyses (see Table 1). The full probit model’s estimates, reported as marginal
effects, are presented in Appendix Table 2. The probit expression of a child’s foster care
placement is
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑡(Τ = 1 | 𝑋) = 𝜙(𝛾0 + 𝛾1 𝑋 + 𝜀)
The predicted probabilities from the multivariate probit regression model are then
converted into IPWs. The weights for each individual i are then calculated as follows, where Τ𝑖 is

18

the predicted probability of being placed in foster care, estimated using the probit model above,
and 𝑋 is the complete vector of covariates described above (Morgan and Harding 2006; Robins
1986; Wooldridge 2010):
𝑤𝑖 =

Τ𝑖
1 − Τ𝑖
+
𝑃(Τ = 1 | 𝑋) 1 − (𝑃(Τ = 1 | 𝑋))

When applied to estimation procedures, the IPWs will more heavily weight children from lowerprobability cases—children who are placed in foster care but are not as likely to be or children
who are not placed in foster care who ultimately are—and down-weight children who are
estimated to be very likely to experience the foster care history that they are observed to have
had (with predicted probabilities closer to 0 or 1).
I then estimate a series of three nested logistic and three Poisson regression models of
children’s likelihood of experiencing a change in their caregiver and household contexts and the
number of changes experienced, respectively, as functions of out-of-home placement over the
study period. The three models incrementally adjust more comprehensively for the selectivity of
children who are ultimately placed in foster care. I begin with (1) an unweighted bivariate model
of the focal relationships described above (Model 1); proceed to a (2) weighted bivariate model
that applies the inverse probability weights estimated in the first stage of the analysis, and then
estimate a (3) weighted multivariate model that adjusts for key baseline child, caregiver, child
protective services risk assessment, and maltreatment report characteristics along which the
analytic sample differs from the full NSCAW sample.
The IPWs, applied in Models 2 and 3, allow for a comparison of children with
statistically similar characteristics and risks of entry into foster care. This makes it more
plausible that any association I find between foster care and instability in children’s care and
living arrangements is due to their placement in foster care rather than other differences. The
19

combination of the weights and additional regression adjustment, as specified in Model 3,
accomplishes two objectives. First, it strengthens covariate balance on characteristics for which
the IPWs modestly (though non-problematically) increased differences across the foster and nonfoster groups, tightening the comparison between them (see Figure 2; Ho et al. 2007; Stuart
2010). Second, it controls for characteristics along which the analytic sample differs from the full
NSCAW sample, addressing the selectivity of the analytic sample relative to the national
population of child welfare-involved youth in the U.S. (Bollen et al. 2016; Solon, Haider, and
Wooldridge 2013; Winship and Radbill 1994).
To account for unequal residual variances across models, which compromises the
comparability of logistic regression models across specifications, for models of any change, I
report all results as marginal effects of predicted probabilities (Allison 1999; Long and Mustillo
2017). I also account for the fact that my observation of a child’s care and living arrangement
changes in the survey is in part a function of the number of waves for which they are observed in
the NSCAW; in addition to including a measure of the total number of NSCAW waves for which
a child is observed as a control in the logistic regression models of any change, as described
above, I include the measure as an offset term in the in the count (Poisson) models of numbers of
changes (Cameron and Trivedi 2013).
The analysis proceeds in two stages. First, I estimate these models for each of the three
measures of caregiver and living arrangement change described above. In the second stage of the
analysis, I explore whether these associations are driven by immediate or later instability in
children’s social contexts by re-estimating the same set of models using measures of change that
do not include changes in caregiver and living arrangements that coincide with a child’s first
removal from the home. Figure 1 provides a stylized illustration of how wave-specific

20

information is incorporated differently across these two sets of change measures. Substantively,
the first set of measures (Stage 1) could be interpreted as models aligned with the perspective
that all instability may be detrimental and/or that current use of foster care placement as a policy
intervention is overly aggressive. The second set of measures (Stage 2), allows me to examine
whether placement in foster care is accomplishing the system’s objectives of stabilizing
children’s living arrangements after what some might argue is a necessary short-term protective
disruption to their care settings. These different ways of identifying instability recognize a longstanding and important, and still contentious, tension in child welfare scholarship and advocacy
regarding whether, how often, and for whom foster care placement is used as a policy response
to confirmed maltreatment (e.g. Bartholet 1999, 2000; Guggenheim 2000).
[Figure 1 about here]

RESULTS
Assessment of the Inverse Probability Weights
To begin, I evaluate the balancing capacity of the inverse probability weights (IPWs) that
I use in the main analyses to account for children’s differential risks of foster care placement. As
described above, the IPWs are based on predicted probabilities from a probit model that
estimates a child’s likelihood of enter foster care as a function of a comprehensive set of
observed risk factors and baseline characteristics. The full results of this model are reported in
Appendix Table 2. Baseline characteristics that emerged as especially predictive of a child’s
likelihood of being placed in foster care included the caregiver’s age, their relationship to the
focal child (e.g. biological parent, grandparent), drug dependency, history of prior foster care
placement of a child, and whether the investigative caseworker assessed the caregiver as having

21

poor parenting skills or experiencing financial hardship. These predicted probabilities then form
the basis of the IPWs, or the assigned weight for each child in the analytic sample.
To test whether the IPWs will accomplish their objective of accounting for variation
across the children ever and never placed in foster care, I compare unweighted and IPWweighted absolute normalized differences for a comprehensive set of pre-placement
characteristics of the two groups. The unweighted differences allow us to assess the degree to
which the two groups vary along observed characteristics, and on which dimensions. The
weighted differences then allow us to assess the performance of the IPWs in re-weighting the
children in each group such that the two are more similar on these observed characteristics. I use
the recommended value of 0.25 as a threshhold for balance across comparison groups; an
absolute normalized difference greater than 0.25 is considered indicative of imbalance on the
characteristic in question (Stuart 2010; Wooldridge 2010).
As shown in Figure 2, it is notable that even in an unweighted comparison, the two
groups of children are only statistically imbalanced along a few characteristics: the baseline
investigative caseworker’s assessment that their caregiver demonstrates poor parenting skills and
their primary caregiver’s prior involvement with the child welfare system (prior receipt of
services, prior CPS investigation, prior maltreatment report). This illustrates the utility of the
NSCAW sample for this study; the non-foster youth subsample provides a strong comparison
group for foster youth in that they differ in their foster care placement, but are unlikely to differ
along other dimensions, including characteristics that have been identified in prior work as key
correlates of care and living arrangement instability (i.e. race/ethnicity, primary caregiver’s
educational attainment and cohabitation/marital status).

22

Turning to the weighted differences, it is clear that the application of the IPWs reduces
any problematic differences to magnitudes well below the threshold and diminishes differences
with respect to most characteristics. For the few characteristics for which absolute normalized
differences increase with weighting, I include them in the multivariate regression models—along
with those included to account for statistical differences between the analytic sample and all
NSCAW children (with some overlap across the two sets of measures)—to achieve further
covariate balance across the foster and non-foster groups (Ho et al. 2007; Stuart 2010).
Foster Care Placement and Change
A description of the children’s baseline care and living arrangements are presented in the
bottom panel of Table 1. Nearly all children had a biological, adoptive, or step-parent as their
primary caregiver when first observed in the NSCAW and just over half (56%) had a secondary
caregiver. 61 percent of children lived in single adult-headed living arrangements, with just over
one quarter of children living with at least one extended family member, and 13 percent with at
least one non-family member. Children who were eventually placed in foster care were more
likely than those who did not to have a non-parent as a primary caregiver, less likely to be living
in a single adult-headed living arrangement, and more likely to be living with extended family.
Table 2 provides a summary of the key outcome variables, indicators of any change in
their primary caregiver, the availability of a secondary caregiver, or their living arrangement, as
well as average numbers of changes experienced over the five waves of the NSCAW I, using
both initial removal-inclusive and -exclusive measures of change. Using measures including all
changes observed across the observation period, children who were ever placed in foster care
were statistically and 1.2 to 5.7 times more likely to experience any change and likely to
experience more changes than those who do not enter foster care over the study period (Table 2,

23

top panel). Turning to the initial removal-exclusive measures, which have the substantive
meaning of treating initial foster care placements as inevitable for child protection and thus
excluded from my measurement of change, there are again statistically significant differences
between youth ever and never placed in care, though with very different patterning.
Children who ever enter foster care are 3.5 times more likely than children who never
enter foster care to experience at least one change in primary caregiver even if we exclude first
transitions into foster care. However, foster youth are now statistically similarly to non-foster
youth in their likelihood of experiencing a change in the presence of a secondary caregiver and
their living arrangement, although children ever in foster care still have a higher average number
of secondary caregiver changes than those who never enter out-of-home care.
[Table 2 about here]
To distinguish between more direct consequences of foster care and those of other
experiences and characteristics in explaining the instability of the care and living arrangements
of foster-involved youth, I now turn to a series of regression models. Tables 3 and 4 report
results as marginal effects, or estimated percentage point differences in predicted probabilities of
caregiver and living arrangement change (Table 3) and predicted numbers of changes
experienced (Table 4), using both the first removal-inclusive and -exclusive measures. Moving
from left to right across each table, the models account increasingly for selection into foster care.
Model 1 is a bivariate regression that estimates a child’s likelihood of experience change in each
dimension of their care and living arrangements as a function of entering foster care after
baseline. Model 2 applies the IPWs, and Model 3 adds covariate adjustments to improve balance
across the comparison groups.

24

As previewed by the descriptive statistics, unadjusted models of change inclusive of
children’s first placement in foster care estimate strong associations between children’s
likelihoods of change in all three dimensions of their care and living arrangements (Table 3, top
panel, column 1). Children ever placed in foster care were 67 percentage points more likely to
experience at least one change in their primary caregiver, 11 percentage points more likely to
experience a change in their secondary caregiver, and 20 percentage points more likely to
experience a change in their living arrangement than children never placed in foster care over the
NSCAW waves. The application of the inverse probability weights (column 2), indicates that
some of the disparity can be explained by differential risk of placement in foster care as captured
by the observable characteristics in the treatment model estimated in the first stage of the
analysis. However, these differences remain statistically distinguishable and substantial in
magnitude. The covariate adjustment in Model 3 (column 3) leaves this estimates essentially
untouched. In the full model, foster care is associated with a 46 percentage-point higher
likelihood of a change in primary caregiver, an 8 percentage-point higher likelihood of change in
the availability of a secondary caregiver, and a 20-percentage point higher likelihood of
experiencing a change in living arrangement.
[Table 3 about here]
Next, I examine whether these differences persist beyond an initial placement in foster
care, or, put in other words, whether the observed differences in caregiver and household change
and instability are explained in full by the child’s first (and potentially necessary) removal from
the home. To do so, I re-estimate the same set of models using change measures that exclude
transitions coinciding with a child’s first entry into foster care, the results of which are presented
in the bottom panel of Table 3. The estimated effects of foster care placement vary across

25

components of children’s care and living arrangements. Children who ever enter foster care
remain significantly and substantially more likely to experience a change in their primary
caregiver than children who do not go into foster care, with foster youth 29 percentage points
more likely to experience a change in primary caregiver even after excluding their initial entry
into foster care from the count. In the case of secondary caregiver availability and living
arrangement changes, however, foster care placement is associated with lower probabilities of
change and statistically indistinguishable differences cross the two groups, respectively. Foster
youth are 7 percentage points less likely than those who do not enter foster care to experience a
later change in the availability of a secondary caregiver.
Foster Care Placement and Instability
Another way to think about instability in these children’s social contexts beyond
dichotomous measures of any change over the study period is to examine frequency or rates of
change in children’s care and living arrangements. To this end, the next stage of analysis
estimates the number of changes that these children experienced as functions of ever being
placed in foster care over the study period, presented in Table 4. When including the initial
transition to foster care, foster youth are, in addition to being more likely to experience any
change, as shown in Table 3, are likely to experience more instability (Table 4, top panel).
Again, inverse probability weighting and covariate adjustment do little to diminish the
magnitude and significance of these estimated associations. The full model (column 3) estimates
that children who enter foster care experience 1.8 more changes in their primary caregiver, 0.2
more changes in their secondary caregiver availability, and 0.4 more changes in their living
arrangement than children who are not observed in foster care.

26

If we consider an initial transition into foster care to be a necessary change and therefore
exclude it from our change counts (Table 4, bottom panel), again, we see that foster care is
associated with lower levels of instability in children’s access to a secondary caregiver (-0.3) and
living arrangement (-0.1). However, foster youth continue to experience approximately one more
change in their primary caregiver than non-foster youth (1.0).
[Table 5 about here]
These results indicate a mixed story about the consequences of foster care for children’s
exposure to instability in their care and living arrangements. In the short- to medium-term period
for which the sample is observed in NSCAW, foster care appears to have modestly-tosignificantly destabilizing effects for children’s care and living arrangements if we consider any
change to be detrimental. If excluding changes coinciding with first entries into foster care, this
analysis suggests that foster care has neutral-to-modestly stabilizing effects on the structure of
children’s care arrangements beyond their initial entry into foster care. However, foster youth
continue to experience substantially higher levels of volatility in relationships potentially critical
to their experiences within these settings: their primary caregivers.
Supplementary Analyses
These analyses face some important limitations, which I describe here and then attempt to
address with additional analyses. First, the estimates discussed up until this point provide
compelling evidence of the consequences of foster care placement on children’s care and living
arrangement instability. However, given the unequal and disproportionate representation of
children of color in the child welfare system at all levels, one might be both interested in and
concerned about whether these dynamics are inconsistent across racial/ethnic groups. Second,
my ability to capture instability in children’s care and living arrangements is in part a function of

27

the number of times or the duration for which I observe their care and living arrangements in the
NSCAW I. If children are observed for unequal lengths of time in ways that are correlated with
their entry into foster care placement and/or changes in their care and living arrangements, my
estimates may be biased upwardly by the experiences of children observed for longer periods of
time and thus with more opportunities to experience change. Third, much of the information I
use to account for children’s baseline characteristics and experiences, as well as those of their
caregivers and families, is self-reported. Given the sensitivity of the ways in which families
became eligible for participation in the NSCAW I (being subjects of child welfare investigations)
and some of the content included in the survey (e.g. retrospective items on child’s foster care
placement), there is reason to be concerned about the accuracy of some of this information.
Supplementary analyses using the NSCAW I that estimate separate models for White,
Black, and Hispanic children confirm the findings I have presented thus far and are reported in
Appendix Table 3. I find that foster youth of all racial/ethnic groups are more likely to
experience changes in their primary caregiver, regardless of whether an initial entry into foster
care is included or excluded from the identification of change, although effect sizes are larger for
Black and Hispanic children. Foster youth are also more likely to experience a change in their
living arrangements than non-foster youth of the same racial/ethnic group, though only when I
include all changes, as was the case in the pooled analyses. The results from these stratified
analyses yield two findings that are distinct from the conclusions drawn from the pooled models;
first, foster youths’ higher probabilities of change in the availability of a secondary caregiver are
only statistically so for White children, and only very minimally so. Additionally, in the first
removal-exclusive analyses, the association between foster care placement and the likelihood of
changes in secondary caregiver availability is only statistically significant for Black children, and

28

associations with living arrangements are not statistically significant for any racial/ethnic group.
However, the estimated coefficients for these outcomes are negative or extremely close to zero
for all racial/ethnic groups, though perhaps underpowered, aligning with my main findings that
foster care appears to have a stabilizing effect on the structure of children’s care and living
arrangements if we consider first placements in foster care to be necessary.
In the main analyses (see above), I account explicitly for varying duration of children’s
observation periods in the NSCAW I in my logistic and Poisson regression models using control
and offset terms, respectively. Further, children ever and never in foster care in my analytic
sample are not statistically different in the number of waves for which they are observed.
However, as a supplementary assessment, I estimate models using data from the NSCAW II,
which also follows a more recent nationally representative sample of child welfare-involved
youth and their families although for a shorter period of time (Dowd et al. 2008). Estimates of
children’s likelihoods of experiencing change in their primary caregiver, secondary caregiver
availability, and living arrangement using these data corroborate findings in the main analyses
for the current study (results not shown). The fully adjusted and inverse probability weighted
models including first removals from the home estimate that foster care is associated with
heightened probabilities of change across all three descriptors of children’s care and living
arrangements. When changes coinciding with first out-of-home placements are excluded, foster
care remains positively associated with primary caregiver changes, not statistically associated to
changes in the availability of a secondary caregiver, and negatively associated with changes in
living arrangements (results not shown). Because the NSCAW II only follows children for three
waves (so up to two changes maximum), I did not estimate count models using those data.

29

Concerns about the reliability and accuracy of the self-reported items in the NSCAW I
are also addressed by the supplementary analyses using the NSCAW II. In addition to following
a different group of children and families for a different point and length in time, the NSCAW II
differs from the NSCAW I in that it draws maltreatment case and foster care history information
from linkages to administrative data from the National Child Abuse and Neglect Data System
and Adoption and Foster Care Reporting System, respectively. These data sources are much less
likely to be affected by respondent error due to recall error or social desirability biases, for
example, and thus provide a useful comparison to the NSCAW I analyses. If respondent error is
systematic and thus threatens the conclusions I draw from the NSCAW I, I would expect
findings to be inconsistent across my analyses of the NSCAW I and II data. However, I find that
that is not the case and that the estimates are, in fact, confirmatory. This does not rule out the
possibility that self-reported measures are imperfect in capturing some aspects of living
conditions, wellbeing, and system involvement, but does address concerns regarding the degree
to which the self-reported measures are problematic in ways that may bias the main findings.

CONCLUSION
Family instability is a key dimension of social inequality and is linked to disparities in
children’s wellbeing in early life and over the life course (e.g. Crosnoe et al. 2014; Fomby and
Cherlin 2007). Further, institutional contact—such as involvement with the child welfare
system—plays an important role in shaping inequality in children’s risks of experiencing family
change and volatility in familial relationships and structures. In this study, I examine the
association between foster care placement and instability in children’s care and living
arrangements by leveraging the uniquely appropriate National Survey of Child and Adolescent

30

Wellbeing and inverse probability-weighted regression analyses that account for the fact that
entry into foster care is a non-random experience. In addition to answering an important question
about the consequences of foster care placement for children’s family instability and wellbeing,
this investigation aims to situate the experiences of foster youth in the broader context of
children’s family instability in the U.S.
Taken together, my analyses point to a few key conclusions about the relationship
between foster care placement and family instability. First, although the focus of this study was
in situating the social instability of foster, the high unadjusted rates of change and instability
across the entire sample of child welfare-involved youth are notable. Second, youth ever placed
in foster care are more likely to experience changes in their caregiving arrangements and their
household/living arrangement even after accounting comprehensively for their differential risks
of foster care entry. However, children’s care and living arrangements are multidimensional:
when considering initial foster care placement as essential to children’s protection and thus
excluding them from measures of instability, foster care is associated with greater stability in the
structures of children’s care and living arrangements, namely the availability of a secondary
caregiver and their household type. They remain, however, at higher risk of experiencing
instability in a key relationship, their primary caregiver, which is likely related to their quality of
care and family life.
These analyses are constrained in a couple of ways that limit the degree to which these
results can speak to more general conclusions about the child welfare-involved population. First,
although the NSCAW data are nationally representative of children who were subjects of child
welfare investigations during the sampling time frame, due to the sample inclusion criteria
necessary for this study, the results presented here are not fully generalizable to that target

31

population. Second, these analyses may miss changes in living arrangements that occur between
waves of data collection. Although supplementary analyses with the NSCAW II, which differs in
the length of the observation period, largely confirm the results of this study, providing some
suggesting evidence that my findings are not likely to be biased by the timing of the care and
living arrangement information used in these analysis, this remains a shortcoming of this study.
Finally, although the inverse probability weighting strategy that I employ in these analyses do
achieve covariate balance on observables across the comparison groups, the modest explanatory
power of the treatment model does not allow me to draw stronger conclusions about the direct
effects of foster care placement on family instability.
Nonetheless, this study builds upon prior family demographic and child welfare research
on instability caregiving and household arrangements in three key ways. First, the NSCAW data,
the use of which has been essentially exclusive to the fields of social work and child psychology
and development, is the only nationally representative data set that allows for a comparison of
foster and non-foster youth who are not confined to a particularly geographic region of the
United States or child welfare agency/system (e.g. child welfare records from a single state).
Second, I define caregiver and household arrangements and characteristics using typologies that
can describe both non-foster and foster youths’ experiences to allow for comparison across two
groups that are often studied separately. Finally, leveraging the sample design, longitudinal
structure, and rich detail of the NSCAW data, I am able to account for elements of selection into
foster care placement to better isolate the relationship between out-of-home care placement and
the likelihood of experiencing caregiver and household change. In so doing, this study brings the
experiences of child welfare-involved youth and the contours of their exposure to family change

32

in dialogue with a growing body of work that examines the consequences of institutional contact
for family diversity, instability, and inequality.

33

REFERENCES
Acs, Gregory. 2007. “Can We Promote Child Well-Being by Promoting Marriage?” Journal of
Marriage and Family 69:1326-1344.
Allison, Paul D. 1999. “Comparing Logit and Probit Coefficients across Groups.” Sociological
Methods and Research 28:186-208.
Amato, Paul R. 2005. “The Impact of Family Formation Change on the Cognitive, Social, and
Emotional Well-Being of the Next Generation.” Future of Children 15(2):75-96.
Amato, Paul R., and Bruce Keith. 1991. “Parental Divorce and the Well-Being of Children: A
Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 110(1):26-46.
Amato, Paul R., Laura Spencer Loomis, and Alan Booth. 1995. “Parental Divorce, Marital
Conflict, and Offspring Well-Being During Early Adulthood.” Social Forces 73(3):895-915.
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, and Esther Arenas-Arroyo. 2018a. “Immigration Enforcement and
Children’s Living Arrangements.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 38(1):11-40.
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, and Esther Arenas-Arroyo. 2018b. “Split Families and the Future of
Children: Immigration Enforcement and Foster Care Placements.” AEA Papers and Proceedings
108:368-372.
Aquilino, William S. 1996. “The Life Course of Children Born to Unmarried Mothers:
Childhood Living Arrangements and Young Adult Outcomes.” Journal of Marriage and the
family 58(2):293-310.
Bartholet, Elizabeth. 1999. Nobody’s Children: Abuse and Neglect, Foster Drift, and the
Adoption Alternative
Bartholet, Elizabeth. 2000. “Whose Children? A Response to Professor Guggenheim.” Harvard
Law Review 113:1999-2008.
Bartholet, Elizabeth. 2015. “Differential Response: A Dangerous Experiment in Child Welfare.”
Florida State University Law Review 42:573-673.
Berger, Lawrence M., Maria Cancian, Laura Cuesta, and Jennifer L. Noyes. 2016. “Families at
the Intersection of the Criminal Justice and Child Protective Services Systems.” ANNALS of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 665(1):171-194.
Berger, Lawrence M., Sarah K. Bruch, Sigrid James, Elizabeth I. Johnson, and David Rubin.
2009. “Estimating the ‘Impact’ of Out-of-Home Placement on Child Well-Being: Approaching
the Problem of Selection Bias.” Child Development 8096):1856-1876.

34

Berzin, Stephanie Cosner. 2008. “Difficulties in the Transition to Adulthood: Using Propensity
Scoring to Understand What Makes Foster Youth Vulnerable.” Social Service Review 82: 171196.
Bollen, Kenneth A., Paul P. Biemer, Alan F. Karr, Stephen Tueller, and Marcus E. Berzofsky.
2016. “Are Survey Weights Needed? A Review of Diagnostic Tests in Regression Analysis.”
Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application 3:375-392.
Booth, Alan, and Paul R. Amato. 1994. “Parental Marital Quality, Parental Divorce, and
Relations with Parents.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 56(1):21-34.
Booth, Alan, and Paul R. Amato. 2001. “Parental Predivorce Relations and Offspring
Postdivorce Well-Being.” Journal of Marriage and Family 63(1):197-212.
Brown, Susan L. 2004. “Family Structure and Child Well-Being: The Significance of Parental
Cohabitation.” Journal of Marriage and Family 66(2):351-367.
Brown, Susan L. 2006. “Family Structure Transitions and Adolescent Well-Being.” Demography
3:447-461.
Brown, Susan L. 2010. “Marriage and Child Well-Being: Research and Policy Perspectives.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 72(5):1059-1077.
Burns, Barbara J., Susan D. Phillips, H. Ryan Wagner, Richard P. Barth, David J. Kolko,Yvonne
Campbell, and John Landsverk. 2004. “Mental Health Need and Access to Mental Health
Serbices by Youths Involved with Child Welfare: A National Survey.” Journal of the Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 43(8):960-970.
Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2013. Regression Analysis of Count Data, 2nd edition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavanagh, Shannon, and Aletha C. Huston. 2005. “Family Instability and Children’s Early
Problem Behavior.” Social Forces 85(1):551-581.
Cherlin, Andrew J. 2009. The Marriage-Go-Round: The State of Marrigae and te Family in
America Today. New York: Vintage.
Cherlin, Andrew J., and Judith A. Seltzer. 2014. “Family Complexity, the Family Safety Net, and
Public Policy.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 654:231239.
Church, Wesley T., Emma R. Gross, and Joshua Baldwin. 2005. “Maybe Ignorance is Not
Always Bliss: The Disparate Treatment of Hispanics within the Child Welfare System.”
Children and Youth Services Review 27: 1279-1292.

35

Courtney, Mark E. 2000. “Research Needed to Improve the Prospects for Children in Out-ofHome Placement.” Children and Youth Services Review 22(9-10: 743-761.
Courtney, Mark E., Amy Dworsky, Gretchen R. Ruth, Thomas Keller, Judy Havlicek, and Noel
Bost. 2005. Midwest Evaluation of the Adult Functioning of Former Foster Youth: Outcomes at
Age 19. Chicago: Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago.
Crosnoe, Robert, Kate Chambers Prickett, Chelsea Smith, and Shannon Cavanagh. 2014.
“Changes in Young Children’s Family Structures and Child Care Arrangements.” Demography
51(2):459-483.
DeGue, Sarah, and Cathy Spatz Widom. 2009. “Does Out-of-Home Placement Mediate the
Relationship between Child Maltreatment and Adult Criminality?” Child Maltreatment 14: 344–
55.
Dong, Maxia, Robert F. Anda, Vincent J. Felitti, Shanta R. Dube, David F. Williamson,
Theodore J. Thompson, Clifton M. Loo, and Wayne H. Giles. 2004. “The Interrelatedness of
Multiple Forms of Child Abuse, Neglect, and Household Dysfunction. Child Abuse and Neglect
28 (7):771–84
Dowd, Kathryn, Susan Kinsey, Sara Wheeless, Rita Thissen, Jean Richardson, Frank Mierzwa,
and Paul Beimer. 2002. National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-Being I: Combined Waves
1-5, Data File User’s Manual, Restricted Release Version. Ithaca, NY: National Data Archive on
Child Abuse and Neglect, Cornell University.
Dowd, Kathryn, Melissa Dolan, Keith Smith, Orin Day, Jennifer Keeney, Sara Wheeless, and
Paul Biemer. 2008. National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-Being II: Combined Waves 13, Data File User’s Manual, Restricted Release Version. Ithaca, NY: National Data Archive on
Child Abuse and Neglect, Cornell University.
Doyle, Joseph J. 2007. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
Care.” American Economic Review 1583-1610.
Doyle, Joseph J. 2008. “Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care.” Journal of Political Economy 116(4):746-770.
Doyle, Joseph J. 2013. “Causal Effects of Foster Care: An Instrumental-Variables Approach.”
Children and Youth Services Review 35:1143-1151.
Doyle, Joseph J., and Anna Aizer. 2018. “Economics of Child Protection: Maltreatment, Foster
Care, and Intimate Partner Violence.” Annual Review of Economics 10:87-108.
Edwards, Frank. 2016. “Saving Children, Controlling Families: Punishment, Redistribution, and
Child Protection.” American Sociological Review 81(3):575-595.

36

Elliott, Sinikka, and Megan Reid. 2019. “Low-Income Black Mothers Parenting Adolescents in
the Mass Incarceration Era: The Long Reach of Criminalization.” American Sociological Review
1-23.
Fomby, Paula, and Andrew J. Cherlin. 2007. “Family Instability and Child Well-Being.”
American Sociological Review 72:181-204.
Fomby, Paula, and Stefanie Mollborn. 2017. “Ecological Instability and children’s Classroom
Behavior in Kindergarten.” Demography 54(5):1627-1651.
Font, Sarah A., and Lawrence M. Berger. 2015. “Child Maltreatment and Children’s
Development Trajectories in Early to Middle Childhood.” Child Development 86(2):536-556.
Furstenberg, Frank F., Sheela Kennedy, Vonnie C. Mcloyd, Ruben G. Rumbaut, and Richard A.
Settersten. 2004. “Growing Up is Harder to Do.” Contexts 3(3):33-41.
Furstenberg, Frank F., and Andrew J. Cherlin. 1991. Divided Families: What Happens to
Children When Parents Part. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Garcia, Antonio, and Mark Courtney, “Prevalence and Predictors of Service Utilization among
Racially and Ethnically Diverse Adolescents in Foster Care Diagnosed with Mental Health and
Substance Abuse Disorders,” Journal of Public Child Welfare. 5(2011): 521-545.
Goemans, Anouk, Mitch van Geel, Merel van Beem, and Paul Vedder. 2016. “Developmental
Outcomes of Foster Children: A Meta-Analytic Comparison with Children from the General
Population and Children at Risk Who Remained at Home.” Child Maltreatment 21(3):198-21.
Graham, John W. 2009. “Missing Data Analysis: Making it Work in the Real World.” Annual
Review of Psychology 60: 549-576.
Guggenheim, Martin. 2000. “Somebody’s Children: Sustaining the Family’s Place in Child
Welfare Policy.” Harvard Law Review 113:1716-1717, reviewing Elizabeth Bartholet, Nobody’s
Children: Abuse and Neglect, Foster Drift, and the Adoption Alternative (1999).
Harris, Marian S., Mark E. Courtney. 2003. “The Interaction of Race, Ethnicity, and Family
Structure with Respect to the Timing of Family Reunification.” Children and Youth Services
Review 25(5-6):409-429.
Hines, Alice M. 1997. “Divorce-Related Transitions, Adolescent Development, and the Role of
the Parent-Child Relationship: A Review of the Literature.” Journal of Marriage and the Family
59(2):375-388.
Ho, Daniel E., Kosuke Imai, Gary King, and Elizabeth A. Stuart. 2007. “Matching as
Nonparametric Preprocessing for Reducing Model Dependence in Parametric Causal Inference.”
Political Analysis 15:199-236.

37

Jonson-Reid, Melissa, and Richard P. Barth. 2000. “From Maltreatment Report to Juvenile
Incarceration: The Role of Child Welfare Services.” Child Abuse & Neglect 24(4):505-520.
Jonson-Reid, Melissa, Patricia L. Kohl, and Brett Drake. 2012. “Child and Adult Outcomes of
Chronic Child Maltreatment.” Pediatrics 129(5):839-845.
Leloux-Opmeer, Harmke, Chris Kuiper, Hannah Swaab, and Evert Scholte. 2016
“Characteristics of Children in Foster Care, Family-Style Group Care, and Residential Care: A
Scoping Review.” Journal of Child and Family Studies 25:2357-2371.
Long, J. Scott, and Sarah A. Mustillo. 2017. “Comparing groups in binary regression models
using predictions.” Working Paper. Retrieved August 5, 2018 at:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/9080/0f860ff738840e65d747d059a7f4f9ec6cfb.pdf
Manning, Wendy D. 2015. “Cohabitation and Child Wellbeing.” Future of Children 25(2):51-66.
Matsueda, Ross L., and Karen Heimer. 1987. “Race, Family Structure, and Delinquency: A Test
of Differential Association and Social Control Theories.” American Sociological Review
52(6):826-840.
McLanahan, Sara. 2004. “Diverging Destinies: How Children are Faring under the Second
Demographic Transition. Demography 41(4):607-627.
McLanahan, Sara, and Larry Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of Family
Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94(1):130-152.
McLanahan, Sara, and Christine Percheski. 2008. “Family Structure and the Reproduction of
Inequalities.” Annual Review of Sociology 34:257-276.
McLanahan, Sara, and Gary G. Sandefur. 1994. Growing Up With a Single Parent: What Hurts,
What Helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mears, Daniel P., and Sonja E. Siennick. 2015. “Young Adult Outcomes and the Life-Course
Penalties of Parental Incarceration.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 53(1):3-35.
Mollborn, Stefanie, Paula Fomby, and Jeff A. Dennis. 2012. “Extended Household Transitions,
Race/Ethnicity, and Early Childhood Cognitive Outcomes.” Social Science Research 41:11521165.
Morgan, Stephen L., and David J. Harding. 2006. “Matching Estimators of Causal Effect:
Prospects and Pitfalls in Theory and Practice.” Soiological Methods & Research 35(1):3-60.
Oosterman, Mirjam, Carlo Schuengel, N. Wim Slot, Ruud A.R. Bullens, and Theo A.H.
Doreleijers. 2007. “Disruptions in Foster Care: A Review and Meta-Analysis.” Children and
Youth Services Review 29(1):53-76.

38

Osgood, D. Wayne, E. Michael Foster, and Mark E. Courtney. 2010. “Vulnerable Populations
and the Transition to Adulthood.” Future of Children 20(1): 209–25.
Perkins, Kristin L. 2017. “Household Complexity and Change among Children in the United
States, 1984 to 2010.” Sociological Science 4:701-724.
Pollak, Robert A. 2004. “An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence.” Journal of
Population Economics 17(2):311-329.
Raley, R. Kelly, and Megan M. Sweeney. 2009. “Explaining Race and Ethnic Variation in
Marriage: Directions for Future Research.” Race and Social Problems 1:132-142.
Raley, R. Kelly, and Elizabeth Wildsmith. 2004. “Cohabitation and Children’s Family
Instability.” Journal of Marriage and Family 66:210-219.
Reich, Jennifer. 2008. “The Child Welfare System and State Intervention in Families: From
Historical Patterns to Future Questions” Sociology Compass 2:888-909.
Research Triangle Institute. 2018. The National Survey on Child and Adolescent Well-being I
(NSCAW I) restricted release [Dataset]. Available from National Data Archive on Child Abuse
and Neglect website, https://www.ndacan.acf.hhs.gov
Roberts, Dorothy. 2001. Shattered Bonds: The Color of Child Welfare. New York: Basic Books.
Robins, James. 1986. “A New Approach to Causal Inference in Mortality Studies with a
Sustained Exposure Period – Application to Control of the Healthy Worker Survivor Effect.”
Mathematical Modelling 7:1393-1512.
RTI International. 2014. The National Survey on Child and Adolescent Well-being II (NSCAW
II) restricted release [Dataset]. Available from National Data Archive on Child Abuse and
Neglect website, https://www.ndacan.acf.hhs.gov
Rubin, Donald B. 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: Wiley.
Rubin, David M., Kevin J. Downes, Amanda L.R. O’Reilly, Robin Mekonnen, Xianqun Luan,
and Russell Localio. 2007. “Impact of Kinship Care on Behavioral Well-Being for Children in
Out-of-Home Care.” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 162 (6):550–6
Ryan, Joseph P., and Mark F. Testa. 2005. “Child Maltreatment and Juvenile Delinquency:
Investigating the Role of Placement and Placement Instability.” Children and Youth Services
Review 27: 227–49
Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey Wooldridge. 2013. “What Are We Weighting For?”
Journal of Human Resources 59(2):301-316.
StataCorp. 2015. Stata Statistical Software: Release 14. College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.
39

Stuart, Elizabeth A. 2010. “Matching Methods for Causal Inference: A Review and a Look
Forward.” Statistical Science 25(1):1-21.
Thoemmes, Felix, and Anthony D. Ong. 2016. “A Primer on Inverse Probability of Treatment
Weighting and Marginal Structural Models.” Emerging Adulthood 4(1):40-59.
Turney, Kristin, and Christopher Wildeman. 2017. “Adverse Childhood Experiences among
Children Placed in and Adopted from Foster Care: Evidence from a Nationally Representative
Survey.” Child Abuse & Neglect 64:117-129.
Turney, Kristin, and Christopher Wildeman. 2015. “Detrimental for Some? Heterogeneous
Effects of Maternal Incarceration on Child Wellbeing.” Criminology & Public Policy 14:125156.
Turney, Kristin. 2015. “Beyond Average Effects: Incorporating Heterogeneous Treatment
Effects into Research on Family Life.” Journal of Family Theory & Review 7:468-481.
U.S. Children’s Bureau, Department of Health and Human Services. 2018. “What We Do.”
Available at: https://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/about/what-we-do (updated June 20, 2018).
Wald, Michael S., J.M. Carlsmith, and P.H. Leiderman. 1988. Protecting Abused and Neglected
Children. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Waldfogel, Jane. 1998. The Future of Child Protection. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Wildeman, Christopher, and Jane Waldfogel. 2014. “Somebody’s Children or Nobody’s
Children: How the Sociological Perspective Could Enliven Research on Foster Care.” Annual
Review of Sociology 40:599-618.
Wildeman, Christopher. 2009. “Parental Imprisonment, the Prison Boom, and the Concentration
of Childhood Disadvantage.” Demography 46(2):265-280.
Winship, Christopher, and Larry Radbill. 1994. “Sampling Weights and Regression Analysis.”
Sociological Methods & Research 23(2):230-257.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey J. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2nd Edition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Yi, Youngmin, and Christopher Wildeman. 2018. “Can Foster Care Interventions Diminish
Justice System Inequality?” Future of Children 28(1):37-58.
Yu, Tianyi, Gregory S. Pettit, Jennifer E. Landsford, Kenneth A. Dodge, and John E. Bates.
2010. “The Interactive Effects of Marital Conflict and Divorce on Parent-Adult Children’s
Relationships.” Journal of Marriage and Family 72:282-292.
40

TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure 1. Illustration of Measures of Caregiver and Household Change

41

Figure 2. Balance Test of Inverse Probability Weights

Notes: N=1,644. Markers note the absolute values of unweighted (empty points) and inverse probability-weighted (filled points)
normalized differences in characteristics between children never and ever placed in foster care in the study period. The dotted line
marks the value for the maximum acceptable absolute normalized difference for a balanced sample (Wooldridge 2010). “HH” is
shorthand for “household” and “PCG” is shorthand for “primary caregiver.”
42

Table 1. Key Sample Descriptives, NSCAW I
Ever in Foster Care
Never
Ever

Overall
Child Characteristics, Wave 1
Observation Period (Waves)
Race/Ethnicity
White
Black
Hispanic
Other
Caregiver Characteristics, Wave 1
Time Living with Child (Months)
Age (Years)
Female
Physical Disability
Unemployment Status
Ever Arrested
Own Maltreatment in Childhood
Prior Maltreatment Substantiation
Previous Child Welfare Services Receipt
Prior Child Placed in Foster Care
Index Report Characteristics
Alleged Abandonment
Perpetrator, Parent (vs Other)
Substantiated/Indicated Maltreatment
Family: Low Social Support
Family: Stress
Stratum
California
Florida
Illinois
Michigan
New York
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Texas
Remainder
Baseline Care and Living Arrangements
Primary Caregiver Type
Biological, Adoptive, Step-Parent
Other Relative
Non-Relative
Secondary Caregiver Present
Baseline Living Arrangement
Single Adult-Headed (vs. Two)
Extended Family
Non-Family
N

4.63
(0.67)

4.62
(0.68)

4.66
(0.66

0.44
0.31
0.18
0.07

0.45
0.29*
0.19
0.07

0.41
0.36
0.18
0.06

61.94
(54.56)
31.15
(9.34)
0.93
0.02
0.14
0.33
0.34
0.30
0.37
0.17

65.71***
(54.71)
30.51***
(8.02)
0.92
0.02
0.14
0.32
0.31***
0.26***
0.33***
0.15***

53.66
(53.37)
32.54
(11.62)
0.94
0.02
0.15
0.35
0.41
0.38
0.46
0.23

0.03
0.70
0.64
0.44
0.68

0.02**
0.70
0.64
0.41***
0.66**

0.05
0.70
0.65
0.51
0.74

0.11
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.40

0.12
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.08
0.05*
0.06
0.10
0.40

0.11
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.09
0.06
0.12
0.39

0.94
0.05
0.01
0.56

0.99***
0.00***
0.00***
0.57

0.81
0.16
0.03
0.54

0.61
0.27
0.13
1,644

0.63*
0.22***
0.13
1,129

0.57
0.37
0.13
515

Notes: Asterisks denote statistically significant differences between non-foster and foster youth at the following
significance levels: ***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05. Estimates are unweighted and based one imputation of multiplyimputed data (n=5) to allow for reporting of standard deviations, reported in parentheses.

43

Table 2. Measures of Care and Living Arrangement Change, NSCAW I
Ever in Foster Care

Including Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver
Any Change
Number of Changes
Presence of Secondary Caregiver
Any Change
Number of Changes
Living Arrangement
Any Change
Number of Changes

Excluding Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver
Any Change
Number of Changes
Presence of Secondary Caregiver
Any Change
Number of Changes
Living Arrangement
Any Change
Number of Changes

Overall

Never

Ever

0.35
0.53
(0.83)

0.14***
0.17***
(0.47)

0.81
1.30
(0.92)

0.55
0.86
(0.94)

0.52***
0.81**
(0.94)

0.63
0.97
(0.92)

0.72
1.35
(1.14)

0.66***
1.19***
(1.12)

0.86
1.71
(1.11)

0.25
0.32
(0.62)

0.14***
0.17***
(0.47)

0.49
0.64
(0.76)

0.51
0.75
(0.89)

0.52
0.81***
(0.94)

0.49
0.93
(0.74)

0.67
1.16
(1.06)

0.66
1.19
(1.12)

0.69
1.09
(0.92)

1,644
1,129
515
N
Notes: Asterisks denote statistically significant differences between non-foster and foster youth
at the following significance levels: ***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05. Estimates are unweighted
and based one imputation of multiply-imputed data (n=5) to allow for reporting of standard
deviations, reported in parentheses.

44

Table 3. Estimated Associations between Foster Care Placement and Likelihood of Care
and Living Arrangement Change
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Including Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver (PCG)

0.67***
(0.63, 0.71)

0.47***
(0.44, 0.45)

0.46***
(0.45, 0.46)

Secondary Caregiver (SCG) Presence

0.11***
(0.05, 0.15)

0.08**
(0.02, 0.14)

0.08**
(0.02, 0.14)

Living Arrangement

0.20***
(0.16, 0.24)

0.20***
(0.16, 0.25)

0.20***
(0.16, 0.24)

0.35***
(0.30, 0.40)

0.30***
(0.24, 0.35)

0.29***
(0.24, 0.34)

Secondary Caregiver (SCG) Presence

-0.04
(-0.09, 0.01)

-0.07*
(-0.13, -0.01)

-0.07*
(-0.13, -0.01)

Living Arrangement

0.03
(-0.02, 0.08)

0.04
(-0.01, 0.09)

0.03
(-0.02, 0.08)

X

X
X

Excluding Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver (PCG)

Inverse Probability Weights
Covariates

Note: N=1,644. Asterisks denote statistically significant differences between non-foster and
foster youth at the following significance levels: ***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05. Estimates are
based on logistic regression models of likelihoods of change estimated using multiply-imputed
data (n=5). Results are reported as marginal effects (percentage-point difference in likelihood of
change), with 95% confidence intervals in parentheses.

45

Table 4. Estimated Associations between Foster Care Placement and Number of Changes
in Care and Living Arrangements
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Including Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver (PCG)

2.00***
(1.84, 2.16)

1.76***
(1.39, 2.06)

1.75***
(1.47, 2.03)

Secondary Caregiver (SCG) Presence

0.16**
(0.05, 0.26)

0.13*
(0.01, 0.26)

0.15*
(0.02, 0.27)

Living Arrangement

0.34***
(0.25, 0.42)

0.35***
(0.26, 0.45)

0.37***
(0.28, 0.45)

1.29***
(1.12, 1.47)

0.98***
(0.63, 1.33)

1.02***
(0.78, 1.26)

Secondary Caregiver (SCG) Presence

-0.28***
(-0.40, -0.15)

-0.31***
(-0.46, -0.16)

-0.31***
(-0.45, -0.16)

Living Arrangement

-0.11*
(-0.21, -0.02)

-0.11*
(-0.22, -0.01)

-0.11*
(-0.21, -0.01)

X

X
X

Excluding Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver (PCG)

Inverse Probability Weights
Covariates

Note: N=1,644. Asterisks denote statistically significant differences at the following significance
levels: ***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05. Estimates are based on Poisson models with an offset
term for the number of waves an individual was observed using multiply-imputed data (n=5).
Results are reported as marginal effects (difference in number of changes) with 95% confidence
intervals reported in parentheses.

46

APPENDIX TABLES
Appendix Table 1. Unweighted Comparison of Baseline and Analytic Samples, NSCAW I
In Analytic Sample
No
Yes

Overall
Child Characteristics, Wave 1
Age (Years)
Observation Period (Waves)
Race/Ethnicity
White
Black
Hispanic
Other
Female
Chronic Health Condition
Cognitive Disability
Social Behavioral Problem (Std Score)
Caregiver Characteristics, Wave 1
Relationship to Child, Bio/Step Parent
Time Living with Child (Months)
Age (Years)
Race/Ethnicity, Non-White
Female
Spanish Language Interview
Some Postsecondary or More Education
Emotional/Behavioral Problem
Physical Disability
Cognitive Disability
Chronic Health Condition
Alcohol Dependency (Logged Score)
Drug Dependency (Logged Score)
Unemployed
Ever Arrested
Own Maltreatment in Childhood
Own Domestic Violence History
Prior CPS Report
Prior CPS Investigation
Prior Maltreatment Substantiation
Previous Child Welfare Services Receipt
Prior Child Placed in Foster Care
Cohabitation Status
No Cohabiting Partner
Cohabiting with Married Partner

5.70
(4.81)
4.37
(0.97)

5.77
(4.82)
4.26***
(1.05)

5.55
(4.78)
4.63
(0.67)

0.43
0.32
0.17
0.07
0.50
0.29
0.10
0.25
(0.43)

0.43
0.33
0.17
0.08
0.51
0.28
0.10
0.24
(0.43)

0.44
0.31
0.18
0.07
0.49
0.30
0.10
0.27
(0.44)

0.70
49.37
(53.20)
34.96
(11.52)
0.55
0.92
0.04
0.26
0.33
0.03
0.11
0.20
0.03
(0.16)
0.04
(0.20)
0.11
0.30
0.33
0.38
0.52
0.50
0.32
0.39
0.16

0.59***
43.97***
(51.69)
36.58***
(11.97)
0.56
0.91*
0.04
0.29
0.32
0.03*
0.11
0.20
0.03
(0.16)
0.04
(0.20)
0.09***
0.29**
0.32
0.38
0.53
0.50
0.33**
0.40*
0.15*

0.94
61.94
(54.56)
31.15
(9.34)
0.54
0.93
0.04
0.21
0.34
0.02
0.10
0.19
0.03
(0.17)
0.05
(0.22)
0.14
0.33
0.34
0.37
0.51
0.49
0.30
0.37
0.17

0.50
0.35

0.47***
0.39***

0.58
0.25

47

Cohabiting with Non-Married Partner
Secondary Caregiver Present
Baseline Living Arrangement
Single Adult-Headed (vs. Two Adult)
Extended Family
Non-Family
Index Report Characteristics
Number of Alleged Maltreatment Types
Maltreatment Type(s)
Physical Abuse
Sexual Abuse
Emotional Abuse
Neglect
Abandonment
Most Severe Maltreatment Type
Physical Abuse
Sexual Abuse
Emotional Abuse
Neglect
Abandonment
Perpetrator, Parent (vs Other)
Substantiated/Indicated Maltreatment
Criminal Investigation
Family: Financial Hardship
Family: Low Social Support
Family: Stress
Poor Parenting
Stratum
California
Florida
Illinois
Michigan
New York
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Texas
Remainder
N

0.15
0.60

0.14***
0.60**

0.18
0.56

0.48
0.29
0.16

0.43***
0.30*
0.17***

0.61
0.27
0.13

1.54
(1.21)

1.56*
(1.24)

1.49
(1.12)

0.33
0.15
0.12
0.61
0.06

0.33
0.14
0.12
0.61
0.07***

0.32
0.15
0.11
0.61
0.03

0.23
0.12
0.07
0.47
0.03
0.66
0.61
0.30
0.36
0.41
0.65
0.52

0.23
0.12
0.08
0.46
0.04***
0.64***
0.60**
0.30
0.36
0.40**
0.64***
0.53

0.22
0.12
0.07
0.48
0.01
0.70
0.64
0.28
0.37
0.44
0.68
0.50

0.13
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.09
0.43

0.13
0.05
0.05**
0.06
0.07
0.05
0.05
0.08**
0.45***

0.11
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.40

5,501

3,857

1,644

Notes: ***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05 indicate statistically significance differences from the
analytic sample. Estimates are unweighted and based one imputation of multiply-imputed data
(n=5) to allow for reporting of standard deviations, which are reported in parentheses.

48

Appendix Table 2. Marginal Effects of Probit Regression Model of Foster Care Placement

Age (Years)
Child Sex (1 = Female)
Child Race/Ethnicity (White, Non-Hispanic)
Black
Hispanic
American Indian/Native American
Other
Child Social Behavioral Problem (Standardized Score)
Child Cognitive Disability
Child Chronic Health Problem
Child Health (Ref: Poor)
Caregiver Age (Years)
Caregiver Sex (1=Female)
Caregiver Race/Ethnicity (1 = Non-White, Non-Hispanic)
Caregiver Education (1 = Some Postsecondary Education)
Caregiver Relationship to Child (Ref: Biological, Step, Adoptive Parent)
Other Relative
Non-Relative/Independent
Caregiver Emotional/Mental Health (Standardized Score)
Caregiver Physical Disability
Caregiver Chronic Health Problem
Caregiver Time Living with Child (UNIT)
Caregiver Alcohol Dependency (Logged Score)
Caregiver Drug Dependency (Logged Score)
Caregiver Ever Arrested
Caregiver Spanish Language Interview
Caregiver Prior Child Removal
Caregiver Unemployment Status
Index Report Criminal Investigation
Index Report, Alleged Perpetrator, Parent
Index Report, Alleged Perpetrator, Other Family Member
Index Report, Alleged Physical Abuse
Index Report, Alleged Sexual Abuse
Index Report, Alleged Neglect
Index Report, Alleged Abandonment
Index Disposition (1 = Substantiated)
Index Report, Most Severe Maltreatment
Sexual Abuse
Emotional Abuse
Physical Neglect
Supervisory Neglect
Abandonment
49

Marginal
Effect
0.007
-0.028

Standard
Error
0.006
0.021

0.055
0.075
0.018
0.131
0.017
0.034
0.041
-0.013
-0.004*
0.003
-0.034
-0.013

0.045
0.057
0.066
0.091
0.039
0.035
0.035
0.011
0.002
0.045
0.047
0.028

0.693***
0.588***
0.041
0.030
-0.000
-0.001
0.021
0.122**
0.035
-0.190**
0.076**
0.020
-0.037
-0.052
-0.051
0.042
-0.097
-0.040
0.114
-0.037

0.023
0.081
0.037
0.071
0.039
0.000
0.061
0.046
0.023
0.067
0.028
0.029
0.025
0.033
0.044
0.041
0.073
0.041
0.088
0.024

0.047
0.022
0.047
0.046
-0.001

0.093
0.062
0.054
0.054
0.124

Other
Risk Assessment: Family, Financial Hardship
Risk Assessment: Family, Low Social Support
Risk Assessment: Family, High Stress
Risk Assessment: Primary Caregiver, Child Maltreatment Victim
Risk Assessment: Primary Caregiver, Poor Parenting Skills
Risk Assessment: Primary Caregiver, Cognitive Problem
Risk Assessment: Primary Caregiver, Domestic Violence Victim
Risk Assessment: Family, Prior Report
Risk Assessment: Family, Prior Investigation
Risk Assessment: Family, Prior Substantiation
Risk Assessment: Family, Prior Child Welfare Services Received
Baseline Living Arrangement: Secondary Caregiver Present
Baseline Living Arrangement: Caregiver Cohabitation Status
Living with Spouse/Partner, Married
Living with Partner, Not Married
Sampling Stratum
Florida
Illinois
Michigan
New York
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Texas
Remainder
Total Number of Waves Observed

-0.063
0.050*
0.035
-0.005
0.021
0.079**
0.006
-0.022
0.110
-0.064
0.023
0.020
-0.017

0.054
0.025
0.023
0.026
0.024
0.024
0.035
0.023
0.066
0.068
0.032
0.026
0.026

0.017
0.011

0.031
0.031

-0.072
-0.050
-0.073
-0.074
0.047
-0.013
-0.014
-0.038
0.015

0.057
0.057
0.057
0.055
0.059
0.059
0.049
0.043
0.016

Constant

0.313***

0.010

Notes: N=1,644. Asterisks note statistical significance at the ***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05
levels. Estimates are unweighted and based one imputation of multiply-imputed data (n=5) to
allow for reporting of standard deviations, which are reported in parentheses. The final inverse
probability weights use the averaged predicted probabilities from probit models estimated on
each of the five imputed data sets.

50

Appendix Table 3. Estimated Associations between Foster Care Placement and Likelihood
and Number of Care and Living Arrangement Change(s), by Race/Ethnicity
White
Black
Hispanic
Including Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver (PCG)
Change
Number of Changes
Secondary Caregiver (SCG) Presence
Change
Number of Changes
Living Arrangement
Change
Number of Changes
Excluding Initial Removal
Primary Caregiver (PCG)
Change
Number of Changes
Secondary Caregiver (SCG) Presence
Change
Number of Changes
Living Arrangement
Change
Number of Changes

0.45***
(0.44, 0.47)
1.54***
(1.30, 1.79)

0.49***
(0.46, 0.53)
2.32***
(1.98, 2.66)

0.48***
(0.41, 0.55)
1.81***
(1.26, 2.37)

0.10*
(0.01, 0.18)
0.19*
(0.01, 0.37)

0.09
(0.00, 0.18)
0.11
(-0.10, 0.32)

0.03
(-0.11, 0.17)
0.09
(-0.16, 0.35)

0.19***
(0.13, 0.25)
0.33***
(0.21, 0.46)

0.18***
(0.10, 0.25)
0.38***
(0.22, 0.54)

0.19***
(0.09, 0.29)
0.34***
(0.16, 0.52)

0.23***
(0.16, 0.31)
0.74***
(0.47, 1.00)

0.36***
(0.28, 0.43)
1.59***
(1.20, 1.97)

0.39***
(0.30, 0.48)
1.30***
(0.81, 1.79)

-0.05
(-0.14, 0.04)
-0.23*
(-0.44, -0.02)

-0.10*
(-0.19, 0.01)
-0.35*
(-0.61, -0.08)

-0.12
(-0.25, 0.02)
-0.41*
(-0.71, -0.12)

0.01
(-0.07, 0.09)
-0.13
(-0.28, 0.01)

0.02
(-0.07, 0.11)
-0.10
(-0.28, 0.09)

0.02
(-0.10, 0.14)
-0.12
(-0.34, 0.10)

X
X

X
X

X
X

Covariates
Inverse Probability Weights

N
716
515
303
Note: Asterisks denote statistically significant differences at the following significance levels:
***p<0.001 **p<0.01 *p<0.05. Estimates of change are reported as marginal effects
(percentage-point difference in likelihood of change). Estimates of numbers of changes are
reported as marginal effects (difference in number of changes). All estimates draw on multiplyimputed data (n=5) and have 95% confidence intervals reported in parentheses.
51

