Working Paper Series

Working Paper No. 19-04

Can Exposure to Celebrities Reduce
Prejudice? The Effect of Mohamed Salah
On Islamophobic Behaviors and Attitudes
Ala’ Alrababa’h, William Marble, Salma Mousa,
and Alexandra Siegel

IPL working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been formally peer reviewed.
© 2019 by Ala’ Alrababa’h, William Marble, Salma Mousa, and Alexandra Siegel.
All rights reserved.

Can Exposure to Celebrities Reduce Prejudice?*
The Effect of Mohamed Salah on Islamophobic Behaviors and Attitudes
Ala’ Alrababa’h,1,2,a William Marble,1 Salma Mousa,1,2 Alexandra Siegel2,3
1
2
3

Department of Political Science, Stanford University

Immigration Policy Lab, Stanford University and ETH Zurich

Department of Political Science, University of Colorado Boulder
a

Corresponding author: alaa@stanford.edu

Initial Draft: May 2019
This Draft: January 2021

Abstract

Can exposure to celebrities from a stigmatized group reduce prejudice toward that group writ
large? We estimate the causal effect of Mohammed Salah—a visibly Muslim soccer player—
joining Liverpool Football Club on Islamophobia, using hate crime reports throughout England,
15 million tweets from British soccer fans, and a survey experiment of Liverpool F.C. fans. We find
that hate crimes in Merseyside (home to Liverpool F.C.) dropped by 16% compared to a synthetic
control, and Liverpool F.C. fans halved their rates of posting anti-Muslim tweets relative to fans of
other top-flight clubs. Our survey experiment suggests that the salience of Salah’s Muslim identity
enabled positive feelings toward Salah to generalize to Muslims more broadly. Providing realworld behavioral measures of prejudice reduction and experimental evidence from a naturalistic
setting, our findings provide support for the parasocial contact hypothesis, indicating that positive
exposure to outgroup celebrities can reduce prejudice.
Keywords: prejudice, migration, intergroup contact, hate crimes
Word count: 10,355

* For

helpful feedback, we thank Vincent Bauer, Lisa Blaydes, Andrew Brooks, Jens Hainmueller,
Niklas Harder, David Laitin, Hans Lueders, Rachel Myrick, Christiana Parreira, James Tozer, Matthew
Tyler, Elisabeth van Lieshout, Jeremy Weinstein, Scott Williamson, and participants at the Immigration
Policy Lab. Thanks also to Toby Nowacki for replicating our empirical analyses. This project was
generously funded by the Institute for Research in the Social Sciences (IRiSS) at Stanford University
and by the Immigration Policy Lab (IPL). We also thank Yiqing Xu and Licheng Lui for advice on the
gsynth package. We are grateful to YouGov for sharing data.

In February 2018, fans of one of England’s most storied soccer clubs, Liverpool F.C., celebrated
a decisive victory in soccer’s most elite league. A 5 - 0 win over F.C. Porto in the UEFA Champions
League previewed an excellent season that saw Liverpool F.C. advance to the final. Mohamed Salah,
a young Egyptian striker, was key to the club’s success. After the victory, fans chanted:

If he scores another few
Then I’ll be Muslim, too.
If he’s good enough for you,
He’s good enough for me.
Sitting in a mosque,
That’s where I wanna be.
Fans created more homespun chants as Liverpool F.C. continued their successful season:

Mohamed Salah
A gift from Allah.
He’s always scoring,
It’s almost boring.
So please don’t take
Mohamed away.
In the first three seasons that Salah played for Liverpool F.C., the club had been extraordinarily successful, appearing in consecutive Champions League finals and taking the title in 2019. The club was
similarly successful in the domestic league, winning the English Premier League for the first time in
club history in 2020, with Salah being crowned the league’s top goal-scorer two years in a row.
Salah is noteworthy not only for his skill on the soccer field, but also for his conspicuous Islamic
identity — arguably unprecedented at the elite level of global soccer Salah occupies. European fans
were not accustomed to seeing players prostrate in Muslim prayer (sujood ) after scoring goals, for
example, fueling media speculation that the centrality of Salah’s Muslim identity to his public image
might be reducing Islamophobia among fans (The National, 2018; Thomas, 2018).1 Some pundits
argued that Salah portrayed “favorable images of Muslims, helping to reduce stereotypes and break
1

We adopt a relatively expansive definition of Islamophobia: fear, hatred, or dislike of Islam or

Muslims, as well as anti-Muslim prejudicial attitudes or behaviors more generally (Sheridan, 2006).

1

down barriers within communities” (Monks, 2018). Others disagreed. Despite the fact that “everyone
loves a winner,” there was still no systematic evidence that Salah’s fame could “in any way decrease
the mainstream Islamophobia in British culture” (Al-Sayyad, 2018). Beyond anecdotes, little is known
about whether Salah has had a systematic impact on Islamophobia.
The possibility that exposure to Salah may reduce Islamophobia represents an instance of the
parasocial contact hypothesis (Schiappa, Gregg and Hewes, 2005) — the idea that mediated contact
with celebrities or characters from minority groups has the potential to reduce prejudice toward that
group as a whole. This proposed extension to Allport’s (1954) classic contact hypothesis has received
support in a plethora of observational studies, laboratory- and survey-based experiments, but not realworld settings with causal purchase. In this paper, we provide a real-world test of the parasocial contact
hypothesis. We test the proposition that Salah’s meteoric rise has reduced anti-Muslim attitudes and
behaviors among Liverpool F.C. fans. We test this hypothesis using three complementary research
designs: an analysis of hate crimes in England, an analysis of anti-Muslim tweets among UK soccer
fans, and an original survey experiment.
First, we draw on hate crime data from 25 police departments in England between 2015 and 2018.
We employ a variant of the synthetic control method to generate a counterfactual hate crime rate for
the Merseyside police force — which covers the city of Liverpool — after Salah signed. We find that
Merseyside experienced a 16% lower hate crime rate after Salah was signed relative to the expected
rate had he not been signed. Second, we analyze 15 million tweets produced by followers of prominent
soccer clubs in the English Premier League. Using the same synthetic control method as in our hate
crime analysis, we find that the proportion of anti-Muslim tweets produced by Liverpool F.C. fans after
Salah joined was about half of the expected rate had he not joined Liverpool — 3.8% versus 7.3% of
tweets related to Muslims. Finally, we implement a survey experiment among 8,060 Liverpool F.C. fans
to explicitly test how exposure to Salah might lead to generalized tolerance toward Muslims. In line
with the parasocial contact hypothesis, our results suggest that the salience of Salah’s Muslim identity
facilitates prejudice reduction toward Muslims writ large. Priming respondents with information about
Salah’s religious practices boosted the belief that Islam is compatible with British values by around

2

5 percentage points, compared to the baseline rate of 18% among the control group. These findings
suggest that positive exposure to outgroup celebrities, especially when these celebrities’ minority group
membership is highly salient, can reduce prejudice across a range of social contexts.
This “Salah effect” is likely not unique to Salah. Celebrities with role model-like qualities have long
been thought to shape social attitudes. When Jackie Robinson broke baseball’s color barrier in 1947, his
“efforts were a monumental step in the civil-rights revolution in America … [His] accomplishments
allowed Black and White Americans to be more respectful and open to one another,” according to
historian Doris Kearns Goodwin (Williams and Sielski, 2004). British-Bangladeshi Nadiyah Hussain,
the headscarf-clad winner of the most watched program on British television, The Great British Bake-

Off, was credited with doing “more for British-Muslim relations than 10 years of government policy”
after her 2015 win (Wiseman, 2018). The 2018 reboot of Queer Eye for the Straight Guy has similarly
been lauded as a “tool for helping people unlearn” homophobia (Reyes Jr., 2018).
Indeed, exposure to celebrities through mass-media is one of the most common forms of intergroup contact, making parasocial contact an important but understudied frontier of prejudice reduction
research (Park, 2012). This study contributes to our understanding of parasocial contact in four primary
ways. First, we study naturally occurring exposure to a celebrity — rather than exposure induced in a
laboratory or survey experiment — providing strong claims to external validity. Second, we examine
an unexpected and plausibly exogeneous increase in exposure to a celebrity from a minority group,
allowing us to estimate plausible counterfactuals for the treated units. This research design gives us
causal purchase beyond what is typically attainable in observational studies on parasocial contact or
the contact hypothesis more generally, where selection bias poses a threat to inference. Third, we
study behavioral outcomes, like hate crimes and hate speech, that are of direct interest for policy. Finally, we buttress our observational results with an original survey experiment both to lend further
credence to our causal estimates, and to test the critical assumption needed for parasocial contact with
one individual to reduce prejudice toward an entire group — the salience of minority group identity.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 1, we draw on the intergroup contact
literature to generate empirical hypotheses. Section 2 provides context on Islamophobia in the U.K.

3

Section 3 presents our analysis of English hate crime data. In Section 4, we analyze tweets produced
by Twitter followers of English Premier League clubs. Section 5 provides tests of robustness and
generalizability. Section 6 describes our original survey experiment testing the proposition that the
salience of Salah’s identity may play a key role in reducing prejudice toward Muslims more generally.
Finally, in Section 7 we interpret the results and speak to their generalizability.

1

The Parasocial Contact Hypothesis
A rich literature documents the relationship between various forms of intergroup contact and preju-

dice. The contact hypothesis posits that personal contact across social lines can reduce prejudice if that
contact is positive, endorsed by communal authorities, egalitarian, and involves cooperating to achieve
a common goal (Allport, 1954). Such contact has been found to reduce prejudice by alleviating intergroup anxieties, inducing empathy, highlighting commonalities, and forging friendships, among other
social, emotional, and cognitive pathways (Pettigrew and Tropp, 2006; Pettigrew, 1998). Experimental evidence from myriad contexts and countries establishes the effectiveness of positive contact in
improving intergroup relations (Burns, Corno and La Ferrara, 2015; Carrell, Hoekstra and West, 2015;
Rao, 2019; Lowe, 2017; Barnhardt, 2009). Meta-analyses subsequently conclude that positive contact
“typically reduces prejudice” (Pettigrew and Tropp, 2006; Paluck, Green and Green, 2018).
While interpersonal contact presents a promising way to foster intergroup tolerance, its potential
may be limited due to a scarcity of opportunities for such contact. Residential and occupational segregation, intergroup anxiety, or the small size of some minority groups can pose social, economic, and
psychological barriers to meaningful contact between minority and majority groups (Joyce and Harwood, 2014; Ortiz and Harwood, 2007; Enos, 2017). This has led scholars, including the father of the
contact hypothesis, to suggest that mass media may play an important role in shaping and sustaining
prejudice (Allport, 1954).
Building on this insight, Schiappa, Gregg and Hewes (2005) propose the “parasocial contact hypothesis” as an analogue of the classic contact hypothesis. This hypothesis stipulates that mediated

4

contact with members of minority groups has the potential to reduce prejudice toward that group. Numerous observational and experimental laboratory studies document support for the parasocial contact
hypothesis. While much of this literature has focused on the role of negative media coverage in exacerbating prejudice (Ramasubramanian, 2013), exposure to fictional television characters and celebrities
has been shown to reduce diverse types of prejudice including racial prejudice, religious prejudice,
prejudice based on gender or sexual orientation, and prejudice against individuals with disabilities or
mental health disorders (Park, 2012; Wong, Lookadoo and Nisbett, 2017; Abrams, McGaughey and
Haghighat, 2018; Miller et al., 2020; Bond, 2020).
Like face-to-face contact, the quality and quantity of parasocial contact determines the degree to
which it might reduce prejudice. While the conditions under which parasocial contact might be successful have yet to be systematically tested, Schiappa, Gregg and Hewes (2005) stress that parasocial
contact should involve repeated exposure to likable and clearly identifiable members of a minority
group. Studies of traditional intergroup contact similarly highlight the importance of repeated exposure (Dovidio et al., 2017), a positive portrayal of minority group members (Aberson, 2015; Barlow
et al., 2012; Paolini, Harwood and Rubin, 2010), and a salient group identity (Al Ramiah and Hewstone,
2013). When these conditions are met, individuals appear to use the same cognitive processes underpinning prejudice reduction during parasocial contact — for example, in developing “relationships”
with television characters — as they do in real-world interpersonal contact with outgroup members
(Park, 2012).
For Liverpool F.C. fans, exposure to Salah fulfills these criteria. First, fans have sustained contact
with Salah over time. Salah is a regular starter for Liverpool F.C.’s games within the English Premier
League, which entails 38 weeks of game play every season, in addition to appearances at other domestic
and international tournaments. Off the field, Salah is active on social media and appears in high-profile
advertisements for corporations like Pepsi, Adidas, and Vodafone. Appearances at sporting events,
sports television, and commercials are all known to facilitate parasocial relationships between fans and
celebrity athletes (Brown and Basil, 1995).
Second, with Salah enjoying tremendous success at the individual, club, and national levels during

5

the period under study, Salah is portrayed positively in the media and receives a great deal of positive
attention from fans and teammates. In May 2018, he carried his club to the world’s most watched
annual sporting event, the UEFA Champions League Final, before leading the Egyptian national side
to the FIFA World Cup for the first time in three decades one month later. His remarkable breakout
season earned him a nomination for the English Premier League’s Player of the Year and the coveted
FIFA Puskás Prize for Goal of the Year, satisfying the positive exposure criterion of parasocial contact.
Finally, Salah’s Muslim identity is highly salient. His first name is recognizably Muslim, he prostrates in prayer after scoring a goal, and points his index finger to the sky while reciting the shahada,
the Muslim profession of faith. Die-hard fans will also know that Salah’s daughter, Makka, is named
after Islam’s most sacred site, and his veiled wife can often be seen cheering him on from the sidelines.
Salah is distinctive in this way: Europe has seen many excellent players of Muslim heritage, but most
are dissociated from Islam in the minds of fans because of their lack of public piety. By contrast, fan
chants centered on Salah refer to mosques, Muslims, and Allah while the Liverpool F.C. coach, Jürgen Klopp, has also pointed to Salah’s religiosity as an integral part of his identity (Bascombe, 2019).
Given that Salah meets the three hypothesized criteria for parasocial contact to reduce prejudice —
positivity, repeated exposure, and salient outgroup identity — he provides an ideal case through which
to test the parasocial contact hypothesis.

2

Context: Islamophobia in the U.K
The British Empire has historically perpetuated racism to justify the continued occupation of for-

eign territories. South Asians and Afro-Caribbeans have subsequently endured a legacy of discriminatory policies and practices, including waves of skinhead violence by far-right, anti-immigrant groups.
The government passed the Race Relations Acts of 1965 and 1976, and self-reported racist attitudes
declined between the 1980s and 2001 (BBC News, 2014). However, the terrorist attacks on September
11, 2001 and July 7, 2005 re-invigorated discrimination against visible minorities, particularly Muslims. Suspicion toward Muslims manifested in the behavior of the British state, media coverage of

6

Muslims, and public attitudes toward Islam. Scholars have argued that British surveillance of Muslims
following terrorist attacks was driven in large part by an irrational fear of Muslims, and “informed by
the framing of the terror threat as an Islamic threat, which casts all Muslims as potential terrorists that
need to be monitored and categorised” (Qurashi, 2018). The sweeping skepticism toward Muslims ingrained in the British state bureaucracy was such that even Christians from Muslim-majority countries
faced additional barriers during immigration and asylum processes (Madziva, 2018).
The British media has also played a role in perpetuating a fear of Muslims and Islam. For instance,
in response to a question by the Evening Standard about the impact of Islam on life in London, a
former BBC Today program editor asserted that “Islam is masochistic, homophobic and a totalitarian
regime. It is a fascistic, bigoted and medieval religion” (Milly and Khiabany, 2010). A columnist for

The Daily Mail characterized the veil worn by some Muslim women as an “Islamist symbol which
plays a role analogous to the use of the swastika by Nazism” (Milly and Khiabany, 2010). Meanwhile,

The Daily Express published a column that stated, “Make no mistake, the proliferation of the burkawearing is a direct threat to the British way of life and in all too many instances is intended to be just
that” (Milly and Khiabany, 2010). A study of the print news media between 2000 and 2008 found that
36% of stories about British Muslims overall are related to terrorism, with 32% of all stories about
Muslims in 2008 centered on the religious and cultural differences between Islam and British values
(Moore, Mason and Wren Lewis, 2008). The rise of negative portrayals of Muslims in mainstream
media has been accompanied by an increase in anti-Muslim cyber bullying, cyber harassment, cyber
incitement and threats of offline violence (Awan and Zempi, 2016).
Negative attitudes toward Islam are similarly reflected in public opinion data. Figure 1 summarizes
polling data, from YouGov, that shows a steady increase in the belief that “there is a fundamental clash
between Islam and the values of British society” from 2015 to 2017. Despite a slight dip in 2017,
over half the respondents continued to affirm this sentiment in 2018, signaling a continued, strong
skepticism toward Islam in the U.K.
High levels of prejudice compound other disadvantages faced by British Muslims. Data from
the 2014 Office for National Statistics’ Labour Force survey show that Muslim men are up to 76%

7

Percent saying Islam clashes w/ British values

60%
●

●
●

●

●

●

55%

●
●
●

●
●

50%

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

45%
●

●

40%

2015

2016

2017

2018

Figure 1: Attitudes toward Islam in the British public between 2015 and 2018. The vertical axis is
the percentage of survey respondents stating that “there is a fundamental clash between Islam and the
values of British society.” Points are weighted averages within survey waves; the trend line is a GAM
fit to all 34,409 survey respondents using survey weights. Source: The YouGov-Cambridge Center.
less likely to be employed, and Muslim women up to six times less likely, than their White, nonMuslim counterparts (Khattab and Johnston, 2015). A government report concluding that “Muslims
experience the greatest economic disadvantages of any group in U.K. society” attributed part of this
disadvantage to discrimination in the workplace (Stevenson et al., 2017). Discrimination likely extends
beyond the labor market. Over a quarter of British Pakistanis feel discriminated against on the housing
market compared to just 1% of White non-Muslim Britons, according to a 2013 survey, and Muslims
consistently report poorer health outcomes relative to other religious groups (McLeod, 2013; Elahi and
Khan, 2017). Prejudice against Muslims also seems to beget violence. While race or ethnicity already
motivated 82% of hate crimes in England and Wales in 2012 (Home Office, 2012), reported abuse
against Muslims nearly doubled between 2015 and 2017 according to one watch group (Tell Mama,
2017).
How might parasocial contact operate in the British context? Prior work shows that the macro8

political environment and the tone of media coverage shape the outcomes of intergroup encounters,
but that effects are highly contextual. Hopkins (2010) finds that hostile national rhetoric, especially
when combined with local demographic change, increases individual and political hostility toward
ethnic outgroups. In contrast, Sønderskov and Thomsen (2015) show that hostile national rhetoric can
reduce prejudice among individuals with friends and coworkers from outgroups, further suggesting
differential effects of national climates on prejudice. Generating expectations as to how intergroup
contact might operate in the city of Liverpool is likely to be even more context-dependent. On the
one hand, Liverpool is less ethnically diverse than the rest of England (86.2% White vs. the national
average of 81.4%), and is located in one of the top five police jurisdictions with the highest prevalence
of hate crimes (Liverpool City Council, 2011). On the other hand, Liverpudlians have long boycotted

The Sun, one of the most influential right-wing tabloids, and therefore have more liberal attitudes on
some political issues (Foos and Bischof, 2018). Further complicating our expectations, the study period
coincides with a Brexit process fueled by anti-immigrant sentiment (Goodwin and Milazzo, 2017), but
one that was ultimately rejected by 58.2% of Liverpool residents (BBC, 2016). The complex interaction
of individual, local, and national forces thus leaves us with ambiguous expectations with regards to the
moderating effect of the political climate on intergroup contact in Liverpool during the study period.

3

Analysis of Hate Crimes in the U.K.
We begin our empirical analysis with arguably a hard test of the parasocial contact hypothesis: an

analysis of hate crimes in the U.K. If Salah’s signing decreased the general public’s tolerance of hate
crimes, or changed the underlying beliefs of bigots, then we would expect to see fewer hate crimes.2
To test this proposition, we use an event-study analysis that exploits Salah’s rapid rise to fame. We
2

Hate crimes are rare events that are likely to be perpetrated by extreme bigots. Hate crimes are

also public acts, and as such are likely to be subject to social pressure. A reduction in hate crimes thus
requires either that the underlying beliefs of these bigots have changed, or that hate crimes are less
socially acceptable.

9

consider what happened to the hate crime rate in the area covered by Merseyside’s police force —
which covers the city of Liverpool — after Salah joined Liverpool F.C., relative to what we would
have expected if prior trends had continued. In particular, we use hate crime statistics from over two
dozen other police forces in the U.K. to construct a synthetic control unit for Merseyside. We then
compare the actual hate crime rate to the synthetic control as an estimate of the effect of Salah. We
find that hate crimes in Merseyside were significantly lower after Salah joined Liverpool F.C. than we
would have otherwise expected.

3.1

Data and Research Design
To gather data on hate crimes, we submitted Freedom of Information requests to every police de-

partment in England in April 2018. In order to be classified as a hate crime, police should have a clear
indication that the perpetrator targeted the victim mainly on the basis of their religious, racial, sexual,
or abilities-based identity. We include a police jurisdiction in our analysis if its response provided sufficient information for us to calculate the total number of hate crimes reported in the jurisdiction for
each month. We obtained usable data from from 25 police jurisdictions out of the 39 contacted, and
936 month-police force observations.
Our main outcome variable is an annualized hate crime rate per thousand residents. For instance, a
police jurisdiction with a population of 100,000 that experiences 10 hate crimes in a given month has
an annual hate crime rate of (10 / 100,000) × 1,000 × 12 = 1.2 hate crimes per thousand residents in
that month.3 The dependent variable ranges from 0 to a maximum of 4.342, with a mean of 0.951 and
standard deviation of 0.767. We consider the Merseyside police force — which covers Liverpool — to
be treated after Salah’s official signing in June 2017.4 When Salah joined, his transfer fee constituted a
club record, stoking interest in the player among the club’s fans, and suggesting that his signing date is
an appropriate choice for the start of treatment.5 We present descriptive statistics and further discussion
3
4

Any other normalization procedure would yield identical results, up to a multiplicative constant.
Merseyside encompasses both Everton F.C. and Liverpool F.C. fans. A backlash among Everton

fans would dilute any treatment effects for the hate crime analysis, biasing against finding an effect.
5
Figure A-1 shows that public interest in Salah — as measured by Google searches in the U.K. —
10

of the data in Appendix A.1.
Our goal is to estimate how hate crimes in Merseyside changed after Salah joined Liverpool F.C.,
relative to what would have happened had he not joined the team.This task requires estimating a counterfactual quantity: the trajectory of hate crimes in Merseyside had Salah not joined Liverpool. To
construct such a counterfactual, we use the pre-treatment data from Merseyside and the control group
data. Our main analysis uses the matrix completion method of Athey et al. (2018), as implemented
in the R package gsynth (Xu and Liu, 2018). This method imputes the unobserved outcomes in the
post-treatment period by first looking for structure in the pre-treatment control data that generates good
predictions of the treated unit’s outcomes in the pre-treatment period. The same structure is then applied to the post-treatment periods to generate estimates of the counterfactual potential outcomes for
the treated unit. To obtain an estimate of the treatment effect on the treated unit, we simply take the difference between the observed outcome for the treated unit in the post-treatment period and the imputed
counterfactual outcome.6
Statistical inference in the setting of a single treated unit is challenging. Standard methods for
computing standard errors based on asymptotic theory obviously do not apply. We therefore implement three complementary approaches to inference. First, we use the nonparametric bootstrap, where
we repeatedly resample control units and re-estimate the model to generate a bootstrap distribution
and standard error for the treatment effect estimator. Second, we conduct a permutation test where
we reshuffle units’ treatment status to generate a null distribution for the treatment effect estimator,
analogous to the procedure in Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller (2010). Third, we conduct a placebo
test using other types of crime, collected by the U.K. Home Office, that are unlikely to be affected by
changes in anti-Muslim sentiment. If we find that the effect size for hate crimes is comparable to that
spiked shortly after he was signed in the summer of 2017 and then began to steadily increase afterwards
through mid-2018.
6
Therefore, if there are T post-treatment periods, we obtain T treatment effect estimates. In addition, we compute the treatment effect averaged over the T post-treatment periods as a simple summary
of the treatment effect.

11

for other types of crime, it would suggest that the results are capturing a more general decline in crime,
rather than an effect of Salah.
Appendix A provides greater detail on the data, research design, and methods for the hate crime
analysis. It also present the results of an alternative method of estimating the treatment effect — a
generalized difference-in-differences regression with two-way fixed effects. This approach yields very
similar results.

3.2

Results
The main results are presented in Figure 2. The top plot shows the actual outcome data for Mersey-

side, along with the imputed counterfactual for Merseyside. The bottom plot shows the difference
between the observed and imputed outcomes in all periods for Merseyside and all other permutations
of treatment assignment.7 In both plots, the shaded region indicates the post-treatment period. In
the post-treatment period, the difference between the observed and imputed outcomes is the treatment
effect estimate.
If the matrix completion method is performing well, the imputed estimates should closely match
the observed outcomes in the pre-treatment period. Reassuringly, this is the pattern we see. In the
top panel, the two lines in the pre-treatment period track each other closely. In the bottom plot, the
pre-treatment line is close to 0 in most periods. While it fluctuates at times, there does not appear to
be a trending pattern in the pre-treatment period that would cause concern about the validity of the
treatment effect estimates.
Moving on to the post-treatment periods, the observed levels of hate crime in Merseyside are consistently lower than the predicted level from the synthetic control unit. Averaging across all months
in the post-treatment period, the difference between the observed outcome and the synthetic control is

−0.275 annualized hate crimes per 1,000 residents. Compared to the counterfactual imputed average
in the post-treatment period, this treatment effect represents a 16% drop in hate crimes. The bootstrap7

That is, each gray line shows the matrix completion results if we pretend that one of the control

units was, in fact, treated.
12

(a) Observed and imputed outcomes for Merseyside

Monthly hate crime rate

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

2015−01−01
2015−02−01
2015−03−01
2015−04−01
2015−05−01
2015−06−01
2015−07−01
2015−08−01
2015−09−01
2015−10−01
2015−11−01
2015−12−01
2016−01−01
2016−02−01
2016−03−01
2016−04−01
2016−05−01
2016−06−01
2016−07−01
2016−08−01
2016−09−01
2016−10−01
2016−11−01
2016−12−01
2017−01−01
2017−02−01
2017−03−01
2017−04−01
2017−05−01
2017−06−01
2017−07−01
2017−08−01
2017−09−01
2017−10−01
2017−11−01
2017−12−01
2018−01−01
2018−02−01
2018−03−01
2018−04−01

1.00

Treated

Estimated Y(0)

Observed − Imputed Hate Crime Rate

(b) Treatment effect estimates for Merseyside and placebo units
0.6

0.3

0.0

−0.3

−0.6
−30

−20

−10

0

10

Months relative to treatment
Controls

Treated (Pre)

Treated (Post)

Figure 2: Synthetic control results for hate crimes analysis. The top panel shows the observed (solid
line) and imputed (dashed line) monthly hate crime rates in Merseyside. The bottom panel shows
the difference between the observed and imputed outcomes. In the post-treatment period, this is the
estimate of the treatment effect. The red line shows the estimates obtained for Merseyside, while the
gray lines show the estimates obtained when we treat each of the control units as if it were treated. The
fact that the Merseyside estimates are consistently lower than the control-group estimates provides
evidence that our treatment effect estimates are unlikely to be due to chance.

13

based standard error for the treatment effect, averaging over post-treatment periods, is 0.069 and the
central 95% confidence interval is [−0.401, −0.154]. Looking at the estimates month-by-month, the
differences between the observed and imputed outcomes begin soon after Salah agreed to join Liverpool, in June 2017, and persist through at least April 2018 — the last month in our dataset.
The bottom plot in Figure 2 shows the estimated treatment effect for Merseyside, in red, alongside
the placebo treatment effect estimates for every other unit, in gray. This plot shows that the decrease
in hate crimes in Merseyside is large, relative to the placebo estimates. No placebo unit’s treatment
effect estimates are as consistently negative as Merseyside. When we average across post-treatment
periods, Merseyside has the largest decrease in hate crimes. Only two placebo units have treatment
effect estimates that are larger in absolute value — and these are increases in hate crimes, relative to
their respective synthetic controls. With these statistics, we can calculate one-sided and two-sided pvalues. There are 24 possible permutations of the treatment assignment — Merseyside plus 23 placebo
units — so the one-sided p-value is 1/24 = 0.042 and the two-sided p-value is 3/24 = 0.125. This
result suggests that the decrease in hate crimes observed in Merseyside is unusual relative to changes
observed in other police jurisdictions.
The change in hate crimes is consistent with a Salah effect, but it is unclear whether Salah was the
cause of the decline. Instead, it could also be that there was a general decline in crime in Merseyside
that happened to coincide with Salah’s arrival at Liverpool F.C. If this were the case, we might observe
a decrease in hate crimes relative to other police jurisdictions, even if Salah’s arrival at Liverpool F.C.
had no direct effect on hate crimes.
The placebo outcome analysis helps to address this concern. If there were a general decline in
crime, the estimated treatment effect on hate crimes would not be distinctive relative to the treatment
effect on other types of crimes. Figure 3 shows the treatment effect estimates for Merseyside for each
of 15 different types of crimes — hate crimes, plus the 14 types tracked in the U.K. Home Office police
data. The results show that the decrease in hate crimes is larger than changes observed for most other
types of crime in Merseyside. Recall that the treatment effect for hate crimes was a 16% decrease,
relative to the synthetic control in the post-treatment period. No other crime category saw such a large

14

Observed − Imputed
Relative to pre−treatment baseline

40%

20%

0%

−20%

−40%
−30

−20

−10

0

10

Months relative to treatment
Hate crimes

Other crime categories

Figure 3: Synthetic control results for all crime types in Merseyside. The red line shows the treatment
effect estimate for hate crimes and the gray lines show treatment effect estimates for each of 14 types
of crimes defined by the U.K. Home Office. To generate estimates on comparable scales across crime
types, the treatment effect estimates are expressed as a percent of the pre-treatment mean for each crime
type. The estimated treatment effect on hate crimes is consistently more negative than the estimate for
any other crime outcome.
relative decrease, and only one, “drugs,” had a change that was larger in magnitude — and it was an

increase in crime by 19.5%. Thus, the drop in hate crimes after Salah was signed does not appear to
be attributable to a general decrease in crimes in Merseyside.
Overall, we interpret these results to support the hypothesis that Salah’s arrival at Liverpool F.C.
caused a decrease in extreme acts of bigotry. Hate crimes in Merseyside were lower after Salah was
signed than we would expect given prior hate crime trends and the trends of other police jurisdictions
after Salah was signed. This decline was more extreme than we would expect based on chance alone,
and the decrease in hate crimes was more pronounced than the decrease in any other crime category.
Taken together, the evidence points to Salah’s rise in prominence causing a decrease in hate crimes in
Liverpool F.C.’s home county.8
8

Some may object to the hate crimes analysis because only about 39% of hate crimes targeted
15

4

Analysis of U.K. Soccer Fans’ Tweets
Our analysis of hate crimes in the U.K. provides evidence that Salah joining Liverpool F.C. may

have decreased hate crimes in Merseyside relative to their expected rates if he had not joined Liverpool F.C. Although hate crimes are extremely harmful and consequential, they are quite rare and severe
events. As such, they tell us little about how Salah’s signing may have impacted more quotidian forms
of anti-Muslim behavior among mainstream Liverpool F.C. fans. To gain more purchase on this question, we analyze approximately 15 million tweets produced by U.K.-based soccer fans in the period
preceding and following Salah joining Liverpool F.C.

4.1

Data and Research Design
Looking at soccer fans based in the U.K., we compare the frequency of anti-Muslim tweets pro-

duced by fans of Liverpool F.C. relative to fans of other English teams over time. We began by using
Twitter’s API to scrape the account IDs of all followers of the top five most followed teams in the
English Premier League: Manchester United F.C. (19 million followers), Arsenal F.C. (14 million),
Chelsea F.C. (12 million), Liverpool F.C. (11 million), and Manchester City F.C. (6 million). We also
scraped the followers of Liverpool F.C.’s cross-town rival Everton F.C., a smaller team with 1.75 million followers that is also located in the city of Liverpool. Fans of both clubs are nearly identical in
terms of demographics: the home stadiums are within walking distance of each other, there are no
historic political, religious, or social differences between their fanbases, and many Liverpudlian families are mixed in their allegiances (Borden, 2014). Evertonians thus constitute the closest comparison
group in the sample, with one key difference as a result of their fierce rivalry: exposure to Salah may
Muslims (see Appendix A). Considering that Muslims make up only 5% of the British population, they
are significantly overrepresented among hate crime victims. Another objection is that Islamophobia
may be underlying some other crime categories that are used in the placebo tests. While this is a
possibility, it would bias against our findings, since the trends for all crimes would look more similar
to the trend for hate crimes.

16

skew negative for Evertonians, but is positive and goal-aligned for Liverpool F.C. fans.
After obtaining followers’ account IDs, we collected our sample of tweets as follows. First, to
ensure that the users in our sample had been soccer fans prior to Salah joining Liverpool, we subset our
follower IDs to the oldest 500,000 followers of each club and subsetted to those who live in the U.K.
based on the text of their self-reported locations. Once we identified longtime Twitter followers of
English Premier League teams that were likely to be located in the U.K., we randomly sampled 10,000
followers from each team. We used Twitter’s API to scrape up to 3,200 of the most recent tweets
published by each of these 60,000 U.K. soccer fans.9 This resulted in a dataset of approximately 15
million tweets produced by the 60,000 English followers of the “Big Five” clubs of English soccer plus
Everton F.C.
In order to identify anti-Muslim tweets, we began by identifying all tweets that are broadly about
Muslims in the data using generic keyword search and word2vec (a neural network that processes text)
to find other relevant terms in the data. We only chose to include relevant keywords that were among the
top 50 words that the word2vec model indicated were most similar to the terms “Muslim” and “Islam.”
About 44,000 of the 15 million tweets in our dataset contained one of these relevant keywords. We
then took a sample of about 1,500 of these tweets and asked three native English speakers to code each
of these tweets as anti-Muslim or not.
Using this human-coded data, we trained a Naive Bayes classifier to classify all of our tweets
containing one of the keywords described above as anti-Muslim or not.10 We then used this classifier
9

The 3,200 tweet limit is imposed by Twitter’s API. For most Twitter users, we observe their entire

Twitter timelines beginning on the day they first joined the platform. For 84% of users in our sample
we have tweets from before and after Salah joined Liverpool.
10
Our classifier’s out of sample performance yielded scores of 88% Accuracy, 98% Precision, 90%
Recall, and an F1 score (harmonic mean of Precision and Accuracy) of 94%. However, because antiMuslim tweets were relatively rare in our data, and our training dataset was not balanced, Balanced
Accuracy (i.e., the average of the proportion of tweets classified correctly in each class individually) is
a better and more conservative measure of classifier performance. Our classifier performed with 70%

17

to classify all 44,000 tweets relevant to Islam or Muslims in our dataset as anti-Muslim or not.11 These
classified tweets allowed us to compute a month measure of the proportion of fans’ anti-Muslim tweets
in their tweets about Muslims or Islam (relevant tweets).12 More details about the data collection and
coding, as well as descriptive statistics, are presented in Appendix B.
Following the approach we use to analyze hate crime data, our main analysis of the Twitter data
again uses the matrix completion method. This method allows us to use the rates of anti-Muslim tweets
published by fans of Liverpool F.C. and other clubs in the pre-treatment period to construct a synthetic
control unit for Liverpool F.C. fans in the post-treatment period. This, in turn, enables us to estimate
how the rates of anti-Muslim tweets among Liverpool F.C. fans’ tweets changed after Salah joined the
club, relative to what they would have been if he had not joined. The previous section provides more
details on this method.

4.2

Results
The results are presented in Figure 4. The top plot shows the actual outcome data for Liverpool

F.C. fans, along with the imputed counterfactual for these fans. The bottom plot shows the difference
between the observed and imputed outcomes in all periods for Liverpool F.C. fans as well as for fans
of four other large football clubs (Arsenal, Chelsea, Manchester United, and Manchester City) and
fans of Everton. In both plots, the shaded region indicates the post-treatment period. In the postBalanced Accuracy. Given that intercoder agreement among human coders was 76%, we are satisfied
that our classifier gives us a reasonable, if imperfect, measure of anti-Muslim sentiment in our tweets.
11
Tweets that did not contain relevant keywords were classified as irrelevant.
12
This measure is less sensitive to changes in the salience of topics related to Muslims or Islam
than a related outcome: the proportion of anti-Muslim tweets in fans’ total tweets. For example, terror
attacks are often followed by an uptick in anti-Muslim language, but this is generally accompanied by
much larger increases in tweets defending Muslims and Islam or condemning Islamophobia, as well as
upticks in neutral tweets discussing the event (Magdy, Darwish and Abokhodair, 2015). We thus focus
only on tweets relevant to Muslims or Islam to alleviate this concern.

18

0.15

0.10

0.05

2014−01−01
2014−02−01
2014−03−01
2014−04−01
2014−05−01
2014−06−01
2014−07−01
2014−08−01
2014−09−01
2014−10−01
2014−11−01
2014−12−01
2015−01−01
2015−02−01
2015−03−01
2015−04−01
2015−05−01
2015−06−01
2015−07−01
2015−08−01
2015−09−01
2015−10−01
2015−11−01
2015−12−01
2016−01−01
2016−02−01
2016−03−01
2016−04−01
2016−05−01
2016−06−01
2016−07−01
2016−08−01
2016−09−01
2016−10−01
2016−11−01
2016−12−01
2017−01−01
2017−02−01
2017−03−01
2017−04−01
2017−05−01
2017−06−01
2017−07−01
2017−08−01
2017−09−01
2017−10−01
2017−11−01
2017−12−01
2018−01−01
2018−02−01
2018−03−01
2018−04−01
2018−05−01
2018−06−01
2018−07−01
2018−08−01

Monthly Proportion of anti−Muslim Tweets

(a) Observed and imputed outcomes for Liverpool

Treated

Estimated Y(0)

(b) Estimated ATT in every period (Liverpool F.C. vs. Other Clubs)
0.20

Observed − Imputed

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
−0.05
−0.10
−0.15
−40

−35

−30

−25

−20

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

Months relative to treatment
Controls

Treated (Pre)

Treated (Post)

Figure 4: Synthetic control results for Twitter data. The top panel shows the observed (solid line)
and imputed (dashed line) monthly proportion of anti-Muslim tweets in Liverpool F.C. fans’ tweets
that are relevant to Muslims or Islam. The bottom panel shows the difference between the observed
and imputed outcomes. In the post-treatment period, this is the estimate of the ATT for Liverpool,
compared to other prominent English clubs.

19

treatment period, the difference between the observed and imputed outcomes is our estimate of the
average treatment effect on the treated unit (ATT).
As in the hate crime results, if the matrix completion method is performing well, the imputed
estimates should closely match the observed outcomes in the pre-treatment period. Again, we observe
this pattern: the pre-treatment imputed and observed outcomes for Liverpool tend to be very similar,
and there does not appear to be a pre-treatment trend that would threaten the validity of the treatment
effect estimates.
Examining the post-treatment periods, the observed monthly proportions of anti-Muslim tweets
among Liverpool F.C. fans are consistently lower than what we would predict based on the synthetic
control. Averaging across all months in the post-treatment period, the difference between the observed
outcome and imputed outcome of the proportion of anti-Muslim tweets is −0.035 (bootstrap-based
S.E. = 0.006). Compared to the pre-treatment average among Liverpool F.C. fans, this treatment
effect represents a 47.8% drop in the proportion of anti-Muslim tweets in tweets about Muslims (from
0.073 to 0.038). Looking at the estimates month-by-month, the differences between the observed and
imputed outcomes begin soon after Salah agreed to join Liverpool, in June 2017, and persist through
at least May 2018 — almost a year after Salah joined the team.
When we employ the same permutation inference approach as in the hate crime section, only for
Liverpool F.C. followers do we estimate a consistently negative treatment effect in the post-treatment
period. The placebo estimates tend to oscillate between positive and negative treatment effects, while
the Liverpool treatment effect estimates are negative in every post-treatment month but one — again
suggesting that the observed estimate for Liverpool F.C. followers is unlikely to have occurred by
chance. As a robustness check, we again present a generalized difference-in-differences approach in
Appendix B. That analysis method generates very similar estimates as the ones reported here.

20

5

Robustness and Generalizability Tests
Overall, these two sets of analyses provide evidence that exposure to Mohamed Salah reduced

prejudice in Liverpool, as measured by real-world behavior, providing support for the parasocial contact hypothesis. Hate crimes in Merseyside were lower and anti-Muslim tweets among Liverpool F.C.
fans were less common after Salah was signed, relative to what we would have expected based on
prior trends and the trends among groups that were less exposed to Salah. In this section, we briefly
summarize several extensions and robustness checks to these event study analyses.
First, one potential threat to inference is that there there were two Islamist terrorist attacks —
the Manchester Arena and London Bridge attacks — roughly one month before Salah was signed by
Liverpool F.C. If these attacks led to spikes in Islamophobia in the targeted cities, our results could be
driven by the trajectory of the control units, rather than a change in behavior in Liverpool. To verify
that our hate crime results are not driven by a spike in hate crimes in these cities, we re-run the analysis
but exclude London and Manchester. The hate crime results are virtually unchanged, as shown in
Figure A-4.
Robustness checks for the Twitter analysis are more difficult as these two cities contain all four
large control teams in the Twitter analysis.13 However, there is reason to think that the Twitter results
are not driven by upticks in Islamophobia in these cities: the treatment effects we uncover last well
beyond the terrorist attacks. The attacks would have had to have caused a long-term, sustained increase
in anti-Muslim tweets among just followers of London- and Manchester-based clubs to generate the
patterns that we observe. This would run counter to patterns observed in studies of the effect of terror
attacks on anti-Muslim tweets, which tend to spike and then re-equilibrate quickly following attacks
(Magdy, Darwish and Abokhodair, 2015).
Second, perhaps the Twitter results are driven by an uptick in anti-Muslim sentiment among fans
of rival clubs — representing a backlash to Salah. To rule out this possibility, we conduct an additional
analysis comparing tweets of rival fans to tweets from people who do not follow any soccer clubs. As
13

Chelsea and Arsenal are both located in London, and Manchester United and Manchester City are

of course located in Manchester.
21

we detail in Appendix B.5, rival fans did not increase anti-Muslim tweets, relative to non-soccer fans,
after Salah’s signing. In short, we find no evidence of a backlash effect.
Third, if parasocial contact is indeed reducing prejudice toward Muslims, we may wonder whether
other Muslim players have induced a similar effect. In probing the generalizability of our results, we
turn our attention to another Liverpool F.C. player, Sadio Mané — a Senegalese Muslim who joined
the squad exactly one year before Salah and who also demonstrates his religiosity to fans on occasion.
Did Mané have a similar effect on prejudice as Salah? Ex ante, Mané seems to fit the criteria for
the parasocial contact hypothesis somewhat less neatly than Salah — particularly sustained exposure
and salient group identity. Mané is not as heavily covered by the international nor local media when
compared with his Egyptian teammate. We scraped the headlines of Liverpool’s most widely circulated
newspaper, The Liverpool Echo, to analyze trends in coverage of the two players. We find that Mané’s
signing captured around 3% of headlines relative to Salah’s 9% (Figure A-7), suggesting that exposure
to Mané is weaker compared with exposure to Salah. Moreover, Mané’s group identity is likely less
salient. His name is not as recognizably as Muslim as “Mohamed,” and Black Muslims tend to be
perceived as less representative of Islam (Harvard, 2017). Fans have yet to create chants about Mané’s
religious identity (as they have done with Salah), speaking to the difference in group identity salience
between the two players. These factors suggest a weaker perceived link between player and Muslim
identity, undermining the salience of group identity needed for parasocial contact to take effect.
Nonetheless, we look for evidence of “Mané effect” using the same research designs. We find no
such effect on hate crimes when constraining the study period to the pre-Salah era, and taking the date
of Mané’s signing as the relevant time break (Figure A-8). We do, however, find a Mané effect on antiMuslim tweets similar in magnitude to the Salah effect (Figure A-9). Recall that the Twitter analysis
focuses only on soccer fans, who are more likely to be familiar with a less publicized player like Mané,
shedding some light on why we might detect an effect solely for the Twitter analysis. One response to
an open-ended question on our survey of Liverpool F.C. fans (detailed in the next section) underscores
the idea that club fans recognize Mané as Muslim: “I think with having Mo Salah and Mané, people
should read more into Muslim life and try to understand the kind of people our favourite players are.”

22

In sum, we find support for the parasocial contact hypothesis in two event studies centered on
Salah’s rise to fame. These results are neither driven by backlash to contemporaneous events nor
by backlash to Salah among fans of rival clubs. We also stress-test parasocial contact by replicating
our analysis for another Muslim player. We find some evidence of generalizability by studying Salah’s
teammate Sadio Mané. As expected for a player with weaker media coverage and a less salient Muslim
identity, we find evidence of prejudice reduction among Liverpool F.C. fans who closely follow their
club players, but not among broader residents of Merseyside. These additional analyses lower the
plausibility of factors other than positive parasocial contact driving effects, while increasing confidence
in the parasocial contact hypothesis by testing its applicability to another Muslim player.

6

Analysis of Survey Experimental Evidence
The evidence presented thus far suggests that exposure to Salah may have reduced anti-Muslim

behavior among Liverpool F.C. fans. As we outlined in Section 1, the parasocial contact hypothesis
suggests that sustained, positive exposure to a minority group member can reduce prejudice when that
individual’s group membership is salient. The group salience assumption is critical for all theories of
intergroup contact — any positive effects should extend beyond the specific contact partner and generalize to other members of the outgroup (Al Ramiah and Hewstone, 2013; Brown and Hewstone, 2005).
This “generalization” of positive effects requires that the contact partner is viewed as representative of
their group, without confirming negative stereotypes (Bond, 2020). While we have argued that Salah’s
first name, family, and his public displays of religiosity all highlight his identity as a Muslim, our
analysis of aggregate-level observational data does not enable us to directly test whether awareness of
Salah’s Muslim identity leads individuals to express less prejudice toward Muslims as a whole.
To test the generalization assumption directly, we design a survey experiment to evaluate whether
priming Liverpool F.C. fans to think about Salah’s Muslim identity causes them to express more positive attitudes towards Muslims writ large.14 Our survey experiment does not directly test whether
parsocial contact reduces prejudice, as all respondents have received positive and sustained exposure
14

As described in Appendix D, we also attempted to test the positivity condition by providing
23

to Salah. Instead, this experiment enables us to evaluate, conditional on exposure, whether highlighting
Salah’s group identity reduces generalized prejudice toward Muslims, thus testing a necessary condition of parasocial contact.

6.1

Experimental Design
To evaluate this key condition of the parasocial contact hypothesis — the generalization assumption

— we conducted a survey targeting people who “like” the Liverpool F.C. page on Facebook and who
live in the U.K.15 These users saw a Facebook advertisement stating: “Help us research L.F.C.! Love
Liverpool F.C.? Take 2 mins. to help us research Liverpool fans!” The survey was launched from
October 2018 to January 2019, until $1,500 worth of clicks were exhausted. The survey experiment
was approved by the Stanford Institutional Review Board, protocol #47168, and pre-registered with
EGAP, #20181115AB. Before taking the survey, respondents were shown a page that explained their
rights as research subjects, gave contact information for the investigators and the IRB, and required
participants to affirm that they were at least 18 years old.
We presented people in the treated group with a picture of Salah prostrating in prayer and the
following text, which highlights Salah’s Muslim identity without affirming negative stereotypes about
Muslims:
In addition to his goal scoring, Salah is known for an attachment to his Muslim identity
prompts highlighting Salah’s success or casting doubt on his ability to maintain his successful streak.
However, our manipulation did not appear to affect respondents’ perceptions of Salah’s performance,
as shown in the manipulation check in Figure A-11. This manipulation failure is perhaps because
fans already have strong views on players’ performance and because Salah was playing well during
the study period, rendering our experimental treatment not credible. For these reasons, we relegate
discussion of this arm of the survey experiment to Appendix D.
15
The majority of the respondents were indeed Liverpool F.C. fans. Around 85% mentioned that
they follow Liverpool F.C. “Very closely” and over 98% mentioned they follow Liverpool F.C. at least
“Somewhat closely.”
24

both on and off the pitch. After every goal he scores, Salah touches his head to the ground
in prayer. He also fasts during Ramadan (except on match days) and shares well wishes
with his followers on social media during Islamic holidays. He named his daughter Makka
after Islam’s holiest site (Mecca).16
The control group was assigned to a pure control, and thus did not receive any treatment. All
respondents who were not in the control condition saw the following statement, which preceded each
of the vignettes: “As you probably know, Mohamed Salah is an Egyptian winger who joined Liverpool
F.C. in June 2017.” A table showing balance on pre-treatment covariates is presented in Appendix D.3.
The outcomes variables comprise three survey items that capture whether: (1) the respondent believes there is a “fundamental clash between Islam and British values”; (2) the respondent has “some”
or “a lot” in common with Muslims in the U.K.; and (3) the respondent thinks immigrants “generally
have a positive influence on the U.K..” All of these outcomes are coded as binary in a pro-tolerant
direction. We then used the first principal component generated by these items as a fourth, composite
outcome.17 These outcomes capture three communities linked with Salah to varying degrees: Islam in
general, Muslims in the U.K., and immigrants. Salah’s public piety explicitly links him to Islam, but
less so to Muslims and immigrants in the U.K. — only 5.8% of U.K. residents born abroad are from
the Middle East or North Africa (Office for National Statistics, 2019), tempering expectations around
these outcomes.
We estimate the main effect of the religiosity treatment, which is defined as the effect of the religiosity treatment, averaged over the levels of other factors. This definition is directly analogous to the
average marginal component effect estimand commonly used in conjoint experiments (Hainmueller,
Hopkins and Yamamoto, 2014). Due to randomization of the treatments, the main effects can be esti16

As this was a factorial design, people in the treated group where also presented with text portraying

Salah as succeeding or failing. See Appendix D.2 for more details. In the analysis below, we pool
across both the success and failure treatments.
17
The outcomes were scaled to have mean 0 and unit variance for the principal component analysis.
The first principal component explained 76% of the total variance.

25

●

PC Outcome

Islam compatible with
British values (0−1)

Treatment

●

Feel common with
Muslims (0−1)

Impact of Immigrants
on the U.K. (0−1)

●

●

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

Estimate

Figure 5: Coefficient plots representing the main effect of the religiosity treatment on the four outcomes, relative to the pure control condition. The top outcome represent the first principal component
of the other three outcomes and has a mean of zero and unit variance. The other three outcomes are
binary. Bars show 95% robust confidence intervals.
mated without bias via linear regression.18

6.2

Results
Figure 5 shows a coefficient plot from regressions estimating the average treatment effect of the

religiosity treatment on the four outcome measures, which are detailed on the y-axis. We find some
effects of the Religiosity vignette on tolerance. In particular, reading a vignette emphasizing Salah’s
18

Due to a coding error in the survey experiment, the control group was initially much larger than

the treatment group. We corrected this survey coding error midway through data collection. However,
this correction introduced the complication that not all units had equal treatment probabilities. To
obtain unbiased treatment effect estimates, we weight all observations by the inverse probability of the
realized treatment assignment. All the results presented here represent the weighted results.

26

Muslim identity sparked a small but statistically significant increase in respondents’ belief that Islam
is compatible with British values. Reminding respondents of Salah’s Muslim identity and practices
made them around 5 percentage points more likely to say that Islam is compatible with British values,
relative to the control group baseline of 18 percent. The treatment effect on the Religiosity vignette
also increased the principal component outcome by 8% of one standard deviation. The Religiosity
prime also moved the outcome capturing tolerance toward British Muslims in the expected direction,
although this difference is not statistically significant, while tolerance toward immigrants remained
unchanged. These effects are stable across various social and political subgroups.19
This experiment provides further evidence in support of the parasocial contact hypothesis generally and the importance of group salience in particular. When reminded of Salah’s Muslim identity,
respondents express more tolerant attitudes towards Islam — consistent with the idea that a contact
partner’s group identity must be salient in order for positive feelings towards an individual to extend
to the outgroup as a whole.

7

Discussion
Taken together, our findings provide diverse sources of evidence for the parsocial contact hypoth-

esis. Our analyses demonstrate that positive and sustained exposure to Mohamed Salah likely reduced
hate crimes and anti-Muslim speech on Twitter among Liverpool F.C. fans. Specifically, we find that
hate crimes and anti-Muslim tweets decreased among people most exposed to Salah, relative to counterfactual groups that were less exposed. These two outcomes are both costly and public, typically
committed by those with high levels of prejudice. Observing such a tangible effect in this context is
thus particularly compelling evidence of the effects of parasocial contact, especially given that Liverpool F.C. fans reside in a city that is less ethnically diverse than the rest of England and Wales and that
19

Full regression results are presented in Table A-5. As we show in Appendix D.4, these effects do

not differ for those who are more or less inclined to like Salah, be empathetic, or hold right-leaning
political views, suggesting a consistent effect of group salience across social and political subgroups.

27

has a relatively high prevalence of hate crimes (Liverpool City Council, 2011). These results provide
evidence, in a naturalistic setting, that exposure to celebrities from stigmatized groups can decrease
prejudice.
Our analyses of observational data provide support for the parasocial contact hypothesis. However, they do not enable us to directly test the assumptions underlying the theory. We therefore use an
original survey experiment of Liverpool F.C. fans to test one of the primary assumptions underpinning
all theories of intergroup contact — that any positive effects will generalize beyond the contact partner
to the entire outgroup when the contact partner’s outgroup identity is salient. In particular, our experiment allows us to examine whether highlighting Salah’s Muslim identity encourages fans to make an
inferential leap from Salah to Muslims as a whole, and thus express lower levels of Islamophobia in
general. Our survey experiment demonstrates that being reminded of Salah’s strong Muslim identity
causes Liverpool F.C. fans to express lower levels of Islamophobia, providing direct evidence of the
mechanics underlying the parasocial contact hypothesis.
How generalizable are these results? Our findings suggest that positive and sustained exposure to
celebrities should reduce prejudice when the celebrity’s group identity is salient. Indeed, our additional
analyses of Salah’s teammate Sadio Mané show the potential for generalizability. However, to further
understand the generalizability of the phenomenon we document, future work should unpack three
(related) components of the compound treatment we study here: the positive media media coverage
Salah receives, his success on the pitch, and the fact that he does not take public political stances.
First, following the parasocial contact literature, we expect that positive media is important for the
“Salah effect” to unfold. Media commentary about Salah has been almost uniformly positive since his
arrival at the club, but it remains unclear how parasocial contact operates when the media stigmatizes
a celebrity. Media portrayals — whether they appear in news stories (e.g., Gilliam and Iyengar, 2000)
or entertainment media (e.g., Mastro and Tropp, 2004) — form the primary basis of attitudes towards
outgroups for many individuals. Mass media has often portrayed marginalized groups in negative or
otherwise stereotypical ways, further contributing to marginalization (Ramasubramanian and Murphy,
2014). Laboratory experiments have shown that showing positive media portrayals of celebrities can

28

help to reduce stated prejudice. For example, Ramasubramanian (2015) uses news stories on celebrities like Kanye West and Beyoncé Knowles to show how Black celebrities exhibiting stereotypical or
counter-stereotypical behavior shapes perceptions of African Americans. How and when the media
cover a celebrity in a positive light remains hard to predict a priori, however.
Second, another component of the positive exposure to Salah is his success with Liverpool F.C.
Anecdotal evidence points to a backlash effect on prejudice when celebrity athletes underperform.
Salah has enjoyed phenomenal success at the individual and team level during the study period — so
much so that our manipulation check on a treatment arm priming fans to think of him as a failure was
unsuccessful. Nonetheless, positive attitudes towards outgroups may be conditional on the success
of their public figureheads, a claim made by several elite soccer stars of immigrant descent. When
he left the German national team because of alleged racist abuse, Mesut Özil, who is of Turkish descent, stated: “I am a German when we win and an immigrant when we lose” (Stanley-Becker, 2018).
Similarly, Inter Milan star Romelu Lukaku has written that when he plays well, newspapers refer to
him as the “Belgian striker,” but when he plays poorly, they refer to him as “the Belgian striker of
Congolese descent” (Lukaku, 2018). This aspect of elite sports and other high-stakes, real-world domains makes them qualitatively different from television shows, the most commonly studied media in
the parasocial contact literature (e.g., Schiappa, Gregg and Hewes, 2005, 2006; Bond, 2020). Future
work should study the role that real-world performance has on the potential for parasocial contact to
influence behaviors and attitudes.
Third, the extent to which a celebrity takes polarizing political stances may also shape the outcomes of parasocial contact. Consider the American football player Colin Kaepernick, a young Black
quarterback who started in two conference championship games and one Superbowl. Since he began
protesting against racial injustice by kneeling during the national anthem, he has remained unsigned
— reportedly because team owners fear backlash from (mostly White) fans (Reid, 2017). Taking a
stance on divisive political issues may thus lead to a negative parasocial contact experience, in part by
fueling negative media coverage. By contrast, as one writer notes, “part of Salah’s charm is that he’s
not an outwardly political figure addressing Islamophobia in England” (Al-Sayyad, 2018). While we

29

speculate that avoiding polarizing stances can facilitate prejudice reduction, more work is needed to
understand where and when we should expect exposure to celebrities to reduce prejudice.
Finally, future work should unpack the social, emotional, and cognitive mechanisms underpinning
parasocial contact. In addition to outgroup identity salience, other possible mechanisms at play include
undermining negative stereotypes (Ramasubramanian, 2013; Fujioka, 1999), and activating vicarious
contact with ingroup members (Wright et al., 1997; Ortiz and Harwood, 2007; Vezzali et al., 2014). To
this end, Salah is known to be on friendly terms with White, British-born teammates from Liverpooladjacent areas, which may reduce intergroup anxiety by proxy. Research disentangling these mechanisms holds important implications for generating scope conditions for “Salah effects” elsewhere.

8

Conclusion
Exposure to celebrities has become a quotidian feature of modern life both online and through tra-

ditional media channels. Yet, we know relatively little about how these public figures may influence
intergroup relations. In practice, traditional intergroup contact is difficult to orchestrate and rare in
the U.K. and beyond. Because most people rarely have meaningful interactions with members of outgroups, positive exposure to public figures through media coverage has the potential to be particularly
impactful. We take a first step in quantifying the effect of such exposure by assessing the effect of
exposure to a successful Muslim celebrity on Islamophobia. We find evidence that positive exposure
to public figures from stigmatized groups can mitigate prejudicial behaviors, such as hate crimes and
bigoted speech. We also provide evidence for a key assumption of the parasocial contact hypothesis — that the salient group identity of the public figure allows positive exposure to generalize to the
outgroup as a whole. Our survey experiment demonstrates that primes emphasizing Salah’s Muslim
identity boosted the expression of tolerant opinions of Islam among Liverpool F.C. fans.
Our work builds upon prior research literature in three key ways. First, we provide causally identified naturalistic evidence in support of the parasocial contact hypothesis. Existing studies primarily
rely on correlational evidence from surveys — showing that those who consume media portraying

30

minority group members have lower levels of prejudice — or from laboratory experiments on nonrepresentative populations. The first research strategy could suffer from reverse causality, if people
who already have low levels of prejudice choose to consume media portraying out-group members.
The second research strategy, while solving the internal validity problems presented by correlational
studies, is limited in its external validity. The artificial laboratory environment may generate larger
effects than would be observed in more naturalistic settings and undergraduate students may be particularly receptive to positive portrayals of out-group members. By contrast, our research design —
which leverages differential exposure to the celebrity across different subsets of the British public —
overcomes the internal validity problem. Additionally, the fact that we study real-life exposure, outside
of the artificial experimental context, provides greater external validity.
Second, existing studies focus on self-reported measures of prejudice and behavior, often measured
shortly after exposure to experimental manipulation. While these attitudinal measures are undoubtedly
important, prior research leaves open the question of whether the effects extend to real-world behavior. Of the three studies we conduct here, two focus on behavioral outcomes, measured by naturally
occurring administrative and digital trace data — rather than self-reported measures. We therefore
contribute evidence that parasocial contact can change behaviors as well as attitudes.
More broadly, our work contributes to a large literature in political communication documenting
the effects of mass media on political attitudes. Political communication scholars have long been
concerned with the effect that media portrayal of minorities — especially in the news — has on political
attitudes. Experiments have shown that the way media portrays minority groups in the U.S. can shift
people’s attribution of responsibility for social issues, their evaluations of political candidates, and
their policy attitudes (e.g. Gilliam and Iyengar, 2000; Iyengar, 1996; Valentino, 1999). We add to this
literature by showing that exposure to minorities in nonpolitical media can also influence attitudes and
behavior. We hope that future work can adapt a similar research design to explore the impact of other
public figures from minority groups on prejudice and assess the underlying mechanisms through which
parasocial contact can shape prejudice. Such work will help us to better evaluate the scope conditions
of the “Salah effect” and offer new potential avenues for building social cohesion around the globe,

31

especially where traditional contact across group lines is difficult to achieve.

32

References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies : Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program.” Journal of
the American Statistical Association 105(490):493–505.
Aberson, Christopher L. 2015. “Positive intergroup contact, negative intergroup contact, and threat
as predictors of cognitive and affective dimensions of prejudice.” Group Processes & Intergroup
Relations 18(6):743–760.
Abrams, Jessica R, Karen J McGaughey and Hannah Haghighat. 2018. “Attitudes toward Muslims: A
test of the parasocial contact hypothesis and contact theory.” Journal of Intercultural Communication Research 47(4):276–292.
Al Ramiah, Ananthi and Miles Hewstone. 2013. “Intergroup contact as a tool for reducing, resolving,
and preventing intergroup conflict: Evidence, limitations, and potential.” American Psychologist
68(7):527.
Al-Sayyad, Yasmine. 2018. “Liverpool F.C.’s Mohamed Salah, an Arab Muslim Sports Star Subtly
Confronting Racism and Islamophobia.” New Yorker .
URL:
https://www.newyorker.com/sports/sporting-scene/liverpool-fcsmohamed-salah-an-arab-muslim-sports-star-subtly-confronting-racism-andislamophobia
Allport, Gordon W. 1954. The Nature of Prejudice. 25 ed. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Perseus Books
Publishing, L.L.C.
Athey, Susan, Mohsen Bayati, Nikolay Doudchenko, Guido Imbens and Khashayar Khosravi. 2018.
“Matrix completion methods for causal panel data models.”.
Awan, Imran and Irene Zempi. 2016. “The affinity between online and offline anti-Muslim hate crime:
Dynamics and impacts.” Aggression and violent behavior 27:1–8.
Barlow, Fiona Kate, Stefania Paolini, Anne Pedersen, Matthew J Hornsey, Helena RM Radke, Jake
Harwood, Mark Rubin and Chris G Sibley. 2012. “The contact caveat: Negative contact predicts
increased prejudice more than positive contact predicts reduced prejudice.” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 38(12):1629–1643.
Barnhardt, Sharon. 2009. “Near and Dear? Evaluating the Impact of Neighbor Diversity on InterReligious Attitudes.” Unpublished Working Paper .
http://research.economics.unsw.edu.au/gbose/DevWorkshop/papers/
URL:
Barnhardt_near_and_dear_paper.pdf
Bascombe, Chris. 2019. “Jurgen Klopp full of praise for Mohamed Salah after Time magazine
recognition: ‘It’s an important statement for the world’.”.
URL: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/football/2019/04/19/jurgen-klopp-fullpraise-mohamed-salah-time-magazine-recognition/

33

BBC. 2016. EU Referendum Results. Technical report.
https://liverpool.gov.uk/council/key-statistics-and-data/census/
URL:
census-summary/
BBC News. 2014. “One third of Britons ’admit being racially prejudiced’.”.
BBC News. 2018. “Religious hate crimes: Rise in offences recorded by police.” BBC News .
URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/premier-league/kashifsiddiqi-interview-premier-league-kashif-siddiqi-foundation-altus-leaguea8283736.html
Benoit, Kenneth, Drew Conway, Benjamin E Lauderdale, Michael Laver and Slava Mikhaylov. 2016.
“Crowd-sourced text analysis: Reproducible and agile production of political data.” American Political Science Review 110(2):278–295.
Bond, Bradley J. 2020. “The Development and Influence of Parasocial Relationships With Television
Characters: A Longitudinal Experimental Test of Prejudice Reduction Through Parasocial Contact.”
Communication Research p. 0093650219900632.
Borden, Sam. 2014. “The Friendly Derby? Well, Everton-Liverpool Is Friendlier.” The New York
Times .
https://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/28/sports/soccer/the-friendlyURL:
derby-well-everton-liverpool-is-friendlier.html
Brown, Rupert and Miles Hewstone. 2005. “An integrative theory of intergroup contact.” Advances
in experimental social psychology 37(37):255–343.
Brown, William J and Michael D Basil. 1995. “Media celebrities and public health: Responses
to’Magic’Johnson’s HIV disclosure and its impact on AIDS risk and high-risk behaviors.” Health
Communication 7(4):345–370.
Burns, Justine, Lucia Corno and Eliana La Ferrara. 2015. “Interaction, Prejudice and Performance.
Evidence from South Africa.” Unpublished Working Paper .
URL: https://bit.ly/30T51z1
Carrell, Scott E, Mark Hoekstra and James E West. 2015. “The Impact of Intergroup Contact on Racial
Attitudes and Revealed Preferences.” National Bureau of Economic Research (No. w20940).
URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w20940
Doudchenko, Nikolay and Guido W. Imbens. 2016. “Balancing, regression, difference-in-differences
and synthetic control methods: A synthesis.” National Bureau of Economic Research (No.
w22791).
URL: https://www-nber-org.stanford.idm.oclc.org/papers/w22791.pdf
Dovidio, John F, Angelika Love, Fabian MH Schellhaas and Miles Hewstone. 2017. “Reducing intergroup bias through intergroup contact: Twenty years of progress and future directions.” Group
Processes & Intergroup Relations 20(5):606–620.

34

Elahi, Farah and Omar Khan. 2017. “Islamophobia: Still a challenge for us all.” Runnymede Trust .
URL: https://bit.ly/2K9SXDI
Enos, Ryan D. 2017. The space between us: Social geography and politics. Cambridge University
Press.
Foos, Florian and Daniel Bischof. 2018. “Can the tabloid media create Eurosceptic attitudes? A quasiexperiment on media influence in England.” Working Paper .
URL: http://www.florianfoos.net/resources/Foos_Bischof_Hillsborough.pdf
Fujioka, Yuki. 1999. “Television portrayals and African-American stereotypes: Examination of television effects when direct contact is lacking.” Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly
76(1):52–75.
Gilliam, Franklin D. and Shanto Iyengar. 2000. “Prime Suspects: The Influence of Local Television
News on the Viewing Public.” American Journal of Political Science 44(3):560.
Goodwin, Matthew and Caitlin Milazzo. 2017. “Taking back control? Investigating the role of immigration in the 2016 vote for Brexit.” The British Journal of Politics and International Relations
19(3):450–464.
Hainmueller, Jens, Daniel J. Hopkins and Teppei Yamamoto. 2014. “Causal Inference in Conjoint
Analysis: Understanding Multidimensional Choices via Stated Preference Experiments.” Political
Analysis 22:1–30.
Harvard, Sarah. 2017. “Why Doesn’t the Muslim Community Look Up To Its Black Celebrities?”
The Washington Post .
URL:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/acts-of-faith/wp/2017/09/
20/why-doesnt-the-muslim-community-look-up-to-its-black-celebrities/
?noredirect=on
Hecht, Brent, Lichan Hong, Bongwon Suh and Ed H Chi. 2011. Tweets from Justin Bieber’s heart:
the dynamics of the location field in user profiles. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
human factors in computing systems. ACM pp. 237–246.
Home Office. 2012. Hate crimes, England and Wales 2011 to 2012. Technical report.
URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hate-crimes-england-andwales-2011-to-2012--2/hate-crimes-england-and-wales-2011-to-2012
Hopkins, Daniel J. 2010. “Politicized places: Explaining where and when immigrants provoke local
opposition.” American political science review 104(1):40–60.
Iyengar, Shanto. 1996. “Framing Responsibility for Social Issues.” The ANNALS of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 546(1):59–70.
Joyce, Nick and Jake Harwood. 2014. “Improving intergroup attitudes through televised vicarious
intergroup contact: Social cognitive processing of ingroup and outgroup information.” Communication Research 41(5):627–643.

35

Khattab, Nabil and Ron Johnston. 2015. “Ethno-religious identities and persisting penalties in the UK
labor market.” The Social Science Journal 52(4):490–502.
Liverpool City Council. 2011. Census summary. Technical report.
URL:
https://liverpool.gov.uk/council/key-statistics-and-data/census/
census-summary/
Lowe, Matt. 2017. “Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative and Adversarial Caste
Integration.” MIT Working Paper .
Lukaku, Romelu. 2018. “I’ve Got Some Things to Say.” The Players Tribune .
URL: https://www.theplayerstribune.com/en-us/articles/romelu-lukaku-ivegot-some-things-to-say
Madziva, Roda. 2018. ““Your name does not tick the box”: the intertwining of names, bodies, religion
and nationality in the construction of identity within the UK asylum system.” Ethnic and Racial
Studies 41(5):938–957.
Magdy, Walid, Kareem Darwish and Norah Abokhodair. 2015. “Quantifying public response towards
Islam on Twitter after Paris attacks.” Unpublished Manuscript .
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.04570
Mastro, Dana E. and Linda R. Tropp. 2004. “The Effects of Interracial Contact, Attitudes, and Stereotypical Portrayals on Evaluations of Black Television Sitcom Characters.” Communication Research Reports 21(2):119–129.
McLeod, Maurice. 2013. “Theresa May’s immigration bill is a valuable tool for racist landlords.” The
Guardian .
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/15/theresa-mayimmigration-bill-racist-landlords
Miller, Patrick R, Andrew R Flores, Donald P Haider-Markel, Daniel C Lewis, Barry Tadlock and
Jami K Taylor. 2020. “The Politics of Being “Cait”: Caitlyn Jenner, Transphobia, and Parasocial Contact Effects on Transgender-Related Political Attitudes.” American Politics Research
p. 1532673X20906460.
Milly, Williamson and Gholam Khiabany. 2010. “UK: The veil and the politics of racism.” Race &
Class 52(2):85–96.
Mislove, Alan, Sune Lehmann, Yong-Yeol Ahn, Jukka-Pekka Onnela and J Niels Rosenquist. 2011.
Understanding the demographics of twitter users. In Fifth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media.
Monks, Kieron. 2018. “Mohamed Salah’s greatest legacy may be off the pitch.” Middle East Eye .
Moore, Kelly, Paul Mason and Justin Matthew Wren Lewis. 2008. “Images of Islam in the UK: The
representation of British Muslims in the national print news media 2000-2008.” Race & Class .
URL: http://orca.cf.ac.uk/id/eprint/53005

36

Office for National Statistics. 2019. “Population of the UK by country of birth and nationality.”.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/
URL:
populationandmigration/internationalmigration/datasets/
populationoftheunitedkingdombycountryofbirthandnationality/
Ortiz, Michelle and Jake Harwood. 2007. “A social cognitive theory approach to the effects of mediated intergroup contact on intergroup attitudes.” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media
51(4):615–631.
Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, Seth Green and Donald P Green. 2018. “The contact hypothesis re-evaluated.”
Behavioural Public Policy pp. 1–30.
Paolini, Stefania, Jake Harwood and Mark Rubin. 2010. “Negative intergroup contact makes group
memberships salient: Explaining why intergroup conflict endures.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36(12):1723–1738.
Park, Sung-Yeon. 2012. “Mediated intergroup contact: concept explication, synthesis, and application.” Mass Communication and Society 15(1):136–159.
Pettigrew, Thomas F. 1998. “Intergroup contact theory.” Annual Review of Psychology 49(1):65–85.
Pettigrew, Thomas F and Linda R Tropp. 2006. “A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact theory.”
Journal of personality and social psychology 90(5):751.
Qurashi, Fahid. 2018. “The Prevent strategy and the UK ‘war on terror’: embedding infrastructures of
surveillance in Muslim communities.” Palgrave Communication 4(1):1–13.
Ramasubramanian, Srividya. 2013. “Intergroup contact, media exposure, and racial attitudes.” Journal
of Intercultural Communication Research 42(1):54–72.
Ramasubramanian, Srividya. 2015. “Using Celebrity News Stories to Effectively Reduce Racial/Ethnic
Prejudice.” Journal of Social Issues 71(1):123–138.
Ramasubramanian, Srividya and Chantrey J. Murphy. 2014. Experimental Studies of Media Stereotyping Effects. In Laboratory Experiments in the Social Sciences, ed. Murray Webster Jr. and Jane
Sell. 2 ed. Academic Press pp. 385–402.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-404681-8.00017-0
Rao, Gautam. 2019. “Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Diversity, Discrimination and Generosity
in Delhi Schools.” American Economic Review 109(3):774–809.
Reid, Jason. 2017. “We may have seen the last of Colin Kaepernick in the NFL.” The Undefeated .
URL:
https://theundefeated.com/features/we-may-have-seen-the-last-ofcolin-kaepernick-in-the-nfl/
Reyes Jr., Ruben E. 2018. “Queer Eye for the Small-Minded Guy.” The Harvard Crimson .
URL:
https://www.thecrimson.com/column/pop-cultural/article/2018/7/25/
reyes-queer-eye/

37

Schiappa, Edward, Peter B Gregg and Dean E Hewes. 2005. “The parasocial contact hypothesis.”
Communication monographs 72(1):92–115.
Schiappa, Edward, Peter B Gregg and Dean E Hewes. 2006. “Can one TV show make a difference?
A Will & Grace and the parasocial contact hypothesis.” Journal of Homosexuality 51(4):15–37.
Sheridan, Lorraine P. 2006. “Islamophobia pre–and post–September 11th, 2001.” Journal of interpersonal violence 21(3):317–336.
Sky News. 2018. “Liverpool goalkeeper Loris Karius sent death threats after Champions League
blunders.”.
URL:
https://news.sky.com/story/liverpool-goalie-loris-karius-sentdeath-threats-after-champions-league-blunders-11386990
Sloan, Luke. 2017. “Who Tweets in the United Kingdom? Profiling the Twitter Population Using the
British Social Attitudes Survey 2015.” Social Media+ Society 3(1):1–11.
Social Backers. 2019. United Kingdom Social Marketing Reports. Technical report.
URL:
https://www.socialbakers.com/statistics/twitter/profiles/unitedkingdom/
Sønderskov, Kim Mannemar and Jens Peter Frølund Thomsen. 2015. “Contextualizing intergroup
contact: do political party cues enhance contact effects?” Social Psychology Quarterly 78(1):49–
76.
Stanley-Becker, Isaac. 2018. “Mesut Ozil: World Cup player says he is ‘a German when we win’ but
‘an immigrant when we lose,’ quits national team.” The Washington Post .
URL:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2018/07/23/
quitting-national-team-world-cup-player-says-he-is-a-german-when-wewin-but-an-immigrant-when-we-lose/
Stevenson, Jacqueline, Sean Demack, Bernie Stiell, Muna Abdi, Lisa Clarkson, Farhana Ghaffar and
Shaima Hassan. 2017. “The Social Mobility Challenges Faced by Young Muslims.” Social Mobility
Commission .
URL: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/642220/Young_Muslims_SMC.pdf
Tell Mama. 2017. Beyond the Incident: Outcomes for Victims of Anti-Muslim Prejudice. Technical
report.
URL: https://tellmamauk.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Tell-MAMA-Report2017.pdf
The National. 2018. “Footballer Mo Salah is tackling Islamophobia head-on.”.
URL:
https://www.thenational.ae/opinion/editorial/footballer-mo-salahis-tackling-islamophobia-head-on-1.724010
Thomas, Andi. 2018. “Soccer star Mo Salah’s massive popularity is changing perceptions of Muslims
in the UK.” Vox.com .
38

https://www.vox.com/world/2018/6/15/17433822/mo-salah-liverpoolinjury-egypt-2018-world-cup-muslim-islam
URL:

Valentino, Nicholas A. 1999. “Crime News and the Priming of Racial Attitudes During Evaluations of
the President.” 63(3):293–320.
Vezzali, Loris, Miles Hewstone, Dora Capozza, Dino Giovannini and Ralf Wolfer. 2014. “Improving
intergroup relations with extended and vicarious forms of indirect contact.” European Review of
Social Psychology 25(1):314–389.
Williams, Pat and Mike Sielski. 2004. How to Be Like Jackie Robinson. Health Communications,
Inc.
Wiseman, Eva. 2018. “Nadiya Hussain: ‘This is more than a job – it’s important to be out there’.”
The Guardian .
https://www.theguardian.com/food/2018/dec/16/nadiya-hussain-bakeURL:
off-winner-this-is-more-than-a-job
Wong, Norman CH, Kathryn L Lookadoo and Gwendelyn S Nisbett. 2017. ““I’m Demi and I have
bipolar disorder”: Effect of parasocial contact on reducing stigma toward people with bipolar disorder.” Communication Studies 68(3):314–333.
Wright, Stephen C, Arthur Aron, Tracy McLaughlin-Volpe and Stacy A Ropp. 1997. “The extended
contact effect: Knowledge of cross-group friendships and prejudice.” Journal of Personality and
Social psychology 73(1):73.
Xu, Yiqing. 2017. “Generalized Synthetic Control Method: Causal Inference with Interactive Fixed
Effects Models.” Political Analysis 25:57–76.
Xu, Yiqing and Licheng Liu. 2018. gsynth: Generalized Synthetic Control Method. R package
version 1.0.9.
URL: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=gsynth

39

Online Appendix for “Can Celebrities
Reduce Prejudice?”

Contents
A Hate Crimes Analysis
A.1 Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2 Treatment Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.3 Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.4 Generalized Difference-in-Difference . . . . . .
A.5 Are London and Manchester Driving the Results?

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

1
1
1
3
4
6

B Twitter Analysis
B.1 Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.2 Twitter Coding Instructions . . . . . .
B.3 Twitter Data Descriptive Statistics . . .
B.4 Twitter Data Additional Data Analysis
B.5 Testing for Backlash . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

8
8
10
11
11
13

C Mané Effect Analysis
C.1 Liverpool Echo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.2 Hate Crimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.3 Twitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14
14
14
14

D Survey Experiment
D.1 Survey experiment design . . . . . .
D.2 Vignette Descriptions . . . . . . . .
D.3 Balance Table for Survey Experiment
D.4 Heterogeneous treatment effect . . .
D.5 Additional Analyses . . . . . . . . .

18
18
18
20
20
22

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

A

Hate Crimes Analysis

A.1

Data Collection

To gather data on hate crimes, we submitted Freedom of Information requests (FOI) to every police
department in England in April 2018. We requested a dataset consisting of every hate crime that was
reported to the department between January 2015 and April 2018, along with information including the
date, location, motivation for the crime, and demographic information about the victim. We include
a police jurisdiction in our analysis if its response provided sufficient information for us to calculate
the total number of hate crimes reported in the jurisdiction for each month. We obtained usable data
from from 25 police jurisdictions out of the 39 contacted, and 936 month-police force observations.
Hate crimes themselves cover a range of offenses. Common violations include harassment, aggravated
common assault, criminal damage to vehicles, and aggravated public fear, alarm, or distress. In order
to be classified as a hate crime, police should have a clear indication that the perpetrator targeted the
victim mainly on the basis of their religious, racial, sexual, or abilities-based identity.
In our analysis, we use all reported hate crimes. We requested data on hate crimes broken down by
victim religion and ethnicity, but the responses were inconsistent. In some cases, police departments
do not collect this information; in others, they began collecting it near the end of the study period. As a
result, we include all reported hate crimes. The focus on all hate crimes should still reflect trends driven
by anti-Muslim incidents: the Home Office reports that 76% of hate crimes perpretrated from January
2017 to January 2018 were religiously or racially motivated.1 Of these crimes, 52% were categorized
as anti-Muslim in particular (BBC News, 2018).
Our main outcome variable is an annualized hate crime rate per thousand residents. For instance, a
police jurisdiction with a population of 100,000 that experiences 10 hate crimes in a given month has
an annual hate crime rate of (10 / 100,000) × 1,000 × 12 = 1.2 hate crimes per thousand residents in
that month.2 The dependent variable ranges from 0 to a maximum of 4.342, with a mean of 0.951 and
standard deviation of 0.767.

A.2

Treatment Assignment

We consider the Merseyside police force — which covers Liverpool — to be treated after Salah’s
official signing in June 2017. Merseyside is a metropolitan county that encompasses both Everton
F.C. and Liverpool F.C. fans.3 While a Salah effect is likely to be most pronounced after his stellar
performances with the team in late 2017, we choose his signing date as the start of treatment for two
reasons. First, any other cutoff would be somewhat arbitrary, whereas there is a clear justification
for choosing June 2017. Second, when Salah was signed, his transfer fee constituted a club record,
stoking interest in the player among the club’s fans. Figure A-1 shows that public interest in Salah —
as measured by Google searches in the U.K. — spiked shortly after he was signed in the summer of
2017 and then began to steadily increase afterwards through mid-2018. In Appendix C we show that
1

Note that the same offense can be categorized as both racially and religiously motivated.
Any other normalization procedure would yield identical results, up to a multiplicative constant.
3
A backlash among Everton fans would dilute any treatment effects for the hate crime analysis,
2

biasing against finding an effect.

1

mentions of Salah in Liverpool Echo headlines follow a similar trend.4
Figure A-2 plots the raw time series data for each police force, with Merseyside highlighted. In
the pre-treatment period, hate crimes are relatively common in Merseyside. Averaging over all pretreatment observations, the hate crime rate in Merseyside is higher than 19 of the other 24 police forces
in the data.
Interest over time
100

Search hits

75

salah (GB−ENG)

50

25

0
2014

2016

2018

Date

Figure A-1: Normalized Google Searches for “Salah” in the UK (2014-2018)
4

We also discuss other events relevant to Islamophobia that occurred around this time — which

could complicate interpretation of our estimates — in Section 7.

2

Annualized hate crimes
per 1,000 residents

4

3

2

1

2015−01−01
2015−02−01
2015−03−01
2015−04−01
2015−05−01
2015−06−01
2015−07−01
2015−08−01
2015−09−01
2015−10−01
2015−11−01
2015−12−01
2016−01−01
2016−02−01
2016−03−01
2016−04−01
2016−05−01
2016−06−01
2016−07−01
2016−08−01
2016−09−01
2016−10−01
2016−11−01
2016−12−01
2017−01−01
2017−02−01
2017−03−01
2017−04−01
2017−05−01
2017−06−01
2017−07−01
2017−08−01
2017−09−01
2017−10−01
2017−11−01
2017−12−01
2018−01−01
2018−02−01
2018−03−01
2018−04−01

0

Controls

Treated (Pre)

Treated (Post)

Figure A-2: Hate crime data across police jurisdictions. The red line shows hate crimes reported by
the Merseyside police force.

A.3

Research Design

Our goal is to estimate a counterfactual quantity: the predicted trajectory of hate crimes in Merseyside had Salah not joined Liverpool. A number of methods have been developed for this task, including
two-way fixed effects models, interactive fixed effects, the synthetic control method, and matrix completion methods (Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller, 2010; Doudchenko and Imbens, 2016; Xu, 2017;
Athey et al., 2018). Roughly speaking, these methods attempt to impute the unobserved outcomes in
the post-treatment period by first looking for structure in the pre-treatment data that generates good
predictions of the treated unit’s outcomes in the pre-treatment period. The same structure is then applied to the post-treatment periods to generate estimates of the counterfactual potential outcomes for
the treated unit. To obtain an estimate of the treatment effect on the treated unit, we simply take the difference between the observed outcome for the treated unit in the post-treatment period and the imputed
counterfactual outcome. Therefore, if there are T post-treatment periods, we obtain T treatment effect
estimates. In addition, we compute the treatment effect averaged over the T post-treatment periods as
a simple summary of the treatment effect.
This method outperforms others in approximating the outcome in Merseyside prior to the treatment
period, so arguably generates a more suitable counterfactual estimate than others. This method attempts
to find a low-dimensional matrix structure in the data by minimizing the mean squared error between
the observed outcomes and the outcomes predicted by another (low-rank) matrix. To avoid overfitting,
the procedure penalizes the complexity of the matrix by adding a penalty term proportional to the

3

nuclear norm of the matrix, with the scaling factor chosen via leave-one-out cross-validation.5
Statistical inference in the setting of a single treated unit is challenging. Standard methods for
computing standard errors based on asymptotic theory obviously do not apply. We implement three
complementary approaches to inference: the nonparametric bootstrap, a permutation-based method,
and a placebo analysis leveraging other types of crimes.
First, by repeatedly resampling control units and re-estimating the model, we generate a bootstrap
distribution and standard error for the treatment effect estimator. We can then compute a standard error
by taking the standard deviation of bootstrap estimates and obtain confidence intervals by taking the
appropriate quantiles of the bootstrap distribution.
Second, we reshuffle units’ treatment status to generate a reference distribution for the estimator.
For each control unit, we pretend it was in fact treated and estimate the “treatment effect” on the placebo
treated unit. By construction, there is 0 treatment effect for these units (since they were not actually
treated), so this procedure generates a distribution of the treatment effect estimator under the sharp null
of no treatment effect in any period, for any unit. We can then take the actual Merseyside estimates
and compare them to the null distribution to generate a permutation-based p-value. This method of
inference is proposed by Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller (2010).6
Third, we conduct a placebo test using other types of crime that are unlikely to be affected by
changes in anti-Muslim sentiment. We collected data from the U.K. Home Office on crime at the
police jurisdiction level.7 These data are formatted in a standard set of 14 crime types (which does not
include hate crimes), such as shoplifting, robbery, possession of weapons, drugs, and so on. There is
little reason to believe that these crimes would be affected by a decrease in anti-Muslim sentiment. If
we find a significant decrease in these crimes in Merseyside after Salah was signed, it would indicate
that a decrease in hate crimes may be explained as part of a more general trend. To conduct this test,
we re-run the matrix completion analysis on each of the placebo outcomes, then compare the estimated
effect sizes (normalized by the pre-treatment mean for each outcome).

A.4

Generalized Difference-in-Difference

An alternative method of measuring the effect of Salah on hate crimes is to employ a generalized
difference-in-differences framework by estimating a two-way fixed-effects (TWFE) regression of the
5

In each cross-validation iteration, we omit one pre-treatment observation for the treated unit. We

then select the penalization parameter that produces the smallest mean-squared prediction error for the
held out observations. Because we have 30 pre-treatment periods for Merseyside, we choose k = 30fold cross validation in the gsynth software.
6
In implementing this method, we omit data from West Yorkshire because we only have data for
two pre-treatment months. In all, there are 23 placebo units we use for this procedure.
7
Data were downloaded from the U.K. police data download page (https://data.police.uk/

data/). Accessed on May 22, 2019.

4

form

Yit = τ Dit + δi + γt + ϵit ,

(A-1)

where Dit is an indicator that switches on for Merseyside in the post-treatment period, δi and γt are
unit and month fixed effects, respectively, and ϵit is a mean-zero error term. In this framework, given
parallel trends for the treated and untreated units in the absence of treatment, τ is the the ATT.
Table A-1 presents the main regression results. The first column reports the plain TWFE model, the
second adds police force-specific linear time trends, and the third and fourth add population weights.
All specifications give similar results, showing that there was a decrease in the hate crime rate in
Merseyside after Salah was signed. The estimates are in the range of -0.2, which is very similar to the
estimated ATT yielded by the matrix completion method, which was −0.275.
In all the regression models, the estimates appear to be significant. However, with only a single
treated unit, the standard errors may not be reliable. We therefore undertake an alternative form of
inference, whereby we randomly assign a single unit to be treated, with treatment beginning in a randomly chosen month that is at least 4 months after the first observations in our dataset and as late as
the actual treatment month. We then estimate the TWFE specification in column (1) of Table A-1. We
repeat this procedure 10,000 times to generate a null distribution of the parameter estimate. We then
compute a p-value by calculating the proportion of simulated coefficient estimates that are at least as
small as the actual observed estimate.
The result of this exercise is presented in Figure A-3, which shows a histogram of the null distribution generated using the placebo approach described above. The vertical line shows the actual estimate
reported in column (1) of Table A-1. The estimated one-sided p-value is 0.139. In other words, roughly
13% of simulations generated a point estimate less than −0.296. We interpret this to be weak evidence
in favor of the Salah effect hypothesis.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Treated

−0.296∗∗∗ −0.214∗∗∗ −0.288∗∗∗ −0.152∗
(0.0610) (0.0488) (0.0903) (0.0805)

Observations
R-squared
Police Force FE
Month FE
Unit-specific time trend
Weights

969
969
969
0.896
0.932
0.913
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

969
0.942
✓
✓
✓
✓

Table A-1: Regression results with monthly annualized hate crime rate as the dependent variable.
Robust standard errors, clustered by police force, are reported in parentheses. For comparison, the
estimated ATT yielded by the matrix completion method, averaging across post-treatment months,
was −0.275. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.

5

4
3
0

1

Density
2

Observed estimate
One sided p = .139

-.5

0
.5
Placebo coefficient estimate

1

Figure A-3: The histogram shows the simulated null distribution of difference-in-differences estimates.
The solid black line shows the observed coefficient for Merseyside. The one-sided p-value is 0.139.

A.5

Are London and Manchester Driving the Results?

As noted in Section 7, there were two terrorist attacks just prior to Salah joining Liverpool F.C. —
one in Manchester and one in London. To confirm that our results are not being driven by an increase
in hate crimes in these cities in response to the attacks, we re-estimate the matrix completion model
for hate crimes without Manchester and London. The results are virtually identical to those obtained
from the full data.
Figure A-4 plots the difference between imputed and observed outcomes for each month using the
full data (horizontal axis) against the difference when we omit Manchester and London. Each point is
a month in the data. The 45-degree line is also plotted. All points fall very close to the 45-degree line,
which indicates that the results are not being driven by Manchester and London.

6

ATT omitting London and Manchester

●
●●

0.2
●
● ●

●
●

●
●

0.0

●
●

●

●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

−0.2

●
●
●

●

●●
●

●
●

●
●

−0.4
−0.4

●
●

−0.2

0.0

0.2

ATT using all counties
●

Pre−treatment

●

Post−treatment

Figure A-4: Difference between observed and imputed outcomes for Merseyside using the full dataset
(horizontal axis) and omitting Manchester and London (vertical axis). Each point is a month. The
45-degree line is shown.

7

B

Twitter Analysis

B.1

Data Collection

As of 2018, about one quarter of the U.K.’s population was an active Twitter user. While this
constitutes a large subsection of the U.K. population, recent research indicates that U.K. Twitter users
are not representative of the U.K. population as a whole. They are disproportionately young, male, and
more likely to have managerial, administrative, and professional occupations (Sloan, 2017). However,
the platform is widely used by British soccer fans, with 3 of the top 20 most followed accounts in the
U.K. belonging to English Premier League teams, alongside popular news accounts like the BBC and
celebrities such as Harry Styles and Emma Watson (Social Backers, 2019). Twitter data thus gives us
access to public messages produced by a large cross-section of U.K. soccer fans.
Looking at soccer fans based in the U.K., we compare the frequency of anti-Muslim tweets published by fans of Liverpool F.C. relative to fans of other English teams over time. We began by using
Twitter’s API to scrape the account IDs of all followers of the top five most followed teams in the
English Premier League: Manchester United F.C. (19 million followers), Arsenal F.C. (14 million),
Chelsea F.C. (12 million), Liverpool F.C. (11 million), and Manchester City F.C. (6 million). We also
scraped the followers of Everton F.C., a smaller team with 1.75 million followers that is also located
in the city of Liverpool. Fans of both clubs are nearly identical in terms of demographics: the home
stadiums are within walking distance of each other, there are no historic political, religious, or social differences between their fanbases, and many Liverpudlian families are mixed in their allegiances
(Borden, 2014). Evertonians thus constitute the closest comparison group in the sample, with one key
difference as a result of their fierce rivalry: exposure to Salah may skew negative for Evertonians, but
is positive and goal-aligned for Liverpool F.C. fans.
After obtaining followers’ account IDs, we collected our sample of tweets as follows. First, to
ensure that the users in our sample had been soccer fans prior to Salah joining Liverpool, we subset our
follower IDs to the oldest 500,000 followers of each team. Follower IDs are scraped from Twitter’s
API in the reverse order that the users began following the account, with newer users appearing first.
This feature of the data enables us to identify long-term fans of each team, given that the team accounts
have been popular for almost a decade and now have millions of followers. Then, to ensure that users
in our sample were located in the U.K., we again used Twitter’s API to download profile metadata
for the 500,000 oldest followers of each team.8 We then used their “user.location” metadata field to
determine if each user was located in the U.K. based on the text of their self-reported locations.9 Once
we identified longtime Twitter followers of English Premier League teams that were likely to be located
8

This method ensures that the sample joined Twitter before the treatment. For instance, the 500,000

most recent followers for Liverpool F.C., and the most recent accounts, were created between 2015 and
mid-2016.
9
Users were classified as being located in the U.K. if their “user.location” metadata field contained
either a city or country keyword indicating that the user was located in the U.K. City keywords were
obtained using the maps package in R. While this method does not necessarily capture all fans of
these soccer teams located in the U.K., as many users do not provide any location metadata at all, it
8

in the U.K., we randomly sampled 10,000 followers from each team. We used Twitter’s API a final
time to scrape up to 3,200 of the most recent tweets published by each of these 60,000 U.K. soccer
fans.10 This resulted in a dataset of approximately 15 million tweets produced by the 60,000 English
followers of the “Big Five” clubs of English soccer plus Everton F.C.
In order to identify anti-Muslim tweets, which are relatively rare in this dataset of all tweets produced by soccer fans in the U.K. (approximately .03% of all tweets), we first identified all tweets
broadly about Muslims in our dataset. We began with the terms “muslim” and “islam” and used
a word2vec model (a neural network that processes text) to find other relevant terms in the data.
This yielded the following broad relevant keywords: “arab,” “arabs,” “islam,” “muslims,” “muslim,”
“mosque,” and “mosques.”11 About 44,000 of the 15 million tweets in our dataset contained one of
these relevant keywords. We then took a sample of about 1,500 of these tweets containing a keyword
relevant to Muslims or Islam and used Figure8 (formerly Crowdflower), a crowd-sourced data enrichment platform, to have three native English speakers code each of these 1,500 tweets as anti-Muslim
or not.12
ensures that our sample consists only of likely U.K. residents. As Hecht et al. (2011) demonstrate, a
user’s country and state can be determined with decent accuracy using self-reported Twitter data, and
users often reveal location information with or without realizing it. Similarly, Mislove et al. (2011)
explain that because large numbers of users report their location in the “user.location” field and in
aggregate these reports are quite accurate, this is a reasonable way to determine a user’s location. This
is particularly true given that we are more interested in obtaining a high degree of precision (ensuring
that the users are actually U.K. residents) than recall (obtaining the entire population of tweets sent by
U.K. residents).
10
The 3,200 tweet limit is imposed by Twitter’s API and for most Twitter users covers their entire
Twitter timelines beginning on the day they first joined the platform.
11
The word2vec model also identified many irrelevant keywords to our study such as “rohingya”
(in reference to the ongoing conflict in Myanmar) and “assad” (in reference to the Syria conflict). We
only chose to include relevant keywords that were among the top 50 words that the word2vec model
indicated were most similar to the terms “muslim” and “islam.” Although most British Muslims are
of South Asian descent, the word ”pakistani” did not appear in the top 50 words identified by the
word2vec model and therefore we did not use it as keyword to filter our data.
12
The instructions provided to coders are displayed in Appendix B. For more information on using
Figure8 (formerly Crowdflower) to code data for training classifiers, see Benoit et al. (2016).

9

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
2014−01−01
2014−02−01
2014−03−01
2014−04−01
2014−05−01
2014−06−01
2014−07−01
2014−08−01
2014−09−01
2014−10−01
2014−11−01
2014−12−01
2015−01−01
2015−02−01
2015−03−01
2015−04−01
2015−05−01
2015−06−01
2015−07−01
2015−08−01
2015−09−01
2015−10−01
2015−11−01
2015−12−01
2016−01−01
2016−02−01
2016−03−01
2016−04−01
2016−05−01
2016−06−01
2016−07−01
2016−08−01
2016−09−01
2016−10−01
2016−11−01
2016−12−01
2017−01−01
2017−02−01
2017−03−01
2017−04−01
2017−05−01
2017−06−01
2017−07−01
2017−08−01
2017−09−01
2017−10−01
2017−11−01
2017−12−01
2018−01−01
2018−02−01
2018−03−01
2018−04−01
2018−05−01
2018−06−01
2018−07−01
2018−08−01

Proportion Anti−Muslim Tweets Per Month

0.4

Controls

Treated (Pre)

Treated (Post)

Figure A-5: Anti-Muslim tweets as a proportion of tweets mentioning Muslims or Islam, across followers of British soccer clubs. The red line shows anti-Muslim tweets by followers of Liverpool F.C.

B.2

Twitter Coding Instructions

The instructions provided to coders on Figure8 (formerly Crowdflower) were as follows:
Overview In this job, you will be presented with tweets about Muslims and Islam. Review the
tweets to determine the sentiment so that we can have a greater understanding about the overall sentiment expressed by the author.
Steps

• Read the tweet.
• Determine if the tweet is relevant to Muslim people or Islam.
• Determine if the tweet expresses a positive, neutral, or negative attitude towards Muslims or
Islam
Rules & Tips
The posts can be classified as positive, negative or neutral:

• Positive tweets portray Muslim people or Islam in a positive manner or argue that Muslims and
Islam should not be portrayed negatively. For example, tweets that state that Muslims are not
terrorists or extremists or that Islam is a peaceful religion or tweets that defend Muslims or Islam
are positive.

10

• Neutral tweets are only informative in nature and provide no hint as to the mood of the author.
They do not express an opinion about Muslims or Islam.
• Negative tweets are tweets in which some aspects of the tweet uncover a negative mood such
as, criticism, insults or a negative comparison. These include tweets portraying Muslims as
terrorists, extremists, or violent, and those making negative generalizations about Muslims or
Islam as a whole.
• Irrelevant tweets do not mention Muslims or Islam or are not in English. These include tweets
where the word “Muslim” or “Islam” appears in the handle of a Twitter user and tweets in foreign
languages, for example.
• Note: Tweets that are purely factual (links to news articles without comment) are not necessarily
Neutral — consider whether the fact/news itself is Positive or Negative regarding the business
and select one of those when possible.

B.3

Twitter Data Descriptive Statistics
Table A-2: Proportion of Anti-Muslim Tweets Pre and Post-Salah
type
Anti-Muslim / Muslim Relevant
Anti-Muslim / Muslim Relevant
Anti-Muslim / Muslim Relevant
Anti-Muslim / Muslim Relevant

B.4

team
liverpool
liverpool
other teams
other teams

post_salah
0
1
0
1

mean
0.073
0.076
0.102
0.115

Twitter Data Additional Data Analysis

As an alternative method of analyzing the effect of Salah joining Liverpool on the monthly proportion of anti-Muslim tweets produced by Liverpool fans, we conduct difference-in-differences estimation as follows:

y = β0 + β1 T + β2 L + β3 (T · L) + ε

(A-2)

Here T is a dummy variable for the time period, equal to 1 in the post-Salah period and 0 in the preSalah period, and L is a dummy variable for Liverpool group membership, equal to 1 for Liverpool and
0 for other teams. The interacted term (T · L) is a dummy variable indicating when L = T = 1. If the
coefficient β3 on (T · L) is negative, as expected, then Liverpool fans tweet less anti-Muslim content
in the post-Salah period relative to the pre-Salah period, compared to fans of other teams. We conduct
this analysis comparing Liverpool fans’ tweets to tweets produced by fans of other large teams as well
as Everton F.C.. We use the proportion of anti-Muslim tweets (anti-Muslim tweets / tweets relevant to
Islam or Muslims) as our outcome variable y .
Because there is only one treated unit and standard errors may be misleading, we again undertake
an alternative form of inference, whereby we randomly assign a single unit to be treated, with treatment
beginning in a randomly chosen month that is at least 4 months after the first observations in our dataset
and as late as the actual treatment month. We then estimate the difference-in-difference model above.
11

We repeat this procedure 10,000 times to generate a null distribution of the parameter estimate. We
then compute a p-value by calculating the proportion of simulated coefficient estimates that are at least
as small as the actual observed estimate.
The result of this exercise is presented in Figure A-6, which shows a histogram of the null distribution generated using the placebo approach described above. The vertical line shows the actual estimate
of the model in equation A-2. The estimated one-sided p-value is 0.07. In other words, roughly 7% of
simulations generated a point estimate less than −0.038. We interpret this to be suggestive evidence
in favor of our Salah effect hypothesis.
0.08

Observed estimate
One−sided p = 0.071

Density

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
−0.05

0.00

0.05

Placebo coefficient estimate

Figure A-6: The histogram shows the simulated null distribution of difference-in-differences estimates.
The solid black line shows the observed coefficient for Liverpool. The one-sided p-value is 0.07.

12

B.5

Testing for Backlash

In order to increase our confidence that we are indeed measuring a decrease in the use of antiMuslim discourse by Liverpool fans, relative to fans of rival teams, we conduct a difference in differences analysis comparing tweets of rival team fans to tweets of Twitter users located in the UK who
do not follow any soccer teams. If our results are driven by backlash from rival team fans, we would
expect to see an increase in anti-Muslim discourse from these fans after Salah joins Liverpool, relative
to non-soccer fans in the UK.
To identify these non-soccer fans located in the UK we first collect 30,000 recent tweets from
Twitter users who are geolocated in the UK. We then filter these accounts to individuals who do not
follow any of the major football team accounts, who had active Twitter accounts during our period of
analysis, leaving us with a sample of about 15,000 unique users. We then scrape the 3200 most recent
tweets from each of these accounts and use our same method to classify their tweets.
The results of our differences in differences analysis, reported in Table A-3 suggest that there is
no “Salah backlash effect” in which fans of rival teams publicly express more anti-Muslim sentiment
after Salah joins Liverpool, relative to non-soccer fans in the UK. This increases our confidence that
we are actually measuring a decrease in anti-Muslim Tweets by Liverpool fans, rather than a change
driven by backlash from rival teams.
Table A-3: Effect of Salah Joining Liverpool on Daily Proportion of Anti-Muslim Tweets

Constant
Non-Liverpool Fans (Treated Dummy)
Post-Salah (Post-Treatment Dummy)
Non-Liverpool Fans x Post-Salah (DID)
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗ p

< 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05, · p < 0.1

13

Proportion of Anti-Muslim Tweets
0.139∗∗∗
(0.012)
−0.045∗∗
(0.014)
−0.014
(0.035)
0.047
(0.039)
0.047
0.037
288
0.081

C
C.1

Mané Effect Analysis
Liverpool Echo
Percent of Headlines Mentioning Player
Percent of articles per month

0.15
Mane
Joins

Salah
Joins

0.10

0.05

2019−06

2019−03

2018−12

2018−09

2018−06

2018−03

2017−12

2017−09

2017−06

2017−03

2016−12

2016−09

2016−06

2016−03

2015−12

2015−09

2015−06

2015−03

2014−12

2014−09

2014−06

2014−03

2013−12

2013−09

2013−06

0.00

Date
Mane

Salah

Figure A-7: Percent of monthly titles in Liverpool Echo that mention Mané or Salah

C.2

Hate Crimes

Here, we repeat the same matrix completion analysis of hate crime data as in the main text, except
treating July 2016 — the month in which Sadio Mané signed with Liverpool — as the beginning of
treatment. Additionally, to avoid picking up the Salah effect, we truncate the data to before Salah
signed.
The results are shown in Figure A-8. Overall, we see no consistent difference between observed and
imputed hate crimes in Merseyside after Mané joined Liverpool (but before Salah joined). Averaging
across post-treatment months, the estimated ATT is 0.017 (S.E. = 0.049), which corresponds to a
1.3% increase in the hate crime rate — though this result is not statistically significant.

C.3

Twitter

We also repeat the same matrix completion analysis of Twitter data as in the main text, except
treating July 2016 — the month in which Sadio Mané signed with Liverpool — as the beginning of
treatment. Additionally, to avoid picking up the Salah effect, we truncate the data to before Salah
signed.
14

(a) Observed and imputed outcomes for Merseyside

Monthly hate crime rate

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

2015−01−01
2015−02−01
2015−03−01
2015−04−01
2015−05−01
2015−06−01
2015−07−01
2015−08−01
2015−09−01
2015−10−01
2015−11−01
2015−12−01
2016−01−01
2016−02−01
2016−03−01
2016−04−01
2016−05−01
2016−06−01
2016−07−01
2016−08−01
2016−09−01
2016−10−01
2016−11−01
2016−12−01
2017−01−01
2017−02−01
2017−03−01
2017−04−01
2017−05−01
2017−06−01

1.00

Treated

Estimated Y(0)

(b) Estimated ATT in every period

Observed − Imputed for Merseyside

0.50

0.25

0.00

−0.25

−0.50
−10

0

10

Months relative to treatment

Figure A-8: Matrix completion results for hate crime outcomes, treating Sadio Mané’s signing as
the beginning of treatment. The top panel shows the observed (solid line) and imputed (dashed line)
monthly hate crime rates in Merseyside. The bottom panel shows the difference between the observed
and imputed outcomes. In the post-treatment period, this is the estimate of the ATT.
15

The results are shown in Figure A-9. Unlike the hate crime data, here we do observe a significant
decrease between observed and imputed anti-Muslim tweets in Merseyside after Mané joined Liverpool
(but before Salah joined). Averaging across post-treatment months, the estimated ATT is −0.043
(S.E. = 0.007), which corresponds to a 59.8% decrease in the proportion of anti-Muslim tweets.

16

Treated

2017−05−01

2017−04−01

2017−03−01

2017−02−01

2017−01−01

2016−12−01

2016−11−01

2016−10−01

2016−09−01

2016−08−01

2016−07−01

2016−06−01

2016−05−01

2016−04−01

2016−03−01

2016−02−01

2016−01−01

2015−12−01

2015−11−01

2015−10−01

2015−09−01

2015−08−01

2015−07−01

2015−06−01

2015−05−01

2015−04−01

2015−03−01

2015−02−01

2015−01−01

2014−12−01

2014−11−01

2014−10−01

2014−09−01

2014−08−01

2014−07−01

2014−06−01

2014−05−01

2014−04−01

2014−03−01

2014−02−01

2014−01−01

Monthly Proportion of anti−Muslim Tweets

(a) Observed and imputed outcomes for Merseyside

Estimated Y(0)

(b) Estimated ATT in every period

0.25

Observed − Imputed

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
−0.05
−0.10
−30

−25

−20

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

Months relative to treatment
Controls

Treated (Pre)

Treated (Post)

Figure A-9: Matrix completion results for tweet outcomes, treating Sadio Mané’s signing as the beginning of treatment. The top panel shows the observed (solid line) and imputed (dashed line) monthly
proportion of anti-Muslim tweets produced by Liverpool fans. The bottom panel shows the difference
between the observed and imputed outcomes in Liverpool fans’ tweets (red line) relative to tweets produced by fans of other U.K. football clubs (gray lines). In the post-treatment period, this is the estimate
of the ATT.
17

D

Survey Experiment

D.1

Survey experiment design

The survey experiment is a 2 × 2 factorial design embedded in the survey, in addition to a pure
control group. First, we provided the treated respondents with a vignette emphasizing Salah’s success
(Success Condition) or speculation about his potentially declining performance (Failure Condition).13
This factor is designed to test the “model minority” dimension of the positivity condition for prejudice
reduction. Next, treated respondents saw another vignette emphasizing either Salah’s religiosity (Religiosity Condition) or agreeable character (Character Condition).

D.2

Vignette Descriptions

Respondents in the success condition saw a picture of Mo Salah holding the Golden Boot with the
following text:

In the 2017-18 season, Salah scored 43 goals for Liverpool, setting numerous club and
league records along the way. For his efforts, he was named the Premier League’s
Player of the Month three times, won the Golden Boot, and was awarded the PFA
Players’ Player of the Year award. Along with Christiano Ronaldo and Luca Modric,
he was shortlisted for UEFA Player of the Year. He recently won the FIFA Puskás
award for best goal.
Salah was also central in taking Egypt to the World Cup and Liverpool F.C. to the
Champions League final.
Respondents in the failure treatment saw an image of Salah looking regretful with the following
text:

Despite a successful 2017-18 season, some believe he is underperforming this season.
As of late October, he had scored only 4 goals in Premier League play.14 Due to this
lackluster performance, some critics have suggested that Salah will be a ‘one-season
wonder.’
After the success/failure treatment, respondents then received a treatment emphasizing either Salah’s
character or his religiosity. Respondents who received the character treatment saw a picture of Salah
with his daughter and the following text:
13

In the beginning of the 2018-2019 season, when we fielded the experiment, Salah got off to a

slower start than the previous season, which the vignette in the Failure Condition emphasized.
14
This statistic was updated for respondents taking the survey in or after January 1, 2019 to read:
“As of early January, he had scored in just 62% of Premier League games played — compared to 89%
last season.

18

In addition to his goal-scoring, Salah is known for his character both on and off the
pitch. In his native Egypt, Salah privately donated millions of pounds to charity and
to a leading anti-drug campaign. Always a sportsman, Salah does not celebrate goals
against his former teams and picked up only two yellow cards in 49 matches for Liverpool last season.
Respondents in the religious treatment saw Salah prostrating with this text:

In addition to his goal scoring, Salah is known for an attachment to his Muslim identity
both on and off the pitch. After every goal he scores, Salah touches his head to the
ground in prayer. He also fasts during Ramadan (except on match days) and shares
well wishes with his followers on social media during Islamic holidays. He named his
daughter Makka after Islam’s holiest site (Mecca).

19

D.3

Balance Table for Survey Experiment

Age (Years)
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range
Female
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range
University Edu.
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range
Salah Favorite
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range
Karius Empathy
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range
Liverpool Resident
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range
Conservative
N-Miss
Mean (SD)
Range

Control (N=2887)

Char. - Fail. (N=1463)

Char. - Succ. (N=1454)

Rlgn. - Fail. (N=1421)

Rlgn - Succ. (N=1441)

136
49.90 (12.84)
18.00 - 98.00

161
50.46 (12.22)
18.00 - 98.00

170
49.90 (12.71)
18.00 - 98.00

204
50.23 (12.43)
18.00 - 98.00

173
49.78 (11.44)
18.00 - 98.00

1
0.28 (0.45)
0.00 - 1.00

20
0.27 (0.44)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.25 (0.44)
0.00 - 1.00

5
0.25 (0.43)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.28 (0.45)
0.00 - 1.00

6
0.32 (0.47)
0.00 - 1.00

18
0.34 (0.48)
0.00 - 1.00

5
0.31 (0.46)
0.00 - 1.00

38
0.33 (0.47)
0.00 - 1.00

14
0.31 (0.46)
0.00 - 1.00

560
0.52 (0.50)
0.00 - 1.00

686
0.52 (0.50)
0.00 - 1.00

466
0.52 (0.50)
0.00 - 1.00

615
0.53 (0.50)
0.00 - 1.00

413
0.52 (0.50)
0.00 - 1.00

217
0.38 (0.48)
0.00 - 1.00

381
0.36 (0.48)
0.00 - 1.00

274
0.38 (0.49)
0.00 - 1.00

333
0.39 (0.49)
0.00 - 1.00

244
0.38 (0.49)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.22 (0.42)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.24 (0.43)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.23 (0.42)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.23 (0.42)
0.00 - 1.00

0
0.22 (0.41)
0.00 - 1.00

241
0.27 (0.44)
0.00 - 1.00

188
0.27 (0.44)
0.00 - 1.00

193
0.28 (0.45)
0.00 - 1.00

171
0.28 (0.45)
0.00 - 1.00

233
0.28 (0.45)
0.00 - 1.00

F-Stat (p.value)
0.89 (0.47)

1.95 (0.1)

1.66 (0.16)

0.02 (1)

0.5 (0.73)

0.75 (0.56)

0.24 (0.91)

Table A-4: Summary statistics for several demographic variables as well as the outcome questions by
treatment group. Female indicates proportion of respondents who identified as females. University
Edu. indicates proportion of respondents who have at least some university education. Salah Favorite
indicates the proportion of respondents who indicated that Salah is their favorite player. Karius Empathy indicates those who expressed empathy with Liverpool’s goalkeeper Karius. Liverpool Resident
indicates whether the respondents live in Liverpool. Conservative indicates respondents who indicated
they are associated with the Conservative or UK Independence Party.

D.4

Heterogeneous treatment effect

Additionally, we examine heterogenous treatment effects by three subject attributes: (1) choosing
Salah as one’s favorite player, (2) residing in Liverpool, and (3) baseline empathy.15 We leverage an
incident familiar to most Liverpool F.C. (and soccer) fans to measure (3). During the 2018 UEFA
Champions League final, Liverpool F.C.’s goalkeeper, Loris Karius, committed two blunders that arguably cost his team the championship. Karius was hounded by the international media for what were
seen as schoolboy errors on the world’s most prestigious stage in club soccer. Fans were divided on the
issue. Some stood by their keeper, referencing their club’s motto of “You’ll Never Walk Alone” and
his sincere apology after the game. Others were less forgiving. Some referred to the German player
15

Analyses (1) and (2) are pre-registered, while (3) is an exploratory analysis aimed at capturing a

novel measure of empathy.

20

Not Liverpool
Resident

Favorite player
Salah

●

Favorite player
not Salah

●

Liverpool Resident

−0.05

0.00

0.05

●

0.10

0.15

0.20

No Karius
empathy

●

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

●

●

Karius empathy

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Figure A-10: The points show the estimated average treatment effect on the compatibility of Islam
with British values outcome. Lines are robust 95% confidence intervals.
as a Nazi and sent death threats to his home, prompting police intervention (Sky News, 2018). We use
a question asking whether the respondent believes that Karius deserved the criticism he received as a
measure of baseline empathy. Around 62% of respondents agreed or strongly agreed with the criticism,
categorized as an unempathetic response.
Diving deeper on the religious prime, we unpack heterogenous treatment effects by three respondent traits in Figure A-10. The results suggest that there is not much heterogeneity among any of these
subgroups. Empathizing with Liverpool F.C.’s former goalkeeper, Loris Karius, and living in Liverpool generates positive interactive effects, although these effects are not robust. Lastly, selecting Salah
as one’s favorite player has no added effect on tolerance.

21

D.5

Additional Analyses
Treatment Effect on Views
of Salah's Performance

●

Treatment

Success

●

Failure

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

Estimate

Figure A-11: Effects of treatments on views of Salah’s performance

Feel common with
Muslims (0−1)

Impact of Immigrants
on the U.K. (0−1)

●

Religion − Success

●

●

Religion − Failure

●

Character − Failure

●

Treatment

Character − Success

●

●

●

Islam compatible with
British values (0−1)

PC Outcome

●

Religion − Success

●

●

Religion − Failure

●

●

Character − Success

●

●

Character − Failure

−0.1

0.0

●

0.1

−0.1

0.0

0.1

Estimate

Figure A-12: Coefficient plots representing the average treatment effects on the four outcomes, relative
to the pure control condition. The first three outcome variables are binary, while the the fourth is a
continuous variable with mean of zero and unit variance. Bars show 95% robust confidence intervals.

22

Feel common with
Muslims (0−1)

Impact of Immigrants
on the U.K. (0−1)

●

Religion

●

●

Treatment

Character

●

Islam compatible with
British values (0−1)

PC Outcome

●

Religion

●

●

Character

−0.05

0.00

●

0.05

0.10

0.15

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

Estimate

Figure A-13: Coefficient Plot for the average marginal component effects of the religion/character
treatment

23

Feel common with
Muslims (0−1)

Impact of Immigrants
on the U.K. (0−1)

●

Success

●

●

Treatment

Failure

●

Islam compatible with
British values (0−1)

PC Outcome

●

Success

●

●

Failure

−0.05

0.00

●

0.05

0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Estimate

Figure A-14: Coefficient Plot for the average marginal component effects of the success/failure treatment

Feel common with
Muslims (0−1)

Impact of Immigrants
on the U.K. (0−1)
0.5

0.6

0.4
0.4

0.3
0.2

0.2

outcome

0.1
0.0

0.0
Islam compatible with
British values (0−1)

PC Outcome
0.06

0.20
0.03
0.15
0.00

0.10
0.05

−0.03

0.00

treatment
Pure Control

Character − Failure

Character − Success

Religion − Failure

Religion − Success

Figure A-15: Average of each outcome by treatment group

24

Constant
Religion
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
0.08∗
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
4997
2.14

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
5361
1.05

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.05∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
5168
0.87

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
5032
1.06

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-5: Main regressions using the character/religion treatments.

Constant
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.00
(0.05)
0.09
(0.05)
0.07
(0.05)
0.00
0.00
7515
2.25

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.06∗∗
(0.02)
0.04∗
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
7771
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
7571
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-6: Average treatment effects for the main outcomes.

25

(Intercept)
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
Age
Female
Univ. Edu.
Character - Failure:Age
Character - Success:Age
Religion - Failure:Age
Religion - Success:Age
Character - Failure:Female
Character - Success:Female
Religion - Failure:Female
Religion - Success:Female
Character - Failure:Univ. Edu.
Character - Success:Univ. Edu.
Religion - Failure:Univ. Edu.
Religion - Success:Univ. Edu.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
0.09∗
(0.04)
0.08
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)
0.06
(0.06)
0.68∗∗∗
(0.06)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.01
(0.10)
0.02
(0.10)
0.17
(0.10)
0.01
(0.10)
0.04
(0.09)
0.02
(0.10)
−0.06
(0.10)
−0.01
(0.10)
0.11
0.11
7377
2.13

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
−0.00∗∗
(0.00)
0.06∗
(0.03)
0.24∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.02
(0.05)
0.00
(0.05)
0.03
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.01
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.04)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.06
0.06
7914
1.08

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.06∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.05∗∗
(0.02)
0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.22∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.06
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.09∗
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.04)
−0.05
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.04)
0.06
0.06
7627
0.87

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-7: Lin regressions for the main outcomes.

26

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.25∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.05
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.03
(0.05)
0.09
(0.05)
0.09
(0.05)
0.03
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.08
0.08
7429
1.08

(Intercept)
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
Salah Fav.
Character - Failure:Salah Fav.
Character - Success:Salah Fav.
Religion - Failure:Salah Fav.
Religion - Success:Salah Fav.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.06)
0.02
(0.07)
0.05
(0.07)
0.11
(0.07)
0.01
(0.06)
−0.00
(0.09)
−0.04
(0.09)
0.07
(0.10)
−0.06
(0.09)
0.00
0.00
7025
2.26

Muslims Common
0.58∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)
0.05
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.05)
−0.04
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
−0.04
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7531
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.17∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
0.06∗
(0.03)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
0.01
0.00
7265
0.90

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-8: Interacting the treatments with selecting Salah as the favorite player.

27

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.00
(0.05)
0.02
(0.05)
0.02
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.00
-0.00
7079
1.12

(Intercept)
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
Conservative
Character - Failure:Conservative
Character - Success:Conservative
Religion - Failure:Conservative
Religion - Success:Conservative
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
0.08∗
(0.03)
−0.05
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.10
(0.06)
0.07
(0.06)
−0.38∗∗∗
(0.06)
0.12
(0.09)
−0.01
(0.09)
−0.03
(0.10)
−0.03
(0.09)
0.03
0.03
7372
2.22

Muslims Common
0.61∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.04
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
−0.14∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.08
(0.05)
0.00
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.00
(0.05)
0.02
0.02
7900
1.10

Islam Compatible
0.21∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.06∗
(0.02)
0.04
(0.02)
−0.12∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.02
0.02
7617
0.89

Immigrant Impact
0.51∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.15∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.03
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.02
0.02
7417
1.11

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-9: Interacting the treatments with an indicator for conservative views. This indicator is coded
as 1 if the respondent identifies with the Conservative Party or the UK Independence Party. It is coded
as 0 if the respondent identifies with the Labour Party, Liberal Democrats, other parties, or none of
these parties.

28

(Intercept)
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
Liverpool Res.
Character - Failure:Liverpool Res.
Character - Success:Liverpool Res.
Religion - Failure:Liverpool Res.
Religion - Success:Liverpool Res.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.06
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
0.15∗
(0.07)
0.08
(0.11)
−0.03
(0.11)
0.15
(0.11)
0.13
(0.12)
0.01
0.01
7515
2.25

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.06
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.07
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.00
0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.17∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.06∗∗
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
0.06∗
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.01
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
0.01
0.01
7771
0.89

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-10: Interacting the treatments with an indicator for residing in Liverpool.

29

Immigrant Impact
0.45∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.07∗
(0.03)
0.04
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.08
(0.05)
0.04
(0.06)
0.01
0.01
7571
1.12

(Intercept)
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
Follow Liverpool
Character - Failure:Follow Liverpool
Character - Success:Follow Liverpool
Religion - Failure:Follow Liverpool
Religion - Success:Follow Liverpool
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.07)
−0.11
(0.11)
−0.13
(0.11)
0.19
(0.12)
0.09
(0.12)
−0.00
(0.07)
0.11
(0.12)
0.15
(0.12)
−0.12
(0.13)
−0.02
(0.13)
0.00
0.00
7513
2.25

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.06
(0.06)
−0.04
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
0.01
(0.06)
0.02
(0.04)
0.05
(0.06)
0.03
(0.06)
−0.04
(0.06)
0.02
(0.06)
0.00
0.00
8057
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.04)
−0.04
(0.04)
0.09
(0.05)
0.06
(0.05)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
0.06
(0.04)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.02
(0.05)
0.01
0.00
7768
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.48∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.05
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
0.01
(0.06)
0.02
(0.06)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.06
(0.06)
0.06
(0.06)
−0.02
(0.06)
−0.04
(0.06)
0.00
-0.00
7569
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-11: Interacting the treatments with an indicator for closely following Liverpool FC. People
who follow Liverpool very closely (watch every match, read news almost daily) are coded as 1 and
people who follow Liverpool less often are coded as 0.

30

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Age
Female
Univ. Edu.
Character:Age
Religion:Age
Character:Female
Religion:Female
Character:Univ. Edu.
Religion:Univ. Edu.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.04)
0.08∗
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)
0.06
(0.06)
0.68∗∗∗
(0.06)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.08)
0.08
(0.08)
0.03
(0.08)
−0.03
(0.08)
0.11
0.11
7377
2.13

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
−0.00∗∗
(0.00)
0.06∗
(0.03)
0.24∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
0.06
0.06
7914
1.08

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.05∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.22∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.06
0.06
7627
0.87

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.25∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.08∗
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.08
0.08
7429
1.08

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-12: Lin regressions using the character/religion treatments.

31

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Conservative
Character:Conservative
Religion:Conservative
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
0.08∗
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.05)
0.09
(0.05)
−0.38∗∗∗
(0.06)
0.06
(0.08)
−0.03
(0.08)
0.03
0.03
7372
2.22

Muslims Common
0.61∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
−0.14∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
0.02
0.02
7900
1.10

Islam Compatible
0.21∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.05∗∗
(0.02)
−0.12∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.02
0.02
7617
0.89

Immigrant Impact
0.51∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.15∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
(0.04)
0.02
0.02
7417
1.11

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-13: Interacting the character/religion treatments with an indicator for conservative views. This
indicator is coded as 1 if the respondent identifies with the Conservative Party or the UK Independence
Party. It is coded as 0 if the respondent identifies with the Labour Party, Liberal Democrats, other
parties, or none of these parties.

32

(Intercept)
Failure
Success
Age
Female
Univ. Edu.
Failure:Age
Success:Age
Failure:Female
Success:Female
Failure:Univ. Edu.
Success:Univ. Edu.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
0.05
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)
0.06
(0.06)
0.68∗∗∗
(0.06)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.07
(0.08)
0.02
(0.08)
−0.02
(0.08)
0.01
(0.08)
0.11
0.10
7377
2.13

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
−0.00∗∗
(0.00)
0.06∗
(0.03)
0.24∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.06
0.06
7914
1.08

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.03∗
(0.01)
0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.22∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
0.07∗
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.06
0.06
7627
0.87

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.00
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00∗
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.25∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.00)
−0.00
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.06
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.08
0.08
7429
1.08

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-14: Lin regressions using the success/failure treatments.

33

(Intercept)
Failure
Success
Conservative
Failure:Conservative
Success:Conservative
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
0.08∗
(0.03)
0.02
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
−0.38∗∗∗
(0.06)
0.05
(0.08)
−0.02
(0.08)
0.03
0.03
7372
2.22

Muslims Common
0.61∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
−0.14∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
(0.04)
0.02
0.01
7900
1.10

Islam Compatible
0.21∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
−0.12∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)
0.02
0.01
7617
0.89

Immigrant Impact
0.51∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.15∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.02
0.02
7417
1.11

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-15: Interacting the success/failure treatments with an indicator for conservative views. This
indicator is coded as 1 if the respondent identifies with the Conservative Party or the UK Independence
Party. It is coded as 0 if the respondent identifies with the Labour Party, Liberal Democrats, other
parties, or none of these parties.

Constant
Failure
Success
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
-0.00
7515
2.26

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.03∗
(0.01)
0.00
0.00
7771
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
7571
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-16: Main regressions using the success/failure treatments.

34

(Intercept)
Failure
Success
Salah Fav.
Failure:Salah Fav.
Success:Salah Fav.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.04)
0.02
(0.06)
0.07
(0.06)
0.01
(0.06)
0.04
(0.08)
−0.05
(0.08)
0.00
-0.00
7025
2.26

Muslims Common
0.58∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
−0.04
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7531
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.17∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.04
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.00
0.00
7265
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
-0.00
7079
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-17: Interacting the success/failure treatments with selecting Salah as the favorite player.

(Intercept)
Failure
Success
Liverpool Res.
Failure:Liverpool Res.
Success:Liverpool Res.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.06
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
0.15∗
(0.07)
0.11
(0.09)
0.04
(0.09)
0.01
0.01
7515
2.25

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.07
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.17∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
0.06∗
(0.03)
0.00
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.01
0.00
7771
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.45∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.07∗
(0.03)
0.06
(0.04)
0.02
(0.05)
0.01
0.01
7571
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-18: Interacting the success/failure treatments with an indicator for residing in Liverpool.

35

(Intercept)
Failure
Success
Follow Liverpool
Failure:Follow Liverpool
Success:Follow Liverpool
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.07)
0.04
(0.10)
−0.02
(0.10)
−0.00
(0.07)
−0.00
(0.11)
0.06
(0.10)
0.00
-0.00
7513
2.26

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
0.01
(0.05)
0.02
(0.05)
0.00
0.00
8057
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7768
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.48∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.05)
−0.03
(0.05)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.02
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.00
-0.00
7569
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-19: Interacting the success/failure treatments with an indicator for closely following Liverpool
FC. People who follow Liverpool very closely (watch every match, read news almost daily) are coded
as 1 and people who follow Liverpool less often are coded as 0.

Constant
Character
Religion
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.08∗
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7515
2.25

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.05∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
7771
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
7571
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-20: Main regressions using the character/religion treatments.

36

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Salah Fav.
Character:Salah Fav.
Religion:Salah Fav.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.06)
0.08
(0.06)
0.01
(0.06)
−0.02
(0.08)
0.01
(0.08)
0.00
0.00
7025
2.26

Muslims Common
0.58∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7531
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.17∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
0.05∗
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)
0.00
0.00
7265
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
0.00
-0.00
7079
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-21: Interacting the character/religion treatments with selecting Salah as the favorite player.

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Liverpool Res.
Character:Liverpool Res.
Religion:Liverpool Res.
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.06
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.05
(0.04)
0.15∗
(0.07)
0.03
(0.09)
0.14
(0.10)
0.01
0.01
7515
2.25

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.17∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.05∗∗
(0.02)
0.06∗
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
0.01
0.01
7771
0.89

Immigrant Impact
0.45∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.07∗
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
0.06
(0.05)
0.01
0.01
7571
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-22: Interacting the character/religion treatments with an indicator for residing in Liverpool.

37

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Follow Liverpool
Character:Follow Liverpool
Religion:Follow Liverpool
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.07)
−0.12
(0.09)
0.14
(0.10)
−0.00
(0.07)
0.13
(0.10)
−0.07
(0.11)
0.00
0.00
7513
2.25

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.05
(0.05)
0.02
(0.05)
0.02
(0.04)
0.04
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.00
0.00
8057
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.03)
0.07
(0.04)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7768
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.48∗∗∗
(0.03)
−0.06
(0.05)
0.02
(0.05)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.06
(0.05)
−0.03
(0.05)
0.00
0.00
7569
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-23: Interacting the character/religion treatments with an indicator for closely following Liverpool FC. People who follow Liverpool very closely (watch every match, read news almost daily) are
coded as 1 and people who follow Liverpool less often are coded as 0.

38

(Intercept)
Character - Failure
Character - Success
Religion - Failure
Religion - Success
Karius Empathy
Character - Failure:Karius Empathy
Character - Success:Karius Empathy
Religion - Failure:Karius Empathy
Religion - Success:Karius Empathy
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.03
(0.04)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.04
(0.06)
0.05
(0.06)
0.06
(0.06)
0.01
(0.06)
0.17
(0.09)
0.12
(0.09)
0.11
(0.10)
0.03
(0.10)
0.01
0.00
7510
2.25

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
0.05
(0.05)
0.04
(0.04)
0.03
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.04)
0.01
0.00
8040
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.03
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.04
(0.02)
0.04
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.05
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
0.05
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
0.01
0.00
7758
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.03
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.08
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.03
(0.05)
0.00
0.00
7563
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-24: Interacting the treatments with expressing sympathy with Karius. Respondents are coded
as empathetic with Karius if they did not agree with the criticism that Karius received after following
the 2018 Champions League final.

39

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Karius Empathy
Character:Karius Empathy
Religion:Karius Empathy
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.03
(0.04)
−0.06
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.01
(0.06)
0.15
(0.08)
0.07
(0.08)
0.00
0.00
7510
2.25

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.04
(0.03)
0.05
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
8040
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.04∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.05
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.00
0.00
7758
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.06
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7563
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-25: Interacting the character/religion treatments with an indicator for empathy with Karius.
Respondents are coded as empathetic with Karius if they did not agree with the criticism that Karius
received after following the 2018 Champions League final.

40

(Intercept)
Character
Religion
Karius Empathy
Character:Karius Empathy
Religion:Karius Empathy
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.03
(0.04)
−0.06
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.01
(0.06)
0.15
(0.08)
0.07
(0.08)
0.00
0.00
7510
2.25

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.04
(0.03)
0.05
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
8040
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.18∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.04∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.05
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.00
0.00
7758
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.03
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.03)
0.06
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
7563
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-26: Interacting the success/failure treatments with an indicator for empathy with Karius. Respondents are coded as empathetic with Karius if they did not agree with the criticism that Karius
received after following the 2018 Champions League final.

Constant
Day After Victory
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.00
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.05)
0.00
-0.00
3022
2.27

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
3243
1.12

Islam Compatible
0.20∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
3113
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.47∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
3037
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-27: Relationship between victory and outcomes. This compares responses on the day after a
Liverpool victory with responses on the day before a Liverpool victory).

41

Constant
Day After Victory
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
0.01
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.04)
0.00
-0.00
7515
2.26

Muslims Common
0.57∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
8060
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.20∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
7771
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.01)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
7571
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-28: Relationship between victory and outcomes. This compares responses on the day after a
Liverpool victory with responses on all other days.

Constant
Day After Salah Scores
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.05)
0.00
-0.00
2587
2.26

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
2774
1.11

Islam Compatible
0.19∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.00
0.00
2665
0.89

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.03)
0.00
-0.00
2602
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-29: Relationship between victory and outcomes. This compares responses on the day after
Salah scored with responses on the day before Salah scored.

Constant
Day After Salah Scores
R2
Adj. R2
Num. obs.
RMSE
∗∗∗

PC Outcome
−0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.05)
0.00
-0.00
3080
2.26

Muslims Common
0.56∗∗∗
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
3303
1.12

Islam Compatible
0.20∗∗∗
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
3171
0.90

Immigrant Impact
0.46∗∗∗
(0.02)
−0.00
(0.02)
0.00
-0.00
3095
1.12

p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05

Table A-30: Relationship between victory and outcomes. This compares responses on the day after
Salah scored with responses on all other days.

42

