United in Diversity?
An Empirical Investigation on Europe’s Regional Social Capital
Fabian Braesemanna,∗, Fabian Stephanyb,∗
a Oxford Internet Institute - University of Oxford,
fabian.braesemann@oii.ox.ac.uk, ORCID-ID: 0000-0002-7671-1920
b Vienna University of Economics and Business,
fabian.stephany@wu.ac.at, ORCID-ID: 0000-0002-0713-6010

Abstract
Purpose: Aiming to explain the European divide with respect to social and political values,
scholars in the past have relied on a simplified four- (or even two-) dimensional regime model which
tranches the continent according to the social capacities of its inhabitants. This "cartography" of
"Social Europe" proves to be outdated by the results presented in this study which re-measures
the social capital landscape in Europe.
Approach: In this work, we apply a factor analysis model to the most commonly used approximations of social capital on the European Social Survey. In addition, we explore, as a novelty
in social capital literature, a classification tree to model generalized trust.
Findings: The analysis shows that three distinct dimensions of social capital measures are
important in Europe: additionally to generalised social capital, which is usually approximated
by generalised trust, there is one dimension of civic engagement and one of communitarian values. This distinction leads to a new social landscape of Europe, which highlights the relevance of
considering regional and cross-border clusters in all relevant social capital dimensions.The results
of the non-parametric model reveal that Protestantism and education are good benchmarks to
classify trust on an individual level. Based on these findings we argue for the necessity of policies
with a regional focus that take the different sub-national structures of social capacity in Europe
into account.
Originality: We re-measure the European Social Capital landscape using current data and
provide a novel non-parametrical statistical method from data science for this purpose.
JEL classification: C 33, C 38, D 70, Z 13
Keywords: classification trees, factor analysis, social capital, multi-level modeling

1. Introduction
In 2016, the European Union stands divided. Never before, in its 65 years-old history, the Community had to face internal dissonance on as many issues as today. Most prominently, debates
on the support for refugees, the economic shelter for member states in crisis, and the stagnant
integration process, reveal the discrepancies between Europeans. The heated disputes have polarised and given rise to various anti-European movements in many member states. The virtues
∗ Both

authors contributed equally to this work.

of the European citizen; solidarity, community and civicism, are in question. In explaining the
European divide, scholars in the past have relied on a simplified four- (or even two-) dimensional
regime model which tranches the continent according to the social capacities of its inhabitants.1
This "cartography" of "Social Europe" proves to be outdated by the presented findings. Our
work creates a regional multifaceted topography of the European landscape of social values with
two major novelties to the existing body of literature. First, in order to understand where the
European divergence in social capacities originates, researchers have started to rely on the concept
of social capital.2 However, in the past, the definition of social capital, its empirical measurement
and its relation to civicism, are dominated by rotating theoretical and often highhanded assumptions. The presented work leaves theoretical arbitrariness aside and succeeds with a data-driven
measurement of social capital using factor analysis and an ample selection of social indicators.
Secondly, a regional perspective is imperative in a contextual analysis of Europe which is threatened by tendencies towards more political fragmentation; for instance shown by the pursuits for
independence of Scotland and Catalonia. The geographical context of the presented work, unlike
previous investigations, focuses therefore on sub-national levels. It examines the social capacities
and opinions of 38,447 Europeans from 316 regions in 26 countries in a hierarchical three-level
model on European Social Survey (ESS) data.

2. Literature Review
One of the most prominent concepts used to assess social capabilities of individuals and societies
is that of social capital. Therefore, the same conceptualization is employed in this study to evaluate
the differences in social capacity between European regions. However, while this contribution can
be classified as part of the social capital research programme, it differs in two important points
from many other articles published in this research branch: first, instead of developing empirical
measurements based on one or the other theory of social capital, a strictly empirical approach
defines the different dimensions of social capital in this work. In doing so, all measures that
potentially indicate social capacities and that are part of the European Social Survey have been
included in the empirical analysis.
Secondly, with respect to social capital in Europe, this work does not stick to the concept
1 For instance (Van Oorschot and Arts, 2005), (Van Oorschot et al., 2006) categorise Europe into four welfare
regimes and (Kaasa and Parts, 2008) and (Parts, 2013) compare only Western to Eastern European countries.
2 The concept was first introduced by (Bourdieu, 1986), (Coleman, 1988) and (Putnam, 1995). More on the
different conceptualizations in section 2.

2

of welfare regimes (Esping-Andersen, 1990) which has been used to classify European regions
into specific categories according to supposed differences in the structure of their social systems.
Instead, this study investigates differences of social capital in Europe on a sub-national, national
and cross-national level. This more flexible approach allows to reveal cross-border clusters of
social capital and center-periphery structures within countries that could not be detected with
data aggregated on a national level.3 Based on these findings we argue for the necessity of policies
with a regional focus that take the different sub-national structures of social capacity in Europe
into account.
Besides this policy recommendation, a main reason for our study is to close the gap left open in
the literature on social capital in Europe. While there exists more literature on empirical indicators
of social capital than could be listed here, most of them stress only a few specific elements of the
concept. The focus on some aspects of the multidimensional social capital construct, on the
contrary, is due to the fuzzy definition of the concept which is itself a long-debated issue.
Beginning with the work by Pierre Bourdieu (Bourdieu, 1986), James Coleman (Coleman,
1988) and Robert Putnam (Putnam et al., 1993), (Putnam, 1995), social capital was built out
of four blocks: social norms, networks, trust and civic engagement. However, the definitions
used in these contributions were somewhat different to each other, so that they left room for
interpretation, particularly with respect to the empirical measurement of social capital (Ackermann
and Freitag, 2015). Accordingly, many subsequent studies define social capital based on one or
the other of the above-mentioned works and do not include all aspects of the multidimensional
concept. This has been of particular importance for early studies on the subject. As a result,
some scholars identified social capital with only one indicator, most prominently generalised trust.
Well-recognised examples for this are the articles by (Knack and Keefer, 1997) or (Glaeser et al.,
2000).4
Others understood social capital as a multidimensional phenomenon that could not easily
be captured by only one measure. This has lead to a discussion on the multidimensionality
on a more theoretical basis: for example (Brehm and Rahn, 1997) define social capital as the
interplay between interpersonal trust, civic engagement and confidence in government. (Lin,
3 This is in accordance with the result that social capital is a regional phenomenon, see for instance (Beugelsdijk
and Van Schaik, 2005) or (Pichler and Wallace, 2007).
4 There are many more recent studies focusing on the socioeconomic role of trust, e. g. (Stephany, 2019; Testa
and Stephany, 2017) or (Freitag and Bauer, 2013). However, in contrast to earlier contributions, these studies do
not claim a specific relation between trust and social capital and avoid to use the term "social capital" in order to
get around conceptual discussions.

3

1999) emphasises the interpersonal network component of social capital, while (La Due Lake and
Huckfeldt, 1998, p. 567) consider it as a "by-product of the social interactions" and focus on its
role for political participation and (Adler and Kwon, 2002) describe social capital as a valuable
resource of goodwill (sympathy, trust, forgiveness) offered to a person by others. As a consequence
of these widespread interpretations, some scholars provide deep reflections on the commonalities
and differences of the various definitions in order to identify the common roots of the concept,
e. g. (Dasgupta and Serageldin, 2001), (Stephany et al., 2017) and (Fine, 2001).
However, these contributions could also not eventually decide on one single definition of social
capital. As a consequence, some scholars started to criticise the very concept of social capital
as being to fuzzy to use it in explaining socioeconomic phenomena, for instance (Durlauf, 1999),
(Sobel, 2002), (Bowles, 1999) and (Paldam, 2000).
Independently of these conceptual criticisms, the number of articles that apply empirical social capital measures increased substantially in the meantime. Common to the many different
contributions is their focus on the four main dimensions of social norms, trust, networks and
civicism. These aspects have been investigated in different combinations in numerous empirical
studies that try to capture the effect of social capital on some socioeconomic outcome: inter alia
(Dakhli and De Clercq, 2004) investigate the effect of trust, civic activity and norms on innovation(Stephany et al., 2019; Stephany and Braesemann, 2017). (Edwards et al., 2015) analyse
the effect of social capital (measured by civic engagement) on the social impact of voluntary organizations. (Schneider, 2009) examines the role of organizational social capital (measured by
trust, norms and networks) in non-profit organizations. (Stephany, 2017) highlights the relation
between trust, civic engagement and economic inequality and (Gesthuizen et al., 2009) inspect the
link between social capital (trust, participation in voluntary organizations, social interaction) and
ethnic fragmentation.
The trend to investigate the socioeconomic effect of some part of the multidimensional social
capital concept continues also in more recent studies with respect to online-social capital: examples
are (Williams, 2006), (Valenzuela et al., 2009), (Mandarano et al., 2010), (Gil de Zúñiga et al.,
2012) and (Ellison et al., 2014).
Another related branch of social capital research considers the "dark side of social capital"
which means the negative outcomes of specific forms of particularised trust, and small homogeneous
networks (van Deth and Zmerli, 2010). This is often related to differences in Europe: for instance
(Pichler and Wallace, 2007) consider the structures of formal and informal social capital and

4

(Paldam and Svendsen, 2000) emphasise missing social capital in Post-communist countries.
As mentioned above, it is common to all these contributions that they refer to some specific
theoretical presumption of what social capital is and how it could be measured empirically. This
approach, however, leaves those aspects of social capacity aside which do not fit to the specific
definition. Accordingly, social capital in this kind of studies is often approximated by only very
few measurements and their relation to each other is justified on a theoretical basis. As a consequence of this theory-based restriction of empirical indicators, interrelations between various
measurements that could allow to reveal the very multidimensional character of social capital are,
thus, significantly limited if not ruled out.
Therefore, some scholars started to incorporate methods of statistical clustering, in particular
factor analysis, to empirically assess the interrelation of the various indicators. Examples for those
studies with a focus on Europe are (Kaasa and Parts, 2008) and (Parts, 2013) on the differences
between Eastern and Western European countries, (Franzen and Pointner, 2007) and (Freitag and
Traunmüller, 2008) on sub-national social capital differences in Germany and Switzerland and
(Freitag and Kirchner, 2011), (Van Oorschot and Arts, 2005), (Van Oorschot et al., 2006) on the
empirical measurement of social capital in Europe.
Only the latter group of researchers attempts to capture the empirical relation between different
social capital indicators. However, even if the factor analysis makes it possible to assess the
relation between the indicators, the pre-selection of variables that serve as indicators determines
the results. Accordingly, some of the studies that apply factor analysis are still mainly driven
by theoretically driven classification of social capital indicators. For example (Parts, 2013) and
(Kaasa and Parts, 2008) use only very few variables that are presumed to capture the different
social capital dimensions and ex-post check the association between them by a factor analysis.
Similarly (Freitag and Kirchner, 2011) construct a social capital indicator building on a factor
analysis including only four variables.
The studies (Van Oorschot and Arts, 2005) and (Van Oorschot et al., 2006) include many
more variables in the factor analysis and thus attempt to empirically assess the different social
capital dimensions in Europe. However, while they concentrate on cross-national differences of
social capital, they miss to account for regional disparities and do not consequently apply the data
driven approach of measuring the social capital dimensions. Rather than composing social capital
indicators out of the many different variables the authors take into account, they use the factor
analysis only as a confirmation for the variable selection that has been done a priori.

5

Closer to our approach is the study by (Onyx and Bullen, 2000). The authors investigate local
disparities in social capital with a questionnaire containing 68 potential social capital indicators of
1,200 individuals in five Australian communities. The factor analysis applied identifies 36 variables
of the all potential indicators grouped into eight factors as important in explaining the overall
variation. From these factors, which are mainly related social activities and interpersonal networks,
one general social capital factor is derived. The results of the factor analysis are compared in
the subsets of the five communities where the questionnaires were collected. Differences in the
responses between rural and metropolitan regions lead the authors to the conclusion that the
distinction between bonding and bridging social capital needs to be emphasised.
Our study combines the different approaches made by the contributions mentioned so far.
Following (Onyx and Bullen, 2000), we hypothesise that there is a conceptual relation between
numerous different social capital measures that can be revealed by empirical clustering. In this
interpretation, social capital is a multifaceted phenomenon with different indicators linked to each
other but not being the same.
Besides that, continuing the work done by Van Oorshort, Freitag and others, we use the social
capital factors to illustrate the social topography of Europe. However, in contrast to studies
that stick to a national or simplified cross-national perspective, we assert that social capital is
a regional phenomenon with clusters on regional, national and cross-national level in Europe.
Recognizing this small-scale structure of social capital could be a key of designing better policies
that acknowledge the different social capabilities in the European regions and thus lead to more
acceptance.

3. Data and Methods
Our analysis is based on data from the 6th (2012) and 7th (2014) wave of the European
Social Survey. This multi-country survey consists of data of more than 54,000 individuals from 34
countries. It contains more than 620 variables for all these individuals. Besides many demographic
and economic variables, there are also many questions included in the survey that assess social and
political values, so that the data fits very well to collect many different social capital indicators.
In order to include as many variables and observations as possible, we decide to merge the 6th
and the 7th wave of the ESS.5 While we try to include all variables that are potentially relevant
5 Additionally, we perform the analysis separately for both waves which does not affect the results significantly.
This is also true for different variable-country combinations for which we conducted the factor analysis as a robustness check.

6

for the social capacities of Europeans, it turns out that the variable selection entails an important
trade-off. In order to provide the most relevant data, the inclusion of the current wave of the
ESS appears promising. However, while there are a couple of important survey questions asked
only in wave seven, the data has been available only for very few European countries at the time
of conducting the analysis. Therefore we decide to join the data with the 2012 edition of the
ESS which leads to significantly more observations. Additionally we further have to restrict the
number of variables in order to not lose too many relevant European regions, since not every
survey question has been asked in all countries. Finally we end up with a data set consisting of
38,447 individuals in 316 regions of 26 European countries.
TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE
In sum, we can identify 26 variables that are potential indicators of social capital. These
are displayed in table 1.6 Note that we do not pre-classified the variables; the four categorical
variable-labels (p, c, g and n) are already the result of the empirical clustering. Some of the
variables describe certain actions done by individuals (e. g. the question whether one worked for
some kind of organization or association in the last 12 months), others are more closely related to
interpersonal networks (e. g. the question whether one meets often with colleagues or friends), a
third category is about social values (like the question whether it is important for an individual
to understand different people) and a fourth type of questions is about trust. Thus, the different
questions capture all categories of social capital that are discussed in the literature.
Factor Analysis
The method of empirical clustering applied in this study is a factor analysis, as outlined in
section 2, a frequently used approach in the context of social capital. This is a method used to
explain the variability among a set of potentially correlated variables with the expression of a
smaller number of measures, called factors. In our example, it can be assumed that the variations
of the various measures of social capital mainly reflect the variation of some or even only one
unobserved variable. What factor analysis does is that it looks for joint variations in response to
unobserved latent variables, while the potential factors are modelled as linear combinations of the
observed measures.7
6 All

figures and tables can be found in the appendix starting on page 25.
are a couple of different methods used in factor analysis. Maximum-likelihood-estimators have been
established as main methods to determine the factors after development of stable algorithms by Karl Gustav
JËĘreskog and others.
7 There

7

Each observable variable contributes to the linear combination with a weight, the so called
factor loading. The interdependencies of observed variables can be used to reduce the set of
measures to a couple of even only one common factor. Technically, a factor analysis is similar to
a low-rank approximation of the matrix of observable variables.
FIGURES 1 AND 3 ABOUT HERE
In a first step, several possible factors, with different factor loadings, are compared by their
eigenvalue. The Kaiser criterion in factor analysis recommends to use only factors with an eigenvalue of higher than one. The eigenvalues of the initial set of factors suggested in our example are
displayed in a so called screeplot, see figure 1. Accordingly, three factors are taken into consideration. The high eigenvalue of factor one already exhibits that this factor, as a linear combination
of the underlying measures, explains to a large extent the overall variation of the social capital
measures.
FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE
In a second step, in order to distribute the factor loadings of each variable more distinctively
among the three factors and thereby identify each variable more precisely with one factor, a
varimax rotation method is applied. This method is an orthogonal rotation of the factor axes, in
order to maximise the variance of the squared loadings of a factor on all variables in a factor matrix
(Russell, 2002). Each factor will either show small or large loadings with one variable. Figure 2
explains the procedure in a simplyfied way. The results of the factor analysis are presented in
section 4.
Multi-Level Analysis
In order to investigate the individual and regional characteristics that are the important determinants of the three social capital factors, we apply multiple three-level hierarchical linear models
(HLM) with the three factors as dependent variables and individual and regional covariates as
independent variables. This approach is imperative, since the data is nested with respect to three
levels: the questionnaire is based on individual level data, but the social capital theory outlined
in the literature review suggests that regional and cross-national characteristics play also an important role for the level of individual social capital. The inclusion of regional and cross-national
characteristics implies the application of multi-level model. Therefore, the HLM applied consists
of an individual, a regional and a cross-national level.
8

This way of modeling allows for different slopes and intercepts of the individuals in the regression equation and thus corrects for errors that could occur if the higher-level clustering of the
individuals was ignored. Thus, we avoid biased results that could occur if we were to apply a
simple multiple regression, as it is occasionally done in the social capital literature.8 In the model
presented in this study we incorporate the same individual covariates as for example (Van Oorschot
et al., 2006), but with the introduction of regional characteristics (GDP per capita and share of
people without paid work) and the application of an HLM we extend the literature also from a
methodological point of view.

8 For

more information about multi-level modeling see for instance (Woltman et al., 2012) or (Buxton, 2008).

9

4. Results
Empirical Relation between the Social Capital Indicators
The factor analysis illustrated in figure 1 and 3 shows that there are three latent factors which
capture most of the variation of the 26 social capital indicators that are part of the ESS. Interestingly, the variables with the highest weight for the distinct factors have high conceptual
similarities. While the variables that are highly weighted with respect to factor 1 involve questions about civic participation and political engagement (e. g. "Involved in work for voluntary or
charitable organizations in the last 12 months"), the variables that determine factor 2 are very
closely related to each other and refer to statements about the society in general (e. g. "Generally
speaking, most people can be trusted") and the variables with the highest loading on factor 3 are
entirely related to the local community (e. g. "People in the local area help one another").
Due to these conceptual commonalities between the three factors we label them according to
those social capital dimensions they represent most closely. Since factor 1 is mainly about civic
participation, it can be labeled civic social capital or civicism. Factor 2 involves variables with a
general focus and can therefore be marked as generalised social capital. And since factor 3 consists
essentially of variables about the local community, the term communitarian social capital best
describes this factor.
TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE
The extent to which the factors are related to each other can easily be assessed with a look on
the correlations between them, displayed in table 2. There is a positive correlation between factor
1 (civicism) and factor 2 (generalised social capital) and a negative correlation between factor 2
and factor 3 (communitarian social capital). The correlation between civicism and communitarian
social capital is not significant. What does this tell us? First, people with a higher level of
generalised social capital tend to be more engaged in the society. Secondly, those with a stronger
focus on their local community tend to have a lower level of generalised social capital. Thirdly,
the extend to which someone is politically or civically engaged does not necessarily depend the
level of communitarian social capital.
While the three factors together capture much of the overall variation of all the variables, each
single variable measures only a specific dimension of social capital. That means it is not appropriate
to select one or the other variable arbitrarily to construct a common social capital indicator, but
such a selection should be done carefully with respect to the aspect of social capital one wants to

10

approximate with the chosen variable. We illustrate this with factor 2 as an example: the three
variables with the highest loading on factor 2 are plotted so closely within the 3D-scatterplot that
it is hard to distinguish them. That means that they capture more or less the same information
- all three variable have a very high loading on factor 2 and very low weight on the other two
factors. This is different for the variables of factor 3. There is much more variation within this
group of variables; for example c1 ("Feel people in local area help one another") is similar to other
questions within the cluster but shows also some loading on factor 2. In contrast, the variables
with a high loading on factor 1 are relatively closer related to each other than to the other factors.
Furthermore, other variables take only a relatively low weight with respect to all three factors.
This indicates that these variables do not explain much of the overall variation. This is particularly interesting, since some of these variables have been used in the social capital literature to
capture certain dimensions of social capital. For example (Freitag and Kirchner, 2011) use the
questions "How often do you meet socially with friends, relatives or work colleagues?" (ESS-code:
sclmeet) and "Compared to other people of your age, how often would you say you take part in
social activities?" (ESS-code: sclact) as two out of four main determining variables of a common
social capital indicator. The other two components of social capital used in that study - "Have
you been involved in the work for voluntary or charitable organizations in the last 12 months?"
(ESS-code: wkvlorg) and "How often do you actively provide help for other people?" - could be
associated to the dimension of social capital that is captured by factor 1 in the study presented
here. This comparison implies, that the common social capital factor constructed in the (Freitag
and Kirchner, 2011) article captures only one particular dimension of social capital, while it ignores
other important aspects of the concept.
Hence, the presented data driven approach applied is advantageous, since it reveals the actual
empirical relation between all accessible social capital indicators. In doing so, it includes all
available information about the social capacities of the individuals and is interestingly very closely
related to the different dimensions of social capital that have been defined on a theoretical basis
in earlier contributions.
The Social Topography of Europe
The most interesting feature of the data driven clustering becomes apparent, when regional
differences of the factors are considered.
FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE

11

Figure 4 displays the average values of the three factor for the 316 European regions that
are part of the data set. For illustration, for each country a characteristic region is labeled with
country code and the data points are colored according to the geographic cluster the countries
belong to, respectively the welfare regime, see (Van Oorschot and Arts, 2005). Interestingly, there
is a significant variation with respect to all three factors. This is particularly remarkable, since
the factor analysis has been solely performed with individual-level data of the social actions and
values, without considering any geographic information of the individuals. This result supports
the assertion made in the previous section that inferential models used to explain social capital
in Europe necessarily have to consider the multi-level grouping of individuals into regions and
country-clusters.
Whereas the figure shows that there is much within-cluster variation in all four country-clusters,
there are obviously significant differences between the clusters. The largest differences exist with
respect to generalised social capital. The regions of the northern European countries form a
particular cluster that is totally distinct from eastern European regions. The western and southern
European regions show moderate levels of generalised social capital but exhibit much variation.
A similar pattern can be observed for the factor civic social capital. However, when considering
communitarian social capital, the situation changes significantly: Eastern European regions have
the highest levels of communitarian social capital with a huge within-cluster variation and the
other European regions exhibit on average only moderate levels of communitarian social capital.
FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE
Obviously there are tremendous differences not only with respect to the different dimensions
of social capital on an individual level, but also with respect to different aggregates on regional,
national and cross-national level. To highlight the extent of geographical variation, boxplots for
all 26 countries are displayed in figure 5.
TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE
In figure 5 the three factors are considered separately. Each boxplot represents a country
ordered by cross-country cluster and the units of observation are the regional average values for
each factor in all the 316 regions. The comparison between the cross-country clusters and the
countries on the one hand and that between the different factors within one country on the other
hand reveal the large differences with respect to the level of social capital and its variation.9 To
9 Since

some countries, like cyprus, consist only of very few or even only one factor, the variation of these countries

12

facilitate the interpretation of the information captured in figure 5, consider table 3 which provides
some examples for the different levels of regional clustering.
As mentioned in the introduction, the geographic variation of the social capital factors suggests
that a simplified two- or four-dimensional cartography is not appropriate to describe the social capacities in Europe. Instead, table 3 provides illustrative examples for different dimensions of social
capital in Europe. To describe the geographical dimension, at least three different level seem to
be appropriate. First, there are some cross-national regions with very similar levels of a particular
social capital factor that allow to group them into a cross-national cluster or regimes. Examples
for this are the Eastern European countries for civicism and the Northern European countries
for general and communitarian social capital. In all three cases the within-cluster variation (the
horizontal difference between the region with the lowest value for the respective factor and that
with the highest value) is relatively low. Compare for instance the closeness with respect to civic
social capital of the Eastern European regions: the difference between the region with the lowest
value (-0.65 Udena in Lithuania) and the region with the highest value in this cluster (0.04 Durrës
in Albania) is only 0.69 - much smaller than the variation of the same factor in the other regions.
The same is true for the northern European regions with respect to the other two factors.10
Secondly, some countries show such small within-country variation that the could be considered
as consistent entity in a particular social capital dimension, but not in other dimensions. A good
example for this is Belgium: while the within-country variation of factor 1 and factor 3 is very
small there is much variation with respect to factor 2.11
Thirdly, there are some countries with such a high level of within-country variation on specific
factors that a regional perspective on its social capacities appears more appropriate than considering the country as a single social entity. Examples are Italy for all three factors, Sweden on
factor 1 and Bulgaria on factor 2 and 3.12
FIGURES 6 to 8 ABOUT HERE
The maps displayed in figure 6 to 8 illustrate the differences in Europe more clearly. Similarly

is very small.
10 The difference between the lowest value region of factor 2 in Northern Europe (Skåne County in Sweden with
0.33) and the highest (Midtjylland in Denmark with 0.81) is only 0.48. With respect to factor 3 the difference in
the northern regions sums up to only 0.55 (Finnish Ostrobothnia with -0.37 compared to Danish Nordjylland with
0.18).
11 The difference between the lowest and the highest value on factor 1 sums up to 0.31 while it is 0.67 on factor
2 and 0.28 on factor 3.
12 Differences in Italy: 0.78 on factor 1, 1.19 on factor 2 and 0.74 on factor 3; Sweden: 0.69 on factor 1; Bulgaria:
0.79 on factor 2 and 1,23 on factor 3.

13

to results provided in other studies about trust or social capital we observe a north-south and
a west-east divide in Europe. However, this is only the case for civic and general social capital,
but not for communitarian social capital. Additionally, the regional perspective allows to identify
within-country variations and cross-country clusters. For instance, consider figure 7: without
knowing which regions belongs to which country it would be hard to distinguish Sweden from
Norway or the central-eastern European countries Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary
based on the average level of general social capital. At this place it is worth mentioning again
that the substantial geographic differences of the social capacities in Europe presented in these
figures are the result of an empirical clustering based solely on individual-level data. Thus, the
differences can be interpreted as the result of inherent traits of the regions, countries and crossnational clusters that need to be considered and understood when European policies should be
implemented successfully.
A First Step to Explain the Social Divide in Europe
While the main focus of this paper is to introduce a truly empirical approach to measure the
social capacities in Europe and thus provide descriptive results on the divide in social values,
actions and attitudes, this section undertakes a first step in explaining the observed differences by
providing inferential hierarchical multi-level models on the ESS-data.
TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE
Table 4 summarises the results of the three models separated by social capital dimension.
These models build on the studies (Van Oorschot and Arts, 2005) and (Van Oorschot et al., 2006)
that try to explain different social capital dimensions by individual, national and cross-national
characteristics. In particular, the same individual covariates are included: age, gender, education,
employment status, religion and political stance. As mentioned in the methodology section of
this study, the models presented here are multi-level models that allow for different intercepts and
slopes of the individuals who belong to different groups (i. e. regions and cross-country clusters).
As a consequence, these models capture the hierarchical grouping of the individuals and thus
provide unbiased estimates for the effect of the individual-level determinants of social capital.
Additionally and in contrast to earlier contributions, the models assess the quantitative effect of
regional characteristics (measured by regional GDP and the percentage of the regional population
without paid work) and the cross-national regime (indicated by dummy variables).13
13 Note

that, to increase readability, only the significant results are displayed in table 4.

14

Some of the individual characteristics effect all social capital dimensions similarly. For example,
unemployed or sick individuals tend to have lower values on social capital, while the membership
in the Protestant church can be associated with higher levels of social capital. In contrast, many
of the individual characteristics affect the three social capital dimensions differently, which makes
it possible to describe the factors more precisely in relation to the demographic variables. Recall
that factor 1 clusters those variables that can be associated with civic participation, while factor
2 mainly reflects trust in the society and factor 3 is related to the local community or traditions.
Against this background, most of the individual covariates have an intuitive effect on the
different social capital dimensions. Higher civic social capital is positively correlated with age,
higher education, student status and membership in a Protestant church. In contrast, people who
do not actively take part in the society (i. e. retired, sick or people responsible for housework)
or those with a rather conservative political stance have on average a lower level of civic social
capital.
Similarly, generalised social capital is positively associated with education and student status
and, different to factor 1, also by a rather right political stance. In contrast, communitarian social
capital is driven positively by religion and a more conservative world view, while education is not
important. This result is in accordance with the interpretation of communitarian social capital as
those values that are more oriented on traditions and rather independent of education.
Interestingly, the cross-country dummies are not significant for factor 3, while they are highly
significant for the other two factors. This result confirms the descriptive observations made earlier
about the social topography of Europe. In addition, note that the regional covariates are also only
partially important in the models.

5. Classification Techniques in Social Capital Research
This section complements the previous investigation with a non-parametric approach. This
shall serve as an example of the application of non-parametric statistics not only to social capital
research, but likewise to many other fields in empirical social science. More and more, nonparametric statistical techniques from data science and machine learning are starting to find
application in social science. In most cases, classification techniques are tested as an alternative
approach to frequentest statistical estimations. One of the most commonly considered classification
techniques are Classification and Regression Trees (CART). While CART is an umbrella term for
two types of decision trees, the distinction between classification trees and regression trees is made

15

on the basis of the nature of the predicted outcome. Classification trees predict an outcome, which
can be put in a specific class, e.g., male/female or survived/died, while regression trees consider
numbers with a real meaning as an outcome, such as house prices or number of children.
About CARTs
For this example, we present a single binary target feature, called the classification and several
input features with discrete domains (similar to (Abel et al., 2019). Each element of the domain
of the classification is called a class. In a classification tree each internal (non-leaf) node is labeled
with an input feature. The arcs of each node marked with an input feature are either labeled with
one of the possible values of the target feature or otherwise the arc leads to a subordinate decision
node on a different input feature. Each leaf of the tree is labeled with a class or a probability
distribution over the classes. At each subordinate node only a subsample of the original population
is considered, the population had been divided in two groups according to the splitting criterion
of the last input feature.
The Titanic dataset, a digital copy of the registration notebook of passengers of the Titanic,
has been a very popular open-source training dataset in the data science community. As illustrated
in figure 9, it has been used for the application of CARTs predicting the probability of survival.
FIGURE 9 ABOUT HERE
The goal of a CART is to create a model that predicts the value of the target feature based
on several input variables. As a rule for the decision which input feature to consider for the next
splitting decision tree algorithm typically consults a measure of data purity of the target feature.
If a continuous input feature is chosen, the cut-off value for the feature is likewise determined by
the data purity measure. One of the most commonly measures of data purity is the Gini impurity
index. Simply put, the Gini impurity ranges from 0 to 0.5. For a binary target feature, a Gini
of 0.5 indicates that by picking an observation from the original sample at random could in 50
percent of the cases result in one ore the other outcome. A Gini of 0 implies that a population
only contains one type of outcome, the data are perfectly pure. Figure 2, illustrates this example
with a binary target feature (triangles or circles) on a two-dimensional discrete parameter space
x and y. The two-node decision tree shows a truncation of the sample in x and y dimension with
four resulting subsamples of perfect data purity.
The goal of a CART is to create a model that predicts the value of the target feature based
on several input variables. As a rule for the decision which input feature to consider for the next
16

splitting decision tree algorithm typically consults a measure of data purity of the target feature.
If a continuous input feature is chosen, the cut-off value for the feature is likewise determined by
the data purity measure. One of the most commonly measures of data purity is the Gini impurity
index. Simply put, the Gini impurity ranges from 0 to 0.5. For a binary target feature, a Gini
of 0.5 indicates that by picking an observation from the original sample at random could in 50
percent of the cases result in one ore the other outcome. A Gini of 0 implies that a population
only contains one type of outcome, the data are perfectly pure. Figure10, illustrates this example
with a binary target feature (triangles or circles) on a two-dimensional discrete parameter space
x and y. The two-node decision tree shows a truncation of the sample in x and y dimension with
four resulting subsamples of perfect data purity.
FIGURE 10 ABOUT HERE
Classifying Generalized Trust
The target feature in our example is generalized trust. The feature is constructed in a binary
fashion summing all individuals with reported values from 0 to 5 under 0 and all individuals
who reported a value of six and higher under 1. The initial sample of 36,365 individuals has a
distribution of 52 percent with low and and 48 percent with high levels of generalized trust. The
feature set is chosen accordingly to the characteristics in the previous multilevel model. Macrolevel features are not taken into consideration. Figure 11 illustrates the results of the classification
algorithm.
FIGURE 11 ABOUT HERE
The first splitting feature is education (the arrow to the left always leads to a subsample for
which the splitting criterion is true). The original sample is split in two subsamples, those with an
educational attainment below ISCED 5 (67.9 percent) and those with a higher level of education
(32.1 percent). For the ladder subsample the next splitting criterion is whether the individual
belongs to a non-protestant religion. After selecting all individuals, who are of Protestant religion
and have a high level of education, the first terminal node is reached. No other feature could
yield better data purity when applied as a splitting criterion. This first terminal node also has
the lowest Gini and the highest proportion of individuals with high levels of trust (75 percent).
On the other hand, following the ISECD 5 splitting criterion to the very left of the three, one
begins a branch of the decision tree that ultimately leads to the node with the lowest share of

17

individuals with high trust values (second node from the left in the sixth row). This subsample
contains individuals, who 1) have an educational attainment below higher tertiary education (<
ISCED 5), 2) are no Protestants, 3) state a specific religion, 4) have at maximum higher secondary
education (< ISCED 3), and 5) and are older than 21 years. Of the remaining 11.7 percent of the
original sample (4,255), 71 percent (3,021 individuals) reported trust levels of 5 and lower.
Even though the presented case is just an example of how classification algorithms can be
applied to social capital research, it confirms the findings of the parametric multilevel model. Education and religion, most pronouncedly protestantism, are strongly related to levels of generalized
trust. However, unlike the previous model, the classification approach reveals that employment
and political opinions are of little additional significance.

6. Policy Implications and Conclusion
What can be learned from the descriptive and inferential results presented in this study?
First, social capital provides a theoretical framework to capture the differences in social capacity
in Europe. This concept has been of interest to sociologists, political scientists and economists for
the last decades and was used to explain many different socio-economic phenomena. However, it
has often been defined somehow arbitrarily and was therefore prone to the severe criticism that
the concept is not able to explain anything if it builds on such a weak definition that it can be
used to explain everything. As an empirical answer on this critique and in continuing studies that
went into this direction, we provide a solely data-driven approach to measure social capital with
European Social Survey data.
Secondly, this approach allows to empirically cluster all variables about social norms, values,
attitudes and participation in the ESS into three distinct categories. The resulting categories show
strong conceptual similarities which allow to label the groups as civic, generalised and communitarian social capital. This empirical result supports the arguments of those scholars who are
in favor of the multidimensional character of social capital. Moreover, the empirical and conceptual proximity of the variables clustered in each factor shows that there are important relations
between the different indicators of social capital that should not be ignored. Otherwise it could
happen that one inadvertently captures only one specific dimension of social capital if the chosen
questions are too closely related to one aspect of the overall concept.
Thirdly, the empirical classification of social capital clearly captures the regional disparities in
Europe with respect to social capacity. Even if we control for numerous individual and regional

18

covariates, the spatial clusters in Europe play an important role in explaining the individual level
of social capital in all its dimensions. Furthermore, the regional averages of the three social
capital factors are highly volatile and clustered not only on national, but also on regional and
cross-national level.
Why are these results important? The results suggest that the spatial pattern of social capital
is more complex than described in earlier studies. If one wants to map the social cartography of
Europe, it is not enough to stick to a simplified two- or four-dimensional classification of countries
into larger groups or welfare regimes. Instead, it is important to appreciate the regional and
border-crossing structure of social values, norms and actions. This is even more essential in the
face of major disputes in the European Union against the background of debates about refugees and
financial crisis. If policies with a potential influence on all European societies should be successful,
they need to take a regional perspective on the social capacities of the population in the different
countries. Social norms and values differ substantially not only between countries, but also within
them. Center-periphery structures are pronounced not only between old and new member states
of the European Union, but also within countries like Sweden. This regional spatial structure
has been considered in other areas like European environmental policy (Lenschow, 2002), regional
economic cohesion (Clarysse and Muldur, 2001) or innovation policy (Tödtling and Trippl, 2005)
and it needs to be considered also with respect to social capacity in Europe.
This article provides an overview of the social topography in Europe and sketches possible
determinants that might be important to explain the European social landscape. However, it is
only one step in this direction. Further research aiming to explain the social differences in Europe
could employ spatial econometric models to investigate the cross-regional social interdependencies.
Additionally, more qualitative research could delve deeper into case studies on particular regions
in order to explain why some regions exhibit a particularly important socio-geographic clustering
and others do not. Since this study is concentrated on the ESS and took the survey questions as
they are, it could also be of interest to compare different surveys in Europe on the same research
question. Moreover, from a methodological point of view, it could be worthwhile to compare
different statistical clustering methods and further examine the benefit of applying hierarchical
linear models for social capital research.

19

References
Abel, G., Muttarak, R., Stephany, F., 2019. Learning about internal migration from half a billion
records - applying localized classification trees to large-scale census data. Journal of official
statistics.
Ackermann, K., Freitag, M., 2015. Social Capital in der Vergleichenden Politikwissenschaft. In:
Handbuch Vergleichende Sozialwissenschaft. Springer, Wiesbaden.
Adler, P. S., Kwon, S.-W., 2002. Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. Academy of management review 27 (1), 17–40.
Beugelsdijk, S., Van Schaik, T., 2005. Social capital and growth in European regions: an empirical
test. European Journal of Political Economy 21 (2), 301–324.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0176268004000886
Bourdieu, P., 1986. Forms of Capital. In: Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of
Education. Greenwood Press, pp. 241–260.
Bowles, S., 1999. "Social captial" and community governance. Focus 20 (3), 6–10.
Brehm, J., Rahn, W., 1997. Individual-level evidence for the causes and consequences of social
capital. American journal of political science, 999–1023.
Buxton, R., 2008. Statistics: Mulitlevel Modeling. Tech. rep., Mathematics Learning Support
Centre.
URL www.statstutor.ac.uk/resources/uploaded/multilevelmodelling.pdf
Clarysse, B., Muldur, U., 2001. Regional cohesion in Europe? An analysis of how EU public RTD
support influences the techno-economic regional landscape. Research Policy 30 (2), 275–296.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048733399001134
Coleman, J. S., 1988. Social capital in the creation of human capital. American journal of sociology,
S95–S120.
Dakhli, M., De Clercq, D., 2004. Human capital, social capital, and innovation: a multi-country
study. Entrepreneurship & regional development 16 (2), 107–128.
URL http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/08985620410001677835

20

Dasgupta, P., Serageldin, I., 2001. Social capital: a multifaceted perspective. World Bank Publications.
Durlauf, S. N., 1999. The case "against" social capital. Focus 20 (3), 1–5.
Edwards, M., Onyx, J., Maxwell, H., Darcy, S., Bullen, P., Sherker, S., 2015. A Conceptual Model
of Social Impact as Active Citizenship. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and
Nonprofit Organizations 26 (4), 1529–1549.
Ellison, N. B., Vitak, J., Gray, R., Lampe, C., 2014. Cultivating social resources on social network
sites: Facebook relationship maintenance behaviors and their role in social capital processes.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 19 (4), 855–870.
Esping-Andersen, G., 1990. The three political economies of the welfare state. International journal
of sociology 20 (3), 92–123.
Fine, B., 2001. Social capital versus social theory. Routledge.
Franzen, A., Pointner, S., 2007. Sozialkapital: Konzeptualisierungen und Messungen. Sozialkaiptal.
Grundlagen und Anwendungen, 66–89.
Freitag, M., Bauer, P. C., 2013. Testing for measurement equivalence in surveys dimensions of
social trust across cultural contexts. Public Opinion Quarterly 77 (S1), 24–44.
Freitag, M., Kirchner, A., 2011. Social Capital and Unemployment: A Macro-Quantitative Analysis of the European Regions. Political studies 59 (2), 389–410.
Freitag, M., Traunmüller, R., 2008. Sozialkapitalwelten in Deutschland. Zeitschrift für vergleichende Politikwissenschaft 2 (2), 221–256.
Gesthuizen, M., Van der Meer, T., Scheepers, P., 2009. Ethnic diversity and social capital in
Europe: tests of Putnam’s thesis in European countries. Scandinavian Political Studies 32 (2),
121–142.
Gil de Zúñiga, H., Jung, N., Valenzuela, S., 2012. Social media use for news and individuals’ social
capital, civic engagement and political participation. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 17 (3), 319–336.
Glaeser, E. L., Laibson, D. I., Scheinkman, J. A., Soutter, C. L., 2000. Measuring trust. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 811–846.
21

James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., 2013. An introduction to statistical learning.
Vol. 6. Springer.
Kaasa, A., Parts, E., 2008. Individual-level determinants of social capital in Europe differences
between country groups. Acta sociologica 51 (2), 145–168.
Knack, S., Keefer, P., 1997. Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross-country investigation. The Quarterly journal of economics, 1251–1288.
La Due Lake, R., Huckfeldt, R., 1998. Social capital, social networks, and political participation.
Political Psychology 19 (3), 567–584.
Lenschow, A., 2002. Environmental policy integration: Greening sectoral policies in Europe. Routledge.
Lin, N., 1999. Building a network theory of social capital. Connections 22 (1), 28–51.
Mandarano, L., Meenar, M., Steins, C., 2010. Building social capital in the digital age of civic
engagement. Journal of Planning Literature 25 (2), 123–135.
Onyx, J., Bullen, P., 2000. Measuring social capital in five communities. The journal of applied
behavioral science 36 (1), 23–42.
Paldam, M., 2000. Social capital: one or many? Definition and measurement. Journal of economic
surveys 14 (5), 629–653.
Paldam, M., Svendsen, G. T., 2000. Missing social capital and the transition in Eastern Europe.
Tech. rep., Department of Economics, Faculty of Business Administration, Aarhus School of
Business.
Parts, E., 2013. The dynamics and determinants of social capital in the European Union and neighbouring countries. Discussions on Estonian economic policy: Theory and practice of economic
policy in the European Union (1).
Pichler, F., Wallace, C., 2007. Patterns of formal and informal social capital in Europe. European
sociological review 23 (4), 423–435.
Putnam, R. D., 1995. Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal of democracy
6 (1), 65–78.

22

Putnam, R. D., Leonardi, R., Nanetti, R. Y., 1993. Making democracy work: Civic traditions in
modern Italy. Princeton university press.
Russell, D. W., 2002. In search of underlying dimensions: The use (and abuse) of factor analysis in
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. Personality and social psychology bulletin 28 (12),
1629–1646.
Schneider, J. A., 2009. Organizational social capital and nonprofits. Nonprofit and Voluntary
Sector Quarterly 38 (4), 643–662.
Sobel, J., 2002. Can we trust social capital? Journal of economic literature, 139–154.
Stephany, F., 2017. Who are your joneses? socio-specific income inequality and trust. Social
indicators research 134 (3), 877–898.
Stephany, F., 2019. It deepens like a coastal shelf: Educational mobility and social capital in
germany. Social Indicators Research 142 (2), 855–885.
Stephany, F., Braesemann, F., 2017. An exploration of wikipedia data as a measure of regional
knowledge distribution. In: International Conference on Social Informatics. Springer, pp. 31–40.
Stephany, F., Braesemann, F., Graham, M., 2019. Coding together-coding alone: The role of trust
in collaborative programming.
Stephany, F., Braesemann, F., et al., 2017. Bonds and bridges, and between: An empirical analysis
of group-based trust. Tech. rep.
Testa, M. R., Stephany, F., 2017. The educational gradient of fertility intentions: a meta-analysis
of european studies. Vienna Yearbook of Population Research 15, 293–330.
Tödtling, F., Trippl, M., 2005. One size fits all?: Towards a differentiated regional innovation
policy approach. Research policy 34 (8), 1203–1219.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048733305001137
Valenzuela, S., Park, N., Kee, K. F., 2009. Is there social capital in a social network site?: Facebook use and college students’ life satisfaction, trust, and participation1. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication 14 (4), 875–901.
van Deth, J. W., Zmerli, S., 2010. Introduction: civicness, equality, and democracy—a “dark side”
of social capital? American Behavioral Scientist 53 (5), 631–639.
23

Van Oorschot, W., Arts, W., 2005. The social capital of European welfare states: The crowding
out hypothesis revisited. Journal of European social policy 15 (1), 5–26.
Van Oorschot, W., Arts, W., Gelissen, J., 2006. Social capital in Europe measurement and social
and regional distribution of a multifaceted phenomenon. Acta sociologica 49 (2), 149–167.
Williams, D., 2006. On and off the’Net: Scales for social capital in an online era. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 11 (2), 593–628.
Woltman, H., Feldstain, A., MacKay, J. C., Rocchi, M., 2012. An introduction to hierarchical
linear modeling. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for Psychology 8 (1), 52–69.
URL http://mail.tqmp.org/RegularArticles/vol08-1/p052/p052.pdf

24

7. Appendix
Figures

Figure 1: Screeplot of the Factor Eigenvalues: the factor analysis leads to three distinct factors with an eigenvalue
higher than 1 that capture together all the variation of the social capital indicating variables.
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

25

(a) Factor Loadings

(b) Varimax Rotation

Figure 2: Factor Analysis Explained: the factors are rotated in the n-dimensional space until the variance of the
squared factor loadings is maximised. Due to this procedure, moderate loadings can be more clearly assigned to a
specific factor.
Source: (Russell, 2002)

Figure 3: Factor Loadings in the Model derived by the Factor Analysis: the factor analysis reveals that the variables
that measure social capital can be assigned into three distinct categories: civic, generalised and communitarian
social capital.
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

26

Figure 4: The Different Social Capital Regimes in Europe: there are significant differences between the European
regions with respect to civic, generalised and communitarian social capital. There is also much variation within the
country clusters, in particular for communitarian social capital in Eastern Europe.
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

27

28
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

Figure 5: The Variance of the three social capital dimensions in Europe: the regional average of the social capital factors vary substantially in Europe; not only between
countries, but also within some countries.

29
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

Figure 6: Civic social capital in Europe: There are major regional differences with respect to civicism in many European countries, while the Eastern European regions show
very low values of that social capital dimension.

30
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

Figure 7: Generalised social capital in Europe: A north-south and east-west-divide is prevalent.

31
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

Figure 8: Communitarian /traditional social capital in Europe: Eastern European countries and regions with a majority of Catholics show higher values of communitarian
social capital

Figure 9: Chances of survival on the Titanic: A tree showing survival of passengers on the Titanic (sibsp is the
number of spouses or siblings aboard). The figures under the leaves show the probability of outcome and the
percentage of observations in the leaf.
Source: Wikipedia - CARTs

Figure 10: A classification tree with two input features: While the original sample contained 15 observations of
which seven were circles and 8 triangles, the final for subsamples solemnly contain one or the other outcome.
Source: James et al. (2013)

32

Figure 11: The binary target feature is generalized trust: The first line in each node indicates the next splitting
criterion, while the second line reports the Gini index, and the last line the distribution of binary generalized trust.
Source: ESS7 and own calculations

33

Table 1: Social capital indicating questions in ESS 6 and 7 :

ESS-Code

Description

Abbr.

polintr
contplt
wrkprty
wrkorg
wkvlorg
badge
sgnptit
pbldmn
bctprd

How interested in politics in general
Ever contacted a politican or government official in the last 12 months
Worked for a political party or action group in the last 12 months
Worked in another organization or association in the last 12 months
Involved in work for voluntary or charitable organizations in the last 12 months
Worn or displayed campaign badge/sticker in the last 12 months
Signed a petition in the last 12 months
Taken part in lawful public demonstration in last 12 months
Boycotted a certain product in the last 12 months

p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
p8
p9

ppltrst
pplfair
pplhlp

Generally speaking most people can be trusted, or you can’t be too careful
Most people would try to take advantage of you, or try to be fair
Most of the time people try to be helpful, or mostly looking out for themselves

g1
g2
g3

pplahlp
flclpla
flapppl
ipudrst
iphlppl
iplylfr
imptrad

Feel people in local area help one another
Feel close to the people in local area
Feel appreciated by people you are close to
Important to understand different people
Important to help people and care for others well-being
Important to be loyal to friends and devote to people close
Important to follow traditions and customs

c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
c7

vote
implvdm
sclmeet
inprdsc
sclact
aesfdrk
rlgatnd

Voted in last election
How important for you to live in democratically governed country
How often socially meet with friends, relatives or colleagues
How many people with whom you can discuss intimate and personal matters
How much do you take part in social activities compared to others of same age
Feeling of safety of walking alone in local areas after dark
How often attend religious services apart from special occasions

n1
n2
n3
n4
n5
n6
n7

Source: European Social Survey 6, 7

Table 2: Correlation between the SC factors: While generalised social capital is positively correlated to civicism,
the relation to communitarian social capital is negative. the other factors are not significantly related to each other.

Civicism
Civicism
General
Community
*** p < 0.01

General

Community

1.000
0.571***

1.000

-0.025

-0.247***

1.000

Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

34

Table 3: Examples for the different dimensions of social capital in Europe: The social landscape of Europe is
complex - there are not only different dimensions of social capital, but these dimensions show specific spatial
structures.

Regime

Civicism

General

Community

East

North

North

(low within-regime variation, high between-regime variation)

Country

Belgium

Portugal

Spain

(low within-country variation, high between-country variation)

Region

Sweden

Italy

Bulgaria

(high within-country variation)
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

35

Table 4: Multilevel model explaining the three distinct social capital factors: The disparities in social capital are
significant between the macro-regions in Europe, while this effect is different for the three different dimensions of
social capital.

Model on Social Capital:

Civicism (1)

General (2)

Gender

0.086***

ns

(ref. = Female)

(0.009)

Age
Age Squared·1000
Education (0-8)
Status (ref.
Student

Community (3)
-0.176***
(0.009)

0.020***

-0.009***

(0.002)

(0.002)

-0.001***

0.001***

0.001**

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)
ns

ns

0.121***

0.067***

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.297***

0.094***

(0.023)

(0.023)

-0.042**

-0.180***

-0.100***

(0.018)

(0.017)

(0.018)

ns

-0.076***

ns

= Paid Work)

Unemployed
Retired

ns

(0.016)

Disabled, Military, etc.
Housework

ns

-0.052***

-0.296***

-0.105***

(0.026)

(0.027)

ns

ns

(0.017)

Religion (ref. = None)
Roman Catholic

-0.048***

ns

(0.012)

Protestant
Other

0.298***
(0.013)

0.050***

0.058***

0.252***

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.014)

-0.057***

-0.155***

0.362***

(0.019)

(0.019)

(0.020)

Left-Right-Scale

-0.025***

0.014***

0.017***

(0 Left -10 Right)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

Regional covariates
GDP per capita

ns

0.001*

ns

(2012, in EUR)

(0.000)

Without paid work
(2012, in percent)

Regime
East

-0.271*

ns

ns

-0.440***

-0.319***

ns

(0.044)

(0.053)

0.186***

0.386***

(0.036)

(0.043)

(0.158)

(ref. = West)

North
South
Observations
Number of groups
AIC/Obs
BIC/Obs

0.129***

-0.255***

(0.040)

(0.047)

30,584
288
2.245
2.251

30,584
288
2.191
2.196

ns
ns

30,584
288
2.254
2.259

Standard errors in parentheses
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Source: European Social Survey 6, 7 and own calculations

36

