“Being, Transcending, & Harmonizing”: Nature, Patterns and Expressions of
Caring Among Nurses Working in Hemodialysis Unit

Rudolf Cymorr Kirby P. Martinez, PhD, RN
rmartinez@sanbeda.edu.ph
San Beda University - College of Nursing
Arellano University – Graduate School of Nursing
ABSTRACT
This study explored the patterns and expressions of caring among nurses in the working
in a hemodialysis unit. Eleven (11) nurses working for at least three (3) years from three (3)
selected hemodialysis units within Metro Manila participated in this study. Multiple face to face
in-depth interviews, story-telling sessions and non-participatory observation were utilized to
create the individual narratives from where the patterns and expressions of caring were later
explicated.
After a series of content analysis following the focused ethnography design, three
patterns and expressions of caring were then identified: (1) being at the moment, (2)
transcending perceived boundaries and (3) harmonizing with technology. These patterns
represent for informants their unique expressions of caring in the context of working in a
hemodialysis unit. It reflects a moment to moment transitioning between caring for and caring
with persons thru technology.
Insights from this study suggest that the nature of caring as articulated by the informants
is an expression of their anticipated role as career within the moment and their perceived image
of the person being cared for.

Page 1 of 19

Professional role clarification, fluency in communication and technological competency
training were implied as possible ways of strengthening their perception of being caring which in
the end could improve patient’s outcomes. Further studies exploring the nature and process of
image representation of persons being cared for is implied since there seems to be a consistent
dilemma among the informants of the blurring of their professional roles as nurses and their
personal boundaries as a human person.

Page 2 of 19

CONTEXT OF THE STUDY

Worldwide, two million patients are affected by end stage renal disease (ESRD), and the
number of patients diagnosed with the disease continues to increase at a rate of 5% to 7% per
year (U.S. Renal Data System, 2013) with over two million people currently receiving dialysis
treatment worldwide. In the Philippines alone, twenty percent (20%) of the Filipino population
was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and at least 70,000 patients on dialysis as of 2017
(Magtubo, 2017). It is for this reason that a number of hemodialysis unit created globally and
locally to provide an answer to this gap (Ozgen and Ozcan, 2002). The latest available data from
the Department of Health (2012) show that there is a total of 423 dialysis offices across the
country, of which 355 were hemodialysis and 68 were peritoneal dialysis facilities.
With these trends, many nurses find themselves working in the field of hemodialysis
nursing. Previous studies have posited that working in the hemodialysis unit is associated with
high levels of exhaustion (Kapucu et al., 2009), poor work environment (Hayes et al., 2013), low
job satisfaction (Arikan et al., 2007), poor patient satisfaction (Argentero et al., 2008), and high
incidence of burnout among health care members (Klersy et al., 2007). Registered Nurses
working in the hemodialysis units also experience high levels of stress and suffer from an array
of work-related emotional stressors (Dermody and Bennett, 2008), and impaired coping
mechanisms (Ashker, Penprase and Salman, 2012). Although studies have explored the
experiences of nurses in the hemodialysis unit, including their compliance (Eid and Abd El-Aziz,
2013) and adherence to standard precautions (El-Enein and El-Mahdy, 2011), little research has
been made to explicate the culture of caring among nurses working in the hemodialysis unit.
Although there are a number of qualitative researches exploring topics incidental to the nature of

Page 3 of 19

caring among nurses working in a hemodialysis unit such as the role of knowledge in the expert
practice of nephrology nursing (Bonner, 2007) and the nature of nephrology nursing practice
(Bonner and Walker, 2003) there is still a paucity of studies that focus on understanding how
nurses working in the hemodialysis make sense of their experience and how these affect their
expression and understanding of the nature of caring.
Caring, a culturally sensitive construct, is considered as the essence of nursing (Cohens,
1991; Leineger, 1988; Watson 2009). It is focused on caring’s relationship to health and healing
that differentiate nursing in a way from the other profession (Watson & Smith, 2001). Though
caring is unanimously considered as the essential core of the nursing profession, it has not been
fully and exhaustively explicated as a single concept or phenomenon and no single definition of
care has been fully accepted both by practitioners and academicians alike. A universal definition
of care maybe seen as less importance since its expression is markedly different by the context
where it occurs. It is this unique expression of caring influenced by the culture where it was
created that makes caring context specific (Finfgeld-Connett, 2006). Since a micro definition and
appreciation of caring is always contained within the boundaries of the context where it
occurred, researches tend to focus their topic on a single phenomenon where care is present as
seen through the lens of a certain group of nurses working in a specific setting.
The continued global burden of kidney disease, increasing creation of hemodialysis units,
and lack of studies exploring the nature and expression of caring among nurses in the context of
the hemodialysis unit justify the gap this study intends to fill. This study aimed to explore the
nature, patterns and expressions of caring among nurses working in a hemodialysis unit and its
implication to the nursing profession.

Page 4 of 19

METHODOLOGY
Research Design
This study is rooted on the interpretivist paradigm with focused ethnography as its
specific approach of understanding. The philosophy of focused ethnography serves as its unique
lens by which the the nature, patterns and expressions of caring among hemodialysis nurses was
appreciated. The interpretivist paradign and philosophy of focused ethnography serves as the
underpinnings by which this study is founded upon (Arnould, 1998; Atkinson, 2014; Carruthers,
Schensul, Schensul, and LeCompte, 1999; Morse, 1994).
Focused ethnograpy is a variant of traditional ethnography implemented in the
investigation of specific phenomenon that is socially and culturally higly differentiated created
by the shared experiences of a certain group of people (Knoblauch, 2005; Richards & Morse,
2007). Further, Muecke (1994) posited that focused ethnography studies are (1) problem-focused
and context specific; (2) focused on a discrete community; (3) has the conceptual orientation of a
single researcher; (4) involves a limited number of informants; (5) has episodic participation
observation; (6) involves informants who hold specific knowledge; and, (7) used in the academe
and in the healthcare field for the development of care services.
In nursing, focused ethnography is conducted to understand the meaning that members of
a subculture or group assign to their experience the practice of nursing as a cultural phenomenon
(Roper & Shapira, 2000). In the current study, focused ethnography was selected based on the
assumptions previously discussed.

Page 5 of 19

Selection of Informants
Eleven (11) informants from three (3) hemodialysis unit agreed to participate in the
study. The informants were selected based on the critera that (1) They are working as registered
nurse on a hemodialysis unit on a full time basis for at least three (3) years and (2) They are
willing to undergo multiple face-to-face interview and non-participatory observation during the
data gathering and data analysis phase of this study. Theoretical saturation and maximum
variation technique were utilized to arrive at the total number of informants for this study.
Maximum variation sampling technique is a specific approach of purposive sampling technique
which considers the variation in characteristics of the respondents which may affect the
experiences of the informants (Polit & Beck, 2014). In the current study, the researcher
considered sex, age, and years of clinical experience in the dialysis units as potential variations
that provide multiple lenses in understanding the phenomenon under investigation.

Data Gathering Procedure
Ethics clearance was sought prior to the conduct of this study. The informants were
interviewed on the place they are comfortable in during an agreed timeframe. There were at least
three (3) face-to-face interviews for each informants followed by non-participatory observation
in their workplace. No interviews with the informant and their patients were done during the
conduct of non-paticipatory observation. Further, follow-up interviews among the informants
were also done to ascertain that the analysis of their individual narratives is reflective of their
experience as hemodialysis nurse. Three approaches therefore were utilized in this study to
gather rich textual information from the informants, namely: multiple, free flowing, in-depth,
face to face interview, storytelling session and non-participatory observation in their workplace.

Page 6 of 19

The in-depth interviews were freeflowing and unstructured to let the informants share
their experiences without prior self-inflicted constraints normally present in a structured
interview (Creswell, 2013). The interviews centered on key concepts and experiences of caring
expressions as informants experienced them in their work as hemodialysis nurses. Storytelling on
the other hand is embedded within the interview process and focused on letting the informants
share their stories of caring while working as hemodialysis nurse. These sharings were done
without much intrusion from the researcher as opposed to the dialogical nature of the interview
process. These allowed the informants to express themselves freely and be actively engaged in
the process of exploring their experiences (Gruen, 2000).
Non-participatory observations of the informants during their selected duty shift were
also done to provide another lens by which their expressions of caring were gleaned upon.
During the observation, the researcher stayed on the nurse’s station and took note of how the
informants interact with their patients. Clarificatory interviews were done after the four (4) hours
observation to ascertain that the implied meaning of the observations made by the researcher
were reflective of the informants’ experiences.
The interviews and storytelling sessions were audio recoded and were later individually
transcribed verbatim. The transcribed transcripts serve as the informants’ individual narratives,
which were later reflectively analysed.

Analysis Plan
The individual narratives, together with the notes on the non-participatory observations
were reflectively analysed using the analytic technique proposed by Roper & Shapira (2000)
involving five (5) essential steps, namely: (1) coding for descriptive labels, (2) sorting of

Page 7 of 19

patterns, (3) identifying outliers, (4) generalizing constructs and theories, and (5) memoing with
reflective remarks. This analysis technique was chosen by the researcher for its simplicity,
availability (Cruz and Higginbottom, 2013; Higginbottom, 2013) and appropriateness of the
design to the research aim.

Maintaining Rigor
To maintain the study’s rigor, varied techniques were utilized by the researcher namely:
member checking, audit trail, and method triangulation. Member checking, defined as a method
of validating the credibility of qualitative data through debriefings and discussions with
informants (Polit & Beck, 2014), involved the researchers going back to the informants to verify
the accuracy of the narratives and the analysis of the researchers. To further establish the
authenticity of the resulting findings from this study, audit trailling was also utilized. This was
done by making the process of the analysis traceable and confirmable to an external expert or
auditor. Lastly, method triangulation, defined as the utilization of varied methods of data
collection (Creswell, 2013), was utilized to provide multiple lenses of their experiences and
ascertain that the resulting findings are reflective of their experiences.

Page 8 of 19

FINDINGS
The process of reflective analysis of the narrative of the informants resulted into three (3)
distinct patterns of caring, namely: (1) Being at the moment, (2) Transcending perceived
boundary, (3) Harmonizing with technology

Being at the moment
For the informants, being at the moment is one of the patterns of being a caring nurse.
For them, the expression of being at the moment involves the nurse’s sense of immediacy, caring
presence and rapport building skill.
Informants expressed that for nurses to be caring, they need to be constantly present
whenever the patient needs them to be. This internalized sense of immediacy for them is
essential to be at the moment with the patient. This was reflected when one of the informants
shared:
“I had a patient who always complains of chest pain and I need to be constantly be with
him during these episodes, that’s what caring is for us here. You need to be there when
they need you to be there either to treat or just to chat with them” (Informant 8).

The development of this sense of immediacy is attached by the informants to the chronic
nature of the kidney disease that their patient had and the resulting repetitive nature of caring for
them in the hemodialysis unit. Knowing the patient as person expressed by their patterns of
behaviour enables the informants to attune themselves to their patients’ need thus the sense of
immediacy is developed.

Page 9 of 19

The informants also see caring presence as one of the expressions of being in the
moment. For them, caring presence means being genuinely present at the moment exhibiting an
“aura” of caring. These “aura”, according to them is reflected by how nurses carry themselves as
they interact with the patient such that even if they are not doing anything, people around them
still perceived that they are caring. Caring presence for the informants means that the nurse is
mindful and aware of what is happening to the patient at the moment and is competent to address
their immediate need. One of the informants shared:
“Besides actually being competent in cannulation, you need to somehow train yourself to
show that you are confident in it in the first place. The patient and the relative will know
if you are not really competent just by your “aura”… that you really know what you are
doing.” (Informant 3)

Rapport-building skill was also seen by the informants as another expression of caring.
For them, forming a trusting relationship build on mutual respect is one of the key elements for
effective nursing to occur. Rapport-building skill is essential in this formation of a trusting
relationship. For the infromants, rapport-building skill, such as proper communication, enables
them to genuinely connect with the patient and know the patient as person moment to moment. It
is this human connection that rapport-building skill brings that makes their action for them, more
caring. Informant 4 shares the following story:
“You should know your patient, it really matters. That patient you will be handling will
be your patient for year, even decades so you really need to know them for them to trust
you. Know who they are, their stories. You need to develop how to build rapport really,
that caring for us”

Page 10 of 19

For the informants, being at the moment enables them to give the maximum care needed
by their patients. It is for them their reason for being in the nutrsing profession. These findings
bear similarity to the results of the study by Nobahar (2016) which points out that providing
high-quality care to patients undergoing dialysis is the main priority of the nurse. This finding
reflects Boykin and Schoenhoffer’s (2001) assertion that caring is expressed moment to moment,
person to person.

Transcending perceived boundary
Another pattern of caring seen by the informants is transcending perceived boundaries as
expressed in the blurring of the informants’ personal lives and professional roles. This is
reflected in two unique aspects, seeing their patient as a family and going beyond their “job
descriptions”.
The informants see actions as caring when it is perceived as beyond their “job
description”. Following up the patient at home, connecting with the patient’s relative via social
media, personally extending ones duty time without expecting over time pay just so the patient
can finish the treatment are some of the acts that the informants sees as caring. It seems that for
them, the interventions and actions that they routinely perform as part of their professional
obligations as staff nurses are not the epitome of caring but the small gestures and acts of
kindness that they do beyond what is stipulated in their employee-employer contract. One of the
informants shared,

Page 11 of 19

“Sometimes we need to remember that they are also human being not just patients and
that we are also like them, humans… I do (act of kindness) with them because I am
human first before I was a nurse and that is caring for me”

Among the informants, there is a notion that going beyond what society expects of them
constitute caring. This expectation of society in the form of professional roles and
responsibilities are seen by the informants as creating a boundary between them and the patient.
Symbolically transcending this boundary then is seen as caring since they are giving more of
than what society expects them to do. Informant 5 shared the following:
“You will not be effective and caring if you will only see them as patient, if you will only
do those things that nurses are exected to do… you need to go beyond that, show
compassion, show humanity”

Another expression of caring among the informant is seeing the patient as part of their
family. Among the informants, all agreed that they have over familiarity among their patients
that a lot of times they treat their patients as if they are their relatives. For them, caring at this
moment transcends the professional level and move to a more personal one. The informants see
the more personal form of discourse and interaction with the patient as caring than the
professional one. The informants further maintained that by becoming more personal with their
care and interaction with their patients, they are more attuned to their needs and thus are more
caring. This was reflected when one of the informants shared:
“For my patient, I just think of them like my grandparents. There are some patients who
seem sad and they need someone to talk to. I talk to them like I talk to my grandparents…

Page 12 of 19

that is why I always ask them how they are doing and always check on their status even if
I am not assigned to them anymore” (Informant 2)

Because of this level of intimacy and personal knowing between the patient and the
informants, the boundaries between their personal lives and professional roles seem to blurr. For
the informants, a paradoxical boundary seems to exist with them and their patients, a boundary
that they both need to maintain and break at the same time for caring to occur. This was evident
when all of them during the interview agreed that there is a need for a boundary between them
and their patients yet they deliberately choose to break it in one way or another. Informant 7
shares the following:
“My relationship with them is like they (the patients) are my parents. I treat them as my
parent, it just developed over time. I pity them so the way I treat and cared for my parents
, the respect I gave them, I also gave my patients. One time I cried when a patient close to
me died… there are times that you will get hurt… there will be times that when you
became close to them you will become emotional but what can we do, that is how we
care…”

A challenge faced by the informants is a felt paradoxical blurring of personal and
professional boundaries as part of the process of caring in the hemodialysis unit. This expression
of caring finds similarity in the result of a qualitative study done by Atashzadeh, Pazargadi, &
Zagheri (2018) where the central theme is a “challenging care” as the same blurring of role was
also seen.

Page 13 of 19

Harmonizing with technology
For the informants, technology is part and parcel of their lives as hemodialysis nurses.
Caring for them is expressed in their technical skills and their competent use of technology.
Harmonizing with technology then is seen as one of the patterns of caring.
Proficiency and efficiency in technical skills especially in intravenous line insertion is
seen by the informants as one of the expressions of caring. For them, you cannot be an effective
hemodialysis nurse unless you have mastered the art of intravenous line insertion. It is interesting
to note that almost all patients see nurses as caring when they can insert with ease an IV line on
their first try. The “IV-insertion moment” is one of the moments where nursing knowing occurs
in the hemodialysis unit as during this time, the patient and the nurse gets to know each other as
persons. The image of the nurse will be tested in this moment for when he/she succcesfully
inserted an IV, he/she will be seen as a proficient and efficient nurse and therefore a caring
nurse. The informants, when asked who the most caring nurse among themselves is, will always
points out the staff who mastered the art of IV insertion. One informant shared:
“You are not caring unless you know how to insert an IV (intravenous line)… That will
stick to you for a long time… the patient tends to be picky at first especially if you are
new to the unit but when they experience you getting (the IV) in the first try, they will
trust you and you will earn their respect… sometimes even the respect of other patients
since they gossip a lot who can and cannot insert an IV effortlessly.”

The centrality of technical skill such as cannulation in the hemodialysis ward have
similar findings in the study by Parisotto, Pelliccia, Grassmann, & Marcelli (2017) which shows
that cannulation accounts are the most frequent procedure in the hemodialysis unit.

Page 14 of 19

Another expression of caring for the informants is their competency in the use of the
dialysis machine. Informants would describe the dialysis machine as their “partner” and even
their “lover” since the machine seems to have a mood of its own. Being a caring nurse means
having the capability to operate, control and manage the dialysis machine. As the dialysis
machine is the most prominent and permanent fixture in the hemodialysis unit, it is not surprising
that it has become the ultimate symbol related to the practice of hemodialysis nursing. For the
informants, the hemodialysis machine enables them to perform their functions as a caring nurse.
The hemodialysis machine serves as an extension of themselves in caring for their patients such
that competency in the complexity of its operation is seen as one expression of caring.
Technology, in the form of hemodialysis machine, actualizes the care rendered by the nurses in
the hemodialysis ward. Informant 10 shares the following:
“If the nurse “knows” the machine he/she can efficiently use it and manipulate it using
parameters or settings. If you are a dialysis nurse, you will be familiar with how the
machine and the patient works, you can sense when the blood pressure will go down
among other things. If you are competent in the use of the machine , well that is caring…
without the machine you will not be a hemodialysis nurse… without it the patient will
die”

Technological competency with the dialysis machine was seen as one aspect of a caring
nurse working in a hemodialysis unit. This centrality of technological competency as one of the
importance aspect of was also seen in the study by Abdelsatir (2013) using nurses as informants

Page 15 of 19

and that of Chiaranai (2016) and Nobahar (2016) using the patient’s frame of reference from
Thailand and Iran respectively.

INSIGHTS and IMPLICATIONS
After a series of content analysis following the focused ethnography design, three
patterns and expressions of caring were then identified: (1) being at the moment, (2)
transcending perceived boundaries and (3) harmonizing with technology. These patterns
represent for informants their unique expressions of caring in the context of working in a
hemodialysis unit. It reflects a moment to moment transitioning between caring for and caring
with persons thru technology.
Insights from this study suggest that the nature of caring articulated by the informants is
an expression of their anticipated role as career within the moment and their perceived image of
the person being cared for. The context of the hemodialysis ward and the processes inherent in it
as it functions provide the backdrop from which caring moments and expressions were seen by
the informants.
Professional role clarification, fluency in communication and technical & technological
competency training were implied as possible ways of strengthening their perception of being
caring which in the end could improve patient outcomes. Further studies exploring the nature and
process of image representation of persons being cared for is implied since there seems to be a
consistent dilemma among the informants of the blurring of their professional roles as nurses and
their personal boundaries as a human person.

Page 16 of 19

REFERENCES
Abdelsatir, S. (2013). Evaluation of nurses awareness and practice of hemodialysis access care in
Khartoum state, Sudan. Arab Journal of Nephrology and Transplantation, 6(2), 119-121.
Retrieved from: https://www.ajol.info/index.php/ajnt/article/view/88699
Argentero, P., Dell’Olivo, B., & Santa Ferretti, M. (2008). Staff burnout and patient satisfaction
with the quality of dialysis care. American Journal of Kidney Diseases, 51(1), 80-92 doi:
10.1053/j.ajkd.2007.09.011
Arikan, F., Köksal, C. D.& Gökçe, Ç. (2007). Work‐related stress, burnout, and job satisfaction
of dialysis nurses in association with perceived relations with professional contacts.
Dialysis & Transplantation, 36(4), 182-191 doi: 10.1002/dat.20119
Arnould, E. J. (1998). Daring consumer-oriented ethnography. Representing consumers: Voices,
views and visions, 85-126.
Ashker, V.E., Penprase, B., & Salman, A. (2012). Work-related emotional stressors and coping
strategies that affect the well-being of nurses working in hemodialysis units. Nephrology
Nursing Journal, 39(3), 231-236. Retrieved from:
https://search.proquest.com/openview/a4654964 d8e5df1ea240fbc18a69c 35f/1?pqorigsite=gscholar&cbl= 45638
Atashzadeh Shoorideh, F., Pazargadi, M., & Zagheri Tafreshi, M. (2012). The concept of nursing
care quality from the perspective of stakeholders: a phenomenological study. Journal of
Qualitative Research in Health Sciences, 1(3), 214-228. Retrieved from:
http://jqr.kmu.ac.ir/browse.php?a_id=119&sid=1&slc_lang=en
Atkinson, P. (2014). The ethnographic imagination: Textual constructions of reality. Routledge.
Bonner, A. (2007). Understanding the role of knowledge in the practice of expert nephrology
nurses in Australia. Nursing & Health Sciences, 9(3), 161-167. doi: 10.1111/j.14422018.2007.00314.x
Bonner, A. & Walker, A. (2003). Nephrology nursing: blurring the boundaries: the reality of
expert practice. Journal of Clinical Nursing 13 (2), 210-218 doi: 10.1046/j.13652702.2003.00858.x
Boykin, A., & Schoenhofer, S. O. (2001). Nursing as caring: A model for transforming practice.
Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Bulfin, S. (2005). Nursing as caring theory: Living caring in practice. Nursing Science Quarterly,
18(4), 313-319. doi: 10.1177/0894318405280401
Carruthers, B. G., Schensul, S. L., Schensul, J. J., & LeCompte, M. D. (1999). Essential
ethnographic methods: Observations, interviews, and questionnaires (Vol. 2). Rowman
Altamira.
Chiaranai, C. (2016). The lived experience of patients receiving hemodialysis treatment for endstage renal disease: a qualitative study. Journal of Nursing Research, 24(2), 101-108. doi:
10.1097/jnr.0000000000000100
Cohen, J. A. (1991). Two portraits of caring: a comparison of the artists, Leininger and Watson.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 16(8), 899-909.
Creswell, J. (2013). Research design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches
(4th ed). USA: Sage Publications,Inc. Retrieved from: https://goo.gl/vWj2pb
Cruz, E., & Higginbottom, G. (2013). The use of focused ethnography in nursing research. Nurse
Researcher, 20(4).
Dermody, K., & Bennett, P. N. (2008). Nurse stress in hospital and satellite hemodialysis

Page 17 of 19

units. Journal of Renal Care, 34(1), 28-32 doi: 10.1111/j.1755- 6686.2008.00007.x
Eid, N. & Abd El-Aziz, L. (2013). Proposed developed standards: Staff nurses compliance at
dialysis unit. Greener Journal of Medical Sciences 3(5), 179-189. Retrieved from:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/666d/9d655c0e 414e11f124b384863936cd28c5ca.pdf
El-Enein, N. Y. A., & El Mahdy, H. M. (2011). Standard precautions: a KAP study among
nurses in the dialysis unit in a University Hospital in Alexandria, Egypt. The Journal of the
Egyptian Public Health Association, 86(1 and 2), 3-10 doi:
10.1097/01.EPX.0000395430.92943.69
Finfgeld‐Connett, D. (2008). Meta‐synthesis of caring in nursing. Journal of Clinical Nursing,
17(2), 196-204.
Flynn, L., Thomas-Hawkins, C., & Clarke, S. P. (2009). Organizational traits, care processes,
and burnout among chronic hemodialysis nurses. Western Journal of Nursing Research,
31(5), 569- 582 doi: 10.1177/0193945909331430
Gruen, D. (2000). Beyond scenarios: the role of storytelling in CSCW design. Locus Research.
IBM Research. Retrieved from http://domino.research.ibm.com
Hayes, B., Douglas, C., & Bonner, A. (2015). Work environment, job satisfaction, stress and
burnout among haemodialysis nurses. Journal of Nursing Management, 23(5), 588- 598
doi: 10.1111/jonm.12184
Higginbottom, G. (2013). The use of focused ethnography in nursing research. Nurse
Researcher. 20(4), 36-43. Retrieved from:
http://www.academia.edu/7907385/Focused_ethnography_in_nursing_research
Higginbottom, G., Pillay, J., and Boadu, N. (2013). Guidance on performing focused
ethnographies with an emphasis of healthcare research. The Qualitative Report, 18 (9), 4
Retrieved from:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/7b9b/19091a93bfd61795bef596f98e73cfcc34ce.pdf
Kapucu S., Akku ̧s Y., Akdemir N., Karacan Y. (2009). The burnout and exhaustion levels of
nurses working in haemodialysis units. Journal of Renal Care 35(3), 134–140 doi:
10.1111/j.1755- 6686.2009.00108.x
Klersy, C., Callegari, A.,Martinelli, V., Vizzardi, V., Navino, C., Malberti, F., ... & Rampino, T.
(2007). Burnout in health care providers of dialysis service in Northern Italy —a
multicentre study. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 22(8), 2283-2290 doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfm111
Knoblauch, H. (2005). Focused ethnography. Forum: Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum:
Qualitative Social Research, 6, Art.44. doi: 10.17169/fqs-6.3.20
Leininger, M. M. (1988). Leininger's theory of nursing: Cultural care diversity and universality.
Nursing Science Quarterly, 1(4), 152-160.
Lopez, E., Saga-Valdez, M., Antonio, Z., De Leon, O., Marbella, M., Valderrama, V., Simangan,
M. (2017). Peritoneal Equilibration Test (PET) Analysis among Filipino Childrenon
Chronic Peritoneal Dialysis at the National Kidney and Transplant Institute:A CrossSectional Study. The Philippine Journal of Nephrology, 25(1), 1-40. Retrieved from:
http://www.pjnonline.com/index.php/ pjnonline/article/view/3
Magtubo, C. (2017). The state of kidney disease in the Philippines: Preventable, treatable, but
lacking in Donors. MIMS Today. Retrieved from: https://today.mims.com/the-state-ofkidney-disease-in the-philippines--preventable--treatable--but-lacking-in-donors
Morse, JM. (2007). Does health research warrant the modification of qualitative methods?
Qualitative Health Research. 17 (7), 863-865.

Page 18 of 19

Morse, J. M. (Ed.). (1994). Critical issues in qualitative research methods. Sage.
Muecke, M. A. (1994). On the evaluation of ethnographies. In J. M. Morse (Ed.), Critical Issues
In Qualitative Research Methods (pp. 187-209). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Nobahar, M. (2016). Exploring experiences of the quality of nursing care among patients, nurses,
caregivers and physicians in a haemodialysis department. Journal of Renal Care, 43(1),
50–59. doi:10.1111/jorc.121
Ozgen, H. & Ozcan, Y. (2002). A national study of efficiency for dialysis centers: an
examination of market competition and facility characteristics for production of multiple
dialysis outputs. Health Services Research, 37(3), 711-712. Retrieved from:
http://cyber.sci- hub.la/MTAuMTExMS8xNDc1LTY3NzMuMD
AwNDU=/ozgen2002.pdf
Parisotto, M. T., Pelliccia, F., Grassmann, A., & Marcelli, D. (2017). Elements of dialysis
nursing practice associated with successful cannulation: result of an international survey.
The Journal of Vascular Access, 18(2), 114–119. doi: org/10.5301/jva.5000617
Polit, D.F., & Beck, C.T. (2014). Nursing research: Generating and assessing evidence for
nursing practice (8th ed.). Philadelphia: Lipincott Williams & Wilkins.
Richards, L., & Morse, JM. (2007). Readme First for a User’s Guide to Qualitative Methods (2 nd
Ed.). CA: Sage Publications.
Roper, J. M., & Shapira, J. (2000). Ethnography in Nursing Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
U.S Renal Data System. (2013). The kidney project. Retrieved from:
https://pharm.ucsf.edu/kidney /need/statistics
Watson, J. (2009). Caring science and human caring theory: Transforming personal and
professional practices of nursing and health care. Journal of Health and Human Services
Administration, 466-482.
Watson, J., & Smith, M. C. (2002). Caring science and the science of unitary human beings: a
trans‐theoretical discourse for nursing knowledge development. Journal of Advanced
Nursing, 37(5), 452-461.
Wolf, Z. R. (2003). Exploring the audit trail for qualitative investigations. Nurse educator, 28(4),
175-178.

Page 19 of 19

