"x"
"1" "This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by  Cambridge University Press  in  Social Policy and Society  on  10 th  July 2019 , available online:  [ https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/social-policy-and-society ]   [ https://doi.org/10.1017/S147474641900027 ]"
"2" "Title:"
"3" "Changing family dynamics and in-work benefits"
"4" "Authors:"
"5" "Clíona Rooney"
"6" "UNESCO Child and Family Research Centre, National University of Ireland Galway"
"7" "E-mail:  cliona.rooney@opw.ie"
"8" "Jane Gray"
"9" "Maynooth University So cial Science Institute (MUSSI)"
"10" "Maynooth University"
"11" "E-mail:  jane.gray@mu.ie"
"12" "Published as:  Rooney, C., & Gray, J. (n.d.). Changing Family Dynamics and In-Work Benefits. Social Policy and Society, 1-21. doi:10.1017/S1474746419000277"
"13" "Changing family  dynamics  and in-work benefits"
"14" "ABSTRACT"
"15" "Internationally, in-work benefits (IWBs) are widely adopted as a measure to assist parents transitioning to work and to ‘make work pay’ for  low-income  families.  The family income supplement (FIS) is an Irish IWB, introduced at a time of rapid societal chan ge."
"16" "This article shows how changing family dynamics ,  and a shift in policy focus towards a ‘work-first’ approach ,  challenged the original values underlying FIS . We discuss FIS in the context of changes to family life and social policy. We then outline the results of te n int erviews with experts using three  themes : work-first  approach;  child poverty  and encouraging care ."
"17" "Our analysis shows  that  policymakers  faced new challenges to provide an income support for children while also promoting full-time labour participation. FIS continues to support working families, but in a manner that creates contradictions for the contemporary ‘work - first’ approach. It is necessary to re-examine FIS in relation to its wider policy context and to address requirements for caring."
"18" "Key words:  In-work benefits, Family change, Social policy, Low-Income families, Work-first policy"
"19" "INTRODUCTION"
"20" "This article demonstrates how changing family dynamics and a shift in policy focus towards a ‘work-first’ approach c ountered  the original values of  FIS , Ireland’s In-Work Benefit (IWB) , creating challenges for   policymakers seeking to provide a child income support (CIS), while also promoting full-time paid employment. Since the introduction of FIS, Ireland’s policy regime has moved away from supporting breadwinner families to promoting an ‘adult-worker’ model’.   However , experiences of implementing FIS  reveal the   contradi ctions associated with this change  in the absence of attention to implications for the division of unpaid family labour, including  caring  responsibilities (Daly ,  2011)."
"21" "In a recent analysis, McCashin (2019 : 193) described developments in Irish C IS  policy as ‘a stable set of provisions in a changing context, such that the changed context undermines the capacity of the provisions to meet their underlying goals.’  He argued that policy makers were constrained over time in their efforts to adapt the male breadwinner model, both by their own views and by a distinctive legal and constitutional legacy (McCashin 2019 :  168).  This article adds to McCashin’s analysis  by offering a first-hand description of how  one of Ireland’s  CIS  payments -  FIS   has  altered over time in the context of  changing family dynamics and  policy priorities .  Based on qualitative, semi-structured interviews with key informants ,  we show  that  policymakers   now  see FIS primarily  as an incentive  for  parents to transition into full-time employment .   However,  their reflections reveal the extent to which  this creates new difficulties for meeting FIS’s dual role as a child income support."
"22" "The article begins with an overview of international research on IWBs,  placing them in the context of the transition towards a social investment state.  This is followed by a detailed analytical discussion of FIS, showing how it has altered alongside changing family dynamics and social policy imperatives in Ireland.  We then present our analysis of interviews with key informants, carried out as part of a larger study on participant experiences of FIS ( Gray and Rooney, 2018 ) .  We conclude with a discussion of our findings  and suggest some implications."
"23" "OVERVIEW OF IN-WORK BENEFITS"
"24" "IWBs are policy measures ,  introduced in many countries  which  seek to reduce poverty  alongside  incentivising employment (Immervoll  and  Pearson, 2009). Many IWBs and tax credit systems subsidize the wages of low-income workers and particularly target mothers (Blundel l  et al, 2016).  R esearch explores the responsiveness of women to employment incentives and the importance of family situation (Chzh en and Mi d d leton ,  2007; Adam and Browne ,  2010 ;  Akgündüz  and  Plantenga, 2011 ).   Blundell et al (2016) find that tax credits increase labour supply of mothers but decrease that of married mothers.  R eforms  to UK IWBs  strengthen  the incentive for couples with children t o have one earner ,  and  weaken incentives for  dual-earner  households  (Adam and Browne,  2010). Moreover, Chzhen and Middleton (2007) affirm that working tax credit s  act as incentive s  for working partnered  mothers to reduce hours."
"25" "S ocial investment emerged from challenges to neo-liberalism and a  desire  to   ensure that populations   can deal with post Fordist issues such as  employment   in security and precarious employment ( Jenson and Saint Martin, 2003 ;  Jenson, 2009   Morel e t  al, 2012). The European Commission  (EC)  describes   social investment as investing in people and maintains that it involves polic i es designed to strengthen peoples’ skills ,  as well as to support them to participate fully in empl oyment (E C , nd ). This includes   key policy area s  such as education, quality child care, healthcare, training and job searching.  The  E C   social investment package aims to encourage countries to implement social policies that contribute to   economic growth, protect people from poverty and stabilise economies (Bouget  et al , 2015). It states   that women benefit through  equal and better labour market  opportunities .   R ecently  Ireland has  adopted elements of social investment ,  but Irish policies are primarily focused on   activation of unemployed people ,   with   small moves in  early childhood education  (Daly, 2015) .   Transitioning to a social investment state means that there is an emphasis on inclusion ,  plus labour   market participation   favouring  the formation of  two earner households (Ferrera, 2009)."
"26" "A work-first policy approach considers caring as a barrier to employment in many countries (Ingold and Etherington, 2013). Parents are expected to work but policy often does not consider their preferred care choice and childcare prices also affect mothers’ involvement in employment  (Akgündüz and Plantenga, 2011; Ingold and Etherington, 2013). Therefore, caring restricts opportunities for paid work (Shildrick et al 2012). Under social investment perspectives, family policies are framed as employment policies and lead to a focus on reducing family constraints towards labour force participation (Saraceno, 2015). Despite Irish policy moves towards social investment, early childcare education remains expensive and has not embraced a work-life balance approach (Daly, 2015). Focusing on paid work devalues other elements of our lives including leisure or social participation (Saraceno, 2015).  Thus it appears that social investment approaches prioritize the right to work over any right to care."
"27" "OVERVIEW OF FIS AND CHANGES TO FIS"
"28" "Changes to FIS and Family life"
"29" "FIS  is an  Irish  income tested  IWB  and  CIS   introduced in 1984 ,  o riginally intended  as a  temporary measure t o  provide relief to  low- income families  after  food subsidie s  ceased  (DSP 2010 , 40 ).     Over time ,   FIS  has been modified  alongside changes in family dynamics.  FIS defines  ‘ f amily ’  as any household with at least one parent or guardian and a child (Citizens information, 2017 a ). However, since  its introduction ,  there  have been   substantial changes in  household  composition and work-family arrangements.  These have been accompanied by legislative changes  relating to the status of women and children, marriage, c ivil partnership and  child welfare."
"30" "M any  European Union (EU)  states ,  including Ireland ,  have  developed   policies promot ing   female l abour force participation  (Daly,  2011)  which  can le a d  to de-familisation of care (Lewis ,  2001 ; Coakley , 2005 ). Although there was a shift  towards  an adult -worker  model, Irish policies relating to caring have not  fully  adapted to family changes, despite some moves in this direction , including  Early Childhood  Care  and Education (ECCE) scheme s .   ECCE  offers free childcare for  fixed  hours over a  set  period of weeks for children aged over three and less than five and a half (Citizen Information, 2017  b ). However, access to childcare outside of ECCE hours and before or after  f ree pre-school year s  depends on parents’ income (Byrne and O’Toole, 2012).  F ailure to fully address caring by Irish policy has implications for FIS.   In 2018, FIS was renamed the Working Family Payment (WFP) , which aims to   make  employment monetarily worthwhile and reduce child poverty  (Doherty, 2017) .  However,  critics  maintain that  it  is  merely  a name  change   without  address ing  issues that prevent worthwhile employment ,  such as precarious working,  poverty traps,   un affordable childcare,  and  low pay   (Brady,  2017 ; O’Dea, 2017 ).   S ections  below  highlight how FIS was introduced during period s  of change  to  Irish family dynamics and provide an overview of subsequent trends in family life  includ ing   separation, divorce, cohabitation, lone-parenthood ,  increas ing  female  employment  and  immigration   (Daly 2004,  Gray , Geraghty and Ralph , 2016)."
"31" "Early stages 1984-1989"
"32" "Irish social welfare policy traditionally favoured a full-time homemaker role for mothers and  provider  duty for fathers  (Daly and  Clavero ,  200 2 ) .    It  sought to support traditional family structures founded on marriage consisting of  male-female  partnership s  with children.   From the 1970s, there was a change  in  emphasis  towards  promoting the rights and welfare of individuals within families, rather than on supporting the family as a hierarchical, corporate unit (Fahey 1998 ; Fahey and Nixon ,  2012 ).   For example ,   an ‘unmarried mother’s allowance’   was introduced in 1973,  and  payment of children’s allowances directly to mothers was introduced in 1974 .   Yet  aspects   of a ‘male breadwinner’ model   remained in  Irish family policy."
"33" "By 1984, Ireland  experienced  pressure   from  EU  social security equality directive s  and feminist groups  to  transition  from patriarchal values that had dominated social welfare polic y  development   ( O’Connor and  Murphy ,  2008).   Irish unemployment was high in the 1980s and spending on social welfare increased dramatically as a proportion of GDP (Peillon ,  2001).  FIS was  first  introduced to help alleviate child poverty ,  support low-income families  and because wages of low-income workers converged with those of social welfare recipients (Commission for  S ocial  W elfare ,  1986 :  300 ).  However,  its  original structure tended to reinforce the breadwinner family   because  it  was offered  to  one adult p er-household , work ing  a minimum of 30 hours  per-week.  This  favour ed  two-parent families  with a division of labour between work and caring,   i n contrast  to  lone-parents   with   limited  part-time  work availability due to  caring requirements .   As we will see, FIS   increasing ly  bec a me an important source of support for growing numbers of one-parent families  a s Irish family patterns changed ."
"34" "The 1980s witnessed a rapid decline in  birth and fertility rates  ( Punch 2007;  Canavan 2012), accompanied by a steep increase in the proportion of births outside marriage (Fahey 2016, p. 60).    F emale  employment  grew by 54.6   per cent  compared to 10.2   per cent  for men  from 1971-91  (Walsh ,  1993 ) ,  which was   mostly  attributable to married women  entering  the  workforce (Fahey et al. 2012 ).   FIS policy responded to  these  changes  in 1989,  by enabling a spouse’s income to contribute towards eligibility ,  rendering  it possible to combine couples ’ hours  to meet FIS criteria.  The  minimum hours   for eligibility  were reduced  from 30 to 24 in 1987 and again in 1989 to 20 hours  per-week .   Figure  1  demonstrates how  the  reduction  in  minimum hours  for FIS  coincided with   increas ing  female  employment .  (The increased   per child payment to large families in 2006, is discussed in Section 4.4, below)."
"35" "Figure  1 :   Irish  f emale  e mployment rates (Eurostat, 2015 ,  Punch 2007, CSO ,  2015  a ) ."
"36" "fortnight fortnight"
"37" "fortnight"
"38" "fortnight"
"39" "1990-2005"
"40" "In the 1990s, European policy discourse shifted  in favour of  an ‘ adult-worker  model’ in the context of continuing individualisation  and  a focus   on the employment of mothers (Coakley, 2005).  T he EU a nd  Organisation for Economic Corporation and Development (OECD) encouraged   their   members to move from passive to active labour strategies  to encourage   employment  amongst   social  welfare  recipients  ( Whitworth  and  Griggs ,  2013 ;  Bengtsson ,  2014). Ireland was slow to move  in this  direction  and  we argue that attempts to adapt FIS at this juncture exposed paradoxes of individualisation within the adult-worker model ,  in the absence of any plans to address caring."
"41" "The literature   contend s   that  a  reluctance to adopt active strategies  was  partly  due to economic conditions  and  later   documents  a movement towards a ‘mother worker regime’ where part-time work is facilitated alongside  domestic  caring dutie s   (Murphy,  2010,  2014) .  W hen making decisions regarding work, economic costs  are secondary concerns to moral  criteria about what is socially right  ( Duncan and Edwards,  1997).  Mothers’ decisions are often based upon childcare obligations and secon dly by employment opportunities  (Coakley, 2005).  Policy   has also  shift ed to  promot e one parent   workforce  engagement.  In 1996 0.35% of adults over 15 were divorced and this increased to 2.77% in 2016. In 1996 2.82% of adults aged over 15 were separated whereas 3.15% were separated in 2016 (CSO,  2018 ).   F ewer than 10  per cent  of births  were  outside marriage  w hen FIS was introduced ;  however, i n 1997, 41  per cent  of  non-marital births  were to lone-parents (Fahey  and  Russel ,  2001).  I n 2001, 12 per cent of children aged less than 15 lived with a lone-parent (Fahey and Russell, 2001).   Nonetheless ,  e xercising policy elements of both individualisation  and familization  through the adult -worker  model is not unique to Ir eland . Daly (2011)  demonstrates the coexistence of both policy types across Western Europe, with individualisation policies that include minimised supports to lone mothers that target activation strategies alongside financial payments to families . She  suggest s that countries engage in a  dual-earner  gender specialized family model of policy reform   rather than an  adult-worker  model ."
"42" "Irish  employment rose considerably  in  the late 1990s  and  there   wa s  a growth in divi sions  between work-poor  and  work-rich households  due to   domestic   structural changes in   education,  economy and employment   ( Singley  and  Callister 2003 ;  Logue  and  Callan ,  2016) .  D ual-income   and w ork-rich households  increased ,  with   all working age  family  members in paid employment ,   and  such households  were  likely to have high education  levels   (Gregg   and  Wadsworth ,  1994 ;   Russell et al. 2004 ;  OECD, 2011 ).  This contrast s  with  lone parents  who tend to have lower levels of education  plus   a higher risk of unemployment  (Watson  et al. 2011 ). Furthermore, Irish childcare  is not adequately  state - subsided  encourag ing   lone parents to  remain at home to raise  children ,  and m any  households  engage in family leave or  exit   employment (Coakley, 2005, CPA, 2005,  Canavan , 2012)."
"43" "F emale labour force participation   gr e w from 35.7 per cent  in 1990 to 51.9   per cent  in 2005  and  many  engaged in part-time employment   (OECD ,  2015) . In 1990, 21.2   per cent  of employe es  were  part-time female  workers ,   gr o w ing  to 34.6 per cent  in 2005 (OECD ,  2014c).   A majority of  educated women  and those without pre-school children  chang e d  from full-time  domiciliary  role s  to  employment ,  yet  state support s  to encourage both parents into  employment  were low er than  other  EU countries (McGinnity  and  Russell ,  2008).   FIS responded to   dual-earner  household  increase s and  challenges associated with  caring roles  by reducing minimum  eligibility work hours  from 20 hours per week to 38 per fortnight (Figure 2).    These changes responded  to both the movement towar ds a dual-earner regime and  increase s  in lone-parents working  part-time.   However, this was not an incentive for  mothers  to work longer hours, nor did it address the cost of childcare .  This policy change is complex and contradictory in nature as FIS attempted to address both the needs of low - income,  and l ower educated  f amilies while also trying to address requirements of lone-parents."
"44" "C hanges to  FIS  minimum  work  hours represented a response by policymakers to growin g  female employment participation and   women’s tendency to work part-time in the  1990s .  They appeared  to  support   an adaptive breadwinner model by  promot ing part-time employment."
"45" "Figure  2 :  Percentage full - time and part-time  Irish  f emale labour-force  participation 1990-2005 (OECD 2014a ;  OECD 2014 c)"
"46" "T erminology used to describe social policy  gradually changed.   T he  1970s means tested allowance for un-married mothers  became   the  1990s  L one- P arent  A llowance and  the  One-Parent Family Payment (OFP)  in 1997 . However, in 2005 the employment  rate  for lone-parents in Ireland was just 44.9  per cent  compared to the OECD average of 70.6  per cent  (Hannan   et al. 2013).  Irish c ohabitation tripled  from 1994-2002 and was often  a temporary state more common amongst urban younger childless couples  ( Halpin,  and  O' Don oghue 2005;  CSO, 2012;   Canavan , 2012;  Hannan  and  Halpin 2014).   I n a movement away from its original principles favouring traditional family types, cohabitating couples became eligible to receive FIS in 1991.   T her e w ere  a lso  decrease s  in percentage s  of married FIS  recipients   and increase s  in single parent  beneficiaries  ( DSP, 2017;  Figure 3).  I n 1990 ,   95. 4  per cent  of recipients were married  and  1. 9  per cent  were single  whereas, in   2002, 47.4  per cent  of recipients were married  and  34.8  per cent  were single  (Figure 3) ."
"47" "Figure  3 :  Percentage   of single and married FIS recipients   (DSP, 2017)"
"48" "2005-present"
"49" "Ireland witnessed substantial spending on active labour market strategies during the Celtic Tiger era .   H owever, they were not considered well implemented or monitored  and   S ocial  P artnership negotiations  led to increases  in   welfare payments   (Martin ,  2015) . T hus, when the Irish economy crashed after 2008 ,  the government w as  required to implement strict ly  monitored   labour-market  activation strategies   by The Troika  (Murphy, 2016).   Although there was discourse regarding job searching support in the 1980s and a job search programme was introduced compared to activation strategies after 2008, it contained supportive conditionality with poor implementation (Bond, 19 8 8 ; Murphy, 2010 ).   Murphy (2010) charts how  employment  policy discourse in Ireland moved from labour market activation in 1980s  to more   passive strategies alongside strong economic growth during the 1990s and mid-2000s, to vigorous activation strategies  post  2008 ( Figure, 4 )."
"50" "Figure  4 : Timeline of labour market discourse in Ireland adapted from Murphy (2010) ."
"51" "Although FIS is not a labour activation policy,  a  growing emphasis on ‘ work-first’  placed a spotlight on  its  role in  supporting  labour -market  participation   and assisting  in work  activation of lone-parents. Because of increased awareness of FIS, changes to OFP and  an  economic recession, the number of  recipients  increased   from  11898  in  1996 ,   to 50306 in 2014.  Male dominated  occupations  experienced dramatic job losses  compared  to traditionally female sectors such as health and education   in the recession ( McGinnity et al. 2014). Although numbers of  partnered  female employees working  fewer  than 30 hours per week dipped from 46.2  per cent  to 38.8  per cent   in 20 13 , the percentages of  partnered  men   working  fewer   than 30 hours per week increased from 3.9  per cent  in 2006 to 8.6  per cent  in 2013 ( Figure  5 )."
"52" "Figure  5 : Percentage of couples and lone-parents working 1 to 29 hours per week (OECD 2014   b)"
"53" "Adjustments to  FIS income thresholds coincided with changes to the employment rates of lone and partnered mothers ,  and reflected the shift in emphasis towards activation  (Figure 6) .   By 2011, 24.5  per cent  of   Irish births  were to lone-parents (Hannan, Halpin et al. 2013 , figure 6 ).  I n 2012 ,  employment rates were lowest for lone-parents, cohabiting  families  and formally married single adults  ( McGinnity   et al. 2014). In 2014 the employment rate for lone mothers was 46.2  per cent  compared to 63.3  per cent  for partnered mothers ."
"54" "Figure  6 : Percentage employment rate for partnered and lone mothers aged 15-64 years with at least one child aged under 15 years (CSO, 2014;   OECD 2014b ;  CSO 2015  a, CSO 2015,  b )"
"55" "The  Survey on  Income  and Living Conditions ,  s hows  that in 2013, lone-parents (c.60  per cent ) ha d  the highest  basic  deprivation  levels     ( Watso n, et al. 2016). T he  cut-off point  to receive OFP was reduced to seven years for   one’s youngest child in 2015.  R ecipients who no longer qualified for OFP transitioned into other   programmes .   Thus, i n  2013 ,  1,500 people moved from OFP to FIS and a nother  1,100 moved in 2014  (Millar and Crosse, 2016).   In 2003 38.37% of FIS recipients  were one parent families ,   which  increased to 49.79 %  in 2015  (Figure  7 )."
"56" "Throughout the 1980s, large families had been considered most at risk of poverty, before the focus of concern shifted to lone parents  (Fahey and Nix on 2012 : 131). Although  fertility  declined  rapidly in the 1980s  (as discussed in Section 4.1, above), there are still a substantial number of moderately large  families. For instance, in 2006, 21 per cent of mothers had four or more children and 7.5 per cent had more than 5 (Fahey et al ,  2012). Per-child FIS payments to large families were increased in 2006 considering that larger families  continued to be at greater  risk of poverty ."
"57" "Figure  7 : Number of one paren t and two parent FIS recipients  (DSP, 2017)"
"58" "This section discussed  the evolution of  FIS in the context of  changing  family dynamics and  the transformation of  Irish social policy . It   identified how FIS responded to these changes ,   sometimes in  contradictory ways.    In the next section, following a brief discussion of our methodology,  we present results from  expert  interviews   that were carried out as  part of a broader study  on FIS.  Our analysis shows  how  its  evolution alongside changing  Irish  family  dynamics   created paradoxical goals that continue to inform how experts think about the  aims  of FIS within the current socio-economic and policy context."
"59" "METHODOLOGY"
"60" "Data collection"
"61" "The findings in this section are based on a larger study on participant experiences of FIS, funded by  the Irish Research Council (IRC)  in collaboration with   the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection (DEASP) .  As part of that study, we conducted interviews with key informants in order to uncover  underlying drivers of   policy change in  an  Irish context. The  main objective was to  understand the motivations behind policy decisions relating to FIS.   Ten  semi-structured interviews were carried out with  informants  who had knowledge of  IWBs,  policy development and research ( Table 2 ).  Interviews with e xpert s  are valuable data collection tools in the study of public policy-making (Beyers et al, 2014).   The primary advantage is that interviews provide more detailed information than documentary collection methods alone   as  they have the potential to uncover ‘the contradictions, uncertainties and politics inherent in policy-making’ (Duke 2002, p. 55) .  By engaging with experienced informants work ing  with FIS beneficiaries, the research is grounded in tangible evidence from those with knowledge and expertise to consider the evolution of FIS .   Informants were involved  in  design ing , deliver ing   or  implement ing  FIS  and  consisted of policy actors,  representatives of  low-income workers  and   academics.   Participants were recruited through snowball sampling .   E thical approval was obtained from  Maynooth University   ethics committee prior to commencing fieldwork.  I nformation sheet s  and consent forms were  provided to  interview ees  with a n interview topic guide  that focused on  participant’s background, administration of IWBs, description of FIS, integration with other supports,  and  the meaning of supports to families.   This   help ed to   compar e  resultant transcripts  and ensured  consistency of questions, while allowing flexibility to follow emerging leads during interviews (Stevenson, et al,  2007 , Table 1 )."
"62" "Table  1 :  Examples of interview   questions"
"63" "Background information:"
"64" "Could you describe your current role?"
"65" "What is your involvement with FIS?"
"66" "Could you describe  how FIS was developed?"
"67" "Description of FIS:"
"68" "How would you describe FIS?"
"69" "Will  you describe the main purposes of FIS?"
"70" "Will  you describe the main strengths and weaknesses of FIS?"
"71" "Would   you describe how   FIS integrate s  with other means-tested payments or income supplements?"
"72" "Administration of IWB S"
"73" "Would  you discuss how   changes to FIS  since i ts introduction in 1986 affect  its administration/effectiveness  or not ?"
"74" "Will  you describe how changes have affected low-income families?"
"75" "Meaning of supports to families:"
"76" "Will   you describe what  FIS mean s  to low-income families?"
"77" "In your opinion how can FIS change if necessary?"
"78" "Table 2 :  Participant descriptions"
"79" "Interview number Role"
"80" "1 Researcher"
"81" "2 Economist /researcher"
"82" "3 Policy officer /organisation representing low-income"
"83" "workers"
"84" "4 Policy Officer"
"85" "5 Policy Officer"
"86" "6 Policy Officer"
"87" "7 Policy Manger /organisation representing low-income"
"88" "w orkers"
"89" "8 Policy Officer"
"90" "9  Policy Officer"
"91" "10  Policy Officer"
"92" "Analysis of interview transcripts"
"93" "Data were generated using audio-recorded interviews  and  transcribed verbatim. Interviews were analysed  inductively  using  thematic  framework analysis (Ritchie and Spencer, 1994, 2002).   Within this approach, a nalysis  takes place across  five stages ,  namely :  identif y   a   thematic  analysis   framework,  index, chart and synthesis e  the data   (Furber, 2010) .   We constructed a thematic framework by coding  key themes embedded in the transcript s  ( Iliffe et al, 2013) .  T ranscript s  w ere   then further  read and annotated according to the  thematic  framework. Links between categories were identified and grouped to form a hierarchy of themes  and d ata  in   previously  indexed  transcript segments  were arranged into charts of themes  displaying their key characteristics and relationships   (Ritchie and Lewis, 2008 ).   Results were synthesised and described in a report format  ( Gray and Rooney , 201 8 ) ."
"94" "FINDINGS"
"95" "Findings are discussed in the sections below  where three  overarching themes emerged from analysis: (1) 'work-first' approach, (2)  child poverty  and  (3)  encouraging care .   Informants  reported that FIS  responded to economic and demographic changes by moving away from some of its original goals. They noted that  the scheme  is now accessible to part-time workers in response to  increasing  numbers of female employees and lone-parents.  In terms of expenditure FIS  was viewed as a small payment in comparison to  other social welfare schemes and o riginally many eligi ble families did not take-up the scheme  (Callan,  O’N eill and O’Donoghue, 1995). In addition,  informant s felt that take-up of this scheme was initially low :  “I think that the participation rate for FIS recipients relative to where it should have been was low”  ( Informant   2).   They s urmis ed  that  potential claimants were seemingly  unaware of its existence .   Overall,  however,  Informant s   felt that FIS  is developing without a clear  focus and  determined that  the purpose of FIS has become unclear   after years of change:  “But there have been quite a lot of changes. You know…lowering…changing the hours threshold …I mean as I have said it’s grown in terms of expenditure and in terms of numbers but still nobody knows what it is actually doing”   (Informant 1) .   Moreover,   Informant 8 cautioned that changes to policy often have unintended consequences  that  may affect other social welfare schemes, therefore changes to FIS should be given careful consideration:"
"96" "I think what happens is when the scheme changes, where th e eligibility conditions change , often what happens is not what people expected to happen…there can…be unintended consequences and then another change has to be made."
"97" "Work-first approach"
"98" "Informant s reported that  language  used by FIS policy  assumed that it supported male breadwinner households:"
"99" "T he original  legislation of 1984… said man and wife, or husband and wife .. .  But certainly ,  over the years the definition of a couple or family was also included.  It probably said man and woman cohabiting until the new legislation last year, which allows for same sex couples ( Informant  5)."
"100" "The  report for the Commission on Social Welfare (1986)     similarly  used  ‘ male  breadwinner ’  language stating that FIS supplements “ families where the household head is employed full-time ”  (300).    However,  Informant  1   contended that the overarching intention of FIS was  as   an employment incentive: \" FIS is seen as being a way of addre ssing the issue of incentives\"  a nd many  informants  focused upon  the continuing role of FIS  in increasing  overall  employment participation: \" I t’s an in-work benefit for low income families to try and keep them connected to the labour market...it’s a bit  like making work pay for low paid workers…families with children \"  ( Informant  2).  Although   other informants  saw an additional role for FIS in incentivising working parents to transition into full-time employment: ‘the more fundamental question is should we actually support people who are working part-time but should there be conditionality that they have to start to look for more work?’  (Informant 10).   Informant  9 suggested  that, rather than reducing the ‘hours threshold,’ employers should be required to   improv e working   hours and  conditions  to encourage  full-time employment: “ there is an onus on employers I think to give people decent hours and provide decent wages. I think to be reduced any further it (hours threshold) kind of leads to creating unsustainable employment”."
"101" "M any policymakers   subscrib ed  to  a ‘work-first’ approach:  “At the end of the day we want everyone to be in full employment”  ( Informant  5) .   Informant  4  describ ed a work-first approach  a s important socially  thus  encourag ing  positive mental health:"
"102" "It has a huge social aspect to it as well and that encourages people to do better for themselves.   I think that is really positive.  It is always good to see somebody getting into work and  doing what they need to do instead of sitting at home."
"103" "Furthermore,  Informant  8  believed that FIS should encourage in-work approach es  through positive c onditionality measures for  up skilling :"
"104" "There  should be...I think in tandem with employers particularly employers who use FIS quite a lot, I think I’d like to see some sort of training or educational element offered to FIS recipients, not as a stick  -  as a carrot."
"105" "Child poverty"
"106" "From its inception  FIS  had a dual role as an income and child support   that   sought to reduce child poverty. Interviewee 2 describ ed  it  as a way of connecting families to the labour force  and  believed that  it  retained its purpose as payment to reduce child poverty:  “ t he benefits are predominantly intended for the chi ld rather than for the parents”  while   Informant  6 believed that FIS can assist parents to meet the final costs of child rearing:   \"It helps to pay for the additional costs of  working, child care and travel\".  They  noted that child rearing costs change according to children’s' life stages and suggested some scope to carry out research into FIS effectiveness at different time points:"
"107" "Because then you have to throw in childcare costs which surely ... would wipe out  the gains in  working. So there is kind of an interesting balance there as to when FIS does and doesn’t  work for families ...I t would be interesting to see when  (FIS recipients)  started … and to align  that up then to the ages of children ."
"108" "Informant  3  also  found that low-income workers faced challenges throughout a child's lifespan that may  necessitate that parents s pend more time at home: \" They might have a teenager now ...  They ... don’t need childcare but they might be going through difficulties in school, they might have mental health difficulties and parents were saying I actually can’t le ave them alone now\" .   Others  asserted that  when it was introduced FIS   helped  workers ’ overall  recover y  from  a  persis tent  1980s  recession as  it was not   previous ly  possible to receive m ultiple  social welfare payment s :"
"109" "The big thing at the time it was introduced was it wasn’t possible to actually be in receipt of FIS and another welfare payment because if you were working 38 hours a week even in relatively low-income employment you actually couldn’t qualify for another means tested payment…even for…one  parent family payment   ( Informant  10)."
"110" "H owever,  other comments  suggest   that  informant s experienced a  contradiction between  FIS’s   impact  in reducing child poverty and its work-first approach.  Informant   2 suggested the benefit of making FIS available to all low income workers to separate its role as a work benefit and its function as a CIS:  \"B ring in an in work benefit which  would then target low income workers irres pective of whether they  had children \" .   In this model, child benefit is means- tested and a universal credit system exists for all low-income workers. However, he felt this system would perhaps dis - incentivise lone-parents and large families."
"111" "Reflecting on potential po licy changes, informants  discussed  unin tended consequences when changes interact  with other schemes. In this context, Informant 7 noted how changes to OFP had knock-on effects  on  FIS stat ing  that OFP recipients were shocked  at   weekly payment   reductions  when  their  youngest child reached 7 years:  \"I don't think that is particularly incentivising people to stay in work.  And anecdotally...we have heard of a number of parents who have said they had to leave w ork as a result of the reforms\" .      Whereas,  informant  3 was against removing the objective of supporting children: \" The combination of FIS being an in-work income support and a  CIS  at the same time…we think it is important that it does both . .. if you separate the two out, we'd be concerned that the payment wouldn’t be as generous ” ."
"112" "Encouraging care"
"113" "Polic ymakers  thus  suggest  contradiction s  between   the FIS scheme’s  original intention as a work incent ive and  its  evolved  role in enabling parents to care for children or other family members.  Informant s  maintained that there is a focus  on financial models  in  existing research  indicating  a ne ed for qualitative research regarding linkages between FIS as a work incentive and how it responds to caring responsibilities:"
"114" "N one of these  (existing research reports)  are based on people or as ked them  …are you  invested in your job.....you know is it an issue of travel?...childcare?  Or  the money you get?  Um…whatever you know…nobody has actually gone out and talked to people  ( Informant  1)."
"115" "Many  Informant s  queried whether making FIS available to part-time workers was  a disincentive to seeking fulltime  w ork  hour s   given requirements of caring .  They  felt that there was a conflict between FIS as a work-first policy and the cost of childcare:  \" I t would have to be very financially beneficial for a person to increase their hours because otherwise they could spend more time with their children at home \"   ( Informant 4) .   Moreover ,  Informant  10  felt  the purpose of FIS was now unclear  and  was concerned that  entry of  part-time workers go es  against the ethos of work-first strat egies :"
"116" "A reasonably large proportion of the people on FIS have care responsibilities, which are effectively going to prevent them working full-time. Then what is FIS then?   …. I’m not sure what it is… Has FIS become for those people actually a kind of a proxy carer’s payment?"
"117" "However,  others  deemed the  work -first approach as unfair to lone-parents and  suggest ed that the ability to work part-time and care for family members is partic ularly important to this group :  “for a lone-parent the main barriers are their parenting responsibilities, balancing parenting and work, access to affordable child care that is a huge issue”   (Informant 7) .  They  maintained that the  ‘ hour threshold ’  was too high for lone-parents struggling to balance work and caring responsibilities:  “they might find it hard to meet the 38 hours a fortnight condition, but also if their hours drop at certain times in the year then they lose entitlement to FIS”  ( Informant  7).  In addition ,  Informant  3 considered that it was vital to support lone parents:  \"your wages don’t take into account whether you are a single person or a single person with children. So if the social welfare system doesn’t take that into account, people aren’t going to be able to  make ends meet in a job\" .   She believed that   many employed lone-parents experienced income cuts due to changes to OFP   and FIS  in contrast to the ir   stated  aim of incentivising work :"
"118" "And how was that experience for them? To suddenly realise you were €80 a week down as a result of reforms even though you are doing everything the government say they want to you to do which is to go out and to work and to bring in an income."
"119" "However,  in terms of dual income families,  others  maintained  that  current  ‘ hours threshold s ’  enabled  thes e households  to  split   their hours to meet FIS requirements and address carin g responsibilities more easily:"
"120" "Couples have the same childcare responsibilities that a lone-parent has but the hours  ‘ work threshold ’  is the same. So that two people only have to work 19 hours between them. Whereas the lone-parent only has to work 19 on their own. So it's slightly unfair if you've small children  ( Informant 8) ."
"121" "He considered  that  FIS  was  a favourable payment for dual-income households with a large number   of children:  “ I think perhaps it does favour people with larger numbers of children and it was designed that way in the beginning”.   Informant 8   n oted that policy discourse is often critical of high  income thresholds  in  larg e families and  that it  advocates  an option to increase thresholds for one or two children families only.  In addition,  others  emphasised FIS  favour ing of  parent s of large families and proposed an  incom e limit reintroduction as  many of these have large  salaries:  \"(FIS) is based on the number of children that you have… if you have six or seven children the limit is about €1,000s…maybe a limit could be brought in so you could get up to as much as your earnings\"   (Informant 6) ."
"122" "This strategy originated in a NESC (1979) report which   observed that many  large families were financially disadvantaged in comparison to childless households.   Informant  2 noted increase s  in the number of men experiencing reduced incomes in the recent recession and questioned whether FIS create s  a disincentive for men to return to work or increase their hours  in dual-income settings .   H e suspected that childcare might prevent partnered workers from increasing their hours regardless of gender:"
"123" "F emale employment has been slow ... at recov ering … but the recovery it has been a lot  slower in the construction sector and they are predominantly males. ...  that draws  up an  interesting policy question  ... of whether there may be a benefit trap for those males to go back  to work…because of the fact that it is their income rise that would trigger the reduction of  payment.   That’s an interesting policy question for future. ..the provision of childcare is also  an element of the impediments that might be there for some males to go back to work."
"124" "DISCUSSION"
"125" "International literature  s how s  that IWBs  focus on encouraging  low-income mothers to enter  employment  and increase their working hours (Blundell, 2016). It appears that IWBs  also  dis-incentivize  second earners to increase employment (Chzhen and Middleton, 2007 ;  Adam and Browne, 2010;   Blundell, 2016 ) ,  and  work-first approach es  prioritise the right to work over the right to care ( Akgündüz   and  Pantenga, 2011 ;  Ingold and Etherington, 2013 ).  This article sheds light on how IWBs tend to  create  this pattern in an Irish con text and  shows how changing family dynamics with a shift in policy focus towards a ‘work-first’ approach challenge the original values underlying FIS.  This  was originally a work incentive to ensure financial  gain  in low paid employment rather than receiving social welfare payments and was also used as an instrument  to  fight child poverty (Commission for Social Welfare, 1986; DSP, 2010).  Evidence from interviews in this current study,  consistent with documentary evidence provided elsewhere (McCashin 2019;  Gray and Rooney, 2018 )  show that policymakers believe the  initial  aim of FIS was to encourage employment based on a 'male breadwinner' model.  However ,  policymakers are under pressure to make changes due  both to  changing family structures and  shifts in policy priorities . Our study shows that even as policymakers try to adapt to changes and shift towards supporting children rather than family types ,   adjustments to FIS continue to have the unintended consequence of   favouring  a single income household earning strategy , given families’ responsibilities for caring . This  article   documents how policymakers reflected on these challenges."
"126" "Ireland has been moving away from a breadwinner model of labour market participant to a dual-earner model. This study's findings concur with previous research which shows that Ireland has adopted elements of a social investment approach by focusing on the labour activation of parents (Daly, 2015; EU Commission, nd).  Interviews with policy makers and advocacy groups  in this study  demonstrate that there is a strong emphasis  now  on work-first strategies  and  FIS is  viewed  primarily  as  an incentive to assist parents in transitioning into full-time employment.  Policymakers argued that FIS should encourage both parents to work full-time in dual income households.   However,  experts  also maintain that employers  should be obliged  to improve working cond itions and wages for employees."
"127" "This article has outlined changes in family dynamics relating to  the recent ‘great’  recession ,  notably  job loss in traditionally male dominated sectors that led to an increase in part-time working for men (McGinnity et al, 2014) and an increase in the number of lone parents with high levels of deprivation (Watson et al, 2016).  Our expert informants believed  that FIS helped people to recover from recession ,  in line with its second primary aim of fighting child poverty.  Participants  argued  that it helped pay for additional cost s  of working ,  such as childcare or travel.  However , other  research shows that when making decisions regarding work, economic concerns are often secondary to parents versus issues of child care or spending time with their children (Duncan and Edwards, 1997 ; Coakley , 2015)  and interviews with FIS recipients carried out as part of the wider study confirm this for the Irish case ( Gray and Rooney, 2018 ) . Although  our expert informants  believe that FIS helps with the financial cost of child caring, they also note d  that lone - parents face particular challenges balancing meeting  the  hours threshold  against  the need to spend time with their families.  Future research could examine how FIS contributes  financially  to  families when their children are at different life stages."
"128" "Despite maintaining its role as a work incentive, FIS has changed paradoxically  in the context of policy failure  to take account of households with different  work-life strategies and  family formations.   P art-time worker eligibility is contrary to  its  original aims and  the  views of many policymakers wh o   argue that  full-time employment  should be promoted  under the FIS scheme. Policymakers commented that this aspect of FIS goes against its 'work first' ethos in failing to encourage parents to increase their hours.   Research suggests that childcare and early childhood education in Ireland is not adequately subsidised by the state (Canavan, 2012; Daly, 2015).  Contrasting opinions are evident in this present study, where many  informants  feel that it is important for parents to balance care and work. A lack of affordable childcare adds to the complexity of encouraging parents to increase work hours."
"129" "CONCLUSION"
"130" "This  article   helps to provide important context for understanding why IWBs tend to assist single earner rather than dual-income households. It has provided an analytical context for understanding how this pattern persists even in the context of a policy shift towards adult-worker model policies.  Our study demonstrates that even as policymakers try to adapt to changes and shift towards supporting children rather than family types ,  the  scheme paradoxically continues  to favour this household earning strategy  in the absence of wider supports for family caring responsibilities."
"131" "FIS was introduced to support working families at a time when family and household dynamics were beginning to  change  in Ireland. This article highlighted how changes to family formation and a movement in policy focus towards a  work-first  approach challenged the original values underlying FIS.  It  has  been  adapted to some extent to these changes ,  but has morphed in  paradoxical  ways  in the context of policy failures  to take account of  divergent family   household  work strategies.  One  of the original aims of FIS policy was to encourage full-time working .   H owever, the eligibility of  part-time  workers goes against this ethos. This policy may unintentionally favour   the  ‘ adaptive ’   form  of   dual-income households in which one parent works part-time to facilitate  care for family members. It may  also  disadvantage lone-parents who wish to work  less  than 19 hours per - week to care for family.  Nonetheless, it continues to be a vital support for many working families. This is in ways that appear contrary to contemporary policy emphasis on activation towards full-time employment and that disadvantage some family -work strategies ."
"132" "The evolution of changes to Ireland’s IWB opens a critical window on the contradictions inherent in the recent move towards a social investment model with a ‘work first’ agenda , in the context of the ‘innate conservatism’ of the Irish social security system (Murphy 2012) .  Irish policy makers face considerable challenges in attempting to reform  supports to working families  that meet  requirement s  for caring  across the family life course . For instance, there is a need to provide high quality early childhood education  while  acknowledging  parents’ preferences to prioritize family   based  care ,  without disadvantaging lone-parents. In tandem with policy change  it is necessary  to recognise the responsibility of employers to provide adequate working conditions that help to encourage parents to remain in full-time employment. Finally, there is a need for  policymakers  to agree on the modern day purpose of FIS in order to reach its full potential as a family support."
