Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.27

Pp. 324 - 334

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students’ Grammar Performance and Attitudes:
An Investigation of Moodle
Khaleel Bader Al Bataineh
Art Faculty, Irbid National University, Irbid Jordan
Ala’Eddin Abdullah Ahmed Banikalef
School of English Language and Literature, Faculty of Arts
and languages, Jadara University, Irbid Jo Bataineh rdan
Abeer H. Albashtawi
Luminus Technical University College, Irbid Jordan

Abstract
Empowering new generations with technology through employing blended learning approach to
teach English as a Foreign Language has been recently investigated by many researchers in various
contexts. This mixed-methods study aimed at examining the effects of the blended learning
approach on Jordanian EFL learners’ grammar performance. The study also aimed at investigating
the attitudes of Jordanian EFL learners toward blended learning. To achieve the objectives of the
study, it employed a quasi-experimental design (pre and posttests) followed by qualitative
interviews. The participants were divided into two groups: experimental and control groups.
Among the 28 students in the sample, those in the experimental blended learning group (n=13)
were taught using Moodle while those in the control group (n=15) were taught using conventional
methods. All the 13 participants in the experimental group were interviewed. The results of the
posttest revealed that students in the experimental group outperformed students in the control
group. Furthermore, the qualitative analysis results showed that blended learning had a positive
impact on the learners’ English grammar performance and that they were strongly satisfied and
motivated to learn English using similar methods. It is concluded that blended learning could be
used as an effective method of teaching English grammar in EFL settings. It is hoped that these
results will help the university, faculty, and students to develop the skills necessary for blended
learning.
Keywords: attitude, blended learning, EFL students, grammar, Moodle, Performance
Cite as: Al Bataineh, K. B., Banikalef, A.A.A., & Albashtawi A. H. (2019). The Effect of
Blended Learning on EFL Students’ Grammar Performance and Attitudes: An Investigation of
Moodle.Arab World English Journal, 10 (1)324-334
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.27

324

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

Introduction
Blended learning has become a reality in contemporary education, as more and more
educational institutions race to adopt and implement it to provide an attractive and stimulating
learning environment. While many universities in Jordan have at least partly implemented blended
learning to leverage its benefits, online learning is still in the elementary stage at Irbid National
University (INU), where it is utilized only as an aid to support learning and teaching in regular
classrooms. Still, the university is encouraging faculty to take serious steps toward integrating
online learning into their regular classes.
The department of English language and literature has begun to consider online learning
and attempted to integrate it into basic skills and grammar classes. However, EFL learning is a
complicated process that requires substantial efforts to successfully immerse EFL learners in the
language. Further, learning grammar is considered the most tedious skill in learning English, even
though failing to comprehend grammar rules often leads to communication failures (Schulz, 2001).
It is assumed that blended learning can help both EFL teachers and learners reach higher grammar
proficiency by improving their learning practices and utilizing technology to create innovative
learning experiences. Thus, many learning management systems (LMS) have been designed to
support learning and teaching experiences, such as Moodle, Easy LMS, OpenEdX, LearningCart,
and many others. Moodle, the Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment, is
utilized by the majority of Jordanian universities (Bataineh & Mayyass, 2017). Recently, INU has
been promoting Moodle to complement conventional classroom instruction and online tools such
as YouTube, Facebook, and email. Thus, this study aimed at achieving the following objectives:
a) to examine the effects of blended learning on Jordanian EFL learners’ grammar performance
and b) to investigate the learners’ attitudes toward utilizing blended learning.
This study attempted to answer the following research questions:
1. Does blended learning affect Jordanian EFL learners’ grammar performance?
2. Are Jordanian EFL learners motivated to learn English using blended learning?
Literature Review
Blended Learning
Several researchers (Friesen, 2012; Graham, 2006; Poon, 2013) have defined blended
learning as an instructional curriculum which blends online materials with traditional classroom
learning. Both teachers and learners must engage in blended learning, especially since the shift
from teacher-centered education to learner-centered education means the learner actively takes a
major part in the learning process by utilizing online learning. Nevertheless, there are different
models representing the implementation of blended learning, such as an online driver, selfblended, labs, flex, rotation, and face-to-face driver (Horn & Staker, 2015). For the current study,
a face-to-face driver model is adapted, using digital tools to drive EFL education.
The benefits of blended learning cannot be denied, especially at the university level (Wall
& Ahmed, 2008; Garrison & Kanuka, 2004; Poon, 2012). Specific advantages include:
1. Encouraging dynamic, simultaneous, free, joint and significant learning experiences
2. Helping learners to accomplish satisfaction and achievement effectively
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

325

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

3. Enhancing learning and outcomes, including content, objectives, materials, procedures,
and assessment
4. Dealing more effectively with individual differences
5. Managing and controlling the class easily
6. Reducing the cost per credit hour.
On the other hand, blended learning can be a challenge if it is not implemented properly.
For instance, university learners and their teachers should be confident and supported, as they are
the most vital members of successful and permanent implementing blended learning (Darrow et
al., 2013). According to previous scholars (Graham et al., 2005; Hofmann, 2011; Milheim, 2006),
potential challenges to blended learning include:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

The accessibility of technology and the internet.
The need for an LMS matching all the learners’ and teachers’ needs.
Aptitudes and attitudes to cope with new technology.
Live and easy interaction to address learners’ questions.
Cultural adaptation to balance modernity with maintaining one’s identity and values.
Management of the class to assess and observe the learners.

Moodle
Moodle is one of the most well-known LMS with which instructors, administrators, and
learners form personalized learning settings. Moodle courses include resources and activities of
approximately 20 distinct sorts, such as quizzes, assignments, forums, and polls. These activities
can help both teachers and learners navigate and complete courses. Consequently, more than 90
million people from both academic and enterprise settings use it because of its a) ease of use, b)
lack of licensing fees, c) multipurpose platform, d) flexibility, e) security and privacy, f)
accessibility, g) free content and courses, and h) availability in multiple languages (Moodle, 2018).
Using technology to design a language learning class helps EFL learners improve their English
language skills along with giving them numerous chances to practice those skills (Butler-Pascoe,
2003). However, Moodle also can assist in learning many English subjects like grammar. EFL
teachers can integrate Moodle content, for example, into their regular language teaching
classrooms take advantage of the available activities and sources, such as by providing real
interaction with people from different backgrounds who share the same interests and by fostering
a truly collaborative learning environment.
Past Studies
Many researchers have considered blended learning in teaching English in EFL settings.
Recently, Isti’anah (2017) explores the effect of blended learning on students’ grammar
achievement. Twenty-six Indonesian university students were involved in this study. Analysis of
pretest and posttest scores reveal that blended learning had a positive effect on learning English
grammar and that it assists in enhancing the students’ awareness of and interest in learning
grammar. In another study in Thailand, Pumjarean et al. (2017) investigates the impact of blended
e-learning on the grammatical knowledge and writing skills of 54 English major freshmen, their
perceived satisfaction with Moodle’s learning management system, and the effectiveness of
blended learning for enhancing grammatical competency and paragraph writing skills. Their quasiArab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

326

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

experimental design utilizes two instruments, namely a questionnaire and pre and post
achievement tests. The findings shows that the students’ grammar competence is improved, but
the students are neutral regarding their satisfaction with Moodle’s LMS.
In their study, Aslani & Tabrizi (2015) investigates blended learning among 87 Persian
EFL learners. The findings demonstrate that blended learning has an encouraging effect on Iranian
students’ grammar performance. In another study by Ahmad (2016), at a private college in Saudi
Arabia, he explores the impact of Facebook on sixty EFL university students’ writing and grammar
skills, utilizing achievement tests. The findings of the study reveal that Facebook has a positive
effect on the EFL students’ performance on both writing and grammar. In his study, Alshwiah
(2009) explores the impacts of a proposed blended learning strategy for teaching medical
vocabulary to 50 EFL university students. The findings reveal that the experimental group students
(n=28) are more satisfied with online learning when compared to the control group (n=22) due to
administrative issues.
In the Jordanian context, only a few studies were conducted to investigate the effect of
blended learning on EFL students’ grammatical performance. Bataineh & Mayyas (2017) carry
out a quasi-experimental study to explore the effect of blended learning on 32 Jordanian EFL
learners’ grammar and reading comprehension in a state university, where Moodle is utilized in
some classes. In their experimental group, Moodle is used to complement the coventional
classroom. The findings reveal that the students in their experimental group outperform the
students of the control group in grammar as well as reading comprehension. In general, Obiedat et
al. (2014) find that blended learning has a positive and significant impact on university students’
academic achievement. They conduct a survey study on a sample of 427 university students to
investigate the usefulness of blending learning on academic achievement.
Another study by Fakhir (2015) explores the impact of utilizing blended learning on the
academic achievement of 50 female students and their attitudes towards blended learning. To
obtain the desired data, an achievement test and a questionnaire are applied. The findings reveal
that utilizing blended learning has a positive impact on the attitudes of the experimental group,
which do better than the control group in learning English grammar and vocabulary. The study
argues that blending learning is better than conventional learning due to this improvement in the
students’ achievement. Finally, Al-Haq & Al-Sobh (2010) use a web-based EFL program, to
identify a positive impact of blended learning on Jordanian students’ writing achievement. Their
sample includes 122 male and female secondary school students. As online learning is still in the
elementary stage at INU, the current study attempts to investigate the effects of blended learning
on Jordanian EFL learners’ grammar performance and their attitudes toward utilizing blended
learning. The findings of this study depict a realistic picture of how they personally perceived
blended learning and its effect on their performance.
Methodology
Participants and sitting
The participants of this study were 28 Jordanian graduate learners enrolled in the English
language department at INU during the first semester of the 2018–2019 academic year. All the
participants were enrolled in one of two grammar classes that met for three hours a week. The
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

same instructor taught both classes and used the same textbook: English Grammar in Use by
Raymond Murphy. Randomly, one class (13 learners) was assigned to the experimental group
while the other (15 learners) was assigned to the control group. The control group learners were
taught by face-to-face lectures alone while face-to-face lectures taught the experimental group
learners with Moodle supplementation. The Moodle supplementation included Prezi presentations,
videos, homework assignments, and quizzes. A brief introduction to Moodle was given through a
one-day training to the entire experimental group. After preparing the online instructional material,
the lecturer eagerly provided educational and technical assistance via email, forum posts, or online
chat. The posted content included Prezi presentations about grammar (for instance, question tags),
grammar activities, and quizzes.
Instruments
Two instruments were utilized in this study: pre and posttests and semi-structured
interviews. In selecting the pre and posttests from the course test bank, the researchers sought to
cover all the course content, which includes ten textbook chapters on different grammatical
subjects. At the beginning of the semester, all the participants completed a pretest of forty multiplechoice questions. A posttest containing the same questions was given to the learners at the end of
the course. After exploring the posttest data and the related literature, lists of key issues, ideas, and
questions were then prepared for the interviews. As the population of the experimental group was
not large, all 13 learners were interviewed to explore their attitudes toward utilizing blended
learning. This is also vital in providing a clear picture of how they personally experienced blended
learning.
To guarantee the validity of the tests and the interview questions, they were given to five
professors of the English language, then revised according to the professors’ amendments and
advice. A pilot test study was also conducted to test the strength and consistency of the internal
reliability (Cronbach's alpha) of the test. The test was completely reliable, as the reliability
coefficient for the pilot study was measured at 0.83. The pilot study also tested the clarity of the
interview questions and gave the researchers a little practice for the interview. As much as possible,
the pilot study was designed and planned to reflect the actual study to be carried out.
Research Design and Data Analysis
To investigate the effect of blended learning on Jordanian EFL learners’ grammar
performance and their attitudes toward utilizing blended learning, this mixed method study
employed a quasi-experimental design (pre and posttest) followed by qualitative interviews to
clarify student outcomes. Mixed methods research is a helpful strategy for forming a full
understanding of the research problem (Creswell, 2014).
Utilizing SPSS (Version 15.0), the pre and posttest results were analyzed. Descriptive
analyses (means and standard deviation) were conducted to describe the pre and posttest results.
Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) was then employed to find out which group was significantly
different. For the interview, the data were analyzed using interview analysis, which involves
placing the raw data into categories based on the similarities that emerged in the characteristics of
the data (Creswell, 1998).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

328

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

Results
The findings are presented and discussed in light of the research topics: how blended
learning affected learners’ grammar performance and their motivation to continue learning English
using blended learning. Table 1 addresses the first research question, which examines whether
there is any effect of blended learning on Jordanian EFL learners’ grammar performance. The
means and standard deviations of the pre and posttest scores were compared to describe the
grammar performance of both the experimental and control groups.
Table 1. Descriptive statistics of pre and posttest.
Group
Pre Test
Post Test
Adjusted Mean Std. Error
M
SD
M
SD
Control
7.33 3.519 11.47 3.720 11.46
0.685
Experimental 7.31 2.626 15.54 3.178 15.55
0.736
Table 1 shows that the posttest mean of the experimental group (15.54) was higher than
the pretest mean of the control group (11.47). However, the pretest means of both groups
(experimental 7.31 and control 7.33) were almost alike. The data also shows a difference in the
adjusted means (4.09) in favor of the experimental group. The inferential statistical technique
ANCOVA was conducted to find the difference in the adjusted mean post-test scores between the
control group and the experimental group, as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. ANCOVA results of the differences in the adjusted means of the learners’ grammar
posttest scores
Source
Corrected Model
Intercept
Pretest
Group
Error
Total
Corrected Total

Type III Sum of Squares
254.226a
268.563
138.761
116.535
176.203
5426.000
430.429

Df
2
1
1
1
25
28
27

Mean Square
127.113
268.563
138.761
116.535
7.048

F
18.035
38.104
19.688
16.534

Sig.
.000
.000
.000
.000

a. R Squared = .591 (Adjusted R Squared = .558)
As illustrated in Table 2, the adjusted mean of the control group (11.46) was found to be
lower than that of the experimental group (15.55). This reveals that there is a significant difference
in the adjusted means of learners’ grammar posttest scores, in favor of the experimental group
(F=16.534 and p=.000).
The second research question evaluates the motivation of EFL learners for learning English
using blended learning. In face-to-face interviews with all 13 students of the experimental group,
seven questions were discussed. The first interview question was designed to measure students’
willingness to learn grammar using blended learning method. The students were very enthusiastic
about using blended learning, and almost all of them (n=12) stated that they like learning English
grammar using blended learning. For instance, Participant 1 stated: “Yes, of course. I really
Arab World English Journal
329
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

enjoyed during this grammar class.” Participant 7 replied, “I like the new class method.”
Participant 9 said, “Yes, I would like to learn grammar and other courses with this method.” On
the other hand, Participant 10 was not enthusiastic about blended learning, stating, “To me, the
previous “traditional class” was more useful than the blended class. I don’t enjoy it.”
The second question examined the perceived importance of using blended learning. It was
found that the majority of the students believed that using blended learning is very important. One
of the students (Participant 2) stated that “using Moodle is very important as I can easily get in
touch with my professor.” Also, Participant 13 stated that “using this method is really important.
This method facilitates the whole class.” The third question investigated whether the students were
satisfied with the blended learning experience. It was found that almost all of the students were
satisfied with their experience and content with the online materials and quizzes. For instance,
Participants 12 and 4 mentioned that:
“Yes, I am so satisfied with this experience. Although we had some issues in understanding
the Moodle at the beginning, but everything went well and of course having all materials
online allow me to repeat the presentations at home” (Participant 12).
“Yes, I am. The online quizzes were really superb especially the immediate feedback. I
mean you can know the results immediately with the correct answers” (Participant 4).
The fourth question evaluated whether the use of blended learning has fostered or hindered
the grammar learning. All the students emphasized that using blended learning has fostered their
grammar performance. In their words:
Participant 4: “Yes, it fostered my learning. I can do my exercises in any place and at any
time.”
Participant 5: “Sure, the online lessons were more attractive. I mean the lessons are well
developed and organized.”
Participant 3: “Yup, it helped me a lot as I could learn in a very relaxing and comforting
atmosphere. I am that person who is very timid and don’t like to participate in the class.”
The fifth question sought to identify the benefits of utilizing blended learning from the
students’ points of view. According to the majority of the interviewees, blended learning is
beneficial for many reasons, which are summarized below:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Creating a flexible and relaxing setting that accounts for all the individual differences.
Easy to freely access the learning resources through mobile phone and other devices.
Assisting students to better understand the grammar rules.
Attracting students’ attention and making them more involved in the given grammar tasks.
Online assessment and its immediate feedback.
Promoting the interaction between the students and the lecturer and maximizing the active
participation among the students.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

330

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

7. Enhancing students’ computer skills such as downloading and uploading documents,
creating good presentations, and benefitting from websites related to learning the English
language.
The sixth question sought to identify the detriments of utilizing blended learning. The
obtained data revealed that the students encountered a lack of appropriate technological
infrastructure. They reported that the English language lab was not modern and that they had
technical difficulties with the computers, internet network, software, and technical support
services. The students also reported that the internet speed was not good enough, so they relied
on their mobile phones more. For instance, Participant 4 noted that “the main issue was the
lab. The computers were old. I remember that one day the internet was awfully slow and no
one could repair the problem.”
The final interview question assessed whether online learning could totally replace
“face-to-face” education. The majority of the students (n=10) disagreed that online learning
could replace the traditional method. They suggested using online learning along with
traditional methods. They also placed a great value on personal communication with the
lecturer. For instance, Participant 1 responded, “No, I don’t think so. I know that technology
is growing very fast. But, having face to face discussion with my lecturer and colleagues is
very valuable.”
On the other hand, three students agreed that online learning could totally replace the
traditional method. They were very enthusiastic toward online learning as it may facilitate the
learning process. One of them stated, “yes, online learning can completely take the place of
face to face education. Technology will be integrated into almost everything. Our life will be
easier” (Participant 6).
Discussion
The quantitative results showed that the students in the experimental group outperformed
those in the control group. This reflected that blended leaning had a positive impact on students'
grammar performance. Further, the results revealed that integrating technology as a main part of
the learning and teaching process can succeed. Integrating technology allows students to learn in
a motivating and inspiring way in accordance with their individual abilities. The result of this study
is compatible with many previous studies, such as those by Aslani & Tabrizi (2015), Bataineh &
Mayyas (2017), Isti’anah (2017), Fakhir (2015), & Pumjarean et al. (2017), all of which support
the statement that blended learning has a positive impact on the performance of learners in English
grammar.
Moreover, the qualitative results showed that the interviewed students enjoyed the new
experience of blended learning. They were strongly satisfied with and motivated toward learning
English using a blended learning method. The majority of the students believed that using blended
learning is very important to foster their studies. Despite some technical issues, the students
believed that blended learning could help them better understand the lesson and improve their
computer skills in a flexible and relaxing setting that accounts for all their individual differences.
Thus, they suggested that using online learning along with conventional methods. This helps
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

331

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

students to practice what they have learned in front of the class and get the lecturer’s support and
feedback. These findings concur with those of Al-Haq & Al-Sobh (2010), Fakhir (2015), &
Pumjarean et al. (2017), which affirmed that students are motivated toward learning English by
using blended learning. Also, the findings of this study agree with findings by Wall & Ahmed
(2008), Garrison and Kanuka (2004), & Poon (2012), who found that utilizing blended learning is
very advantageous.
Conclusion and Recommendations
In conclusion, the results of this study showed that utilizing blended learning had a positive
impact on the performance of learners in an English language grammar course. Learners in the
experimental group engaged in a dynamic, simultaneous, free, joint, and significant learning
experience. Based on the results, the researchers recommend that the university should implement
the blended learning method in all its graduate courses, especially English language lectures. The
university should take serious steps to update the computer and language labs with new technology
and provide special training on the Moodle system for students, faculty, and employees. Faculty
should be encouraged to utilize blended learning in their classes. Finally, more research should be
conducted to examine the effectiveness of blended learning in Jordanian universities and its impact
on students’ performance. It is hoped that the results of the present study help university, faculty,
and students develop the skills necessary for blended learning.
About the Authors:
Khaleel Bader Al Bataineh, PhD. is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Arts, Department of
English Language and its Literature, Irbid National University, Irbid, Jordan. He is also the director
of INU Library. His research interests are applied linguistics, e-learning, blended learning,
language in use, language analysis, speech acts and their role in communication and sociolinguistic
behavior. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7439-5071
Ala’Eddin Abdullah Ahmed Banikalef PhD. is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Arts,
Department of English Language, Jadara University, Irbid, Jordan. His interests center on the
philosophy of language and philosophy of mind. My current research interests include digital
communications revolution, speech acts and their role in communication, and the influence of
Social Networking Sites on language attitudes and sociolinguistic behavior. https://orcid.org/00000003-4526-9815
Abeer Hameed Albashtawi PhD. is a senior lecturer at Luminus Technical University College,
Foundation and Support Programs Department. Her major research interests include applied
linguistics, reading, vocabulary, motivation, and blended learning. https://orcid.org/0000-00028703-6756
References
Ahmed, A. M. M. (2011). {in Arabic} The impact of using , on the achievement and the attitude
toward it and maintaining the learning impact on the secondary students. The Journal of
the Scientific Education, Egypt, 14 (3): 173-185.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

332

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

Ahmed, M.A. (2016). Using facebook to develop grammar discussion and writing skills in English
as a foreign language for university students. Sino-US English Teachingl, 13, (12): 932952. doi:10.17265/1539-8072/2016.12.004.
Al-Haq, A. F. & Al-Sobh, A. M. (2010). The effect of a web-based writing Instructional EFL
program on enhancing the performance of Jordanian secondary students. The JALT CALL
Journal 6 (3): 189–218.
Alshwiah, A.A. (2009). The effects of a blended learning strategy in teaching vocabulary on
premedical students' achievement, satisfaction and attitude toward English language,
(Unpublished thesis), Arabian Gulf University, Kingdom of Bahrain.
Aslani, S. M. & Tabrizi, H. H. (2015). Teaching grammar to Iranian EFL learners through blended
learning using multimedia softwares. Journal of Applied Linguistics and Language
Research,
2
(8),
76-87.
Retrieved
from
http://www.jallr.com/index.php/JALLR/article/viewFile/188/pdf188
Bataineh, R. F. & Mayyas, M. B. (2017). The utility of blended learning in EFL reading and
grammar: A case for Moodle. Teaching English with Technology, 17(3), 35-49. Retrieved
from http://www.tewtjournal.org
Butler-Pascoe, M. E., & Wiburg, K. M. (2003). Technology and teaching English language
learners. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design - qualitative and quantitative approaches. 4th Edition
California: Saga.
Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design. London: Sage Publications
Fakhir, Z. (2015). The impact of blended learning on the achievement of the English language
students and their attitudes towards it. Master thesis, Middle East University, Amman,
Jordan.
Friesen,
N.
(2012).
Report:
Defining
Blended,
[Online],
Available:
http://learningspaces.org/papers/Defining_Blended_Learning_NF.pdf [22 Sep 2014]
Garrison, D.R. & Kanuka, H. (2004). "Blended learning: uncovering its transformative potential
in higher education", Internet and Higher Education. 7: 95-105.
Graham,C.R. et al. (2005). "Benefits and challenges of BL environments" In M. Khosrow-Pour
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of information science and technology. Hershey, PA: Idea Group.
(253–259).
Graham, C. R. (2006). Blended learning systems: definition, current trends, and future directions,
C. J. Bonk & C. R. Graham, The handbook of blended learning: Global perspectives, San
Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer Publishing.
Hofmann J. (2011). Top 10 challenges of blended learning. Retrieved May 23, 2015
from:http://www.trainingmag.com/article/soapboxtop-10-challenges-blended-learning.
Horn, M. & Staker, H. (2015). Blended: Using disruptive innovation to improve schools. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Isti’anah, A. (2017). The effect of blended learning to the students’ achievement in grammar
class. Indonesian Journal of English Education, 4 (1), 16-30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.15408/ijee.v4i1.5697
Milheim,W.D. (2006). Strategies for the design and delivery of blended learning courses
.Educational Technology, 46 (6).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

333

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Effect of Blended Learning on EFL Students

Al Bataineh, Banikalef & Albashtawi

Obiedat, R. et al. (2014). Effect of blended-learning on academic achievement of students in the
University of Jordan. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET),
9, (2), 37-43. http://dx.doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v9i2.3220
Poon, J. (2013). ‘Blended learning: An institutional approach for enhancing students' learning
experiences’. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 9, (2), 271-288. Retrieved from
http://jolt.merlot.org/vol9no2/poon_0613.htm
Pumjarean, W. et al. (2017). The Development of blended e-learning using Moodle’s LMS for
EFL Grammatical and writing instruction for first-year students in the English major.
Journal of Education and Social Sciences, 7 (1), 81-89. Retrieved from
http://jesoc.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/JESOC7_56.pdf
Wall, J. & Ahmed, V. (2008). Lessons learned from a case study in
deploying blended learning continuing
professional
development,
Engineering,
Construction and Architectural Management, 15 (2), 185-202.
Schulz, R. A. (2001). Cultural differences in student and teacher perceptions concerning the role
of grammar teaching and corrective feedback: USA-Colombia. The Modern Language
Journal, 85: 244-258. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/0026-7902.001

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

334

