Caste, religion, and mental health in India
Aashish Gupta∗†

Diane Coffey∗‡

May 20, 2020

Abstract
The relationship between mental health and social disadvantage in low and middle
income countries is poorly understood. Our study contributes the first populationlevel analysis of mental health disparities in India, where the two marginalized groups
that we study constitute a population larger than that of the United States. Applying two complementary empirical strategies to data on 10,125 adults interviewed by
the World Health Organisation’s Survey of Global Ageing and Adult Health (WHOSAGE), we document and standardize gaps in self-reported mental health between
the dominant social group (higher caste Hindus) and two marginalized social groups
(Scheduled Castes and Muslims). We find that differences in socioeconomic status
cannot fully explain the large disparities in mental health that we document, especially for Muslims. Our results highlight the need for research to understand the
causes and consequences of mental health disparities in India, and for policies to
move beyond redistribution and address discrimination against Scheduled Castes
and Muslims.

keywords: health disparities; mental health; social inequality; India; caste; religion
∗ We

appreciate helpful suggestions from Mahtab Alam, Gurinder Azad, Amrut Bang, Courtney Boen,
Karthik Rao Cavale, Vikrant Dadawala, Jean Drèze, Irma Elo, Sonal Gihara-Sharma, Michel Guillot, Payal
Hathi, Yogesh Kalkonde, Reetika Khera, Sirus Joseph Libeiro, Becky Pettit, Megan Reed, Jason Schnittker, Kanika Sharma, Dean Spears, David Sorge, Nikkil Sudharsanan, Satyajit Somavanshi, Reeve Vanneman, Yana Vierboom, the anonymous reviewers, the editors, and from attendees at SEARCH Gadchiroli, Annual meeting of the Population Association of America, and the Ambedkar Jayanti Seminar at
the University of Pennsylvania. This is a pre-print version. For the online printed version, please see
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-020-09585-9.
† Population Studies Center & Department of Sociology,
University of Pennsylvania.
Email:aashishg@sas.upenn.edu.
‡ Population Research Center & Department of Sociology, University of Texas, Austin and Indian Statistical Institute, Delhi Centre. Email: coffey@utexas.edu. Diane Coffey was supported in part by grant,
P2CHD042849, Population Research Center, awarded to the Population Research Center at The University
of Texas at Austin by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the NIH. The NIH played no role in the preparation of the article, nor in the decision to submit it
for publication.

1

Introduction

A large, multi-disciplinary literature in social epidemiology, public health, and medical
sociology has been concerned with documenting and understanding disparities in health
by race, ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic status, and caste. Researchers studying the
United States have quantified differences in a large number of health outcomes by racial
and ethnic group. This literature also investigates the mechanisms that generate health
disparities and points to policy responses (Kessler and Neighbors, 1986; Link and Phelan,
1995; Williams, 2012; Goosby et al., 2017). Researchers studying low and middle income
countries have also shed light on racial and ethnic health disparities in these contexts, particularly in mortality (Wood and Lovell, 1992; Burgard and Treiman, 2006). Mental health,
in contrast, is widely recognized to be under-researched relative to its disease burden in
low and middle income societies (Demyttenaere et al., 2004). Where population-level
data do permit researchers to investigate the magnitude and nature of mental health disparities in new contexts, such as in Jackson et al. (2010)’s study of psychological distress
in South Africa, gaps in mental health between advantaged and marginalized groups are
large.
We investigate population-level disparities in self-reported anxiety and depression
among adults in India, by caste and religion. Although prior research has shown that, in
India, caste and religion play an important role in many other health outcomes, including
infant mortality (Guillot and Allendorf, 2010; Spears and Geruso, 2018; Ramaiah, 2015),
child height (Coffey et al., 2019), and the use of health services (Baru et al., 2010), to our
knowledge, no prior study has investigated disparities in mental health by social group
using population-representative data in India.
In particular, we document and analyze gaps in these self-reported mental health indicators between higher caste Hindus, the dominant social group, and Scheduled Caste
Hindus (sometimes called “untouchables” or Dalits), a marginalized group which comprises about 17% of India’s population. We also study gaps in self-reported mental health
1

between higher caste Hindus and Muslims. Muslims are a religious minority who constitute about 14% of India’s population. We expect Scheduled Castes and Muslims to
have worse mental health, on average, than higher caste Hindus, not because of anything
inherent about their genetic backgrounds, or cultural or religious beliefs and practices,
but because of their well-documented positions of social and economic disadvantage. We
ask: a) are there disparities in self-reported mental health indicators between Muslims
and higher Caste Hindus, and between Scheduled Castes and higher Caste Hindus? b)
What is the magnitude of these disparities? c) To what extent can they be explained by
disparities in socioeconomic status?
Examining these disparities is important for several reasons. First, the marginalized
groups that we study, Scheduled Castes and Muslims, number 201 million and 172 million
respectively. Together, they constitute a population greater than that of the United States.
Therefore, studying mental health in these large populations furthers our understanding
of the global burden of mental illness and the global burden of disease as well (Whiteford et al., 2013). Second, documenting these disparities in mental health contributes to
an ongoing conversation about the extent and consequences of social disadvantage and
discrimination in India. It adds a much-needed analysis of mental health outcomes to the
literature on health inequalities in India. Third, we test insights from medical sociology
and social epidemiology in a new, developing country context with well-defined social
boundaries and a high burden of material disadvantage.
We use data from the World Health Organisation’s Study of Global Ageing and Adult
Health (SAGE) conducted in 6 large Indian states in 2007-08. The WHO-SAGE is representative of the adult population in these states, and collected information on mental
health outcomes, social group, and socioeconomic status. Prior research has pointed to
the difficulties of translating and verifying measures of mental health disorders in developing countries (Axinn et al., 2013; Jacob and Patel, 2014). Hence, we use broad, simple
indicators of mental health: the extent to which a person has problems with feeling sad,

2

low, or depressed; and the extent to which they have problems with worry or anxiety.
These questions are common to most mental health scales. We also investigate whether
these patterns hold with other measures of mental health available from the WHO-SAGE.
Because prior research on mental health often finds that richer, better educated people
have better mental health (Link and Phelan, 1995), and because India’s Scheduled Castes
and Muslims are materially disadvantaged, we further estimate mental health gaps net
of socioeconomic differences. The results of two different empirical strategies allow us
to draw the same robust conclusion: even after accounting for differences in educational
attainment and asset wealth, marginalized social groups have importantly worse mental
health outcomes than higher caste Hindus.
In the section that follows, we present a conceptual framework and background to
contextualize our approach and findings. We then present our data and approach, followed by our results. We conclude with a discussion of why these findings are important.
In short, most efforts by the Indian government to address social disadvantage focus on
directing resources to marginalized social groups; either in the form of affirmative action
in universities and government jobs, or in the form prioritizing marginalized groups for
government transfers, such as loans and grants for houses, household assets, or village
infrastructure. These policies and programs, while valuable for the people who benefit
from them, do little to address the underlying environment of discrimination that perpetuates inequality across the lifecourse, including disparities in health (Tadvi and Vemula,
2019; Thorat et al., 2007; Housen et al., 2017). Responses to health disparities should combine resource distribution to marginalized groups with stronger stances against violence
and broader efforts to address discrimination.

2

Conceptual framework & background

This research builds on prior work which documents and interprets health disparities
among people from advantaged and marginalized social groups. A rich literature from
3

the United States considers the extent to which health disparities between people of different races can be explained by differences in economic status and education (Williams
et al., 2010; Geruso, 2012; Do et al., 2012). Before presenting our analysis of mental health
disparities in India, we briefly present a conceptual framework based on this literature
that helps us interpret our results.
There is considerable evidence that educational attainment and economic resources
affect health (Elo and Preston, 1996). These relationships often motivate researchers interested in understanding health disparities to control for differences in economic status and
education in their analyses. Disparities that remain after controlling for socioeconomic
variables provide evidence that discrimination, whether structural, such as forms of discrimination related to the organization of health care or to neighborhood segregation, or
interpersonal, such as violence or unfair treatment, also contributes to health disparities.
In the case of mental health in particular, prior studies point to the stress generated by exposure to discrimination as an important reason for differences in mental health outcomes
among people from different social groups (Noh et al., 1999; Williams et al., 1997).
Two observations about this framework are particularly relevant to our analysis. The
first is that the causality between socioeconomic variables and health can run in both
directions: poor health can also cause low socioeconomic status (Deaton, 2003). To the
extent that this is true, standardization analyses like ours, which investigate how much
of gaps in health can be explained by gaps in economic status and education, will provide
an upper bound on the explanatory power of the socioeconomic variables included in the
model (Geruso, 2012). Of course, to the extent that socioeconomic variables included in
the analysis do not capture everything that is relevant about a person’s socioeconomic
status that is relevant for their health, the standardization will underestimate the extent
to which economic status and education explain health disparities. The second observation that we wish to highlight is that, as Hummer (1996) and others have pointed out,
even if differences in socioeconomic status do explain a particular racial or ethnic gap

4

in health, this does not mean that discrimination is not an ultimate cause of the disparity: discrimination often causes differences in economic and educational outcomes, as
well (Pager, Bonikowski, and Western, 2009). Nevertheless, from the perspective of a researcher or policy maker who seeks to understand whether redistribution of educational
and economic resources can close health gaps, the finding that differences in socioeconomic status cannot entirely explain health disparities suggests the need for addressing
the broader social environment as well as unequal material conditions.

2.1

Social disadvantage, socioeconomic status, and mental health

The literature on racial disparities in mental health provides relevant background for
studies of how other forms of social disadvantage, such as caste and religion, contribute
to mental health outcomes. The findings in this literature are nuanced (Earl, Williams,
and Anglade, 2011): although some studies have found lower rates of psychiatric disorders among Black Americans (Breslau et al., 2006), many find that they report worse life
satisfaction and less happiness than whites (Hughes and Thomas, 1998).
More recent analyses from NHANES suggest that Black Americans have slightly higher
prevalence of depression than non-Hispanic Whites (Brody et al., 2018). There is also
considerable evidence that experiencing or perceiving discrimination triggers stress responses and contributes to poor mental health (Myer et al., 2008). Kessler and Neighbors
(1986) analyze community studies and find that race and socioeconomic status interact
to predict psychological distress. Jackson et al. (2010), who study South Africa, find that
socioeconomic differences do not entirely explain differences in distress between blacks
and whites.

2.2

Social inequality and mental health in India

There are many forms of social inequality that may shape mental health in India; this
study focuses on two major divisions – caste and religion. Caste, a system of social strat5

ification with endogamous marriage and hereditary social status, divides Indians into a
large number of groups and sub-groups, called jatis, each occupying varying levels of ritual purity, privilege, and social status (Vaid, 2014; Ambedkar, 1937). The lowest castes,
which were considered “untouchable” because interaction with them was considered polluting, are together classified as the Scheduled Castes (SCs) by the Indian constitution.
Scheduled Castes, who describe themselves as Dalit or “oppressed,” comprise about 17%
of the Indian population (Office of the Registrar General, 2011) and qualify for affirmative
action in politics, government jobs, and university admissions. If India’s 200 million SCs
formed a separate country, they would be the 5th largest country in the world, with a
population slightly larger than Brazil’s.
With a population of over 170 million, Muslims are India’s largest minority religious
group; 14% of the Indian population is Muslim. India has the third largest population
of Muslims in the world, after Indonesia and Pakistan. Indian Muslims face economic
and social discrimination, and often have human development outcomes similar to those
among Scheduled Castes, with far fewer legal protections (Prime Minister’s High Level
Committee, 2006). Compared to the Scheduled Castes, there are fewer government affirmative action programs for Muslims. Muslims in India have frequently suffered violence,
and the rise of right-wing Hindu political parties has further marginalized and disenfranchised Indian Muslims (Ali, 2019; Fazal, 2020).
Comparative sociologists, starting from Marx and Weber, have noted similarities between caste and religious stratification in India, and other ascribed systems of stratification, such as race (Marx et al., 2007; Weber, 2000). Despite similarities, there are also important differences between these systems of social stratification. Whereas racial boundaries are typically considered to be based on phenotypic differences, caste differences are
typically considered to be based on occupational segregation and rules of social interaction governed by rules about purity and pollution (Ambedkar, 1937; Vaid, 2014).
Although caste and religion are social group identities distinct from class, many stud-

6

ies document the role of social disadvantage in reinforcing economic disparities in India
(Deshpande, 2017), in shaping education and schooling achievement (Desai and Kulkarni, 2008), in influencing employment outcomes (Thorat and Neuman, 2012; Aggarwal
et al., 2015), as well as physical health (Ramaiah, 2015; Vyas et al., 2019). These disparities persist inter-generationally (Azam and Bhatt, 2015). Evidence suggests that government programs and the legal system are more coercive when dealing with members
of marginalized social groups (Gupta et al., 2019; Ahmad and Siddiqui, 2017; Bose and
Dayal, 2018). Experiments have helped show that discrimination plays a role in determining these differences (Thorat and Attewell, 2007; Datta and Pathania, 2016; Deshpande
and Spears, 2016). This discrimination likely adversely affect the mental health of SCs
and Muslims over and above the effects they have on economic and educational status.
Data on the mental health is limited in India, and there are no direct estimates of
prevalence of mental health conditions at the national level (Patel et al., 1999; Poongothai
et al., 2009; Gururaj et al., 2016). Modeled estimates from the Global Burden of Disease approach show that in 2017 the prevalence of depressive and anxiety disorders was similar,
with about 3.3% of the Indian population having each (Sagar et al., 2020). A small number of studies, drawing on survey data or community samples, have examined links between social disadvantage and mental health, however (Jadhav and Jodhka, 2012). Ram
et al. (2014) find that male-bias in households was associated with positive mental health
among men and negative mental health among women. In a study in the city of Chennai,
Poongothai et al. (2009) found that female gender, and lower socioeconomic status were
associated with depression. Similar findings have been reported from the state of Goa
in India (Patel et al., 1999). Ravi and Engler (2015) find that workfare programs reduced
anxiety and stress in rural parts of the state of Andhra Pradesh. Housen et al. (2017) find
in a study of the Kashmir valley that 41% of the population had probable depression, and
that exposure to traumatic events was significantly associated with mental illness.
In terms of caste, Mathias et al. (2015) find higher levels of depression among peo-

7

ple from lower castes compared to higher castes in Dehradun district of Uttarkhand, a
state in north India. In a study of mothers who had a recent delivery in the state of Jharkhand, Prost et al. (2012) find that Scheduled Tribe and Scheduled Caste women had higher
odds of having psychological stress when compared to higher-caste women. In Nepal, a
country with a similar caste structure as India, Hawes et al. (2016) finds that Dalits are
more likely to have depressive episodes when compared to higher caste Brahmins and
Chhetris. Spears (2016) uses data from a survey conducted in villages in 13 districts of
North India to document that Scheduled Castes report lower life satisfaction than people from other castes. Our study builds upon this literature by exploring both caste and
religious differences in mental health, and by using population-level data for adults.
There is growing awareness among researchers of the importance of integrating the
study of social inequality with the study of mental health in India. Several autobiographies and short stories by Scheduled Caste and Muslim authors explore links between
experiences of marginalization, discrimination, violence, and mental health (Hasan and
Asaduddin, 2000; Valmiki and Mukherjee, 2008; Pawar and Pinto, 2015). Initiatives to
help those facing mental health problems because of discrimination or violence have involved both counseling (Kandukuri, 2018) and therapeutic support (Susewind, 2013). Following the suicides of students from marginalized social groups in Indian universities,
journalistic accounts have also focused on the mental health impacts of discrimination in
India’s elite universities (Jeelani, 2012; Mondal, 2016; Satheesh, 2019). Recently, psychiatrist Sushrut Jadhav, and anthropologists David Mosse and Ned Dostaler have pointed
out that “caste, mediated by gender and class among other things, affects millions of
people and yet we know little about the mechanisms or experiences of social suffering
involved” (Jadhav et al., 2016) [p. 2]. Our research brings the tools of population health
to advancing this understanding.

8

3
3.1

Data & Methods
Data

We analyze the World Health Organization’s SAGE (Survey of Global AGEing and Adult
Health) data collected in India in 2007-08. SAGE surveys adult health, with a focus on
older adults, and is unique among large-scale population surveys in India because it asks
questions about mental health as well as about physical health. SAGE is representative
of the adult population aged 18 and above in six states: Assam, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal. These states were selected from among Indian
states with populations of more than five million based on their geographic region and
level of economic and human development (World Health Organization, 2013). They are
home to almost half of India’s 1.3 billion people (Office of the Registrar General, 2011).
SAGE used a multi-stage process to select respondents in each state. In rural areas, a
stratified random sample of villages was selected based on village population size with 28
households selected from each village. In urban areas, a stratified random sample of city
wards was selected based on ward population size. Within selected wards, two census
enumeration blocks were further selected, from which 33 households were selected. In
both urban and rural areas, respondents were chosen from within households using a
household roster and a Kish grid. The survey’s response rate was 92.3%, calculated as
the number of completed and partial interviews, divided by the number of respondents
contacted (World Health Organization, 2013).
SAGE collected detailed demographic data for each respondent, including sex, age,
caste, and religion. It also collected information on whether respondents belonged to
one of the Scheduled Tribes recognized by the Indian government’s affirmative action
programs. Scheduled Tribes, also called adivasis, primarily live in central and eastern
India. With the exception of Assam, which has the smallest overall population of any of
the states studied, SAGE was not conducted in places with a substantial Scheduled Tribe

9

population. Consequently, only a small proportion of the overall SAGE sample identify as
Scheduled Tribe. Like Scheduled Castes and Muslims, Scheduled Tribes are marginalized
and often discriminated against (Xaxa, 2008). However, due to the small sample size,
we do not include people from Scheduled Tribes in our analysis. However, when future
data collection efforts permit it, it will be useful for researchers to investigate mental
health disparities between Scheduled Tribes and other groups. Similarly, mental health
disparities in a nationally representative sample of marginalized social groups would be
helpful.
We note that SAGE’s demographic data do not distinguish among the three broad
subgroups within higher caste Hindus – Other Backward Classes (OBCs), Forward castes,
and Brahmins. These three subgroups are hierarchically ranked in the order that they are
listed here, with Brahmins having the highest social rank. The average educational and
economic outcomes for these groups match their social ranking. The fact that we cannot
distinguish among these groups is a limitation of the SAGE data because, although OBCs
have not been as marginalized as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Muslims, they
have historically faced caste-based discrimination. As a result, affirmative action programs were expanded to include OBCs in the late 1990s. If we were able to remove OBCs
from the group “higher caste Hindus,” we would be able to document mental health
gaps between marginalized groups and socially-privileged groups which would almost
certainly be larger than the disparities between these marginalized groups and the group
of higher caste Hindus that SAGE allows us to identify. Therefore, the magnitudes of the
disparities that we document should be considered conservative.
Mental health outcomes. We use responses to two general, simply-worded questions
about self-reported mental health as our outcomes of interest. SAGE asked respondents
the following questions:
• “Overall in the last 30 days, how much of a problem did you have with feeling sad,
low or depressed? None, mild, moderate, severe, or extreme?”

10

• “Overall in the last 30 days, how much of a problem did you have with worry or
anxiety? None, mild, moderate, severe, or extreme?”
These questions are common to most mental health screening tools (Diener et al., 1999).
In additional analyses, we also test the robustness of our results using additional mental
health related outcomes in the WHO-SAGE.
Independent variables. The independent variables we use in our analysis are age, sex
of the respondent, household assets owned, education, per-capita log expenditure, rural
residence, and state.
Income data is typically hard to collect in developing countries; asset wealth is a more
reliable indicator of economic status (Filmer and Pritchett, 2001). We therefore use asset
wealth as our primary indicator of economic status. SAGE asked respondents whether or
not their household owns each of 17 assets: a chair; a table; a car; a motorcycle; a bicycle; a
bullock cart; livestock; a clock; a bucket; a cot, a bed, or mattress; a refrigerator; a fixed line
telephone; a mobile phone; a radio; a tape recorder, or cd player; and sewing machine. We
created five asset ownership categories (0-4, 5-6, 7-8, 9-10, more than 10) based roughly
on quintiles of asset ownership among all the respondents in the sample. Similarly, we
created five educational attainment categories (no education, 1-5 years, 6-8 years, 9-12
years, more than 12 years) based, roughly, on quintiles of educational attainment.
In addition to asset wealth and educational attainment, the results in this paper also
control for the log of monthly household expenditure per capita, which is an estimate
based on a respondent’s answer to the question: “In general, what is your household’s
average overall monthly spending?”

3.2

Approach

We ask: how large are the gaps in self-reported mental health, and can the gaps between
Scheduled Castes and higher caste Hindus, and between Muslims and higher caste Hindus, be explained by differences in their socioeconomic status? In order to answer these
11

questions, we use two complementary empirical strategies. We first use a non-parametric
reweighting standardization technique to generate counterfactual distributions of mental
health outcomes among Scheduled Castes and Muslims. These distributions tell us what
the mental health outcomes of the two marginalized groups would look like if they had
the same distribution of educational attainment and asset wealth as higher caste Hindus. An advantage of this approach is that it matches on the full distribution of SES
variables, not just the means, as regression would. It flexibly allows any non-parametric
interaction between educational attainment and asset wealth. Second, we use parametric ordered logit regression to show that after controlling for SES differences, Scheduled
Castes and Muslims have worse mental health. The advantage of this regression analysis
over the non-parametric reweighting approach is that there are standard inference procedures that allow us to test the statistical significance of our results. We use survey weights
throughout, and account for the mutli-stage sampling design of the survey by clustering
our standard errors at the level of the primary sampling unit.
Non-parametric reweighting standardization. The reweighting standardization approach
that we use to create counter-factual distributions of mental health outcomes for Scheduled Castes and Muslims is similar to the one used by DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux
(1996) in their study of changes in the wage distribution in the United States. It has been
used in health disparities research as well (Geruso, 2012; Coffey, 2015). The reweighting
function that we use to produce the counter-factual distributions is defined as

Ψ(x) =

f ( x | g = 1)
,
f ( x | g = 0)

(1)

where x is a single set of indicators for the intersections of the 5 educational attainment
categories and 5 asset ownership categories described in Table 1. Reweighting is therefore done over 25 education by asset ownership bins. The function f ( x | g) is the empirical
probability mass function for bin x among the higher caste Hindu population (g = 1) or
the Scheduled Caste or Muslim population (g = 0). In other words, f ( x | g) is the fraction
12

of the population group g sample in education by asset bin x, computed using survey
sampling weights. The reweighting function Ψ(x) is multiplied by the sampling weight
of each Scheduled Caste or Muslim observation, so that a counterfactual distribution can
be computed for a counterfactual Scheduled Caste or Muslim population that has educational attainment and asset ownership to match that of higher caste Hindus.
Therefore, the counterfactual reweighted distribution of mental health outcomes m is

m̃ =

Σ i Ψ ( x i ) wi m i
,
Σ i Ψ ( x i ) wi

(2)

where mi is the self-reported mental health outcome of person i; xi is the education by
asset bin of person i; and wi is the survey sampling weight of person i.
To provide some intuition for what the reweighting does, we note that because Muslims and Scheduled Castes have less education than higher caste Hindus, the reweighted
distribution puts more weight on the mental health outcomes of more educated and
wealthier Muslim and Scheduled Caste respondents than it does on the mental health
outcomes of less educated and poorer respondents. The extent to which mental health
outcomes in the counterfactual distributions improve relative to the unadjusted distributions can be interpreted as the extent to which mental health outcomes among Muslims
and Scheduled Castes can be explained by their socioeconomic disadvantage relative to
higher caste Hindus. Because disadvantage in socioeconomic status among marginalized
groups (relative to higher-caste Hindus) can be seen across the distribution of SES, we are
not concerned that the standardization is sensitive to the choice of the standard (Preston
et al., 2000).
It is important to note that the non-parametric nature of this approach limits the number of SES variables that can be adjusted for: if the sample is partitioned into many bins,
computing reweighted mental health outcomes for Scheduled Castes and Muslims would
require dropping some of the higher caste Hindu respondents from the sample. This is because the denominator in equation 1 would be zero if there are higher caste Hindus who
13

have no counterparts in the marginalized group. However, when we reweight over the
25 educational attainment × asset wealth bins, we do not need to drop any higher caste
Hindu respondents from the sample. In the ordered logit regression approach, which
we describe below, we control for household expenditure per capita as well as for asset
wealth.
Parametric ordered logit regression. Each of the outcome variables we study is measured using five ordered categories (none, mild, moderate, severe, extreme). We model
the ordered, discrete self-reported mental health outcome using a linear ordered logit
regression model. Prior literature has used ordered logit models to study other disparities in ordered health outcomes, including disparities in self-reported health by sex and
marital status (Gorman and Read, 2006; Zheng and Thomas, 2013).
In this model, a latent variable m∗ is assumed to be a linear function of the independent variables, with an error term with a logistic distribution. The ordered outcome categories correspond to cutpoints in the continuous distribution of m∗ that are unobservable
parameters fit by maximum likelihood (Rodríguez, 2007).
We write the linear model for m∗ as
mij∗ = β 1 Muslimij + β 2 Scheduled Casteij +
age

β 3 f emaleij + αij + Eij θ + Aij λ+

(3)

β 4 log(expenditure)ij + β 5 log(expenditure)2ij + ε ij ,
where ε ij has a logistic distribution and the ordered logit link function additionally includes four cut-points for the five levels of the outcome variable. Subscripts i index respondents and subscripts j index survey primary sampling units, which are villages or
urban census enumeration blocks. The coefficients of interest are β 1 , on Muslimij , and β 2 ,
on Scheduled Casteij . We also add controls in stages to see whether, in controlled specifications, the gap in mental health decreases, comparing Scheduled Castes and higher
caste Hindus, and comparing Muslims and higher caste Hindus. f emaleij is an indicator
14

age

for whether person i is female; αij is a set of dummy variables for the age of the respondent, in years; Eij is a set of five indicators for educational attainment; Aij is a set of five
indicators for asset wealth; log(expenditure)ij and log(expenditure)2ij are controls for log
monthly household expenditure and log monthly household expenditure squared.
One disadvantage of the ordered logit approach is that it constrains the covariates
to have the same linear latent effect on mental health at each cut point. For example,
if the question is, “Overall, in the last 30 days, how much of a problem did you have
with feeling sad, low, or depressed? None, mild, moderate, severe, or extreme?,” and if
the exponentiated coefficient on Scheduled Casteij is 2, that implies that Scheduled Castes
have twice the odds of reporting both having an extreme problem relative to higher caste
Hindus and of having an extreme or severe problem relative to higher caste Hindus.1
The non-parametric standardization technique helps us avoid this limitation. We also
check that the results from the ordered logistic regressions are similar to the results from
a logistic model with dichotomous outcomes.
The ordered logit has two main advantages over the non-parametric reweighting
standardization technique described above. First, it is possible to include a much larger
number of control variables. Second, unlike the reweighting standardization, inference
here is straightforward: we can determine whether Muslims and Scheduled Castes have
statistically significantly different self-reported mental health outcomes after controlling
for relevant demographic and socioeconomic variables.
1 We

note that, because odds are ratios of probabilities, a uniform effect on odds could have different
effects on probabilities that are low, moderate or high.

15

4

Results

4.1

Summary statistics

Table 1 shows the proportion of people in each social group who reported having mild,
moderate, severe, or extreme problems with depression and anxiety.2 Among the three
social groups we study, about 43% reported experiencing sadness or depression in the
last month, while 52% said that they experienced any anxiety.
[Insert Table 1 approximately here.]
For both outcomes, Scheduled Caste and Muslim respondents had worse mental
health than higher caste Hindu respondents. About 41% of higher caste Hindu respondents, 46% of Scheduled Caste respondents, and 51% of Muslim respondents reported
being mildly, moderately, severely or extremely depressed in the last month. Slightly less
than half of higher caste Hindu respondents, 57% of Scheduled Caste respondents, and
60% of Muslim respondents reported facing anxiety in the last month.
Table 1 also reports summary statistics for the independent variables we use in our
analysis. Higher caste Hindus, Scheduled Castes and Muslims have similar age and sex
profiles: the average age is about 41 years and about 49% of respondents are female. The
summary statistics in Table 1 show, as many other studies do, that Scheduled Castes and
Muslims are poorer and have less education than higher caste Hindus. Schedule Castes
are also more likely to live in rural areas than higher-caste Hindus, while Muslims are as
likely to live in urban areas as higher-caste Hindus.

4.2

Descriptive results

The left-most bars of Figures 1 and 2 show distributions of self-reported depression (Figure 1) and self-reported anxiety (Figure 2) among disadvantaged groups. These distributions are produced using survey weights provided by the WHO SAGE. The middle
2 These

means and standard errors were calculated using the “mean” command in Stata with the “svy”
prefix to account for survey design.

16

bars of Figures 1 and 2 show distributions of the same variables for higher caste Hindus. Within each Figure, the distribution for higher caste Hindus is repeated in panels
(a) and (b) in order to facilitate comparison with the disadvantaged groups. These distributions show that higher caste Hindus are more likely than both Dalits and Muslims
to report better mental health responses. Differences between higher caste Hindus and
disadvantaged groups exist across all categories of the responses; they are not driven by
differential responses in just one category among the five possible responses.
[Insert Figures 1 and 2 approximately here.]
We performed non-parametric Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to compare
each distribution among a disadvantaged group to that of higher caste Hindus. The
resulting p-values are not shown because for each of the four comparisons the resulting p-value is less than 0.001. These tests allow us to reject the null hypotheses that the
distributions of self-reported mental health outcomes among disadvantaged groups and
higher caste Hindus are the same.

4.3

Non-parametric reweighting standardization results

The right-most bars of Figures 1 and 2 plot distributions of self-reported mental health
that are reweighted using the non-parametric approach described above. The reweighted
distributions represent counterfactual distributions of mental health outcomes that answer the question: what would the mental health outcomes of Muslims (or Scheduled
Castes) look like if they had the same distribution of assets and educational attainment as
higher caste Hindus?
The reweighted distributions are closer to the distributions of mental health outcomes
among higher caste Hindus than the unweighted distributions, but for most outcomes,
there is nevertheless still a visible mental health gap. The exception is the gap for depression between Scheduled Castes and higher caste Hindus, which appears to be entirely
explained by differences in assets and educational attainment.
17

4.4

Parametric ordered logit results

Table 2 reports proportional odds from the ordered logit regressions of depression and
anxiety respectively on social group membership and control variables. In each panel,
model 1 shows proportional odds of reporting worse mental health responses for Muslims, Scheduled Caste respondents, and women, with age dummies. The age dummies
allow a non-linear relationship between mental health and the age of the respondent.
Models 2 to 4 add controls for socioeconomic variables in stages: model 2 adds controls
for education categories, model 3 adds controls for asset categories, and model 4 adds
controls for per-capita log expenditure. Model 5 controls for state dummies and rural
residence. [Insert Table 2 approximately here.]
Model 1, which has only demographic controls for age and sex, finds that Muslims
have about 1.7 times the proportional odds of reporting depression, and 1.9 times the proportional odds of reporting anxiety, when compared to higher caste Hindus. After adding
the full set of SES controls (model 4), the coefficient drops to 1.4 for depression and 1.5
for anxiety. These results suggest that Muslims’ lower SES (as measured by the controls
included in the regression) cannot account for the fact that they have worse mental health
than high caste Hindus. The coefficient on being Muslim is robust to the inclusion of state
of residence and rural residence (model 5).
Scheduled Castes have 1.4 times the proportional odds of reporting depression as
higher caste Hindus, and 1.5 times the proportional odds of reporting anxiety (model
1). As the results of the reweighting standardization suggested, model 4 shows that the
association between having depression and being Scheduled Caste is not statistically significant after controlling for SES (model 4 of Table 2). However, the association between
anxiety and being Scheduled Caste remains statistically significant after controlling for
SES, but not after controlling for state dummies and rural residence.
Tables A1 and A2 in the Appendix verify that the results presented in Table 2 are
robust to the inclusion of interactions. The regressions in Tables A1 and A2 take the
18

same form as Table 2, except that we add interactions between social group and asset category (A1), and interactions between social group and educational attainment category
(A2). We find no evidence that social group interacts with socioeconomic status to predict
mental health outcomes in this ordered logit framework. Figure A1 plots the relationship
between asset ownership and the mental health outcomes we study, and education and
the mental health outcomes we study, separately for each social group. These results
suggest that higher socioeconomic status is associated with better mental health, but not
differentially so for the three social groups.

4.5

Additional analyses

Are these results robust to modifications to the analytic approach or the particular mental
health questions we study? Results shown in Tables A3, A4, and A5 in the Supplementary
Appendix address this question.
Table A3 shows odd-ratios from logistic regressions for dichotomized self-reported
mental health outcomes. Those who reported having no problems with depression or
anxiety were classified as having no depression or anxiety, respectively. Those who reported having mild, moderate, severe, or extreme problems were classified as having the
respective mental health problem. Models 1 and 2 in Table A3 are for depression or sadness, and models 3 and 4 are for anxiety or worry. Models 1 and 3 control only for sex
and age. Models 2 and 4 also control for state, rural residence, assets, education, and
expenditure. The results here are remarkably similar to the results in Table 2 which uses
ordered logit regression.
Table A4 shows ten alternative mental health outcomes available from the WHOSAGE. For each outcome, we run two regressions: one with only age and sex controls,
and one with all the controls specified in model 5 of Table 2 - age, sex, education, assets,
expenditure, rural residence, and state. If the outcome has ordered responses, we use ordered logit models. For binary outcomes, we use logit models. The results shown in the
19

Supplementary Appendix are similar to the main results. For some outcomes, Scheduled
Castes and Muslims have significantly worse outcomes even after including all controls,
and for some outcomes, they do not. However, they have higher odds of reporting mental
health problems for every outcome. This shows that our results are not sensitive to the
way the mental health questions we study are asked.
Table A5 shows that controlling for socioeconomic status by controlling for 17 assets
as individual dummy variables (rather than five asset categories) does not change the
results.
Tables A6 and A7 report the results of ordered logit regressions of mental health outcome on social group separately by state. Although the number of observations in regressions that are stratified by state is small, and therefore may not be powered to detect
significant differences across social groups, we nevertheless find higher odds of reporting
mental health problems among Muslim and Scheduled Caste respondents in most states.
The state-wise patterns are interesting and revealing. In Assam, a state with a large Muslim population and a comparatively more violent and continuous history of riots against
Muslims (Weiner, 1983; Pathak, 2012), Muslims are as much as 3.5 times more likely
to have anxiety or depression than higher-caste Hindus. Disparities between Muslims
and higher-caste Hindus are also high in Maharashtra and West-Bengal, where available
data suggest a higher incidence of riots (Wilkinson, 2006). Disparities between Scheduled
Castes and Higher-castes have less variation across states, suggesting that marginalization across states may be similarly severe (Teltumbde, 2007).
Supplementary Appendix Table A8 compares the SAGE sample to that of the nationally representative India Human Development Survey 2011 (Desai and Vanneman,
2015). Compared to the IHDS, the SAGE sample was older and poorer. Although the
WHO-SAGE was not designed to generate nationally representative estimates for the social groups we study here, we note that the patterns of disadvantage in both the SAGE
and the IHDS are similar. In both surveys, Scheduled Castes and Muslims are more likely

20

to be disadvantaged when compared to higher caste Hindus, with Scheduled Castes being the most disadvantaged.
Figure A2 in the Supplementary Appendix shows mental health outcomes by social
group and by age. The age pattern of mental health outcomes shown in Figure A2 is similar to the age pattern found in studies of mental health elsewhere in the world (Kessler
and Bromet, 2013). Specifically, older people have worse mental health, on average, than
younger people. Most importantly, the figure shows that across all ages, marginalized
groups have worse mental health.

5

Discussion

Our research provides the first population-level evidence that Scheduled Castes and Muslims have worse self-reported mental health than higher caste Hindus. In most cases,
these gaps remain even after accounting for the fact that Scheduled Castes and Muslims
have less education and own fewer assets.
Additional data are needed to better understand the mechanisms and processes that
generate the gaps that we document. The study of mental health disparities in the United
States has benefited data sets which provide information not only on mental health outcomes, social group membership, and socioeconomic status, but also on experiences of
discrimination, the extent to which discrimination is internalized, stressors, experiences
of violence or trauma, childhood health and socioeconomic status, neighborhood-level
variables, and, more recently, clinical measures of mental-health. Moving beyond selfreported measures of mental health to clinical diagnoses may provide additional insights.
If we are to learn exactly how caste and religion shape mental health outcomes in India, such variables will need to be added to existing health surveys and new surveys will
need to be fielded. With the exception of a few studies which document how discrimination against Scheduled Castes is practiced (Shah et al., 2006; Jodhka, 2002; Coffey et al.,
2018), there are few quantitative measures of experiences of discrimination by marginal21

ized groups. Yet, there are many challenges to collecting such data in India. Perhaps
understandably, considering India’s high rates of mortality and burden of infectious and
childhood disease, the government and international organizations have traditionally focused on collecting physical health data. However, given its large population burden as
well as its links with social inequality, monitoring and improving mental health should
also be a priority.
In this study, we are limited by data that represent six large states, but not all of
India. Surveys that bring in evidence from other states, or are nationally representative
are thus crucial. Nor do the SAGE data allow us to separate those belonging to Other
Backward Classes and High Castes. Investigating disparities in mental health between
High-Caste Hindus and Other Backward Classes is important as well. Finally, the data
do not allow us to compare answers to the depression and anxiety questions we study to
clinical diagnoses. Although such diagnoses would certainly be useful, researchers have
pointed to the challenges of making them in contexts with few trained mental health
professionals (Jacob and Patel, 2014).
Despite these limitations, our results, combined with prior research on social inequality in India, nevertheless point to the incompleteness of government efforts to address
the consequences of social disadvantage. First, it is important to note that federallysponsored programs to reduce economic, educational, or health disparities between Hindus and Muslims are extremely limited. Rather than being assisted by the state, Muslims
in India are often victims of politically motivated violence (Wilkinson, 2006; GhassemFachandi, 2012; Kamdar, 2020). The state arguably does more to promote the interests of
Scheduled Castes. Affirmative action in the form of caste-based quotas for political office,
higher education, and government jobs are provided for in the Indian constitution. Government development programs also often make Scheduled Caste priority beneficiaries;
for example, in many states, a proportion of annual government budgetary allocations
are required to be specially marked for Scheduled Castes under the Scheduled Caste Sub-

22

plan.
Our results, however, suggest that merely redistributing wealth, and even helping
Scheduled Castes or Muslims get more education, may not close gaps in mental health.
Indeed, our results echo those of Coffey et al. (2019), who find that gaps in height between lower caste and higher caste children cannon be explained by observable characteristics (such as parental education and household economic status) alone. This may be
because discrimination against Scheduled Castes is still widespread – even though a set of
discriminatory practices known collectively as “untouchability” have been criminalized
since the 1950s, these laws go largely unenforced. Surveys suggest that a large fraction of
people still openly admit to engaging in these forms of discrimination (Thorat and Joshi,
2015; Coffey et al., 2018). To our knowledge, similar estimates of the extent to which people from dominant social groups admit to discrimination against Muslims have not yet
been published.3
We hope that these results will contribute to broader efforts to draw attention to the
need for research and policies to address social inequality in India. Further study of the
relationships among discrimination, prejudice, and mental health in the context of social
inequality and material disadvantage in India would inform social policy in India and,
by testing external validity, theories of health and social inequality everywhere.

3 Social

Attitudes Research, India (SARI) is a mobile phone survey which collects data on social discrimination in India. In 2018, SARI asked about discrimination against Muslims in its Bihar, Jharkhand, and
Maharashtra samples. The data, which are available at www.riceinstitute.org, are currently being
analyzed.

23

References
Aggarwal, Ankita, Jean Drèze, and Aashish Gupta. 2015. “Caste and the Power Elite in
Allahabad.” Economic & Political Weekly 50:45.
Ahmad, Irfan and Md Zakaria Siddiqui. 2017. “Democracy in Jail: Over-representation
of minorities in Indian prisons.” Economic & Political Weekly 52:98–106.
Ali, Asim. 2019. “What if this is the Hindu Rasthra?” The Wire .
Ambedkar, Bhimrao Ramji. 1937. Annihilation of caste: With a reply to Mahatama Gandhi.
University of Columbia.
Axinn, William G, Dirgha J Ghimire, Nathalie E Williams, and Kate M Scott. 2013. “Gender, traumatic events, and mental health disorders in a rural Asian setting.” Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 54:444–461.
Azam, Mehtabul and Vipul Bhatt. 2015. “Like father, like son? Intergenerational educational mobility in India.” Demography 52:1929–1959.
Baru, Rama, Arnab Acharya, Sanghmitra Acharya, AK Shiva Kumar, and K Nagaraj. 2010.
“Inequities in access to health services in India: Caste, class and region.” Economic and
Political Weekly 45:49–58.
Bose, Ajoy and John Dayal. 2018. For Reasons of State: Delhi Under Emergency. Penguin
Random House India Private Limited.
Breslau, Joshua, Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, Kenneth S Kendler, Maxwell Su, David Williams,
and Ronald C Kessler. 2006. “Specifying race-ethnic differences in risk for psychiatric
disorder in a USA national sample.” Psychological Medicine 36:57–68.
Brody, Debra J, Laura A Pratt, and Jeffery P Hughes. 2018. “Prevalence of depression
among adults aged 20 and over: United States, 2013 - 2016.” Technical report, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention.
Burgard, Sarah A and Donald J Treiman. 2006. “Trends and racial differences in infant
mortality in South Africa.” Social Science & Medicine 62:1126–1137.
Coffey, Diane. 2015. “Prepregnancy body mass and weight gain during pregnancy
in India and sub-Saharan Africa.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences p.
201416964.
Coffey, Diane, Ashwini Deshpande, Jeffrey Hammer, and Dean Spears. 2019. “Local social
inequality, economic inequality, and disparities in child height in India.” Demography
56:1427–1452.
Coffey, Diane, Payal Hathi, Nidhi Khurana, and Amit Thorat. 2018. “Explicit prejudice:
Evidence from a new survey of social attitudes.” Economic & Political Weekly 53:46–54.

24

Datta, Saugato and Vikram Pathania. 2016. “For whom does the phone (not) ring? Discrimination in the rental housing market in Delhi, India.” Technical report, WIDER
Working Paper.
Deaton, Angus. 2003. “Health, inequality, and economic development.” Journal of Economic Literature 41:113–158.
Demyttenaere, Koen, Ronny Bruffaerts, J Posada-Villa, I Gasquet, V Kovess, JPeal Lepine,
MC Angermeyer, S d Bernert, G De Girolamo, P Morosini, et al. 2004. “Prevalence,
severity, and unmet need for treatment of mental disorders in the World Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys.” JAMA 291:2581–2590.
Desai, Sonalde and Veena Kulkarni. 2008. “Changing educational inequalities in India in
the context of affirmative action.” Demography 45:245–270.
Desai, Sonalde and Reeve Vanneman. 2015. “India human development survey-II (IHDSII), 2011-12. ICPSR36151-v2.” Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research [distributor] 31.
Deshpande, Ashwini. 2017. The grammar of caste: Economic discrimination in contemporary
India. Oxford.
Deshpande, Ashwini and Dean Spears. 2016. “Who is the identifiable victim? Caste and
charitable giving in modern India.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 64:299–
321.
Diener, Ed, Eunkook M Suh, Richard E Lucas, and Heidi L Smith. 1999. “Subjective wellbeing: Three decades of progress.” Psychological Bulletin 125:276.
DiNardo, John, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor market institutions
and the distribution of wages, 1973-1992: A semiparametric approach.” Econometrica
64:1001–1044.
Do, D Phuong, Reanne Frank, and Brian Karl Finch. 2012. “Does SES explain more of the
black/white health gap than we thought? Revisiting our approach toward understanding racial disparities in health.” Social Science & Medicine 74:1385–1393.
Earl, Tara, David Williams, and Stacey Anglade. 2011. “An update on the mental health of
Black Americans: Puzzling dilemmas and needed research.” Journal of Black Psychology
37:485–498.
Elo, Irma T and Samuel H Preston. 1996. “Educational differentials in mortality: United
States, 1979–1985.” Social Science & Medicine 42:47–57.
Fazal, Tanweer. 2020. The Minority Conundrum: Living in Majoritarian Times. Penguin
Random House India Private Limited.
Filmer, Deon and Lant H Pritchett. 2001. “Estimating wealth effects without expenditure
data – or tears: An application to educational enrollments in states of India.” Demography 38:115–132.
25

Geruso, Michael. 2012. “Black-white disparities in life expectancy: how much can the
standard SES variables explain?” Demography 49:553–574.
Ghassem-Fachandi, Parvis. 2012. Pogrom in Gujarat: Hindu nationalism and anti-Muslim
violence in India. Princeton University Press.
Goosby, Bridget J, Jacob E Cheadle, and Colter Mitchell. 2017. “Stress-Related Biosocial
Mechanisms of Discrimination and African American Health Inequities.” Annual Review of Sociology .
Gorman, Bridget K and Jen’nan Ghazal Read. 2006. “Gender Disparities in Adult Health:
An Examination of Three Measures of Morbidity.” Journal of health and social behavior
47:95–110.
Guillot, Michel and Keera Allendorf. 2010. “Hindu-Muslim differentials in child mortality
in India.” Genus 66.
Gupta, Aashish, Nazar Khalid, Payal Hathi, Nikhil Srivastav, Sangita Vyas, and Diane
Coffey. 2019. “Coercion, Construction, and ’ODF paper pe’: Swachh Bharat According
to Local Officials.” The India Forum .
Gururaj, G, M Varghese, V Benegal, GN Rao, K Pathak, LK Singh, RY Mehta, D Ram,
TM Shibukumar, and A Kokane. 2016. “National Mental Health Survey of India, 201516: prevalence, patterns and outcomes.” NIMHANS Publication pp. 90–121.
Hasan, Mushirul and Mohammad Asaduddin. 2000. Image and Representation: Stories of
Muslim Lives in India. Oxford University Press, USA.
Hawes, Armani M, William G Axinn, and Dirgha J Ghimire. 2016. “Ethnicity and psychiatric disorders.” Annals of psychiatry and mental health 4.
Housen, Tambri, Annick Lenglet, Cono Ariti, Showkat Shah, Helal Shah, Shabnum Ara,
Kerri Viney, Simon Janes, and Giovanni Pintaldi. 2017. “Prevalence of anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder in the Kashmir Valley.” BMJ global health
2:e000419.
Hughes, Michael and Melvin E Thomas. 1998. “The continuing significance of race revisited: A study of race, class, and quality of life in America, 1972 to 1996.” American
Sociological Review pp. 785–795.
Hummer, Robert. 1996. “Black-white differences in health and mortality: A review and
conceptual model.” The Sociological Quarterly 37:105–125.
Jackson, Pamela Braboy, David R Williams, Dan J Stein, Allen Herman, Stacey L Williams,
and Deidre L Redmond. 2010. “Race and Psychological Distress The South African
Stress and Health Study.” Journal of health and social behavior 51:458–477.
Jacob, K Stanly and Vikram Patel. 2014. “Classification of mental disorders: a global
mental health perspective.” The Lancet 383:1433–1435.
26

Jadhav, Sushrut and Surineder Jodhka. 2012. “Caste, culture, and the clinic.” Seminar
India 633.
Jadhav, Sushrut, David Mosse, and Ned Dostaler. 2016. “Minds of caste: Discrimination
and its affects.” Anthropology Today pp. 1–2.
Jeelani, Mehboob. 2012. “Unhealed Wounds:.” Caravan Magazine .
Jodhka, Surinder S. 2002. “Caste and untouchability in rural Punjab.” Economic and Political Weekly pp. 1813–1823.
Kamdar, Mira. 2020. “What happened in Delhi was a pogrom.” The Atlantic .
Kandukuri, Divya. 2018. “Caste and mental health.” Roundtable India .
Kessler, Ronald and Evelyn Bromet. 2013. “The epidemiology of depression across cultures.” Annual Review of Public Health 34:119–138.
Kessler, Ronald C and Harold W Neighbors. 1986. “A new perspective on the relationships among race, social class, and psychological distress.” Journal of Health and Social
Behavior pp. 107–115.
Link, Bruce G and Jo Phelan. 1995. “Social conditions as fundamental causes of disease.”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior pp. 80–94.
Marx, Karl, Francis Wheen, and James Ledbetter. 2007. Dispatches for the New York Tribune:
Selected Journalism of Karl Marx. Penguin Classics.
Mathias, Kaaren, Isabel Goicolea, Michelle Kermode, Lawrence Singh, Rahul Shidhaye,
and Miguel San Sebastian. 2015. “Cross-sectional study of depression and help-seeking
in Uttarakhand, North India.” BMJ open 5:e008992.
Mondal, Sudipto. 2016. “Rohith Vemula: An unfinished portrait.” Hindustan Times .
Myer, Landon, Dan J Stein, Anna Grimsrud, Soraya Seedat, and David R Williams. 2008.
“Social determinants of psychological distress in a nationally-representative sample of
South African adults.” Social science & medicine 66:1828–1840.
Noh, Samuel, Morton Beiser, Violet Kaspar, Feng Hou, and Joanna Rummens. 1999.
“Perceived racial discrimination, depression, and coping: A study of Southeast Asian
refugees in Canada.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior pp. 193–207.
Office of the Registrar General. 2011. “Census of India 2011: Household Listing Operations.” Office of the Registrar and General Census Commissioner of India .
Pager, Devah, Bart Bonikowski, and Bruce Western. 2009. “Discrimination in a low-wage
labor market: A field experiment.” American Sociological Review 74:777–799.
Patel, Vikram, Ricardo Araya, Mauricio De Lima, Ana Ludermir, and Charles Todd. 1999.
“Women, poverty and common mental disorders in four restructuring societies.” Social
science & medicine 49:1461–1471.
27

Pathak, Suryasikha. 2012. “Ethnic violence in Bodoland.” Economic and Political Weekly
pp. 19–23.
Pawar, Dagdu Maruti and Jerry Pinto. 2015. Baluta. Speaking Tiger.
Poongothai, Subramani, Rajendra Pradeepa, Anbhazhagan Ganesan, and Viswanathan
Mohan. 2009. “Prevalence of depression in a large urban South Indian population: The
Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology study (CURES–70).” PloS one 4:e7185.
Preston, Samuel, Patrick Heuveline, and Michael Guillot. 2000. “Demography: measuring
and modeling population processes. 2001.” Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers .
Prime Minister’s High Level Committee. 2006. “Social, economic, and educational status
of the Muslim community of India: A report.” official report, Government of India.
Prost, Audrey, Rashmi Lakshminarayana, Nirmala Nair, Prasanta Tripathy, Andrew Copas, Rajendra Mahapatra, Shibanand Rath, Raj Kumar Gope, Suchitra Rath, Aparna
Bajpai, et al. 2012. “Predictors of maternal psychological distress in rural India: a crosssectional community-based study.” Journal of affective disorders 138:277–286.
Ram, Usha, Lisa Strohschein, and Kirti Gaur. 2014. “Gender Socialization: Differences
between Male and Female Youth in India and Associations with Mental Health.” International Journal of Population Research .
Ramaiah, Avatthi. 2015. “Health status of dalits in India.” Economic and Political Weekly
50:70–74.
Ravi, Shamika and Monika Engler. 2015. “Workfare as an effective way to fight poverty:
The case of India’s NREGS.” World Development 67:57–71.
Rodríguez, Germán. 2007.
Lecture Notes on Generalized Linear Models.
http://data.princeton.edu/wws509/notes/.

URL:

Sagar, Rajesh, Rakhi Dandona, Gopalkrishna Gururaj, RS Dhaliwal, Aditya Singh, Alize
Ferrari, Tarun Dua, Atreyi Ganguli, Mathew Varghese, Joy K Chakma, et al. 2020. “The
burden of mental disorders across the states of India: the Global Burden of Disease
Study 1990–2017.” The Lancet Psychiatry 7:148–161.
Satheesh, Shone. 2019. “Payal Tadvi suicide case: The death of a doctor.” LiveMint .
Shah, Ghanshyam, Harsh Mander, Sukhdeo Thorat, Satish Deshpande, and Amita
Baviskar. 2006. “Untouchability in rural India.” Untouchability in rural India. .
Spears, Dean. 2016. “Caste and Life Satisfaction in Rural North India.” Economic & Political
Weekly 51:13.
Spears, Dean and Michael Geruso. 2018. “Neighborhood sanitation and infant mortality.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10:125–162.

28

Susewind, Raphael. 2013. Being Muslim and working for peace: Ambivalence and ambiguity
in Gujarat. SAGE Publications India.
Tadvi, Abeda Salim and Radhika Vemula. 2019. “Writ petition under article 32 of the
constitution seeking issuance of specific guidelines and/or directions in respect of caste
based discrimination in higher educational institutions.” Supreme Court of India .
Teltumbde, Anand. 2007. “Khairlanji and its aftermath: Exploding some myths.” Economic and Political Weekly pp. 1019–1025.
Thorat, Amit and Omkar Joshi. 2015. “The continuing practice of untouchability in India:
Patterns and mitigating influences.” India Human Development Study Working Paper 3.
Thorat, Sukhadeo and Paul Attewell. 2007. “The legacy of social exclusion: A correspondence study of job discrimination in India.” Economic and Political Weekly pp. 4141–4145.
Thorat, Sukhadeo and Katherine S Neuman. 2012. Blocked by caste: economic discrimination
in modern India. Oxford University Press.
Thorat, Sukhadeo, KM Shyamprasad, and RK Srivastava. 2007. “Report of the committee
to enquire into the allegation of differential treatment of SC/ST students in All India
Institute of Medical Science, Delhi.” Thorat committee pp. 2–77.
Vaid, Divya. 2014. “Caste in contemporary India: Flexibility and persistence.” Annual
Review of Sociology 40:391–410.
Valmiki, Omprakash and Arun Prabha Mukherjee. 2008. Joothan: An Untouchable’s Life.
Columbia University Press.
Vyas, Sangita, Aashish Gupta, and Payal Hathi. 2019. “Social disadvantage and life expectancy in nine Indian states.” Technical report, r.i.c.e.
Weber, Max. 2000. The religion of India: The sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism. The Free
Press.
Weiner, Myron. 1983. “The political demography of Assam’s anti-immigrant movement.”
Population and Development Review pp. 279–292.
Whiteford, Harvey A, Louisa Degenhardt, Jürgen Rehm, Amanda J Baxter, Alize J Ferrari,
Holly E Erskine, Fiona J Charlson, Rosana E Norman, Abraham D Flaxman, Nicole
Johns, et al. 2013. “Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance
use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010.” The Lancet
382:1575–1586.
Wilkinson, Steven I. 2006. Votes and violence: Electoral competition and ethnic riots in India.
Cambridge University Press.
Williams, David R. 2012. “Miles to go before we sleep: Racial inequities in health.” Journal
of Health and Social Behavior 53:279–295.
29

Williams, David R, Selina A Mohammed, Jacinta Leavell, and Chiquita Collins. 2010.
“Race, socioeconomic status, and health: Complexities, ongoing challenges, and research opportunities.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1186:69–101.
Williams, David R, Yan Yu, James S Jackson, and Norman B Anderson. 1997. “Racial
differences in physical and mental health: Socio-economic status, stress and discrimination.” Journal of Health Psychology 2:335–351.
Wood, Charles H and Peggy A Lovell. 1992. “Racial inequality and child mortality in
Brazil.” Social Forces 70:703–724.
World Health Organization. 2013. Study on Global AGEing and Adult Health. WHO & IIPS.
Xaxa, Virginius. 2008. State, society, and tribes: Issues in post-colonial India. Pearson Education India.
Zheng, Hui and Patricia A Thomas. 2013. “Marital status, self-rated health, and mortality:
overestimation of health or diminishing protection of marriage?” Journal of Health and
Social Behavior 54:128–143.

30

Table 1: Summary statistics for the sample, overall and by social group
Higher Caste
Hindu
mean
s.e.

Scheduled Caste
mean

s.e.

Muslim
mean

Total

s.e.

mean

s.e.

self-reported mental health outcomes (mild, moderate, severe, or extreme)
have depression
have anxiety

0.41
0.49

(0.013)
(0.014)

0.46 *
0.57 **

(0.023)
(0.026)

0.51 ** (0.032)
0.60 ** (0.031)

0.43
0.52

(0.011)
(0.012)

mean age
female

41.7
0.49

(0.357)
(0.010)

39.8 **
0.47

(0.472)
(0.020)

41.0
0.47

(0.940)
(0.215)

41.2
0.49

(0.304)
(0.007)

mean # of assets (out of 16)

7.8

(0.139)

6.2 *** (0.224)

7.2

(0.117)

asset wealth categories
0-4 assets
5 or 6 assets
7 or 8 assets
9 or 10 assets
more than 10 assets

0.16
0.22
0.21
0.18
0.23

------

0.21
0.24
0.21
0.16
0.18

------

mean years of education

6.6

(0.205)

5.7

(0.176)

years of education categories
no education
1 to 5
6 to 8
9 to 12
more than 12

0.29
0.16
0.14
0.26
0.15

------

rural resident

0.64

(0.028)

0.81 *** (0.034)

log per-capita expenditure

6.3

(0.032)

6.1 *** (0.037)

predictor variables

n

6.0 *** (0.175)

0.32
0.29
0.19
0.13
0.07

------

4.5 *** (0.304)

0.45
0.17
0.14
0.15
0.08

6,832

------

1,951

0.28
0.29
0.24
0.10
0.08

------

4.0 *** (0.403)

0.47
0.20
0.14
0.13
0.05

------

0.35
0.17
0.14
0.22
0.12

------

0.65

(0.060)

0.68

(0.027)

6.0 *** (0.049)

6.2

(0.030)

1,342

10,125

Source: WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Means calculated using survey weights, and standard errors are clustered at
the level of the primary sampling unit. Tests of significance from adjusted wald tests comparing Scheduled
Castes and Muslims to Higher Caste Hindus are also shown (+ p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001). These
tests were not conducted for asset categories and education categories. People who reported having mild,
moderate, severe or extreme problems with depression or anxiety in the last 30 days were coded as having
depression or anxiety.

31

Table 2: Ordered logit regression showing odds-ratios for self-reported
mental health outcomes by social group
panel a: depression

Muslim

problems with feeling sad, low, or depressed
from 1 "none" to 5 "extreme"
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1.683*** 1.513*** 1.422** 1.397** 1.341*
(0.211)
(0.185)
(0.169)
(0.168)
(0.166)

Scheduled Caste

1.380**
(0.135)

Female

1.847*** 1.611*** 1.783*** 1.816*** 1.816***
(0.164)
(0.155)
(0.178)
(0.182)
(0.184)

dummies for age (in years)
education categories
asset categories
per capita log expenditure
rural residence
state dummies
n

1.257*
(0.123)

1.149
(0.116)

1.139
(0.115)

1.035
(0.106)

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

10,125

10,125

10,125

10,125

10,125

panel b:anxiety

Muslim

problems with worry or anxiety
from 1 "none" to 5 "extreme"
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1.870*** 1.653*** 1.557*** 1.542** 1.448**
(0.257)
(0.224)
(0.207)
(0.207)
(0.196)

Scheduled Caste

1.485*** 1.346**
(0.157)
(0.139)

Female

2.030*** 1.751*** 1.920*** 1.939*** 2.024***
(0.197)
(0.184)
(0.203)
(0.206)
(0.213)

dummies for age (in years)
education categories
asset categories
per capita log expenditure
rural residence
state dummies
n

1.239*
(0.130)

1.233*
(0.129)

1.116
(0.111)

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

10,125

10,125

10,125

10,125

10,125

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

32

Figure 1: Distributions of self-reported depression among Scheduled
Castes, Muslims, and higher caste Hindus

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

panel a. Scheduled Castes & higher caste Hindus

SC

higher caste Hindu
none
moderate
extreme

SC - reweighted
mild
severe

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

panel b. Muslims & higher caste Hindus

Muslim

higher caste Hindu
none
moderate
extreme

Muslim - reweighted
mild
severe

WHO SAGE, 2007-8. The leftmost distributions are self-reported distributions of depression among disadvantaged groups, and among higher caste Hindus, computed using sampling weights. The rightmost
distributions are the reweighted distributions of depression among disadvantaged groups, where twentyfive education by asset categories are used in the reweighting function, as described in Section 3.2.

33

Figure 2: Distributions of self-reported anxiety among Scheduled Castes,
Muslims, and higher caste Hindus

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

panel a. Scheduled Castes & higher caste Hindus

SC

higher caste Hindu
none
moderate
extreme

SC - reweighted
mild
severe

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

panel b. Muslims & higher caste Hindus

Muslim

higher caste Hindu
none
moderate
extreme

Muslim - reweighted
mild
severe

WHO SAGE, 2007-8. The leftmost distributions are self-reported distributions of anxiety among disadvantaged groups, and among higher caste Hindus, computed using sampling weights. The rightmost distributions are the reweighted distributions of anxiety among disadvantaged groups, where twenty-five
education by asset categories are used in the reweighting function, as described in Section 3.2.

34

Supplementary Appendix for online publication.

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX
Appendix Tables
Table A1 and A2 show results of regressions similar to those in Table 2 in the main text,
except that they add interactions with assets and years of education. In general, the interactions show that association of higher asset wealth or years of education with mental
health is not significantly different for Muslims or Scheduled Caste respondents than it is
for higher caste Hindu respondents.
Table A3 presents odds-ratios from logistic regressions for dichotomized self-reported
depression and anxiety. The two outcomes have been dichotomized such that reporting
mild, moderate, severe or extreme problems implies having depression and anxiety. Only
two models are shown for each of the outcome - a basic model with age and sex controls,
and a full model with additional controls for state, rural residence, assets, education, and
expenditure. The results of the logistic model are very similar to that of the ordered logit
model in Table 2.
Table A4 shows odds-ratios from ordered logit or logistic regressions for alternative selfreported mental health outcomes available from the WHO-SAGE. For most mental health
outcomes, Scheduled Castes and Muslims are significantly more likely to report having
problems with mental health than higher-caste Hindus.
Table A5 shows that controlling for socioeconomic status by controlling for five asset categories or 17 individual binary assets does not change the results.
Tables A6 and A7 show logistic regressions stratified with state, with the basic and the
full models, for anxiety and depression. It is important to remember that the state-wise
samples are much smaller than the combined sample, and may not be powered to detect
social group differences. Still, the results reveal that Muslims and Scheduled Castes are
more likely to report having depression or anxiety across states.
Table A8 presents summary statistics for WHO-SAGE respondents, aged 18 to 85, and
compares them to a nationally representative sample of adults of the same ages from the
India Human Development Survey, 2011. Summary statistics are presented separately for
Dalits, Muslims, and upper caste Hindus. The table shows that WHO SAGE oversampled
35

Supplementary appendix for online publication.
older adults. Th SAGE respondents are, on average, poorer and less educated than the
average Indian adult in each social group. This is likely because the SAGE was focused on
health of older adults, and was conducted earlier than the IHDS-II. Patterns of disadvantage are similar in the WHO-SAGE and the IHDS. In both the surveys, Scheduled Castes
are the most disadvantaged. Muslims are less likely to own assets have less education
than higher caste Hindus. The only difference is in the proportion of Muslims which live
in an urban area - in the WHO-SAGE, Muslims are less likely to be urban residents compared to higher caste Hindus, but nationally, they are more urbanized than higher-caste
Hindus.

Appendix Figures
Figure A1 shows differences in self-reported mental health among the three social groups
by measures of socioeconomic status. Largely, the figures do not reveal a consistent pattern to understand differences by social group and socioeconomic status. Although there
are levels of education and assets without differences in mental health between the social
groups, differences do exist for most levels. Moreover, disparities can be seen at both high
and both ends of the distribution of socioeconomic status, as well as in the middle.
Figure A2 shows age patterns for dichotomous mental health outcomes for the three social groups. Age-misreporting and heaping is an important concern for data collection
efforts in developing countries, and age-misreporting is likely to be higher among Scheduled Castes and Muslims, given that they are poorer and less-educated. Another concern is selection and mortality, especially above sixty. Still, these graphs show a pattern
well-known to mental health researchers, that with age, mental health tends to worsen.
Overall, Muslims and Scheduled Caste Hindus have worse mental health outcomes when
compared to higher Caste Hindus at most ages.
Figure A3 shows differences in self-reported mental health by sex and 95% Confidence
Intervals. These confidence intervals are constructed accounting for the clustering of observations in the primary sampling unit. The figure shows that disparities in mental
health can be seen for both men and women.

36

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A1: Ordered logit regressions do not find evidence that social group
interacts with asset wealth to predict self-reported mental health
depression

anxiety

Muslim

1.424+
(0.304)

1.642*
(0.379)

Scheduled Caste

0.914
(0.135)

1.093
(0.183)

1.870***
(0.172)

2.052***
(0.203)

5 or 6 assets

0.635**
(0.0883)

0.818
(0.122)

7 or 8 assets

0.672**
(0.0970)

0.656**
(0.0901)

9 or 10 assets

0.484***
(0.0756)

0.447***
(0.0675)

more than 10 assets

0.361***
(0.0528)

0.423***
(0.0610)

5 or 6 assets X Muslim

1.411
(0.395)

1.241
(0.390)

7 or 8 assets X Muslim

0.915
(0.301)

0.725
(0.262)

9 or 10 assets X Muslim

0.502
(0.219)

1.108
(0.361)

more than 10 assets X Muslim

0.930
(0.285)

0.764
(0.269)

5 or 6 assets X Scheduled Caste

1.801**
(0.385)

1.349
(0.301)

7 or 8 assets X Scheduled Caste

1.263
(0.306)

1.300
(0.335)

9 or 10 assets X Scheduled Caste

1.147
(0.310)

0.930
(0.252)

more than 10 assets X Scheduled Caste

1.151
(0.567)

1.193
(0.573)

n

10,125

10,125

Female

0 - 4 assets (reference)

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

37

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A2: Ordered logit regressions do not find evidence that social group
interacts with education to predict self-reported mental health
depression

anxiety

Muslim

1.507*
(0.240)

3.809***
(1.339)

Scheduled Caste

1.186
(0.173)

1.676+
(0.458)

1.759***
(0.185)

0.932
(0.0914)

1 - 5 years of education

0.881
(0.118)

0.840
(0.119)

6 - 8 years of education

0.773+
(0.104)

0.748+
(0.113)

9 - 12 years of education

0.722*
(0.0983)

0.621***
(0.0811)

more than 12 years of education

0.448***
(0.0875)

0.426***
(0.0780)

1 - 5 years of education X Muslim

1.384
(0.359)

1.557
(0.422)

6 - 8 years of education X Muslim

1.537
(0.530)

0.967
(0.385)

9 - 12 years of education X Muslim

1.017
(0.368)

1.025
(0.293)

more than 12 years of education X Muslim

0.894
(0.366)

0.905
(0.438)

1 - 5 years of education X Scheduled Caste

0.928
(0.214)

1.430
(0.325)

6 - 8 years of education X Scheduled Caste

0.826
(0.227)

0.973
(0.282)

9 - 12 years of education X Scheduled Caste

1.042
(0.278)

1.530+
(0.390)

more than 12 years X Scheduled Caste

0.596
(0.292)

0.921
(0.441)

n

10,125

10,125

Female

no education (reference)

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

38

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A3: Odds-ratios from logistic regressions for having any selfreported depression or anxiety (mild, moderate, severe, or extreme)
depression
(1)
(2)
1.664*** 1.327*
(0.230)
(0.187)

(3)
1.787***
(0.253)

(4)
1.409*
(0.193)

scheduled caste

1.398**
(0.149)

1.543***
(0.184)

1.148
(0.136)

female

1.799*** 1.758***
(0.175)
(0.198)

muslim

female
age dummies
state dummies
rural residence
asset categories
educational categories
per capita log expenditure
n

1.057
(0.116)

anxiety

2.011*** 2.041***
(0.207)
(0.233)

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

10125

10125

10125

10125

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

39

40

1.183+
(0.107)

Ordered 1.683***
logistic (0.162)
1.300*
(0.164)

Logistic

Logistic

Logistic

Logistic

Logistic

Logistic

4 Taking all things together, how would you say you are these days? Are you…? (Very
happy, happy, neigher happy nor unhappy, unhappy, very unhappy)

5 During the last 12 months, have you had a period lasting several days when you felt
sad, empty or depressed? (Yes, no)

6 ... have you had a period lasting several days when you lost interest in most things you
usually enjoy such as personal relationships, work or hobbies/recreation? (Yes, no)

7 ... have you had a period lasting several days when y ou have been feeling your energy
decreased or that you are tired all the time? (Yes, no)

8 I will now ask you some questions about how you felt yesterday overall. Did you feel
…depressed…? (Yes, no)

9 … Did you feel …worried… for much of the day yesterday? (Yes, no)

10 … Did you feel …tense or stressed……for much of the day yesterday? (Yes, no)

1.032
(0.105)

1.059
(0.124)

0.903
(0.110)

1.208
(0.147)

1.123
(0.131)

1.661**
(0.281)

1.273
(0.193)

1.664**
(0.271)

1.913***
(0.338)

1.686**
(0.279)

1.454*
(0.243)

1.505*
(0.249)

1.023
(0.160)

1.525*
(0.250)

1.624*
(0.319)

1.370+
(0.259)

1.221
(0.217)

2.361*** 1.761***
(0.322)
(0.235)

2.340*** 1.556***
(0.379)
(0.206)

1.746*** 1.364**
(0.267)
(0.159)

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights. Outcome 6 and 7 were asked for the last 12 month period preceding the survey,
using the language in outcome 5. Outcome 9 and 10 were asked for the day before the survey. Models with
age and sex controls adjust for age dummies and sex of the respondent. Models with all controls adjust
for age dummies, sex of the respondent, rural residence, state of residence, education categories, asset
categories, and per capita household log expenditure.

1.199+
(0.121)

1.343**
(0.143)

1.042
(0.123)

1.413**
(0.173)

1.346*
(0.163)

1.194+
(0.127)

3 How would you rate your overall quality of life? (Very good, good, moderate, bad, very Ordered 1.839***
bad)
logistic (0.208)

1.116
(0.133)

1.025
(0.124)

Ordered
logistic

1.335*
(0.150)

2 How satisfied are you with yourself? (Very satisfied, satisfied, neither satisfied nor
dissatisfied, dissatisfied, very dissatisfied)

Odds-ratios
Scheduled caste
Muslim
#
Survey question (response options)
Model
age & sex
all
age & sex
all
controls controls
controls controls
1 Taking all things together, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these days?
1.867*** 1.414**
Ordered 1.592*** 1.191+
(0.118)
(0.291)
(0.169)
(Very satisfied, satisfied, neither satisfied nor dissatisfied, dissatisfied, very dissatisfied) logistic (0.149)

Table A4: Odds-ratios from logistic or ordered logit regressions for alternative mental health outcomes

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A5: Odds-ratios from ordered logit regressions for reporting depression and anxiety, with controls for asset categories and assets controlled
individually

depression
(1)
(2)
1.402** 1.399**
(0.172)
(0.174)

(3)
1.499**
(0.197)

(4)
1.528**
(0.199)

scheduled caste

1.056
(0.108)

1.128
(0.115)

1.113
(0.112)

asset categories
all 17 assets
sex
age dummies
rural
state dummies

X

muslim

N

1.052
(0.107)

anxiety

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

10125

10125

10125

10125

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

41

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A6: Odds-ratios from logistic regressions for having any selfreported anxiety (mild, moderate, severe, or extreme) by state
Assam
muslim

scheduled caste

female
age dummies
rural residence
asset categories
educational categories
per capita log expenditure
n

muslim

scheduled caste

female
age dummies
rural residence
asset categories
educational categories
per capita log expenditure
n

(1)
(2)
4.536*** 3.401***
(1.282)
(1.103)

Karnataka
(3)
(4)
1.470
1.812
(0.392)
(0.664)

Maharashtra
(5)
(6)
1.379
1.235
(0.570)
(0.466)

1.709+
(0.472)

1.397
(0.444)

1.548
(0.466)

0.851
(0.232)

1.746*
(0.437)

1.484
(0.415)

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

931

931

1400

1400

1804

1804

Rajasthan
(7)
(8)
1.711
1.581
(0.618)
(0.596)

Uttar Pradesh
(9)
(10)
1.217
1.084
(0.273)
(0.264)

West Bengal
(11)
(12)
2.937**
1.579
(1.139)
(0.513)

1.320
(0.272)

1.236
(0.256)

1.578*
(0.338)

1.372
(0.295)

1.224
(0.355)

0.659
(0.193)

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

1937

1937

2117

2117

1849

1849

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

42

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A7: Odds-ratios from logistic regressions for having any depression
(mild, moderate, severe, or extreme) by state
Assam
muslim

scheduled caste

female
age dummies
rural residence
asset categories
educational categories
per capita log expenditure
n

muslim

scheduled caste

female
age dummies
rural residence
asset categories
educational categories
per capita log expenditure
n

(1)
(2)
3.917*** 3.464***
(1.039)
(0.954)

Karnataka
(3)
(4)
1.091
1.391
(0.353)
(0.545)

Maharashtra
(5)
(6)
2.871+
2.522+
(1.686)
(1.377)

1.535
(0.399)

1.433
(0.395)

1.534
(0.422)

0.849
(0.227)

1.378
(0.347)

1.094
(0.285)

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

931

931

1400

1400

1804

1804

Rajasthan
(7)
(8)
1.988*
1.731+
(0.650)
(0.513)

Uttar Pradesh
(9)
(10)
0.927
0.856
(0.186)
(0.183)

West Bengal
(11)
(12)
3.002**
1.650+
(0.977)
(0.495)

0.967
(0.228)

0.853
(0.201)

1.370
(0.287)

1.256
(0.266)

1.589+
(0.404)

0.914
(0.244)

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

1937

1937

2117

2117

1849

1849

WHO SAGE, 2007-08. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the level of the primary
sampling unit in parentheses. + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001. All regressions are weighed using
national individual weights.

43

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Table A8: Comparison of adults in the SAGE’s (2007-8) six state sample to
adults in the nationally representative IHDS (2005)
Scheduled Caste
IHDS
SAGE
age
39
49
urban
0.29
0.18
fraction with no education
0.41
0.57
years of education (if any)
8.36
6.94
electricity in home
0.81
0.55
household owns a motorcycle 0.21
0.10
household owns a TV
0.60
0.36
a
asset count (of 7 assets)
2.35
1.74
n
27,548
1,964

Muslims
IHDS SAGE
38
49
0.45
0.26
0.37
0.54
8.14
6.89
0.84
0.58
0.25
0.15
0.59
0.35
2.55
1.97
16,406 1,350

higher caste Hindus
IHDS
SAGE
41
50
0.35
0.29
0.27
0.39
9.38
8.34
0.88
0.77
0.38
0.27
0.72
0.59
2.98
2.55
76,065
6,864

The table presents weighted summary statistics by population group for adults 18-85 from the WHO
SAGE data and the India Human Development Survey (IHDS). a The 7 assets, measured in both surveys,
are a bicycle, a refrigerator, a motorcycle, a table or chair, a television, a computer, and a car.

44

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

.6
.4

0

0

.2

proportion reporting having
any problems with depression

.6
.4
.2

proportion reporting having
any problems with depression

.8

.8

Figure A1: Mental health outcomes by measures of socioeconomic status
and social group

proportion reporting having
any problems with worry or anxiety

.6
.4
.2

Scheduled Caste

5o

r6

r8

7o

5

6-

8

9-

12

an

th
ore

12

0

Higher Caste Hindu

4

1-

m

Muslim

0-

0

10

.8

re
mo

n
tha

.6

0

r1
9o

.4

r8

7o

.2

r6

5o

.8

4

0

proportion reporting having
any problems with worry or anxiety

0-

r 10

9o

han

10

re t
mo

0

1-

5

6-

8

9-

12
m

a) by number of assets owned

b) by years of education

WHO SAGE, 2007-08.

45

han

t
ore

12

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

Scheduled Caste
Muslim

.4

.6

Higher Caste Hindu

.2

proportion reporting having any problems
with depression

.8

Figure A2: Local polynomial regressions of mental health outcomes by age
and social group

40

60

80

20

40

60

80

.6
.4
.2

proportion reporting having any problems
with worry or anxiety

.8

20

WHO SAGE, 2007-08.

46

Supplementary appendix for online publication.

.8

Figure A3: Mental health outcomes by sex and social group

Male

0

proportion reporting having
any problems with depression
.2
.4
.6

Female

0.39

0.55

0.49

Muslim

0.35

0.46

Higher Caste Hindu

.8

Scheduled Caste

0.54

Male

0

proportion reporting having
any problems with worry or anxiety
.2
.4
.6

Female

0.50

0.65

0.58

Scheduled Caste

0.64

Muslim

WHO SAGE, 2007-08.

47

0.42

0.56

Higher Caste Hindu

