1

Formative and Facilitative Information as Mechanisms of Human Capital Concentration
Robert Manduca
rmanduca@g.harvard.edu

Over the past 30 years highly educated workers in the United States have become increasingly
concentrated in a relatively small number of cities. This paper uses qualitative interviews to
understand the process by which graduates of elite colleges decide where to live following
graduation. It shows that many graduates are indifferent about exactly where they live, and find
themselves funneled towards certain cities based on geographically uneven access to two key types
of information. Facilitative information eases the job search process, enabling graduates to find
and obtain opportunities they want, while formative information helps them determine what they
want in the first place. Graduates’ position in social structure—in particular their past experiences
and personal networks—affects their exposure to both types of information in ways that strongly
influence where they end up and on occasion even overcome their stated location preferences. This
geographically uneven access to information supplies one mechanism leading to the spatial
concentration of human capital.

2
Each year, millions of college seniors look toward graduation with a mix of glee and
trepidation. After sixteen or more years of schooling, they will at last be free of the academy,
many for the first time in their lives. They are young, mobile, and frequently without external
responsibilities. They are also highly sought after, with the human capital believed to be
necessary to the economic development of cities and regions (Glaeser and Saiz 2003). But what
should they do with that freedom? Given the possibility of going almost anywhere, how do
people end up in one job in one city?
Increasingly, graduates are ending up in the same places as one another. The geographic
concentration of college graduates has increased dramatically over the last 25 years: 33% of all
college graduates in 2016 were found in just 10 metro areas, up from 25% in 1990 (IPUMS CPS
2016). Recent graduates of elite universities are even more concentrated. 79% of recent MIT
graduates live in just three states—California, Massachusetts, and New York—while 74% of
Yale graduates live in those states plus Connecticut and Washington DC. On the other coast,
69% of recent Stanford graduates stay in California (MIT Global Education & Career
Development 2017; Yale Office of Career Strategy 2018; Stanford Career Education 2017). This
concentration occurs despite these universities’ extensive efforts to enroll students from all parts
of the country.
The concentration of highly educated workers has coincided with a “Great Divergence”
in the social and economic fortunes of cities and regions within the United States (Moretti 2012).
After more than a century during which poorer states and metropolitan areas gained on rich ones
in per capita income, there has been little progress since 1980 and possibly even retrenchment
(Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1992; Ganong and Shoag 2013; Amos 2014). This has been
accompanied by an opening of geographic disparities in life expectancy (Chetty et al. 2016),
drug use (Popovich 2016), and ideology (Bishop 2008). Roughly one-quarter of the divergence
in regional incomes since 1980 is directly attributable to income sorting (Manduca 2018), and
the departure of high achieving students is a major social and economic challenge for rural areas
in particular (Carr and Kefalas 2009).
To the extent that attracting and keeping educated residents is important to the health and
vibrancy of communities, it is important to know how they come to live where they do. Past
work on domestic migration has emphasized the importance of jobs and local lifestyle factors as
draws that lead individual workers to choose a given region as a destination (e.g. Mazek and

3
Chang 1972; Graves and Linneman 1979; D. E. Clark and Hunter 1992; Partridge 2010; Storper
and Scott 2009). This literature has led to insight on the attractive power of employment and
location amenities, but in focusing on the results of the migration decision it has failed to provide
an account of the decision process itself, and specifically the ways in which social interactions
shape location choice.
In this paper I use qualitative interview data to investigate the decision process by which
recent graduates from selective colleges ended up living in Boston, Massachusetts, a major
human capital hub on the US East Coast. Previous research on migration has relied
predominantly on large-scale quantitative data analysis that treats the actual migration decision
as a black box, an enigma that can only be understood through its outcomes. Here, following an
approach that has yielded great insight into the process of residential mobility between
neighborhoods (Lareau and Goyette 2014; Krysan and Crowder 2017), I use interviews to open
this black box and examine how exactly the decision happens: which options are considered,
what tradeoffs are weighed, and how certain possibilities are ruled out. Doing so allows me to
develop a rich perspective on the process by which highly educated workers decide where to
begin their careers. I show that my respondents for the most part had incomplete preferences
over their post-graduation job and location. Rather than ranking all possible destinations and
choosing the best one, they typically conducted their job searches by eliminating most options
with a few broad rules and selecting the best from what remained.
Like decisions about everything from organ donation to mate selection (Johnson and
Goldstein 2003; Blau and Schwartz 1984), my respondents’ migration decisions were influenced
by the relative ease of choosing various options. And like most social decisions, the ease of
choosing each option was socially determined (Bruch and Feinberg 2017). Specifically, the
cities my respondents found it easiest to move to were those about which they had abundant
formative and facilitative information. Formative information told respondents that a given city
might be a worthwhile place to live and begin their adult life, while facilitative information
helped them find job opportunities there. Both types of information were obtained primarily
through social means—specifically through respondents’ network ties and past experiences—and
as a result access to each was geographically uneven, based on each graduate’s position in social
structure.

4
Importantly, many of my respondents reported a willingness to move to a wider range of
cities than they ended up considering. Many cities were dropped from consideration due to a lack
of familiarity (formative information) or labor market connections (facilitative information),
even when respondents would have been willing or eager to move to them. This behavior implies
that some of the geographical concentration of graduates may originate in the social nature of the
job search, a consequence of the way in which graduates look for jobs rather than the location of
acceptable jobs or graduates’ preferences about where to live. It also highlights how facilitative
information—the information about opportunities whose transmission is celebrated in the
literature on social networks (e.g. M Granovetter 1973; Burt 1992)—can function as a positive
constraint in real-world decision processes, channeling people into suboptimal outcomes by
making those easier to choose in the moment.
Regional income divergence and human capital concentration
For more than a century, from the late 1800s until roughly 1980, regional incomes
converged across the United States (Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1992; G. A. Carlino and Mills 1993;
Williamson 1965). As predicted by neoclassical models, per capita incomes in poor states grew
faster than those in rich ones, leading to an overall decline in the variation of income across the
country (Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1992). Since 1980, however, this convergence has stalled out
(Ganong and Shoag 2013; Berry and Glaeser 2005) and even begun to reverse (Nissan and
Carter 1993; G. Carlino and Mills 1996; Amos 2014, 1989; Rey and Janikas 2005; Fan and
Casetti 1994).
At the same time as regional incomes have diverged, college-educated workers have
become more concentrated in certain metro areas (Berry and Glaeser 2005; Moretti 2012). Cities
with high levels of education grew faster than those with lower levels over the second half of the
20th century (Glaeser and Saiz 2003; Glaeser, Scheinkman, and Shleifer 1995), and roughly onefourth of the divergence since 1980 can be directly attributed to the geographic concentration of
high-income workers (Manduca 2018). Their geographic concentration may have further,
indirect effects, both on economic performance through endogenous growth (Lucas 1988; Romer
1986), and on many other aspects of community life, since educated or high-income residents
often become local civic leaders (Carr and Kefalas 2009; Pacewicz 2016, 113). As a result of the
economic and social benefits of attracting highly educated residents, cities increasingly see

5
themselves in a “global competition for talent” (Florida 2005), where the attraction and retention
of highly skilled, high income workers is fundamental to their economic survival. Understanding
the migration decisions of these workers is important to these cities and to those seeking to
understand the dynamics of regional inequality.
How and where do workers move?
The study of internal migration has a long history in the social sciences. Ever since
Ravenstein’s 1885 work exploring the “laws of migration,” geographers, sociologists, and
economists have been interested in why people move between cities, and what determines where
they go (Ravenstein 1885; Greenwood 1975, 1997). On the question of why migrants go where
they do, however, such prolonged study has not yet produced a consensus. For decades, a heated
debate has raged within the economics and regional science literature about the relative
importance of jobs and amenities as drivers of migration and urban growth (Mazek and Chang
1972; Muth 1971).
For much of the 20th century, jobs were seen as paramount: as employment opportunities
in a city grew beyond its local supply of workers, wages would rise and migrants would be
drawn from other areas (Weber 1899; Hicks 1963). Studies in this framework see migration as a
chief means by which regional labor markets are kept in equilibrium, and conceptualize the
decision to migrate as a human capital investment by the individual (Greenwood and Hunt 1989;
Hanna 1959; Lansing and Mueller 1967; Sjaastad 1962).
An alternative viewpoint gained traction starting in the 1980s. This view argues that
migration is often driven not by a need to find employment, but by a desire to access locationspecific consumption goods (Graves and Linneman 1979). Initial accounts of this amenity-driven
migration focused on the role of climate (Graves 1980), but later work expanded this to include
urban consumption goods such as access to upscale shopping or cultural institutions (T. N. Clark
et al. 2002; Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz 2001) and social attributes such as tolerance for diversity
(Florida 2002). High human capital workers are thought to be particularly influenced by
amenities (Florida 2005). Dozens of studies over the decades have attempted to resolve this
“people vs. jobs” or “jobs vs. amenities” debate, with large numbers coming down on either side
(e.g. Greenwood and Hunt 1989; Kemeny and Storper 2012; Partridge 2010; Chen and Rosenthal
2008).

6
Recent work by sociologists highlights a third driver of migration choices. Using
administrative data from Denmark, Dahl and Sorenson find that social factors—the desire to be
near friends or family, or to live in one’s hometown—play a substantial role in the decision of
where to live. Among both blue collar and technical workers, they find that migrants are willing
to forego tens of thousands of dollars in annual income to live close to their hometown, friends,
and relatives (2010a, 2010b). Other work suggests that German graduates are more likely to
move to places that are culturally and physically similar to their hometowns (Buenstorf, Geissler,
and Krabel 2016). These findings conform to previous research finding that social factors
contribute to the likelihood of outmigration from a state (Speare, Kobrin, and Kingkade 1982).
Studies that break out migration patterns by age and education level suggest that highly
educated and young workers are the groups with the highest propensity to migrate, and to
migrate long distances (Kodrzycki 2001; Lansing and Mueller 1967; Plane 1993; Schwartz 1976;
Wozniak 2010). Young, college educated migrants have been found to be particularly sensitive
to recreation and cultural amenities (Whisler et al. 2008).
How major life decisions are made
Sociologists have long been interested in the aggregate outcomes of individual decisions
such as who to marry or which neighborhood to live in (Blau and Schwartz 1984; Logan 1978;
Schelling 1971; Coleman 1986). Recently, there has been a renewed focus on the process of
decision-making itself (e.g. Bruch, Hammond, and Todd 2015; Dietz and Whitley 2018; Vaisey
and Valentino 2018). These researchers have asked how people come up with possible options,
evaluate them, and ultimately end up picking one over another.
In their studies of life decisions, sociologists have drawn on decades of scholarship on
judgment and decision-making (JDM). Marketers and psychologists have studied the process by
which people make decisions across a wide variety of contexts (Bruch and Feinberg 2017). A
common finding in many studies of choice is that decision-makers in most contexts use a process
of “satisficing,” selecting an acceptable option from a limited set rather than exhaustively
searching out every possible alternative and choosing the universal maximum (Simon 1976).
When faced with a large number of potential options, consumers will first construct a
“consideration set” using cognitively simple decision rules to eliminate the large majority of
potential options. Once the realm of possibilities has been narrowed, they will use a different set

7
of decision rules, typically much more exhaustive, to make the final choice (Howard & Sheth,
1969; Roberts & Lattin, 1991; Swait, 1984). Models of migration that explicitly incorporate
consideration set formation have been proposed, but are difficult to implement without high
quality data on exactly where migrants considered moving (Greenwood et al. 1991; Pellegrini
and Fotheringham 2002).
JDM scholars have also documented that features of the decision environment—for
example, the number of available alternatives, the time pressure under which the decision is
made, and the option that is presented as the default—have a substantial impact on the decision
process and the outcome of the decision (W. Samuelson and Zeckhauser 1988; Simonson and
Tversky 1992; Sunstein and Thaler 2008). For questions such as whether to open a savings
account or become an organ donor, simply changing the default option from “yes” to “no” can
flip the answer given by a large proportion of choosers (Johnson and Goldstein 2003; Beshears et
al. 2009).
Incorporation of the JDM perspective has already made major contributions to many
areas of sociological research, most notably including residential segregation (Krysan and
Crowder 2017; Lareau and Goyette 2014) and dating (Bruch, Feinberg, and Lee 2016; Bruch and
Newman 2018). These studies have in turn extended understanding of decision-making by
documenting how in many real-world decisions the key features of the decision environment are
themselves determined by social context (Bruch and Feinberg 2017).
The new sociological focus on decision-making has not yet been incorporated into the
study of internal migration. Using migration decisions as its case, this paper contributes to the
theorizing of decision-making in social contexts by highlighting the role played by access to two
types of socially transmitted information, which I term “formative” and “facilitative.”

Formative and facilitative information
Access to information is an important factor in many major life decisions. There are at
least two distinct forms of socially transmitted information that are influential in decisionmaking. What I call “formative” information concerns which outcomes are desirable, while
“facilitative” information concerns which outcomes are available and how to get them. Broadly
stated, formative information drives preference formation and facilitative information connects

8
people to opportunities. Both types of information can be absorbed via personal experiences and
transferred through social networks. In a variety of decision contexts it is much easier to obtain
formative and facilitative information about some options than about others, based on the
decider’s structural position. This differential access to information is frequently influential in
shaping the final choice.
Formative information
Which cities are desirable places to live? What jobs are good jobs? Who would make the
best spouse? A major part of many life decisions is determining which outcome one should want.
Formative information is knowledge about the existence and desirability of an option. It is at the
core of most consumer decisions, determining whether a brand is in a shopper’s “awareness set”
and then his “consideration set” of options to evaluate seriously (Howard and Sheth 1969;
Roberts and Lattin 1991).1 In many choices, such as which dish to order at a familiar restaurant,
decision-makers may have access to all the formative information they need based on their own
experiences. But often—especially in unfamiliar contexts, such as when entering a new life
stage—they don’t. In these cases deciders must seek formative information out, frequently by
asking others for advice. Even in the context of food, our first question upon entering a new
restaurant is typically some variant on “what’s good here?” When formative information is
incomplete, options about which more is known may be favored over more unfamiliar
alternatives independent of the inherent quality of each.
The importance of formative information, often acquired in incomplete, socially
structured ways, has been noted by sociologists in a wide range of contexts. Cultural sociologists
studying taste formation have highlighted the ways in which people are taught what sort of art or
food they should enjoy (Bourdieu 1984; DiMaggio and Useem 1978; Daniel 2016). Among
residential movers who have the time and money to make a considered decision, formative
information is paramount—they tend not to invest much energy in learning objective details
about their possible destinations, but rather form an opinion of which neighborhoods are best for

1

Note that the key information for inclusion in the awareness set is knowledge of an option’s existence, while
inclusion in the consideration set requires information about an option’s quality—specifically whether it is
promising enough to evaluate thoroughly (see Roberts and Lannin 1991). I collapse this distinction here because
both types of information influence the desire of a person to pursue a certain option, in contrast to facilitative
information which influences their ability to pursue it.

9
“people like them” through personal experience and conversations with friends (Holme 2002;
Krysan and Crowder 2017; Lareau 2014). High school seniors choosing colleges similarly
acquire formative information about what colleges they ought to consider from their families and
high school environments (McDonough 1997). Once at college, students at prestigious
universities learn through conversations with older students and experiences on campus that
careers in certain industries such as consulting or finance are desirable (Binder, Davis, and
Bloom 2015). These are all examples of choices shaped by formative information acquired
through means other than direct personal experience with a given option. In certain cases, such
as housing searches where people are completely unfamiliar with some neighborhoods (Krysan
and Bader 2009), simple access to such formative information in addition to its content can affect
decision outcomes.
Facilitative information
In some choices, deciding what you want isn’t enough—you still have to figure out how
to get it. In these cases a second type of information, facilitative information, is crucial in
providing instrumental knowledge of specific opportunities. Facilitative information can include
instructions on how to apply for a particular job so as to maximize the chances of success, or
even just the knowledge that a particular position is open, a particular apartment is available, or a
particular shirt is on sale.
In contexts where all options are readily available, access to facilitative information is
complete and plays little role in the decision. But many important decision processes feature
incomplete facilitative information, including job search, roommate choice, and investment
selection. In these cases having the right facilitative information can be more important than
actual qualifications or preferences (Borondo et al. 2014; Burt 1992). A key service of many
Internet companies, literally from Amazon to Zillow but especially in areas like online dating
and peer to peer marketplaces, is to provide facilitative information in markets where it was
previously hard to obtain: who is looking to date, what houses are for sale, who is willing to part
with a rare baseball card. These are all cases where a decider has a clear goal in mind and faces
uncertainty about how to achieve that goal.
Like formative information, the importance of facilitative information has been
frequently documented in sociological research. It is probably most strongly associated with

10
social network analysis, where facilitative information transmitted through social ties is a key
source of the advantage accrued through network position (Burt 1992; M Granovetter 1973; Lin
1999, 1982). Specific situations in which facilitative information acquired from social networks
affects choices include job search (Mark Granovetter 1974; Rees 1966; Marsden and Gorman
2001); housing searches, especially among low income movers or movers under time pressure
(Carrillo et al. 2016; DeLuca, Rosenblatt, and Wood 2012; Krysan and Crowder 2017); and
migration, where facilitative information about opportunities in a given destination lowers the
cost to movers and contributes to chain migration (Garip 2008; Garip and Asad 2016).
Facilitative information is often passed through organizational ties, for instance via the childcare
center bulletin boards described by Small (2009).
Both formative and facilitative information are important inputs into social decisionmaking, and both are key ways by which the social position of deciders affects the choices they
make. In this paper, I trace how the availability of each type of information constrained the
geographic choices of elite college graduates.
Methods and Data
In this project, I examine the decision processes by which recent graduates of elite
colleges ended up moving to Boston, Massachusetts following graduation. The decision to focus
on elite graduates in Boston is deliberate. The goal of this study is to understand the processes
that have led human capital to concentrate spatially. Graduates of elite colleges are both more
economically successful (US Department of Education 2015; Chetty et al. 2017) and more
spatially concentrated than college graduates as a whole (e.g. MIT Global Education & Career
Development 2017; Stanford Career Education 2017). They tend to be highly sought after as
employees, and therefore should in theory have the option to seek out a range of jobs in a range
of cities. But they disproportionately end up in cities like Boston, New York, and San Francisco.
Boston is accordingly one of the country’s largest concentrations of human capital. While just
30% of the US population over 25 has a bachelor’s degree, 45% of Boston residents do. The
disparity is even greater among young adults, with 57% of Boston metropolitan area residents
age 25-34 possessing a BA compared to just 33% of young adults in the country at large (US
Census Bureau 2015).

11
Boston’s well educated residents are employed in a robust economy with thriving
industry clusters in information technology, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, and finance (Institute
for Strategy and Competitiveness 2016). In part because of its residents’ high levels of human
capital, the Boston metro area has grown steadily richer than the country as a whole over the past
35 years—the timeframe during which Moretti’s “Great Divergence” occurred. Per capita
income in the Boston metro was 10% higher than the national average in 1980, a gap which
increased to 26% in 1990, 39% in 2000, and 42% in 2015. Elite college graduates moving to
Boston and places like it are a core process in the spatial concentration of US human capital.
The limitations of focusing my efforts on one group in one city are apparent: it may be
the case that the processes that draw elite graduates to cities like Boston are different from those
that take other people to other places. If that is the case, then my findings here will not generalize
to graduates of other types of institutions or destinations. But the question for this paper is not
how do college graduates in general decide where to move, but rather why so many of them end
up in Boston and places like it. If the decisions processes leading some people to Boston are
different from those leading other people elsewhere, it is the former that are key to human capital
concentration.
This paper is primarily based on 51 in-depth interviews conducted with recent college
graduates (n = 43) and current seniors (n = 8). In line with my goal of understanding the spatial
concentration of human capital, the majority of my sample is composed of graduates of selective
private universities (n = 19) and selective private liberal arts colleges (n = 18), although I also
interviewed several graduates of flagship public universities (n = 6). The majority (n = 36) of
my interviews were with graduates who ended up in Boston, though I supplemented these with
interviews with graduates who ended up in states that were extremely unusual for their
universities (defined as states where fewer than 1% of employed graduates move after
graduation) to see if the same decisions processes and mechanisms were active in these more
atypical decisions (n = 8).
I split the sample of graduates who ended up in Boston between those who went to
universities in New England (n = 20, of which n = 11 were in the Boston metro area), for whom
Boston is the nearest major city, and those who went to universities in other parts of the country
(n = 16). I also interviewed current seniors at universities in New England to see if people in the
heat of the decision described it in the same way as those a few years out (n = 8). I found that

12
they largely did, mentioning a similar range of job search strategies to those recalled by
graduates a few years older, though the seniors typically did not yet know which strategy would
ultimately bear fruit.
I constructed my sample by obtaining access to alumni directories for several selective
private universities and liberal arts colleges. I searched these directories for alumni less than five
years from graduation who were currently employed (as opposed to being in graduate school)
and living in the desired location. I then emailed either the full set of graduates meeting my
criteria or a random subset depending on how many fit my criteria. Overall, 32% of my emails
eventually resulted in an interview. I supplemented this with theoretical sampling from my own
personal networks, asking friends and acquaintances if they knew anyone who had gone to a
particular type of school and moved to a particular type of place after graduation. Finally, at the
end of each interview I asked the respondents if they knew anyone else in a similar situation who
might be willing to talk to me. In total 23 of my graduate respondents were sourced from alumni
directories, 12 from my personal networks, and 8 through snowball sampling. Current seniors
were accessed through announcements to dorm email listservs (n = 5) and my personal networks
(n = 3).
My respondents sourced from atypical destinations were contacted through alumni
directories (n = 5) and my personal networks (n = 3). When using alumni directories I chose
states at random from those where fewer than 1% of employed graduates move immediately after
graduation. I then emailed all alumni less than 5 years from graduation listed as employed and
living in those states. It was very difficult to find respondents this way—by design, these states
tended to have very few alumni fitting my criteria, and many of the alumni that I emailed
responded by saying that they while were originally from the state listed they now lived in
Boston, Los Angeles, or other major cities. The difficulty of finding employed recent alumni in
these states through the directories led me to rely more heavily on my personal networks in these
cases.
My respondents worked in a wide variety of industries, with consulting, finance,
engineering, and biotechnology jobs particularly well represented. The average respondent was
2.2 years from graduation, although some respondents were as many as six years out. 27 of my
respondents were female and 24 were male. 39 of my respondents were white, 2 black, 4 Latino,

13
and 5 Asian. Whites were thus overrepresented in my sample even for the schools that I selected,
though I cannot determine whether they were overrepresented among alumni living in Boston.
My interviews lasted anywhere from 25 to 90 minutes. I began each interview by asking
the respondent to describe their current work to me as a means of building rapport, and then
asked them to walk me through the process by which they ended up moving where they did. As
they did that, I probed them about their priorities for life after graduation, which cities they
considered moving to, and how they found job opportunities. I specifically asked them to
describe each type of resource they used to search for jobs and if there was a reason why they
used those. I also asked how they learned about, applied for, and decided to accept the job they
ultimately took, and the extent to which location was a factor. If they obtained multiple job offers
I asked them how they chose which one to take.
While the retrospective nature of these interviews raises concerns about faulty memories
and post-hoc rationalizations, the magnitude of the decision and its recent occurrence give reason
for confidence. Many of my questions were about specific factual events that are difficult to
fabricate—it is unlikely that someone will “remember” seriously considering a specific job in
San Francisco if in reality he never even looked there. Additionally, the search processes,
tradeoffs, and dilemmas described by current seniors broadly conformed with those described by
graduates.
The unpredictable nature of the job search almost requires it to be studied retrospectively.
Many graduates search for jobs in several ways simultaneously, checking online job boards at
the same time as they offhandedly describe their dilemma to friends or acquaintances, and
perhaps reaching out to past employers after a few months if nothing is working out. Until a job
offer materializes, it is often unclear which approach will ultimately bear fruit. This makes it
difficult to determine which of a current senior’s strategies will actually be the key until after the
fact. Because it is unclear where the job will come from until it actually appears, some level of
retrospection is unavoidable, and concerns about rationalization are probably just as large three
months after the fact as two years (though concerns about faulty memories may increase with
time).
In the following sections I present my findings. I begin by describing the surprising
ambivalence many of my respondents displayed about where to begin the next stage of their
lives. I then show how in the absence of strong preferences, many respondents found their

14
ultimate destination determined by the cities about which they had access to formative and
facilitative information through their past experiences and social ties. When quoting respondents
I indicate their profession and their destination if it was somewhere other than Boston.
Pseudonyms are matched to gender.
Recent graduates’ relative indifference to location
Where to move after college is a major decision. Graduates are deciding on the setting
that will be the backdrop for their transition to adulthood—the places and institutions in which
their life stories will play out. Where they move also determines the friendship groups they will
have and, for many, the person whom they will marry. It’s almost certain that the choice they
make when graduating will heavily shape how their lives unfold, even for graduates who
eventually move on from their initial city. And yet many of my respondents expressed
substantial indifference about where they ended up. It wasn’t uncommon to hear sentiments like
those of Beatrice, an event planner, who said “I was open to anywhere, it’s just this was easier.”
Job prospects often drive location decisions
How can graduates be so indifferent towards place? In some cases, this was a reflection
of the bundled nature of the decision they were making. When setting up their new lives,
graduates are actually making several decisions at the same time: where to live, certainly, but
also what job to take and even what friendship group to have. But they only get to make one
choice, and different aspects of the decision dominate it for different people (see Dellaert et al.
2018 on bundled decisions across a range of contexts). For many of my respondents, location
was secondary to career. This was true for Catherine, a transportation consultant. As she put it,
“That’s the only reason I’m here…I was like ‘Oh, I got a job! Ok, I guess I’m gonna move to
Boston.’” Daniel, a biomedical engineer, moved more than 1,000 miles to Manchester, New
Hampshire—a city he’d never visited and where he knew no one—in order to take a job in his
field. As he put it, “It wasn’t like I wanted to move to a particular place. It was that I wanted a
job...I was living at home and working at a restaurant, so I was looking for a job within my field
and just slowly expanding my search.” These respondents decided where to live almost entirely
based on where they found the best job, with location itself a secondary consideration, if that.
David, a current senior who had accepted a tech job in Seattle just prior to our interview, put this

15
sentiment especially bluntly: “When I applied to jobs, they were like ‘Where would you want to
work?’ And I was like, ‘I am willing to work anywhere, including the moon.’”
Preferences about locations are typically vague
Even for people who cared a great deal about the place they lived, strong preferences
often didn’t lead to a set list of places. Many respondents cared strongly about the type of place
they lived, but not the exact location. It was especially common for people to want to be in an
urban area. Anna, a teacher, was typical in this regard. As she said, “I probably would have
looked at any city. Had I got into something in Chicago or the Bay Area or the East Coast I
would have looked into that too. It could have been anywhere that wasn’t the South, and that was
a big city.” A full 25% of my respondents explicitly echoed this sentiment: that being in a city
was vital, but they didn’t care which one.
How to make a decision without having a top choice
In the absence of strong preferences on where to live, how did graduates decide where to
go? My respondents for the most part followed a process of satisficing (Simon 1976). They
typically started with a few general goals, such as getting a job in a certain industry or ending up
in a certain region of the country. They used these goals to rule out opportunities from
consideration, keeping the set of leads they pursued to a size that was cognitively tractable. They
applied to jobs within their constrained set, sometimes relaxing their constraints if they didn’t
initially get enough responses. Once their first one or two job offers came in, they frequently
suspended their search and accepted the best offer among the initial round of responses. Francis,
a theater promoter, had a fairly typical search process:
During senior year I decided that…I’m going to try to do arts administration...I applied
for things in Boston, New York, or Philly. I would have been open to either. I was
determined to stay on the East Coast and be in a city, and not be somewhere I had to
drive. So I applied to different jobs everywhere and the Boston jobs came up first, that I
got an offer for a job in Boston. And it wasn’t great but it was fine.

16
Francis first determined the broad field that he wanted to enter, arts administration. He then
limited his search to three cities on the east coast that had the cultural and lifestyle fit he wanted,
not specifying his location preferences beyond this. This created a manageable pool of job
openings that would be satisfactory in terms of both content and location, since he couldn’t
possibly apply to every job or even every arts administration job in the country. He started
applying and accepted the first offer that came up, at which point he decided to move to Boston.
Francis’s job search, like those of most of my respondents, was not about optimization. It was
more about constraining the search to jobs and locations that would be satisfactory, and then
accepting the first or best offer from that choice set.
In contrast to decision-making in dating (Bruch, Feinberg, and Lee 2016), where final
choices were selected using cognitively demanding decision rules, the final decision in the job
search was typically made by default based on the first offer to appear. This was likely due to the
uncertain and time-dependent nature of the job search, where offers must be decided on within a
few weeks without knowing the likelihood of future offers materializing. In this way, the
graduates were clearly satisficing—cutting off their search when they got a job that was good
enough rather than holding out for the best possible offer. Geoffrey, an aerospace engineer,
withdrew his outstanding applications after receiving his first offer: “And then I got the job and
after that I stopped the search completely. I had applied to lots of jobs, but I was like ‘I don’t
want to leave Boston at this point, I don’t want to leave my girlfriend, this sounds like a great
job, done.’” Heather, a chemical engineer who moved to Louisiana, was similarly ready to be
finished with the search process: “[Company] was my first and only offer. I'm sure that I could
have gotten others if I stuck with it but part of me—I don’t want to say settled, but I was just
ready to know what I was doing.” Ian, an economic consultant, later felt ambivalent about
accepting the first offer he received: “[I]n retrospect it probably wasn’t so good to take the first
job that I got, because maybe I could have gotten a bunch of other things…[but] I probably
would have had to say no and then go into the unknown again. And that's hard to do.”
The job search process typical among my respondents differed from the idealized model
of migration choice in at least two major ways. First, my respondents didn’t have a clear ranking
of potential destinations. Many of them still don’t know whether they would prefer in the
abstract to live in Boston or somewhere else. Second, my respondents only considered a highly
select subset of all possible opportunities. It would be impossible for anyone to actually evaluate

17
every single entry-level job in the country, even if they were aware of all of them. Instead, my
respondents ruled out most jobs and most cities without much consideration, and applied to a
small subset selected based on geography, industry, or quality of the job lead. As a result their
searches were a process of satisficing, rather than optimizing as is modeled in most quantitative
migration studies.
Because respondents only considered a subset of possible opportunities, the exact nature
by which opportunities were ruled out or selected for serious consideration strongly influenced
where they ended up. Respondents limited the size of their job searches by making categorical
decisions—conscious ones based on stated preferences and implicit ones driven by incomplete
formative information—about which cities and careers to focus on or rule out, and by relying on
high quality sources of facilitative information. Both of these methods of ruling out options had
strong geographic effects that didn’t necessarily reflect respondents’ preferences for one location
over another.

Categorical decisions: Ruling out options based on characteristics and familiarity
Many respondents constrained their searches through normative decisions to only look in
certain places. Sometimes these decisions were conscious choices based on preferences about the
kind of place they wanted to live, or just the need to cut down the number of possible options. In
other cases these decisions were made implicitly, with respondents forgoing locations where they
had incomplete formative information and focusing on those places they knew about, typically
because they had lived or visited there in the past.

Explicit preferences about location characteristics
As noted above, the most common way that amenities and lifestyle factors influenced the
job searches of my respondents was by ruling out certain types of locations. Jennifer, an
environmental engineer who ended up in Anchorage, didn’t apply to any jobs south of Denver
because, as she put it, “[she and her partner are] northerners and can’t deal with the heat.” Many
other respondents, like Anna and Francis, ruled out places that wouldn’t offer an urban lifestyle.
Kristina, a biology researcher, was fairly typical in this regard: “I only looked in cities. I knew I

18
wanted to be in a city…. City, not in the South, preferably in the Midwest or Northeast.”
Relatively few of my respondents made an affirmative choice to live somewhere because of
lifestyle factors alone, but amenities still shaped the decision by eliminating large parts of the
country from consideration.
Geography as triage: Choosing a location to limit the scope of the job search
Some of my respondents, especially those in careers with wide geographic footprints,
consciously used geography to narrow their options, but not based on any particular desire to live
in one place or another. Susan, a teacher, “[did]n’t love Boston.” Even so, she limited her job
search to the Boston metro area as a way to keep it manageable. As she put it, “It’s
overwhelming. You can be a teacher anywhere, you know, and I felt like I needed to narrow the
search in some kind of arbitrary—not arbitrary, but like it was like ok, I’m just gonna look in
Massachusetts.” Tiffany, a copywriter, took a similar approach:
[T]he problem was that because copywriting is an ubiquitous type of job, there was really
cool stuff all over America. But I needed something to fall down in place, like one
constraint. And I just decided that Boston would be a good constraint given my financial
constraints and my sister would be there for the summer. So I originally started bigger,
but then I narrowed it down because there were too many options really. I would've been
writing 150 applications—okay no I'm not gonna do that.”
Respondents like Susan and Tiffany used geography to constrain their searches, but more as a
way to keep their searches manageable than because they had strong location preferences.
Familiarity: formative information from lived experience
Many respondents geographically limited their searches to places where they had spent
time, or at least visited. Through previous experiences, these respondents had acquired the
formative information that certain places were worthwhile destinations. Jennifer, the
environmental engineer, felt comfortable applying to her job in Alaska because she had spent a
summer there during college: “Since I had already been to Alaska and knew I liked it up here I
was like ‘eh, I’ll apply’…I didn’t just pick up and move to Alaska; I had been here before.”

19
Conversely, respondents sometimes ruled out cities where they had no formative connection.
Luis, a current senior who ended up taking a job as an urban planner in Texas, briefly considered
looking for jobs in Seattle: “I think I looked at Seattle once, but I’ve never been there, and I
don’t know why I would go to Seattle without ever having experienced it.”
This elimination of unfamiliar places wasn’t always conscious. Maria, an economics
researcher, felt like there were no constraints on where she could move. As she put it, “it [felt]
like I had this blank canvas where I could go anywhere.” Still, she didn’t ever think seriously
about moving to the West Coast: “I’ve never been to the West Coast, I’ve basically been to
Arizona and nowhere past that. So I’m sure part of it is it’s hard for me to imagine what the
living would be like so it wasn’t in my frame of reference.” Some respondents would later regret
not looking more closely at unfamiliar places. Neil, a consultant, reflected on his job search a
year later:
At that time I’d never been to San Francisco. After this road trip that I took with my
friend I’m honestly thinking about taking a job out there if I get an offer. It’s beautiful.
That’s something else. It’s a different life, a different pace, different kind of person, so
many different industries in which I would be interested in working…I guess I was naïve.
If I had the opportunity to do it again I would definitely look out there.
Respondents like Maria and Neil unconsciously limited their searches to places about which they
had formative information, almost without recognizing that they were doing so. In Neil’s case he
later realized this was a mistake.
Of course, not all respondents ruled out the unknown. Other respondents specifically
sought out the chance to live somewhere new. As Olivia, a graduating senior, put it, “I want to
live somewhere I’ve never lived before because I’ve been in Massachusetts my whole life.” But
even when specifically seeking to move away, the ultimate destination could come from past
experiences, as with Penny, a petroleum engineer who moved to New Orleans: “I wanted to go
literally anywhere else in the world [besides the East Coast]….I had been to New Orleans and
knew it was fun, but it was far away and I didn’t know anyone moving here so it would be a
fresh start.” Penny’s highest priority was moving far away from her previous life on the East

20
Coast, but the best way to do that was to move to a city where she had spent a summer during
college. She knew it was sufficiently exotic because she had been there before.
It is easy to picture how formative information about possible destinations could be
passed on through social ties, for example via a friend who raves about his hometown to a
decider who has never been there. I did not observe any instances of that specific type of
transmission in my data, but several respondents did describe receiving formative information
about career options through their networks. Quentin was a financial analyst who did a summer
internship and almost took a job in insurance. He first considered that industry because a
roommate told him about it:
I had roommate that year who was also an econ major. And he had told me about an
internship that he just got at another insurance company called Travelers. And I was like
‘Oooh…’ I’d never thought of insurance companies as being a good fit for econ majors
but I’m like maybe that would be it.
This was a case of formative information—that an industry might be a good fit for an economics
major—being passed solely through social networks.

Facilitative information: sources of job leads and their geographic implications
The other major way respondents limited their job searches was by focusing attention on
leads they perceived to be especially promising. In doing this, they selected which opportunities
to pursue based on where they had the best facilitative information. The most common sources of
leads were online databases, frequently run by university career services offices; personal and
alumni networks; and contacts from previous jobs or internships. Each of these sources had a
distinctive geographical footprint, which in turn influenced where graduates using the source
ended up. In some cases this created tension between the places where a graduate would have
liked to live and the places where they had the best facilitative information.
Online databases

21
Respondents who undertook extensive job searches frequently used online databases.
While some respondents used public databases such as Monster.com, Indeed.com, and
Idealist.org, more preferred to use proprietary databases run by their university career services
offices (64% of my respondents used university-run databases in their searches, and 20% found
their ultimate job through them). These databases, classic examples of information storage
through organizational ties (Small 2009), were seen as having higher success rates than public
databases. As Quentin, the financial analyst, put it,
I kind of relied somewhat heavily on this search engine to match me, because it had
actually a pretty good rate of actually getting my resume read, and interviews and things
like that…I felt like it had a pretty good turnaround, and all you really had to do was
check the box that you were interested, fill out the information and go.
Neil, the consultant, similarly noted that, “[I]t’s much better than going onto Indeed.com and
finding a job there. Because first of all, you’re within a much smaller pool, and secondly in a
pool that’s highly regarded.”
These databases were not neutral with respect to geography, even conditional on the
national distribution of entry-level jobs for college graduates. Rather, because they tended to
source leads from alumni and companies with a history of hiring at their university, the job leads
were concentrated in certain cities. As Beatrice, the event planner, put it, “[College] kind of has
its spheres…DC they have a lot, Boston, New York have a lot, and then San Francisco.” Quentin
also noticed the geographic patterning: “In part because the school itself was in New England,
then in turn the companies that tried to recruit from that college were based in New England as
well.”
In some cases, the power of the university network was enough to override preferences
about where to live. This was the case for Ethan, an economics researcher. As he said, “I would
have loved to have been on the West Coast, but it was mainly on the East Coast [that I looked]
just because that’s where the jobs that came through the [College] network came from.” Because
he was making a bundled decision, his desire to move West was outweighed by the easier job
search he would have in the East.

22
Personal, professorial, and alumni networks
A second way in which respondents identified job leads was through networking.
Sometimes this was through family and friends, other times through university alumni networks,
and occasionally through professors. 72% of my respondents applied to at least one job they
learned about through networking, and 25% found the job they ultimately took through their
personal, professorial, or alumni networks. Richard, an international development researcher,
found his job by cold-emailing a graduate of his college:
I really ended up at this job because the executive director of the center is a [College]
alum…Last spring when I was applying to jobs…one of my tactics was to go on the
website of places I was interested in working and search on the website for [College] and
if they had bios of their staff and anybody who went to [College] there. And I’d email the
person a blah networking email…so I emailed [Person], who’s the head of the center
where I work and she responded, ‘Yeah we might have a job opening in next couple
months.’
Other respondents used their personal networks in a similar manner. Steven, a transportation
researcher, found his job through a friend’s mother. As he described it:
I was mentioning my difficulty finding a position to a friend of mine. And he says ‘oh
you’re interested in transportation. My girlfriend’s mom works in HR for the offsite
contractor at [Organization].’…So I tried contacting her and within a couple weeks I had
a position.
The use of university and personal networks shaped the geography of the job search. Because
each college’s alumni tend to concentrate in certain cities, the jobs that can be found through
them are similarly geographically concentrated. And graduates’ personal networks tended to be
clustered in places where they had themselves spent time. As with databases, the geography of
networks could overwhelm preferences about location. As Tara, a pharmaceutical researcher, put
it, “I would love to move; I actually don’t like Boston. But I just don’t know anybody anywhere

23
else so it’s harder to find jobs elsewhere.” Tara would like to leave Boston, and biotech jobs like
hers do exist in other parts of the country. But her network is keeping her from moving.
Past experiences
In addition to finding job leads through friends and family or universities, respondents
also revisited their past experiences. 20% of my respondents found their final job because of a
previous work experience. Some of these respondents received offers at the end of a formal
summer internship program, as with Uma, a financial analyst: “I worked really hard during the
internship and then had conversation with my manager about next steps…I didn’t apply
anywhere else.” Others sought jobs from past employers informally. Vance, a medical
researcher, ended up working for a colleague of his previous boss: “[W]hen it came time to apply
for jobs, you know, [previous boss] was like, ‘Yeah, why don’t you come work here?’….so she
just passed on my resume and then some point later this guy said, ‘Why don’t you come for an
interview?’ So I came for an interview and a couple of months later I had a job offer.”
Importantly, in many cases these respondents had first sought out their experiences
without any thought of future employment prospects. Wendy, a curatorial intern, got her job
through a boss from one of her summer internships. But she had not taken the internship with an
eye towards a job offer: she had taken it so that she could spend a summer living near her
grandmother. Xavier, a medical researcher, first took an internship at a hospital in high school,
choosing it because it had a lab working on a topic he was interested at the time. He came back
for two summers during college. When it came time to look for a job, he remembered, “I just
kind of realized there’s probably a job there, and it’s kind of the path of least resistance, and it’s
gonna be a job that I’m gonna enjoy, so I was like I might as well just do it.”
For many respondents, the easiest or best path to a job after college was through the
internships and experiences they had gotten during their education. This made them more likely
to move to cities they had previous connections to, entirely independent of their feelings about
the cities themselves.

Structural factors can be overcome by strong, specific preferences

24
The respondents I have described thus far found their ultimate destinations heavily
influenced by the geographic distribution of their sources of formative and facilitative
information, specifically by their personal and university connections and the set of places they
had spent time in the past. These forces were powerful in determining where my respondents
moved. But they were not deterministic—no respondent was forced to move to the city with the
most alumni connections. In particular, it was possible to overcome limited facilitative
information with strong enough motivation. Yael, a biology researcher, knew exactly what she
wanted after college. For her, the job search was just a matter of getting it:
I grew up in the Boston area…and so when I was graduating college I knew that I wanted
to be a lab technician somewhere, and I knew that, you know, when I was graduating
college I didn’t want to just go off to some big city by myself really, and so I very
specifically looked in the Boston area for job positions. And so I just emailed probably
like 70 or 80 professors at MIT with my resume…And so this person responded and was
like ‘yeah I have a position’ and interviewed me and it was a great fit, so I ended up here.
Yael did not make any use of university or even personal networks when she applied for jobs,
she just cold-emailed professors off the MIT website. Because her goal was quite specific—she
knew she wanted to work as a lab technician in Boston—she could find the job leads herself.
The connections used by my respondents were not deterministic of where they looked for jobs
and ended up. As Yael demonstrated, it was possible for someone to forego these networks
entirely given the right reason. Rather, the influence was felt through the relative ease with
which these connections allowed people to look in certain places compared to others. Without
very strong, very specific preferences, the ease of looking in a particular place was often very
influential.
How graduates end up in atypical locations
The mechanisms that I have described thus far were visible in both the respondents that
ended up in Boston and those I selected based on their movement to atypical places for their
universities. Access to both formative and facilitative information was key for getting people to
unusual parts of the country. Of the seven people I interviewed because they lived in states

25
where fewer than 1% of their colleges’ recent graduates lived, six lived in places they had never
been before starting college (the last one moved to her hometown). Four of these moved
somewhere they had never even visited before because they received a job offer there. Three of
them received these job offers through public databases, which were otherwise relatively
unusual, and one through a university database. The other two—Penny and Jennifer, mentioned
above—moved to places they had spent summers during college. The experiences of Penny and
Jennifer suggest that the formative information acquired by spending a summer in a new city can
be enough to make someone move back there, especially when coupled with a job offer. The
other four respondents suggest that the job offer may be enough in itself.
Discussion
Very few of the graduates that I interviewed knew exactly where they wanted to live after
college. In many cases, their ultimate destination was more about finding the right job than about
finding the right place. And when location did influence the choice, it was more often by
eliminating certain types of cities from consideration than by selecting optimal ones.
Among graduates who didn’t know exactly where they wanted to live, a common search
strategy was to use a blunt decision rule to eliminate the majority of possible destinations, apply
widely to jobs in the remaining places, and then go where they got the first or best offer. Some
options were ruled out based on preferences about where to live or what job to do, but many
were eliminated either explicitly or by default based on incomplete formative or facilitative
information. Because this information, largely obtained through network ties and past
experiences, was geographically concentrated, it disproportionately led respondents to settle in
certain cities, even if the respondents would have been open to living elsewhere.
My findings have several important implications for research on human capital
concentration, migration in general, decision-making, and social networks. I discuss each briefly
here, and offer some suggestions for future research.
Human capital concentration and the social nature of the job search
Previous studies of human capital concentration have emphasized the role of changes in
labor demand (Diamond 2016; Moretti 2012; Storper and Scott 2009), limitations on housing
supply (Ganong and Shoag 2013; Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai 2013), and lifestyle desirability

26
(Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz 2001; Florida 2002, 2005) as reasons why workers in the United States
have geographically sorted themselves by education over the past 35 years. To these mechanisms
I add the social nature of the job search. My respondents described migration decisions as
heavily constrained by geographically uneven access to formative and facilitative information.
They often indicated that they would have considered or even preferred living somewhere other
than where they ended up, but that it was difficult for them to find a job there.
This is hardly the sole or even primary mechanism responsible for geographical sorting.
Most notably, the geographic distribution of jobs was fixed before my respondents began their
searches, and only one of my respondents moved to a city before receiving a job offer there. But
social mechanisms mean that graduates of specific colleges are probably much more
geographically concentrated than the distribution of jobs or their own location preferences
require.
The cases of graduates who ended up in atypical locations show that at least some of
them were willing to consider moving to unfamiliar parts of the country if presented with a job
opportunity there, and that others actively desired to move back to places they had first
experienced through summer internships. From a policy perspective, this suggests that it may be
possible to reduce human capital concentration by providing college students more experiences
throughout the country, or even just by expanding the geographic reach of university career
services databases.

Implications for research on internal migration
Past research on internal migration has tended to use quantitative methods to make
inferences about the migration decision based on its outcomes, while leaving the actual decision
process as a black box (e.g. Diamond 2016; Partridge 2010; Dahl and Sorenson 2010a). In this
paper I have used in-depth qualitative interviews to directly examine the migration decision for a
specific group of highly sought after migrants. Doing so provides a few important insights into
the migration process. First, it makes clear the asymmetry between jobs and amenities within the
migration decision. Both jobs and amenities factored into the decisions of many of my
respondents, but in different ways and at different points in the decision process. Amenities were
typically used to rule out certain types of cities or regions of the country from consideration.

27
Respondents then chose their specific city based on where they found a job. Future migration
research should consider jobs and amenities as complimentary forces that interact with one
another rather than competing explanations for what drives a complex decision.
More broadly, my findings are inconsistent with the way migration decisions are
typically modeled. Many studies of domestic migration make inferences about the relative appeal
of various cities by looking at the “revealed preferences” (P. A. Samuelson 1938) of migrants
who choose where to live. These analyses assume that the decision to move to one city implies a
rejection of all others—the city someone ends up moving to must be at least as good from their
perspective as everywhere else in the country. However, my respondents never evaluated
anywhere near all of the possible destinations. That was too difficult, so they eliminated the vast
majority of possible destinations without a second—or sometimes even a first—thought. Many
respondents noted that they would have been perfectly fine living somewhere other than where
they ended up, and several explicitly stated that they would have preferred it. This casts doubt on
the ability of researchers to infer preferences based only on observations of the final choice.
Future attempts to model migration or make inferences about the desirability of cities based on
migration patterns must take the decision process into account.
Formative and facilitative information in major life decisions
The migration decisions of elite college graduates present a clear example of a major life
choice that was heavily influenced by default options, which were in turn a product of social
structure. JDM scholars have convincingly established that even in relatively important choices
the ultimate decision can be influenced by seemingly irrelevant features of the decision
environment (Johnson and Goldstein 2003; Beshears et al. 2009). Sociologists have elaborated
on this by noting that in social life, the decision environment is typically socially constructed or
the product of one’s position in social structure (Bruch and Feinberg 2017). My respondents
who found their jobs through networks, university databases, or previous experiences—78% of
them—are perfect examples of this phenomenon. For many of them, the ease with which they
could accept these jobs, and certainly the ratio of expected job quality to search effort, was a key
factor in their decision to take the position they did. In turn, these jobs were easy to find because
of who they knew, what experiences they had, and where they were coming from.

28
My contribution here has been to identify two distinct types of socially transmitted
information, formative and facilitative, that are necessary when making a decision, and to show
how differential access to each determined the ease of choosing various opportunities. In this
case the default options were those cities the respondents knew to be destinations worth
considering (about which they had formative information) and where they had preferential access
to job opportunities (facilitative information). It was rare to overcome a lack of either type of
information, and almost impossible to overcome a lack of both. Differential access to one or both
of these types of information also serves to shape the decision environment, and therefore the
final choices, of deciders in other major life decisions such as who to marry (Blau and Schwartz
1984), which house to buy (Rhodes and DeLuca 2014; Lareau 2014), and which job to take
(Mark Granovetter 1974).
Facilitative information as a positive constraint on choice
A number of researchers over the years have pointed to the possible negative impacts of
social capital on individuals (e.g. Waldinger 1995; Portes and Sensenbrenner 1993; Portes 1998).
Most of these accounts have emphasized aspects of social networks that I have not touched on
here, such as demands placed on individuals by their network alters or pressure to engage in
certain behaviors (Portes and Sensenbrenner 1993). The downsides of information transmission
are thought to fall primary on those excluded from the network: every job that goes to a friend or
co-ethnic is one that wasn’t available to the less well connected (Waldinger 1995), and people
who lack extensive social networks, or can’t activate the ties they do have (Smith 2005), may
lose out. In contrast, facilitative information has typically been portrayed as an unambiguous
benefit to the recipient—at minimum, if you don’t like an opportunity, you don’t have to take it
(Lin 1999; Burt 1992; M Granovetter 1973).
The experiences of several of my respondents suggest that in real-world, bundled
decisions made under pressure, things are not so simple. Respondents like the economics
researcher Ethan found themselves living in parts of the country they would have preferred to
avoid because of the preferential access they had to employment opportunities there. In these
instances, facilitative information acted as a positive constraint: it presented a good enough
option that preempted an extended search that might have ended up with a better outcome. It’s
quite possible that if forced to search exhaustively, Ethan would have been able to find a job in

29
his field on the West Coast—plenty of economic research jobs exist there, and Yael’s success
getting a similar research assistant position (albeit in a different field) illustrates that it is possible
to acquire these without connections. This might have left him ultimately better off, with a
comparable job in a place he would have preferred to live. But because it was so much easier to
find good enough jobs on the East Coast, he couldn’t justify the extra time, effort, and risk of
looking out West. In this way, the extra facilitative information Ethan had about the East Coast
may have constrained rather than enabled him.

Limitations and future research
The research presented here is by no means exhaustive, and it suggests many avenues for
future scholarship. A natural place to start would be to look for systematic patterns in the
heterogeneity that I documented. Some of my respondents were willing to move anywhere for a
job, “including the moon” in the case of David. Others limited themselves to just one city off the
bat, either because they loved it, they had friends there, or just needed a way to limit their
options. In my relatively small, non-probability sample, it was difficult to discern whether these
differences had any patterns to them. But future work, perhaps using survey methods, could look
for systematic variation, whether on the basis of demographics, intended career path, college
major, or previous life experience. There are some suggestive possibilities: several of the
respondents who moved the furthest, including David and Daniel, also reported feeling
particularly stressed about securing a job, sometimes due to experience with unemployment in
the past. Future studies might take particular interest in looking for differences in job search
strategies across racial or ethnic groups, since it has been well-documented that African
Americans in particular face employment discrimination, even after graduating from prestigious
universities (Gaddis 2015; Pager 2003), and that this shapes their job search strategies (Pager and
Pedulla 2015). While I did not observe obvious differences in search strategy by gender, it is
possible that these exist. Among married heterosexual couples, the husband’s career typically
drives migration decisions (Bielby and Bielby 1992).
Future research should also consider the ways in which recent graduates of selective
colleges may be different from recent college graduates as a whole or labor migrants in general.
Coming primarily from selective colleges with well-resourced career services offices, it is

30
possible that the job leads my respondents could get through organizational ties were much
stronger than is typical. Graduates of less selective universities may rely more on their personal
networks, which could keep them more concentrated in space, or public-facing job websites,
which might let them explore a wider range of geographies. Additionally, a large faction of my
respondents had chosen to move far away from home for their schooling, so they might be
temperamentally more predisposed to move long distances for their careers.

Conclusion
Every year a new cohort of college graduates enters the workforce, and every year many
of them end up in the same relatively small set of cities. In this paper I have examined the
processes by which one set of college graduates ended up in Boston, a major human capital hub.
I have shown that many of these graduates were surprisingly indifferent about which city to live
in after college, and documented how their ultimate destinations were often profoundly
influenced by seemingly irrelevant factors like where alumni of their colleges were concentrated
or even what internship they had held back in high school. Access to formative information
about which parts of the country were worth considering and facilitative information about job
leads was crucial in shaping their migration decisions, and was in turn heavily influenced by my
respondents’ position in social structure.
While it is impossible with these data to determine the extent to which the search
strategies my respondents used contribute to the overall spatial concentration of human capital,
there are reasons to believe it may be substantial. Respondents who ended up in Boston weren’t
necessarily averse to living elsewhere, and in some cases would have preferred it. Further,
respondents who moved to atypical locations often did so based only on a bit of familiarity and a
job offer. This suggests that some portion of the geographic concentration of human capital
could be averted by equipping graduates with more geographically balanced formative and
facilitative information, perhaps through making available more geographically representative
career databases or facilitating exposure to various parts of the country during college.
More broadly, my results reaffirm the importance of studying how decisions unfold, and
not just their aggregate outcomes. Engagement with cognitively plausible decision models has
already yielded great insights in the realms of neighborhood segregation (Lareau and Goyette

31
2014; Krysan and Crowder 2017), elite hiring (Rivera 2015; Binder, Davis, and Bloom 2015),
and romantic relationships (Bruch, Feinberg, and Lee 2016). Here I have demonstrated that such
an approach is also applicable to the study of internal migration, even among a population with
very few constraints on its mobility.

32

References
Amos, Orley M. 1989. “An Inquiry into the Causes of Increasing Regional Income Inequality in
The United States.” The Review of Regional Studies 19 (2): 1–12.
———. 2014. “Evidence of Increasing Regional Income Variation in the United States: 19692006.” Modern Economy 5: 520–32.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1992. “Convergence.” Journal of Political Economy
100 (2): 223–251.
Berry, Christopher R., and Edward L. Glaeser. 2005. “The Divergence of Human Capital Levels
across Cities.” Papers in Regional Science 84 (3): 407–444.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2009. “The Importance
of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States.”
In Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment, 167–195. University of Chicago
Press. http://www.nber.org.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/chapters/c4539.pdf.
Bielby, William T., and Denise D. Bielby. 1992. “I Will Follow Him: Family Ties, Gender-Role
Beliefs, and Reluctance to Relocate for a Better Job.” American Journal of Sociology 97
(5): 1241–1267.
Binder, Amy J., Daniel B. Davis, and Nick Bloom. 2015. “Career Funneling How Elite Students
Learn to Define and Desire ‘“Prestigious”’Jobs.” Sociology of Education 89 (1): 20–39.
Bishop, Bill. 2008. The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of like-Minded America Is Tearing Us
Apart. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=nLNVd8ZkW0UC&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&d
q=big+sort&ots=UWk-PkbBPV&sig=nkpZkAKm_kuyQWMYVmWZrM8OuPM.
Blau, Peter M., and Joseph E. Schwartz. 1984. Crosscutting Social Circles. Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.
Borondo, J, F Borondo, C Rodriguez-Sickert, and C a Hidalgo. 2014. “To Each According to Its
Degree: The Meritocracy and Topocracy of Embedded Markets.” Scientific Reports 4
(January): 3784. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep03784.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bruch, Elizabeth E., and Fred Feinberg. 2017. “Decision-Making Processes in Social Contexts.”
Annual Review of Sociology 43 (1): 207–27. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-060116053622.
Bruch, Elizabeth E., Fred Feinberg, and Kee Yeun Lee. 2016. “Extracting Multistage Screening
Rules from Online Dating Activity Data.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, August, 201522494. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1522494113.
Bruch, Elizabeth E., Ross A. Hammond, and Peter M. Todd. 2015. “Coevolution of DecisionMaking and Social Environments.” Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral
Sciences: An Interdisciplinary, Searchable, and Linkable Resource, May, 1–16.
Bruch, Elizabeth E., and M. E. J. Newman. 2018. “Aspirational Pursuit of Mates in Online
Dating Markets.” Science Advances 4 (8): eaap9815.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aap9815.

33
Buenstorf, Guido, Matthias Geissler, and Stefan Krabel. 2016. “Locations of Labor Market Entry
by German University Graduates: Is (Regional) Beauty in the Eye of the Beholder?”
Review of Regional Research 36 (1): 29–49.
Burt, Ronald S. 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Harvard university
press. https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books?hl=en&lr=&id=FAhiz9FWDzMC&oi=fnd&pg=PR5&dq=s
tructural+holes&ots=vIM4cC2PJP&sig=yrNT-adgEhXhkzFqDdeNyvx7xOc.
Carlino, Gerald A., and Leonard O. Mills. 1993. “Are US Regional Incomes Converging?: A
Time Series Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics 32 (2): 335–346.
Carlino, Gerald, and Leonard Mills. 1996. “CONVERGENCE AND THE US STATES: A
TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS.” Journal of Regional Science 36 (4): 597–616.
Carr, Patrick J., and Maria J. Kefalas. 2009. Hollowing out the Middle: The Rural Brain Drain
and What It Means for America. Boston: Beacon Press. https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books?hl=en&lr=&id=s6CmlA7PDzMC&oi=fnd&pg=PT5&dq=k
efalas+brain+drain&ots=kizatBRmM3&sig=CYRqeWppo143CK1497J0dMH41WE.
Carrillo, Laura, Mary Pattillo, Erin Hardy, and Dolores Acevedo-Garcia. 2016. “Housing
Decisions Among Low-Income Hispanic Households in Chicago.” Cityscape 18 (2): 109.
Chen, Yong, and Stuart S. Rosenthal. 2008. “Local Amenities and Life-Cycle Migration: Do
People Move for Jobs or Fun?” Journal of Urban Economics 64 (3): 519–537.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2008.05.005.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017.
“Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility.”
http://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/papers/coll_mrc_paper.pdf.
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
Augustin Bergeron, and David M. Cutler. 2016. “The Association between Income and
Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014.” JAMA 315 (16): 1750–66.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.4226.
Clark, David E., and William J. Hunter. 1992. “The Impact of Economic Opportunity,
Amenities, and Fiscal Factors on Age-Specific Migration Rates.” Journal of Regional
Science 32 (3): 349–365.
Clark, Terry Nichols, Richard Lloyd, Kenneth K. Wong, and Pushpam Jain. 2002. “Amenities
Drive Urban Growth.” Journal of Urban Affairs 24 (5): 493–515.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9906.00134.
Coleman, James S. 1986. “Social Theory, Social Research, and a Theory of Action.” American
Journal of Sociology, 1309–1335.
Dahl, Michael S., and Olav Sorenson. 2010a. “The Migration of Technical Workers.” Journal of
Urban Economics 67 (1): 33–45.
———. 2010b. “The Social Attachment to Place.” Social Forces 89 (2): 633–658.
Daniel, Caitlin. 2016. “Economic Constraints on Taste Formation and the True Cost of Healthy
Eating.” Social Science & Medicine 148 (January): 34–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.11.025.
Dellaert, Benedict G. C., Joffre Swait, Wiktor L. Vic Adamowicz, Theo A. Arentze, Elizabeth E.
Bruch, Elisabetta Cherchi, Caspar Chorus, et al. 2018. “Individuals’ Decisions in the
Presence of Multiple Goals.” Customer Needs and Solutions 5 (1–2): 51–64.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40547-017-0071-1.

34
DeLuca, Stefanie, Peter Rosenblatt, and Holly Wood. 2012. “Why Poor People Move (and
Where They Go): Residential Mobility, Selection and Stratification.”
http://grahamimac.com/housingandeducation/pdf/DelucaRosenblattWood_2013.pdf.
Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of U.S. Workers’
Diverging Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000.” American Economic Review 106 (3):
479–524.
Dietz, Thomas, and Cameron T. Whitley. 2018. “Inequality, Decisions, and Altruism.” Sociology
of Development 4 (3): 282–303. https://doi.org/10.1525/sod.2018.4.3.282.
DiMaggio, Paul, and Michael Useem. 1978. “Social Class and Arts Consumption.” Theory and
Society 5 (2): 141–161.
Fan, C. Cindy, and Emilio Casetti. 1994. “The Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of US Regional
Income Inequality, 1950–1989.” The Annals of Regional Science 28 (2): 177–196.
Florida, Richard. 2002. The Rise of the Creative Class. New York: Basic Books. https://booksgoogle-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books/about/The_Rise_of_the_Creative_Class_Revisited.html?id=
_f0WBQAAQBAJ.
———. 2005. The Flight of the Creative Class. Harper Business New York.
https://athenaalliance.org/athenaalliance/pdf/FloridaSummary.pdf.
Gaddis, S. Michael. 2015. “Discrimination in the Credential Society: An Audit Study of Race
and College Selectivity in the Labor Market.” Social Forces 93 (4): 1451–79.
https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/sou111.
Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag. 2013. “Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the US
Declined?” http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2081216.
Garip, Filiz. 2008. “Social Capital and Migration: How Do Similar Resources Lead to Divergent
Outcomes?” Demography 45 (3): 591–617.
Garip, Filiz, and Asad L. Asad. 2016. “Network Effects in Mexico–US Migration: Disentangling
the Underlying Social Mechanisms.” American Behavioral Scientist 60 (10): 1168–1193.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. 2001. “Consumer City.” Journal of Economic
Geography 1 (1): 27–50.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Albert Saiz. 2003. “The Rise of the Skilled City.”
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10191.
Glaeser, Edward L., José A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1995. “Economic Growth in a
Cross-Section of Cities.” Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (1): 117–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3932(95)01206-2.
Granovetter, M. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology 78 (6):
1360–1380.
Granovetter, Mark. 1974. Getting a Job. https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books/about/Getting_a_Job.html?id=R7-w4BLg7dAC.
Graves, Philip E. 1980. “Migration and Climate.” Journal of Regional Science 20 (2): 227–37.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.1980.tb00641.x.
Graves, Philip E., and Peter D. Linneman. 1979. “Household Migration: Theoretical and
Empirical Results.” Journal of Urban Economics 6 (3): 383–404.
Greenwood, Michael J. 1975. “Research on Internal Migration in the United States: A Survey.”
Journal of Economic Literature 13 (2): 397–433.

35
———. 1997. “Internal Migration in Developed Countries.” Handbook of Population and
Family Economics.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574003X97800049.
Greenwood, Michael J., and Gary L. Hunt. 1989. “Jobs versus Amenities in the Analysis of
Metropolitan Migration.” Journal of Urban Economics 25: 1–16.
Greenwood, Michael J., Peter R. Mueser, David A. Plane, and Alan M. Schlottmann. 1991.
“New Directions in Migration Research*.” Annals of Regional Science 25 (4): 237.
Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher J. Mayer, and Todd M. Sinai. 2013. “Superstar Cities.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 167–99.
Hanna, Frank Allan. 1959. State Income Differentials, 1919-1954. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Hicks, John R. 1963. “The Theory of Wages. (1932).” And 245: 117.
Holme, Jennifer Jellison. 2002. “Buying Homes, Buying Schools: School Choice and the Social
Construction of School Quality.” Harvard Educational Review 72 (2): 177–206.
Howard, John A., and Jagdish N. Sheth. 1969. The Theory of Buyer Behavior. Vol. 14. Wiley
New York. http://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/clc/410800.
Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness. 2016. “Regional Dashboard: Boston Metropolitan
Area.” U.S. Cluster Mapping. 2016. http://clustermapping.us.
Johnson, Eric J., and Daniel Goldstein. 2003. “Do Defaults Save Lives?” Science 302 (5649):
1338–1339.
Kemeny, Thomas, and Michael Storper. 2012. “The Sources of Urban Development: Wages,
Housing, and Amenity Gaps Across American Cities.” Journal of Regional Science 52
(1): 85–108. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.2011.00754.x.
Kodrzycki, YK. 2001. “Migration of Recent College Graduates: Evidence from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth.” New England Economic Review.
http://repository.lib.ncsu.edu/ir/handle/1840.16/5950
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.195.7724&rep=rep1&type=pdf
.
Krysan, Maria, and Michael DM Bader. 2009. “Racial Blind Spots: Black-White-Latino
Differences in Community Knowledge.” Social Problems 56 (4): 677–701.
Krysan, Maria, and Kyle Crowder. 2017. Cycle of Segregation: Social Processes and Residential
Stratification. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Lansing, John B., and Eva Mueller. 1967. The Geographic Mobility of Labor. Survey Research
Center, University of Michigan.
http://www.psc.isr.umich.edu/dis/infoserv/isrpub/pdf/Geographicalmobility_2210_.PDF.
Lareau, Annette. 2014. “Schools, Housing, and the Reproduction of Inequality.” In Choosing
Homes, Choosing Schools, edited by Annette Lareau and Kimberly Goyette, 169.
http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=mvXCAgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA169
&dq=%222013%3B+for+the+influence+of+schools+and+family+background+on%22+
%22key+goal+of+this+study+is+to+understand+how+parents+of%22+%22libraries,+sc
hools,+crime,+and+public+services.+In+general,%22+&ots=L17zdbWmt&sig=tbUyhqyIEBOSpBERvb3GGtJVj3s.
Lareau, Annette, and Kimberly Goyette. 2014. Choosing Homes, Choosing Schools: Residential
Segregation and the Search for a Good School. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Lin, Nan. 1982. “Social Resources and Instrumental Action.” In Social Structure and Network
Analysis, edited by Peter V. Marsden and Nan Lin, 131–46. Sage Publications, Inc.

36
———. 1999. “Social Networks and Status Attainment.” Annual Review of Sociology 25 (1):
467–487.
Logan, John R. 1978. “Growth, Politics, and the Stratification of Places.” American Journal of
Sociology, 404–416.
Lucas, RE. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (February): 3–42.
Manduca, Robert. 2018. “Unifying National Income Inequality and Regional Economic
Divergence.” SocArXiv, February. https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/9HMES.
Marsden, Peter V., and Elizabeth H. Gorman. 2001. “Social Networks, Job Changes, and
Recruitment.” In Sourcebook of Labor Markets, 467–502. Springer.
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4615-1225-7_19.
Mazek, Warren F., and John Chang. 1972. “The Chicken or Egg Fowl-up in Migration:
Comment.” Southern Economic Journal, 133–139.
McDonough, Patricia M. 1997. Choosing Colleges: How Social Class and Schools Structure
Opportunity. SUNY Press. https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books?hl=en&lr=&id=AVjdTBQdpJwC&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=c
hoosing+colleges&ots=K0Zn6sGrCe&sig=ftq5rDyR0I_gTFWQIcHPgn9_9GU.
MIT Global Education & Career Development. 2017. “Graduating Student Survey.” Cambridge,
MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Moretti, Enrico. 2012. The New Geography of Jobs. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Muth, Richard F. 1971. “Migration: Chicken or Egg?” Southern Economic Journal, 295–306.
Nissan, Edward, and George Carter. 1993. “Income Inequality across Regions over Time.”
Growth and Change 24 (3): 303–319.
Pacewicz, Josh. 2016. Partisans and Partners: The Politics of the Post-Keynesian Society.
University of Chicago Press.
Pager, Devah. 2003. “The Mark of a Criminal Record.” American Journal of Sociology 108 (5):
937–75. https://doi.org/10.1086/374403.
Pager, Devah, and David S. Pedulla. 2015. “Race, Self-Selection, and the Job Search Process.”
American Journal of Sociology 120 (4): 1005–54. https://doi.org/10.1086/681072.
Partridge, Mark D. 2010. “The Duelling Models: NEG vs Amenity Migration in Explaining US
Engines of Growth.” Papers in Regional Science 89 (3): 513–536.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1435-5957.2010.00315.x.
Pellegrini, Pasquale A., and A. Stewart Fotheringham. 2002. “Modelling Spatial Choice: A
Review and Synthesis in a Migration Context.” Progress in Human Geography 26 (4):
487–510.
Plane, David. 1993. “Demographic Influences on Migration.” Regional Studies 27 (4): 375–83.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00343409312331347635.
Popovich, Nadja. 2016. “A Deadly Crisis: Mapping the Spread of America’s Drug Overdose
Epidemic.” The Guardian, May 25, 2016.
Portes, Alejandro. 1998. “Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Modern Sociology.”
Annual Review of Sociology, 43–67.
Portes, Alejandro, and Julia Sensenbrenner. 1993. “Embeddedness and Immigration: Notes on
the Social Determinants of Economic Action.” American Journal of Sociology, 1320–
1350.
Ravenstein, EG. 1885. “The Laws of Migration.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 48
(2): 167–235.

37
Rees, Albert. 1966. “Information Networks in Labor Markets.” The American Economic Review
56 (1/2): 559–566.
Rey, Sergio J., and Mark V. Janikas. 2005. “Regional Convergence, Inequality, and Space.”
Journal of Economic Geography 5 (2): 155–176.
Rhodes, Anna, and Stefanie DeLuca. 2014. “Residential Mobility and School Choice Among
Poor Families.” In Choosing Homes, Choosing Schools, edited by Annette Lareau and
Kimberly Goyette. Russell Sage Foundation. https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books?hl=en&lr=&id=mvXCAgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR5&dq
=choosing+homes+choosing+schools&ots=L17z-dbWrz&sig=AtCZuYTuxltNMGNVvMXf5vg9uI.
Rivera, Lauren A. 2015. Pedigree: How Elite Students Get Elite Jobs. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Roberts, John H., and James M. Lattin. 1991. “Development and Testing of a Model of
Consideration Set Composition.” Journal of Marketing Research 28 (4): 429.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3172783.
Romer, Paul M. 1986. “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.” The Journal of Political
Economy, 1002–1037.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1938. “A Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer’s Behaviour.” Economica 5
(17): 61–71.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1988. “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1 (1): 7–59.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1971. “Dynamic Models of Segregation.” Journal of Mathematical
Sociology 1 (2): 143–186.
Schwartz, Aba. 1976. “Migration, Age, and Education.” The Journal of Political Economy, 701–
719.
Simon, Herbert A. 1976. Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in
Administrative Organization. (3rd Ed). Vol. l. New York, NY, US: Free Press.
Simonson, Itamar, and Amos Tversky. 1992. “Choice in Context: Tradeoff Contrast and
Extremeness Aversion.” Journal of Marketing Research 29 (3): 281.
Sjaastad, LA. 1962. “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration.” The Journal of Political
Economy 70 (5): 80–93.
Small, Mario Luis. 2009. Unanticipated Gains: Origins of Network Inequality in Everyday Life.
https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books/about/Unanticipated_Gains_Origins_of_Network_I.html?id
=SROnD65YaCkC.
Smith, Sandra Susan. 2005. “‘Don’t Put My Name on It’: Social Capital Activation and JobFinding Assistance among the Black Urban Poor1.” American Journal of Sociology 111
(1): 1–57.
Speare, Alden, Frances Kobrin, and Ward Kingkade. 1982. “The Influence of Socioeconomic
Bonds and Satisfaction on Interstate Migration.” Social Forces 61 (2): 551–574.
Stanford Career Education. 2017. “Stanford Destinations.” Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.
Storper, Michael, and Allen J. Scott. 2009. “Rethinking Human Capital, Creativity and Urban
Growth.” Journal of Economic Geography 9 (2): 147–67.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jeg/lbn052.
Sunstein, Cass, and Richard Thaler. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth
and Happiness. http://lnwprogram.org/sites/default/files/Keynote%20-

38
%20Cass%20Sunstein%20-%20Simpler%20%20The%20Future%20of%20Government%20and%20Outcomes.pdf.
US Census Bureau. 2015. “Sex by Age by Educational Attainment for the Population 18 Years
and Over.” B15001. 2011-2015 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.
Washington DC.
US Department of Education. 2015. “College Scorecard.” 2015. https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/.
Vaisey, Stephen, and Lauren Valentino. 2018. “Culture and Choice: Toward Integrating Cultural
Sociology with the Judgment and Decision-Making Sciences.” Poetics 68 (June): 131–
43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2018.03.002.
Waldinger, Roger. 1995. “The ‘Other Side’of Embedded Ness: A Case-Study of the Interplay of
Economy and Ethnicity.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 18 (3): 555–580.
Weber, Adna Ferrin. 1899. The Growth of Cities in the Nineteenth Century: A Study in Statistics.
29. Columbia university. https://books-google-com.ezpprod1.hul.harvard.edu/books?hl=en&lr=&id=5aYrAQAAMAAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&dq=
The+Growth+of+Cities+in+the+Nineteenth+Century&ots=Jfcrngf9Ji&sig=ruj8RTSXbU
qbLDPtP-Fnq4uOWMk.
Whisler, Ronald L., Brigitte S. Waldorf, Gordon F. Mulligan, and David a. Plane. 2008. “Quality
of Life and the Migration of the College-Educated: A Life-Course Approach.” Growth
and Change 39 (1): 58–94. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2257.2007.00405.x.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1965. “Regional Inequality and the Process of National Development: A
Description of the Patterns.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 13 (4): 1–84.
Wozniak, Abigail. 2010. “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market
Opportunities ?” Journal of Human Resources, no. May.
http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/45/4/944.short.
Yale Office of Career Strategy. 2018. “Final Destination Report: Class of 2018.” New Haven,
CT: Yale University.

