Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019.

Pp.3-17

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.1
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Chia-Pei Wu
Department of Applied English
I-Shou University, Taiwan
Abstract
Digital interactive language learning has become increasingly prevalent and significant in educational
settings. It is challenging to apply collaborative learning methods because students tend to engage passively
with traditional methods of lectures. Several studies have suggested that digital interactive technologies
such as Zuvio Interactive Response System (IRS) have been applied to increase learning motivation.
However, related studies on using IRS in English a foreign language (EFL) classrooms are limited in
Taiwan, especially from learners' perspectives. The aim of this study was to integrate an interactive response
system into an English grammar course and to explore whether the assistance of this digital tool could
promote students' learning motivation and whether it could facilitate a student learning environment. Based
on the research background and rationale, the following research questions were investigated: (1) How does
the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward their learning attitudes? (2) How does the use of
the IRS influence students' perceptions toward learning contents? (3) How does the use of the IRS influence
students' perceptions toward classroom interaction? An experimental design was employed. This research
was conducted in this one-semester project to uncover 49 EFL learners’ views of IRS in a grammar class.
Zuvio IRS and the British Council Grammar Snacks videos were utilized in this experimental instruction.
A questionnaire was administered and consisted of demographic information, Likert scale questions, and
open-ended short-answer questions. The results showed positive attitudes for learning with Zuvio IRS and
videos, and the interactions between students and the teacher that mediated by Zuvio IRS. Future studies
might explore learning outcomes of students from different majors, implement results of IRS studies into
curriculum and instruction, and create more appropriate questions into IRS.
Keywords: EFL in Taiwanese context, grammar videos, interaction, interactive response system,
motivation

Cite as: Wu, C. P. (2019). Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL
Grammar Class. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5). 3-17
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.1

3

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

Introduction
In the past decade, many studies on teaching and learning in different educational contexts have
shown significant concerns in the use of interactive technologies to promote interactions between
teachers and students. Students' engagements of classroom interaction play a crucial role in
language classrooms. There are various technologies and digital tools in recent years. Interactive
response systems (IRSs) are one of the common digital tools for teachers' employment in the
classroom. An increasing number of research papers concerning the application of such as new
interactive response systems such as Clickers or Zuvio have revealed that the IRS has positive
effects (Heaslip, Donovan, & Culle, 2014; McDonugh & Foote, 2015; Wang, 2018).
On the other hand, other studies have some issues that the disadvantages and inadequacies of
IRSs (Aljaloud, Gromki, Billingsley, & Kwan, 2015). For teachers' perspective, how to integrate
technology into a classroom to enhance students' engagement, increase their learning motivation,
and facilitate learning environment should be considered. In this study, the researcher wanted to
discuss an IRS could enhance teacher-student and peer-to-peer interactions in a technologymediated language classroom. Instructors could pose questions to different formats (e.g.,
true/false, multiple choice, short answer) and promptly collect student responses and display the
results on projection screens. Then instructors could take opportunities to elaborate the answers or
give feedback (Denker, 2013).
Many relevant studies describe IRS implementations for various disciplines like physics and
chemistry (Chu, Lu, & Wann 2009; Lin, Liu& Chu, 2011). These studies have shown positive
feedback after using IRSs, and students are more willing to interact with instructors and
classmates. Past studies focused on the science fields; also, the majority of studies on the
application of IRSs have been limited to traditional IRSs (e.g., Clickers or Kahoot). An online
interactive system developed in Taiwan, Zuvio, is a cloud-based system which students can
interact with their instructors and peers through any Internet-enabled hand-held device, for
example, a smartphone or tablet computer. To date, not many studies have made attempts to
discuss the effectiveness of using Zuvio to assist English learning, especially grammar class.
Consequently, the purpose of this study was to integrate an interactive response system into an
English grammar course and to explore whether the assistance of this digital tool could promote
students' learning motivation and whether it could facilitate a student learning environment. Based
on the research background and rationale, the following research questions were investigated: (1)
How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward their learning attitudes? (2)
How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward learning contents? (3) How
does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward classroom interaction?
Literature Review
Sociocultural Theory
The sociocultural theory is used to describe and understand how human learn through different
social means and interactions. Instruction, therefore, is designed to be a collaborative event for
students to learn in the zones of proximal development (ZPD). Furthermore, social networking is
implemented into various cooperative learning pedagogies that contradicts and challenges
traditional educational theories, especially those language acquisition theories from Chomsky
(Lin, 2011). Because of the nature of learning cooperatively through using technologies, the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

4

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

sociocultural theory rooted in Vygotsky's approach is essential in terms of knowledge constructed
in social interactions (Daniels, 1993). The sociocultural theory is used in this study for its
theoretical framework, research design, interpretation, and discussion.
Mediation
Mediation is the central concept of sociocultural theories (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p59). For
Vygotsky, mediation means "acting indirectly through something" (Cole, 2003a). For mediation,
Vygotsky makes a cognitive justification between them by saying that "… the use of signs and
tools using the schema … shows each concept subsumed under the more general concept of
indirect (mediated) activity." (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 54) Vygotsky thinks that meditation happens
when tools and signs work together to perform an indirect function (Vygotsky, 1978).
Based on Vygotsky's notion of social interaction in human cognitive development, learning
is socially constructed. The sociocultural context affects the use of tools and signs to construct the
meaning of new knowledge.
Grammar Instruction for L2 students
Grammar learning is different from a native speaker than a second language (L2) student. Native
speaker students have learned a great deal of grammatic knowledge through daily life experiences
before entering formal education. Since all the grammatical skills are internalized and become
natural to them, they do not aware of it until they are asked to make it externalized. Vygotsky
describes this process as "… children are forced to create the situation or – more accurately – to
represent it in thought" (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 203). In other words, grammar learning for native
speaker students is a cognitive process moving from daily life concepts into scientific concepts. In
addition to the concept formation process, Lantolf & Thorne (2006) depict Vygotsky's argument
that "… instruction in writing and grammar does not depend on the developmental readiness of
school children; on the contrary, it leads to the very development other approaches assumed to be
necessary for learning to occur … instruction leading development" (p. 293).
Moreover, this development is the process of "how language in general functions to serve
human communicative needs and of how various subsystems (i.e., phonology, morphology,
syntax, semantics, pragmatics) are organized" (p.293). Vygotsky describes the relationship
between development and learning: Developmental processes do not coincide with the learning
process. Instead, the developmental process lags behind the learning process; this sequence then
results in zones of proximal development. (Vygotsky, 1978, p.90)
In terms of L2 students' grammar learning, on the other hand, is an opposite process than those
native speakers' experience. In other words, L2 student is consciously taking the rules and
functions of grammar and try to apply it in daily lives. It is a process of from scientific concept
into daily life concept in Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD).
Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD)
Language learning, based on the concept of mediation and ZPD, is processed by using culturally
constructed means. According to Lantolf & Thorne (2006), “with respect to symbolic artifacts,
language activity, speaking, and writing, is the primary, though not exclusive, mediational means
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

5

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

humans deploy for thinking” (p. 79). Vygotsky introduced the ZPD for this mediational process in
the concept formation. Vygotsky (1978) calls the difference of development between without and
with adult assistance as the zone of proximal development and describes:
It [the zone of proximal development] is the distance between the actual developmental
level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem-solving under adult guidance or in
collaboration with more capable peers. (1978, p.86)
With this analogy, grammar learning for L2 students is not merely a proactive acceptance from
rules of "the other," but an active procedure of concept formation from language mediated intrapsychological speech intertwined with inter-mental communication in the form of interaction with
peers and teachers. The grammatic awareness is already there but trying to make it useful in a more
casual way, which can be actualized in the process of classroom interactions in a collaborative
perspective (Gutiérrez, 2006). The computer as a mediational tool in the processes of collaboration
based on the understandings of the sociocultural theory, the implications of technology was
utilized and integrated into learning. As part of the computer-mediated communication,
pedagogical implementation of IRS can be very meaningful.
Interactive Response Systems in Classroom
The framework of IRS
The Interactive (or instant) Response System (IRS) is designed for increasing students’
interaction for better learning. As early as 1991, Eric Mazur from Harvard University designed the
“Flashcard” system for students to respond to questions and applied to peer instruction. As
technology advances, wireless or mobile devices are used nowadays to collect and calculate
students’ learning performances; therefore, teachers can adjust their teaching methods and
progresses accordingly. In recent years, learner-centered education with Flipped learning is one of
the applications that incorporate the IRS. (Chu & Yang, 2017, p.619)
Application of Zuvio in L2 Learning
Zuvio is one of the Interactive Response Systems used in classroom settings. As described in
the official website saying it as a powerful classroom supportive system that prepares teachers for
test preparation, interaction, and statistics. A teacher can prepare different types of class questions
ahead of time according to the course progress, post questions for students to answer, taking
attendance, or ask questions, and collect answers from students for further discussions,
instructions, and gradings (Zuvio, 2019). As Chu & Yang (2017) describe, Zuvio is “an online
teaching and learning platform which provides a variety of assessment types, including the
functions of an instant- response system (IRS)” (p.620). Because students can work in groups and
solve problems together with its IRS functions, the Zuvio IRS can increase students’ learning
motivation by using its online peer assessment system (Wang 2016, Chu & Yang 2017).
Methodology
Participants
The participants were 49 Taiwanese college students who took English Grammar as a requirement
at a four-year university in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 80 % of all the participants were freshmen. 15 %
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

6

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

of juniors, and 5% of exchange students. 75% of the students were female, and 25 % male students.
The majors of the participants are mostly Applied English (80%), International Business (15%),
and Mass Communication (5%). This particular course was a required one for freshman students
with two credit hours per week. Participants studied English for at least eight years. The average
score of practice Oxford Practice Grammar Intermediate Diagnostic Test that the participants took
as a placement test was 55 out of 100, which shows that they have an intermediate level of English
Grammar proficiency. Most participants did not have experience of using an interactive response
system in their high school English classes.
Instruments
Diagnostic Grammar Test
This diagnostic test contains 100 multiple-choice and write-in questions based on grammar
points covered at the Intermediate level such as verbs, passive voice, adjectives and adverbs, and
relative clauses. Oxford Practice Grammar Diagnostic Tests have three levels, basic,
intermediate, and advanced. The researchers adopted the intermediate level because most
students learn English grammar for six years. The reliability of this test was Cronbach alpha
.681.
Zuvio IRS
Zuvio is an Interactive Response System (IRS) developed by a Taiwanese team in 2013 (see
Figure. 1). The purpose of this system is to increase students’ learning motivation, improve
teaching quality, and facilitate digital education (Yan, 2014). Zuvio IRS contains various features
and functions for both teachers and students. Teachers could design different types of questions
like the multiple-choice, short answer, and open-ended questions. Besides, teachers divide students
into different groups to complete questions and present students’ responses in class. Grading
rubrics could be set in advance before the class, and it is allowed to ask students to give comments
for their classmates. For students’ platform, they can answer questions instantly, peer-evaluate
classmates’ responses, and have some interactive discussions with teachers and classmates.
Meanwhile, students could use digital devices such as smartphones, computers, or tablets to
answer questions immediately. After class, students could also read the previous exercise to review
the course.

Figure 1 The Interface of Zuvio IRS
Course Materials
British Council has valuable online materials such as puzzle, games, and videos that can be
available for beginners or intermediate learners. Grammar Snacks videos (see Figure. 2) were
Arab World English Journal
7
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

chosen for this course, and students were required to watch videos after learning grammar points.
These videos show the grammar being used in natural conversation. After watching videos,
students read an explanation of the grammar point and do the exercises to check the understanding
of grammar points. The research prepared ten multiple-choice questions for each grammar point,
and the students were required to answer the questions via the platform of Zuvio IRS in class.

Figure 2 The Interface of British Council Grammar
The questionnaire with open-ended questions
A 5-point Likert scale questionnaire of 39 items was modified based on the questionnaire
from Carreira’s study (2016) for the evaluation of language learning motivation and attitudes. The
questionnaire was designed to investigate the students’ perceptions from three perspectives,
including their perception toward their attitudes toward grammar videos and Zuvio IRS (39 items),
interaction, and learning materials. Each item was measured on the 5-point Likert scale, ranging
from 5 (Strongly Agree) to 1 (Strong Disagree). Moreover, the researcher designed several openended questions for participants to understand their more in-depth reflection of using Zuvio IRS
and learning grammar by watching videos.
Procedure
This experiment was conducted in 2018 and lasted for 18 weeks. One video was demonstrated per
week, and each video lasted for only several minutes and took 30 minutes to complete follow-up
exercises. The researcher designed at least ten questions for each grammar point based on the
content of the British Council Grammar Snacks videos before the class. During the class, the
instructor first taught grammar points, asked students to do exercises, and played the specific
grammar video to the students. When the instructor considered that the students watched the video
that students might not understand well, the instructor would then pause the video and make
students answer the questions via Zuvio IRS. Since each video just played several minutes, most
students watched the whole video once and answered all the questions simultaneously. At the end
of the questions, the instructor would check the students' answers and discuss with them. In the
last week of grammar class, students were asked to complete the questionnaire and open-ended
questions. Those procedures were in a sociocultural context (see Figure. 3).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

8

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

Figure 3 Task model for IRS learners in Sociocultural Context
Data Analysis
The data from the questionnaire and open-ended answers were analyzed according to the research
questions. SPSS 18 for Windows was used as the leading software for statistical analysis.
Descriptive statistics were calculated to describe the means, and standard deviations were adopted
to analyze the questionnaire results of perceptions toward English grammar learning in a Zuvio
IRS classroom. For the open-ended questions from the questionnaire, each participant was given
a code; for example, AE-0001 represents learner 0001 in AE. The researcher firstly translated the
responses to the open-ended questions into raw data for each participant and then re-coded the raw
data to different themes to understand the learners’ perceptions of grammar learning via Zuvio
IRS. The themes were designed according to the research questions and their feedback in openended questions.
Results
Results of Students’ three closed-ended questions
1. How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions of their learning attitudes?
The data from the questionnaire regarding learners' perceptions of their attitudes were
analyzed to answer the first question. Table 1 shows the descriptive results of the students’
response to their learning attitudes. Among the 56 returned questionnaires, five were incomplete
and invalid. Thus, the researcher only computed the results for 49 questionnaires. The mean scores
of 18 questions ranged from 2.98 to 3.71 with acceptable standard deviations; thus, all students
displayed moderate levels of agreement regarding the statements in the questionnaire. Items 1 to
9 are related to the students' perceptions toward learning attitudes of using Zuvio IRS. As shown
in Table 1, the students agreed that they enjoy using Zuvio IRS to help their learning grammar
(M=3.67) and are willing to learn more in this way (M=3.55).
Item 10 to 18 investigated students’ perception of learning attitudes by watching grammar
videos. Students agreed that watching English videos could improve their listening skills (M=3.69)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

9

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

and increase their learning motivation(M=3.71). On the other hand, students reported that they are
less willing to watch grammar videos after class (M=2.65). Results of these questions indicated
that the students feel positive and joyful with the use of Zuvio IRS; also, they believed in improving
their listening proficiency by watching British Council Grammar videos and could continue to
practice it for improving my grammar.
Table 1. Descriptive results for participants’ perceptions toward the learning attitudes
RQ
No
Statement
Mean
SD
Learning 1
It is a pleasure to learn in this way.
3.67
.774
Attitudes 2
I want to learn in this way in more subjects (classes).
3.55
.914
3
I am satisfied with my performance in learning activities.
3.31
.742
4
Using Zuvio is very rewarding when I learn.
3.27
.953
5
Using Zuvio is very helpful to my learning.
3.27
.972
6
Using Zuvio is very helpful in making my positive
3.06
1.008
learning attitude toward this subject.
7
Using Zuvio helps me to increase my learning interests
3.04
.999
toward this subject.
8
Using Zuvio allows me to concentrate on my studies.
3.08
1.017
9
Using Zuvio lets me learn the course content faster.
3.20
1.020
10 Using Zuvio to learn is easy for me, no pressure at all.
3.71
.898
11 Using British Council Grammar videos increases my
3.45
.937
learning motivation.
12 Using British Council Grammar videos to learn English
3.51
.845
is less stressful.
13 I use British Council Grammar videos, both in-class and
2.65
1.032
after-class.
14 Because of this method of English training, I begin to
2.98
.924
listen to British Council Grammar videos.
15 I like to use British Council Grammar videos after-class
3.35
.948
because I can repeat learning the content that I am not
familiar with.
16 After listening to British Council Grammar videos, I
3.59
.888
learn more methods of self-learning English at home.
17 After listening to British Council Grammar videos, I
3.65
.879
would like to continue using it for improving grammar.
18 I believe that practicing more with British Council
3.69
.796
Grammar videos can improve my English listening
proficiency.
1. How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward learning contents?
The data from the questionnaire regarding learners' perceptions toward their learning contents
were analyzed to answer the second question. Table 2 shows the descriptive results of the students’
response to their learning contents. In this domain, “Learning contents about British Council
Grammar videos,” obtained mean scores ranging from 3.20 to 3.90, which indicates that students
experienced a moderate level of an agreement the questions. Question 4,6,9, and 10 obtained the
higher mean scores of 3.67, 3.67, 3.73, and 3.90, respectively, indicating that students thought that
Arab World English Journal
10
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

the contents of grammar videos indeed facilitate their English learning in terms of the practical
English usage, general knowledge, and spoken language.
Table 2. Descriptive results for participants’ perceptions toward the learning contents
RQ
No
Statement
Mean
SD
Learning 1
Using British Council Grammar videos helps learn
3.60
.818
Content
new English vocabularies.
2
Using British Council Grammar videos makes English
3.59
.788
grammar learning fun.
3
I will continue to use British Council Grammar videos
3.20
.935
to improve English grammar.
4
Practicing with British Council Grammar videos is
3.67
.826
helpful in my English grammar learning.
5
Using British Council Grammar videos enriches my
3.53
.868
English grammar learning and life.
6
British Council Grammar videos provide much
3.67
.851
information on English grammar learning.
7
I like to use British Council Grammar videos to learn
3.51
.916
with varieties of video contents.
8
I like to use British Council Grammar videos to
3.43
.957
enhance the training of my English listening.
9
I like to learn general knowledge through British
3.73
.811
Council Grammar videos in the English grammar
class.
10 I like to learn the usage of spoken language through
3.90
.714
British Council Grammar videos in an English
listening and speaking class.
11 After listening to British Council Grammar videos, I
3.63
.883
found more vocabularies and usages from the video
than the textbook.
2. How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward classroom interaction?
The data from the questionnaire regarding learners’ perceptions toward classroom interaction
was analyzed to answer the third question. As illustrated in Table 3, descriptive statistics for each
questionnaire mean, ranging from 3.16 to 4.04, which indicated that students possessed moderately
high levels of agreement and positive feedback on classroom interaction. Question 5, 10, and 6
obtained the high mean scores of 4.04, 3.63, and 3.41, respectively, indicating that students
addressed that Zuvio IRS was easy to use and interacted with the teacher via Zuvio IRS after
watching grammar videos. The mean score of Question 3 and 4 is 3.16, which reveals that a few
of the students did not consider using Zuvio IRS help their interaction with classmates and answer
questions in class. In particular, question 3, “I think using Zuvio can increase opportunities for me
to discuss with other classmates," obtained the lowest score of 3.16, indicating that students did
not have enough practices to interact with classmates.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

11

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

To conclude, the moderate average mean scores on 39 statements in the learning attitudes,
contents, and classroom interaction survey completed by the 49 students indicate that students
possessed positive attitudes toward British Council grammar videos learning and IRS Zuvio
platform.
Table 3. Descriptive results for participants’ perceptions toward classroom interaction
RQ
No
Statement
Mean
SD
Interaction 1
Using Zuvio can let me realize if my classmates and I
3.35 1.091
understand the course content or not.
2
Using Zuvio can let me know if I am following the
3.41
.998
progress of the course.
3
I think using Zuvio can increase opportunities for me to
3.16 1.067
discuss with other classmates.
4
I think Zuvio can help me to answer questions in class.
3.16 1.067
5
Using Zuvio is simple for me to operate.
4.04
.789
6
I think the interaction with teachers is better with using
3.41 1.135
Zuvio than the traditional instruction.
7
I think the discussion in a class by using Zuvio is better
3.27 1.095
than traditional instruction.
8
I think I like to interact with teachers by using Zuvio in
3.29 1.080
classes overall.
9
I like to discuss the content of videos with classmates in
3.18
.811
English grammar class.
10 I like the way that the teacher guides us learning by
3.63
.668
using British Council Grammar videos.
Analysis of Students’ three open-ended questions
Question1: Do you think that you have more fun and achievement in English grammar
learning by using British Council Grammar videos? Why?
The qualitative data from students’ feedback of question 1 were organized and presented in
Table 4. The feedback for the first question open-ended question was further categorized into three
categories: Interesting videos, Learning daily conversation, and Different learning materials. The
data show that the students affirmed that watching British Council Grammar videos was more, and
they were willing to continue learning grammar. The second category was learning daily
conversation. The data show that students agreed that the content in British Council grammar
videos would help them to learn new words and more daily English conversation. Moreover,
students reported that they felt a sense of achievement after they learned new vocabulary or knew
something new about western culture. The third category was different learning material. Some
students thought that it was boring when they listened to lectures for grammar points. With British
Council grammar videos, they enjoyed watching some interactive English episodes.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

12

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

Table 4. The organized qualitative feedback from the questionnaire question 1
Theme
Responses
a. Interesting
 Increase interest in learning. There are videos and cartoons, not
videos
merely teachers' lectures. AE-0024
 It is fun to learn grammar with videos. If I can understand the English
content by listening, I have a sense of accomplishment. AE-0003
 It is more interesting and fun to learning with videos. AE-0033
 It attracts people because it is interesting comparing with traditional
learning methods. AE-0042
b. Learning
 I can learn dialogs from daily lives, it is helpful to my English
daily
listening and speaking. AE-0012
conversation  The language used in the videos is colloquial and not too formal. It is
more fun. AE-0033
 I can learn more new cultures, vocabularies that makes me feel
accomplished. AE-0025
 I can learn more phrases and vocabularies AE-0038
c. Different
 Using video with short stories can make learning closer to your daily
learning
lives. Video can present the learning content lively.
material
 AE-0029
 Because it is boring to listen to teachers always in a class, it is better
to have us watch. AE-0048
Question 2: What are the effects of using British Council Grammar videos in learning English?
The qualitative data from students’ feedback of question two were organized and displayed in
Table 5. The feedback for the second question open-ended question was further categorized into
two categories: Learn the British accent and Increase learning motivation. The data show that the
students agreed that watching British Council Grammar videos could help them to practice the
British English accent and they would have more opportunities to learn different accent from
videos by improving their listening comprehension. The second category was to Increase learning
motivation. The data show that students asserted that grammar videos broaden their horizons
because of the different themes in the episodes. After watching grammar videos, they would
increase motivation to learn more about different grammar points.
Table 5. The organized qualitative feedback from the questionnaire question 2
Theme
Responses
a. Learn the  Practice British pronunciation and improve my listening skills. AE-002
British
 I get used to British English accent. AE-0009
English
 It is an additional opportunity to practice listening while studying
accent
grammar. AE-0012
 It let me have some improvements and learn foreign accents. AE-0012
b. Increase
 I have interests in learning English, and I have the motivation to learn
learning
more. AE-0011
motivation  Can train my English listening and understand directly how to use
grammar correctly. AE-0051
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

13

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

 I understand grammar in a different way. AE-0002
 I can enrich and widen my knowledge and understand the world more.
AE-0042
Question 3: What are your suggestions on Zuvio IRS?
The qualitative data from students’ feedback of question three were organized and
demonstrated in Table 6. The feedback for the third question was further categorized into three
categories: More various question designs, Instant and interactive response, and distraction in the
classroom. Students suggested that teachers should give more diverse exercises, not only multiplechoice. Other students stated that they could check whether their understanding of the content was
correct via Zuvio IRS instantly; however, a few students suggested that it would be better if they
could see an explanation to each answer via the interface of Zuvio IRS. Another student mentioned
that students could answer questions anonymously, so it would be less stressful to answer
questions. As for the second category, students agreed that the feature could instantly help the
teacher check their answers and also allow both the teacher and students observe all of the students’
answers. On the other hand, several students mentioned that it would distract their learning when
using Zuvio IRS to answer questions. They would prefer traditional lectures because they would
tend to over-rely on smartphones.
Table 6. The organized qualitative feedback from the questionnaire question 3
Theme
Responses
a. More
 The teacher can have a variety of types of questions. AE-0003
various
 The teacher can assign more types of homework. AE-0021
question
 The teacher can provide more extracurricular grammar questions for
designs
students to practice. AE-0036
b. Instant
 Review the answers immediately. AE-0009
response
 It is easier to know if I understand clearly by reviewing with the teacher
and classmates. AE-0016
 I can get answers immediately and study the lesson that I get wrong.
AE-0041
c. Distraction  My spelling skill gets weaker because of relying on a cellphone too
in the
much. I prefer learning in a traditional way when it is related to a
classroom
course. AE-0023
 It is quite inconvenient if the cellphone is out of battery or cannot be
connected to the Internet. AE-0019
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to integrate an interactive response system into an English grammar
course and to explore whether the assistance of this digital tool could promote students' learning
motivation and whether it could facilitate a student learning environment. The results of this
experimental study indicate that students need more learning contents to practice both for grammar
materials and online materials. Also, the use of Zuvio IRS in a language classroom indeed
facilitates students’ learning. In answer to the first question (How does the use of the IRS influence
students' perceptions toward their learning attitudes?) the current research results reveal that the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

14

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

students felt positive and joyful with the use of Zuvio IRS in class, but it was noticed that the
students reported that they are less willing to watch grammar videos after class. This result is
consistent with other IRS research findings (Chen, 2014; Khalil & Fahim,2016; Wang, 2016)
which reported the IRS’ positive effects of formative assessment. The IRS made it possible to
assess the degree of students' understanding instantly and assist the teacher to decide how much to
explain in detail or proceed to the next part of the lesson. Thus, in answer to the second question
(How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward learning contents?), the
finding showed that the contents of grammar videos indeed improve their English learning in terms
of the practical English usage, general knowledge, and spoken language. This could be explained
by the findings of the qualitative data which addressed that teachers should always leave room for
leaner agency and design meaningful in -class and follow-up activities (Liu & Chao, 2017).
The results of the open-ended question also revealed that students enjoyed watching grammar
videos to broaden their horizons because they liked different themes in the episodes. To answer
the last research question (How does the use of the IRS influence students' perceptions toward
classroom interaction?), the study presented that, according to the questionnaire and open-ended
question results, students reported that Zuvio IRS was easy to employ and it was a tool to interact
with the teacher after watching grammar videos. The current findings were in accordance with Lee
and Oh’s (2014) study which suggested that students had positive feedback on IRS in an EFL
reading class, and the current finding supported the fact that college learners would like to
participate in the IRS activities in class. Besides, according to the students’ qualitative feedback,
it was also found that some students were aware of some drawbacks of Zuvio IRS such as the
failure of Internet connection and distraction in the classroom. This observation was in line with
Chen's (2019) findings on the effects of web-based IRS research.
Conclusion
Over the past years, different mobile technologies have been integrated into classroom settings.
Among those technologies, the IRS can be used for increasing classroom interaction and students’
learning motivation. The purpose of this study was to integrate an interactive response system into
an English grammar course and to explore if this digital tool promoted students' learning
motivation and facilitated students’ learning. After 18 weeks of English grammar class instruction
with Zuvio IRS and the British Council Grammar Snacks videos, data was collected through
questionnaires consisted with demographic information, close-ended Likert scale items, and openended short answer items. The results showed a positive attitude from students when learning with
Zuvio IRS with video. Students also enjoyed learning with the content video via Zuvio IRS but
only in the class time, not after class. Zuvio mediates the interactions between students and the
teacher and other classmates. Students liked to interact with the teacher directly, but unaware of
the interaction mediated by Zuvio IRS with the teacher, and other classmates were incorporated
with the direct interaction with the teacher.
Future studies might explore whether students from different majors will have different
learning outcomes. Besides, learners’ detailed demographic data could be collected for further
cross-data analysis. Further IRS research topics could focus on how the results of IRS studies could
be implemented into curriculum and instruction. More importantly, it is crucial for teachers to
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

15

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

design appropriate questions of the IRS platform to have better interaction and more effective
learning in large language classes.
About the author
Dr. Chia-Pei Wu is an assistant professor of Applied English Department at I-Shou University.
She has taught reading, business English, and academic writing in Taiwan. Her primary research
interests include academic writing, computer-assisted language learning, and reading instruction.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5981-192X
References
Aljaloud, A., Gromik, N., Billingsley, W., & Kwan, P. (2015). Research trends in student
response systems: a literature review. International Journal of Learning Technology, 10(4),
313-325.
Barker, C., & Sparrow, C., (2016). Technology and presentation skills teaching: activity theory
as a tool for the design and evaluation of strategies for the use of video as a learning tool in
presentation skills teaching. European Journal of Law and Technology, 7(3),1-25.
Carreira, J. M., (2006). The motivation for learning English as a foreign language in Japanese
elementary schools. JALT, 28(2), 135.learning tool in presentation skills teaching. European
Journal of Law and Technology, 7(3). Retrieved from http://ejlt.org/article/view/480/690.
Chen, H. J., (2014). EFL teachers' and students' perceptions toward IRS-based MALL in
language classrooms (NSC 102-2410-H-003-045-).
Chen, H. T. T. (2019). Investigating the Effects of Web-Based Instant Response System on
Learning and Teaching in Pre-service Teacher Courses. In Shaping the Future of Education,
Communication, and Technology (pp. 141-151). Springer, Singapore.
Chu, H.H., Lu, T. J., & Wann, J.W. (2009). The impact of the use of IRS to students’ satisfaction
on teaching quality. The First International Conference on Service Science and Innovation
(ICSSI 2009).
Chu, H. C., & Yang, C. (2017, July). Learning achievements and attitudes in a computer science
course: activating students flipped learning via ICT technologies. In 2017 6th IIAI
international congress on advanced applied informatics (IIAI-AAI) (pp. 619-622). IEEE.
Cole, M., (2003). Mediation, Creativity, and Consciousness. The lecture was a bilingual
interactive English/Russian video conference transmitted over the Internet. Retrieved March
3, 2005, from http://earth.ucsd.edu:8080/ramgen/courses/econ113/cole111803.rm
Daniels, H. (1993) Charting the Agenda: Educational Activity after Vygotsky. London:
Routledge.
Denker, K. J., (2013). Student response systems and facilitating the large lecture basic
communication course: Assessing engagement and learning. Communication Teacher,
27(1), 50-69.
Gutiérrez, G. A., G. (2006). Sociocultural theory and its application to CALL: A study of the
computer and its relevance as a mediational tool in the process of collaborative activity.
ReCALL, 18(2), 230-251.
Heaslip, G., Donovan, P., & Cullen, J. G. (2014). Student response systems and learner
engagement in large classes. Active Learning in Higher Education, 15(1), 11-24.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

16

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Exploring the Effects of Interactive Response System (IRS) in an EFL Grammar Class

Wu

Khalil, R., Rania, M., & Fahim, S. S., (2017). Assessment as a learning tool in a flipped English
language classroom in higher education. Paper presented at ASELS Annual Conference,
Morocco.
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural Theory and He Genesis of Second Language
Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lee, C. M., & Oh, E. (2014). Exploring the effects of a learner response system on EFL
reading. Multimedia-Assisted Language Learning, 17(2), 130-151.
Lin, Y. C., Liu, T. C., & Chu, C. C. (2011). Implementing clickers to assist learning in science
lectures: The Clicker- Assisted Conceptual Change model. Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology, 27(6), 979–996.
Liu, Q., & Chao, C., (2018). CALL from an ecological perspective: How a teacher perceives
affordance and fosters learner agency in a technology-mediated language
classroom. ReCALL, 30(1), 68-87. doi:10.1017/S0958344017000222
McDonough, K., & Foote, J. A., (2015). The impact of individual and shared clicker use on
students' collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 86, 236-249.
Wang, B. T., (2016). Applying PBL and ZUVIO to enhance English learning motivation.
International Journal of Cyber Society and Education, 9(1), 1-16.
Wang, Yi-Hsuan (2018) Interactive response system (IRS) for college students: individual versus
cooperative learning, Interactive Learning Environments, 26:7, 943-957.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher psychological processes.
London, England: Harvard University Press.
Yan, L. Q. (2014). ZUVIO IRS software: No distance between teachers and students.
Zuvio. (2019, May 15). Zuvio. Retrieved from http://www.zuvio.com.tw/.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

17

