Once bitten, twice shy: An exploratory study of victim
impact from and adoption of self-protective behaviours
against cyber abuse
Zarina I. Vakhitova∗, Rob I. Mawby†, Clair L. Alston-Knox‡
September 6, 2019

Abstract
Background and purpose of the research: The impact of crime on its victims is
reflected in the expansion of victim services across the world since the 1970s. These
policy developments have largely expanded alongside research on how crime affects
victims. Most established research has focused on conventional crimes such as
burglary, sexual and violent offences, with little of the published research examining
the impact of online crime like cyber abuse. The current paper explores a relatively
new subject, the impact of cyber-abuse on its victims and the factors associated
with the adoption of self-protective behaviours following victimization from different
types of cyber abuse.
Methodology: To better understand the impact of cyber abuse on its victims, the
data from a large nationwide (US) crowd-sourced sample (N = 1, 463) of adult
members of an online labour portal Mechanical Turk was collected using an online
survey platform Qualtrics. Around half of the respondents reported experiencing
at least one type of cyber abuse victimization (N = 746) and were included in the
sample analyzed in this study. To identify the factors predictive of higher victim
∗ zarina.vakhitova@monash.edu
† ProfessorRobMawby@hotmail.com
‡ calston-knox@pa-group.com.au

impact and adoption of self-protective behaviours, the data was modelled using a
Bayesian variable selection procedure implemented via a stochastic search algorithm
in AutoStat R .
Results: Our findings suggest that first, being a female and having a prior relationship with the abuser is associated with an increased victim impact from cyber abuse
victimization. The type of abuse experienced by the victim has not been found to
be predictive of the level of impact. Second, the adoption of self-protective behaviours was significantly associated with a higher perceived victim impact, older
victim, and the mixed type of cyber abuse.
Conclusion/discussion: Findings from this study contribute to both our understanding of cyber abuse as a broad crime category, the mechanism of adoption
self-protective behaviours following victimization, as well as help inform policy responses to the needs of cyber abuse victims.

Keywords: cyber abuse, victimization, impact of crime, self-protective behaviours, Bayesian
variable selection, stochastic search algorithm.

Introduction
Crime is a significant social issue that affects millions of people around the world every
year. In the US, in 2017, 3 in every 1,000 Americans experienced violence and 24 in every
1,000 Americans were victims of property crime (Gramlich, 2019). With the advent of the
Internet and other telecommunication technologies over the past several decades, novel
methods of committing crimes have been introduced. According to Gallup’s annual crime
survey, as many as one in four U.S. households experienced cybercrime victimization in
2018 (Reinhart, 2018)1 .
Crime can negatively affect many areas of victims’ lives, including their physical
health, employment or education prospects, finances and emotional well-being (Dinisman
and Moroz, 2017; Fisher et al., 2000; Shapland and Hall, 2007; Tjaden and Thoennes,
2000). The extent of the impact of crime on its victims varies:
1 In fact, cybercrime victimization now is much more common than burglary, assault and robbery
experienced by only about 14, 2, and 1 % of American households respectively.

2

Experiencing a crime can affect people in many ways, and every person’s reaction is different. At the start, you might feel shocked, fearful or angry. A
common reaction is feeling numb, and not believing that this has happened
to you. You might suffer from: headaches, nausea, sleep problems or fatigue, jumpiness, repeated thoughts of the event. Or you might have feelings
that come and go, like: guilt, fear, anger, sadness, confusion, helplessness.
Your day-to-day life might be affected by: trouble with your concentration or
memory, reduced performance at work or school, withdrawing from others,
feeling like you’ve lost control. Later, some people can experience depression
or anxiety (Victim Support Agency, n.d.).
Besides the aforementioned psychosomatic reactions to crime, a common response
to victimization is the adoption of self-protective behaviours. These actions could take
the form of modifying the usual daily routines, undertaking protective actions such as
carrying a weapon, changing the locks and installing an alarm system in the house,
withdrawing from social activities, moving, changing the contact information (e.g. email
address), reporting victimization to the police or undertaking some judicial action such
as obtaining a restraining order against the offender, seeking an assistance from friends,
family, co-workers or others, and other similar behaviours (Baum et al., 2009; Fisher
et al., 2002; Tjaden, 1998; Buhi et al., 2009; Reyns et al., 2011; Sheridan and Grant,
2007; Wilcox et al., 2007). Like with psychosomatic reaction to crime, the adoption
of self-protective behaviours is not uniform (Nobles et al., 2014), and, as a result, the
factors that determine an individual’s reaction to criminal victimization is not yet clear.
The existing research suggests that the impact of crime and the subsequent reaction vary according to the offence type and victim characteristics. The brunt of research
about victim impact so far focused on conventional crimes like burglary and assault.
However, with the proliferation of new types of technology-facilitated crimes such as
cyber abuse, it became necessary to explore the mechanisms of victimization and the
victim’s reaction to victimization in the context of these new types of crime. With this
in mind, the present study addresses two issues related to the impact of cyber abuse

3

victimization on its victims, which are currently largely unexplored. First, we identify
the factors predictive of victim impact from different types of cyber abuse. Second, we
identify the determinants of adopting self-protective behaviours following cyber abuse
victimization.
This study contributes to both the knowledge base on cyber abuse victimization,
its mechanisms and impact on victims, as well as the literature on adopting self-protective
behaviours following incidents of personal victimization. In practical terms, this research
has a potential not only to assist in improving crime prevention strategies, especially for
preventing repeat victimization but also to ensure that victims receive the help they
need.

The effect of offence type on victim impact
Victims of serious interpersonal attacks, such as sexual and other violent offences tend
to be severely affected by crime with long-term consequences (Holmstrom and Burgess,
1978). Research commissioned by the Victim Support England and Wales, UK, noted:
Victims of violence describe feelings of shock and loss of trust in society, and
guilt at becoming a victim of crime, as they typically feel they could have
prevented the incident from occurring. Violent crime can also cause victims to
feel a sense of uncertainty and dis-empowerment and to feel more vulnerable,
leading to high levels of worry about personal safety. Violent victimization
has also been found to be linked to the development of symptoms of fear,
anxiety, depression or confusion, sadness, anger and stress (Dinisman and
Moroz, 2017, p. 4).
On the other hand, property crimes are generally considered less harmful to vic2

tims . However, studies based on the analyses of Crime Survey England and Wales and
British Crime Survey data suggested that burglary victims may also be severely affected.
2 As reflected in the development of various crime harm indexes around the world, see for example,
Cambridge Crime Harm Index (Sherman et al., 2016)).

4

In contrast to victims of violent crimes, victims of vehicle-related crimes tend to react
in the form of anger rather than fear or anxiety (Mawby, 2001; Mawby and Walklate,
1997; Shapland and Hall, 2007). Summarizing the findings, Mawby and Walklate (1994)
concluded that victims were most affected when the crime was serious, interpersonal,
and was likely to occur again rather than be a ‘one-off’.
While most established research has focused on conventional crimes such as burglary, sexual and violent offences, more recently the effects of online crime such as cyber
abuse3 have been studied (Sheridan and Grant, 2007; Hensler-McGinnis, 2008; Dreßing
et al., 2014; Nobles et al., 2014; Short et al., 2014; Short et al., 2015; Worsley et al.,
2016; Fissel, 2018; Fissel and Reyns, 2019). Research suggests that, much like the victims of conventional crimes, victims of cybercrimes such as cyber abuse experience a
variety of negative effects including persistent psychological impairment and issues of
personal insecurities (Parsons-Pollard and Moriarty, 2009; Dreßing et al., 2014; Nobles
et al., 2014).
Sheridan and Grant (2007) found that both offline and online stalking had a serious
impact on victims, with no significant differences in terms of medical and psychological
consequences and only minor differences in social and financial consequences between the
two types of abuse. In contrast, Nobles et al. (2014) found some significant differences
between online and offline stalking with victims of cyber stalking less likely to report
fear of crime but higher out-of-pocket costs associated with the incident of victimization. Victims of cyberstalking were also more likely to report adopting self-protective
behaviours compared with victims of offline stalking. Short et al. (2015) compared the
victim impact from offline and online harassment and found that both could result in
high levels of psychological distress comparable to the effects of post-traumatic stress
disorder. In a different setting, Hensler-McGinnis (2008) examined a sample of university students and found that cyberstalking victimization was significantly associated with
trauma and impairment in academic/career functioning. Fissel and Reyns (2019) distin3 Cyber abuse is a wide crime category that includes any behaviour that aims to stalk or harass
an individual over the age of 18 using technology. In this paper, we review studies that examined
cyber abuse, cyberstalking and cyberharassment as these terms significantly overlap and often used
interchangeably.

5

guished between four categories of consequences of cyberstalking victimization—health,
social, work and school. In a sample of victims aged 18 to 25, the researchers found that
when online stalking was combined with offline stalking the risk of experiencing one or
more of types of consequences of victimization was much higher.
Dreßing et al. (2014) examined the impact of cyberstalking in a sample of members of the German social network. The researchers found that the victims commonly
experienced some form of negative psychological or health-related outcome, including a
general feeling of inner unrest, mistrust towards other people, sleep disorders, feeling of
helplessness, anger, aggression, and a variety of health problems including headaches,
depression, and panic attacks. Similar, Short et al. (2014), who conducted an in-depth
analysis of cyberstalking victim narratives, found that victims experienced psychological, physical and social consequences as a result of victimization. To summarize, the
research suggests that cyber abuse can affect its victims in different ways and, in general,
consequences to the victim can be quite serious.

The effect of victim characteristics on impact from
crime
While it is clear that the impact of crime varies for different subgroups of victims,
the actual mechanism of variation, including the predictive factors, as well as whether
these mechanisms are common between different categories of crime is less obvious. In
an offline context, an earlier study by Mawby and Walklate (1994), using British Crime
Survey data, reported that the most vulnerable victims were most affected: poorer people
living in rented accommodation, nonwhites, divorced victims and those living in single
adult households; older citizens, and women. Stalking research identified prior offendervictim relationship, and gender of the victim as consistent predictors of higher victim
impact (Baum et al., 2009; Davis et al., 2002; Korkodeilou, 2017). Sheridan and Lyndon
(2012), in an online survey of self-defined stalking victims, found that females were more
likely than males to experience more severe psychological and physical consequences

6

of stalking victimization compared to males, as were those who had had a close prior
relationship with the perpetrator. Johnson and Kercher (2009) analysis of the Texas
Crime Victimization Survey also identified women, those with a prior relationship with
the stalker, and those who were divorced or separated as particularly affected.
Cyber abuse research that focused on predictors of victim impact is currently
limited to only two studies. Dreßing et al. (2014) found that prior intimate partner
relationship between the offender was a factor in cyberstalking victimization. Unsurprisingly, the researchers found the majority of offenders to be males and conversely, the
majority of victims to be females. Fissel and Reyns (2019) distinguished the impact of
cyberstalking on victims on four dimensions - work, school, social and health and concluded that incidents that lasted longer, included more online pursuit behaviours, and
also involved offline stalking victimization had a greater impact (Fissel and Reyns, 2019).
However, in contrast to research on offline stalking their findings on the relationship between gender and offender-victim relationship and impact were ambiguous. Both studies
treated cyber abuse as one uniform crime. To date, no study that we know of examined
victim impact from different forms of cyber abuse victimization. A better understanding
of mechanisms of victim impact from different types of cyber abuse is needed to ensure
the appropriate level and type of victim support.

Predictors of adoption of self-protective behaviours as
a reaction to victimization
One way, not yet discussed here, in which the effect of victimization can be expressed and
observed most readily, is in the adoption of self-protective behaviours following victimization. Research shows that victims of conventional types of crime such as stalking adopt
a variety of different self-protective behaviours including changing their daily routines,
moving homes, or undertaking prevention measures in the form of carrying a weapon
(Baum et al., 2009). The research in identifying predictors of adopting self-protective
behaviours in the context of conventional crimes such as stalking is quite limited. Earlier

7

work by Gottfredson and Hindelang (1979) found that identified seriousness of the crime
as important in the victim’s decision to report the crime to the police in the National
Crime Survey (US).
Cho et al. (2019) focused on predictors of help-seeking behaviour and the use
of formal and informal sources of help (e.g. medical or legal help) by the victims of
intimate partner violence (IPV). This research is of particular interest to this study
as cyber abuse often occurs in the context of IP4 . The researchers found that victim’s
characteristics, patterns of victimization and consequences of victimization determined
help-seeking behaviours, while gender moderated the relationship between consequences
and the use of formal help.
The literature on adopting self-protective behaviours following stalking victimization is relatively well developed (Baum et al., 2009; Buhi et al., 2009; Fisher et al.,
2002; Reyns et al., 2011; Sheridan and Grant, 2007; Tjaden, 1998; Wilcox et al., 2007).
Victims of stalking often report adopting avoidant behaviours, moving to a different
location, undertaking security protective measures (e.g. installing alarms, security cameras, changing locks, etc.), taking preventive actions (e.g. carry pepper spray), seeking
assistance from third parties or pursuing judicial or disciplinary action responses (e.g.
reporting to the police) (Baum et al., 2009; Nobles et al., 2014; Tjaden, 1998). In
the context of cyber abuse, content analysis of cyber abuse victimization survey conducted by Tokunaga and Aune (2017) identified seven self-protection techniques used
by victims including ignore/avoidance, active technological disassociation, help seeking,
negotiation/threat, compliance/excuses, technological privacy management and derogation, with using technology to move away from pursuers reported as the most effective
self-protection tactic.
Due to the diverse nature of self-protective behaviours, researchers operationalized self-protective behaviours using a variety of different measures. In the context of
cyber abuse victimization, Fissel (2018) operationalized self-protective behaviours as re4 A report by Ybarra et al. (n.d.) estimates that as many as 12% of U.S. internet users have experienced
intimate partner digital abuse. The same report identified that 77% of victims of intimate partner digital
abuse have used at least one protective strategy; one in six have gotten a restraining order or protection
order as a result of their digital abuse experiences.

8

porting incidents of victimization to the police. Worsley et al. (2016), who focused on
the psychological impact of cyberstalking, conceptualized self-protective behaviours as
behaviours aiming to cope with the stress associated with experiencing victimization and
was measured as avoidant coping, ignoring the perpetrator, confrontational coping, support seeking and cognitive re-framing. Sheridan and Grant (2007), who compared victims
impact and response to victimization between stalking and cyberstalking victims measured self-protective behaviours using the following indicators: changing employment,
changing the course of study, changing/getting rid of the car, undertaking some security
measures, going underground/changing identify, and giving up social activities.
In terms of specific predictors of adopting self-protective behaviours by victims of
cyber abuse, the literature, as Nobles et al. (2014, p. 993) suggested, “has not developed
to the point where patterns in responses to victimization, including self-protective behaviours taken by the victim, have been clearly identified”. The one study in this area
is by Nobles et al. (2014) who examined the factors that influence of the adoption of
self-protective behaviours among victims of cyber stalking. The study focused on the
seriousness of the experienced incident of victimization operationalized through the presence of physical attacks, threats, financial costs to the victim, duration of stalking, level of
experienced fear, and acknowledgement of experience as stalking. The researchers aimed
to predict the number of self-protective behaviours adopted by cyberstalking victims
using the seriousness of the event and controlling for several demographic characteristics
(Nobles et al., 2014). Nobles and colleagues found that almost all variables measuring the
seriousness of victimization included in the model were significant predictors of adopting
self-protective behaviours. Specifically, the results indicated that victims who experienced greater out-of-pocket costs, greater fear at the onset, and those who considered
their experiences to be stalking engaged in significantly more self-protective behaviours5 .
No study, that we are aware of, has examined the nature of the relationship between the
perceived impact of cyber abuse victimization and the adoption of self-protective behaviours against different types of cyber abuse victimization. This gap in knowledge is
5 These findings should be treated with caution however as the sample of cyberstalking victims analyzed in this study was quite small (N = 296).

9

significant and addressing it will allow researchers and practitioners not only to better
understand the mechanisms of adopting self-protective behaviours but also to develop
more targeted prevention strategies against cyber abuse.
In summary, this literature review suggests that while research on the impact
of crime on victims is extensive, the expansion of internet crime has brought a new
dimension to victimization and victims’ experiences, and little of the published research
relates directly to this. The current paper thus explores a relatively new subject, the
impact of cyber-abuse on its victims.

The current study
The impact of cyber abuse can be addressed on at least four levels. First, given that
victims of conventional crime report being affected in various ways, we can ask whether
cyber abuse victims are similarly affected. Second, we can address the question of how
they are affected: in psychological terms or through changing behaviour patterns (in
particular, the ways they use technology). Third, we can consider variations among
cyber abuse victims according to victim characteristics: that is, are different subgroups
of victims (e.g. distinguished by age) affected more than, or in different ways to others. Fourth, we can consider variations according to the subcategories of cyber abuse
discussed above: that is, are those subjected to a particular type of cyber abuse (e.g.
direct) affected more than, or in different ways to, others, just as different types of crime
trigger different victim response and have a different perceived impact?
In this study, we follow Ellison and Akdeniz (1998) classification of cyber abuse,
which groups different related behaviours according to the method used to perpetrate
them as either direct or indirect cyber abuse. In this context, direct cyber abuse is delivered by the offender directly to the victim via abusive emails or text messages, by
posting comments on the victim’s social media pages, or through covert surveillance of
the victim’s activities (Vakhitova et al., 2018). In contrast, indirect cyber abuse is delivered with minimal or no direct interaction between the victim and the offender. Indirect
cyber abuse does not require knowledge of the victim’s personal contact information.
10

These methods of abuse include posting damaging information about the victim on a
non-victim’s social media pages or web sites (Vakhitova et al., 2018). This updated
classification of cyber abuse is particularly useful if we consider the potential to develop
targeted crime prevention strategies. It would appear logical that behaviours that involve direct contact between offenders and victims would require a prevention approach
different from the one needed to prevent behaviours that do not require direct contact.
With this in mind, the current study draws from two areas of research - cyber
abuse and lifestyles and routine activities as predictors of victimization to identify factors
associated with 1) victim impact from cyber abuse and 2) adoption of self-protective
behaviours following cyber abuse victimization. In this study, we focus on one type
of self-protective behaviours—changes in the way victims use technology to reflect the
inherently technological nature of cyber abuse.
To answer our research questions we model the mechanisms of victimization using
the indicators of victims’ lifestyles and routine activities as well as their demographic
characteristics. Findings from this study contribute to both understanding of cyber abuse
as a broad crime category as well as help inform policy responses to the needs of cyber
abuse victims. This study contributes to our understanding of new technology-facilitated
types of crime such as cyber abuse by identifying the determinants of individual reaction to cyber abuse victimization and, specifically, of adopting self-protective behaviours
following cyber abuse victimization.

Methodology
The research reported here used an online survey instrument. Cyber abuse, due to its
technological nature, is especially suited for exploring using an online survey. Online
surveys are also associated with reduced interviewer-induced measurement error (Baker
et al., 2010; Sue and Ritter, 2012) and social desirability bias (Chang and Krosnick,
2009; Kreuter et al., 2008) when compared to face-to-face and telephone interviews.
The survey was designed to collect the information about the experience of our
respondents with cyber abuse victimization, the effect it had on their lives and their re-

11

lationship with technology, and demographic characteristics. All of the survey questions
were original, developed especially for this study. It took our respondents om average
no longer that 15 minutes to complete the survey.
A non-probability (convenience) sample drawn from the members of Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk, an online contract labour portal, formed the foundation for data analysis in this study. As the focus of this study was on cyber abuse, the phenomenon, which
by definition involves adults only, only those 18 years of age or older US residents were
invited to participate in the survey. Crowd-sourced samples, like the one we’ve collected,
allow for access to a large and fairly diverse pool of potential respondents (Behrend et al.,
2011; Berinsky et al., 2012; Buhrmester et al., 2011).
We limited participation to workers who were at least 18-years-old and who resided
in the United States. The workers were offered a small monetary compensation (US 35c)
for their participation in the research. This amount was chosen based on the minim
hourly wage in the USA and the estimated average amount of time required to complete
a survey. Research suggests that this approach improves response quality in Mechanical
Turk surveys (Peer et al., 2013).
The rate of missing data in the survey—both from break-off and item non-response—
was low. In total, 1,623 workers began the survey, and 1,463, or slightly over 90%, completed the survey. To identify victims of cyber abuse among those who accepted our
invitation to participate in the survey, we first asked all our respondents whether they
experienced any form of cyber stalking or cyber harassment directed at them personally. To ensure that the respondents were clear about the types of behaviours we were
interested in, we provided a number of examples of different forms that cyberstalking
and cyber abuse6 . Out of the total number of respondents, around half (N = 746) reported experiencing some form of cyber abuse. Only responses from those individuals
were included in the final sample analyzed herein.
6 Here are the examples of cyber abuse behaviours we provided our respondents: 1) emails, texts
(SMS), posts on blogs, online forums and social media pages of a persistent, annoying, alarming or
threatening nature, 2) monitoring your daily activities using social media or specialized software, 3)
posting information about your online (photos, documents, videos) without your consent or distribution
such information to others via email, SMS or other technological means, 4) impersonating you online or
through email or SMS, 5) subscribing you online to unwanted services, products, activities, etc.

12

Measures
Dependent variables
To answer our research questions, we have constructed two dependent variables: 1)
Overall Effect (continuous: min = 0, max = 2, 1 decimal place) and 2) Adoption of
self-protective behaviours (dichotomous: yes = 1, no = 0). To collect this information
we asked our respondents the following two questions:
Question 1: How affected were you by this incident (psychologically, emotionally, financially, or otherwise)?
Question 2: Did this incident cause you to change the way you conduct your
online activities and/or use technology? (Yes, No)
To answer the first question, the respondents picked a position on a slider anywhere
between 0 and 2 where 0 meant the respondent was not at all affected by the abuse, 1 somewhat affected and 2 - profoundly affected. Note, in relation to the previous research
discussed earlier, that we did not include any follow-up questions on the ways in which
victims were affected.
Our analyses include three groups of independent variables: 1) types of cyber
abuse victimization, 2) lifestyle and routine activities–related factors at the time of the
incident, and 3) demographic controls. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all
independent variables, demographic controls and situational factors.
Independent variables
To isolate direct, indirect and mixed types of cyber abuse, we asked the respondents who
identified as victims to think about the most recent or the most memorable incident they
experienced, and to select one or more specific behaviours they experienced from the list:
1) you received a text message, email or a private message via social media addressed
to you personally, 2) someone posted derogatory, embarrassing information (documents,
photos, videos, etc.) about you on the Internet or distributed to others via email, text

13

(SMS) or other technology, 3) you have been subscribed to unwanted services, products,
activities. You only found out about the subscription after you started to receive the
services, products or invited to participate in the activities, 4) someone, pretending to
be you, sent email or text messages or private messages on social media pages to your
family, friends, co-workers, or other third parties, 5) your daily activities been monitored
by someone via social media or a tracking software, 6) someone created a website or a
social media page containing derogatory or embarrassing information about you. We
then combined the information from these two questions (about the fact of victimization
and the specific type of victimization) and created a 3-level factor variable Method (direct
= 0, indirect = 1, mixed = 2). The resulting variable had levels in following proportions:
direct (n = 309), indirect (n = 168), mixed (n = 269).
Further, to assess the nature of offender-victim relationship prior to the abuse,
we asked our respondents who was the person(s) involved in the incident in relation
to the respondent and provided the following possible responses: a) close or extended
family; b) romantic partner or spouse; c) romantic ex-partner or ex-spouse; d) business
or work connection (co-worker, colleague, employer, employee or business associate); e)
education connection (college or university professor or student, academic advisor or
supervisor, tutor, teacher, coach or trainer); f) friend or acquaintance; g) social media or
online gaming connection; h) someone I met through sports, social clubs or committees,
volunteer organizations etc.; i) a stranger (someone I definitely do not know); j) I am not
sure of the real identity of the person(s) involved, but I suspect, it is someone I know; k)
a mixed group of people; l) other. Please specify. We then coded responses as follows:
a-h and j - 1 - prior relationship and i - 0 - no prior relationship. Responses k and l were
coded accordingly and following the same principles.
To control for the effect of demographic characteristics on the perceived level of
victim impact, we have included the following demographic variables as controls in both
our models: age (in years), gender (female = 1), race/ethnicity (white = 1), and employment status (employed = 1). To ensure that we measure the demographic characteristics
around the time of the cyber abuse incident, we asked our respondents-victims to give

14

us the information in the context of the time of the incident they reported. For example,
“Around the time of the incident, what was your age?”.

Analytic strategy
To answer the research questions posed in this study, we first conducted univariate and
bivariate analyses for our variables of interest and then modelled victim impact and
adoption of self-protective behaviours using a generalized linear model7 . In deciding on
the modelling approach, we took into consideration the exploratory nature of the study;
the explicit lack of theoretical guidance on selection of variables to be included in our
models; and the benefits of statistical methods of variable selection identified in previous
literature (see for example, Raftery (1995), Vakhitova and Alston-Knox (2018), and
Vakhitova et al. (2016)). With this in mind, a stochastic search algorithm to determine
the most likely models which include variables that can explain the outcomes as well
as preserving good estimation performance was deemed most appropriate. AutoStat R
software was used to estimate these models8 .
A Bayesian approach to estimation was used to determine the most probable
models in terms of explanatory power. These models were then used to estimate the
posterior distributions of the unknown parameter effects. In regression, where there are
k potential explanatory variables, the full model likelihood can be specified as

y | β, X, σ 2 ∼ N (βK X, σ 2 I)
where K = {0, 1, 2, · · · , k} possible regressors (K=0 indicates intercept term).
In a Bayesian setting, the unknown parameters, β and σ require a prior distribution to be specified in order to estimate their respective posterior distributions. Zellner’s
G-prior (Zellner, 1986) is convenient as it allows us to introduce information about the
parameters “mean” location but does not require the specification of the correlation
7 To reflect the specific nature of our two dependent variables, continuous variable Victim Impact and
dichotomous variable Adoption of Self-Protective Behaviours, we employed generalized linear models in
the form of linear and binary logistic regressions.
8 To conduct the analyses in this paper we employed AutoStat, a software package for statistical
analysis by Predictive Analytics Group (http://pa-group.com.au/autostat.php).

15

structure between regressors, which is difficult to achieve. The prior distributions for the
parameters βK and σ for the full model are:
βK | σ 2 , X ∼ Nk+1 (β̃, gσ 2 (X T X)−1 )
σ 2 ∝ σ −2

where g is specified to reflect the certainty of the prior. For example, large values of g
increase the variance, hence the prior becomes less certain as g increases. In our analysis,
we set g equal to our sample size, hence the prior distribution is akin to the influence of
one observation. As a result, the posterior distribution is dominated by the data. The
hyper-prior β̃ is set at zero.
It is often the case that variables in the full model may exhibit collinearity. As a
result, assessing the merit of each variable is difficult, as even the sign of the coefficient
may give an erroneous impression of that variable’s role in the outcome. Reducing
the model using variable selection is a common technique for approaching this issue,
but as there are 2k competing models (assuming that the intercept is always included),
statistical analysis requires a strategy to traverse the space.
In this analysis, we used stochastic search variable selection, where each of the
2k models (Mγ ) is associated with a binary vector γ where γi = 1 when xi is in the
model and 0 otherwise. As the model probability, Mγ , is now another parameter to be
estimated, we assign the prior as a uniform distribution for all models. The stochastic
search algorithm of Marin and Robert, 2007 (p82) is then used to determine the posterior
probability of each model.
Under this model, the prior for the coefficients included in model Mγ (known as
the “slab”) becomes
βγ | γ, σ 2 ∼ Nqγ +1 (β˜γ , gσ 2 (XγT Xγ )−1 )
and the prior distribution for σ 2 is unchanged from the full model. Variables in model
Mγ where γi = 0 are considered to be on the “spike” which is a point mass at zero,
and hence βi = 0 in this model. For more information about the prior and the model

16

specification please see Marin and Robert (2007).

Results
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for the sample. Means and standard deviations
are provided for continuous variables and percentages of the total sample for dichotomous
variables. The final sample is similar to the general population of American adults in
terms of gender split, but differs in terms of age and race - it is whiter and younger.
This is consistent with prior research using Mechanical Turk samples (Levay et al., 2016;
Weinberg et al., 2014; Pickett et al., 2018).
Table 1: Descriptive statistics (Nvictims = 746)
Variables
Dependent variables
Perceived impact
Adopting self-protective behaviours
Independent Variables
Type of abuse
Direct
Indirect
Mixed
Prior offender-victim relationship
Demographic Controls
Age
Female
White
Employed

% (N)

Mean

SD

Min

Max

1.13

0.56

40 (299)

0
0

2
1

41
23
36
78

0

1

13**
0
0
0

70
1
1
1

(309)
(168)
(269)
(562)
30.90

54 (399)
70 (522)
80 (601)

10.83

*Abbreviations: SD - standard deviation; min - minimum; max - maximum
**Age at the time of the incident.
All respondents were at least 18 years of age at the time of the survey.

As Table 1 shows, in our sample, direct abuse is much more common than indirect
abuse (41% and 23% respectively) with the majority of victims reporting having a preexisting relationship with the offender, which is highly consistent with previous literature.
In terms of the perceived victim impact, the average level in our sample was 1.13 (out
of maximum 2) (see Fig. 1 for a histogram of victim impact), which corresponds to
slightly higher than “somewhat affected”, with almost half of the sample (40%) reporting
adopting some self-protection behaviours (in the form of changing the way they use
technology) following the victimization.
17

Figure 1: Histogram of victim impact with a density curve

Table 2 presents correlation coefficients for bi-variate relationships for the variables
of interest9 .
Table 2: Correlation matrix for variables of interest

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Variables

1

2

3

5

6

7

Victim impact
Adopting self-protective behaviours
Offender-victim relationship
Age
Gender
Race
Employment

.326**
.146**
-.022
.132**
-.004
.031

-.100**
.151**
.132**
-.005
.009

-.182**
.007
.044
.034

.107**
.199**
.005

.034
-.126**

-.040

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

As Table 2 shows, victim impact is significantly10 positively associated with adopting self-protective behaviours, offender-victim relationship and gender11 , while adopting
self-protective behaviours are significantly12 positively associated with age and gen9 Spearman correlation coefficients were calculated for pairs of continuous variables (dark gray cells),
Pearson correlation coefficient for continuous-dichotomous pairs (light gray cells), and Phi coefficient for
pairs of dichotomous variables (white cells).
10 Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
11 Victim impact is also significantly positively associated with employment, but this correlation is
only significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
12 Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

18

der and significantly negatively associated with the offender–victim relationship. The
strongest relationship is between the victim impact and adopting self-protective behaviours (see Fig. 2). This association suggests that those victims who experienced
higher impact from victimization are more likely to react by adopting self-protective
measures.

Figure 2: Boxplot of victim impact and adopting self-protective behaviours

Next, with the goal of measuring the combined effect of our explanatory variables
on victim impact and adopting self-protective behaviour, and selecting the best explanatory model and to estimate the relative importance of our explanatory variables, we
conducted two Bayesian variable selection analyses.

Victim impact from cyber abuse
Table 3 presents the results of the Bayesian variable selection analysis of the importance
of coefficients included in the model explaining the level of perceived impact from different
types of cyber abuse. While mixed cyber abuse has a relatively high inclusion probability
of around 35%, it is still well below the 50% mark, so it is not likely to contribute
meaningfully to our explanatory model. Also, as Table 3 shows, by adding Mixed abuse
to the explanatory model (See Model 2), the posterior probability of the model is reduced
19

by nearly half making it a much less likely to be the best explanatory model. These
findings suggest that the methods of cyber abuse are not, in fact, useful at explaining the
perceived victim impact and instead it is the victim’s gender and pre-existing offendervictim relationship that are the best explainants. Females with a pre-existing relationship
with the offender are more likely to report a higher level of impact from cyber abuse
victimization.
Table 3: Coefficients and models explaining the perceived level of impact from cyber
abuse victimization
Coefficient
Constant
Female
Prior OVR
Mixed abuse
Indirect abuse
Age***
Employed
White

Mean

SD

2.5%
HPD**

97.5%
HPD**

Probability
of inclusion

1

2

4

5

0.903
0.168
0.163
0.036
0.001
-0.001
0.002
-0.001

0.069
0.046
0.071
0.055
0.015
0.005
0.014
0.011

0.775
0.077
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.010
0.000
-0.021

1.051
0.254
0.263
0.152
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

100
99
92
35
5
5
5
4

0.917
0.167
0.163
–
–
–
–
–

0.867
0.171
0.179
0.101
–
–
–
–

1.044
0.172
0.000
–
–
–
–
–

0.906
0.167
0.173
–
–
-0.011
–
–

0.869
0.174
0.180
–
–
–
0.036
–

47

25

5

2

2

Posterior probability (%)

Model*
3

* Best 5 models (cumulative posterior probability = 81%)
** Highest Posterior Density
*** Standardized

In terms of the victim’s gender and offender-victim relationship, they are included
in all five best models with a cumulative posterior probability of over 80%13 . As Fig. 3
shows, female victims are more likely than male victims to report higher impact from
victimization. It is not clear why this might be the case, but we hypothesize that this
effect may be related to the seriousness of abuse female victims experience compared with
male victims. Also, it chimes with earlier research that suggests that female victims of
conventional crime are more affected than male victims.
13 The

rest of possible models are not very likely

20

Figure 3: Density plot of victim impact vs. gender. Here, the darker grey density denotes
female victims; light grey density - male victims

Females are more likely to report being abused by someone they knew prior to the
attack, while males are more likely to be abused by a stranger. This seems to indicate
that the nature of the triggers of interpersonal conflict may affect the perceived impact
from cyber abuse. Research currently in progress will unpack the gendered nature of
these triggers.

Adopting self-protective behaviours
The posterior means and standard deviations for each coefficient considered for explaining adopting self-protective behaviours following cyber abuse victimization are presented
in Table 4. Using our data, perceived victim impact, age of the victim, prior offendervictim relationship and whether the victim experienced, mixed, indirect of direct type of
cyber abuse are the factors that best explain the adoption of self-protective behaviours.
All five best models include Impact, Abuse Methods, and Age and only 3 out of 5 best
models include Gender. Variables Race, Employment and Motivation are not included
in any of the best five models, meaning these variables do not explain adopting selfprotective behaviours following victimization.
21

Table 4: Coefficients and models explaining adopting self-protective behaviours following
cyber abuse victimization
Coefficient
Constant
Impact
Age***
Prior OVR
Mixed Abuse
Indirect Abuse
Female
Employed
White

Mean

SD

2.5%
HPD**

97.5%
HPD**

Probability
of inclusion

1

2

Model*
3

4

5

0.110
0.299
0.072
-0.108
0.098
-0.065
0.014
0.001
-0.001

0.071
0.033
0.021
0.066
0.065
0.072
0.032
0.011
0.008

-0.028
0.235
0.035
-0.202
0.000
-0.193
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.246
0.362
0.113
0.000
0.189
0.000
0.098
0.000
0.000

100
100
99
81
77
52
21
5
4

0.099
0.300
0.073
-0.134
0.140
–
–
–
–

0.133
0.304
0.073
-0.135
0.102
-0.106
–
–
–

0.173
0.311
-0.136
0.068
–
-0.154
–
–
–

0.079
0.287
0.071
-0.138
0.141
–
0.072
–
–

0.006
0.287
0.082
–
0.142
–
–
–
–

23

14

12

8

5

Posterior probability (%)
* Best 5 models (cumulative posterior probability = 62%)
** Highest Posterior Density
*** Standardized

Based on the above, using our data we can conclude that experiencing higher
impact from a cyber abuse victimization event is associated with a higher probability
(57%) of adopting self-protective behaviours. Older victims and those who experienced
mixed abuse are more likely to adopt self-protective behaviours following an incident of
victimization. In contrast, those who knew their abuser prior to the incident as opposed
to those who were attacked by a stranger(s) are less likely to modify their behaviour
(probability of adopting self-protective behaviours is 47%). We might speculate that this
is because where the victim is known to the offender, the victim recognizes that modifying
technological behaviour alone will have a minimal effect—indeed, it may provoke the
perpetrator to, for example, the shift from online to offline abuse.
Further, those who experienced indirect methods of cyber abuse are less likely to
change their behaviour (probability of adopting self-protective behaviours is 48%). This
is likely to be explained through the nature of indirect abuse, which does not directly
involve the victims, making adopting self-protective behaviours against an attack more
or less futile.

22

Discussion and conclusion
This study had a dual focus: to consider how the nature of the cyber abuse experienced
and the characteristics of its victims affected both the perceived impact of the incident(s)
and adoption of self-protective behaviours by victims. Consequently, our findings contribute to the larger literature on cyber abuse and impact from victimization.
While media often focuses on cyber abuse incidents on the extreme side of the spectrum of victim impact, the average impact in our sample was quite moderate (1.13 out of
maximum 2). In line with the existing literature on victim impact from traditional and
new technology-facilitated types of crimes, female victims reported experiencing higher
perceived impact compared with male victims. Also, as expected from previous research,
we found that those who had a prior relationship with their offender and women were
more likely to say that they had been more affected by the abuse. Perhaps surprisingly,
the type of cyber abuse experienced (direct, indirect or mixed) had a minimal effect
on the psychological impact victims experienced. However, while we did not detect the
differences in victim impact between different types of cyber abuse, the type of experienced cyber abuse actually plays a much more important role in adopting self-protective
behaviours.
Forty per cent of victims of cyber abuse in our sample reported adopting some
form of self-protective behaviours following their victimization. This is not dissimilar
to findings in Nobles et al. (2014) who analyzed the 2006 Supplemental Victimization
Survey to the National Crime Victimization that found that 51.01% of cyberstalking
victims adopted at least one type of self-protective behaviours. The difference could
be explained by the differences in sample collection methodologies and/or differences in
definitions of self-protective behaviours.
Those who reported being affected the most were significantly more likely to adopt
self-protective measures. On the other hand, women, older victims and those with no
prior relationship with the offender were more likely to adopt self-protective behaviours.
In the case of older victims, this may be a by-product of the relationship between age
and offender-victim relationship, but it might reflect older victims being better informed

23

about protective strategies. Future research should unpack the mechanism by which the
age of the victim determines the likelihood of adopting self-protective behaviours. The
fact that those with a prior close relationship with their abuser were less likely to adopt
self-protective behaviours maybe because where the offender knows them well; merely
changing internet usage may be considered insufficient.
Interestingly those who experienced mixed cyber abuse were significantly more
likely to adopt self-protective behaviours (mixed cyber abuse was included in the best
explanatory model with a probability of inclusion of 77%) but experiencing indirect cyber abuse actually makes the victims less likely to adopt self-protective behaviours (with
inclusion probability of just over 50%). This suggests that victims feel that they do
not have a lot of control over the victimization event and adoption of self-protective
behaviours is not going to make any difference. The significant increase in chances of
adopting self-protective behaviours by the victims of mixed cyber abuse is likely attributable to the inclusion in mixed abuse direct. By definition, mixed abuse requires
that at least two different methods of abuse are present in one incident—at least one of
which must be of the direct kind. If someone is sending you derogatory messages via
email - it is easy to see how adopting a self-protective behaviour in the form of blocking
the offending address could stop or at least temporarily prevent further victimization.
However, if an offender is not involving the victim and instead uses third parties or online public spaces to commit the abuse (as in the case of indirect abuse), there is not
much the victim can do to protect him or herself from re-victimization. This finding
is quite significant as it provides additional evidence for the utility of a more detailed
classification of cyber abuse that considers the nature of methods of abuse.
Our findings should be interpreted in light of the limitations of this study. First,
considering the non-probability nature of our sample, we cannot generalize the findings
to our target population of interest. Future research should test the findings using a
sample randomly selected from the general population of American adults. Second, the
data analyzed in this study is based on self-reports of victims of cyber abuse and may
suffer from a number of biases, recall issues and other issues common for this type of

24

data. While potentially limited by the self-report nature, victimization survey is the best
currently available method of data collection on perceived victim impact. Allowing our
respondents to use a slider rather than to have a binary response option (as was done
in previous research) for measuring the perceived impact allowed us to have a much
more nuanced data. And finally, the cross-sectional nature of the design of this study
means that we could not establish whether the adoption of self-protective behaviours
actually influences the risk of re-victimization. Future research should potentially utilize
an experimental or longitudinal design to examine the effectiveness of self-protective
behaviours against cyber abuse re-victimization.
Notwithstanding these limitations, the study contributes to several areas of knowledge. In particular, our findings suggest that similar to research in conventional types of
crimes like stalking, victim impact from cyber abuse is perceived as more significant by
female victims and those who had a relationship with the offender prior to the abuse. We
also found no significant differences in perceived victim impact between different types of
cyber abuse (direct, indirect and mixed abuse). However, our model was able to identify
the important role the type of cyber abuse victimization experienced by the victim plays
in adopting self-protective behaviours. Specifically, we found that while victims of mixed
abuse were significantly more likely to adopt self-protective behaviours, in contrast, the
victims of indirect abuse were less likely to so that. This indicates that the nature of
the abuse experienced by the victim affects his or her decision making processes following the victimization, that is in line with previous literature that suggests the effect of
offence type on the victim impact. These findings should help form coupled with future
in-depth research in self-protective behaviours victims of different types of cyber abuse
adopt to protect themselves from re-victimization should provide additional insight for
developing better crime prevention strategies against cyber abuse.

25

References
Baker, R., Blumberg, S., Brick, J., Couper, M., Courtright, M., Dennis, J., . . . Lavrakas,
P. (2010). Research synthesis: AAPOR report on online panels. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 74, 711–781.
Baum, K., Catalano, S., Rand, M., & Rose, K. (2009). Stalking victimisation in the
United States. Retrieved from https : / / victimsofcrime . org / docs / src / baum - k catalano-s-rand-m-rose-k-2009.pdf?sfvrsn=0
Behrend, T., Sharek, D., Meade, A., & Wiebe, E. (2011). The viability of crowdsourcing
for survey research. Behavior Research Methods, 43, 800–813.
Berinsky, A., Huber, G., & Lenz, G. (2012). Evaluating online labor markets for experimental research: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk. Political Analysis, 20, 351–
368.
Buhi, E., Clayton, H., & Surrency, H. (2009). Stalking victimization among college
women and subsequent help-seeking behavior. 57, 419–425.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. (2011). Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new
source of inexpensive, yet high-quality data? Perspectives on Psychological Science,
6, 3–5.
Chang, L.-C. & Krosnick, J. (2009). National surveys via RDD telephone interviewing
versus the Internet: Comparing sample representativeness and response quality.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 73, 641–678.
Cho, H., Seon, J., Han, J. B., Smirnova, D., & Kwon, I. (2019). Gender differences in
the relationship between the nature of intimate partner violence and the survivor’s
help-seeking. Violence Against Women, 1––18.
Davis, K. E., Coker, A. L., & Sanderson, M. (2002). Physical and mental health effects
of being stalked for men and women. Violence and Victims, 17, 429–443.
Dinisman, T. & Moroz, A. (2017). Understanding victims of crime: The impact of crime
and support needs. Retrieved from https : / / www . victimsupport . org . uk / sites /
default/files/VS Understanding\%20victims\%20of\%20crime web.pdf

26

Dreßing, H., Bailer, J., Anders, A., Wagner, H., & Gallas, C. (2014). Cyberstalking in a
large sample of social network users: Prevalence, characteristics, and impact upon
victims. Cyberpsychology, Behaviours and Social Networking, 17, 61––67.
Ellison, L. & Akdeniz, Y. (1998). Cyber-stalking: The regulation of harassment on the
internet (special edition: Crime, criminal justice and the internet). Criminal Law
Review, 2948. Retrieved from http://www.cyber-rights.org/documents/stalking
Fisher, B., F.T., C., & M.G., T. (2000). The sexual victimization of college women.
Washington, DC: US Department of Justice.
Fisher, B., Cullen, F., & Turner, M. (2002). Being pursued: Stalking victimization in a
national study of college women. Criminology & Public Policy, 1, 257–308.
Fissel, E. R. & Reyns, B. W. (2019). The aftermath of cyberstalking: School, work, social,
and health costs of victimization. American Journal of Criminal Justice.
Fissel, E. (2018). The reporting and help-seeking behaviours of cyberstalking victims.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 1–26.
Gottfredson, M. R. & Hindelang, M. J. (1979). A study of behaviour of law. American
Sociaological Review, 44, 3–18.
Gramlich, J. (2019). 5 facts about crime in the u.s. Retrieved from https : / / www .
pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/01/03/5-facts-about-crime-in-the-u-s/
Hensler-McGinnis, N. F. (2008). Cyberstalking victimization: Impact and coping responses
in a national university sample. Dissertation.
Holmstrom, L. L. & Burgess, A. W. (1978). The victim of rape: International reaction.
Wiley; New York.
Johnson, M. C. & Kercher, G. A. (2009). Identifying predictors of negative psychological
reactions to stalking victimization. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 24, 866––82.
doi:10.1177/088626050831719
Korkodeilou, J. (2017). “No place to hide”: Stalking victimisation and its psycho-social
effects. International Review of Victimology, 23, 17–32.

27

Kreuter, F., Presser, S., & Tourangeau, R. (2008). Social desirability bias in CATI, IVR,
and Web surveys: The effects of mode and question sensitivity. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 72, 847–865.
Levay, K. E., Freese, J., & Druckman, J. (2016). The demographic and political composition of mechanical turk samples. SAGE Open, 1, 1–17.
Marin, J.-M. & Robert, C. (2007). Bayesian core: A practical approach to computational
bayesian statistics. Springer.
Mawby, R. I. (2001). Burglary. Willan Publishing: Cullompton.
Mawby, R. I. & Walklate, S. (1994). Critical victimology: International perspectives. Sage:
London.
Mawby, R. & Walklate, S. (1997). The impact of burglary: A tale of two cities. International Review of Victimology, 4, 267–295.
Nobles, M., Reyns, B., Fox, K., & Fisher, B. (2014). Protection against pursuit: A conceptual and empirical comparison of cyberstalking an stalking victimization among
a national sample. Justice Quarterly, 31, 986––1014.
Parsons-Pollard, N. & Moriarty, L. J. (2009). Cyberstalking: Utilizing what we do know.
Victims & Offenders, 4 (4), 435–441.
Peer, E., Vosgerau, J., & Acquisti, A. (2013). Reputation as a sufficient condition for
data quality on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Behavior Research Methods, 46, 1023–
1031.
Pickett, J., Roche, S., & Pogarsky, G. (2018). Toward a bifurcated theory of emotional
deterrence. Criminology.
Raftery, A. (1995). Bayesian model selection in social research. Sociological Methodology,
25, 111–163.
Reinhart, R. J. (2018). One in four americans have experienced cybercrime. Retrieved
from https : / / news . gallup . com / poll / 245336 / one - four - americans - experienced cybercrime.aspx

28

Reyns, B., Henson, B., & Fisher, B. (2011). A situational crime prevention approach to
cyberstalking victimization: Preventive tactics for internet users and online place
managers. Crime Prevention and Community Safety, 12, 99––118.
Shapland, J. & Hall, M. (2007). What do we know about the effects of crime on victims?
International Review of Victimology, 14, 175–217.
Sheridan, L. & Lyndon, A. E. (2012). The influence of prior relationship, gender, and fear
on the consequences of stalking victimization. Sex Roles: A Journal of Research,
66, 340–350. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11199-010-9889-9
Sheridan, L. & Grant, T. (2007). Is cyberstalking different? Psychology, Crime & Law,
13.
Sherman, L., Neyroud, P. W., & Neyroud, E. (2016). The Cambridge Crime Harm Index:
Measuring total harm from crime based on sentencing guidelines. Policing, 1––13.
doi:doi:10.1093/police/paw003
Short, E., Linford, S., Wheatford, J., & Maple, C. (2014). The impact of stalking: The
lived experience - a thematic analysis. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 199, 133–137.
Short, E., Guppy, A., Hart, J., & Barnes, J. (2015). The impact of cyberstalking. Studies
in Media and Communications, 3, 1–15.
Sue, V. & Ritter, L. (2012). Conducting online surveys. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tjaden, P. & Thoennes, N. (2000). Prevalence and consequences of male-to-female and
female-to-male intimate partner violence as measured by the national violence
against women survey. Violence Against Women, 6, 241–161.
Tjaden, P. (1998). Stalking policies and research in the united states: A twenty year
retrospective. European Journal on Criminal Policy Research, 15.
Tokunaga, R. S. & Aune, K. S. (2017). Cyber-defense: A taxonomy of tactics for managing cyberstalking. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 32 (10), 1451–1475.
Vakhitova, Z. I., Webster, J. L., Alston-Knox, C. L., Reynald, D. M., & Towsnley, M. K.
(2018). Offender–victim relationship and offender motivation in the context of in-

29

direct cyber abuse: A mixed-method exploratory analysis. International Review of
Victimology, 24 (3), 347–366. doi:10.1177/0269758017743073
Vakhitova, Z. & Alston-Knox, C. (2018). Non-significant p-values? strategies to understand and better determine the importance of effects and interactions in logistic
regression. PLoS ONE, 13 (11). doi:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0205076
Vakhitova, Z., Reynald, D., & Townsley, M. (2016). Toward adapting routine activity
and lifestyle exposure theories to account for cyber abuse victimization. Journal of
Contemporary Criminal Justice, 32 (2), 169–188.
Victim Support Agency. (n.d.). The effects of crime. Retrieved from https : / / www .
victimsofcrime.vic.gov.au/the-crime/the-effects-of-crime
Weinberg, J. D., Freese, J., & McElhattan, D. (2014). Comparing data characteristics and
results of an online factorial survey between a population-based and a crowdsourcerecruited sample. Sociological Science, 1, 292–310.
Wilcox, P., Jordan, C., & Pritchard, A. (2007). A multidimensional examination of campus safety: Victimization, perceptions of danger, worry about crime, and precautionary behavior among college women in the post-clery era. Crime & Delinquency,
53, 219–254.
Worsley, J., Wheatcroft, J., Short, E., & Corcoran, R. (2016). Victim’s voices: Understanding the emotional impact of cyberstalking and individual’s coping responses.
SAGE Open, 7, 1–13.
Ybarra, M., Price-Feeney, M., Lenhart, A., & Zickuhr, K. (n.d.). Intimate partner digital
abuse. Center for Innovative Public Health Research. Retrieved from https : / /
datasociety.net/pubs/oh/Intimate Partner Digital Abuse 2017.pdf
Zellner, A. (1986). On assessing prior distributions and Bayesian regression analysis
with g-prior distributions. In Bayesian inference and decision techniques: Essays
in honor of Bruno de Finetti (Chap. 15, pp. 233–243). North-Holland ; Sole distributors for the U.S.A. and Canada, Elsevier Science Pub. Co. Retrieved from
http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/0444877126

30

