"x"
"1" "The Academic Performance of Undocumented Students in Higher Education  in the United States"
"2" "Amy Hsin"
"3" "Associate Professor of Sociology"
"4" "Queens College, City University of New York"
"5" "amy.hsin@qc.cuny.edu"
"6" "Holly Reed"
"7" "Associate Professor of Sociology"
"8" "Queens College, City University of New York"
"9" "holly .reed@qc.cuny.edu"
"10" "Abstract"
"11" "Our understanding of the sources of educational inequality for the estimated   250,000 undocumented immigrant college students in the United States is limited by   poor data. We use student administrative data from a large public university, which   accurately identify legal status and include pre-enrollment characteristics, to   determine the effect of legal status on GPA and graduation. We find that undocumented students are hyper-selected relative to peers; failing to account for this   difference underestimates the effect of legal status on academic outcomes. Our   findings also highlight the ways legal status interacts with institutional settings and   race/ethnicity to affect educational outcomes."
"12" "An estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants — one-quarter   of the  foreign-born  population —r esides in the United States without authorization  (Passel and Cohn 20 17 ) .  As unauthorized residents, they cannot legally work, vote ,   or  benefit from social services; in many states, it is difficult to open a bank account or obtain a driver’s license.   Undocumented children, however, have the right to  kindergarten through   12 th - grade  (K-to-12)  schooling and are not barred from pursuing hi gher  education ,  yet on ly 21  states currently offer in-state tuition to resident undocumented youth  (National Immigration Law Center 2018) . A lthough an estimated 65,000 undocumented students graduate  from  high school every year, only a small fraction of those  ( about 1/4 )  go on to attend college (U.S. Department of Education 2015) .  These students  share a common dream with their  legal - status counterparts: that higher education will be a vehicle for social mobility. Yet  undocumented students  face greater barriers to college attendance because they are  in eligible for government financial aid,  because  their returns to education are uncertain  since  they cannot legally work, and  because  they attend school under the threat of deportation  ( Abrego  2006;  Gonzales 2011;  Terriquez  2014 ) ."
"13" "Our understanding of how legal status affects the educational experiences of undocumented students in  college   has  been limited by data constraints  primari ly  because large -scale  representative surveys  in the United States  do not collect data on legal status  (e.g. ,  American Community Survey, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Educational  Longitudinal Survey, etc.) . This  situation  is problematic for several reasons. First, we cannot know how legal status affects college outcomes if we cannot compare representative samples of undocumented students with their  documented  peers. Second, undocumented college students are likely to be hyper-selected relative to college students with legal status because they had to overcome larger financial and psychological barriers to enroll in college (Enriquez 2011; Perez et al. 2009 ; Hsin and Ortega 2018 ). Omitting pre-enrollment characteristics—such as acad emic preparedness and socioeconomic status —will result in underestimating  the effect of legal status on educational attainment."
"14" "In addition to data limitations, the research primarily focuses on understanding the experiences of Latino youth, and as a result, we know relatively little about the experiences of non-Latino undocumented youth .  Much  of what we know   about undocumented youth  comes from qualitative studies that focus on very specific  sub populations (e.g., Mexicans or Latinos in California) ( Abrego  2006; Enriquez 2011, 2017;  Patler  2017; Perez et al. 2009;  Terriquez  2014).  Yet , the  fastest- growing groups of undocumented immigrants are from Asia, Central America ,  and Africa  ( Rosenblum  and Ruiz Soto 2015); their experiences are rarely examined.  Finally,  data constraints have prevented researchers from systematically examining variation by college type.  The effect of legal status might vary by college type because  community colleges differ from 4-year colleges in terms of their institutional structure, student composition, proportion  of students  working while attending school, and re tention/graduation rates."
"15" "This article  analyze s  10 years of administrative data on students atte nding a large public university: the City University of New York ,  or CUNY,  from 2002 to 201 2 . The data are unique because they allow us to accurately identify legal status, contain nearly the entire population of undocumented college students residing in  a  large metropolitan region ,  and have information on  pre-enrollment variables such as  high- school grade point average  (GPA) .  We use these data to  examine 4 questions: (1)  Are  undocumented students positively selected relati ve to their peers  who have legal status  ( e.g. those with US citizenship and those with legal permanent residence) ?;  (2)  Does  legal status have a negative effect on  college  performance  and graduation ? ;  (3)  How does the effect of legal status vary by students’ origin region?; and (4)  How  does the effect of legal status vary by  2-year versus 4-year colleges?"
"16" "Our results from estimating linear probability models indicate the following. First, undocumented students are  positively   selected relative to their peers with legal status.  This  finding  indicate s  that undocumented college students represent some of the most resilient and academic ally   prepared  youth  in the United States . Second, undocumented students significantly outperform their citizen peers and perform as well as their peers with legal permanent  resident  status. Third, once we account for selection, we find a persistent negative effect of legal status at 4-year colleges ,  suggesting that  at relatively selective institutions ,   legal status functions as a  master status , or a social status that has an outsized effect on life chances relative  to  other social characteristics like socioeconomic status or race/ethnicity   ( Enghceren , 1999) . In contrast, legal status does  not  seem to function as a master status at open-access community colleges , where  undocumented students outperform both citizens and legal permanent residents, even after accounting for selection. Finally, our  analysis  revea l s  interesting sources of  variation  across  origin  country  in the effect of legal status  on student performance . Take n  together, these results offer new evidence  on  the way legal status interacts with educational processes, institutional contexts ,  and race/ethnicity to affect  college  outcomes."
"17" "BACKGROUND"
"18" "Many i mmigration scholars contend that the condition of illegality functions as a  master status  that “outweighs and overpowers all other social  characteristics ”   ( Enghceren , 1999) in shaping individual s’  life chances . Scholars argue that legal status  has an overarching effect on every aspect of individuals’  li ves , including  how they interact with peers and institutions, how they are perceived and treated by society ,  and how they perceive their own future and social mobility (Gleeson and Gonzales 2012 ; Gonzales 2016;  Terriquez  2014 ;  Patler  2017 ). In terms of how legal status affects educational pathways, Gonzales (2016) illustrates  its  outsized role at critical periods during the life   course. The transition out of  K-to- 12 schooling is particularly salient because it involves exiting the legally protected status  of   primary and secondary education  and  entering   situations where undocumented youth  in the U nited  S tates   must assess trade-offs between continuing education or seeking employment  without  work authorization and residency rights  ( Gonzales 2011; 2016). The literature to date consistently shows that undocumented status negatively affects decision s  to pursue schooling   beyond high school  (Gonzales 2011;  Terriquez  2014) .  For example,  Abrego  (2006) finds that undocumented Latino immigrants in Los Angeles , California,  were less likely to pursue college ,  even when they attained college admissions ,  relative to other working - class Latino immigrants with legal status.  Greenman  and Hall (2013)  also find that undocumented  youth are less likely to enter  college  than  their peers ,  when analyzing nationally  represent ative  data  from the Survey of Income and Program Participation."
"19" "However, t here  are reasons to suspect  that legal status may not  necessarily  function as a master status  for  college students .  One reason is that the subset of undocumented youth who make it to college are likely to be  hyper-selected relative to  college students  who have legal status . B ecause legal status plays such an outsized role in steering  otherwise- qualified  undocumented youth away from college and into the workforce ,  undocumented college students  are likely to be more positive ly  selected  in terms of the qualities that correlate with academic performance (e.g. ,  academic preparedness, intellectual ability, motivation ,  and resilience)  relative to college students with legal status.   Thus, hyper-selection may reduce the effect of legal status."
"20" "Another reason why legal status may not operate as a master status for undocumented college students is because  undocumented college students share common challenges with other first-generation college students from low-income families who have legal status ,  such as lack ing both  financial  and  cultural resources that enable educational success  (Suarez-Orozco et al. 2015; Bailey, Jenkins ,  and  Jaggar  2015;  Goldrick-Rab  2006).  For example,  Valdez and  Golash-Boza  (2017) observe that undocumented students attending a Hispanic-Serving Institution  identify financial hardship and struggle, not  legal status ,  as their primary source of adversity.  As t hey  show ,  legal status  does not have a stand- alone effect on college experiences but intersect s  with multiple  identities —including race and class—to  shape  college outcomes .  Enriquez (2017; 3) contends that legal status introduces unique and insurmountable legal barriers that “weaken resistance to the limitations created by these other social locations . ”   Enriquez’s work shows that legal status operates   as  a  “final straw” that  prevents  many undocumented student s—a lready struggling with challenges related to poverty,  as well as  being  immigrant   and first-generation college student s —f rom completing  their intended degree s .  These studies  demonstrate that the relative effect of legal status  for undocumented students  will not be so pronounced if their documented counterparts are also struggling with a similar set of challenges."
"21" "To  reliably  assess how legal status affects educational outcomes in college ,  we need (1)  ways  to  account for  the  hyper-selectivity of undocumented college students   and (2) data that  allow us to compare representative samples of undocumented college students with representative sample s  of documented college students. To our knowledge, no such data  have  previously existed."
"22" "The  research  that come s  the closes t  to approximating representativeness is  Terriquez’s  (201 5 )  mixed- method study of undocumented students attending community college in California. This study is exceptional because  Terriquez  surveys 18 undocumented college students who were randomly selected from a representative sample of college students contacted by phone. She supplemented these data with 20 additional undocumented students who were non-randomly selected via youth organizations. Her results  suggest that  undocumented students were more likely to withdraw  from college  compared to their citizen peers. She concludes that legal status serves as a master status by increasing the likelihood that undocumented students leave college.   Terriquez’s   2015  study was the first of its kind to use a randomly selected sample of undocumented students.  However,  because the total sample of stu dents was small,  she could not  systematically compare  undocumented students with their  counterparts with legal status  (i.e .  those  with citizenship and those with legal permanent status) .  Our study seeks to extend  Terriquez’s  work by analyzing unique administrative data that include valid comparison groups."
"23" "How  Might Legal Status Affect  College  Persistence and  Attainment ?"
"24" "Existing   research  offers mixed evidence on the effect of legal status on college persistence and attainment. Some  studies   suggest that  l ack of l egal status  has  negative effect s on college  persistenc e  because undocumented students  struggle to pay for college. Nearly 70% of families headed by undocumented parents subsist at or near the poverty line ( Amuedo-Dorantes  and  Antman  2017), compared to 29% of students who come from poor families nationwide (National Center for Education Statistics). As a result, undocumented students have greater  difficulty paying for college than their peers with legal status. Additionally, low-income undocumented students  are   not eligible for federal  (or, in most states,  state )  government financial aid for tuition assistance or work-study programs  (U.S. Department of Education 2015) . They are   also  highly credit constrained because they cannot borrow from banks to offset tuition costs  (Cowley 2017) .  According to the National Immigration Law Center, at least twenty states and the District of Columbia  have polices that allow undocumented students who reside in the  states to pay in-state tuition .   In states that exclude resident undocumented students from paying instate tuition,  undocumented students must pay  out-of-state or international student tuition rates , making  the cost of college attendance  substantially higher  for them  than  for  their  legal- status counterparts.  Terriquez  (2015)  found  that twice as many undocumented students   at community colleges  reported withdrawing  from college because of  an  inability to afford educational expenses  compared to students with legal status ."
"25" "But there are also reaso ns to believe that the selected group of undocumented youth who overcome challenges to attend college may be more likely to persist and graduate with a degree.  Because undocumented youth cannot legally work,   they  earn   lower wages and  are employed in  jobs that subject them to more occupational hazards ,  compared to  legal  immigrant workers ( Donato  et al. 2008; Hall,  Greenman  and  Farkas  2010 ; Ortega, Edwards and Hsin 2018 ). This  reality  means the wages undocumented youth forgo to attend college  are  lower than the wages their  legal- status peers forgo.  L ack of legal work options , thus,  may have a positive effect on  college  attainment  because  the opport unity costs of attending school   are  lower for undocumented students . Additionally, s chools foster a culture of meritocracy where legal status is deemphasized and students are encouraged and rewarded for pursuing intellectual interests (Gleeson and Gonzales 2012).  By contrast,  the workplace  offers harsher conditions  because lack of work  authorization renders  occupational mobility nearly impossible.   As a result, r emaining in school helps  undocumented youth  delay a future that will see them joining the low-wage, contingent workforce where they are at   risk of exploitation."
"26" "Finally, undocumented youth who beat the odds to attend college are hyper-selected and represent the most academically gifted, motivated, and resilient individuals with exceptionally high educational aspirations (Conger and  Chellman  2013;  Terriquez  2014; Contreras 2009; Perez and Cortes 2011). Many benefited from a support network of mentors, encouraging high-school teachers and guidance counselors, and supportive friends and family members at critical periods like the transition from high school to college and once they are enrolled in college (Enriquez 2011; Perez et al. 2009). Hyper-selection and the opportunity to draw on supportive networks may mean that undocumented college students are better equipped for the challenges of college than are their peers with legal status."
"27" "Variation in the Effects of Legal Status by 2-year and 4-year Colleges"
"28" "Community colleges differ from 4-year colleges because they are more affordable, feature open admission s  (e.g. ,  accept anyone with a  high- school diploma or  General Educational Development   diploma  ( GED) ) ,  and accommodate working students  with variable work schedules and  students with family  caregiving  responsibilities ( Teranishi  et al. 2011;  Goldrick-Rab  2006).   N early 70 percent of  community- college students work while attending school ,  c ompared to about 30 percent at 4-year college students   (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2017 ).  Greater accessibility  and  affordability mean that community colleges  attract non-traditional students including immigrants, students from low er  socioeconomic backgrounds, those with young children to financially support ,   first- generation college students , and those  with  the least academic prepar ation .   In part b ecause community colleges tend to attract students  with the  fewe st resources, graduation rates at community colleges are significantly lower than at 4-year colleges  ( Bailey, Jenkins, and  Leinbach  2005) .  Nationally, 35% of  community- college students graduate with a degree within 6 years, wherea s more than  60% of students  do so  at public four-year institutions .   M any  high- achieving undocumented students may be channeled into  lower- cost  community colleges because they are denied access to financial aid and scholarships that would have allowed them to attend 4-year colleges or more selective institutions ( Terriquez  2015; Gonzales 2016 ). Thus ,  research suggest s that  l ack of legal status  will under-place  more  high- achieving  undocumented students at community colleges than at 4-year colleges."
"29" "In sum, we know that 2-year and 4-year colleges substantially differ in terms of institutional settings, student composition ,  and graduation rates. These differences may also influence how legal status affects  undocumented students’  educational outcomes by college type.   H owever,  we do not  know  whether and how legal status varies by 2-year and 4-year college s .  At community colleges, we might expect undocumented youth to outperform their peers because   (1) undocumented students at community colleges are hyper-selected and likely to be under-placed and (2) the comparison pool of documented students at community colleges tend s  to be low   performing and  to  share similar challenges as undocumented students."
"30" "Variation in the Effects of Legal Status by  Origin  Country"
"31" "While Mexican immigrants comprise the largest share of undocumented immigrants in the United States (56  percent ), the  fastest- growing groups of undocumented immigrant s  are populations from Asia, Central America ,  and Africa ( Rosenblum  and Ruiz Soto 2015).  However,  we know relatively little about the educational outcomes  of  non-Latino, and more specifically non-Mexican, undocumented youth.  The  CUNY  data  offer the unique opportunity to better  understand the educational experiences of  these  under-studied but fast-growing groups from Asia, the Caribbean ,  and Africa. As shown in Table 1, the data include large numbers of undocumented studen ts from   Mexico (10 %), Ecuador ( 6 %), South Korea (6%), Jamaica (5%), Dominican Republic ( 3 %), and China (4%)."
"32" "[Table 1]"
"33" "Racial and ethnic stratification’s  effect   on the  educational outcomes  of US citizens is also likely to apply to  undocumented students. For example,  New York City  has one of the  country’s  most s egregat ed school systems, and Black and Latino youth  living in New York City  are more likely than their white and Asian peers to attend racial ly  segregated schools with high concentrations of poverty (Kirkland and  Sanzone ,  2017 ;  Kasinitz  et al. 2009 ).    The racial inequalities and discrimination faced by Black and Latino students with legal status  may  also affect Black and Latino students without legal status and  make them less academically prepared for college ."
"34" "Additionally,  we hypothesize that  legal status  may  interact with racial/ethnic stratification to create new forms of inequalities. Stereotypes of the quintessential undocumented student being Latino – and more specifically, Mexican – may reduce the scrutiny of and discrimination against Asian, African ,  and Caribbean undocumented students in our study  ( Dreby  2015;  Patler  2018) . Therefore, non-Latino undocumented youth may be able to “fly under the radar” and avoid being stigmatized as undocumented.  A t the same time,  however,  racialized  stereotypes of undocumented immigrants  may also make it more difficult for  non-Latino  students to connect with networks and organizations that assist undocumented students with navigating their  educational career s , finding resources to help pay for college ,  and landing a job. For example, many Asian undocumented immigrants are unaware of the existence of other undocumented Asians immigrants in their communities and suffer feelings of shame, loneliness ,  and isolation (Chan 2010; Cho 2017)."
"35" "Differential access to co-ethnic resources may also contribute to stratification in educational outcomes across immigrant groups.  Chinese and Korean immigrants are two of the largest Asian immigrant groups in New York City ,  and they  benefit from the presence of  large and well-established ethnic  enclaves  ( Kasinitz  et al. 2009; Min 2011).  These enclaves are  supported by a strong co-ethnic middle   class and a steady flow of foreign transnational investments   ( Kasinitz  et al. 2009; Min 2011).   Such enclaves   offer valuable sources of ethnic capital to low-income Chinese and Korean immigrants—including undocumented immigrants— including  low-cost or free supplementary education programs and vast information networks about schooling (Lee and Zhou 2015).  Asian immigrant parents also have some of the highest educational expectations for their children ,  and it is widely speculated that this orientation toward education contributes to Asian  immigrants’  educational achievement (Kao and  Tienda  1998;  Goyette  and  Xie  1999; Hsin and  Xie  201 4 ).  Because e thnic  enclaves help reinforce  and magnify education al expectations   within the community  (Lee and Zhou 2015; Hsin 2015), a ccess to these  ethnic  resources should positively affect  Asian undocumented youth’s  educational performance and graduation rates.  Other immigrant groups—both documented and undocumented— originating from Latin America, the Caribbean ,  and Africa do not have access to the same kind of  resource- rich ethnic enclaves ( Kasinitz  et al. 2009) , which may mean that their educational performance will suffer ."
"36" "Access to affluent and  capital- rich ethnic enclaves may also increase the returns to college education for Asian undocumented youth and motivate  them  to graduate at higher rates relative to undocumented youth of other immigrant backgrounds who lack similar access. For example, in her ethnographic study of  undocumented  Mexican and Korean college students in California, Cho (2017) found that Korean students successfully gained employment in a  variety  of occupations  ranging  from employment in retail to afterschool centers to law firms. In contrast, Mexican respondents were uniformly placed into low-wage, blue-collar occupations. Cho attributes differences in employment outcomes to the fact that Korean youth had access to a wide network of Korean-owned businesses and organizations willing to employ fellow undocumented Korean compatriots ,  whereas  undocumented  Mexican youth lacked similar ethnic resources.  As a result , better employment opportunities, including employment in white-collar professions that require college education, may offer Korean and Chinese undocumented youth greater incentives to achieve and graduate at higher rates than other undocumented groups who lack access to similar employment options."
"37" "Research Questions"
"38" "U ndocumented status will likely have important effects on college students’ outcomes, and these effects are likely to vary by the type of institution and by students’  origin  countries.   Building upon and extending the literature to date, we examine 4  key research  questions:"
"39" "(1) To what exten t  are undocumented students positively selected relative to their peers  who have  citizenship  or  legal permanent status?"
"40" "(2) How do undocumented students fare in terms of academic performance and graduation rates relative to their peers  (both citizens and legal permanent residents) ?"
"41" "(3) How does the effect of legal status  on college performance and graduation  vary  across  2-year versus 4-year colleges?"
"42" "(4) How does the effect of legal status  on college performance and graduation  vary by students’  origin  countr ies ?"
"43" "DATA AND ANALYTIC APPROACH"
"44" "We analyze administrative data from one of the largest public university systems in the  United States , the City University of New York ,  or CUNY .  This university is located in the largest  US  major metropolitan area —New York City— and educates over 260,000 degree seekers  each year  across 18 undergraduate campuses. Administrative records track each entry cohort of students since  F all  1999 ,  and data collection is ongoing. We analyze entering cohorts for a 10-year period from  Fall   2002 to  Fall  2012 ."
"45" "The se  data are  well-suited  for the project for several reasons. First,  CUNY, as an  institution ,  spans the range of selectivity. Seven 2-year community colleges are open access, with the sole admission requirement being a  high- school diploma or GED equivalent. Eleven 4-year senior colleges offer bachelor’s degrees and vary in terms of admissions selectivity. Thus, our analysis can consider the broad spectrum of institutional selectivity and type (2-year vs. 4-year colleges).   Second, the data reliably identify documentation status. Upon enrollment  at CUNY , students are asked to self-report as US citizens, legal permanent residents, temporary visa holders, refugees, or undocumented immigrants. Students must submit documentation to validate their own self-reports; those who fail to provide documentation are categorized as undocumented. Moreover, to qualify for in-state tuition rates, undocumented students must  provide a notarized affidavit stating they will pursue steps to obtain legal residency if such options become available. Using data on self-reported race and  birth  country, documentation status can be  cross-classified  with  origin  country and race/ethnicity to compare undocumented students with co-ethnics who are legal permanent residents   (LPRs) and US citizens. Finally, the data track all degree-seeking students as long as they are enrolled and include transfer and re-entry  students ,  as well as  outcomes like GPA, time to graduation, credit completion, major choice, and course-taking patterns."
"46" "Our main variables for the analysis are described in Tables 2 and 3.   The main dependent variables are graduation with  an  associate’s degree (AA), graduation with  a  bachelor’s degree (BA), and cumulative college GPA. The first two variables are measured as dichotomous variables indicating whether individuals graduated with a BA or  an  AA, respectively. The third variable is a continuous variable indicating cumulative GPA. This variable measures the cumulative GPA from the last semester before graduation  ( if the student graduated ) . If the student left college, the variable measures the cumulative GPA attain ed  in the last semester that the student attended. To simplify  the  analysis, we estimate the likelihood of attaining an AA degree among students enrolled at a community college and estimate the likelihood of attaining a BA degree among students enrolled at 4-year colleges ."
"47" "Our key independent variable is legal status. We compare undocumented students to LPRs and US   citizens  (US born  or  naturalized). This is a  trichotomous  variable indicating : 1) undocumented:  a student  who  reported being undocumented and submitted an affidavit to obtain  in-state tuition rates   or failed to provide documentation of legal status;  2) LPR:  a student  who  submitted documentation of legal permanent resident status; or  3) citizen:  a student  who  submitted documentation of US citizenship. Individuals who obtained their  high- school degree outside the  U nited States   and self-report as undocumented (N=962) and individuals who obtained their  high- school degree in the  United States   but outside  New York  (N=448) were not classified as undocumented. This step was taken to eliminate the possibility that foreign students or out-of-state, documented students are self-reporting undocumented status to gain access to the lower in-state tuition rates. Our analytical sample of students includes 3,717 undocumented students, 51,671 legal permanent residents ,  and 101,554 citizens."
"48" "Our control variables  include a  number of demographic characteristics and pre-college enrollment ability and background characteristics (see Table 2). We include   sex (dummy variable; female=1) and age of entry into college (continuous variable). The models also include Pell Grant receipt (dummy variable; receipt=1) as a measure of disadvantaged socioeconomic status . Students from families making household income of less than $50,000 are eligible for Pell Grants. U ndocumented students , however, are ineligible for Pell Grants. We assume that all undocumented students are  disadvantaged   and assign them a value of 1 .  We also include dummy variables for cohort and calendar year."
"49" "We use  high- school  GPA   to control for pre-college ability ,  motivation ,  and preparation. This variable is standardized to z-scores by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. The administrative database also contains information on the type of high school attended, include d here  as a set of dummy variables indicating   no  high- school information ,  GED, private, public, within the state,  and  out of state. Finally, we consider  origin  regions as key  variables for analyses of  a subsample consisting of  only undocumented students. These are a series of dummy variables indicating the region from which the student immigrated to the U nited States : Latin America   (0 , 1 ) ,  Caribbean (0 , 1 ) ,  Africa (0 , 1 ) ,  Asia (0 , 1 ) ,  and Europe (0 , 1 )."
"50" "We estimate linear probability models to predict the probability of attaining an AA or BA degree  and  linear OLS model s  to predict college GPA. We estimate all models separately for 2-year and 4-year colleges  and  estimate nested models that successively add control  variable s.  We present and discuss the regression results below."
"51" "RESULTS"
"52" "Descriptive Results"
"53" "Table 1 presents  the  distribution of undocumented immigrants  by   origin  country at the national level and  at CUNY . Nationally, 77 percent of the undocumented immigrant population originates from Latin America ,  with about 56  percent  of all undocumented immigrants originating from Mexico. Asian and Caribbean undocumented immigrants comprise  only  13.7 and 2.4 percent  of the  national  population , respectively.  The CUNY  population of undocumented students is more diverse. Only 30 .3  percent originate from Latin America. Additionally, only 10.2 percent originate from Mexico ,  with many Latin American students originating from Ecuador (6.0 percent) and Col o mbia (4.4 percent). The second largest group of undocumented students originates from the Caribbean (24.2 percent). The third largest group originates from Asia (19.5  percent ) ,  with 5.9 percent from South Korea and 3.7 percent from China."
"54" "[Table 2]"
"55" "Table 2 presents select ed  descriptive statistics comparing undocumented students to  US  citizens  and LPRs . The results  demonstrate a number of key  points. First, undocumented students  are more positively selected in terms of  high - school GPA relative to their  citizen  peers at both community and 4-year colleges.  Second, the results  show that   on average ,   community- college students are less academically prepared than students attending 4-year colleges. However, at both community and 4-year colleges, undocumented students have  higher  high- school GPA s   relative  to their citizen peers at their respective schools. For example, citizen students  at community colleges  have GPAs that are .58 standard deviations below the sample mean  (77 out of 100) ,  whereas undocumented students have GPAs that are only .34 standard deviations below the sample mean. At 4-year colleges, citizen students have GPAs that are .25 standard deviations above the sample mean ,  but undocument ed students have GPAs that are  .59 standard deviations above the sample mean.  Finally, the results show tha t 4-year colleges, undocumented students are also significantly more positively selected relative to  LPRs . At community colleges, they have  high- school GPAs that are slightly below  those of LPRs ."
"56" "Overall ,  these findings show that undocumented students who enroll in postsecondary schooling are more academically prepared relative to their peers with legal status. We do not have direct measures of resilience, motivation ,  and academic aspirations ,  but to the extent that  the literature indicates that  these qualities correlate with  high- school GPA  ( e.g.,  Hartley 2011;  Cheng and Ickes 2009;  Chavira  et al. 2016) , our results suggest that undocumented students are likely positively selected in terms of those qualities as well."
"57" "[Table 3]"
"58" "Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for  the  three outcome variables  by  legal  status. We present rates for graduating with an Associate’s degree for  community- college students and rates for graduating with a Bachelor’s degree for 4-year college students.  Note that the mean age of entry is similar across different groups within the two types of colleges.  For  2-year colleges  it   ranges from 20.53 (citizens;  sd : 4.95) to 20.77 (undocumented;  sd : 4.88) to 22.77 years (LPRs;  sd : 6.34).  The mean age of entry into 4-year colleges is slightly lower, ranging from 18.89 (citizens;  sd : 3.02) to 18.98 (undocumented;  sd : 2.51) to 20.10 years (LPRs;  sd : 4.28)."
"59" "The findings indicate two key points. First, the unadjusted averages show that undocumented students graduate at a similar rate and have similar cumulative GPAs as LPR students . B oth undocumented and LPR students are significantly more likely to graduate and have higher academic performance than citizen students ; 27 percent of und o cumented students at community colleges graduate compared to 25 percent of LPR and 19 percent of citizen students, for example. At 4-year colleges, 38 percent of undocumented students and 39 percent of LPR students graduate, compared to 33 percent of citizen students. At 2-year colleges, LPR and undocumented students have GPAs very close to the mean (0.02 standard deviations higher than the mean and -0.03 standard deviations lower than the mean, respectively) ,  while citizen students have GPAs -0.30 standard deviations lower than the mean.    While all three groups have higher GPAs than the mean at 4-year colleges, LPR and undocumented students have GPAs of 0.23 and 0.27 standard deviations higher than the mean, respectively, while citizen students only have GPAs 0.11 higher than the mean."
"60" "Second,  as discussed above,  interesting variations in outcomes between 2-year and 4-year colleges can be observed. The comparison group of citizen students at community colleges is lower performing than at 4-year colleges ; citizen students  at community colleges have a graduation rate of 19 percent and GPAs that are 0.30 standard deviations below the mean. In comparison, citizen students at 4-year colleges have a graduation rate of 33 percent and GPAs that are 0.11 standard deviations above the mean . Thus, there is much greater variation in educational outcomes by immigration status at community colleges than at 4-year colleges  primarily because citizen students at community colleges perform  lower than average . This result is consistent with what we know about compositional difference s  between students attending open-access community colleges and students attending relatively more selective 4-year colleges  ( Bailey  et al.  2005; Suarez-Orozco et al. 2015) ."
"61" "Overall, these  descriptive  results highlight the importance of accounting for differential selection when considering the effect of legal status on academic performance and educational attainment. The unadjusted averages presented in Table 3 show that undocumented students either perform as well as or outperform their  legal- status peers, particularly compared  to  citizens. Therefore, based on a simple comparison of means, one might conclude that legal status has no effect on educational attainment. Yet our results from Tables 2 also indicate important sources of variation in pre-enrollment characteristics that must be included in multivariate analyses to  obtain   a better understanding of the effect of legal status. Additionally, the descriptive results suggest that differential selection of citizen and LPR students into community versus 4-year colleges may lead to differential effects of legal status by institutional setting. Specifically, the results show that the variation in outcomes at community colleges is much wider than at 4-year colleges because the comparison group of citizen students at community colleges is so low performing."
"62" "Table 4 examines variation in educational outcomes and students’ backgrounds by undocumented students’  origin  region. We find that students from Asia and Europe are more positively selected in terms of  high- school GPA at both community and 4-year colleges.   Caribbean and African undocumented students are the least positively selected at both types of colleges. In terms of graduation rates, the results show that Asian and European students who attend 4-year colleges are also more likely to graduate with a  bachelor’s  degree  (45 percent and  47 percent, respectively)  than Latino, Caribbean ,  and African  (38 percent, 31 percent, and 37 percent, respectively)  undocumented students. Interestingly, Asian and European undocumented students at community colleges are not more likely to graduate with an associate ’s  degree  compared to  other undocumented groups."
"63" "[Table 4]"
"64" "Results from Linear Probability  and OLS  Models"
"65" "Table s  5  and  6 present results from linear probability models  and OLS models  predicting degree attainment and GPA, respectively. We compare outcomes across three categories of  legal  status: undocumented, LPR, and citizen (omitted category). We separately analyze community and 4-year colleges  and  successively estimate nested models. Model 1 includes only immigration status as  an  independent  categorical  variable. Model 2  also  includes  high- school GPA. Model 3  adds   origin  region. Finally, Model 4  incorporates   all  control variables , including  socio-demographic characteristics (sex, age of entry, Pell Grant receipt,  and  origin  region ) and  high- school type (whether  the student  graduated from  a  public or  private high school   or obtained a GED).  In Model 5, we  also  include statistical interactions between  legal  status and race/ethnicity to determine whether the effect of legal status varies by ethnic origin.  Only the results for  the main independent variable—i mmigration status —a re shown, but full tables with coefficients for  all  control variables are available upon request."
"66" "[Table 5]"
"67" "Table 5 demonstrates that at 2-year community colleges, undocumented students are about 9 percentage points more likely to attain an associate’s degree compared to citizens; legal  permanent residents are 6 percentage points more likely to attain an associate’s degree relative to citizens (Model 1). Undocumented students’ advantage over citizens is unchanged once pre-college ability,  origin  region, and demographic characteristics are added to the model (Models 2, 3, and 4). Interactions with  origin  country indicate that the advantage undocumented Europeans possess over citizens is smaller relative to  that of  other undocumented groups."
"68" "Turning to the second panel of results for 4-year colleges,  Model 1 also indicates that undocumented students are more likely to graduate with a BA degree relative to citizens   but not more likely to graduate relative to legal permanent residents. Controlling for pre-enrollment measures of academic preparedness in Model 2 complete ly  eliminates the positive effect of legal status for undocumented students. Once demographic characteristics are controlled for in Model 4, the effect of legal status reverses signs ,  indicating that undocumented students are less likely to graduate with a BA degree relative to citizens. In Model 5, we include statistical interactions with  origin  country. These results indicate that all undocumented students are less likely to graduate relative to citizen s ,   except  for Asian undocumented students. Asian undocumented students are as likely to graduate with a BA degree as citizens  are ."
"69" "[Table 6]"
"70" "Table 6 presents results for cumulative college GPA. Overall ,  these results are similar to those presented in Table 5. Model 1 shows that  a t community colleges,  undocumented students outperform  both  citizens  and  legal permanent residents. The advantage undocumented students have over citizens is reduce d  by about one-half when all controls are included (.383 in Model 1 to .189 in Model 4), but the advantage remains, net of all controls. In Model 5, we include statistical interactions and find that Asian and European undocumented students underperform relative to Latino, Caribbean ,  and African undocumented students at community colleges."
"71" "In contrast,  in the second panel of results, we find that at  4-year colleges ,  control ling  for selection completely eliminates the advantage undocumented students have over citizens in terms of college GPA. In Model 1, undocumented students outperform citizens by .221 standard deviations. Controlling for pre-enrollment academic preparedness reduces this effect by one-half. Once all demographic characteristics  and interactions  have been controlled for in Model 5, the results show a negative effect of legal status on  cumulative  college GPA  at 4-year colleges .  Thus, while undocumented youth continue to outperform their legal status peers at community colleges after controlling for prior characteristics, the same pattern is not observed at 4-year colleges. Instead, at 4-year colleges, prior characteristics account of all of the observed advantage in college performance that undocumented youth have over their legal status peers."
"72" "CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION"
"73" "For most  undocumented youth , graduation marks a pivotal transition from the protected status that K -to- 12 schooling affords them to a harsher reality in the workplace where lack of work authorization presents large barriers to upward mobility (Gleeson and Gonzales 2012; Gonzales  2011).  A small minority—about on e  quarter —pursue  post-secondary schooling (Ortega et al. 2017). Debate continues regarding whether legal status continues to exert an outsized effect on educational outcomes once undocumented youth enter college ( Abrego  2006; Gonzales 2011;  Terriquez  2014) or whether legal status interacts with other characteristics such as race and socioeconomic status to shape college outcomes (Enriquez 2017; Valdez and  Golash-Boza  2018).   Our study seeks to contribute to this debate by using new data on the population of undocumented college students in a large metropolitan area  in the United States . The data give us unique access to critical pre-enrollment  student  characteristics (e.g. ,   high- school GPA), information on 2-year and 4-year colleges ,  and students originating from a diverse group of  countr ies. As a result, we can better  address issues of sample selection and how legal status might intersect with race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status ,  and institutional characteristics to shape educational outcomes."
"74" "Our results indicate that undocumented college students are hyper-selected relative to their peers  and demonstrate why accounting for  this  hyper-selection matter s .  First, we show that  undocumented students enter college with significantly higher  high- school GPA s  than their citizen peers  and  enter at least as academically prepared as their pee rs with legal permanent  resident  status. Second,  we find that undocumented students significantly outperform their citizen peers in terms of college GPA and graduation rates  when we simply compare students descriptively in terms of graduation and performance across  legal - status  categories .  The story  changes , however,  when we account  for  high- school GPA,  birth  country, and socio-economic s tatus . Once we control for differences in pre-enrollment characteristics, we find that undocumented students outperform their peers with legal status at community colleges but underperform their peers with legal status at 4-year colleges."
"75" "Why might the effect of legal status vary by college type? One reason undocumented students at community colleges do relatively better may be  that  the comparison pool of documented students tends to be low performing. Many undocumented students attendin g 2-year colleges may  have had the academic ability to attend 4-year college s   but were prevented from doing so because of their legal status  and financial and psychological barriers . Thus, undocumented students at community college may be at a greater risk of being “under-placed” relative to their  legal- status counterparts. Another reason might be because undocumented students at community colleges are more likely to share common struggles with their  community- college peers than undocumented students at 4-year colleges with their 4-year  college peers. Thus, undocumented students’ struggle with poverty and balancing work with schooling are not unique  at community colleges  but  instead  struggles  felt by  most students with citizenship or legal permanent residency. Therefore, relative to their comparison group, the additional challenges faced by undocumented students associated with their lack of legal status may not be  so  great at community colleges as compared to 4-year colleges."
"76" "Our results also uncover sources of variation by  origin  country. We find that Latin  American , Caribbean ,  and African undocumented students outperform Asian and European undocumented students at community colleges but  that  at 4-year colleges, this pattern is reversed. Asian students are the most likely to graduate among undocumented students at 4-year colleges.  Undocumented Asian students’  higher academic performance at 4-year colleges reflects the well-established patterns of Asian American performance in education settings (Lee and Zhou 2015; Hsin and  Xie  2014;  Kao and  Tienda  1998;  Goyette  and  Xie  1999) .   The factors that propel Asian American achievement—high parental educational expectations, ethnic resources, and orientation toward education—likely bolster  undocumented Asian s’  achievement as well. Additionally, there is some evidence that the returns to education for some Asian undocumented college graduates are higher than for other ethnic groups.  A s already mentioned,  Cho (2017) shows that undocumented Korean college graduates can find employment in white-collar professions in Korean ethnic enclaves whereas many undocumented Mexican graduates lack these same resources and were more commonly relegated to low-wage, blue-collar work."
"77" "Why this pattern is reversed at community colleges  remains  an open question. One possible explanation is that legal status has a stronger effect of channeling  otherwise- promising Latin  American,  Caribbean ,  and African students who would have attended more prestigious colleges to community colleges than  it does for  Asian undocumented students. However, when  we test this hypothesis by simply comparing  high- school GPA across ethnic groups at community colleges, we do not find evidence  for it : Latino, Caribbean ,  and African undocumented students do not have higher  high- school GPAs than Asian undocumented students. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that Latino, Caribbean ,  and African undocumented students are more likely to be under-placed with respect to characteristics that we cannot observe such as academic resilience, educational aspirations ,  support networks ,  and school segregation. Regardless, our results reveal important interactions between legal status and  origin  country that should be further explored by immigration scholars."
"78" "Overall, our results offer a more positive, although mixed, picture than what prior qualitative research  ha s   shown in terms of how undocumented students fare in college ( Abrego  2006;  Terriquez  2014; Gonzales 2011; Enriquez 2011).  In particular, they  highlight the contextual and relational aspects of undocumented status when compared  to  traditional master status identities such as race and social class."
"79" "There are two possible reasons why our results differ from past findings. First,  our data allow us  to examine variation  in a less biased and  more systematic manner. Second ,  results may differ from past studies because  of differences  in  state-sponsored support .  Compared to college students in California,  for example,  students in New York face significantly larger financial hurdles to college attendance and graduation.  California was one of the first states to offer in-state tuition to resident undocumented college students and  also  offers undocumented students financial aid to attend college .  Bills have been introduced to the  California  state legislature that would allow undocumented students to participate in work-study programs (AB206) and designate a liaison at each public community and 4-year college to offer advising and mentorship  to undocumented students (AB1366, AB2009, AB1622). In contrast, our study is focused on students attending public colleges in New York City , which  is situated in a state that is significantly  less friendly  to undocumented immigrants. Undocumented students in New York are able to pay  lower  in - state tuition  rates ,  but this policy was briefly overturned in 2001 ,  and there are continuing efforts by Republican lawmakers to rescind in - state tuition policies .  For over a decade, New York  State   has been unable to pass the New York Dream Act, which would extend state financial aid to resident undocumented immigrants.  As the selectivity of college increases, college access declines ,  but graduation rates for those who are admitted increase  ( Bailey et al. 2005; Suarez-Orozco et al. 2015).  Thus, differences in access to state financial aid and other forms of state-sponsored support may account for why we f ind more positive outcomes for these hyper-selected u ndocumented college students in New York."
"80" "One important caveat is that  we do not know  whether our findings are generalizable.  W hile New York City is a unique urban setting, it hosts more  undocumented immigrants than any other  U.S.  metropolitan area  (Passel and Cohn 2017) .   We , thus,  argue that the  experience s  of u ndocumented youth in New York are  more typical of the experience s of undocumented youth in   other  states with large undocumented populations (e.g. ,   Florida, Illinois, New Jersey ,  and Texas ) than  California, which has uniquely pro-immigrant policies. The degree to which our findings can be replicated in settings such as Florida, Illinois ,  and New Jersey would offer important contributions to the literature ,  and we encourage immigration scholars to pursue this line of inquiry ."
"81" "Furthermore, u nauthorized migration is not unique to the United States. Globally, unauthorized migration is on the increase .  T here are , for example, an estimated  1.8  to  8 million  unauthorized migrants in the European Union, 5  to  6 million in the Russian Federation, 3  to  6 million in South Africa, and tens of millions in India, Pakistan, and Iran  ( International Organization for Migration 2018;  Clandestino   Research  Project  Database on Irregular Migration  2009 ;  Frontex   2010 ; South African Police Service  2010 ).  The debate in Europe  over undocumented migration  has most often focused on  health - care access  (e.g., Winters et al. 2018) , with  almost  no research on undocumented students in higher education.   Beyond Europe, we know even less about educational outcomes and access for undocumented students.  Thus,  European and other researchers need to examine this  issue  as undocumented migrant youth  transition to adulthood and  further  integrat e   into local  econom ies   and  societ ies . Undocumented  children often have little memory of their  origin  countries  and may not speak their “native” language . They  attend  primary school  with  native-born peers where they are taught the val ues and principles of their  host  countr ies .  These youth want opport unities  to attend institutions of  higher education,  to  work ,  and  to  contribute to  the  countries  in which they live, but they are often met with xenophobia and marginalization, rather than  supportive  integration policies  ( Ruzza   2019 ) .  With access to administrative data, research like ours could be conducted in other settings with large numbers of undocumented migrants to explore whether there are similar or different patterns of achievement and barriers in higher education."
"82" "REFERENCES"
"83" "Abrego ,  Leisy . 2006. “‘I Can’t Go to College Because I Don’t Have Papers’: Incorporation Patterns of Latino Undocumented Youth.”  Latino Studies  4:212– 2 31."
"84" "Amuedo-Dorantes , Catalina and Francisca  Antman .  201 7 . “Schooling and Labor Market Effects of Temporary Authorization: Evidence from DACA.”  Journal of Population Economics  30(1) :339 -373."
"85" "Bailey, Thomas R . , Davis Jenkins, and Shanna Smith  Jaggars . 2015.  Redesigning America’s Community Colleges .  Harvard University Press."
"86" "Bailey, Thomas R., David Jenkins, and Timothy  Leinbach . 2005. “What We Know about Community College Low-Income and Minority Student Outcomes: Descriptive Statistics from National Surveys.” Community College Research Center."
"87" "Blau, P eter  M.,  and Otis D. Duncan . 1967.  The American  O ccupational  S tructure . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"88" "Bureau of Labor Statistics.   2017.  https://www.bls.gov"
"89" "Chan,  Beleza . 2010. “Not Just a Latino Issue: Undocumented Students in Higher Education.”  Journal of College Admission  206 : 29–31."
"90" "Chavira , G., Cooper, C.R. and Vasquez-Salgado, Y. 2016. “Pathways to Achievement: Career and Educational Aspirations and Expectations of Latina/o Immigrant Parents and Early Adolescents.”  Journal of Latinos and Education   15 (3), pp.214-228."
"91" "Cheng, W. and Ickes, W. 2009.  “Conscientiousness and self-motivation as mutually compensatory predictors of university-level GPA.”  Personality and Individual Differences   47 (8), pp.817-822."
"92" "Cho, Esther  Y . 2017. “Revisiting Ethnic Niches: A Comparative Analysis of the Labor Market Experiences of Asian and Latino Undocumented Young Adults.”  RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences  3(4): 97–115."
"93" "Clandestino  Research Project Database on Irregular Migration.  2009. “ Clandestino  Project Overview: Size and Development of Irregular Migration to the EU. Database on Irregular Migration.” Available from  http://irregular-migration.net/typo3_upload/groups/31/4.Background_Information/4.2.Policy_Briefs_EN/ComparativePolicyBrief_SizeOfIrregularMigration_Clandestino_Nov09_2.pdf"
"94" "Conger, Dylan, and Colin C.  Chellman .  2013. “Undocumented College Students in the United States: In-State Tuition Not Enough to Ensure Four-Year Degree Completion.”  Education Finance and Policy  8(3): 364–77."
"95" "Contreras, Frances. 2009. “Sin  Papeles  Y  Rompiendo   Barreras : Latino Students and the Challenges of Persisting in College.”  Harvard Educational Review  79 (4) : 610 –32."
"96" "Cowley, Stacy.   “Suit Challenges Denial of Education Loans to Unauthorized Immigrants.”  The New York Times  5 Feb. 2017"
"97" "Donato , Katharine,  Chizuko  Wakabayashi,  Shirin   Hakimzadeh , and Amada  Armenta . 2008. “Shifts in the Employment Conditions of Mexican Migrant Men and Women: The Effect of U.S. Immigration Policy.”  Work and Occupations  35:462-95."
"98" "Enghceren ,  Godfried .   1999. “The Undocumented Outsider Class: Illegal Status in Dutch Society.” In  European Societies: Fusion or Fission?  Edited by T.  Boje , B. Van  Steenbergen , and S.  Walby , 84-104. London:  Routledge ."
"99" "Enriquez, Laura E. 2011. “‘Because We Feel the Pressure and We Also Feel the Support’: Examining the Educational Success of Undocumented Immigrant Latina/o Students.”  Harvard Educational Review  81: 476–499."
"100" "Enriquez, Laura E. 2017. “A ‘Master Status’ or the ‘Final Straw’? Assessing the Role of Immigration Status in Latino Undocumented Youths’ Pathways Out of S chool.”  Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies  43(9) :1526 -1543."
"101" "Frontex . 2010. “Beyond the Frontiers:  Frontex : The First Five Years.”  Frontex , Warsaw. Available from http:// frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/General/Beyond_the_Frontiers.pdf"
"102" "Fuller,  W inship   C., C harles  F.  Manski , and D avid  A. Wise.  1982. “New  E vidence on the  E conomic  D eterminants of  P ostsecondary  S chooling  C hoices.”  The Journal of Human Resources  17:477- 4 98."
"103" "Gleeson, Shannon, and Roberto G. Gonzales. 2012. “When Do Papers Matter? An Institutional Analysis of Undocumented Life in the United States.”  International Migration  50(4) :1 -19."
"104" "Goldrick-Rab , Sara.  2006. “Following Their Every Move: How Social Class Shapes Postsecondary Pathways.”  Sociology of Education  79(1) :67 -79."
"105" "Gonzales, Roberto G. 2011. “Learning to Be Illegal Undocumented Youth and Shifting Legal Contexts in the Transition to Adulthood.”  American Sociological Review  76(4) : 602 –19."
"106" "Gonzales, Roberto G. 2015. “Imagined Futures: Thoughts on the State of Policy and Research Concerning Undocumented Immigrant Youth and Young Adults.”  Harvard Educational Review  85(3) : 518 -524."
"107" "Gonzales, Roberto. 201 6 .  Lives in Limbo: Undocumented and Coming of Age in America . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press."
"108" "Gonzales, Roberto G . , Veronica  Terriquez , and Stephen P .   Ruszczyk . 2014. “Becoming  DACAmented :  Assessing the Short-Term Benefits of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA).”  American Behavioral Scientist  58 (14) : 1852 –72."
"109" "Greenman , Emily, and Matthew Hall. 2013. “Legal Status and Educational Transitions for Mexican and Central American Immigrant Youth.”  Social Forces  91(4) :1475 -1498."
"110" "Hall, Matthew, Emily  Greenman , and George  Farkas . 2010. “Legal Status and Wage Disparities for Mexican Immigrants.”  Social Forces  89 (2) :491 -513."
"111" "Hartley, Michael T. 2011.  “Examining the Relationships between Resilience, Mental Health, and Academic Persistence in Undergraduate College Students.”  Journal of American College Health  59(7) :596 -604. DOI: 10.1080/07448481.2010.515632"
"112" "Hemelt , S.W. ,  Marcotte , D.E . , 2011 . The impact   of   tuition   increases   on   enrollment   at public colleges and universities. Educ.   Eva l .   Policy   Anal.   33(4) , 435 –457."
"113" "Hsin, Amy.  2016.  “ How Selective Migration Enables Socioeconomic M obility . ”  Ethnic and Racial Studies  39(13) :2379 -2384."
"114" "Hsin, Amy, and  Francesc  Ortega.  2017.  “The Effects of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals on the Educational Outcomes of Undocumented Students.”   Manuscript under review."
"115" "Hsin, Amy, and Yu  Xie . 2014. “Explaining Asian Americans’ Academic Advantage over Whites.”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  111(23) :8416 -8421."
"116" "Immigration Policy Center. 2012.  Who and Where the  DREAMers  Are: A Demographic Profile of Immigrants Who Might Benefit from the Obama Administration’s Deferred Action Initiative .  Washington, DC: American Immigration Council."
"117" "International Organization for Migration.  2018.  World Migration Report 2018.  Geneva: IOM."
"118" "Kasinitz , Philip, John H.  Mollenkopf , Mary C. Waters,  and  Jennifer  Holdaway . 2009.  Inheriting the City: The Children of Immigrants Come of Age .  Russell Sage Foundation."
"119" "Lee, Jennifer, and Min Zhou. 2015.  The Asian American Achievement Paradox.  New York: Russell Sage Foundation."
"120" "MacLeod, Jay.  1987.  Ain’t  no Makin’ It: Aspirations and Attainment in a Low-Income Neighborhood.  Westview Press."
"121" "Min,  Pyong  Gap.  2011. \"The immigration of Koreans to the United States: A review of 45 year (1965–2009) trends.\"  Development and Society  40(2): 195-223."
"122" "National Immigration Law Center (NILC). 2018.  Basic Facts  about  In-State Tuition for Undocumented Immigrant Students.  Washington, DC: NILC.  https://www.nilc.org/issues/education/basic-facts-instate/"
"123" "Ortega,  Francesc , Ryan D. Edwards, and Amy Hsin. \"The Economic Effects of Providing Legal Status to  DREAMers .\" (2018)."
"124" "Passel, Jeffrey and  D’Vera  Cohn.  “20 metro areas are home to six-in-ten unauthorized immigrants in U.S.”  Pew Research Center . 9 Feb. 2017. Web. 16 July 2018. http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/02/09/us-metro-areas-unauthorized-immigrants/"
"125" "Patler , Caitlin. \"To Reveal or Conceal: How Diverse Undocumented Youth Navigate Legal Status Disclosure.\" Sociological Perspectives (2018): 0731121418775092."
"126" "Patler , Caitlin. \"Citizen Advantage, Undocumented Disadvantage, or Both? The Comparative Educational Outcomes of Second and 1.5 ‐ Generation Latino Young Adults.\"  International Migration Review (2017)."
"127" "Perez, William, and Richard D .  Cortes. 2011.  Undocumented Latino College Students: Their  Socioemotional  and Academic Experiences . El Paso, TX: LFB Scholarly Publishing."
"128" "Perez, William, Roberta  Espinoza , Karina  Ramos ,  Heidi M.  Coronado, and Richard Cortes. 2009. “ Academic resilience among undocumented Latino students.”  Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences   31(2) :149 -181."
"129" "Pope, Nolan G. 2016. “The Effects of  DACAmentation : The Impact of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals on Unauthorized Immigrants.”  Journal of Public Economics  143:98-114."
"130" "Rosenbaum, James E., Regina  Deil -Amen, and Ann E. Person. 2006.  After Admission: From College Access to College Success.  New York: Russell Sage Foundation."
"131" "Rosenblum , Marc R., and Ariel G. Ruiz Soto. 201.  An Analysis of Unauthorized Immigrants in the United States by Country and Region of Birth.  Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute."
"132" "Ruzza , Carlo.  2019. “Populism, migration, and xenophobia in Europe,” pp. 215-230 in C. de la Torre, ed.,  Routledge  Handbook of Global Populism .  Abingdon, Oxon, UK and New York:  Routledge ."
"133" "Sampson, Robert, Patrick Sharkey, and Stephen W.  Raudenbush . 2008.  “ Durable Effects of Concentrated Disadvantage on Verbal Ability among African-American Children. ”   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  105(3) :845 -852 ."
"134" "Sewell, William H., Archibald O. Haller, and Alejandro  Portes . 1969. “The Educational and Early Occupational Attainment Process.”  American Sociological Review  34(1) :82 -92."
"135" "South African Police Service.  2010. Annual Report 2009/2010. Available from www.gov.za/sites/www.gov.za/files/saps-annual-report.pdf"
"136" "Suarez-Orozco,  Carola ,  Dalal   Katsiaficas , Olivia  Birchall , Cynthia M.  Alcantar , Edwin Hernandez,  Yuliana  Garcia, Minas  Michikyan , Janet  Cerda , and Robert T.  Teranishi . 2015. “Undocumented Undergraduates on College Campuses: Understanding Their Challenges and Assets and What It Takes to Make an  Undocufriendly  Campus.”  Harvard Educational Review  85 (3) :427 –63."
"137" "Teranishi , Robert T.,  Carola   Suárez -Orozco, and Marcelo  Suárez -Orozco. 2011. “Immigrants in Community Colleges.”  The Future of Children  21(1) :153 -169."
"138" "Terriquez , Veronica. 2014. “Trapped in the Working Class? Prospects for the Intergenerational ( Im )Mobility  of Latino Youth.”  Sociological Inquiry  84 (3): 382–411."
"139" "Terriquez , Veronica. 2015. “Dreams Delayed: Barriers to Degree Completion among Undocumented Community College Students.”  Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies  41(8) :2015"
"140" "U.S. Department of Education.  2015.  Resource Guide: Supporting Undocumented Youth .  Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.  https://www2.ed.gov/about/overview/focus/supporting-undocumented-youth.pdf"
"141" "Valdez,  Zulema , and Tanya  Golash-Boza .  2018 . “Nested Contexts of Reception: Undocumented Students at the University of California, Merced.”   Sociological Perspectives ."
"142" "Winters, M.,  Rechel , B., de Jong, L., &  Pavlova , M. 2018.   A systematic review on the use of healthcare services by undocumented migrants in Europe.   BMC health services research ,  18 (1), 30."
"143" "Table 1. Top Countries of Birth of Undocumented Immigrants (by Region of Origin)"
"144" " U.S. Population "
"145" "University Data"
"146" "REGION/COUNTRY"
"147" "Latin America"
"148" "77.0%"
"149" "30.3%"
"150" "Mexico"
"151" "56.2%"
"152" "10.2%"
"153" "Guatemala"
"154" "6.4%"
"155" "0.6%"
"156" "El Salvador"
"157" "4.0%"
"158" "0.6%"
"159" "Honduras"
"160" "2.9%"
"161" "0.7%"
"162" "Ecuador"
"163" "1.3%"
"164" "6.0%"
"165" "Colombia"
"166" "N/A"
"167" "4.4%"
"168" "Peru"
"169" "N/A"
"170" "2.0%"
"171" "Venezuela"
"172" "N/A"
"173" "1.3%"
"174" "Brazil"
"175" "N/A"
"176" "1.0%"
"177" "Argentina"
"178" "N/A"
"179" "0.7%"
"180" "Asia"
"181" "13.7%"
"182" "19.5%"
"183" "China"
"184" "2.6%"
"185" "3.7%"
"186" "India"
"187" "2.6%"
"188" "2.2%"
"189" "Philippines"
"190" "1.8%"
"191" "1.3%"
"192" "S. Korea"
"193" "1.7%"
"194" "5.9%"
"195" "Vietnam"
"196" "1.1%"
"197" "0.03%"
"198" "Bangladesh"
"199" "N/A"
"200" "2.5%"
"201" "Pakistan"
"202" "N/A"
"203" "1.4%"
"204" "Hong Kong"
"205" "N/A"
"206" "0.8%"
"207" "Caribbean"
"208" "2.4%"
"209" "24.2%"
"210" "Dominican Republic"
"211" "1.1%"
"212" "3.4%"
"213" "Jamaica"
"214" "0.7%"
"215" "6.2%"
"216" "Trinidad & Tobago"
"217" "N/A"
"218" "6.2%"
"219" "Guyana"
"220" "N/A"
"221" "3.8%"
"222" "Haiti"
"223" "N/A"
"224" "1.5%"
"225" "Africa"
"226" "3.1%"
"227" "3.5%"
"228" "Nigeria"
"229" "0.4%"
"230" "1.0%"
"231" "Ghana"
"232" "0.3%"
"233" "0.7%"
"234" "Ethiopia"
"235" "0.3%"
"236" "0.01%"
"237" "Guinea"
"238" "N/A"
"239" "0.4%"
"240" "Cote d'Ivoire"
"241" "0.3%"
"242" "Europe/Other"
"243" "3.8%"
"244" "8.4%"
"245" "Poland"
"246" "N/A"
"247" "2.4%"
"248" "Russia"
"249" "N/A"
"250" "0.6%"
"251" "Israel"
"252" "N/A"
"253" "0.4%"
"254" "N"
"255" "11,022,000"
"256" "10,933"
"257" "Source: National estimates of undocumented immigrants come from the Migration Policy Institute (MPI) analysis of U.S. Census Bureau from the 2013 American Community Survey (ACS), 2009-2013 ACS pooled, and the 2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)"
"258" "Table 2. Sample characteristics by citizenship status and college type"
"259" "Citizen"
"260" "LPR"
"261" "Undocumented"
"262" "N"
"263" "%"
"264" "Mean"
"265" "Std. Dev."
"266" "Mean"
"267" "Std. Dev."
"268" "Mean"
"269" "Std. Dev."
"270" "t -test*"
"271" "Community colleges"
"272" "130,197"
"273" "45"
"274" "Standardized H.S. GPA"
"275" "-0.58"
"276" "0.79"
"277" "-0.15"
"278" "0.98"
"279" "-0.34"
"280" "0.86"
"281" "a , b, c"
"282" "Pell Grant Recipient (0,1)"
"283" "0.65"
"284" "0.47"
"285" "0.75"
"286" "0.43"
"287" "0.00"
"288" "0"
"289" "a , b, c"
"290" "Female"
"291" "0.55"
"292" "0.49"
"293" "0.58"
"294" "0.49"
"295" "0.56"
"296" "0.49"
"297" "b , c"
"298" "Age of Entry"
"299" "20.53"
"300" "4.95"
"301" "22.77"
"302" "6.34"
"303" "20.77"
"304" "4.88"
"305" "a , b, c"
"306" "Latino (0,1)"
"307" "0.01"
"308" "0.12"
"309" "0.12"
"310" "0.33"
"311" "0.35"
"312" "0.48"
"313" "a , b, c"
"314" "Caribbean (0,1)"
"315" "0.04"
"316" "0.20"
"317" "0.36"
"318" "0.48"
"319" "0.23"
"320" "0.42"
"321" "a , b, c"
"322" "African (0,1)"
"323" "0.00"
"324" "0.06"
"325" "0.06"
"326" "0.24"
"327" "0.04"
"328" "0.2"
"329" "a , b, c"
"330" "Asian (0,1)"
"331" "0.01"
"332" "0.12"
"333" "0.20"
"334" "0.40"
"335" "0.15"
"336" "0.35"
"337" "a , b, c"
"338" "European (0,1)"
"339" "0.01"
"340" "0.12"
"341" "0.12"
"342" "0.33"
"343" "0.07"
"344" "0.26"
"345" "a , b, c"
"346" "4-Year Colleges"
"347" "156,864"
"348" "55"
"349" "Standardized H.S. GPA"
"350" "0.25"
"351" "0.93"
"352" "0.47"
"353" "0.97"
"354" "0.59"
"355" "0.92"
"356" "a , b, c"
"357" "Pell Grant Recipient (0,1)"
"358" "0.53"
"359" "0.49"
"360" "0.76"
"361" "0.43"
"362" "0.00"
"363" "0"
"364" "a , b, c"
"365" "Female"
"366" "0.55"
"367" "0.49"
"368" "0.56"
"369" "0.49"
"370" "0.56"
"371" "0.49"
"372" "c"
"373" "Age of Entry"
"374" "18.89"
"375" "3.02"
"376" "20.10"
"377" "4.28"
"378" "18.98"
"379" "2.51"
"380" "a , b, c"
"381" "Latino (0,1)"
"382" "0.00"
"383" "0.05"
"384" "0.08"
"385" "0.27"
"386" "0.26"
"387" "0.44"
"388" "a , b, c"
"389" "Caribbean (0,1)"
"390" "0.01"
"391" "0.10"
"392" "0.26"
"393" "0.44"
"394" "0.25"
"395" "0.43"
"396" "a , c"
"397" "African (0,1)"
"398" "0.00"
"399" "0.03"
"400" "0.04"
"401" "0.19"
"402" "0.03"
"403" "0.17"
"404" "a , b, c"
"405" "Asian (0,1)"
"406" "0.01"
"407" "0.10"
"408" "0.29"
"409" "0.45"
"410" "0.23"
"411" "0.42"
"412" "a , b, c"
"413" "European (0,1)"
"414" "0.01"
"415" "0.11"
"416" "0.16"
"417" "0.36"
"418" "0.09"
"419" "0.29"
"420" "a , b, c"
"421" "N (%)"
"422" "101,554 (78)"
"423" "51,671 (18)"
"424" "3,717 (3)"
"425" "287,061"
"426" "Table 3.   College educational outcome characteristics by citizenship status and college type"
"427" "Citizen"
"428" "LPR"
"429" "Undocumented"
"430" "Community Colleges"
"431" "Mean"
"432" "Std. Dev."
"433" "Mean"
"434" "Std. Dev."
"435" "Mean"
"436" "Std. Dev."
"437" "t -test"
"438" "Graduation with Associate’s"
"439" "0.19"
"440" "0.39"
"441" "0.25"
"442" "0.43"
"443" "0.27"
"444" "0.45"
"445" "a , b, c"
"446" "Cumulative college GPA ( std )"
"447" "-0.30"
"448" "1.04"
"449" "0.02"
"450" "1.01"
"451" "-0.03"
"452" "0.97"
"453" "a , b, c"
"454" "4-Year Colleges"
"455" "Mean"
"456" "Std. Dev."
"457" "Mean"
"458" "Std. Dev."
"459" "Mean"
"460" "Std. Dev."
"461" "t -test"
"462" "Graduation with Bachelor’s"
"463" "0.33"
"464" "0.47"
"465" "0.39"
"466" "0.49"
"467" "0.38"
"468" "0.48"
"469" "a , c"
"470" "Cumulative college GPA ( std )"
"471" "0.11"
"472" "0.91"
"473" "0.23"
"474" "0.83"
"475" "0.27"
"476" "0.84"
"477" "a , b, c"
"478" "*  a : difference between citizens and undocumented is significant at 95% confidence level; b: difference between LPRs and undocumented is significant at 95% confidence level; c: difference between LPRs and citizens is significant at 95% confidence level."
"479" "Table 4. Sample characteristics for undocumented students only by region of birth"
"480" "Latino"
"481" "Asian"
"482" "Caribbean"
"483" "African"
"484" "European"
"485" "Mean"
"486" "Std. Dev."
"487" "Mean"
"488" "Std. Dev."
"489" "Mean"
"490" "Std. Dev."
"491" "Mean"
"492" "Std. Dev."
"493" "Mean"
"494" "Std. Dev."
"495" "t -test"
"496" "Community Colleges"
"497" "Grad.  with  AA"
"498" "0.30"
"499" "0.46"
"500" "0.28"
"501" "0.45"
"502" "0.27"
"503" "0.44"
"504" "0.24"
"505" "0.43"
"506" "0.26"
"507" "0.44"
"508" "e , f, g"
"509" "Cum. college GPA ( std )"
"510" "-0.05"
"511" "0.95"
"512" "-0.03"
"513" "1.00"
"514" "-0.06"
"515" "0.94"
"516" "0.05"
"517" "0.96"
"518" "0.10"
"519" "1.01"
"520" "f , g, h,  i"
"521" "H.S. GPA ( std )"
"522" "-0.34"
"523" "0.87"
"524" "-0.30"
"525" "0.84"
"526" "-0.39"
"527" "0.85"
"528" "-0.45"
"529" "0.84"
"530" "-0.31"
"531" "0.86"
"532" "e , f, h,  i , j"
"533" "Female"
"534" "0.51"
"535" "0.50"
"536" "0.45"
"537" "0.50"
"538" "0.68"
"539" "0.47"
"540" "0.63"
"541" "0.48"
"542" "0.56"
"543" "0.50"
"544" "a , c, e, f, g, h,  i , j"
"545" "Age of Entry"
"546" "20.37"
"547" "3.55"
"548" "19.73"
"549" "2.71"
"550" "21.75"
"551" "6.50"
"552" "23.05"
"553" "7.53"
"554" "20.12"
"555" "3.82"
"556" "e , f, g, h,  i , j"
"557" "4-year Colleges"
"558" "Grad.  with  BA"
"559" "0.38"
"560" "0.48"
"561" "0.45"
"562" "0.50"
"563" "0.31"
"564" "0.46"
"565" "0.37"
"566" "0.49"
"567" "0.47"
"568" "0.50"
"569" "b , f, g, h,  i , j"
"570" "Cum. college GPA ( std )"
"571" "0.26"
"572" "0.81"
"573" "0.38"
"574" "0.83"
"575" "0.14"
"576" "0.87"
"577" "0.23"
"578" "0.82"
"579" "0.39"
"580" "0.84"
"581" "f , g, h,  i"
"582" "H.S. GPA ( std )"
"583" "0.69"
"584" "0.87"
"585" "0.79"
"586" "0.86"
"587" "0.34"
"588" "0.93"
"589" "0.53"
"590" "0.91"
"591" "0.62"
"592" "0.94"
"593" "e , f, h,  i , j"
"594" "Female"
"595" "0.52"
"596" "0.50"
"597" "0.49"
"598" "0.50"
"599" "0.65"
"600" "0.48"
"601" "0.47"
"602" "0.50"
"603" "0.54"
"604" "0.50"
"605" "a , c, e, f, g, h,  i , j"
"606" "Age of Entry"
"607" "18.77"
"608" "1.66"
"609" "18.71"
"610" "1.13"
"611" "19.33"
"612" "3.47"
"613" "18.99"
"614" "3.16"
"615" "18.76"
"616" "1.61"
"617" "e , f, g, h,  i , j"
"618" "*  a : difference between Latino and Asian is significant at 95% confidence level; b: difference between Latino and Caribbean is significant at 95% confidence level; c: difference between Latino and African is significant at 95% confidence level; d: difference between Latino and European is significant at 95% confidence level; e: difference between Asian and Caribbean is significant at 95% confidence level; f: difference between Asian and African is significant at 95% confidence level; g: difference between Asian and European is significant at 95% confidence level; h: difference between Caribbean and African is significant at 95% confidence level;  i : difference between Caribbean and European is significant at 95% confidence level; j: difference between African and European is significant at 95% confidence level."
"619" "Table 5.   Regression results for   likelihood of attaining a degree by college type"
"620" "Model 1"
"621" "Model 2"
"622" "Model 3"
"623" "Model 4"
"624" "Model 5"
"625" "Community Colleges"
"626" "Associate’s"
"627" "Citizen"
"628" "Ref."
"629" "Ref."
"630" "Ref."
"631" "Ref."
"632" "Ref."
"633" "LPR"
"634" "0.061"
"635" "0.003"
"636" "***"
"637" "0.032"
"638" "0.003"
"639" "***"
"640" "0.033"
"641" "0.004"
"642" "***"
"643" "0.033"
"644" "0.004"
"645" "***"
"646" "0.032"
"647" "0.004"
"648" "***"
"649" "Undocumented"
"650" "0.092"
"651" "0.006"
"652" "***"
"653" "0.077"
"654" "0.006"
"655" "***"
"656" "0.077"
"657" "0.007"
"658" "***"
"659" "0.080"
"660" "0.007"
"661" "***"
"662" "0.091"
"663" "0.009"
"664" "***"
"665" "Undoc *Asian"
"666" "-0.031"
"667" "0.020"
"668" "Undoc *African"
"669" "-0.051"
"670" "0.034"
"671" "Undoc *Caribbean"
"672" "-0.001"
"673" "0.016"
"674" "Undoc *European"
"675" "-0.070"
"676" "0.026"
"677" "**"
"678" "N"
"679" "123,597"
"680" "123,597"
"681" "123,597"
"682" "123,597"
"683" "123,597"
"684" "R 2"
"685" "0.005"
"686" "0.023"
"687" "0.024"
"688" "0.031"
"689" "0.031"
"690" "4-year Colleges"
"691" "Bachelor’s"
"692" "Citizen"
"693" "Ref."
"694" "Ref."
"695" "Ref."
"696" "Ref."
"697" "Ref."
"698" "LPR"
"699" "0.065"
"700" "0.003"
"701" "***"
"702" "0.028"
"703" "0.003"
"704" "***"
"705" "0.023"
"706" "0.004"
"707" "***"
"708" "0.034"
"709" "0.005"
"710" "***"
"711" "0.036"
"712" "0.005"
"713" "***"
"714" "Undocumented"
"715" "0.054"
"716" "0.007"
"717" "***"
"718" "-0.004"
"719" "0.006"
"720" "-0.004"
"721" "0.007"
"722" "-0.019"
"723" "0.007"
"724" "**"
"725" "-0.031"
"726" "0.010"
"727" "**"
"728" "Undoc *Asian"
"729" "0.037"
"730" "0.017"
"731" "*"
"732" "Undoc *African"
"733" "0.067"
"734" "0.038"
"735" "Undoc *Caribbean"
"736" "0.004"
"737" "0.017"
"738" "Undoc *European"
"739" "0.014"
"740" "0.023"
"741" "N"
"742" "156,864"
"743" "156,864"
"744" "156,864"
"745" "156,864"
"746" "156,864"
"747" "R 2"
"748" "0.003"
"749" "0.107"
"750" "0.109"
"751" "0.119"
"752" "0.119"
"753" "Note: Model 1 includes only the legal status variables as independent variables. Model 2 also adds pre-college ability/motivation (high school GPA). Model 3 includes legal status, high school GPA, and region of origin. Model 4 includes control variables for socio-demographic characteristics (sex, age of entry, Pell Grant receipt, region of origin) and high school type, in addition to all of the variables from the previous models. Finally, Model 5 includes interaction terms for region of origin by legal status, in addition to all of the variables from the previous models."
"754" "Table 6.   Regression results for cumulative college GPA by college type"
"755" "Model 1"
"756" "Model 2"
"757" "Model 3"
"758" "Model 4"
"759" "Model 5"
"760" "Community Colleges"
"761" "Citizen"
"762" "Ref."
"763" "Ref."
"764" "Ref."
"765" "Ref."
"766" "Ref."
"767" "LPR"
"768" "0.379"
"769" "0.007"
"770" "***"
"771" "0.235"
"772" "0.007"
"773" "***"
"774" "0.144"
"775" "0.011"
"776" "***"
"777" "0.095"
"778" "0.011"
"779" "***"
"780" "0.090"
"781" "0.011"
"782" "***"
"783" "Undocumented"
"784" "0.383"
"785" "0.014"
"786" "***"
"787" "0.301"
"788" "0.015"
"789" "***"
"790" "0.245"
"791" "0.018"
"792" "***"
"793" "0.189"
"794" "0.019"
"795" "***"
"796" "0.235"
"797" "0.025"
"798" "**"
"799" "Undoc *Asian"
"800" "-0.169"
"801" "0.043"
"802" "***"
"803" "Undoc *African"
"804" "0.039"
"805" "0.090"
"806" "Undoc *Caribbean"
"807" "-0.047"
"808" "0.369"
"809" "Undoc *European"
"810" "-0.188"
"811" "0.058"
"812" "**"
"813" "N"
"814" "89,639"
"815" "89,639"
"816" "89,639"
"817" "89,639"
"818" "89,639"
"819" "R 2"
"820" "0.018"
"821" "0.086"
"822" "0.089"
"823" "0.128"
"824" "0.128"
"825" "4-year Colleges"
"826" "Citizen"
"827" "Ref."
"828" "Ref."
"829" "Ref."
"830" "Ref."
"831" "Ref."
"832" "LPR"
"833" "0.162"
"834" "0.006"
"835" "***"
"836" "0.067"
"837" "0.006"
"838" "***"
"839" "0.020"
"840" "0.007"
"841" "**"
"842" "0.006"
"843" "0.008"
"844" "0.008"
"845" "0.008"
"846" "***"
"847" "Undocumented"
"848" "0.221"
"849" "0.013"
"850" "***"
"851" "0.073"
"852" "0.011"
"853" "***"
"854" "0.042"
"855" "0.011"
"856" "***"
"857" "-0.003"
"858" "0.011"
"859" "-0.012"
"860" "0.017"
"861" "***"
"862" "Undoc *Asian"
"863" "0.002"
"864" "0.030"
"865" "Undoc *African"
"866" "0.118"
"867" "0.070"
"868" "Undoc *Caribbean"
"869" "0.032"
"870" "0.031"
"871" "Undoc *European"
"872" "-0.020"
"873" "0.039"
"874" "N"
"875" "140,039"
"876" "140,039"
"877" "140,039"
"878" "140,039"
"879" "140,039"
"880" "R 2"
"881" "0.003"
"882" "0.220"
"883" "0.221"
"884" "0.238"
"885" "0.238"
"886" "Note: Model 1 includes only the legal status variables as independent variables. Model 2 also adds pre-college ability/motivation (high school GPA). Model 3 includes legal status, high school GPA, and region of origin. Model 4 includes control variables for socio-demographic characteristics (sex, age of entry, Pell Grant receipt, region of origin) and high school type, in addition to all of the variables from the previous models. Finally, Model 5 includes interaction terms for region of origin by legal status, in addition to all of the variables  from the previous models."
