Comparing demographics of signatories to public letters on
diversity in the mathematical sciences
Chad M. Topaz 1,2* , James Cart3 , Carrie Diaz Eaton4 , Anelise Hanson Shrout4 , Jude A.
Higdon2 , Kenan İnce5 , Brian Katz6 , Drew Lewis7 , Jessica Libertini8 , Christian Michael
Smith9
1 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Williams College, Williamstown, MA,
USA
2 Institute for the Quantitative Study of Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity, Williamstown,
MA, USA
3 Office of Institutional Research, Williams College, Williamstown, MA, USA
4 Digital and Computational Studies Program, Bates College, Lewiston, ME, USA
5 Department of Mathematics, Westminster College, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
6 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Smith College, Northampton, MA, USA
7 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL,
USA
8 Department of Applied Mathematics, Virginia Military Institute, Lexington, VA, USA
9 Department of Sociology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
* qside@qsideinstitute.org

Abstract
In its December 2019 edition, the Notices of the American Mathematical Society
published an essay critical of the use of diversity statements in academic hiring. The
publication of this essay prompted many responses, including three public letters
circulated within the mathematical sciences community. Each letter was signed by
hundreds of people and was published online, also by the American Mathematical
Society. We report on a study of the signatories’ demographics, which we infer using a
crowdsourcing approach. Letter A highlights diversity and social justice. The pool of
signatories contains relatively more individuals inferred to be women and/or members of
underrepresented ethnic groups. Moreover, this pool is diverse with respect to the levels
of professional security and types of academic institutions represented. Letter B does
not comment on diversity, but rather, asks for discussion and debate. This letter was
signed by a strong majority of individuals inferred to be white men in professionally
secure positions at highly research intensive universities. Letter C speaks out
specifically against diversity statements, calling them “a mistake,” and claiming that
their usage during early stages of faculty hiring “diminishes mathematical achievement.”
Individuals who signed both Letters B and C, that is, signatories who both privilege
debate and oppose diversity statements, are overwhelmingly inferred to be tenured
white men at highly research intensive universities. Our empirical results are consistent
with theories of power drawn from the social sciences.

Introduction
The American Mathematical Society (AMS) is the largest mathematics society in the
world. According to the AMS, its monthly publication, Notices of the American

April 1, 2020

1/21

Mathematical Society (AMS Notices), is one of the most widely-read mathematics
publications in the world. In the December 2019 edition of the AMS Notices, a Vice
President of the AMS published an invited essay critical of the use of diversity
statements in faculty hiring within higher education [1].
In a typical faculty search process, candidates submit the following materials: a
cover letter; a curriculum vitae; a research statement, which describes research
experience and future plans; and a teaching statement, which discusses teaching
experience and philosophy. Many faculty searches now additionally require candidates
to submit a diversity statement (or similarly named document). The diversity statement
is meant to empower search committees and institutions to identify candidates who
have skills, experiences, and/or plans that would support inclusion, diversity, and equity
on campus. For an example of an institution’s rationale for and guidelines to writing
such a statement, see materials from the University of California, Davis [2].
Ref. [1] argues that the required use of diversity statements in hiring is akin to
McCarthyism, the campaign begun by Senator Joseph McCarthy against alleged
communists in the United States during the early 1950s. The author writes:
In 1950 the Regents of the University of California required all UC faculty
to sign a statement asserting that “I am not a member of, nor do I support
any party or organization that believes in, advocates, or teaches the
overthrow of the United States Government, by force or by any illegal or
unconstitutional means, that I am not a member of the Communist Party.”
Eventually thirty-one faculty members were fired over their refusal to sign...
Faculty at universities across the country are facing an echo of the loyalty
oath, a mandatory “Diversity Statement” for job applicants. The professed
purpose is to identify candidates who have the skills and experience to
advance institutional diversity and equity goals. In reality it’s a political
test, and it’s a political test with teeth.
The essay elicited many responses including [3], written by the leadership of the
university where the author of [1] is on faculty. In our present work, however, we focus
on high-profile responses generated within the mathematical sciences community itself:
one online blog post and three public letters, each with hundreds of signatories, that
appeared in the AMS Notices.
First, the Institute for the Quantitative Study of Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity
published an online post [4]. This post critiques [1] and the AMS’s choice to publish it.
Additionally, [4] expresses concern for those in the author’s professional sphere
potentially affected by the publication of the essay. Finally, [4] recommends a number of
actions that community members could take in response to [1].
Second, a group of concerned mathematical scientists drafted a public letter,
hereafter referred to as Letter A [5]. Like [4], this letter expresses dissatisfaction with
the publication of [1]. However, Letter A highlights the need for social justice within the
mathematical sciences community, assures readers that there are many individuals who
see diversity work as integral, and reaffirms the importance of diversity statements in
hiring.
Third, a different group of concerned mathematical scientists drafted a public letter
in response to [4], hereafter referred to as Letter B [6]. This second public letter
expresses displeasure with [4], frames it as an attack on the author of [1], and provides
an explicit stance neither on diversity statements nor on diversity in general. Rather,
Letter B affirms as its highest priority the need for discussion and debate within the
community.
Fourth and last, another letter was drafted, hereafter referred to as Letter C [7].
Unlike Letter B, Letter C does briefly mention the importance of “reducing various

April 1, 2020

2/21

difficulties still faced by underrepresented groups.” However, also unlike Letter B, it
specifically addresses diversity statements, calling their mandatory use “a mistake” and
stating that using them to eliminate candidates during the early stages of a search
“diminishes mathematical achievement.” Supporting information contains the full text of
all three public letters.
Letter A was made available for signing beginning on November 22, 2019.
Unfortunately, we do not have access to the dates that Letters B and C were first made
available for signing. As a result of this missing timeline information, we are not able to
make meaningful statements comparing the total number of signatories to each letter.
All three letters were published online on December 13, 2019, as part of the January
2020 edition of the AMS Notices [5–7]. The purpose of this manuscript is to report on
crowdsourced inferences of certain demographic characteristics of the signatories.
We have declared potential conflicts of interest during the submission of this journal
article, but we repeat them here in the body of our manuscript because it is an
important ethical practice to do so. Co-authors CMT and JAH are co-founders of
QSIDE, and CMT wrote the blog post to which Letter B is a response. Additionally,
co-authors CMT, CDE, KI, BK, DL, and JL are drafters of and signatories to Letter A,
and hence appear in the data set that we construct and study.
Our primary results are as follows. Letter A, which highlights diversity and social
justice, was signed by relatively more individuals inferred to be women and/or members
of underrepresented ethnic groups. Moreover, this group is diverse with respect to the
levels of professional security and types of academic institutions represented. In stark
contrast, Letter B, which privileges discussion and debate, was signed by a strong
majority of individuals inferred to be white men in professionally secure positions at
highly research intensive universities. Letter C speaks out specifically against diversity
statements. Individuals who signed both Letters B and C, that is, signatories who
privilege debate and oppose diversity statements, are overwhelmingly inferred to be
tenured white men at highly research intensive universities. These results are consistent
with theories of power from the social sciences, which predict that people from
demographic groups in different positions within social power structures (as determined
by overrepresentation within larger populations, monetary compensation, or professional
security) have divergent perspectives on these structures.

Methods
While Letters A and B were being signed electronically by the public during November
and December of 2019, the lists of signatories were publicly accessible via links provided
by the letters’ drafters. We retrieved these lists from their respective Google
spreadsheets [8, 9] the morning of December 10, 2019. The AMS informed letter drafters
that lists of signatories must be submitted by the evening of December 10. Therefore,
the final published lists may contain a small number of additional records not included
in our present study because they were submitted in the intervening hours.
Additionally, for Letters A and B, we removed duplicate signatures, and we removed
fake signatures such as “J. Epstein, Department of Children’s Rights” (a reference to
public figure Jeffrey Epstein) and “Donald J. Trump, University of Washington, D.C.”
It is possible that the AMS removed additional names during the publication process;
our data set will include any such names, but based on manual inspection, we believe
the number to be statistically negligible. We retrieved the signatories to Letter C once
they were published [7]. For all letters, the AMS may update the lists of signatories
between the drafting of this manuscript and its publication, and our study will not
reflect those changes.
To sign one of the letters, each signatory submitted their name and affiliation. We

April 1, 2020

3/21

refer to this textual data as the raw data. To discover information about each signatory,
we used the crowdsourcing platform Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). MTurk is a
crowdsourcing labor platform. Requesters sign up for the platform to post tasks that
they would like completed in return for a small fee. Workers sign up for the platform
and earn money by completing these tasks. For further background on MTurk, see, for
example [10]. For our study, we served as requesters, posting each raw data record to
MTurk. We asked workers to locate information about that signatory, such as personal
and academic demographics. We provide details about the information requested later
in this section, and we provide the full text of our Amazon Mechanical Turk
questionnaire in Supporting information. A number of peer-reviewed published studies
adopt this crowdsourcing methodology to infer demographics; see, for example, work on
diversity in art and diversity on mathematical sciences journal editorial boards [11, 12].
We adopted several strategies to ensure data quality. First, we only hired workers
who had previously completed at least 1,000 crowdworking tasks and who had a prior
requester approval rating of 99% or higher. Second, we had each signatory initially
researched by four independent workers. For each item on our survey instrument, we
made a final determination of the answer only if there was a consensus of at least three
among the four independent responses. When we could not find a consensus, we
deployed the record one additional time to MTurk and sought a consensus of three out
of five. If such a consensus still did not exist, we assigned the value NA, meaning that
we were not able to make an inference. For most questions, MTurk workers had the
option to choose “cannot confidently determine” if they felt unable to make a clear
inference, and we coded these responses as NA.

Demographic Information
Some information we collected was for procedural use only, and is not part of our final
data set. This excluded information consists of the signatory’s web page, email, and
year of receipt of Ph.D. (if these were available). For several reasons, our final data set
does include the signatories’ names. First, having appeared in the AMS Notices, these
names are public. Additionally, all information used to infer demographics is public on
the internet and was accessed by MTurk workers via Wikipedia, college/university web
pages, and other pages easily located from a Google search. Second, we include the
signatories’ names in order to follow standards of reproducible research. To omit them
would make this research less verifiable. Third and last, the crowdsourcing approach to
inferring demographics of public figures based on public information has been previously
established in the literature [11, 12]. We now describe in more detail the procedures we
applied to each raw data record for each question on our survey instrument that is
contained in our final data set.
Affiliation
We asked workers to extract the signatory’s affiliation, which was typically a company
or an academic institution. In cases where multiple affiliations were listed, we accepted
the first academic affiliation.
Gender
Gender is a complex construct incorporating gender identity, gender expression, social
roles, and more [13]. In reality, an individual’s gender is determined by that individual.
However, we judged that surveying the signatories would be unlikely to produce
sufficient data, and so similar to [11, 12], we have used crowdsourced inferences,
recognizing the limitations of this approach, and keeping in mind that self-identifications

April 1, 2020

4/21

are always preferable. We proceed with our gender analysis because both actual gender
(as self-identification) and inferred gender (as perceived by others) are salient to issues
of representation in the academy. We asked workers to infer the signatory’s gender
based on name, pictures, and/or textual information such as pronouns. The options for
gender are woman, man, and nonbinary/gender nonconforming.
Ethnicity
We adopted a similar approach as for gender, again recognizing serious limitations.
First, as with gender, ethnicity is most accurately stated by the individual. Second, our
survey instrument asks for “primary” ethnicity, which disallows the identification of
individuals who might be placed in multiple categories. While this approach may
provide an incomplete ethnic categorization from an individual’s perspective, it may
reflect how an individual’s ethnicity is perceived by others. We asked workers to infer
ethnicity based on any information they found. The options for ethnicity are Asian,
Black, Latinx, Middle Eastern, Native American/Alaska Native, Hawaiian
Native/Pacific Islander, White, and Other.
Professional sphere
We asked workers to research whether or not the signatory is situated in higher
education.
Institutional Classification
If a signatory was determined to be in higher education, we asked workers to determine
their type of institution, which could be a U.S. Research Intensive: Very High Research
Activity (R1) institution, a U.S. Research Intensive: High Research Activity (R2)
institution, another type of U.S. institution, or an institution outside of the U.S.
Institutions belonging to the first two categories are determined by the Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education [14]. We provided a list of R1 and R2
institutions to help workers make this determination. In cases where there was a
consensus that the institution is outside of the U.S., we asked workers to enter the
country as free text.
Professional Role
If a signatory was determined to be in higher education, we asked workers to determine
their role, which could be retired/Emeritus, Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant
Professor, non-tenure-track (e.g., lecturer, instructor, postdoctoral fellow, or visiting
faculty), staff, graduate student, undergraduate student, or other. Our MTurk
questionnaire comments briefly that workers should be aware of international
equivalents of some of the aforementioned roles, and we check these as part of our
validation process (described below).
Academic Field
If a signatory was determined to be in higher education, we asked workers to determine
the person’s field based on their department, degree program, title, or related
information. The workers could choose Mathematics/Applied Mathematics,
Statistics/Data Science, Mathematics Education, Computer Science/Computer
Engineering, or other. For some individuals, multiple field associations are possible.

April 1, 2020

5/21

Cleaning and Validation
After inferring demographic characteristics, part of our research team used internet
searches and their own professional knowledge to fill in some missing data and to
correct obvious errors, including in titles of signatories situated outside of the U.S.
Additionally, after posting our data set publicly, and during the writing of this
manuscript, we received emails from the community pointing out some errors in the
data, namely eight for ethnicity and three for field. We made these corrections. We
manually de-duplicated the data set, identifying individuals who signed more than one
letter. Finally, we normalized institutional affiliations so that, for instance, “UC Davis”
and “University of California Davis” would be aggregated together.
Then, a separate part of our research team manually checked the accuracy of a
random 5% subsample of the records having a professional affiliation in higher
education. For the 72 records checked, we agreed with all crowdsourced inferences for
gender, institutional classification, and academic field. For inferred ethnicity, we
detected one possible error for an individual who was categorized as White by MTurk
workers, but whom we ourselves would have classified as “cannot confidently determine.”
This accounts for an observed 1.4% error rate for inferred ethnicity in our data set.
However, a 95% confidence interval for the true error rate reaches approximately 4%,
meaning (loosely) that amongst the 1,367 higher education signatories in our data set,
we might reasonably expect up to 55 errors in inferred ethnicity. We detected four
errors in professional role. Two individuals, labeled respectively as Assistant Professor
and Associate Professor, should have both been categorized as non-tenure-track. Two
individuals labeled as Professor should have been labeled as retired/Emeritus. Later, we
will aggregate professional roles into two coarser categories of professional security. The
four aforementioned errors only result in one error under that coarser categorization: an
Associate Teaching Professor classified as more professionally secure should have been
classified as less professionally secure because the position is not tenurable. This is the
same error rate as for inferred ethnicity. We found no other errors. While we cannot
know the true error rates in our data, our validation procedure suggests that they are
small, especially for our coarser categorizations. After completing our validation
procedure, we edited our data set to correct the aforementioned errors we found.

Results
Letter A has 621 signatories, Letter B has 680 signatories, and Letter C has 210
signatories. The overlap between signatories to Letter A and Letter B is six individuals.
There is no overlap between the signatories to Letters A and C. There is substantial
overlap between the signatories to Letters B and C, namely 74 individuals. The six
individuals who signed Letters A and B do not constitute a group large enough to
analyze meaningfully, so we leave them in that data set accompanies this manuscript,
but we exclude them from our analyses (meaning they are not represented in the tables
and charts prsented here). We divide the remaining signatories into four disjoint groups:
the 615 signatories to Letter A only, the 600 signatories to Letter B only, the 136
signatories to Letter C only, and the 74 signatories to Letters B and C, for a total of
1,425 signatories. Hereafter, we refer to the groups as Pool A Only, Pool B Only,
Pool C Only, and Pool B and C.
We divide our presentation of results into two subsections. First, we examine
personal demographics, namely inferred gender and inferred ethnicity. Second, for
signatories situated in higher education, which constitute over 95% of the original data,
we examine institutional classification, professional role, and academic field. For each of
the aforementioned variables except for inferred gender, we also develop a simplified

April 1, 2020

6/21

version of the variable by aggregating certain levels of the original one. We describe
these aggregations later.
For each demographic variable, we present a two-way contingency table showing
proportions of letter signatory pool versus that variable. See Table 1 for personal
demographics and Table 2 for academic demographics. Within a given contingency
table, for each combination of pool and demographic, the left-hand number gives the
column percentage and the right-hand number gives the row percentage. For example,
for inferred gender in Table 1, looking down the first column, Pool A Only has 0.2%
signatories for whom we did not infer gender, 0.2% of individuals inferred as nonbinary,
50.7% inferred as women, and 48.9% inferred as men. In the same section of Table 1,
looking across the row tabulating women, we see that of all individuals inferred to be
women in our data set, 69.2% of them are in Pool A Only, 21.1% are in Pool B Only,
8.2% are in Pool C Only, and 1.6% are in Pool B and C.
We perform statistical tests on the contingency tables for gender and for the
simplified variables (described below) with NA values excluded. For these tables, we
first perform a χ2 test of the null hypothesis that the demographic characteristic and
letter signatory pool are independent. At the top of the contingency table, we report
the value of the χ2 test statistic, the degrees of freedom df , the p-value, and Cramér’s
effect size V . All χ2 tests result in rejection of the null hypothesis. Second, we test for
significance of individual cells in the contingency table via a z-test for sample percentage.
Colors indicate whether, at the α = 0.05 significance level, a particular cell represents
more (blue) or fewer (orange) individuals than we would expect if the variables were
independent. We use Holm-adjusted p-values to correct for multiple comparisons. For
background on the statistical approaches we use, see reference texts such as [15].
It is important to remember that the population in our statistical tests is the 1,425
letter signatories. As we highlight later, these signatories do not represent a random
sample of the mathematical sciences community (or any other group). In the
presentation of our results, we will use the words “overrepresented” and
“underrepresented.” When we use these words in the following two subsections, we mean
over/under-represented as compared to what we would expect if demographics and
signatory pool were independent.

Personal Demographics
We reiterate that all demographic data are inferred data. This is especially critical for
gender and ethnicity. Below, we will use language such as “individuals inferred to be
women” and “individuals identified as belonging to underrepresented ethnic groups.”
Ideally, gender and ethnicity would be self-identified.
Fig 1(A) displays the inferred gender composition of each letter signatory pool; the
percentages shown are column percentages from Table 1. The proportion of individuals
inferred to be nonbinary or gender nonconforming is low. We do not conjecture on the
true proportion of these individuals within our data, nor within the mathematical
sciences community at large. However, we do suspect that the low percentage we
observe is attributable at least in part to the limitations of our method of gender
inference [16]. As for the remaining (binary) gender categories, Pool A Only achieves
approximate gender parity, comprising 50.7% inferred women. In contrast, Pools B
Only, C Only, and B and C have low percentages – 15.8%, 27.2%, and 9.5% respectively
– and hence are dominated by individuals inferred to be men. Compared to what we
would expect under the assumption of independence of gender and pool, signatories
identified as women are overrepresented in Pool A Only and underrepresented in
Pool B Only and Pool B and C.
Fig 1(B) examines inferred ethnicity. Table 1 shows the full results for our original
ethnicity variable. However, because there are many ethnicity categories, we perform an

April 1, 2020

7/21

Table 1. Two-way contingency tables for letter signatory pool and personal demographics, namely inferred
gender, inferred ethnicity, and inferred underrepresented minority (URM) status. Gender and URM both
fail a statistical test for the independence of demographics and pool. Within a given contingency table, for each
combination of pool and demographic, the left-hand number gives the column percentage and the right-hand number gives
the row percentage. Colors indicate whether a particular cell represents more (blue) or fewer (orange) individuals than we
would expect if the variables were independent. For details of statistical tests, see table notes below.
Pool

Inferred Gender
χ2 = 189.8, df = 3, p < 0.00001, V = 0.366
NA (n = 7)
Nonbinary (n = 1)
Woman (n = 451)
Man (n = 966)
Inferred Ethnicity
statistical tests not performed
NA (n = 80)
Asian (n = 108)
Black (n = 27)
Latinx (n = 68)
ME (n = 42)
NAAN (n = 1)
HNPI (n = 2)
White (n = 1097)
Inferred Underrepresented Status
χ2 = 49.6, df = 3, p < 0.00001, V = 0.192
NA (n = 80)
Not URM (n = 1247)
URM (n = 98)

A Only
n = 615
Col % Row %

B Only
n = 600
Col % Row %

C Only
n = 136
Col % Row %

B and C
n = 74
Col % Row %

0.2%
0.2%
50.7%
48.9%

14.3%
100.0%
69.2%
31.2%

1.0%
0.0%
15.8%
83.2%

85.7%
0.0%
21.1%
51.7%

0.0%
0.0%
27.2%
72.8%

0.0%
0.0%
8.2%
10.2%

0.0%
0.0%
9.5%
90.5%

0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
6.9%

6.3%
7.0%
3.3%
8.5%
2.1%
0.2%
0.3%
72.4%

48.8%
39.8%
74.1%
76.5%
31.0%
100.0%
100.0%
40.6%

6.3%
7.8%
1.0%
2.2%
4.2%
0.0%
0.0%
78.5%

47.5%
43.5%
22.2%
19.1%
59.5%
0.0%
0.0%
42.9%

2.2%
13.2%
0.7%
0.7%
2.2%
0.0%
0.0%
80.9%

3.8%
16.7%
3.7%
1.5%
7.1%
0.0%
0.0%
10.0%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
2.7%
1.4%
0.0%
0.0%
95.9%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
2.9%
2.4%
0.0%
0.0%
6.5%

6.3%
81.5%
12.2%

48.8%
40.2%
76.5%

6.3%
90.5%
3.2%

47.5%
43.5%
19.4%

2.2%
96.7%
1.5%

3.8%
10.5%
2.0%

0.0%
97.3%
2.7%

0.0%
5.8%
2.0%

Results of a χ2 test for independence appear at the top of the contingency tables for inferred gender and inferred underrepresented
minority status. Here, χ2 is the value of the test statistic, df is degrees of freedom, p is the probability value, and V is Cramér’s effect
size. We perform the χ2 tests on modified contingency tables (not shown) with the small number of NA values removed. To test for
significance of individual cells (as coded by the colors) we use a z-test for sample percentage at the α = 0.05 significance level with
Holm-adjusted p-values to account for multiple comparisons. Inferred underrepresented status is a collapsed form of the inferred
ethnicity variable. Above, we use the following abbreviations: ME (Middle Eastern), NAAN (Native American/Alaska Native), HNPI
(Hawaiian Native/Pacific Islander) and URM (ethnic groups underrepresented in mathematics, namely Black, Latinx, NAAN, and
HNPI). Non-URM ethnic groups are White, Middle Eastern, and Asian.

Fig 1. Personal demographic characteristics of letter signatory pools. See
Table 1 for details. (A) Inferred gender. Pool A Only achieves (approximate) gender
parity, whereas Pools B Only, C Only, and B and C are dominated by people inferred to
be men. (B) Inferred underrepresented minority (URM) status. At 12.2%, Pool A Only
has a higher than expected percentage of people inferred to belong to ethnic groups
traditionally underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. Pools B Only, C Only, and
B and C each have approximately 3% or less.

additional analysis by grouping together minoritized ethnicities that are considered to
be traditionally underrepresented (URM) in mathematics: Black, Latinx, Native
American/Alaska Native (NAAN), and Hawaiian Native/Pacific Islander (HNPI). Under
this classification, the percentage inferred to be URM is 12.2% for Pool A Only, 3.2%
for Pool B Only, 1.5% for Pool C Only, and 2.7% for Pool B and C, as shown in
Fig 1(B). The statistical tests of Table 1 indicate that individuals identified as URM are

April 1, 2020

8/21

overrepresented in Pool A Only and underrepresented in Pools B Only and C Only.

Academic Demographics
We now restrict attention to the signatories situated within higher education (HE). We
refer to the pools as Pool A Only HE, Pool B Only HE, Pool C Only HE, and
Pool B and C HE. These pools have, respectively, 586, 563, 135, and 73 members, for a
total of 1,357 individuals.
Fig 2(A) addresses institutional classification. Table 2 shows the full results for our
original institutional classification variable. We perform an additional analysis by
creating a collapsed version of this variable as we now describe. The non-U.S. countries
appearing most frequently in our data (and their counts) are Israel (47), Canada (37),
the United Kingdom (21), Germany (14), and France (13). The specific non-U.S.
institutions appearing most frequently in our data (and their counts) are Hebrew
University of Jerusalem (20), Technion (15), and University of Toronto (13). We judge
that if located in the U.S., these institutions would be classified as Very High Research
Activity (R1). Therefore, we aggregate US R1 and international institutions into the
category of more research intensive (more RI), and we aggregate US R2 and US other
institutions into the category of less research intensive (less RI). As shown in Fig 2(A),
Pool A Only HE is composed 57.3% of less RI, whereas Pools B Only HE, C Only HE,
and B and C HE have 24.3%, 4.4%, and 1.4% respectively. The latter two pools are
especially dominated by individuals from more RI institutions, whereas Pool A Only HE
is fairly balanced. Indeed, our statistical tests indicate that less RI institutions are
underrepresented in the last three pools.
Fig 2. Academic demographic characteristics of letter signatory pools. See
Table 2 for details. (A) Research intensiveness. Pool A Only HE shows a balance of
signatories. Pools B Only HE, C Only HE, and especially B and C HE are dominated
by people from highly research intensive institutions. (B) Professional security. At
51.4%, Pool A Only HE overrepresents individuals with less professional security.
Pools B Only HE, C Only HE, and B and C HE underrepresent these individuals, and
the latter two contain nearly zero less professionally secure individuals. (C) Academic
field. Pool A Only HE contains the highest percentage of signatories from mathematics
education, who are overrepresented at 6.0%.
Fig 2(B) addresses professional security. Table 2 shows the full results for our
original professional role variable. We perform an additional analysis by creating a
collapsed version of this variable. We aggregate the roles that are not eligible for
academic tenure or are eligible but have not yet received tenure (as judged based on
title), and refer to these as less professionally secure roles. These roles are
undergraduate student, graduate student, staff, non-tenure-track faculty, and Assistant
Professor (and their international equivalents). Additionally, we aggregate the roles that
do indicate currently or previously held academic tenure, namely Associate Professor,
Full Professor, and retired/Emeritus (and their international equivalents). We refer to
these as more professionally secure roles. As shown in Fig 2(B), in Pool A Only HE,
more professionally secure individuals are in the minority, at 45.4%. Pools B Only HE,
C Only HE, and B and C HE are dominated by more professionally secure individuals,
at 76.7%, 99.3%, and 97.3% respectively. More professionally secure individuals are
statistically overrepresented in these pools. Notably, if we examine Pools C Only HE
and B and C HE, we see that almost every signatory to Letter C is tenured (or was at
some point).
Finally, Fig 2(C) addresses academic field. Table 2 shows the full results for our
original academic field variable. We perform an additional analysis by creating a

April 1, 2020

9/21

collapsed version of this variable. We aggregate the mathematics/applied mathematics
and statistics/data science categories into one category, and we aggregate computer
science/computer engineering and other disciplines into another category, leaving
mathematics education as the third category. As shown in Fig 2(C), Pool A Only HE
contains the highest percentage of signatories from mathematics education, who are
statistically overrepresented at 6.0%. Pool B Only HE contains a substantial group of
signatories from computing and other fields, who are statistically overrepresented at
10.8%. Pool B and C HE is composed exclusively of mathematicians and applied
mathematicians.

Comparison with the Profession
To contextualize our results, we compare gender and ethnicity percentages in the
mathematical sciences at large to those of letter signatories in higher education whose
field is identified as mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, or data science.
When we refer to demographic percentages below, we always mean “within the
mathematical sciences.” The set of comparisons we are able to make is limited by the
availability of data on the profession.
Gender
Women account for approximately 40% of undergraduate mathematical sciences
degrees [17]. There are only seven undergraduate students in our data set, and we could
not infer gender for one of them. The remaining six are inferred as three women in
Pool A Only HE and three men in Pool B Only HE.
At the doctoral level, women account for approximately 30% of mathematical
sciences degrees awarded [18]. Our data set contains 118 graduate students for whom
we inferred gender, and none signed Letter C. In Pool A Only HE, individuals inferred
to be women are overrepresented compared to the field at large, comprising 46.1%. In
Pool B Only HE, they are underrepresented, comprising only 17.2%.
Women comprise approximately 20% of tenure-stream faculty at doctoral degree
granting departments of mathematical sciences in the United States [19]. To make a
comparison with our study, we restrict attention to Assistant Professors, Associate
Professors, and Professors at U.S. R1 and R2 institutions, of which there are 499 in our
data set. Individuals inferred to be women are overrepresented in Pool A Only HE,
comprising 46.9%. They are underrepresented in Pool B Only HE, comprising 10.2%. In
Pool C Only HE, they comprise 23.0%, just over the at-large value. In
Pool B and C HE, they are underrepresented, comprising 11.9%.
Ethnicity
There is not good availability of data on ethnicity in the profession. For instance, the
percentage of active faculty having URM status is unknown [20]. We do know that
individuals having URM status comprise 8% of the pool of doctoral degrees granted in
the mathematical sciences [18]. In our data set, there are 91 graduate students for
whom we inferred ethnicity. None of them signed Letter C. In Pool A Only HE,
individuals inferred as URM are overrepresented, comprising 18.8%, more than double
the at-large value. In Pool B Only HE, they comprise 9.1%, approximately on par with
the at-large value.

April 1, 2020

10/21

Discussion and Conclusions
We have conducted a crowdsourced study of the demographics of signatories to three
public letters in the mathematical sciences community. Our key results are as follows.
As for personal demographics, we infer Pool A Only to be substantially more diverse
than the other pools. We have calculated for each pool the (joint) percentage of
signatories who were inferred to be men and who were not inferred to be members of an
underrepresented ethnic group. For Pool A Only, this percentage is 40.8%, whereas for
Pools B Only, C Only, and B and C, the percentage is 75.8%, 70.6%, and 87.8%
respectively. As for academic demographics, Pool A Only represents a broader range of
institution types and levels of professional security. We have calculated for each pool the
(joint) percentage of signatories who are situated at highly research intensive institutions
in more professionally secure positions. For Pool A Only HE, this percentage is merely
11.8%, whereas for Pools B Only HE, C Only HE, and B and C HE, the percentage is
55.6%, 94.8%, and 95.9% respectively. Finally, restricting attention to our HE pools, we
have calculated the percentages of individuals who (jointly) are inferred to be men, not
members of underrepresented ethnic groups, located at highly research intensive
institutions, and in more professionally secure positions. For Pool A Only HE, this
percentage is a scant 5.6%. For the remaining pools it is 46.5%, 67.4%, and 83.6%.
In summary, Letter A highlights diversity and social justice and was signed by
relatively more people inferred to be women and members of minoritized ethnic groups.
These signatories represent a broader range of institution types and levels of
professional security. Letter B does not comment on diversity, but rather, argues for
discussion and debate. It was signed predominantly by individuals inferred to be men
who have ethnicities not underrepresented in the mathematical sciences, and who are in
professionally secure positions at highly research intensive institutions. Letter C speaks
out specifically against the use of diversity statements. Individuals who signed both
Letters B and C, that is, signatories who privilege discussion and debate and who
oppose diversity statements, are overwhelmingly inferred to be tenured white men at
highly research intensive universities.
We now relate our results to theories of power drawn from scholarship in the social
sciences. Our findings are consistent with the idea of positionality. Positionality
describes the ways in which individuals’ identities and experiences are consequences of
their positions within social structures. These positions shape an individual’s
perceptions [21]. More specifically, positionality theory predicts that individuals’
positions within power structures tilt their perceptions of phenomena in patterned
ways [22]. Differences in perception are particularly pronounced when individuals’
identities confer unequal levels of power. For example, among students who were shown
the same film about race relations, white students were more likely to respond by
describing the film as an exaggeration, or “over the top,” while students of color were
more likely to respond with reflections on how much the film mirrored their own
experiences [23]. In this example, students’ own racial identifications (their positions
within social structures) produced very different perceptions about the same film (the
phenomenon).
In our present study, positionality theory suggests that people with relatively more
power in the mathematical sciences would have very different perspectives from those
with relatively less power. This accords with the aggregate patterns we have
documented. People in more powerful positions within the mathematical sciences,
namely men, white people, people with tenure, and people at highly research intensive
universities, tend in aggregate to endorse perspectives on diversity statements that are
different from the perspectives endorsed in aggregate by people with relatively less
power, namely women, members of underrepresented ethnic groups, people without
tenure, and people at institutions that are not highly research intensive.

April 1, 2020

11/21

Some might read tenure and affiliation with highly research intensive universities as
proxies for the quality of a mathematician. We are not persuaded that this reading
undermines our interpretation above. Regardless of how validly or invalidly tenure
status and institution type capture the quality of a mathematician, these professional
attributes are face-valid indicators of power. Both tenure and employment at highly
research intensive institutions confer substantial monetary benefits. The wage premium
associated with highly research intensive universities is especially marked in the natural
and mathematical sciences [24]. This premium persists even if one controls for
individuals’ research productivity, years of experience, and demographics. All other
things being equal, being tenured and affiliated with highly research intensive
institutions means more access to social power than not being tenured, or being
employed at other types of institutions. Moreover, tenure confers increased academic
freedom [25] and professional security. Money, academic freedom, and professional
security all help individuals exercise their will, or equivalently, give individuals more
power [26].
Additionally, our results are consistent with prior studies that use discourse analysis.
When individuals denounce actions that they perceive as harmful to a group, members
of other groups often discursively frame this denunciation as an attempt to silence the
critiqued actors [27]. Prior research has documented this dynamic in contexts including
standup comedy [28], college campus controversies [29], the immigration policy
debate [30], and more. The framing of denunciation as an attempt at silencing is
consistent with the statements in Letter B, as endorsed by its signatories; see Supporting
information. Indeed, this letter begins with the sentence “We write with grave concerns
about recent attempts to intimidate a voice within our mathematical community.”
In our study, we have reported descriptive statistics and conducted selected
statistical tests. Future work could undertake further statistical modeling and inference.
Finally, while results of our study are consistent with theories of power, our study is not
explanatory. Though Pool A Only has markedly different demographics from the other
pools, we do not know why this is case. For instance, demographic differences could
arise from the way that news of the letters was disseminated through professional
networks, reflecting or even amplifying the (potential) demographic biases of those
networks. Alternatively, demographic differences between the pools could reflect
contrasting personal and professional values. Professional security could also have
played a role in a signing decision of Letters B and C. Of course, these demographic
differences could be caused by a combination of the aforementioned factors and others.
Investigation using tools and frameworks from the social sciences and humanities might
complement our research to provide explanations and further insights.

Supporting information
S1 Appendix A: Letter A
We are a group of concerned mathematicians writing in response to AMS Vice President
Abigail Thompson’s editorial, invited by the AMS for publication in the December 2019
edition of the Notices. In this editorial, Dr. Thompson states her personal opinion
against the mandated use of faculty diversity statements in hiring decisions and
compares such requirements to McCarthyist loyalty oaths.
We are all members of many mathematical societies, including the American
Mathematical Society. Some of us serve on committees in these societies or are chairs of
committees in these societies. Some of us are or have been chairs of departments, some
of us are or have been chairs of search committees, and some of us have written or
reviewed diversity statements as part of search processes. We have all thought deeply

April 1, 2020

12/21

about the role of diversity statements and related tools, such as student success
statements.
We are compelled to write because the AMS leadership’s actions have harmed the
mathematics community, particularly mathematicians from marginalized backgrounds.
We are writing because we support diversity statements as one tool to encourage a more
inclusive and equitable mathematics profession. We are writing because we wish to
correct the misleading impressions readers might have of such statements from
Thompson’s editorial: Thompson’s opinion does not represent the opinions of many
other members of the mathematics community. We are writing because not everyone is
in a position to raise their voice. We are writing because it matters how our community
and its leaders talk about diversity, especially in our profession’s most prominent
publication. We are writing because we are disappointed by the editorial decision to
publish the piece which contradicts the AMS’s commitment to diversity affirmed in its
own diversity statement. Clearly, this is something that people needed to talk about,
but the AMS has chosen to spark this conversation by giving its imprimatur to a piece
that undermines productive discussion and causes real danger and burden to the
marginalized members of our community.
Diversity statements are widely used in academic hiring as one component to assess
candidates’ qualifications for the job. Each statement one requires as part of a hiring
process – research, teaching, mentoring, service, or diversity – helps paint a picture of
how a candidate will contribute to the work of an institution. Increased use of diversity
statements reflects a growing recognition in higher education that faculty contribute in
positive ways to the campus community by acknowledging, appreciating, and
collaborating with groups of students, staff, and fellow faculty who are diverse along
varied axes. In acknowledgement that this is part of the work of a faculty member and
of the hiring process, we recommend that graduate programs explicitly prepare their
graduates to contribute to this work and to write and talk about it meaningfully, and
we commend the programs already undertaking this work. There are plenty of
legitimate questions about how to use diversity statements effectively and how (more
broadly) to create diverse and supportive faculties. In order to reduce bias in the
evaluation of candidates, hiring committees evaluate statements according to criteria
that indicate evidence of these important contributions, grounded in the missions of
higher education in general and their institution in particular. Asking for and
evaluating diversity statements are not quick solutions to the complex challenge of
justice and inclusion in higher education, but they can help hiring committees to
evaluate candidates’ skills in doing this portion of our professional work.
Diversity statements help assess a candidate’s ability to effectively teach a diverse
group of students. If our goal as mathematicians and educators is truly to reach as
many students as possible, thinking about diversity and inclusion is necessary. Good
teaching is necessarily inclusive. If we willfully ignore an important area of pedagogy
that demonstrably helps more students succeed in math, then we will continue to
reproduce systems of inequity, and we will do a great disservice to our students. We will
therefore not be effective teachers.
Suggesting that actively attempting to include more students in mathematics is
equivalent to the Red Scare is ignorant (about both history and the present) and
dangerous. Claims of “reverse racism,” which equate critiquing privilege with
oppressing the privileged, have a long and unsavory history in and beyond higher
education. Without understanding the history in which these discussions are rooted, it
is possible to profess support for the ideal of equality while acting in ways that lead to
exclusion and inequity.
While Dr. Thompson attempts to spin this issue with partisan wording, diversity
statements are a small yet necessary step towards creating a more equitable and

April 1, 2020

13/21

inclusive community. Higher education in the US is shifting, student populations we
serve are changing, and our understanding of how to better serve all students is
advancing. We need a rehumanization of mathematics that can affirm students’ cultural
funds of knowledge while examining and combating its own roles in supporting power
structures. We need leadership at all levels, from professional societies to presidents,
boards, deans, and chairs, to recognize this reality, advocate for students and faculty
from a variety of backgrounds, and move us forward.
Dr. Thompson’s preface that the letter is her “personal opinion” does not alleviate
our concerns, nor does the fact that she seems to be referring primarily to the use of
these documents at the UC system. The fact remains that the Notices made an editorial
decision to give Thompson’s essay a national (indeed, international) platform, and in a
prominent position within the publication. Notices is a publication of the AMS, and Dr.
Thompson is identified as an AMS officer in her byline. According to Notices editor
Erica Flapan, Dr. Thompson’s position in the AMS leadership led the AMS to solicit
her letter. These contextual details send a message to the profession about how diversity
is viewed by those with power and responsibility in the AMS and a major university
department. The AMS and Notices bear responsibility for amplifying views that fly in
the face of research-based practices and that falsely equate evidence-based approaches
to teaching and professional practice with the blacklisting of people based on political
ideology, all in direct contradiction of the AMS’s stated commitment to diversity.
AMS’s own diversity statement claims, “The American Mathematical Society is
committed to promoting and facilitating equity, diversity and inclusion throughout the
mathematical sciences. . . We reaffirm the pledge in the AMS Mission Statement to
‘advance the status of the profession of mathematics, encouraging and facilitating full
participation of all individuals,’ and urge all members to conduct their professional
activities with this goal in mind.” While merely publishing Dr. Thompson’s letter
demonstrates the AMS’s lack of commitment to this statement, the fact that it was
written by and credited to an officer of the AMS raises even more serious questions
about the statement’s sincerity.
We strongly disagree with the sentiments and arguments in Dr. Thompson’s
editorial, and we hope that the AMS will reconsider the way that it uses its power and
position in the mathematics communities in these kinds of discussions. However, we
primarily write this letter to our fellow mathematicians and students of all kinds who
might have wondered if inclusion work is valued in our community. We want students
and faculty, especially those with multiple identities that are minoritized in
mathematics, to know that many mathematicians see this inclusion work as integral to
our community and identity.

S1 Appendix B: Letter B
We write with grave concerns about recent attempts to intimidate a voice within our
mathematical community. Abigail Thompson published an opinion piece in the
December issue of the Notices of the American Mathematical Society. She explained her
support for efforts within our community to further diversity, and then described her
concerns with the rigid rubrics used to evaluate diversity statements in the hiring
processes of the University of California system.
The reaction to the article has been swift and vehement. An article posted at the
site QSIDE urges faculty to direct their students not to attend and not to apply for jobs
at the University of California, Davis, where Prof. Thompson is chair of the math
department. It recommends contacting the university to question whether Prof.
Thompson is fit to be chair. And it recommends refusing to do work for the Notices of
the American Mathematical Society for allowing this piece to be published.

April 1, 2020

14/21

Regardless of where anyone stands on the issue of whether diversity statements are a
fair or effective means to further diversity aims, we should agree that this attempt to
silence opinions is damaging to the profession. This is a direct attempt to destroy Prof.
Thompson’s career and to punish her department. It is an attempt to intimidate the
AMS into publishing only articles that hew to a very specific point of view. If we allow
ourselves to be intimidated into avoiding discussion of how best to achieve diversity, we
undermine our attempts to achieve it.
We the undersigned urge the American Mathematical Society to stand by the
principle that important issues should be openly discussed in a respectful manner, and
to make a clear statement that bullying and intimidation have no place in our
community.

S1 Appendix C: Letter C
In an essay in the December 2019 issue of the Notices, Abigail Thompson describes the
mandatory “Diversity Statement” (mDS) that mathematics job applicants to UC
Schools must submit together with their regular applications. At some campuses, the
mDS is evaluated, in various categories, according to a detailed list of criteria (called a
“rubric”).
If an applicant to Berkeley, for example, merely says that she advocates “mentoring,
treating all students the same regardless of background,” she merits a score of 1–2 out
of a possible top score of 5 in the “track record for advancing diversity” category*.
Hiring committees (at UC Davis and Berkeley, in particular) are encouraged by the
Administration to use the rubrics, establish a cutoff, and eliminate candidates who score
below the cutoff as a first step in the hiring process for all hires. In this way Diversity
Statements diminish the value of mathematical achievement as the key element in
securing a position at a UC Mathematics Department.
Mandatory Diversity Statements undermine Faculty Governance. Should the use of
scored diversity statements become required as the first step in the hiring process, this
opens the way for Administrators, who have no professional knowledge of mathematics,
to exert primary control over the hiring of mathematicians. And indeed, testing the
waters, small scale pilot programs have already been implemented at various UC schools
requiring the first cut on hiring to be based on such scored diversity statements.
We applaud Abigail Thompson for her courageous leadership in bringing this issue
to the attention of the broader Mathematics Community. As she says in her essay:
“Mathematics has made progress over the past decades towards becoming a more
welcoming, inclusive discipline. We should continue to do all we can to reduce barriers
to participation in this most beautiful of fields.... There are reasonable means to further
this goal: encouraging students from all backgrounds to enter the mathematics pipeline,
trying to ensure that talented mathematicians don’t leave the profession, creating
family-friendly policies, and sup-porting junior faculty at the beginning of their careers,
for example.”
We agree wholeheartedly with these sentiments. It is important to strive to hire
faculty that will make the atmosphere more welcoming to all. It is also important to
recognize and help reduce various difficulties still faced by underrepresented groups.
But as Abigail says, there are mistakes to avoid: mDS’s are one of them.
Finally, we commend the Editorial Board at the Notices for opening up the
discussion on this very important matter.
*If you insert the following into a google search, the first thing which comes up is a
pdf with the rubric for Berkeley:
rubric to assess candidate contributions to diversity equity and inclusion-1.pdf

April 1, 2020

15/21

S1 Appendix D: Amazon Mechanical Turk Questionnaire
We are interested in gathering demographic information about people who signed a high profile
public letter to an academic/professional society. Immediately below, you will see the way a
person signed the letter.
[public signature text information]
We ask you to find certain demographic information about the person above. To find this
information, you might use:
• Wikipedia
• Google searches
• The Mathematics Genealogy Project
• any other resources you find helpful
1. The information above needs to be separated into a person’s name and professional
affiliation. Please enter the person’s name as they have written it above. That is, separate the
person’s name from all other information, and enter it here. If there are typos or extra spaces,
please clean these up.
[free text entry]
2. The information above needs to be separated into a person’s name and professional
affiliation. Please enter the person’s professional affiliation. That is, separate the affiliation
from all other information and enter it here. This should be the name of an educational
institution or a company ONLY. If the person has given other information (for instance, title,
academic department, professional specialization, honors/awards, random geographic info that
is not part of the company’s or academic institution’s name) please ignore it in answering this
question. If the person has listed multiple affiliations, enter only the first one. If the person has
not listed an affiliation (just a name) then see if you can locate the person’s affiliation (by
Googling) and enter it here. If you cannot determine their affiliation with confidence, please
leave this question blank.
[free text entry]
3. Please try to locate web information associated with the person. This might be their own
personalized web site and/or the web site of a department, college/university, or company.
Please enter at most one website, even if you use more in answering other questions below. If
you cannot locate any web information, please leave this question blank.
[free text entry]
4. Please try to locate an email address associated with the person. A professional email
address (college/university, company) is preferred. If you cannot locate an email address,
please leave this question blank.
[free text entry]
5. What do you think the person’s gender is? In answering this question, you might use their
name, and/or any pictures you find of them, and/or any textual information you find referring
to them with gendered pronouns.
• Woman
• Man
• Binary man/woman choice does not apply (nonbinary, gender nonconconforming)
• Cannot confidently determine (insufficient time/information)
6. An ethnic group is a category of people who identify with each other based on similarities
such as common ancestral, linguistic, social, cultural or national experiences. What is the
person’s primary ethnic background?

April 1, 2020

16/21

• American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any of the original peoples
of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains tribal
affiliation or community attachment.
• Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of
Africa.
• Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast
Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan,
Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.
• Latinx. A person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American origin,
or similar.
• Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the original
peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.
• Middle East or North Africa. A person having origins in locations such as Algeria,
Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon, or Syria.
• White. A person having origins in Europe.
• Other (not listed above).
• Cannot confidently determine (insufficient time/information).
7. Based on the person’s affiliation as given above (and, as necessary, based on other
information you find) does the person have an affiliation with higher education (student or
employee at a college, university, or other post-secondary educational institution)? Note:
please answer yes for a person who is retired or “Emeritus” from teaching in higher education.
• Yes, the person is affiliated with higher education.
• No, the person is not affiliated with higher education.
• Cannot confidently determine (insufficient time/information).
If the answer to question 7 above is NO or CANNOT DETERMINE, please
scroll down to the bottom of this form and submit it without answering any
further questions. If the answer to question 7 is YES, please continue.
8. We would like to know a little bit more about the person’s college/university. In particular
we’d like to know if it is in the United States, and if so, its degree of research intensiveness. As
for research intensiveness, please see this Wikipedia page:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_research_universities_in_the_United_States
A college/university may be in the first list on that page as “R1: Doctoral Universities – Very
high research activity,” or in the second list on that page as “R2: Doctoral Universities – High
research activity,” or on neither list. Choose the appropriate option below.
• The institution is in the United States and is on the R1 list.
• The institution is in the United States and is on the R2 list.
• The institution is in the United States but is on neither the R1 list nor the R2 list.
• The institution is not in the United States.
• Cannot confidently determine (insufficient time/information).
9. If you selected NOT IN THE UNITED STATES in question 8 above, please type the full
name of the country where the institution is located. Otherwise, please leave this question
blank.
[free text entry]
10. We would like to know a little bit more about the person’s role/title at their
college/university. Choose the appropriate option below.
• The person is a retired professor (they may or may not have the title Emeritus).

April 1, 2020

17/21

• Their title is Professor (or an international equivalent).
• Their title is Associate Professor (or an international equivalent).
• Their title is Assistant Professor (or an international equivalent).
• The person is an instructor who is not eligible for academic tenure. For instance, their
title is Instructor or Lecturer or Postdoctoral Fellow, or it contains one of the following
phrases: “NTT”, “non-tenure track,” “visiting”, or similar.
• The person is a graduate student (earning master’s degree or PhD).
• The person is an undergraduate student (earning bachelor’s degree or similar).
• The person is staff at the institution (they are not a student nor are they any of the
faculty types listed above).
• Other (none of the choices above).
• Cannot confidently determine (insufficient time/information).
11. If you chose STAFF, OTHER, or CANNOT DETERMINE for question 10, please skip this
question. Otherwise, we would like to know a little bit more about the person’s academic field.
This might be based on their title, academic department, degree program, or other information.
Choose the appropriate option below.
• Mathematics or Applied Mathematics.
• Statistics or Data Science.
• Computer Science, Computer Engineering, or similar.
• Mathematics Education (this means that the person’s research and/or studies pertain to
how best to teach mathematics).
• Other (none of the choices above).
• Cannot confidently determine (insufficient time/information).
12. If in question 10 you chose GRADUATE STUDENT, UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT,
STAFF, OTHER, or CANNOT DETERMINE, please skip this question. Otherwise, for
question 8, you indicated one of the first five choices (some type of professor or other
instructor). Determine the year that person earned a PhD degree. You might find this on their
web page, their curriculum vitae, or in the Mathematics Genealogy Project. Please enter the
Ph.D. year as a four-digit number. If you cannot find this information, or if you believe the
person does not have a Ph.D., please leave this question blank.
[free text entry]

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Alicia Prieto Langarica for contributions during the early stages of this work,
and to Carina Curto and Joshua Paik for helpful comments regarding our methodology and
data.

References
1. Thompson A. A Word from Abigail Thompson, a Vice President of the AMS. Notices of
the AMS. 2019;66(11):1778–1779.
2. University of California Davis, Academic Affairs. Guidelines for Writing a Statement of
Contributions to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion; 2019. Available from:
http://academicaffairs.ucdavis.edu/ [cited Dec. 21, 2019].
3. May GS, Garrison Tull R. UC Davis Defends Its Diversity Statements; 2019. Dec. 26,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/
uc-davis-defends-its-diversity-statements-11577392382.

April 1, 2020

18/21

4. Institute for the Quantitative Study of Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity. Diversity
Statements in Hiring, the American Mathematical SocIety, and UC Davis; 2019.
Available from: htts://www.qsideinstitute.org [cited Dec. 21, 2019].
5. Responses to “A Word from... Abigail Thompson”: The Math Community Values a
Commitment to Diversity (online only). Notices of the AMS. 2020;67(1):2–9.
6. Responses to “A Word from... Abigail Thompson”: Letter to the Editor. Notices of the
AMS (online only). 2020;67(1):9–15.
7. Responses to “A Word from... Abigail Thompson”: Letter to the Notices of the AMS.
Notices of the AMS (online only). 2020;67(1):18–19.
8. Signatories to Public Letter A, raw data; 2019. Available from: https://docs.google.
com/spreadsheets/d/1XAslNFBa9ynIoZpLXwZP5yu28d6SHkO1fk1qTJmQex0 [cited Dec.
10, 2019].
9. Signatories to Public Letter B, raw data; 2019. Available from: https://docs.google.
com/spreadsheets/d/1SrfMiCFzaU8If6zdy8HhquHda84IDPwrJWI0tFzKvy4 [cited Dec.
10, 2019].
10. Berinsky AJ, Huber GA, Lenz GS. Evaluating Online Labor Markets for Experimental
Eesearch: Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk. Polit Anal. 2012;20(3):351–368.
11. Topaz CM, Sen S. Gender Representation on Journal Editorial Boards in the
Mathematical Sciences. PLOS One. 2016;11(8):1–21.
12. Topaz CM, Klingenberg B, Turek D, Heggeseth B, Harris PE, Blackwood JC, et al.
Diversity of Artists in Major U.S. Museums. PLOS One. 2019;14(3):1–15.
13. Butler J. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Routledge; 1990.
14. Wikipedia contributors. List of Research Universities in the United States — Wikipedia,
The Free Encyclopedia; 2019. Available from: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_research_universities_in_the_United_States
[cited Dec. 21, 2019].
15. Agresti A. An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley & Sons; 2018.
16. Nicholas L. Queer Ethics and Fostering Positive Mindsets toward Non-Binary Gender,
Genderqueer, and Gender Ambiguity. Intl J Transgend. 2019;20(2-3):169–180.
17. American Mathematical Society. Annual Survey of the Mathematical Sciences; 2019.
Available from:
http://www.ams.org/profession/data/annual-survey/2016dp-tableUD2.pdf [cited
Dec. 21, 2019].
18. American Mathematical Society. Annual Survey of the Mathematical Sciences; 2019.
Available from: http://www.ams.org/2016ND-TableD4.pdf [cited Dec. 21, 2019].
19. American Mathematical Society. Annual Survey of the Mathematical Sciences; 2019.
Available from:
http://www.ams.org/profession/data/annual-survey/2016dp-tableDF1.pdf [cited
Dec. 21, 2019].
20. Institute for the Quantitative Study of Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity. We Don’t Know
How Many Faculty of Color There Are: This is Bad for Everyone; 2019. Available from:
htts://www.qsideinstitute.org [cited Dec. 21, 2019].
21. Alcoff L. Cultural Feminism versus Post-Structuralism: The Identity Crisis in Feminist
Theory. Signs. 1988;13(3):405–436.
22. Hartsock N. Rethinking Modernism: Minority vs. Majority Theories. Cult Crit.
1987;(7):187–206.
23. Kinefuchi E, Orbe MP. Situating Oneself in a Racialized World: Understanding Student
Reactions to Crash through Standpoint Theory and Context-Positionality Frames. J Int
Intercult Comm. 2008;1(1):70–90.
24. Melguizo T, Strober MH. Faculty Salaries and the Maximization of Prestige. Res Higher
Ed. 2007;48(6):633–668.

April 1, 2020

19/21

25. Chemerinsky E. Is Tenure Necessary to Protect Academic Freedom? Am Behav Sci.
1998;41(5):638–651.
26. Weber M. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. Univ. of
California Press; 1978.
27. Van Dijk TA. Discourse and the Denial of Racism. Discourse Soc. 1992;3(1):87–118.
28. Pérez R. Learning to Make Racism Funny in the ‘Color-Blind’ Era: Stand-Up Comedy
Students, Performance Strategies, and the (Re)production of Racist Jokes in Public.
Discourse Soc. 2013;24(4):478–503.
29. Moore WL, Bell JM. The Right to be Racist in College: Racist speech, White
institutional Space, and the First Amendment. Law Policy. 2017;39(2):99–120.
30. Chiang SY. “Well, I’m a lot of things, but I’m sure not a bigot”: Positive
Self-Presentation in Confrontational Discourse on Racism. Discourse Soc.
2010;21(3):273–294.

April 1, 2020

20/21

Table 2. Two-way contingency tables for letter signatory pool and academic demographics, namely
institutional classification, research intensiveness, professional role, professional security, academic field,
and simplified academic field. Research intensiveness, professional security, and simplified field each fails a
statistical test for the independence of demographics and pool. Within a given contingency table, for each
combination of pool and demographic, the left-hand number gives the column percentage and the right-hand number gives
the row percentage. Colors indicate whether a particular cell represents more (blue) or fewer (orange) individuals than we
would expect if the variables were independent. For details of statistical tests, see table notes below.
Pool

Institutional Classification
statistical tests not performed
US R1 Very High Research Activity (n = 672)
US R2 High Research Activity (n = 103)
US Other (n = 377)
Non US (n = 205)
Research Intensiveness
χ2 = 247.1, df = 3, p < 0.00001, V = 0.427
Less Research Intensive (n = 480)
More Research Intensive (n = 877)
Professional Role
statistical tests not performed
NA (n = 34)
Undergraduate Student (n = 7)
Graduate Student (n = 119)
Staff (n = 11)
Non-Tenure-Track Position (n = 89)
Assistant Professor (n = 194)
Associate Professor (n = 207)
Full Professor (n = 629)
Retired/Emeritus Professor (n = 67)
Professional Security
χ2 = 238.2, df = 3, p < 0.00001, V = 0.424
NA (n = 35)
Less Secure (n = 419)
More Secure (n = 903)
Field
statistical tests not performed
NA (n = 13)
Math/Applied Math (n = 1206)
Statistics/Data Science (n = 12)
Mathematics Education (n = 36)
Computer Science (n = 16)
Other (n = 74)
Simplified Field
χ2 = 67.9, df = 6, p < 0.00001, V = 0.159
NA (n = 13)
MASD (n = 1218)
Mathematics Education (n = 36)
Computer Science/Other (n = 90)

A Only HE
n = 586
Col % Row %

B Only HE
n = 563
Col % Row %

C Only HE
n = 135
Col % Row %

B and C HE
n = 73
Col %
Row %

37.2%
11.1%
46.2%
5.5%

32.4%
63.1%
71.9%
15.6%

52.4%
6.2%
18.1%
23.3%

43.9%
34.0%
27.1%
63.9%

71.1%
2.2%
2.2%
24.4%

14.3%
2.9%
0.8%
16.1%

86.3%
0.0%
1.4%
12.3%

9.4%
0.0%
0.3%
4.4%

57.3%
42.7%

70.0%
28.5%

24.3%
75.7%

28.5%
48.6%

4.4%
95.6%

1.2%
14.7%

1.4%
98.6%

0.2%
8.2%

3.1%
0.5%
14.8%
1.2%
10.1%
24.9%
20.5%
24.1%
0.9%

52.9%
42.9%
73.1%
63.6%
66.3%
75.3%
58.0%
22.4%
7.5%

2.7%
0.7%
5.7%
0.7%
5.0%
8.5%
13.9%
54.2%
8.7%

44.1%
57.1%
26.9%
36.4%
31.5%
24.7%
37.7%
48.5%
73.1%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.7%
0.0%
5.9%
85.9%
7.4%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.1%
0.0%
3.9%
18.4%
14.9%

1.4%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.4%
0.0%
1.4%
91.8%
4.1%

2.9%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.1%
0.0%
0.5%
10.7%
4.5%

3.2%
51.4%
45.4%

54.3%
71.8%
29.5%

2.7%
20.6%
76.7%

42.9%
27.7%
47.8%

0.0%
0.7%
99.3%

0.0%
0.2%
14.8%

1.4%
1.4%
97.3%

2.9%
0.2%
7.9%

0.9%
87.5%
1.5%
6.0%
1.2%
2.9%

38.5%
42.5%
75.0%
97.2%
43.8%
23.0%

1.4%
87.0%
0.5%
0.2%
1.2%
9.6%

61.5%
40.6%
25.0%
2.8%
43.8%
73.0%

0.0%
96.3%
0.0%
0.0%
1.5%
2.2%

0.0%
10.8%
0.0%
0.0%
12.5%
4.1%

0.0%
100.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

0.0%
6.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

0.9%
89.1%
6.0%
4.1%

38.5%
42.9%
97.2%
26.7%

1.4%
87.6%
0.2%
10.8%

61.5%
40.5%
2.8%
67.8%

0.0%
96.3%
0.0%
3.7%

0.0%
10.7%
0.0%
5.6%

0.0%
100.0%
0.0%
0.0%

0.0%
6.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Results of a χ2 test for independence appear at the top of the contingency tables for research intensiveness, professional security, and
simplified field. Here, χ2 is the value of the test statistic, df is degrees of freedom, p is the probability value, and V is Cramér’s effect
size. When NA values are present, we perform the χ2 tests on modified contingency tables (not shown) with the small number of NA
values removed. To test for significance of individual cells (as coded by the colors) we use a z-test for sample percentage at the α = 0.05
significance level with Holm-adjusted p-values to account for multiple comparisons. Research intensiveness, professional security, and
simplified field are collapsed versions of institutional classification, professional role, and field. Above, we use the abbreviation MASD
(Mathematics/Applied Mathematics/Statistics/Data Science).

April 1, 2020

21/21

