Full Shelves, Good Skills? Immigration, Adolescent Language Aptitude and New
Evidence on Books in the Home from Four European Countries

Nate Breznau, University of Bremen, breznau.nate@gmail.com
Lisa Sauter, University of Mannheim
Zerrin Salikutluk, Berlin Institute for Integration & Migration Research, Humboldt-University Berlin

ABSTRACT

Evidence suggests that books in the childhood home impacts children’s educational and occupational
attainments. Previous research finds this ‘book effect’ after conditioning on parental socio-economic status and
national context. Human and cultural capital theories offer plausible explanations for this book effect. However,
mechanisms underlying the book effect remain empirically illusory. Drawing on previous findings, we develop
theoretical arguments that human and cultural capital are not the entire story behind the book effect. Designing
a formal model of all these processes, we test our claims using immigration, language and country-context to
adjudicate between mechanisms hypothesized by the theories. Using CILS4EU data in four countries and
structural equation modeling to test these theories’ models against the data, we find the direct effect of books
does not differ between native and immigrant adolescents in predicting 9th grade language aptitude scores.
Moreover, this effect does not vary much by country. Reading habits and primary language spoken at home
explain only part of the effect suggesting the presence of books measures something operating independently
and in addition to human and cultural capital. We expand previous theoretical explanations to include books as
creating opportunities for children whose parents are unlikely to cultivate scholarly values on average.

1

1

INTRODUCTION
Research shows that the number of books in individuals’ childhood homes predicts their educational

and occupational attainments later in life. The statistical association is ubiquitous across diverse data sources
and countries. Although it is not clear that books cause children to read, learn or become more socially mobile,
we acknowledge a formidable book effect in educational and sociological research that begs further theoretical
and empirical exploration.
Books in the home predict occupational and educational outcomes in addition to parental occupation
and education attainments suggesting they are a key component of status transmission (Marks 2011). Some
suggest large libraries of high culture books are cultural capital, thus provide access to closed elite circles (Jaeger
2011; DiMaggio 1982). Others suggest alternative mechanisms given the powerful association of just a few
books in the home and greatly increased chances of upward social mobility (Evans et al. 2010, 2014, 2015). So
long as parents and children use books for language, studying and critical thinking development, they are tools
of human capital formation, although this seems unlikely to explain the full story behind the effect of a just a
few books that theoretically could only provide a limited range of human capital. Although human and cultural
capital theories are well developed, they seem to fall short in fully explaining the book effect. Our paper picks
up a research agenda aimed at remedying this.
To test if and how human capital, cultural capital and other processes explain the book effect; we
compare native and immigrant adolescent language skills. On average, immigrants are more likely to have
different books in the home than the natives of a given society. As such, books should have a smaller relative
impact on socio-economic outcomes for children of immigrants. We focus on adolescent aptitudes, in particular
language skills, because these are highly correlated with adult socio-economic outcomes (see review in
Fergusson, Horwood and Boden 2008). Focusing on adolescents removes the risks of confounding the effect
when surveying adults (Marks and McMillan 2003). We focus on language because it is a key ability in
socioeconomic mobility and immigrants and natives exhibit similar educational achievement after adjusting for
language abilities (Strobel 2016). Moreover, there is no comparative research on the book effect by migration
background1.
Out of our theoretical discussion, we construct a formal model of adolescent language skills as a
function of the number of books in the home net of parental socioeconomic status and language, migration
background and children’s reading habits. We apply this model to data from the Children of Immigrants
Longitudinal Survey in Four European Countries (CILS4EU), conducted in England, Germany, the
Netherlands, and Sweden (Kalter et al. 2016). Around half of the sample in each country are second-generation
immigrants. This gives us sufficient power to test for effect homogeneity of books on language skills between
natives and immigrants. We test our formal models as structural path models to test parameter constraints. By
1

We use the term migration background to capture those who migrated themselves (first generation) and those who were
native-born to parents of immigrant origin (second generation).

2

employing overidentified models we can test the likelihood of observing these data given theory, and test our
theories against one another.

2

THEORIZING THE BOOK EFFECT: HUMAN CAPITAL AND CULTURAL CAPITAL THEORIES
Decades of research spawned by Coleman and colleagues (1966) suggests that family and home lives

of children are often more important than school contexts in shaping educational attainment and socioeconomic
(SES) outcomes. Books are a part of the home context. Several authors observe that books statistically predict
status or achievement outcomes independently of parental resources and individual characteristics (Becker, B.
2011; Evans et al. 2015). Moreover, this statistical finding is unwavering across diverse societies (Ganzeboom,
de Graaf, and Robert 1990; Kraaykamp and Nieuwbeerta 2000; Tsai, Smith, and Hauser 2017).
According to human capital theory, parents aim at reproducing social status among their children, to
prevent their own status losses (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997; Esser 1999). Parents with greater economic
resources can purchase better tools to improve children’s educational success (Becker, G. 1993). Within this
paradigm, books are one tool that parents and children use to develop children’s reading, cognitive ability and
language aptitudes. As human capital, the book effect should explain educational and other life chance outcomes
as a function of parental investment in books (Becker and Tomes 1986; Fergusson, Horwood, and Boden 2008;
Sénéchal et al. 1996). This means the book effect derives from a similar mechanism across populations.
Immigrants and natives, high and low socioeconomic status (SES) and people in diverse countries should
similarly benefit from human capital intentionally developed using books. However, the language skills and
reading aptitude of those using books as human capital tools moderates their effectiveness (Leseman and van
den Boom 1999). Immigrant or low SES students may appear to experience a smaller book effect, when in fact
parents’ language and reading skills are the source of variance. Thus, the human capital book effect is only
theoretically equivalent for those with similar language aptitude backgrounds and conditional upon reading.
As an alternative to human capital, approaches based on cultural capital theory suggest that cultural
artifacts and knowledge provide the symbolic status necessary for children to attain the status distinctions of
their parents, if not gain entry into higher status positions (Bourdieu 1986; Bourdieu and Passeron 1990). We
follow a working hypothesis of cultural capital as an institutionalized system of elite closure (Lamont and
Lareau 1988). In this format, books are one of many Beaux-arts materials and experiences that provide culturally
imbued resources outside of skills and skill formation that signal the status needed to access social circles with
high degrees of closure (a key, albeit not the only argument of Bourdieu’s extensive writings).
In the school setting, teachers reward cultural capital. Even if they themselves are not members of the
elite, teachers perceive children with highbrow cultural capital as higher performing, independent of their
objective performance (DiMaggio 1982; Lareau 2015). By giving them greater attention and higher evaluations,
these students have higher marks, confidence and self-efficacy which lead to better chances of accessing higher
school tracks and higher status outcomes later in life compared to students with other types of cultural capital.

3

To activate this positive bias, only a tacit knowledge of the books and their contents is necessary for books to
have an effect on children. For example, a student might have several Greek tragedies in his/her home and be
able to recount the titles of some, or the names of some characters without having read them, thus signaling
high status to a teacher. As cultural capital, the book effect is categorical. Either students have elite cultural
capital or not. A large home library or a library filled with particular elite books provide signals of high culture.
Therefore, a small number of books in the home should be less likely to give a cultural capital book effect.
DiMaggio (1982) elaborates on the cultural knowledge necessary to use cultural capital artifacts to produce SES
outcomes. Students from non-high culture background lack the appropriate cultural socialization to know how
to access returns from cultural capital. Accordingly, even a large number of culturally dominant books are less
likely to improve life chances for low SES students.
This means that books should have a smaller impact for immigrants who are less likely to possess the
dominant cultural knowledge even if they have high culture books. Such immigrants may face educational and
labor market discrimination further interrupting their capacity to signal elite status. Therefore, several
mechanisms of our operational theory of cultural capital point toward books having a smaller impact on
immigrants’ outcomes on average. In the language of formal modeling, the cultural capital argument suggests
that the effect of books is heterogeneous for immigrants and non-immigrants and that immigration background
moderates the book effect.
The human capital mechanism underlying the book effect may be more pervasive than some cultural
capital scholars suggest. Research claiming to identify cultural capital book effects may mistakenly capture
human capital effects. In the work of DiMaggio (1982) on mobility, just a little cultural capital gives low SES
students the opportunity to access higher statuses. His findings along with those of De Graaf, De Graaf and
Kraaykamp (2000) suggest that cultural capital improves high school grades and educational attainment.
However, a closer inspection of their “cultural capital” measurement reveals that they include student or parental
reading habits. This blurs the boundaries between cultural capital and human capital as reading is a form of
active development of human capital (see also Georg 2004). In the De Graaf et al. (2000) study the authors run
a sensitivity analysis splitting the scale into its Beaux-arts and parental reading components as separate
variables, finding ultimately that parents’ reading habits matter, whereas Beaux-arts do not.

3

EXPANDING HUMAN AND CULTURAL CAPITAL THEORIES
If not human capital or cultural capital, what is the book effect? Spaeth’s scholarly culture hypothesis

(Evans et al. 2014), suggests that family households embody a range of scholarly cultural values. Households
with more books have parents who respect, appreciate, read and cherish books and scholarship in general. This
results in children with higher levels of intellectual complexity and aptitude on average. Therefore, books in the
home provide something unique for children beyond their utility as tools for developing human capital and
beyond their signaling of elite status. A similar argument comes from Lareau’s idea of concerted cultivation
(2002). Based on Bourdieu’s work on parenting styles, she locates this cultivation effect outside of the functional
form of cultural capital as elite closure. The theory and evidence suggest children with the higher status chances

4

in life have parents that cultivate critical thinking and task management, whereas children whose parents are
authoritarian more than reasoning and do not focus on organizing tasks have far lower chances. Similar
arguments and findings abound in mobility research (see Fergusson et al. 2008:279). The result is that higher
status children, in addition to any human capital development, are literally better equipped to learn and perform
in school because of additional parental values and behaviors unrelated to human capital formation. These
scholarly values or parenting-style arguments suggest that books are an indicator of the types of parental values
and behaviors that cultivate higher status chances for their children. Parents have books that reflect their values
and parenting styles.
A third argument emerges alongside the scholarly culture hypothesis. We argue books may be more
than simply a reflection of parental values. We are aware that there are households with some books that have
parents who do not have scholarly cultural values or engage in concerted cultivation of complexity and task
organization. If children from such households have higher status chances in life on average then it is possible
that the presence of books creates status opportunities not previously discussed in academic literature. Children
may become aware of the value of books because their parents have more scholarly values that lead them to
cultivate book awareness or simply because the children notice the books on the shelf and become curious.
Anything present in a childhood home, whether the parents pay attention to it or not, might be of interest and
have an impact on a child. This is something analogous to research showing that the components of
neighborhoods or the availability of toys and objects affects child development and educational skills
independent of parents (Bradley, Caldwell and Rock 1988; Brooks-Gunn 1993). This gives the book effect a
random quality, where the presence of books in the home creates an opportunity for children to develop
cognitive complexity and scholarly values perchance, independently of the parents.
Although the ‘perchance’ book effect has no direct empirical support thus far, findings by Engzell
(2018) provide important first evidence. He shows that lower SES children are more likely to exhibit
innumeracy regarding the number of books in the home. In particular the low SES children engage in
underreporting, whereas high SES children are more accurate. This finding is consistent with the scholarly
culture hypothesis with high SES parents being more likely to present the value of books to their children,
leading to more awareness and thus also more accuracy in reporting the number of books. This would also help
explain Engzell’s other finding that lower SES children are less likely to accrue books. We speculate that lower
SES parents are less likely to present the values of books to the children giving them no direct incentive to heed
any books on the shelf or seek them out. However, if there are books in a low SES home it increases the chances
that each child in the home discovers the value of these books independently of the parents and therefore
explains the large error in the lower SES children’s reporting of books found by Engzell. This would be
consistent with previous findings showing that just a few books in the home have a tremendous impact on SES
outcomes later in life for low SES persons (citations throughout).
Of course this shifts the causal mechanisms away from the books and into the children who may be
more or less predisposed to having and valuing the books, and in particular their parents. Yet we argue that
having books around could also lead, at least certain children, to become more likely to discover their value and

5

in turn do better in school. After all, books associate with communication or thought processes open to new and
complex developments in children (Foy and Mann 2003; Skubic 2014). More books in the home correlate with
positive attitudes toward reading, suggesting that the presence of books might independently increase the
likelihood that children adopt bookish and scholarly attitudes (Mullis et al. 2016). The idea that the presence of
books could cause awareness is a general mechanism and should apply to all book formats and across diverse
individuals (Payne, Whitehurst, and Angell 1994). Moreover this awareness mechanism should operate
independent of reading and parental SES (Barone, Mallette, and Xu 2005; Goodman and Goodman 1979). Our
arguments also suggest that the average effect of books in the home on skills and SES outcomes is proportional.
Each additional book in the home indicates an equally likely increase in scholarly values or the awareness
needed to discover such values net of other factors, and thus each book leads to a proportional increase in SES
and skill outcomes on average. From a formal modeling perspective, parents and reading habits do not fully
mediate the book effect, and the book effect is homogeneous between natives and immigrants.

4

IMMIGRATION AND HYPOTHESIZED BOOK EFFECTS
We consider immigration a phenomenon that allows us to test some of the unknowns related to human

capital, cultural capital and the book effect. For one, there is no comparative research on the book effect between
natives and immigrants. Second, scholars previously tested the elite closure argument only using the quantity
books (Evans et al. 2010, 2014, 2015), whereas cultural capital speaks to the qualities of books as well. Previous
research shows that immigrants tend to be less equipped with cultural capital (Jungbauer-Gans 2004; Lee and
Kao 2009). A simple reason for this can be that immigrants do not take along all their books when they migrate.
However, immigrants are less likely to have or be interested in the types of books necessary to enter elite circles
in the dominant culture of the host society. They are less likely to have the same language and culturally relevant
books (Dali 2012; Listwon and Sen 2009). Therefore, immigrants should not benefit to the same degree as
natives because of the quality-side as much as the quantity-side of elite closure arguments. This means that
children will not develop the same rewards from teachers (Leopold and Shavit 2013). Thus:
In comparison to natives, the book effect on adolescents’ language abilities is substantially less for…
H1: those with a migration background, and
H2: those with a non-native language primarily spoken at home.

The mechanisms in H1 and H2 suggest the contents or types of the books matter for shaping outcomes.
Unfortunately, we lack comparative data on the contents of books. Therefore, our hypotheses are our way of
proximally identifying qualitative book differences using language and migration background (see Becker, B.
2010).
This gives a prediction linking to the backgrounds of families. We expect that scholarly values impact
children with and without immigration backgrounds equally. Regardless of the reasons for migrating, foreign-

6

born individuals and second-generation migrants have lower educational attainment, occupational status and
incomes than non-immigrants on average (Heath and Brinbaum 2007; Kalter and Granato 2007). Most research
on culture and phenotypically-based differences between individuals suggest that race, cultural background and
ethnicity have little to do with this stratification, and instead the differences are a product of access to
socioeconomic resources, in particular parental SES (Marks 2005; Kristen and Granato 2007). As books are a
covariate of stratification across so many spheres of society, we extend this argument to the number of books
in the home. If the theoretically causal mechanism is the scholarly values of parents or symbolic power
embodied in the books, then there should be a book effect independent of their contents and the reading habits
of the children. Moreover, each additional book should reflect a gain in households’ available scholarly culture
values, whether or not these come from the parents or the child. The children only need to be aware of the books
in the home thus opening the door for developing knowledge of the power and value of books.
We expect that human capital and cultural capital theories also offer plausible mechanisms in addition
to scholarly culture, therefore our hypotheses are predictions net of these other mechanisms.
H3: The book effect on adolescents’ language abilities exists in addition to those of human capital and
cultural capital.
This means that looking at different groups by migration background or language at home should produce the
same book effect. These are predictions in opposition with H1 and H2. How strongly academic abilities are
determined by students’ socioeconomic backgrounds varies across the countries: While the correlation between
different indicators of family wealth like parents’ occupational status or cultural possessions at home with
students’ reading literacy are the highest in Germany and the UK, in Sweden this correlation is weaker (OECD
2001). However, given that the mechanisms of how books enhance students’ language skills through both
human capital and scholarly culture, we expect that H3 should hold true across countries and therefore types of
culture, suggesting what we expect a universal book effect after conditioning on several diverse factors.
H4: Across countries, tests of H3 produce the same results.

5

TESTING THE THEORIZED BOOK EFFECTS
Figure 1 presents theoretical causes of adolescent language aptitude conceived of as test scores

(LAN_TEST)2. The path model is a formalization of theory. The theory contains causal arguments that we aim to
translate into path models. These path models are however just theory and do not indicate that we know causality
or causal effects. The book effect is path b. Human capital transmission through book acquisition and reading
occurs along paths c and a, impacting aptitude via paths b and d. If human capital is a causal mechanism behind
the book effect, path e is relevant. If more books in the home signals greater human capital investment then
2

The path model is a formalization of theory. The theory contains causal arguments that we aim to translate into path
models. These path models are however just theory and do not indicate that we know causality or causal effects.

7

books should beget reading behaviors, because parents’ reasons for acquiring books would be coterminous with
their usage. Our test for effects of cultural capital and scholarly culture both posit that an effect of books exists
independent of the human capital process. Thus, our tests are only valid when conditioned on human capital
along paths a, c, e and d. If path b exists, after conditioning, this suggests either cultural capital or scholarly
culture. If cultural capital, then both f and g should be less than zero leading to a book effect b smaller for
adolescents with an immigration background (H1) and a non-native language spoken at home (H2).
Alternatively, a universal book effect means g, h and i should be zero except for measurement error, as predicted
by H3 and H4. In other words, no difference by non-native language and immigration background, and evident
across countries.

- Figure 1 about here To populate our formal model with statistical estimates, we employ structural equation modeling (SEM)
techniques. Our theory as expressed in the Figure 1 model dictates certain structural relationships implying
statistical properties that we should observe in the real world, so long as a given hypothesis is true. When we
measure variables using real-world data, we have observed covariances. The model itself gives us implied
covariances between several variables; for example, H3 and H4 imply that the partial covariances of g, f, h and
i are all zero. Our goal is to test if these theoretically implied covariances match those we observe within a
plausible range of random error. Because our SEM runs on an overidentified model, meaning there are several
possible solutions to fit the implied covariances into the observed data, allowing us to test if we committed
model specification errors (Bollen 1989). Given that we have immigration background and different countries,
we run multigroup SEM allowing us to test whether parameters are the same or different across groups through
the usage of model constraints. Comparing different models to each other allows us to draw conclusions about
which models perform worse (see any basic SEM text, e.g., Kline 2015). Overall our tests rely on hypothesized
effects’ significance and direction (in H1-H4), and whether effects are similar across groups predicted (H3 and
H4).

5.1

Data and Measures
We need a large sample of immigrants to provide the degrees of freedom to perform multivariate

analyses by language, background and country. These requirements severely restrict data choices. Single
country surveys such as the National Educational Panel in Germany have large samples of students with
migration backgrounds, but are not comparative across countries. Data such as PISA are comparative but have
small immigrant sample sizes, meaning weaker tests; a problem that increases with the number of independent
variables. Cross-national comparative data with immigration over-samples are very rare. We use the CILS4EU
data (Kalter et al. 2016) containing nearly equal-sized representative samples of natives and immigrants in
England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden. The students were mostly 14-years-old with a level of
cognitive development for understanding survey questions, and old enough to observe book effect exposures

8

leading to variations in abilities.3 Finally, CILS4EU data Wave 1 contain questions on number of books in the
home and a language aptitude test, both critical for our hypotheses. One drawback of CILS4EU data and
practically all comparative book data to date are no questions over the types of books4, thus one argument of
cultural capital regarding the contents of books is not testable. However, the data allow measuring whether a
foreign language is spoken predominantly at home allowing us to test H2-H4 by proxy.
We measure our dependent variable language aptitude (LAN_TEST) as an indicator of academic ability
and achievement from an aptitude test built into the survey. It is a scale of 25 (England and Germany) or 30
(Sweden and the Netherlands) test questions that reflect a reduced version of common standardized academic
tests.5 Higher scores represent better language aptitude in the primary native language of the country (CILS4EU
2016:40). As the test in each country varies slightly we do not expect these measures to have similar intercepts
or variances, therefore we focus on relative variance through XY-standardization.
We measure number of books in the home as a continuous categorization of the midpoints to survey
responses “0-25” = 12.5, “26-100” = 63, “101-200” = 150, “201-500” = 350 and “more than 500” = 750. Then
we take the natural log (variable label: BOOKS) of this continuous variable to highlight the differences in the
book effect at the lower end of the distribution, consistent with previous research (Evans et al. 2010, 2014) 6.
We measure reading habits (READS) as how often the respondent reports spare time, non-school reading. We
take a continuous coding: every day = 5, once or several times per week = 4, once or several times per month =
3, less often = 2 and never = 1.7
We measure independent variables of mother’s and father’s education (MOM_ED and DAD_ED) using a
continuous variable where missing and less than primary = 0, primary = 1, secondary = 2 and tertiary = 3 for
each parent.8 We are aware that this variable is not conceptually continuous but this is the best we have given
data and societal differences (Schneider and Kogan 2008); we forcibly accept some measurement error here.
Education is our indicator of parental SES. We cannot measure income without severe missing data problems.
Using this variable categorically does not improve model fit, supporting our continuous measurement with error.
3

Students attending 10th grade in England, 9th grade in Germany, 3rd grade of secondary school in the Netherlands and
8th grade in Sweden were sampled.
4
Except the NEPS, but again this is not comparative.
5
In Germany, parts of the KFT 5-12+R (Heller and Perleth 2000) and in the Netherlands parts of the NIO (Van Dijk and
Tellegen 2004) were used. Similar tests were designed in England and in Sweden by the project teams. For further
information, see the technical report for the data (CILS4EU 2016).
6
Models using the continuous instead of logged variable lead to worse fit with similar result patterns.
7
Our first coding attempts were to take the number of days per year and then take the natural log. Using both a continuous
days-per-year measure and a logged version of it, but this led to poorly fitting results, whereas the simple 1 through 5
coding fit the models to the data very well. We speculate that the response categories were too broad (5 steps from never
to every day) and too vague (e.g., “once or several” and “less often”) for the respondents to accurately place themselves
on the continuum in terms of precise number of days per week or month. Thus, they ostensibly responded ‘continuously’
to the question.
8
The logic is that if a child is not aware of their parents’ educational attainments, it suggests that the parent’s education
is not a source impacting the child’s academic achievement or the child has a weak or non-existent relationship with the
parent. In either case, a zero is appropriate. More importantly, the amount of missing data from parents unwilling or
unavailable to respond to the survey is very large and very different by country from 22% in the Netherlands to 63% in
England, so relying on parents’ linked data does not work. Even if we had reliable measures of income or occupational
status, their inclusion in the model would introduce endogeneity with parental education.

9

We measure whether a foreign language is predominantly spoken at home (FGN_LANG) by dichotomizing
responses to a question asking how often a non-native language is spoken at home. We code this question with
always and often = 1 and sometimes and never = 0. We divide the sample into groups of native with both parents
born in the survey country, and immigrant as those with both parents born abroad (“Immigrant” in Figure 1)
given that children of mixed marriages might have confounding factors relating to their language skills (Becker,
B. 2011). To check this, we run additional models with immigrants coded as at least one parent born abroad.
For first generation immigrants it is crucial to consider the age of migration for developmental and acculturation
reasons (Esser 2006), and we add this variable (AGE_IMM). The younger immigrants were upon immigration, the
longer their exposure to the language and school system of the receiving country.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics (see Appendix). Table 2 presents correlations. There is a smaller
correlation between books and language aptitude scores for immigrants with two foreign-born parents (0.16)
than for immigrants with one or two foreign-born parents (0.24) and natives (0.25). As H4 suggests a relatively
universal book effect, we seek to test if this difference reflects a weaker statistical relationship of books and
language test scores for those with two immigrant parents. The correlations between parents’ education level
and child’s reading habits with test scores are very similar to the size of the correlation between books and test
scores. Correlations are low-to-moderately sized suggesting we do not have any collinearity problems.

- Table 2 about here -

5.2

Methods
Table 3 presents descriptions of our different models in the column “Group Structure and Model

Definitions” (see Table 4 in Appendix for sensitivity models). The reason we have so many models is that we
test for differences for immigrants and natives, foreign language spoken at home and by country. This means
the multigroup structure changes depending on the model, thus changing the reference model. Our first test is
if a model displays absolute fit. There is no statistical test that can confirm our theory (Hayduk et al. 2007);
however, chi-square tests reveal if our formal model does not fit the data and should be rejected. Thus, for each
model, we run an exact fit test (Kline 2015). The p-value of this test reveals at what significance level the model
implied covariance matrix is different from the observed covariance matrix in the data, e.g., 0.001 implies that
our model is vastly different from the observed data and should be rejected. Alternatively, 0.050 or higher
implies our model is not much different and could be a good model.
Our next test is if statistical coefficients have size and significance, and crucially if we can constrain
them to equality without loss of fit. We run models using Mplus 7 SEM software, listwise deletion and a scaleshift estimator (MLMV) correcting for the potential non-linear relations in our data. This accounts for the
roughness coding mid-points in the books measure, allowing for non-linear measurement error. It also accounts
for parents’ education measured in four rough categories potentially suffering from a non-linear bias9. This
9

Skewness/kurtosis tests confirm this.

10

correction leads to better estimates and most importantly recovers accurate chi-square tests (Asparouhov and
Muthén 2016). Given the potential biases of listwise deletion, we run a second round of all models using fullinformation maximum likelihood (“FIML” in Mplus, see Table 4 in Appendix).
We run statistical analyses after country-mean centering books, parents’ education and reading habits
variables. This eliminates potential country-level confounding on observed variables. Previous research finds
that economic development has a strong effect on number of books in the home and may explain some of the
book effect and we want to control for this in our tests (Evans et al. 2010). We want to test our book effect as
independent of country-level factors as possible. There will be inevitable variation in educational success,
culture and academic environments that ends up in the error terms.

6
6.1

RESULTS
Model fit tests

Table 3 presents model fit tests. The first column are model names (M1…M99); chi-square value (X2) in the
second and degrees of freedom in the third (df). ‘Exact_F’ is an exact fit test using FIML and ‘Exact_M’ with
MLMV. ‘Equal’ is a fit test of the current model against the comparison model (see Table 3 footnote a). Finally,
a description and hypothesis testing. All models test H3 in some form, namely that a positive and significant
book effect exists net of parental education and student reading habits.

- Table 3 about here In M1 and M21, both exact fit tests reveal that the structural model’s implied relationships are not
significantly different from those observed in the data (p>0.05). This gives no reason to reject our theoretical
causal model, and with strong fit statistics (see Table 6 in Appendix), we have evidence supporting our
theoretical model. The equal fit tests compare each model with a freely associated model, and unsurprisingly,
M1 and M21 fit the data significantly better at p<0.001 (Kline 2015; Rigdon 1994). The coefficients for the
book effect are positive and significant across all 16 groups – 4 countries by 2 backgrounds by 2 language
categories (see Table 5 in Appendix). This is initial evidence in support of H3. However, these two models fit
the data so well that we worry about exclusion restrictions. They ‘behave’ more like justidentified models than
overidentified models (discussed in Hayduk 2014). We need more restrictive testing for H3 and H4.
The models after M21 provide these tests, and are the center of our analyses. In M22 and M23 we force
the book effect to one half the metric size among those speaking a foreign language at home (M22) and those
with a migration background (M33) in comparison with natives and native speakers (again, see Table 4 in
Appendix). These subsequent tests of H1 and H2 pass both exact fit tests with FIML but fail with MLMV. They
fail the equal fit tests revealing that M11 (the model with more df) fits the data significantly worse than M22

11

and M23 at p<0.010 respectively. This is evidence to reject H1 and H2 predicting a smaller book effect on
language skills for immigrants, particularly when a non-native language is predominantly spoken at home.10
In M24 and M25 the book effect is constrained to unstandardized coefficient equality within countries
respectively across groups by language and migration background. These models pass Exact_F and Exact_M
tests, implying no difference in covariance structures and thus good fit. This is support of H4 assuming similar
book effects on language aptitude for native and immigrant students; however, stronger support comes from the
equal fit tests showing that both models are not significantly different from M21 at p<0.01. This means they are
favorable because they are smaller (i.e., more parsimonious/more df). We conclude that an identical book effect
across all 16 groups is likely given these data. However, we cannot fully rule out M22 which is not significantly
different from M21, lending caution to the strength of our results. To check this we run an additional equal fit
test between M22 and M24. Given their identical degrees of freedom, the lower X2 supports M24. We do the
same for M23 and M25 finding that M25 is better (p<0.001). This lends strong support to H4 and further
evidence against H1 and H2.
From M26-M30 (similar to M6-M9) we simplify the grouping structure to countries and background
only (8 groups: 4 countries by 2 backgrounds). There is a strong association between language spoken in the
home and immigrant background leading to some matrix cells without many categories (see Table 7 in
Appendix), a restriction leading to more robust results statistically speaking. M27 is plausible with an Exact_F
and Exact_M of marginal significance (p>0.01). Moreover, it is similar to M26 in the equal fit test (p>0.001).
This is weak support of H3. However, we are unable to support H4 that the book effect is identical across the
entire sample including all groups, as M28 fails both exact and equal fit tests. Digging deeper we realize that
unobserved heterogeneity by country could account for this because M29 starts to show signs of covariance
similarity (at p>0.001) when we allow different intercepts in the German group. Freeing just one country while
keeping book effects constrained within the country achieves decent models in M9 and M29. We determine
which country to free based on modification indices. At first blush, this shows how little we need to free to make
the model fit; i.e., that country heterogeneity is a very small problem. We see that although freeing England in
M9 or Germany in M29 leads to different metric book effects, the standardized coefficients are not particularly
different (see Appendix Table 5). This in itself is a finding pointing directly at a similar data generating process
across countries.
Mathematically identical effects may not represent real-world identical effects if groups have different
distributions on books or language aptitude (after adjusting for covariates). Thus, we run M30 where regression
coefficients are constrained to be roughly equal as standardized coefficients, meaning that effects now take on
similar sizes relative to the distributions in each group. This leads to a model with decent exact and strong equal
fit results (at p>0.025), and solid model statistics (see Appendix Table 6: RMSEA 0.19, TLI 1.00, CFI 0.99,
AIC same as M26 [±5], BIC is 60 points less than M26 and 20 less than M29). After manual adjustments up
and down, we have non-significantly different standardized coefficients ranging from 0.18 to 0.25. This
10

We tried different sizes of reduced effects but we settled on ½ because it was the minimum sufficient to make the
smaller set of coefficients significantly different from the larger across all groups.

12

supports H4 and again points at a data generating process that is similar across countries. We run an additional
equal fit test to see if this relative ‘universal’ book effect model performs better than M29. We confirm it is not
significantly worse (p = 0.122), and with two fewer df, it is preferable.

6.2

Visualizing the Results
Given evidence of a universal book effect with little-to-no variation by country and by migration

background, we develop models that exclude the country structure and instead use the four countries as dummy
variables in pooled data in M98/M980 and M99/M990. These models have only two groups, migration
background and native background. These models provide a visual summary of the book effect and variation in
adolescent language aptitude, and a parsimonious model of our theoretical arguments. There are slightly
different coefficients for different groups on covariates, but overall this simple grouping structure provides an
accurate picture of the models with the 8 and 16 groups (see Table 5 in Appendix). Moreover, these simplified
models fit the data well with the book effect restricted to be identical between natives and immigrants. This
suggests that differences on either unobserved country-heterogeneous variables or differences on our actual
observed variables account for some of the observed differences in the book effect; otherwise, fit tests would
have failed. Figure 2 provides the results of M99 along the path model. The figure includes both metric and
standardized coefficients [in brackets] for native and immigrant background groups (see Figure 3 in Appendix
for immigrants with at least one parent foreign-born).

- Figure 2 about here -

Expecting a book effect to be strictly identical across countries or groups is not realistic in a complex
and diverse causal world. However, after adjusting for some of the complexities, we find it plausible that there
is a universal book effect within a narrow range across contexts after adjusting for theoretical confounders. In
Figure 2, the standardized coefficient 0.66 in both models represents the size of the universal book effect. That
means that for every standard deviation higher in number of books in the home, student language test results
predict a 0.66 standard deviations higher language test score on average. Given that our book measure is a
natural log, this means the correlation is curvilinear more pronounced at the lower end of the distribution of
books in the home (closer to zero) and flattening out at the higher end (with hundreds of books). Figure 4
displays the statistical impact of number of books in the home on language aptitude in standard deviations for
immigrants (with both parents foreign-born) and natives (Figure 5 in the Appendix gives the same graphic for
one-parent foreign-born immigrants), given our model. It is a causal impact if our model takes into account all
possible confounding processes and sources of non-random error. This is too great a burden on our model, thus
we only conclude with certainty a statistical impact, not an inferentially causal one.

- Figure 4 about here -

13

Our hypothesis tests come from absolute and relative model testing in our structural equation models,
but Figure 4 demonstrates visually what the so far calculated numbers and figures cannot: The magnitude of the
book effect and its similarity between natives (dotted line) and immigrants (solid). Shifting from 0 to 10 books
statistically improves language skills by 0.4 standard deviations. Moving to 25 and then to 50 increases this to
0.5 and almost 0.6 standard deviations respectively. The native-immigrant gap is not significant and if it were
would represent less than 0.1 standard deviations difference for those with many books and nearly 0 difference
for those with few books. Of course, we mean-centered the language scores within groups to account for the
fact that immigrants have over 2 standard deviations lower scores on average than natives across the four
countries.
To be clear, this apparently universal effect exists independently of human capital and cultural capital
mechanisms as captured statistically in our models. In all four models, the freely estimated effect of books on
reading is roughly zero (0.01 standardized). If human capital were the sole driving force in the book effect,
parents’ reasons for purchasing books would be the same reasons they push their children to read: because the
books are tools of human capital. Yet we see that almost all of the reading effect comes via parents’ education,
entirely by mother’s education in fact, which renders the multivariate effect of father’s education nil. Note that
mother’s education has a freely estimated standardized coefficient of 0.96 for both natives and immigrants. A
huge effect by any imaginable criteria. Thus, human capital plays a major role, but only directly from parents’
education to books and reading, not indirectly from books through reading, therefore reading cannot mediate
the book effect. As tools of human capital, the books do not lead children to read more, but still have an impact
on academic aptitude. We also do not find evidence of cultural capital as a mechanism of elite closure. Cultural
capital might work differently for immigrants and natives, but it does not distort the book effect here. Immigrant
or non-native language background does not moderate the book effect. Thus, there seems to be no general
cultural capital advantage in the book effect for natives. This is evidence of both H3 and H4.

7

DISCUSSION
In this paper, we reproduced a common finding of a significant statistical positive effect of books in the

home on markers of social mobility. In our case, adolescent language skills. More concretely, we identified a
relation between books in the home and adolescents’ language abilities that exists after conditioning on parental
education and adolescents’ reading habits. Expanding the knowledge base of previous research, we tested the
impact of books on language aptitude for native compared with immigrant students. Including immigrant
students in our analyses provided us with the opportunity to proximally test if the positive effect of books
remains after conditioning on language and native elite culture. We tested this assumption for 14-year old
students in varying contexts using data for adolescents in England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden,
surveyed in 2010 and 2011.
Our results speak in favor of a universal book effect that does not appear to significantly differ between
natives and immigrants or by language spoken in the home in its impact on a language aptitude test for

14

adolescents in all four countries. Using multigroup structural equation modeling, we found that constraining the
book effect to be equal between natives and immigrants fits the observed data well. This means that our formal
path model is an equally good explanation of what we observed in the data compared to a model without
theoretical assumption with the book effect freely estimated across groups and between variables. These results
held true when we defined immigrants as having at least one foreign-born parent or as strictly with two foreignborn parents; and held when dividing native and immigrant groups into those that speak the country’s native
language primarily at home versus not. Thus, we find further evidence of a universal book effect that exists
independently of human capital (measured as parent’s education and children’s reading habits), and cultural
capital (in the elite closure form, as seen in a unit-by-unit increase that is roughly equal for natives and
immigrants, and those with or without the native language spoken at home). The latter suggests there is no
threshold of books or type of books effect, supporting previous findings albeit with a much stricter model
targeting covariance structures.
Our formal model derives from the causal arguments in human and cultural capital theories, but we
cannot rule out all sources of potential confounding and therefore cannot argue along orthodox causal lines.
Much of the black box of the book effect remains enshrouded as we lack questions on book types and parentchild book interactions, thus our findings are limited to the strength of the data and are evidence of total (causal)
effects that might contain confounders going in either direction. But our evidence speaks loudly against human
capital or cultural capital as the only features of the book effect. Our evidence also suggests that the book effect
exists for lower socioeconomic background children. According to Lareau and Bourdieu’s work, and according
to the scholarly culture hypothesis, lower SES parents do not normally offer their children concerted cultivation
of the values that bring them success in academic settings and in later life mobility. This is supported in our
data to some extent with parental education having an effect on adolescent test scores; however, the fact that
books matter independent of parental education – in other words matters equally for low and high educated
adolescents – is evidence that the books themselves provide opportunities for the children that unlikely come
from the parents’ scholarly values or concerted cultivation. Thus, the universal book effect comes both from
parents and in a perchance form given the books’ presence in homes. More research should confirm that books
themselves give a random opportunity for children to discover bookish values.
We suggest a harmonious extension of the scholarly culture hypothesis alongside cultural capital
explanations. Our findings in M30 suggest that cultural capital might remain a factor. Although M30 is not a
‘smoking-gun’ at p>0.001 for exact and equal fit tests, it is evidence of tiny variance in the book effect that
remains alongside the large common variance across countries and immigrant versus native background groups.
This variation is evident in slightly smaller effects for the immigrant background group (standardized
coefficients from 0.18 to 0.21) compared to the native group (0.20 to 0.25)11. Looking at models where the
effect is constrained to mathematical equality in unstandardized coefficients, the standardized effects sometimes
11

Although we use caution here because even standardized effects can mask variance properties that signal alternative
processes across groups.

15

appear slightly smaller for immigrants as well, for example M29 (see Table 5). Although these differences are
not statistically significant in a Wald test, they are suggestive that there might be some small effects attributable
to cultural capital in the qualities of the books. Effects that slightly reduces the impact of books on adolescent
achievement for immigrants.
The scholarly culture explanation does not fully exclude human capital arguments. Both father’s and
mother’s education are critical predictors of number of books in the home. As we know that higher status parents
seek to pass their status on to their children, we assume that books are one component in this process including
several other tools such as computers, tutors, and logic-solving games. Thus, a desire to transmit human capital
may increase the likelihood that children become aware of books because of other human capital development
tools unobserved in our data. This is a big claim, requiring that parents of low SES background in particular
must be aware of the value and power of books and attempt to transmit this as a means to furthering their child’s
life chances, while not pushing the child to read more. This is an unlikely version of human capital in the realm
of our logic, but we cannot rule it out based on these data.
This research has some further shortcomings. We expect number of books and reading habits are
reciprocally causal. Children who enjoy reading demand more books from their parents, or parents reward
reading habits with more books. By having path e in the model (see Figure 1) we hope to control for this
reciprocal process without explicitly modeling it, as this would require additional model parameters that we do
not have (i.e., variables or known, non-causal paths). Also, were unable to test our hypotheses on immigrant
groups with different backgrounds by culture or country of birth. It is possible that by lumping high status
immigrants with blue-collar, unskilled immigrants, or Eastern Europeans with Muslim-culture immigrants that
the heterogeneous book effects appear similar due to pooling. However, a similar argument could be made for
heterogeneous native groups. We think this is unlikely to be a serious problem for two reasons. The first is that
we control for parents’ education and this should roughly capture much of the socioeconomic status of the
household. The second is that if single groups had wildly different effects within the group we would expect
the book effect to be non-significant or the model fit statistics to inflate, and this is not what we observe. Yet,
we made a strong assumption that immigrants and those speaking a foreign language at home have, on average,
books with diverging contents than natives. In future cross-national surveys our hope is that the exact contents
of books will be queried such as how many classics, collector’s items, high culture, and so forth.
Another issue might be lack of information on whom the books belong to or where they are located.
Even if parents own a large number of books, their children might not necessarily interact with the physical
space where the books are located. Moreover, some children might have many books in their own bedrooms
and other siblings not. As we consider the amount of time spent reading books outside of school, we consider
(at least partly) whether students are actively using books in their homes. What this points at is the need to
consider the measurement error associated with books in the home, and to find ways to survey the awareness
mechanism proposed by our theory. This measurement problem is further exacerbated in CILS4EU because,
unlike PISA, there is no answer category “none” for the number of books in the home. Instead, respondents
who have no books in the home are lumped into the category with those having as many as twenty-five. Previous

16

research demonstrates that the purpose of logging the actual number of books captures the huge differences
between those with no books and those with just a few. We suspect that this under-represents the size of the
effect because of the unobserved gap at the lower end of the distribution.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that more books in a childhood home increases the chances that the
child will perform better in school and, as a result attain higher socioeconomic status later in life independently
of parental education and child reading habits. We argue that books increase the likelihood of the child
perchance becoming aware of them and in doing so, gaining complexity, open-mindedness and scholarly values.
Simply adding books to a home should have an impact on children’s chances in life, but this impact is nothing
like the impact that parents’ education has on aptitude both directly and indirectly on aptitude through more
books in the home and increased reading habits in the child. Given a policymakers’ or parents’ desire to improve
children’s chances in life, a cost-benefit analysis ensues weighing the cost of giving books to parents (and trying
to enforce that they keep them at home and show them to the children) versus educating the parents on the
values of scholarly culture and how to transmit them to the children.

17

8

REFERENCES

Asparouhov, Tihomir and Bengt Muthén. 2016. “Structural Equation Models and Mixture Models With
Continuous Nonnormal Skewed Distributions.” Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary
Journal 23(1):1–19.
Barone, Diane M., Marla H. Mallette, and Shelley Hong Xu. 2005. Teaching Early Literacy: Development,
Assessment, and Instruction. New York: Guilford Press.
Becker, Birgit. 2010. “The Transfer of Cultural Knowledge in the Early Childhood: Social and Ethnic
Disparities and the Mediating Role of Familial Activities.” European Sociological Review 26(1):17–29.
Becker, Birgit. 2011. “Cognitive and Language Skills of Turkish Children in Germany: A Comparison of the
Second and Third Generation and Mixed Generational Groups1.” International Migration Review
45(2):426–59.
Becker, Gary S. 1993. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to
Education. 3rd ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.” Journal of
Labor Economics 4(3):S1–39.
Bollen, Kenneth A. 1989. Structural Equations with Latent Variables. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1986. “The Forms of Capital.” Pp. 241–58 in Handbook of Theory and Research for The
Sociology of Education, edited by J. Richardson. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Bourdieu, Pierre and Jean-Claude Passeron. 1990. Reproduction in Education, Society and Culture. 2nd ed.
edited by T. Bottomore(Traslator). London: Sage Publications.
Bradley, Robert H, Bettye M Caldwell, and Stephen L Rock. 1988. “Home Environment and School
Performance: A Ten-Year Follow-Up and Examination of Three Models of Environmental Action.”
Child Development 59(4):852–67.
Breen, Richard and John H. Goldthorpe. 1997. “Explaining Educational Differentials: Towards a Formal
Rational Action Theory.” Rationality and Society 9(3):275–305.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J Duncan, Pamela Kato Klebanov, and Naomi Sealand. 1993. “Do
Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?” American Journal of Sociology
99(2):353–95.
CILS4EU. 2016. Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Survey in Four European Countries. Technical Report.
Wave 1 – 2010/2011, v1.2.0. Mannheim: Mannheim University.
Coleman, James S., Ernest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland, and Robert Mood, Alexander
M. Weinfeld, Frederic D. York. 1966. “Equality of Educational Opportunity.” 1066–5684.
DiMaggio, Paul. 1982. “Cultural Capital and School Success: The Impact of Status Culture Participation on
the Grades of U.S. High School Students.” American Sociological Review 47(2):189–201.
Engzell, P. (2018). What Do Books in the Home Proxy For? A Cautionary Tale. SocArXiv, July 27.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/a6jny
Esser, Hartmut. 1999. Soziologie–Spezielle Grundlagen. Band 1: Situationslogik Und Handeln. Frankfurt am
Main, New York: Campus.
Evans, M. D. R., J. Kelley, and J. Sikora. 2014. “Scholarly Culture and Academic Performance in 42
Nations.” Social Forces 92:1573–1605.
Evans, M. D. R., Jonathan Kelley, Joanna Sikora, and Donald J. Treiman. 2010. “Family Scholarly Culture
and Educational Success: Books and Schooling in 27 Nations.” Research in Social Stratification and
Mobility 28(2):171–97.
Evans, M. D. R., Jonathan Kelley, Joanna Sikora, and Donald J. Treiman. 2015 “Scholarly Culture and
Occupational Success in 31 Societies.” Comparative Sociology.
Fergusson, David M., L.John Horwood, and Joseph M. Boden. 2008. “The Transmission of Social Inequality:
Examination of the Linkages between Family Socioeconomic Status in Childhood and Educational

18

Achievement in Young Adulthood.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 26(3):277–95.
Foy, Judith G. and Virginia Mann. 2003. “Home Literacy Environment and Phonological Awareness in
Preschool Children: Differential Effects for Rhyme and Phoneme Awareness.” Applied
Psycholinguistics 24(1):59–88.
Ganzeboom, H. B. G., P. M. de Graaf, and P. Robert. 1990. “Cultural Reproduction Theory on Socialist
Ground.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 9(11728):79–104.
Georg, Werner. 2004. “Cultural Capital and Social Inequality in the Life Course.” European Sociological
Review 20(4):333–44.
Goodman, Kenneth S. and Yetta M. Goodman. 1979. “Learning to Read Is Natural.” Pp. 137–54 in Theory
and Practice of Early Reading: Volume 1, edited by L. B. Resnick and P. A. Weaver. New York and
London: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.
Dali, Keren. 2012. “Reading Their Way through Immigration: The Leisure Reading Practices of RussianSpeaking Immigrants in Canada.” Library & Information Science Research 34(3):197–211.
De Graaf, Nan Dirk, Paul M. De Graaf, and Gerbert Kraaykamp. 2000. “Parental Cultural Capital and
Educational Attainment in the Netherlands: A Refinement of the Cultural Capital Perspective.”
Sociology of Education 73(2):92–111.
Hayduk, Leslie A. 2014. “Seeing Perfectly Fitting Factor Models That Are Causally Misspecified:
Understanding That Close-Fitting Models Can Be Worse.” Educational and Psychological Measurement
74(6):905–26.
Hayduk, Leslie A., Greta Cummings, Kwame Boadu, Hannah Pazderka-Robinson, and Shelley Boulianne.
2007. “Testing! Testing! One, Two, Three – Testing the Theory in Structural Equation Models!”
Personality and Individual Differences 42(5):841–50.
Heath, Anthony and Yaël Brinbaum. 2007. “Guest Editorial: Explaining Ethnic Inequalities in Educational
Attainment.” Ethnicities 7(3):291–304.
Heller, Kurt A, and Christoph Perleth. 2000. Kognitiver Fähigkeitstest Für 4. Bis 12. Klassen, Revision: KFT
4-12+ R. Göttingen: Beltz-Test.
Jæger, Mads Meier. 2011. “Does Cultural Capital Really Affect Academic Achievement? New Evidence from
Combined Sibling and Panel Data.” Sociology of Education 84(4):281–98.
Jungbauer-Gans, Monika. 2004. “Einfluss Des Sozialen Und Kulturellen Kapitals Auf Die Lesekompetenz:
Ein Vergleich Der PISA 2000-Daten Aus Deutschland, Frankreich Und Der Schweiz/The Influence of
Social and Cultural Capital on Reading Achievement: A Comparison of Germany, France, and
Switzerland.” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 33(5):375–97.
Kalter, Frank et al. 2016. “Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Survey in Four European Countries
(CILS4EU).” Version 1.2.0.
Kalter, Frank and Nadia Granato. 2007. “Ethnic Hurdles on the Way to Structural Assimilation in Germany.”
Pp. 271–319 in Unequal Chances: Ethnic Minorities in Western Labour Markets. Proceedings of the
British Academy, edited by A. F. Heath and Sin Yi Cheung. Oxford: Oxford University Press for the
British Academy.
Kline, Rex B. 2015. Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling. 4th Editio. New York and
London: Guilford Press.
Kraaykamp, Gerbert and Paul Nieuwbeerta. 2000. “Parental Background and Lifestyle Differentiation in
Eastern Europe: Social, Political, and Cultural Intergenerational Transmission in Five Former Socialist
Societies.” Social Science Research 29(1):92–122.
Kristen, Cornelia and Nadia Granato. 2007. “The Educational Attainment of the Second Generation in
Germany: Social Origins and Ethnic Inequality .” Ethnicities 7(3):343–66.
Lamont, Michele and Annette Lareau. 1988. “Cultural Capital: Allusions, Gaps and Glissandos in Recent
Theoretical Developments.” Sociological Theory 6(2):153–68.
Lareau, Annette. 2002. “Invisible Inequality: Social Class and Childrearing in Black Families and White

19

Families.” American Sociological Review 67(5):747–76.
Lareau, Annette. 2015. “Cultural Knowledge and Social Inequality.” American Sociological Review 80(1):1–
27.
Lee, Elizabeth M. and Grace Kao. 2009. “Less Bang for the Buck? Cultural Capital and Immigrant Status
Effects on Kindergarten Academic Outcomes.” Poetics 37(3):201–26.
Leopold, Liliya and Yossi Shavit. 2013. “Cultural Capital Does Not Travel Well: Immigrants, Natives and
Achievement in Israeli Schools.” European Sociological Review 29(3):450–63.
Leseman, Paul P M, and Dymphna C van den Boom. 1999. “Effects of Quantity and Quality of Home
Proximal Processes on Dutch, Surinamese–Dutch and Turkish–Dutch Pre-Schoolers’ Cognitive
Development.” Infant and Child Development 8(1):19–38.
Listwon, Anna, and Barbara Sen. 2009. “Public Library Services and The Polish Community in England:
Case Study.” Library Review 58(4): 290–300.
Marks, Gary N. 2005. “Accounting for Immigrant Non-Immigrant Differences in Reading and Mathematics in
Twenty Countries.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 28(5):925–46.
Marks, Gary N. 2011. “Issues in the Conceptualisation and Measurement of Socio-Economic Background: Do
Different Measures Generate Different Conclusions.” Social Indicators Research 104: 225–51.
Marks, Gary N, and Julie McMillan. 2003. “Declining Inequality? The Changing Impact of Socio-Economic
Background and Ability on Education in Australia.” The British Journal of Sociology 54(4): 453–71.
Mullis, Ina V. S., Michael O. Martin, P. Foy, and M. Hooper. 2017. PIRLS 2016 International Results in
Reading. Boston College, TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center.
Payne, Adam C., Grover J. Whitehurst, and Andrea L. Angell. 1994. “The Role of Home Literacy
Environment in the Development of Language Ability in Preschool Children from Low-Income
Families.” Early Childhood Research Quarterly 9(3):427–40.
Rigdon, Edward E. 1994. “Calculating Degrees of Freedom for a Structural Equation Model.” Structural
Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal 1(3):274–78.
Schneider, Silke L. and Irena Kogan. 2008. “Challenges in the Application to National Data and the
Implementation in Cross-National Surveys.” Pp. 13–46 in The International Standard Classification of
Education (ISCED-97): An Evaluation of Content and Criterion Validity for 15 European Countries,
edited by Silke L. Schneider. Mannheim, Germany: Mannheim Centre for European Social Research.
Sénéchal, Monique, Jo-Anne LeFevre, Ernie Hudson, and E.Penelope Lawson. 1996. “Knowledge of
Storybooks as a Predictor of Young Children’s Vocabulary.” Journal of Educational Psychology
88(3):520–36.
Skubic, Darija. 2014. “Children’s Knowledge of the Concept of Print (Books) as an Element of Early
Literacy.” US-China Education Review 4(4):268–78.
Spaeth, Joe L. 1976. “Cognitive Complexity: A Dimension Underlying the Socioeconomic Achievement
Process.” Pp. 103–31 in Schooling and Achievement in American Society, edited by William H Sewell,
R. M. Hauser, and D. L. Featherman. New York: Academic Press.
Strobel, Bernadette. 2016. “Does Family Language Matter? The Role of Foreign Language Use and Family
Social Capital in the Educational Achievement of Immigrant Students in Germany.” Ethnic and Racial
Studies 39(14): 2641–63.
Tsai, Shu-Ling, Michael L. Smith, and Robert M. Hauser. 2017. “Families, Schools, and Student
Achievement Inequality.” Sociology of Education 90(1):64–88.
Van Dijk, Henk, and Peter J Tellegen. 2004. “NIO Nederlandse Intelligentietest Voor Onderwijsniveau.”
ECLG: Handleiding en Verantwoording.

20

TABLES
Table 2. Observed Correlations for All Variables by Migration Background
- - - - - - - Native - - - - - - LAN_TEST Books (c)
LAN_TEST
Books (c)
BOOKS
READS
FGN_LANG
MOM_ED
DAD_ED
IMM_AGE

1
0.17
0.25
0.23
-0.11
0.20
0.18
-0.08

1
0.83
0.28
-0.01
0.18
0.18
0.00

Books (c)
BOOKS
READS
FGN_LANG
MOM_ED
DAD_ED
IMM_AGE

1
0.18
0.24
0.15
-0.25
0.21
0.16
-0.15

1
0.82
0.21
-0.13
0.19
0.18
-0.03

Books (c)
BOOKS
READS
FGN_LANG
MOM_ED
DAD_ED
IMM_AGE

1
0.10
0.16
0.15
-0.13
0.18
0.15
-0.10

1
0.80
0.18
-0.07
0.15
0.15
0.02

FGN_LANG MOM_ED

BOOKS

READS

1
0.62
-0.08

FGN_LANG MOM_ED

1
0.26
1
-0.17
0.01
1
0.24
0.08
-0.12
1
0.23
0.11
-0.04
0.52
-0.06
0.07
0.19
-0.01
- - - - Immigrant, both parents - - - -

LAN_TEST Books (c)
LAN_TEST

READS

1
0.35
1
-0.02
0.00
1
0.21
0.11
-0.09
0.21
0.10
-0.07
-0.02
0.01
0.19
- - - - Immigrant, one parent - - - -

LAN_TEST Books (c)
LAN_TEST

BOOKS

BOOKS

READS

1
0.24
-0.09
0.20
0.20
0.00

1
0.01
0.08
0.11
0.08

FGN_LANG MOM_ED

1
-0.05
0.01
0.10

1
0.53
0.04

DAD_ED

IMM_AGE

1
-0.06

1

DAD_ED

IMM_AGE

1
-0.01

1

DAD_ED

IMM_AGE

1
0.02

1

Note: Pairwise Pearson Correlations. For variables descriptions see Table 1 and the text. "Books (c)" refers to
the un-logged measure of books.

21

Table 3. Models Testing The Book Effect on Adolescent Language Aptitude. 9th Graders.
CILS4EU Data, England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Chi-square testsa
Model Χ

2

M1
M2
M3
M4
M5

16.9
54.9
66.7
34.7
43.1

M6
M7
M8
M9

11.3
19.3
46.6
28.2

M21
M22
M23
M24
M25

16.9
29.3
41.5
19.1
41.8

M26
M27
M28
M29
M30

6.2
25.6
64.7
32.7
28.5

M98
M99

7.3
12.0

b

df Exact_F Exact_M Equal
Group Structure & Model Description
One Immigrant Parent (at least) / 16 groups
31 0.981 0.125 0.000 All parameters free by group
39 0.047 0.000 0.002 M1 + 1/2 size book effect if foreign language
39 0.004 0.000 0.000 M1 + 1/2 size book effect if immigrant background
39 0.666 0.007 0.017 M1 + equal book effect by language
43 0.466 0.004 0.012 M1 + equal book effect by background
One Immigrant Parent (at least) / 8 groups
23 0.979 0.831 0.000 All parameters free by group
27 0.858 0.557 0.137 M6 + equal book effect by background
30 0.027 0.001 0.000 M7 + equal book effect all groups
29 0.507 0.240 0.030 M8 + book effect free for England
Two Immigrant Parents / 12 groups
23 0.814 0.075 0.000 All parameters free by group
27 0.347 0.009 0.202 M21 + 1/2 size book effect if foreign language
31 0.099 0.001 0.006 M21 + 1/2 size book effect if immigrant background
27 0.866 0.183 0.727 M21 + equal book effect by language
41 0.437 0.068 0.212 M21 + equal book effect by background
Two Immigrant Parents / 8 groups
0.628 0.336 0.000 All parameters free by group
8
12 0.012 0.012 0.005 M26 + equal book effect by background
15 0.000 0.000 0.000 M27 + equal book effect all groups
14 0.003 0.004 0.002 M28 + book effect free for Germany
16 0.028 0.040 0.029 M29 + equal standarized effects
2 groups (Figures 2 & 3)
10 0.694 0.379 0.000 One parent immigrant (at least)
10 0.286 0.101 0.000 Both parents immigrants

Constraint
Test (Figure 1)
H3
H1
H2
H4
H4

none
f<0
g<0
f=0
g=0

H3
H4
H5
H5

none
f = 0;g = 0
h = 0;i = 0
h = 0;i = 0

H3
H1
H2
H4
H4

none
f<0
g<0
f=0
g=0

H3
none
H4 f = 0;g = 0
H5 h = 0;i = 0
H5 h = 0;i = 0
H5 h = 0;i = 0 c
H3 & H5
H3 & H5

a

Estimator MLMV; exact("Exact_M") and "Equal" fit hypothesis tests' p-values (Kline 2015); The test modeling is as follows with test
models(comparison model): M1(baseline), M2-M5(M1), M6(baseline), M7-M9(M6), M21(baseline), M22-M25(M21), M26(baseline), M27M29(M26); Chi-square(X2), df and "Exact_F" reported from FIML sensitivity models M11-M19 & M31-M39 in Appendix Table 4.
b

For coefficients see Figs 2 and 3, and Table 5; READS intercepts equal across groups; case n in Appendix Table 7; 12 groups = 4
countries X 2 backgrounds (native or not) X 2 languages (native or not), excludes 4 groups of native background with foreign language
spoken at home; 8 groups = 4 countries X 2 backgrounds; 2 groups = 2 backgrounds.
c

Relative zero given the different distributions by group

Technical Note : Table 3 uses MLMV and analogous models are tested in Table 4 with FIML. M1-M20 are with one-parent foreign-born and
M21-M40 with two. Thus, e.g., M1=M11=M21=M31 structurally, and so forth. M1-M5 involve 16 groups, four groups within each country
including native-born native-language speakers, native-born foreign-language speakers, immigrant native speakers and immigrant foreignlanguage speakers; M11-M15 are identical to M1-M5 except we drop the four groups of native-born foreign-language speakers due to
collinearity of foreign-language and immigrant background as variables and grouping structure. The remaining models use only eight groups,
native or immigrant in four countries. We focus on the results in M21-M40 because they offer the strictest tests of the scholarly culture
hypothesis defining immigrants only as those with both parents born abroad.

22

FIGURES
Figure 1. Formal Model of the Theoretical Causes of Adolescent Language Aptitude

23

Figure 2. Structural Equation Estimates of Adolescent Language Aptitude.
CILS4EU Data; England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Immigrants with both parents foreign-born.
Natives
α=0.00, θ=0.12

MOM_ED

READS

0.47* [0.96]
0.15* [0.33]

0.00 [0.00]

DAD_ED

0.01 [0.01]

0.63* [0.11]
0.26* [0.17]

AGE_IMM

0.57* [0.15]

0.01*
[0.01]

LAN_TEST
-0.36* [-0.07]

0.66* [0.17]

α=17.2, θ=14.2

BOOKS

-0.03 [-0.02]

α=0.07, θ=1.34

Immigrants
α=0.00, θ=0.12

MOM_ED
0.11* [0.24]

0.00 [0.00]

DAD_ED

-0.03* [-0.08]

0.42 [0.11]

-0.14 [-0.07]
0.56* [0.11]

0.22* [0.18]

AGE_IMM

READS

0.47* [0.96]

0.01
[0.01]

LAN_TEST
-0.21* [-0.16]

0.66* [0.15]

α=17.1, θ=15.7

BOOKS
α=-0.26, θ=1.27

NOTE: *p<0.001, beta coefficients [standardized coefficients], α=intercept and θ=residual error variance. MLMV
estimator, see Tables 2 and 5 for model statistics. Total N=15,704 (Natives=9,884).

24

APPENDIX
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics. CILS4EU data in England, Germany, The Netherlands and Sweden
variable
LAN_TEST

scale of language aptitude test scores

LAN_TEST

mean
sd
- - - - Native - - - 11,103 16.85 4.89

BOOKS

nat. log continuous [books (c)], centered

BOOKS

10,256

4.42

1.27

2.53

6.62

Books (c)

continuous at midpoints, country centered

Books (c)

10,256

169

204

12.5

750

READS

continuous from "never"=1 to "every day" =5 READS

10,561

2.36

1.31

1

5.00

FGN_LANG

"always" or "often" non-native language
spoken at home = 1

FGN_LANG

11,622

0.03

0.18

0

1

MOM_ED

for both mom and dad: "less than primary/
none/ unknown" =0, "primary" =1,
"secondary" =2 and "tertiary" =3
in years (0= less than 1 or native-born)

MOM_ED

11,622

1.68

0.90

0

3

DAD_ED

11,622

1.60

0.95

0

3

IMM_AGE

11,276

0.06

0.78

0

15

DAD_ED
IMM_AGE

measure

label

n

min

max

0

30

a

- - - - Immigrant, one parent - - - LAN_TEST
7,238
13.79 5.37
0
BOOKS
6,163
3.89
1.26 2.53
Books (c)
6,163
111
168 12.5
READS
6,444
2.46
1.31
1
FGN_LANG
7,426
0.61
0.49
0
MOM_ED
7,426
1.43
1.02
0
DAD_ED
7,426
1.44
1.07
0
IMM_AGE
7,315
1.84
3.81
0
a
- - - - Immigrant, both parents - - - LAN_TEST
5,030
12.97 5.19
0
BOOKS
4,189
3.71
1.20 2.53
Books (c)
4,189
90
147 12.5
READS
4,383
2.46
1.31
1
FGN_LANG
5,152
0.73
0.44
0
MOM_ED
5,152
1.34
1.03
0
DAD_ED
5,152
1.39
1.07
0
IMM_AGE
5,055
2.43
4.24
0
a

30
6.62
750
5.00
1
3
3
15
30
6.62
750
5.00
1
3
3
15

Immigrant coded as at least 'one parent' foreign-born or 'both parents' foreign-born. Total cases without missing on dependent
variable: 18,341 overall and 15,704 with listwise deletion of missing on all variables in the table.

25

Figure 3. Structural Equation Estimates of Adolescent Language Aptitude.
CILS4EU Data; England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Immigrants with at least one parent foreign-born.
Natives
α=0.00, θ=0.12

MOM_ED

READS

0.46* [0.96]
0.15* [0.33]

0.00 [0.00]

DAD_ED

0.04 [0.02]

0.59* [0.10]
0.25* [0.16]

AGE_IMM

0.52* [0.14]

0.01*
[0.01]

LAN_TEST
-0.29* [-0.04]

0.69* [0.18]

α=17.2, θ=13.9

BOOKS

-0.03 [-0.02]

α=0.08, θ=1.33

Immigrants
α=0.00, θ=0.12

MOM_ED
0.12* [0.25]

0.01 [0.00]

DAD_ED

-0.03* [-0.08]

0.50* [0.12]

-0.14 [-0.07]
0.72* [0.14]

0.27* [0.22]

AGE_IMM

READS

0.47* [0.96]

0.01
[0.01]

LAN_TEST
-0.26* [-0.17]

0.69* [0.16]

α=17.2, θ=16.2

BOOKS
α=-0.12, θ=1.36

NOTE: *p<0.001, beta coefficients [standardized coefficients], α=intercept and θ=residual error variance. MLMV
estimator, see Tables 2 and 5 for model statistics.

26

Figure 4. The Book Effect on Language Ability between Natives and
Children of Two Immigrant Parents

27

Table 4. The Book Effect on Adolescent Language Aptitude. Table 3 Models Re-Specified with FIML.
CILS4EU Data, England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Chi-square testsa
Constraint
Model

Χ2

df

M11
M12
M13
M14
M15

16.4
55.1
64.0
34.7
43.3

31
39
39
39
43

M16
M17
M18
M19

11.1
19.4
55.8
29.3

23
27
30
29

M31
M32
M33
M34
M35

16.9
29.3
41.5
19.1
41.8

23
27
31
27
41

M36
M37
M38
M39
M40

6.2
25.6
64.7
32.7
28.5

8
12
15
14
16

M980
M990

7.3
12.0

10
10

Exact Equal
Group Structure & Model Description b
Testd
One Immigrant Parent (at least) / 16 groups
0.986 n/a
All parameters free by group
H3
0.045 n/a
M11 + 1/2 size book effect if foreign language
H1
0.007 n/a
M11 + 1/2 size book effect if immigrant background
H2
0.664 n/a
M11 + equal book effect by language
H4
0.456 n/a
M11 + equal book effect by background
H4
One Immigrant Parent (at least) / 8 groups
0.983 n/a
All parameters free by group
H3
n/a
M16
+
equal
book
effect
by
background
0.857
H4
0.003 n/a
M17 + equal book effect all groups
H5
0.449 n/a
M18 + book effect free for England
H5
Two Immigrant Parents / 12 groups
n/a
0.814
All parameters free by group
H3
n/a
0.347
M31 + 1/2 size book effect if foreign language
H1
0.099 n/a
M31 + 1/2 size book effect if immigrant background
H2
0.866 n/a
M31 + equal book effect by language
H4
0.437 n/a
M31 + equal book effect by background
H4
Two Immigrant Parents / 8 groups
0.628 n/a
All parameters free by group
H3
M36 + equal book effect by background
0.012 n/a
H4
0.000 n/a
M37 + equal book effect all groups
H5
0.003 n/a
M38 + book effect free for Germany
H5
0.028 n/a
M39 + equal standarized effects
H5
2 groups (Figures 2 & 3)
0.694 n/a
One parent immigrant (at least)
H3 & H5
Both parents immigrants
H3 & H5
0.286 n/a

(Figure 1)
none
f<0
g<0
f=0
g=0
none
f = 0;g = 0
h = 0;i = 0
h = 0;i = 0
none
f<0
g<0
f=0
g=0
none
f = 0;g = 0
h = 0;i = 0
h = 0;i = 0
h = 0;i = 0 c

a

Estimator FIML; Equal fit tests not possible; Exact fit tests reported in Tables 3 and 4 as substitutes.

b

READS intercepts equal across groups; 12 groups = 4 countries X 2 backgrounds (native or not) X 2 languages (native or not),
excludes 4 groups of native background with foreign language spoken at home; 8 groups = 4 countries X 2 backgrounds; 2 groups
= 2 backgrounds.
c

Zero after adjusting for the distributions (mean/variance) by group

28

Table 5. Metric (b) and Standardized (B) Coefficients for Selected Models from Table 3
Back
gro
und
Model M1
EN Native
EN Imm.
EN Native
EN Imm.
DE Native
DE Imm.
DE Native
DE Imm.
NT Native
NT Imm.
NT Native
NT Imm.
SE Native
SE Imm.
SE Native
SE Imm.
Model M6
EN Native
EN Imm.
DE Native
DE Imm.
NT Native
NT Imm.
SE Native
SE Imm.
Model M8
EN Native
EN Imm.
DE Native
DE Imm.
NT Native
NT Imm.
SE Native
SE Imm.

Lan LAN_TEST ON
gu
BOOKS
MOM_ED
age b
B
b
B
Nat.
Nat.
Fgn.a
Fgn.
Nat.
Nat.
Fgn.a
Fgn.
Nat.
Nat.
Fgn.a
Fgn.
Nat.
Nat.
Fgn.a
Fgn.

BOOKS ON
DAD_ED

b

B

READS

b

0.49
0.41
0.70
0.44
0.83
1.02
1.67
0.74
0.54
0.85
1.29
0.92
0.71
0.84
1.46
0.44

*
*
†
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.22
0.17
0.24
0.16
0.25
0.30
0.54
0.22
0.16
0.23
0.35
0.24
0.19
0.22
0.41
0.11

0.09
0.08 0.52 * 0.16 0.19
-0.23 -0.19 0.54 * 0.17 0.72
-0.96 -0.80 -0.57 -0.16 2.57
-0.07 -0.05 0.38 † 0.11 0.45
-0.12 -0.08 1.19 * 0.19 0.78
-0.62 † -0.38 1.10 * 0.21 1.80
-0.85 -0.52 1.43
0.23 1.53
-0.18 -0.12 1.10 * 0.25 0.47
-0.15 -0.09 0.83 * 0.12 1.13
-0.06 -0.04 0.65 * 0.13 0.08
0.26
0.15 0.69
0.10 0.26
-0.35 -0.21 0.64 * 0.14 0.63
0.42 * 0.25 0.32 * 0.08 -0.05
0.03
0.02 0.56 * 0.13 0.33
-0.14 -0.07 -0.13 -0.03 0.99
0.34
0.20 0.45 * 0.11 -0.33

0.50
0.43
0.85
0.84
0.57
0.89
0.73
0.61

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.22
0.17
0.26
0.24
0.16
0.23
0.20
0.16

0.07
0.07 0.52 * 0.15
-0.16 -0.12 0.47 * 0.14
-0.14 -0.09 1.20 * 0.19
-0.30 † -0.19 1.09 * 0.22
-0.13 -0.08 0.82 * 0.12
-0.22 -0.12 0.65 * 0.13
0.41 * 0.24 0.31 * 0.07
0.25
0.13 0.49 * 0.11

0.22
0.59
0.80
0.85
1.10
0.37
-0.04
-0.08

0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.28
0.24
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.17
0.17
0.16

0.05
0.05 0.47 * 0.14
-0.18 -0.14 0.40 * 0.12
-0.12 -0.08 1.26 * 0.20
-0.29 † -0.18 1.14 * 0.24
-0.14 -0.08 0.80 * 0.12
-0.21 -0.12 0.71 * 0.15
0.42 * 0.25 0.32 * 0.08
0.24
0.13 0.49 * 0.11

0.21
0.57
0.82
0.88
1.09
0.42
-0.02
-0.08

B

AGE_IMM

MOM_ED

DAD_ED

FGN_LANG

AGE_IMM

b

b

b

B

b

b

b

B

0.08
† 0.30
1.11
0.17
* 0.26
* 0.54
0.46
0.15
* 0.32
0.02
0.07
0.17
-0.01
0.09
0.24
-0.09

†
*
*
*

†
*
*
*

READS ON

FGN_LANG

0.10
0.23
0.27
0.26
0.31
0.10
-0.01
-0.02

0.49
-0.07
-2.12
-1.46
-0.37
-1.72
-1.73
-1.20

0.09
0.22
0.28
0.27
0.30
0.11
-0.01
-0.02

0.52
-0.02
-2.23
-1.50
-0.36
-1.80
-1.75
-1.19

*
*
*
†
*

*
*
*
†
*

B

B

B

0.00
† -0.10
-0.18
-0.02
* 0.01
-0.03
† -0.12
† -0.06
-0.01
-0.04
-0.07
-0.02
-0.01
† -0.11
-0.18
-0.05

b

B

Intercepts / Residual variance
MOM_ED

b

B

DAD_ED

b

B

LAN_TEST

b

var

BOOKS

READS

b

b

var

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.11

var

-0.06
-0.28
-1.06
-0.21
0.13
-0.30
-0.15
-0.12
-0.22
-0.33
-1.37
-0.26
-0.78
-0.47
-0.17
-0.24

-0.02 0.19 *
* -0.28 0.15 *
* -0.55 0.11
* -0.30 0.14 *
0.01 0.15 *
* -0.13 0.16 *
-0.03 0.21 †
* -0.10 0.13 *
-0.03 0.14 *
* -0.15 0.08 *
-0.10 0.18 *
* -0.19 0.11 *
† -0.07 0.14 *
* -0.23 0.12 *
-0.13 0.12
* -0.22 0.09 *

0.39
0.31
0.27
0.28
0.33
0.34
0.40
0.29
0.29
0.17
0.38
0.25
0.31
0.24
0.22
0.19

0.33
0.31
0.29
0.40
0.28
0.31
0.34
0.25
0.25
0.22
0.55
0.26
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.21

* 0.23
* 0.24
0.24
* 0.31
* 0.15
* 0.20
0.17
* 0.19
* 0.13
* 0.16
† 0.28
* 0.22
* 0.13
† 0.12
0.12
* 0.19

0.02
-0.01
-0.07
-0.16
-0.02
-0.19
-0.05
-0.12

-0.13
-0.24
0.02
-0.14
-0.24
-0.28
-0.41
-0.28

-0.04
* -0.30
0.00
* -0.10
-0.03
* -0.16
† -0.07
* -0.21

0.19
0.14
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.10
0.14
0.10

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.39
0.29
0.33
0.30
0.30
0.21
0.31
0.21

0.34
0.36
0.29
0.26
0.27
0.24
0.15
0.18

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.23
0.28
0.15
0.19
0.14
0.19
0.13
0.16

-0.16
-0.21
-0.54
-0.24
-0.13
-0.32
-0.18
-0.46

-0.02 -0.01
† -0.08 -0.02
† -0.06 0.02
* -0.09 -0.02 †
-0.02 -0.03
* -0.13 -0.01
-0.02 -0.05
* -0.18 -0.02 †

-0.01
-0.05
0.00
-0.06
-0.01
-0.03
-0.03
-0.06

0.01
0.01 0.47 * 0.97
0.01
0.01 0.49 * 0.97
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96
0.02 † 0.02 0.46 * 0.96
0.01 † 0.02 0.44 * 0.96
0.02 † 0.02 0.44 * 0.96
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96
0.00
0.00 0.49 * 0.97

-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.01

-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.01

17.2
17.2
12.4
11.4
17.8
16.2
19.9
18.6

7.5
9.6
13.6
13.9
15.9
17.0
16.9
21.0

0.08
-0.07
0.20
0.02
0.13
-0.13
0.29
-0.16

1.33
1.41
1.33
1.24
1.36
1.24
1.24
1.43

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12

0.02
0.00
-0.08
-0.17
-0.02
-0.20
-0.05
-0.12

-0.13
-0.23
0.03
-0.15
-0.24
-0.28
-0.42
-0.28

-0.03
* -0.29
0.00
* -0.11
† -0.03
* -0.17
† -0.07
* -0.21

0.19
0.14
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.10
0.14
0.10

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.39
0.29
0.33
0.30
0.30
0.21
0.31
0.21

0.34
0.36
0.29
0.26
0.27
0.24
0.15
0.18

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.23
0.28
0.15
0.19
0.14
0.19
0.13
0.16

-0.16
-0.21
-0.54
-0.24
-0.13
-0.32
-0.18
-0.46

-0.02 -0.01
† -0.08 -0.02
† -0.06 0.02
* -0.09 -0.02 †
-0.02 -0.03
* -0.13 -0.01
-0.02 -0.05
* -0.18 -0.02 †

-0.01
-0.05
0.00
-0.06
-0.01
-0.03
-0.03
-0.06

0.01
0.01 0.47 * 0.97
0.01
0.01 0.49 * 0.97
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96
0.02 † 0.02 0.46 * 0.96
0.01 † 0.02 0.44 * 0.96
0.02 † 0.02 0.44 * 0.96
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96
0.00
0.00 0.49 * 0.97

-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.01

-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.01

17.2
17.2
12.4
11.4
17.7
16.2
19.9
18.6

7.5
9.7
13.7
13.9
15.9
17.1
16.9
21.0

0.08
-0.07
0.20
-0.15
0.13
-0.13
0.29
-0.16

1.33
1.41
1.33
1.24
1.36
1.24
1.24
1.43

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12

29

0.00
-0.04
-0.12
-0.01
0.07
-0.02
-0.25
-0.02
-0.03
-0.03
-0.25
-0.01
-0.02
-0.06
-0.06
-0.01

B

BOOKS

0.01
0.01 0.47 * 0.96 -0.01 -0.01 17.2 7.5 0.08 1.33
0.02
0.01 0.49 * 0.96 0.00
0.00 17.2 8.5 -0.03 1.42
0.04
0.03 0.50 * 0.97 -0.05 -0.03 18.1 6.1 0.05 1.09
0.00
0.00 0.49 * 0.969j0.01
0.00 17.0 10.9 -0.30 1.38
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96 0.01
0.01 12.4 13.6 0.20 1.33
0.01
0.01 0.46 * 0.96 0.00
0.00 11.6 14.5 -0.15 1.33
0.00
0.00 0.47 * 0.96 0.09
0.05 10.5 11.5 -0.30 1.57
0.02 † 0.02 0.46 * 0.96 0.02
0.01 9.9 13.3 -0.40 1.20
0.01 † 0.01 0.44 * 0.96 0.00
0.00 17.8 15.9 0.14 1.36
0.02
0.02 0.44 * 0.95 -0.02 -0.02 16.2 17.4 -0.12 1.37
0.02
0.02 0.46 * 0.95 0.10 † 0.05 17.4 15.4 -0.04 1.18
0.02
0.02 0.44 * 0.96 0.00
0.00 14.5 16.6 -0.45 1.13
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96 0.00
0.00 19.9 16.8 0.29 1.23
-0.01 -0.01 0.48 * 0.97 0.02
0.01 18.7 20.8 -0.13 1.51
0.03
0.04 0.46 * 0.96 0.02
0.02 17.6 20.3 0.14 1.89
0.01
0.01 0.50 * 0.97 0.00
0.00 17.1 20.9 -0.63 1.37

Table 5 continued.
Back Lan LAN_TEST ON
gro
gu
BOOKS
MOM_ED
und age b
B
b
B
Model M9
EN Native
0.48 * 0.21 0.08
0.07
EN Imm.
0.48 * 0.18 -0.16 -0.12
DE Native
0.74 * 0.23 -0.13 -0.09
DE Imm.
0.74 * 0.21 -0.29 † -0.19
NT Native
0.74 * 0.21 -0.14 -0.09
NT Imm.
0.74 * 0.19 -0.21 -0.12
SE Native
0.74 * 0.20 0.41 * 0.24
SE Imm.
0.74 * 0.19 0.23
0.12
Model M25
EN Native Nat. 0.48 * 0.21 0.02
0.02
EN Imm. Nat. 0.48 * 0.17 0.02
0.01
EN Imm. Fgn. 0.48 * 0.17 -0.05 -0.04
DE Native Nat. 0.81 * 0.25 -0.17 -0.11
DE Imm. Nat. 0.81 * 0.23 -0.59 -0.35
DE Imm. Fgn. 0.81 * 0.24 -0.23 -0.16
NT Native Nat. 0.60 * 0.17 -0.15 -0.09
NT Imm. Nat. 0.60 * 0.17 0.00
0.00
NT Imm. Fgn. 0.60 * 0.15 -0.39 -0.24
SE Native Nat. 0.60 * 0.16 0.36 † 0.21
SE Imm. Nat. 0.60 * 0.16 -0.15 -0.09
SE Imm. Fgn. 0.60 * 0.15 0.32
0.17
Model M26
EN Native
0.51 * 0.22 0.00
0.00
EN Imm.
0.37 * 0.13 -0.01 -0.01
DE Native
0.96 * 0.29 -0.22 † -0.14
DE Imm.
0.66 * 0.20 -0.27 -0.18
NT Native
0.59 * 0.17 -0.10 -0.06
NT Imm.
0.87 * 0.23 -0.27 -0.16
SE Native
0.70 * 0.19 0.37 * 0.21
SE Imm.
0.42 * 0.11 0.19
0.11

BOOKS ON
DAD_ED

b

READS

B

b

0.16
0.14
0.20
0.23
0.11
0.14
0.07
0.11

0.22
0.59
0.81
0.86
1.07
0.40
-0.04
-0.08

READS ON

FGN_LANG

AGE_IMM

MOM_ED

DAD_ED

FGN_LANG

AGE_IMM

B

b

B

b

b

B

b

B

b

b

0.10
0.23
0.27
0.27
0.30
0.10
-0.01
-0.02

0.49
-0.06
-2.18
-1.48
-0.34
-1.77
-1.73
-1.15

0.02
-0.01
-0.08
-0.16
-0.02
-0.19
-0.05
-0.11

-0.13
-0.24
0.02
-0.15
-0.24
-0.28
-0.41
-0.28

-0.04
* -0.29
0.00
* -0.10
-0.03
* -0.17
† -0.07
* -0.21

0.19
0.14
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.10
0.14
0.10

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.39
0.29
0.33
0.30
0.30
0.21
0.31
0.21

0.34
0.36
0.29
0.26
0.27
0.24
0.15
0.18

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.23
0.28
0.15
0.19
0.14
0.19
0.13
0.16

-0.16
-0.21
-0.54
-0.24
-0.13
-0.32
-0.18
-0.46

B

B

b

B

Intercepts / Residual variance
MOM_ED

b

B

0.52
0.46
1.23
1.11
0.78
0.68
0.31
0.47

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.53
0.48
0.34
1.20
1.05
0.88
0.77
0.33
0.57
0.33
0.41
0.40

* 0.16 0.30
0.14
† 0.15 0.18
0.07
0.09 0.43
0.16
* 0.20 0.89 * 0.29
* 0.21 1.71 † 0.49
* 0.21 0.53
0.18
* 0.12 1.05 * 0.29
0.08 -0.04 -0.01
* 0.13 0.63
0.18
* 0.08 0.11
0.03
0.10 0.36
0.10
* 0.09 -0.30 -0.08

-0.14
-0.30
-0.20
-0.12
-0.26
-0.10
-0.28
-0.23
-0.26
-0.59
-0.32
-0.22

-0.04 0.18
* -0.37 0.17
* -0.28 0.13
-0.01 0.15
* -0.15 0.13
* -0.09 0.13
† -0.04 0.14
† -0.13 0.04
* -0.20 0.10
† -0.07 0.15
* -0.22 0.05
* -0.21 0.09

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.38
0.34
0.25
0.34
0.27
0.29
0.29
0.09
* 0.24
* 0.32
0.11
* 0.20

0.34
0.24
0.36
0.30
0.19
0.22
0.24
0.11
0.20
0.15
0.04
0.21

*
*
*
*
†
*
*

0.23
0.20
0.29
0.16
0.13
0.17
0.13
0.09
* 0.17
* 0.13
0.04
* 0.20

-0.02
-0.03
0.01
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.04
-0.02
-0.01

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.47
0.50
0.49
0.48
0.45
0.46
0.44
0.45
0.44
0.48
0.48
0.50

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.51
0.47
1.33
0.96
0.83
0.47
0.31
0.44

* 0.16
0.14
* 0.21
* 0.22
* 0.13
† 0.11
* 0.07
* 0.10

-0.18
-0.24
-0.42
-0.13
-0.39
-0.26
-0.47
-0.24

† -0.06
-0.33
* -0.07
* -0.11
* -0.07
* -0.18
* -0.11
* -0.21

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.36
0.33
0.32
0.22
0.26
0.18
0.15
0.16

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

-0.04 -0.03 0.01
0.01
-0.01 -0.03 0.00
0.00
-0.06 † -0.03 0.01
0.01
-0.02 -0.05 0.02
0.02
-0.02 -0.01 0.01
0.01
0.00 -0.01 0.02
0.01
-0.04 -0.03 0.01 † 0.01
-0.02 -0.06 0.01
0.00

0.47
0.49
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.44
0.48
0.49

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.34
0.32
0.92
0.71
0.96
0.40
0.05
-0.09

†
*
*
*

† 0.15
0.12
* 0.29
† 0.23
* 0.27
0.11
0.01
-0.03

*
*
*
†
*

0.18
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.14
0.08
0.14
0.08

0.37
0.28
0.33
0.29
0.30
0.19
0.30
0.17

30

0.25
0.27
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.16
0.13
0.15

-0.02 -0.01
† -0.08 -0.02
† -0.06 0.02
* -0.09 -0.02 †
-0.02 -0.03
* -0.13 -0.01
-0.02 -0.05
* -0.18 -0.02 †

B

BOOKS

DAD_ED

b

B

LAN_TEST

b

var

BOOKS

READS

b

var

b

var

-0.01
-0.05
0.00
-0.06
-0.01
-0.03
-0.03
-0.06

0.01
0.01 0.47 * 0.97
0.01
0.01 0.49 * 0.97
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96
0.02 †
0.46 *
0.01 † 0.02 0.44 * 0.96
0.02 † 0.02 0.44 * 0.96
0.01
0.01 0.48 * 0.96
0.00
0.00 0.49 * 0.97

-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.01

-0.01 17.2 7.5 0.08
0.00 17.2 9.7 -0.07
0.01 12.4 13.6 0.20
11.4 13.9 -0.15
0.00 17.7 15.9 0.13
-0.01 16.2 17.0 -0.13
0.00 19.9 16.9 0.29
0.01 18.6 21.1 -0.16

1.33
1.41
1.33
1.24
1.36
1.24
1.24
1.43

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.11

-0.01
-0.10
0.02
-0.01
0.00
-0.06
-0.01
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.05
-0.05

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97

-0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
-0.03
0.02
0.00
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
-0.02
0.02
0.00
-0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

17.2
17.4
16.9
12.3
10.9
9.8
17.7
15.1
14.1
19.9
16.9
17.0

7.5
9.3
12.1
13.6
15.4
12.8
16.2
15.6
15.9
16.9
20.4
20.7

0.08
-0.17
-0.39
0.17
-0.34
-0.44
0.13
-0.40
-0.57
0.27
-0.55
-0.71

1.36
1.29
1.44
1.33
1.36
1.15
1.36
1.32
1.01
1.24
1.55
1.25

-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01

0.12
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.11

0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.02
0.01
0.00

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00

17.2
17.1
12.1
10.0
17.6
14.6
19.8
16.9

7.5
11.0
14.1
13.4
16.4
16.0
17.3
20.7

0.07
-0.30
0.12
-0.42
0.12
-0.51
0.25
-0.65

1.35
1.39
1.35
1.20
1.36
1.13
1.29
1.34

0.00
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.01

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Table 5 continued.
Back Lan LAN_TEST ON
gro
gu
BOOKS
MOM_ED
und age b
B
b
B
Model M28
EN Native
0.64 * 0.28 -0.03 -0.01
EN Imm.
0.64 * 0.22 -0.05 -0.03
DE Native
0.64 * 0.19 -0.19 -0.12
DE Imm.
0.64 * 0.19 -0.27 -0.18
NT Native
0.64 * 0.18 -0.10 -0.06
NT Imm.
0.64 * 0.17 -0.27 -0.16
SE Native
0.64 * 0.17 0.37 * 0.22
SE Imm.
0.64 * 0.16 0.18
0.10
Model M29
EN Native
0.56 * 0.25 -0.01 -0.01
EN Imm.
0.56 * 0.20 -0.04 -0.03
DE Native
0.88 * 0.26 -0.21 † -0.14
DE Imm.
0.88 * 0.26 -0.28 † -0.19
NT Native
0.56 * 0.16 -0.10 -0.06
NT Imm.
0.56 * 0.15 -0.26 -0.16
SE Native
0.56 * 0.15 0.38 * 0.22
SE Imm.
0.56 * 0.14 0.19
0.10
Model M30
EN Native
0.49 b 0.22 0.00
0.00
EN Imm.
0.53 b 0.19 -0.03 -0.02
DE Native
0.83 b 0.25 -0.21 † -0.13
DE Imm.
0.71 b 0.21 -0.27 -0.18
NT Native
0.71 b 0.20 -0.11 -0.06
NT Imm.
0.80 b 0.21 -0.27 -0.16
SE Native
0.75 b 0.20 0.36 † 0.21
SE Imm.
0.73 b 0.18 0.18
0.10
c
Model M98
Native
0.69 * 0.18 0.04
0.02
Imm.
0.69 * 0.16 -0.14 -0.07
Model M99 c
Native
0.66 * 0.17 0.01
0.01
Imm.
0.66 * 0.15 -0.14 -0.07
NOTE: *p<=.001,†p<=.050

BOOKS ON
DAD_ED

b

READS

B

b

B

READS ON

FGN_LANG

AGE_IMM

MOM_ED

DAD_ED

FGN_LANG

AGE_IMM

b

b

B

b

B

b

b

b

B

B

B

B

BOOKS

b

Intercepts / Residual variance
MOM_ED

B

b

DAD_ED

LAN_TEST

BOOKS

READS

B

b

B

b

var

b

var

b

var

0.46
0.38
1.43
0.96
0.82
0.52
0.32
0.40

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.14
0.11
0.23
0.22
0.12
0.12
0.07
0.10

0.33
0.33
0.95
0.72
0.95
0.43
0.06
-0.10

† 0.15
0.12
* 0.31
† 0.23
* 0.26
0.12
0.02
-0.03

-0.17
-0.24
-0.44
-0.13
-0.39
-0.26
-0.47
-0.23

†
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

-0.06
-0.32
-0.08
-0.11
-0.07
-0.19
-0.11
-0.21

0.18
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.14
0.08
0.14
0.08

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.37
0.28
0.33
0.29
0.30
0.19
0.30
0.17

0.36
0.33
0.32
0.22
0.26
0.18
0.15
0.16

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.25
0.27
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.16
0.13
0.15

-0.04 -0.03 0.01
-0.01 -0.03 0.00
-0.06 † -0.03 0.01
-0.02 -0.05 0.02
-0.02 -0.01 0.01
0.00 -0.01 0.02
-0.04 -0.03 0.01
-0.02 -0.06 0.01

0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00

0.47
0.49
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.44
0.48
0.49

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.02
0.01
0.00

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00

17.2
17.2
12.1
10.0
17.6
14.5
19.8
17.1

7.5
11.1
14.3
13.4
16.5
16.1
17.4
20.7

0.07
-0.30
0.12
-0.42
0.12
-0.51
0.25
-0.65

1.35
1.39
1.35
1.20
1.36
1.13
1.29
1.34

0.00
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.01

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11

0.49
0.41
1.36
0.91
0.84
0.53
0.33
0.41

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.15
0.12
0.22
0.20
0.13
0.12
0.08
0.10

0.33
0.33
0.93
0.68
0.97
0.44
0.07
-0.10

† 0.15
0.12
* 0.30
† 0.22
* 0.27
0.13
0.02
-0.03

-0.18
-0.24
-0.43
-0.12
-0.39
-0.26
-0.48
-0.24

†
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

-0.06
-0.32
-0.07
-0.10
-0.07
-0.19
-0.11
-0.21

0.18
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.14
0.08
0.14
0.08

*
*
*
*
†
*
*
*

0.37
0.28
0.33
0.29
0.30
0.19
0.30
0.17

0.36
0.33
0.32
0.22
0.26
0.18
0.15
0.16

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.25
0.27
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.16
0.13
0.15

-0.04 -0.03 0.01
0.01
-0.01 -0.03 0.00
0.00
-0.06 † -0.03 0.01
0.01
-0.02 -0.05 0.02
0.02
-0.02 -0.01 0.01 † 0.01
0.00 -0.01 0.02
0.01
-0.04 -0.03 0.01 † 0.01
-0.02 -0.06 0.01
0.00

0.47
0.49
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.44
0.48
0.49

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.02
0.01
0.00

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00

17.2
17.2
12.1
10.1
17.6
14.4
19.8
17.0

7.5
11.1
14.1
13.5
16.4
16.1
17.4
20.7

0.07
-0.30
0.12
-0.42
0.44
-0.51
0.25
-0.65

1.35
1.39
1.35
1.20
1.36
1.13
1.29
1.34

0.00
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.01

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11

0.52
0.42
1.37
0.95
0.80
0.49
0.30
0.39

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
†

0.16
0.12
0.22
0.21
0.12
0.11
0.07
0.09

0.34
0.32
0.93
0.71
0.94
0.41
0.04
-0.11

† 0.15
0.12
* 0.30
† 0.23
* 0.26
0.12
0.01
-0.03

-0.18
-0.24
-0.43
-0.13
-0.39
-0.26
-0.47
-0.23

†
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

-0.06
-0.32
-0.07
-0.11
-0.07
-0.19
-0.11
-0.21

0.18
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.14
0.08
0.14
0.08

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.37
0.28
0.33
0.29
0.30
0.19
0.30
0.17

0.36 *
0.33 *
0.32 *
0.22 *
0.26 *
0.18 *
0.15*
0.16 *

0.25
0.27
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.16
0.13
0.15

-0.04 -0.03 0.01
0.01
-0.01 -0.03 0.00
0.00
-0.06 † -0.03 0.01
0.01
-0.02 -0.05 0.02
0.02
-0.02 -0.01 0.01 † 0.01
-0.00 -0.01 0.02
0.01
-0.04 -0.03 0.01 † 0.01
-0.02 -0.06 0.01
0.00

0.47
0.49
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.44
0.48
0.49

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.02
0.01
0.00

-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00

17.2
17.2
12.1
10.0
17.6
14.6
19.8
17.1

7.5
11.0
14.1
13.4
16.5
16.0
17.3
20.8

0.07
-0.30
0.12
-0.42
0.12
-0.51
0.25
-0.65

1.35
1.39
1.35
1.20
1.36
1.13
1.29
1.34

0.00
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.01

0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11

0.59 * 0.10 0.52 * 0.14
0.72 * 0.14 0.50 * 0.12

-0.29 * -0.04 0.15 * 0.33 0.25 * 0.16
-0.26 * -0.17 0.12 * 0.25 0.27 * 0.22

-0.03 -0.02 0.01 * 0.01 0.46 * 0.96 0.00
-0.03 * -0.08 0.01 † 0.01 0.47 * 0.96 0.01

0.00 17.2 13.9 0.08 1.33 0.00 0.12
0.00 17.2 16.2 -0.12 1.36 0.00 0.12

0.63 * 0.11 0.57 * 0.15
0.56 * 0.11 0.42 † 0.11

-0.36 * -0.07 0.15 * 0.33 0.26 * 0.17
-0.21 * -0.16 0.11 * 0.24 0.22 * 0.18

-0.04 † -0.02 0.01 * 0.01 0.47 * 0.96 0.00
-0.01 † -0.04 0.01
0.01 0.47 * 0.96 0.00

0.00 17.2 14.2 0.07 1.34 0.00 0.12
0.00 17.1 15.7 -0.26 1.27 0.00 0.12

a

Too few cases for reliable analysis

b

Fixed parameters within each country have no standard errors.

c

31

Pooled models, including dummy country variables (EN reference): M98 Natives Lan_test ON DE -4.67*, NT 0.54*, SE 2.57*; Books ON DE 0.12*, NT 0.05, SE 0.18*. M98 Immigrants Lan_test ON DE -6.75*, NT -2.03*, SE 0.63*; Books ON
DE -0.20*, NT -0.16*, SE -0.31*. M99 Natives Lan_test ON DE -0.43*, NT 0.04*, SE 0.22*; Books ON DE 0.02, NT 0.02, SE 0.05* Immigrants Lan_test ON DE -0.65*, NT -0.21*, SE -0.01; Books ON DE -0.07*, NT -0.08*, SE -0.15*.

Table 6. Fit Statistics to supplement Tables 3 and 4.
Table 3
Models RMSEA
M1
0.017*
M2
0.039*
M3
0.041*
M4
0.026*
M5
0.026*
M6
0.000*
M7
0.000*
M8
0.023*
M9
0.009*

CFI
1.000
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.999
1.000
1.000
0.999
1.000

TLI
0.999
0.994
0.993
0.997
0.997
1.001
1.000
0.997
1.000

AIC
145548.2
145572.5
145579.6
145551.1
145551.4
145500.4
145500.4
145526.9
145504.2

BIC
SRMR WRMR
147517.3 0.002 0.077
147480.3 0.008 0.223
147487.4 0.010 0.332
147458.8 0.006 0.178
147428.0 0.007 0.282
146611.3 0.001 0.071
146580.7 0.004 0.204
146584.2 0.008 0.440
146569.2 0.005 0.329

Table 4
Models RMSEA
M11
0.000*
M12
0.020*
M13
0.025*
M14
0.000*
M15
0.003*
M16
0.000*
M17
0.000*
M18
0.020*
M19
0.002*

CFI
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.999
1.000

TLI
1.002
0.998
0.998
1.000
1.000
1.001
1.001
0.998
1.000

AIC
152068.8
152091.5
152100.4
152071.1
152071.7
152037.5
152037.7
152068.2
152043.7

BIC
SRMR
154056.8 0.002
154017.7 0.009
154026.6 0.010
153997.3 0.007
153967.0 0.008
153159.1 0.001
153128.5 0.004
153135.7 0.010
153118.9 0.006

M21
M22
M23
M24
M25
M26
M27
M28
M29
M30

0.019*
0.025*
0.028*
0.014*
0.017*
0.008*
0.024*
0.039*
0.026*
0.019*

1.000
1.000
0.999
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.999
1.000
1.000

0.999
0.988
0.997
0.999
0.999
1.000
0.998
0.994
0.997
0.999

137562.1
137566.8
137571.4
137556.4
137550.2
145444.4
145453.2
145483.1
145456.0
145447.6

139030.4
139004.7
138978.9
138994.4
138881.6
146486.3
146464.5
146471.4
146452.0
146428.3

0.002
0.006
0.008
0.003
0.006
0.001
0.006
0.010
0.007
0.006

0.101
0.188
0.270
0.119
0.269
0.074
0.316
0.644
0.373
0.385

M31
M32
M33
M34
M35
M36
M37
M38
M39
M40

0.000*
0.008*
0.016*
0.000*
0.004*
0.000*
0.023*
0.040*
0.025*
0.019*

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.999
1.000
1.000

1.000
1.000
0.999
1.001
1.000
1.000
0.998
0.994
0.997
0.999

143142.9
143147.3
143151.5
143137.1
143131.8
151959.2
151970.7
152003.8
151973.7
151965.5

144624.5
144598.2
144571.7
144588.0
144475.2
153011.2
152991.8
153001.7
152979.3
152955.7

0.002
0.006
0.008
0.003
0.007
0.001
0.007
0.013
0.009
0.008

M98
M99

0.003*
0.009*

1.000
1.000

1.000 146871.8 147208.9
1.000 146595.1 146932.2

0.002
0.002

0.196
0.210

M980
M990

0.000*
0.005*

1.000
1.000

1.000 153426.9 153767.3
1.000 153087.0 153427.4

0.002
0.002

NOTE: *p-close value>0.99

32

Table 7. Multigroup Sample Size
Country
England
England
Germany
Germany
Sweden
Sweden
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
England
England
Germany
Germany
Sweden
Sweden
The Netherlands
The Netherlands

Grouping Criteria
Background
Language
Native
No Fgn_lang
Native
Fgn_lang
Native
No Fgn_lang
Native
Fgn_lang
Native
No Fgn_lang
Native
Fgn_lang
Native
No Fgn_lang
Native
Fgn_lang
Immigrant
No Fgn_lang
Immigrant
Fgn_lang
Immigrant
No Fgn_lang
Immigrant
Fgn_lang
Immigrant
No Fgn_lang
Immigrant
Fgn_lang
Immigrant
No Fgn_lang
Immigrant
Fgn_lang
Total nonmissing
Missing
Total sample size

16 Groups
One
Both
2,256
2,626
41
161
2,350
2,619
49
262
2,304
2,649
40
166
2,720
3,017
124
229
677
307
576
456
556
242
1,249
1,036
616
271
975
849
569
272
647
542
15,704 15,704
2,637
2,637
18,341 18,341

8 Groups
One
Both
2,297

2,787

2,399

2,881

2,344

2,815

2,844

3,246

1,253

763

1,805

1,278

1,591

1,120

1,216

814

15,704
2,637
18,341

15,704
2,637
18,341

NOTE: "One" immigrant defined as at least one foreign-born parent while native have two native born parents;
"Both" immigrant defined as both foreign-born parents while native has at least one native-born parent; "Fgn_lang"
refers to those speaking a language other than the native country language in the adolescent home.

33

Figure 5. The Book Effect on Language Ability between Natives and
Children of at least One Immigrant Parent

34

