"x"
"1" "“Wait, She’s One of Us!” :  American Catholic Nuns, Gender, and Sexuality"
"2" "Ryan P. Murphy"
"3" "Chestnut Hill College"
"4" "murphyr@chc.edu"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "In this qualitative study of one congregation of American Catholic n uns—the Sisters of St. Joseph of  Philadelphia—I explore the ways in which gender influences   the sisters’  work and  their  relationship with the Catholic Church  and secular society. Through interviews with 23 religious sisters, I analyze the subtle strategies of action they employ to minister to marginalized  populations  who may feel alienated by the institutional Catholic Church. Despite their own structural position in the Catholi c Church and secular society, American Catholic nuns like the Sisters of St. Joseph emerge as powerful women who exercise agency to respond to the human and social needs of lay Catholics and non-Catholics, even when this work is counter to official Church teaching. Overall,  I argue that the Sisters of St. Joseph are guiding progressive voices in the Catholic Church—particularly around human sexuality and relationships — and have the potential to shape the direction of the Church in the twenty-first century ."
"7" "In April 2012, after a nearly four-year doctrinal investigation authorized by Pope Benedict XVI, the Vatican reprimanded the largest group of American Catholic nuns, the Leadership Conference of Women Religious (LCWR), which represents more than 80% of the approximately 50,000 vowed religious sisters in the United States. Simultaneously, in late 2008, Cardinal  Franc Rodé, head of the Vatican’s Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life ,   began an Apostolic Visitation of noncloistered American women ’s  religious communities in response to growing concerns about secularism and a feminist spirit."
"8" "In its doctrinal assessment, the Vatican’s arm  for doctrinal investigations — the Congregation for t he Doctrine of the Faith (CDF)— censured the  LCWR and affiliated social justice lobby NETWORK for “serious doctrinal problems.” The report concluded that the sisters promoted “radical feminist themes incompatible with the Catholic faith” and made public statements that “disagree with or challenge the bishops, who are the [C]hurch’s authentic teachers of faith and morals.”  Among several concerns, the  C DF questioned the American nuns’ positions  on the correct pastoral approach to  ministry to homosexual persons,   which did not align  with the bishops’ teachings on  family life and human sexuality.  Similarly, in an examination of their work toward promotion of social justice, the  Vatican determined that the sisters  remained largely silent on discussions about the traditional family structure and gay marriage. The CDF assessment concluded that the LCWR committed crimes of omission and thus embrace d  significantly flawed positions directly in opposition to the bishops’ official doctrinal teachings."
"9" "In this case study of one  congregation  of American Catholic nuns—the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia—I seek to understand h ow  gender influences   the sisters’  work and  their  relationship with the Catholic Church  and secular society. I analyze the ways in which this religious community fights for gender equality and justice and ministers to marginalized populations—LGBT persons for example—despite considerable pressure from within the institutional Church discouraging this work. In this analysis, I demonstrate how the Sisters of St. Joseph navigate prescribed gender roles in society and the Church, and the emergence of a feminist consciousness within the congregation. Specifically, I  show how the sisters challenge  institutional structures t hat perpetuate gender in equality  in the Church, employing strategies of action to meet the needs of the faithful they serve .  Overall, I argue that this congregation of American religious sisters develop strategies of action to respond to the changing needs of the faithful—particularly as they relate to sexuality and  human relationships — within a patriarchal institutional structure whose teachings run counter to these actions. While this group of women religious are not alone in this work, their mission of love and compassion for all persons without distinction fills a ministerial void that many lay Catholic faithful feel from the Church.  Finally, I show how the sisters’ progressive understanding of sexuality and human relationships has the potential to be a guiding voice  of  the Church in the Pope Francis era and beyond."
"10" "Though religious  sisters are relatively  understudied in the sociological literature  (Wittberg 1994 , Mills and Ryan 2001 ), women religious offer sociologists great potential for analysis, given their unique affiliation with the institutional Catholic Church and their  lives of service that are very much lived in secular society. Their  role s  in the Church  are  unique in that  sisters  are in a n  elevated position vis-à-vis the rest of the faithful , yet  they   have no a uthority to determine official C hurch teaching or direction .  Thus,  religious  sisters  occupy a liminal space as  stakeholders in a hierarchical organization that has largely marginalized them through the reinscription of structures of gender inequality , while simultaneously requiring their unfailing obedience to carry out the Church’s ministry. In other words, I suggest that women religious may be understood to be what Collins (1986) describes as “outsiders within” the Catholic Church."
"11" "REVIEW OF LITERATURE"
"12" "In academic literature from sociology and the humanities, there  are generally two characterizations of women religious that inform my research on the Sisters of St. Joseph: the first constructs religious sisters as meek servants of the Church who carry out the will of the Chur c h patriarchy, while the second demonstrates how religious sisters have articulated their own roles in the Church and emphasizes women’s agency. These two themes illustrate the structural and cultural forces at work in secular society, in the Church, and within the congregations themselves that  simultaneously  empower and limit the roles of women religious. Like all women, religious sisters were impacted by specific moments in American social and political history, including the Women’s Movement, the different waves of feminism, the Civil Rights movement, the Vietnam War , the neoliberal Regan era,  the War on Terror , and the 2016 Presidential election . Yet religious sisters were also significantly affected by defining moments in the Catholic Church, including  the Second Vatican Council , the clergy sex abuse scandal, and the different ideologies  represented by Popes Saint John Paul II, Benedict XVI, and Francis. Understanding the evolving social position of religious sisters within the Catholic Church and in the United States in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s situates the lives of the Sisters of St. Joseph in the broader context of the Women’s Movement."
"13" "The Catholic Church as a Gendered Institution"
"14" "Mills and Ryan (2001)  write  that as we understand modernist notions of organizations, the Church evolved as one where the rights to rule over the larger organizational membership rested exclu sively with the male hierarchy. Since  the Catholic Church is  hierarchical and power is  collected in the hands of a few men,  I turn to the literature on the structure of gendered  organization s. Joan  Acker (1990) writes  that an organization is gendered if “advantage and disadvantage, exploitation and control, action and emotion, meaning and identity, are patterned through and in terms of a distinction between male and  female, masculine and feminine ”  (146).  Acker offers five criteria that serve to establish gender differences in organization s , including enforced  s eparate rules for men and women— the use of space, types of work, acceptable language use, and appropriate wor k attire—that  organizations  use to  reproduce gendered assumptions about men and women’s work."
"15" "The   Catholic Church has a  long history of segregated spaces, distinct clothing ,  and similar methods of control  that Church leadership uses to subordinate women . In fact, Mills and Ryan (2001) point to the Church’s gendered rules for men and women that were shaped by centuries of cloister and celibacy. These restrictions served as the primary tools for  reifying  notions of masculinity and femininity in the Catholic Church.  Interpreted through a functionalist lens , religious  sisters in the Church were poised to ascribe to the  discourse surrounding archetyp al feminine roles, including teaching, ministering to the helpless, and nursing ."
"16" "Max Weber and the Religious Virtuoso"
"17" "Several scholars apply Max Weber’s ideal type of the  religious virtuoso   to  help understand the  structural  position of religious sisters in  the Catholic Church (Wittberg 1994; Schneiders  2000) . According to Weber, the religious virtuoso   is  one whose religious participation transcends that of  a  la yperson in that  faith . Weber explains :"
"18" "intensive religiosity has a tendency toward a sor t of social stratification…virtuoso  religiosity is opposed to mass religiosity …. By “mass” we understand  powerful influence  over the religiously “ unmusical ” laymen; this influence might  not be in the direction of his (the virtuoso’s) own reli gious way of life; it might be  an influence in merely ceremonious, ritualist, and conventional p articulars  ( Weber  [1948] 1991:287-290)."
"19" "Sociologist Patricia Wittberg (1994) argues that as religions define the ideological framework for religious virtuosi, they must also declare what role, if any, they have in the Church. Some might be classified as “prophetic witnesses,” whose spirituality  protests  the lack of structure in the Church or against abuses from the hierarchy. Religious virtuosi might also demonstrate the legitimacy and holiness of that religion to a secular society that is unsympathetic or aggressive toward it.  Wittberg  also proposes a third possibility, where the religious virtuosi fulfill roles in the faith like teaching, modeling appropriate moral behavior, and caring for the sick and elderly (Wittberg 1994:14-15)."
"20" "Wittberg (1994)  also points out that in the Catholic Church, religious communities of women and men are distinct from ordained clergy. Unlike diocesan priests, men and women in religious congregations profess public vows of ce libacy,  poverty, and obedience—and  often live in community. Though the laity often groups these men and women into the larger category of “clergy,” religious communities maintain “lay” status within the Church, and have limited voice in its policies and formal government structure. Given these distinctions and though some brothers and monks may be ordained  as priests , male and female religious congregations have more in common with each other, than either group has with ordained diocesan priests."
"21" "Women Religious and Agency"
"22" "The other strain of literature that I draw on emphasizes where religious sisters have been agents in their own lives, in the Church, and in society in general. This literature therefore rejects the limiting notion of the Catholic nun as a meek servant of the patriarchy. Sociologist William Sewell (1992) argues that the capacity to change structures, or human agency, is inherent in all human beings and that this agency is both collective and individual (20-21). Drawing on Anthony Giddens’s work (1976), Sewell views structure as being “dual,” or enabling, meaning that structure shapes peoples’ actions, but peoples’ actions also shape social structure. Sewell contends that human beings can coordinate agency with others to bring change to social structures in a dual, dialectical way."
"23" "In her history of the Sisters of St. Joseph, historian Patricia Byrne (1985) argues “a change in the attitudes of sisters themselves has allowed them to recognize their own identity by examining the secular roles of women in society” (4). Similarly, sociologist Helen Rose Ebaugh (1993a) writes that women religious exercised social mobility and asserted their status within the Church and secular society through three methods: 1) as  educated women, 2) as professional women in various career settings, and 3) as a social support group conscious of their subordinated position in the male-dominated Catholic Church (402). As the primary educators in Catholic schools by the mid-twentieth century, women religious taught tens of thousands of American students even though many of these women had only barely completed their own high school educations (Quiñonez and Turner 1992; Fialka 2003; McGuinness 2013). By the 1950s, Pope Pius XII was concerned that religious sisters in Catholic schools were not adequately trained to teach, and therefore the Church had a responsibility to ensure that these women received the appropriate professional training (Ebaugh 1993b). Consequently, the development of the Sisters Formation Movement in the 1950s encouraged many congregations to empower their members to pursue higher education  to  maintain equal status and credentials with their secular colleagues (Quiñonez and Turner 1992; Ebaugh 1993b; Koehlinger 2007, McGuinness 2013)."
"24" "As religious sisters completed undergraduate and graduate degrees and were exposed to newer strains of intellectual thought, they established themselves as competent professionals in their respective fields and not just servants of the Church ( Quiñonez and Turner 1992 ; Koehlinger 2007). Through increased access to education, women in religious communities trained for administrative roles in other areas beyond just those available in Catholic schools or parishes and eventually became one of the largest bodies of educated women in the United States (Thompson 1986; Wittberg 1989;  Quiñonez and Turner 1992 ; Koehlinger 2007). In fact, historian Margaret Susan Thompson (1986) contends that women religious who oversaw large-scale institutions  like hospitals, asylums, schools, and colleges could be considered among the first “sizable cohort of female executives” (275)."
"25" "Ebaugh (1993b) argues that prior to the Second Vatican Council, women religious were under strict control by congregational leadership, who significantly limited their exposure to laypersons and to secular society in general. Once they entered the convent, sisters were not permitted to visit family, except for once every five or six years, and when they did, they were not allowed to spend the night. If a sister did need to travel beyond th e convent walls— say to a doctor’s a ppointment or to buy groceries— she was always accompanied by at least one other sister. Thus, even those women religious who were members of active congregations experienced profound social isolation. With Vatican II’s changes and calls for renewal however, these rules were relaxed and sisters interacted much more frequently with the laity. Ebaugh (1993b) writes that for some sisters, this decline of monasticism initially produced individual-level anomie for some sisters, which eventually extended  more broadly  to congregations  as  they examined what role and mission they held in the Church and world in the twentieth century (24-26)."
"26" "METHODS"
"27" "From July 2015 through August 2016, I conducted semi-structured interviews (Kvale and Brinkman 2008) with 23 Sisters of St. Joseph. I used an active interview style (Holstein and Gubrium 2003) to interact with the sisters during the interviews and to create meaning from the text produced from transcription.  Given the historical nature of this research, and that I do not test any hypothesis, I adopt ed  a grounded theory approach  in  data collection and analysis.  Specifically,   I   used  a constructivist methodology in  grounded theory, where I reflexively look ed  at data, the social and historical context of the research, my relationships with interview subjects, and my prior knowledge and biases. In constructivist grounded theory, researchers are conscious of their interpretive frames, research context, and relationship with research participants (Charmaz 2005)."
"28" "The congregation  provided   me  with this list of all eligible  Sisters of St. Joseph. In conversation s  with congregational President, Sister Anne Myers, I determined a sister to be eligible for an interview if she was actively engaged in ministry, or if retired, she was physically and mentally capable to participate in a face-to-face interview.  From this list,  I  separate d  the sisters into two  cohorts : those who entered the  congre gation before the Second Vatican Council began— that is 1962 and befor e— (cohort A),  and those who entered after Vatican II  began, or 1963 to present (cohort B) .  I randomly selected 20  potential interview subje cts from each cohort and sent those 40  sisters a letter inviting  them to participate in one  hour-long interview with  me .  I also relied on the sisters’ personal and professional networks and used snowball sampling to recruit interview subjects (Morgan 2008). Most sisters who responded to my request for an interview were enthusiastic and willing to participate in this research.  In all, I interviewed eight sisters who entered the congregation before the Second Vatican Council (cohort A), and 15 sisters who entered after the Council began (cohort B)."
"29" "I conducted all the interviews  at site s  convenient for the research subjects , and they ranged in time from just under 38 minutes to nearly one hour and 25 minutes .  Most interviews lasted about one hour, and every interview was recorded and transcribed. Since the interviews were semi-structured, I did not follow a defined script, however, I  did refer to a list of questions and key topics including relationships with clergy, gender  and  feminism,   the Women’s Movement, and ministry  in the Church and society .  Looking to recent literature from the sociology of religion, I was drawn to inquiry methods that would highlight lived religion in the sisters’ stories and lived experiences. Sociologist of religion Christian Smith et al. (2013) argue that to bring the study of religion into prominence within sociology, scholars must rethink how they conduct new research. Specifically, Smith et al. (2013) call for a methodological shift that favors thickly historical, ethnographic, and comparative approaches, along with survey questions that “capture aspects of everyday ‘lived religion’” (925-926)."
"30" "FINDINGS"
"31" "When the CDF document condemning American women religious was released in 2012, many sisters took  exception  to the accusations surrounding issues of sexuality, ministry to homosexual persons, and abortion. While I was up front with the sisters who I interviewed that I was interested in hearing their perspectives on these issues, I was unsure about their willingness to discuss these sensitive topics, even with the guarantee of anonymity. Along with women’s place in the institutional Church structure, the questions surrounding human sexuality generated the most passionate responses from my interviewees. The general tone of these conversations was that the sisters felt that because the Vatican did not see sisters out protesting abortion and euthanasia, and zealously supporting traditional heterosexual marriage, that the rest of their social justice and ministry work was irrelevant. I was surprised by the lengthy and ardent responses they gave to my questions, and honored with the sisters’ candor in speaking about issues that  truly touch their hearts. These are issues that have profound impacts on the sisters’ lives in the day to day, and with the people whom they serve. They struggle with a Church structure concerned only with black and white when they see their lives and the lives of the faithful very much lived in the grey areas."
"32" "Birth Control and  Sex"
"33" "In her analysis of Vatican II, Melissa Wilde (2007) describes how efforts to liberalize birth control in the Catholic Church fell short. Essentially, the progressive voices at the Council were content to let the issues drop in hopes of advancing other reforms. Besides priestly celibacy, the use of contraceptives was the only other topic at the Council where Pope Paul VI exercised his veto power and removed it from the agenda. Wilde (2007) notes that sociological research shows that despite the ban,  most  Catholics use some form of artificial birth control. Additionally, she contends that Pope Paul VI’s encyclical  Humanae vitae  (1968) which reaffirmed the use of contraceptives as sinful, has driven people away from the Church and reduced papal authority in the eyes of some American Catholics (Wilde 2007:124)."
"34" "The sisters I interviewed are frustrated that somewhere along the line, the issues of abortion and birth control have been conflated. They do not see contraception as being equivalent to terminating a pregnancy, and felt that despite what  Humanae vitae  (1968) declared, birth control should not be considered a settled topic. As Wilde (2007) describes, there was some consensus at Vatican II that the birth control pill could plausibly be given the same consideration as the “rhythm method”  regarding  fami ly planning. The rhythm method— where a couple only engages in intercourse during  infertile periods  in the woman’s menstrual cycle— was and is the only sanctioned form of birth control recognized by the Catholic Church."
"35" "When I asked if birth control was an issue that Church authorities should revisit, Sister Lucia, who entered a few years after  Humanae vitae  was issued, shared, “ That certainly, certainly is one. I certainly think the pope [Francis] is leading the  way to being more open with …all those kin ds of issues, because again,  you know, we jus t can’t turn our back on people.”  Sister Lucia sees birth control as a justice issue, and one that needs to be addressed  to  meet the needs of the Church’s people. She feels that the Church is abandoning people when it focuses on the letter instead of the spirit of the law, and she is hopeful that Pope Francis will show flexibility with issues like artificial birth control. Sister Madeline was more forceful in her opinions on the topic. She said,"
"36" "These people talking  more about birth control  and abortion, stuff like that.  I mean ,  I remember years ago one day picking up the Catholic Standard …I mean every article on the front page  had something to do with a woma n’s body. It really did! Every single one! And I thought , “W hat kind of C hurch do I belong to, that this is what they’re focused on? And only focused on !” T here was an article on abor tion. There was an article on birth control… I start to think , “W hat is in these guys’ heads? ”  Really!! Obsessed!! Obsessed with sex. Sex! Sex! Sex! Sex! Sex! And money. That’s it. And that to me was what that was  [the doctrinal investigation] , and here we are back to sex a nd money. Mostly the sex thing. We weren’t into birth control  and abortion enough, and we were too much into LGBT and whatever else they we re saying we were into too much. So yea,  it’s very hurtful."
"37" "Sister Madeline expressed in no uncertain terms that the institutional Church should stop what she sees as its preoccupation with sex. Other sisters too, felt that Church leaders should focus less on what happens in the bedroom—how and with whom—and instead  direct their efforts toward more pressing problems in the world. For example, Sister Bridget offered,"
"38" "I think about all the people who feel so disenfranchised , so not welcomed… an d honestly, I think about… all those people who filled our churches. And are we thinking about what will happen, what will our Church look like? Who will be in the pews? Like are we thinking about them? And I wish we weren’t so li ke totally hung up on sex. I t makes us look like fools to the world, like it really does. From a Church that has had like  a few problems around that... and not everybody, oh my gosh, not everybody by a landslide, but it’s hard! You know, you wanna say, “Just step back from that just a little bit.” Like who’s whispering in their ear?"
"39" "Sister Bridget summarized what many sisters either said to me outright, or hinted around: that the legacy of the clergy sex abuse scandal was far too painful and raw to give the patriarchy any moral authority to legislate sexual behavior."
"40" "Homosexuality"
"41" "In addition to sex and  birth control, many sisters shared with me their struggles around the Church’s teaching and ministry toward the LGBT population. Around the time I began these interviews in the summer  of 2015, Waldron Mercy Academy— a suburban Philadelphia Catholic school founded and run by the Sisters of Merc y— terminated a popular teacher because she married her partner. While Philadelphia’s Archbishop Chaput denied any interference from the Archdiocese,  several  Sisters of St. Joseph who I interviewed felt this denial was dubious. This situation rankled  many of  my interviewees, who recognized that this issue is bigger than Waldron Mercy Academy, and that  these   numerous  run-ins that women religious have had with Church hierarchy are interrelated. For instance, Sister Bridget said,"
"42" "I think that this whole  Waldron Mercy thing… almost every day at lunch at work, like not everybod y’s Catholic who works with us… they’re eager to hear but they have lots of quest ions about the Church.  And it’s hard to not be negative or not  bad mouth it, and I don’t know that I even want to not do that anymore, you know? I think of somebody like the President of the Mercies and the letter that she wrote…And I want to say, “Tell me you didn’t write that. Tell me some lawyer wrote that and you signed it, and I’m so sorry that you had to do that.”…when the bishop’s spokesperson came out and said, “Hey, we had nothing to…” I SO wanted—that’s why I wish I had the radical boldness—to say, “Ok, so come out and make the statement that if they kept her or reinstated her, their Catholic identity would not be impacted at all. ”  That’s the statement I want you to  make. Say that and we’re good."
"43" "Sister Bridget feels sorry for the leadership of the Mercy sisters, and believes that they succumbed to pressure from the Archdiocese, despite their denial of any involvement. Sister Bridget is tired of defending a Church that does things that she finds indefensible, and clearly, does not want to be put in a situation where she must  continue to  do so. Sister Bridget continued,"
"44" "But I want to go back and say to this whole censure thing [doctrinal investigation] like what was that? What was that about? Like who had your ear that said what about who? Because we weren’t talking enough about abortion, or because we thought people should have healthcare? Like what was it that ticked you off? But I think that kind of like the Waldron thing. There’s this critical tipping point, which perhaps for the Church of Philadelphia this is it. I don’t know…It’s just one issue on a much bigger piece. And maybe that was a ti pping point. I don’t know,  I guess I’d have to defer to the wisdom of folks that were much more embroiled in it, although I think that part of the feminine is being much more reconciling and willing to do that kind of negotiating and conversation."
"45" "She, like so many other sisters, does not understand why Church leadership was so offended by their work, and felt the need to humiliate American women religious so publicly  with the doctrinal investigation . Overall, Sister Bridget sees the Waldron Mercy situation as a potential tipping point for the kind of radical boldness that women religious need to live out in a Church that does not value women’s gifts or their dissenting opinions."
"46" "Sister Moira, who entered the community after Vatican II, also spoke to me about her coming to understand homosexuality despite her own  self-described  naiveté on the subject, and how some women in  her own congregation identify  as lesbians. A few of these sisters eventually left the community, but others remained, and it was through relationships with these women that Sister Moira and others recognized the ministerial void in the Church. She shared,"
"47" "By the time 2012 came, I guess I thought I had lived in a very naïve world, and I knew lots of people. It baffled me that in an institution that knows lots of people, that people didn’t know lots of people with different gender  [sic] orientations.  So in my little world, I knew quite a few people and it upset my world at the time, more because I didn’t understand it, but they were people I loved and they were happy and that was good. I guess I felt that the Church just didn’t understand .  And we had some courageous women i n the congregation say , “I’m a lesbian. I want you to know about this.” I think people were both in a we of people’s courage  to do that, but also rather protective, like “Wa it, she’s one of us! Nobody’s gonna hurt her!”  I say all this, and the bottom line for me…was really, “We’re just not gonna pay attention to the Church, the institution, man-made.” And I had done that in my mind numerous times, you know, this is man-made, it’s not flawless…if they knew my friends, they wouldn’t want to isolate them, or in any way disenfranchise them from the Church they love. Many of  them LOVE the Church,  which baffles me, considering how they’re often treated."
"48" "Sister Moira  was  candid about her own lack of knowledge regarding sexual orientation, but she argues that unlike the institutional Church, her relationships with these people made the difference in her understanding. Sister Moira explicitly says that she will not uphold what she views as  “ man-made ”  rules, especially when they separate people from one another. Here, for Sister Moira, her congregation’s mission and charism of unity and reconciliation trumps her institutional affiliation with the Catholic Church. She questions why some in the LGBT population stay committed to a Church where they are so  unwelcome, but  she   fills this ministerial void and  becomes the face of mercy and compassion to these people."
"49" "Sisters spoke to me about gay and lesbian members of their families, and even how they changed a few minds about sexuality. Like Sister Moira, Sister Mary Lynn stressed the need for the Church to actually get to know people ’ s lived experiences, and listen to their stories before just dismissing them as “sinful.” Sister Mary Lynn, who also ministered to LGBT Catholics shared a story of how she changed her mother’s perspective on homosexuality. She said,"
"50" "M y experience is if it’s only a concept, it’s very easy for people to hold a very black and white concept of it. But once you meet pers ons, once you know their story,  it’s not.  It was really interesting.  I took my then 75-77-year-old mother over to one of the m eetings and I introduced her to …this one guy Paul,  and he was a teacher, he was  David’s partner. And it was funny, Paul  was Catholic and  David was Episcopalian, he  always said he was a JV Catholic, you know? So  my  mother met them and I was going home, and I said , “You know,  would you want  Paul  to tea ch your children/grandchildren?”… And she said , “Y eah ,  yea h.” And I said “C an you imagine what it would be like if your relationship with my father was taboo and you weren’t allowed to show anything ?” A nd she was like , “Y ea h, I get it.”  I mean it was amazing! And this was a woma n who was a catechism Catholic— never worked outside the home, never drove a c ar, never finished high school—but  her intuition in te rms of relationships and faith,  she was like , “W ell that’s not love .” [how the Catholic Church disregards homosexual relationships] And I’m like “Oh, ok mom. W ell ,  that’s why I do this . ”"
"51" "Sister Mary Lynn’s  story  about her mother illustrates several themes around homosexuality that came up in my interviews. First, reflective of her congregation’s mission and charism, she highlights how being in relationship with people gives her perspective on their lives. The implication here is that Church leaders are too removed from the faithful to understand that most people’s lives do not neatly fall into the black and white categories that inform its dogma. She knows that what she is doing—here  ministering to LGBT Catholics—is counter-cultural in the faith. Secondly, Sister Mary Lynn saw  that there are some Catholics—in this case her mother— who perhaps too blindly accept the Church’s teachings on homosexuality, but with exposure to real people and with reasoned thought, they might broaden their perspectives. Sister Mary Lynn was delicate with her mother, using language and references to family that she knew her mother would respond to, thereby shepherding her along to a fuller understanding of love and respect for all people. By the end of the car ride, her mother realized that the rhetoric in her faith about love and respect is not always applied equally to all people, and that women religious and other progressive voices in the Church are trying to change this."
"52" "Other sisters responded to what they see as the Church’s incorrect position on ministering to LGBT persons by taking matters into their own hands. For instance, Sister Moira told me about a time that she went to mass at a local parish while she w as on retreat with other sisters . She said,"
"53" "And we all went to mass… and all thi s literature was out about the C hurch’s stand on homosexuality. And I can  remember the church was  packed… we’re all standing, and I remember it catching my eye and thinking , “This is awful! P e ople are gonna take these home!”  I remember taking a handful of them and thinking , “That’ll at least be 20  people  [who]  aren’t gonna read it .” And then [someone said] “W hy are you taking so many ?” [I replied] “ I don’t want other people rea ding this!” A nd we all walked out with bundles of these. Now, what was that gonna help? Nothin g. But I remember thinking , “ I don’t want anybody hurting people for being true to who they are. ”"
"54" "Sister Moira recognized that stealing these pamphlets would not make an overall difference in the Church’s teaching, but she was moved to prevent that negative message from being spread to people in mass that day. She, like so many other sisters, is outraged  by the dismissive way that the Church addresses homosexuality and found a small, subtle way to  challenge  it, at least for one day."
"55" "Women’s Ordination"
"56" "Unlike sexuality, the sisters I interviewed were more restrained in how they discussed women’s ordination. Often, they couched their positions on the topic in broader, less specific language surrounding the “complementarity of gifts,” how women need to have a full voice in the Church, and how all persons should be free to minister as they feel called to minister. Sister Anne Rita believes that about half of her congregation supports women’s ordination. From my interviews, I suspect this number is probably higher, but there was a hesitance to call for ordination outright, likely due to the Church’s ban on even discussing the topic. Again, women’s ordination was more often grouped in with support for equal rights for women in the Church, and almost no sisters who I interviewed desired  the priesthood for themselves. My q uestions about women’s ordination typically elicited a response like Sister Jacqueline’s,"
"57" "[W]omen’s ordination always comes up, people always ask about it. I think whoever is called to ministry should be able to minister how they feel called to. I know for myself, like I don’t feel ca lled to ordained ministry.  I would love to preach on Sundays, but I don’t know that I feel called to—it’s not even a question of want—I don’t feel called to be a priest. But if somebody is called to that, in the structures that we have, I would want them to be able to."
"58" "Sister Jacqueline does not want to be a priest, but she  also  does not want the Church she loves to exclude other women who might feel called to that ministry."
"59" "Several sisters see women’s ordination as a natural endpoint in a series of other steps along the way. Sister Mary Lynn feels that before the Church can address women priests, “we have to answer the question of sexuality. I mean, we have some real basic  things to do.” Other sisters pointed toward women deacons as   lower hanging fruit, since there is significant historical evidence of deaconesses in the early Church. While the Church has  been reluctant to pursue this— likely out of fear that it would create a slippery slope  toward women in the priesthood— the sisters I interviewed were emboldened by Pope Francis’s 2016 call for a commission to study women deacons (McElwee 2016). For example, Sister Lucia said,"
"60" "I would just like to see… we were joking a little bit about the study being done on the deaconate and the women…And this is how nice our pastor is, he came over the Saturday morning after that was announced and brought a blue clerical shirt and said, “I just thought you’d want this when this is, you kno w…” So we all  were kinda teasing him about how I don’t know if we’re gonna be alive by the time the study’s finished…you know, and we said, “Now remember they did a study on birth control, and decided [to permit] birth control, and then they came out against birth control” so you know these committees can recommend all kinda things. So it may not happen, but I’d certainly like to see it evolve that way and hope that we can continue."
"61" "Sister Lucia expresses cautious optimism for women to be deacons, but also tempers this hope with the reality that progressive developments in the Church can take years and do not necessarily always get approved in the end , like the suggestions on artificial birth control ."
"62" "CONCLUSION"
"63" "If Cardinal Kroll Could Sit with Me, We Could Understand Each Other !"
"64" "During our interview, in the statement above, Sister Moira summed up her frustrations with the patriarchal Church structure and laments her inability to speak face-to-face with its leaders. This sentiment is representative of the congregation’s overall perspective on women’s roles and lack of authority in the institutional Catholic Church. They are marginalized and prevented from assuming leadership positions, but at the same  time are often the primary face of the Church for lay Catholics through their various ministries. Sister Moira and other sisters note how when they get to know the everyday struggles that people face in their lives, their own perspectives are changed, and often this means that sisters respond in ways that do not neatly fit within the boundaries of strict Church teaching. With some exceptions, the Sisters of St. Joseph I interviewed generally believe that clergy are too removed from the people they serve, and thus are unable to meet their spiritual, human, and social needs. Thus,  the sisters  see it as their responsibility as women religious step in to fill these gaps."
"65" "Most  Sisters of St. Joseph  believe that the Church needs to rethink its positions on sex and human sexuality, and some sisters do not believe the Church should even address these topics at all. Instead, they argue for more focus on socioeconomic inequality, war,  universal healthcare,  and immigration. Until a time when sisters are provided equality in the Catholic Church with male clergy and when their congregation is a bolder, more radical voice for justice, many Sisters of St. Joseph are content to claim these spaces for themselves. Through  individual strategies of action,  they resist clergy where appropriate, but more often respond in subtler ways that meet the needs of the faithful but are less noticeable."
"66" "I argue that women religious offer an opportunity to understand how women unite to address the injustices in the realities of their lives lived in two disparate spheres—the Church and secular society—both of which  containing structures that  marginalize them in similar yet also distinctive ways.   After Vatican II, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia began a decades-long process of renewal. Through significant internal  cultural shifts, the congregation was reborn as one with a more outwardly focused social justice orientation. They took public stands against apartheid and the death penalty. The congregation severed financial ties with organizations that opposed their goals, and risked alienating support among their own donors who disagreed with their political activism. In the 1990s and 2000s, sisters were emboldened to be more courageous in their risk-taking, and with the support of the  congregation’s  Commission for Justice, protested the School of the Americas in Fort Benning, Georgia,  and  the Iraq War. In 1999, in collaboration with three other religious communities, the Sisters of St. Joseph founded the African Sisters Education Collaborative (ASEC), a non-profit organization working to provide education to religious women in developing countries in Africa, which in turn leads to better economic, educational, health, and social outcomes for local populations. They have housed migrant farm workers in their convents, and  currently   provide sanctuary for immigrants and refugees  in the United States .  While proportionally,  American  Catholics likely had more contact with religious sisters in 1960s and 1970s, I suspect that the social and political activities that congregations of religious sisters engaged in after Vatican II have had more profound impacts on the everyday lives of American Catholics and overall direction of the Church."
"67" "After  Vatican II and the Women’s Movement, sisters in the community embraced  heightened  gender consciousness as a means of empowerment. The sisters I interviewed had a wide variety of experiences with clergy, summed up best by Sister Claire, who told me succinctly that for her, they were, “ Good. Excellent. Not so good. Pretty rotten. S o, I could say, it spans the  spectrum.” This response was typical, and sisters employed  strategies to navigate the challenges and capitalize on the opportunities. Sisters drew on their social networks in local communities for support and on congregational leadership to intervene on their behalf when necessary. They are hopeful that the current structure in the Catholic Church will change, but also recognize that many of them likely will not be around to see any of these benefits. Still, they press on challenging the gender barriers and looking toward women’s improving positions in society for motivation. The sisters are saddened by the ways in which the Church alienates LGBTQ persons and how it reduces far too many issues to procreation and sexuality. Through their work, they see how peoples’ lives are lived in grey areas, and do not fit neatly into the black and white rules of Catholic dogma. Many sisters wish that the Church would stop talking about sex and sexuality altogether, and instead focus on more pressing issues like income inequality and injustice."
"68" "For the most part, the sisters I interviewed do not feel personally called to ordained ministry, but do support equality for women in the Church. They generally take a more pragmatic view, arguing that as a sacramental Church with declining numbers of priests, there needs to be more gender inclusion so that the needs of the faithful are  met. Sisters are quite capable— and in some cases more e quipped—to address these needs,  but a significant change in Church structure is needed first."
"69" "Despite significant institutional pressures within the Church that marginalize women’s voices, religious sisters like the Sisters of St. Joseph employ strategies of action to navigate rigid dogmatic structures.  This congregation is certainly not alone  in its work for justice and equality —especially among other communities of women religious—and  of course,  the Catholic Churc h is not a monolithic  organization, but rather one that  is comprised of  diverse expressions of faith and political ideologies. The Church too, has experienced profound—if sometimes slow—social and cultural shifts over time , as it is impacted by contemporary politics and a changing society .  Though  they likely are not among the first groups of women that come to mind in conversations  on feminism , I suggest that American women religious are worthy of consideration. Outdated notions of nuns as meek servants of the patriarchy do a disservice to the groundbreaking work that these women do for social and economic justice.  With recent sociopolitical developments, racial unrest, and nativist/anti-immigrant movements around the world,  the twenty-first century  presents significant challenges for marginalized populations. I argue that exploring the lives and work of progressive women’s religious communities—particularly over the past 50 years—give sociologists significant units of analysis to understand how to challenge oppressive and unjust structures from within an unequal system."
"70" "References"
"71" "Acker, Joan. 1990. “ Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A Theory of Gendered Organizations. ”"
"72" "Gender & Society  4(2): 139–158."
"73" "Byrne, Patricia. 1985. “French Roots of a Woman’s Movement: The Sisters of St. Joseph,"
"74" "1650-1836.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Theology, Boston College."
"75" "Charmaz, Kathy. 2005. “Grounded Theory in the 21 st  Century: Applications for"
"76" "Advancing Social Justice Studies.” Pp. 507-535 in  The SAGE Handbook"
"77" "of Qualitative Research, 3 rd  Edition , edited by Norman K. Denzin and"
"78" "Yvonna S. Lincoln. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc."
"79" "Collins, Patricia Hill. 1986. “ Learning from the Outsider Within: The Sociological"
"80" "Significance of Black Feminist Thought .”  Social Problems  33(6):S14-S32."
"81" "Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. 2012.  Doctrinal Assessment of the"
"82" "Leadership Conference of Women Religious.  Retrieved November 24, 2012 ( http://www.usccb.org/upload/Doctrinal_Assessment_Leadership_Conference_Women_Religious.pdf )."
"83" "Ebaugh, Helen Rose. 1993 a . “Patriarchal Bargains and Latent Avenues of Social"
"84" "Mobility: Nuns in the Roman Catholic Church.”  Gender and Society  7(3):400-"
"85" "414."
"86" "------. 1993b.  Women in the Vanishing Cloister: Organizational Decline in Catholic"
"87" "Religious Orders in the United States . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press."
"88" "Fialka, John J. 2003.  Sisters: Catholic Nuns and the Making of America . New York: St."
"89" "Martin's Press."
"90" "Giddens, Anthony. 1976.  New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of"
"91" "Interpretive Sociologies . London: Hutchinson Press."
"92" "Holstein, James A. and Jaber F. Gubrium. 2003. “Active Interviewing.” Pp. 67-80 in  Postmodern Interviewing ,  edited Jaber F. Gubrium and James A. Holstein. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications."
"93" "Koehlinger, Amy L. 2007.  The New Nuns: Racial Justice and Religious Reform in the"
"94" "1960s.   Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press."
"95" "Kvale, Steinar and Svend Brinkmann. 2008.  I nterViews. Learning the Craft of"
"96" "Qualitative Research Interviewing . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications."
"97" "McElwee, Joshua J. 2016 . “Vatican Ends Controversial Three-Year Oversight of US"
"98" "Sisters' L eaders .”  National Catholic Reporter , April 16, 2015."
"99" "McGuinness, Margaret M. 2013.  Called to Serve: A History of Nuns in America . New York: New York University Press."
"100" "Mills, Albert J. and Catherine Ryan. 2001. \"Contesting the Spiritual Space: Patriarchy,"
"101" "Nureaucracy, and the Gendering of Women's Religious Orders.\"  Tamara Journal"
"102" "of Critical Organisation Inquiry  1(4):60."
"103" "Morgan, David L. 2008. “Snowball Sampling.” P. 816 in  The"
"104" "SAGE Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research Methods , edited by Lisa M. Given."
"105" "Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc."
"106" "Quiñonez, Lora  A nn and   Mary Daniel Turner.  1992 .   The Transformation of American"
"107" "Catholic   Sisters.  Philadelphia: Temple University Press."
"108" "Schneiders ,  S andra  M . 2000.   Finding the Treasure: Locating Catholic Religious Life in a"
"109" "New Ecclesial and Cultural Context (Religious Life in a New Millennium)."
"110" "Mahwah: Paulist Press."
"111" "Sewell, William H. 1992. “A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and Transformation.”  The American Journal of Sociology  98(1):1-29."
"112" "Smith, Christian,  Brandon Vaidyanathan, Nancy Tatom Ammerman, José Casanova, Hilary Davidson,  Elaine Howard Ecklund, John H. Evans, Philip S . Gorski,"
"113" "Mary E llen Konieczny, Jason A. Springs, Jenny Trinitapoli, and Meredith Whitnah . 2013. “Roundtable on the Sociology of Religion:  Twenty-Three Theses on the Status of  Religion in American Sociology—A Mellon Working- Group Reflection .”  Journal of the American Academy of Religion  81(4):903-938."
"114" "Thompson, Margaret Susan. 1986. “Discovering Foremothers: Sisters, Society, and the  American Catholic Experience.”  U.S. Catholic Historian  5(3/4):273-290."
"115" "Weber ,  M ax ,  1978  [1915] .   Economy and Society: An Outline   of Interpretive  Sociology ,"
"116" "edited by  Geunther Roth,  and  Claus Wittich   Berkeley: University of California Press ."
"117" "Wilde, Melissa J. 2007.  Vatican II: A Sociological Analysis of Religious Change."
"118" "Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press."
"119" "Wittberg, Patricia. 1989. “Feminist Consciousness Among American Nuns: Patterns of  Ideological Diffusion.”  Women’s Studies International Forum  12(5):529-537."
"120" "------ . 1994.  The Rise and Fall of Catholic Religious Orders: A Social"
"121" "Movement Perspective.  Albany, NY: State University of New York Press."
