AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.15

Pp. 177-191

Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic:
A Text-based Analysis
Irfan Said
Department of English, College of Arts and Letters,
Cihan University, Erbil, Iraq
Abstract:
English existential 'there' lacks equivalent in many languages, yet it has attracted the
attention of linguists working within contrastive linguistics and translation studies. The
aim of the present paper is to investigate how translators deal with English 'there'
sentences in two translated Arabic texts. The method adopted in the study is a descriptiveanalytic one. In Arabic the words 'hunaaka' and 'tammata' are usually used to render
English 'there' ; however, the data of the study show that in many cases translators avoid
using these two words. The flexibility of word order in Arabic , in addition to the use of
full lexical verbs , more frequently than English does in 'there' sentences , help to translate
these sentences adequately into Arabic. It is also found that syntactic restrictions are not
the only reason for the fact that many 'there' sentences are not translated using 'hunaaka'
and ' tammata'; the discourse and stylistic levels, play a role in the translator's decision to
use other means. In some cases, the use of 'hunaaka /tammata' is shown to be optional and
in other cases to be obligatory, unless an alternative construction is produced. Major
translational changes affecting the information structure of the texts, are not found in the
target language.
Key words: Arabic existentials, Arabic-english translation, existential –there , tammata,
hunaaka
Cites as: Said, I. (2019). Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic:
A Text-based Analysis. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (2).
177- 191. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.15

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

177

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

1.Introduction
English existential 'there' as in:
(1) There is a pencil on the table.
lacks equivalent in many languages, yet it has attracted the interest of linguists working within
contrastive linguistics and translation studies ( see Creissles,2014). In Arabic to say:
(2) qalam –un fawqa–l-ṭawilaẗi
pencila on
the table
'A pencil is on the table'.
is usually unacceptable since it starts with an indefinite expression. So, a structure is used in which
the locative phrase 'fawqa –l- ṭawilaẗi' is placed before the indefinite noun phrase 'qalam-un':
(3) fawqa – l -ṭawilaẗi qalam-un
on DEF table pencil a
'There is a pencil on the table.'
In modern standard Arabic the words 'hunaaka' and 'ṯammaẗa' are usually used to translate the
English 'there' sentences into Arabic, though the present study will show that they are not the
preferred translations in many cases. The purpose of this study is to answer the following question:
how are the different roles of the English existential 'there' sentences dealt with in
Arabic;particularly,how translators treat 'there' themes when translating into Arabic which has a
different information structure system from English? It is hypothesized that the functions that are
attributed to the English existential 'there' can be expressed in Arabic in a variety of ways.
2. Data collection
The data of this study consist of two English books translated into Arabic by two professional
translators. The first one entitled 'Axel's Castle', Fontana edition, 1976 is an expository text
concerned with the imaginative literature. It is written by the critic Edmund
Wilson(henceforth:Wilson), translated by Jabra I. Jabra(henceforth: Jabra) and published by Dar
Al-Hurriya,Baghdad, 1976.The second book is a narrative text, D.H.Lawrence's novel 'Women in
Love'(henceforth:Lawrence),Penguin edition, 1960. It is translated by Amjad Hussein (henceforth:
Hussein) and published by Al-Ma'moon House for Translating and Publishing, Baghdad, 1990.
3. Existential 'there' sentences in English
English has two kinds of 'there': existential and adverbial. For example, in:
(4) There is a chair over there.
The first 'there' is a dummy word, a mere place holder, used to introduce the existence of the
indefinite noun phrase 'a chair’; and the second one is an adverb. This clearly shows that the first
'there' functions as the organizer of the message in (4). Collins (2001, p. 1) states that"existentialthere sentences have been characterized as serving a ‘representative’function, drawing attention to
an element that comes into view or to the attention of the addressee."
According to Quirk et al., (1985, pp.1402-08) existential 'there' sentences in English are, generally,
of these types:
A. there + be + indefinite NP + place
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

178

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

(5) There was silence in the room. (Lawrence, p.48)
B. there + be + indefinite NP
(6) There was a pause (Lawrence,p.69)
C. there + be + NP + relative clause
(7) There was a thistle which pricked him vividly. (Lawrence, p. 119)
D. there + be + NP + to infinitive
(8) There was no need to be nasty about it (Lawrence,p.106)
E. there + be + definite NP
(9) How could we get there? – Well, there's the trolley (Rando &Napoli, p 306)
F. there + a verb other than be + NP
(10) In 1873, there had appeared in Paris, a book of poems called 'le Amous Jaunes'(Wilson, p.
80).
4. Existential sentences in Arabic
As mentioned in the introduction, in modern standard Arabic the words 'hunaaka' and
'ṯammaẗa' are used in many cases to render the English existential ‘there’. 'Hunaaka' and 'ṯammaẗa'
are almost synonymous, but it seems that 'ṯammaẗa' sounds more formal than 'hunaaka'.
Aziz(1995,p. 49) states that "The dummy hunaaka was introduced at the beginning of this century
[20th century] by translators, under the influence of the European languages, much to the chagrin
of the purists, who have been fighting a losing battle against this use of hunaaka".Arab
grammarians consider 'hunaaka' and 'ṯammaẗa' referring expressions(literally:referring nouns) and
adverbs at the same time (see Hassan, 1974,p. 295). For example:
(11) sirtu min huna 'la hunaaka.
walked-I from here to there
'I walked from here to there.'
(12) ṯammaẗa ḥall -un
li haḏihi -l – muškilaẗi.
there solution - NOM for
this
DEF
'There is a solution for this problem.'

problem

Arabic has a rather flexible word order and this enables it to express existentials by exploiting this
characteristic. As said earlier, in Arabic a sentence starting with an indefinite noun phrase like (2)
is unacceptable. Instead, the word order is reversed to get (3). This is in agreement with the general
restriction on existential sentences concerning an indefinite expression at the beginning of a
sentence. The verb 'yǔgadu=exist', and other full lexical verbs giving a sense of existence, are also
used to refer to something or someone as will be shown later.
5. Information structure
Many linguists have dealt with the different aspects of the English existential sentences. The
present study adopts the version of analysis presented in Quirk et al., (1985) which draws upon the
idea of 'given', 'new', and 'focus' information in describing such sentences. Information structure,
or 'information packaging', denotes the ways in which thoughts are packaged into sentence
structures to express information progress in discourse (Doherty, 2002). It shows how the status
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

179

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

of information is encoded in the interaction of grammar and cognitive systems. For instance, it is
possible for one meaning to be expressed by a number of different structures, as is seen in the
following examples from English and Arabic respectively:
(13) A. The boy was chasing the girl.
B. The girl was chased by the boy.
C. It was the girl the boy was chasing.
D. What the boy was chasing was the girl.
(14) A. ištaraa
zayd-un kitab-an
bought-he zayd-NOM book-ACC
'Zayd bought a book.'
B. zayd –un ištaraa kitab-an
zayd-NOM bought-he book-ACC
'Zayd, he bought a book.' (i.e., Zayd, not someone else)
C. al- kitab-u zayd-un ištaraa-hu
DEF-book-NOMzayd-NOM bought-it
‘The book, Zayd bought it.'
D. al- kitab-u ištaraa-hu zayd-un
DEF-book-NOM bought-it zayd-NOM
‘The book, Zayd bought it.'
E. zayd-un kitab-aništaraa
zayd-NOM book-ACC bought
'Zayd, it was a book that he bought.'
F. kitab-an ištaraa zayd-un
book-ACC boughtzayd-NOM
'A book, Zayd bought.'
G. ištaraa kitab- an zayd-un
bought-he book-ACC zayd-NOM
'It was a book that Zayd bought.'
Examples (13) and (14) reveal that English and Arabic differ in selecting their information items
and structuring them.
6. Sampling and statistics
Since two texts are used in this study, I will start by examining them and then present text-derived
statistics on the translation of 'there' sentences into Arabic. I will mainly look at how many 'there'
instances are translated into Arabic using 'hunaaka', 'ṯammaẗa', word order, 'yuǧadu', and other
lexical verbs indicating 'existence'. As the number of words in 'Women in Love' is more than the
number of words in 'Axel's Castle', only the first seventeen chapters of Lawrence's novel are
examined in order to get approximately similar sizes of the two texts. Table1) displays the
frequency of ‘there’ sentences in the two texts.
Table1. Frequency of 'there' sentences in the two English texts
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

180

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic
Texts

No. of words
(approx.)
77,400
77,000

Lawrence
Wilson

Said
%

'There' instances
265
63

0.34
0.08

Table 1indicates that existential 'there' is used in the narrative text more than in the expository text.
For the purpose of this study, 100 instances of the translated 'there' sentences (50 from each text)
are selected covering all the existential types in Arabic.
7. Data analysis
The two selected samples of 100 instances of 'there' constructions are translated into Arabic using:
'yuǧadu' and other lexical verbs 49 times, 'hunaaka' 24 times, 'ṯammaẗa' 14 times, and the word
order device 13 times. Table (2) illustrates these results.
Table2Types of existentials in the Arabic texts
Text
No. of instances of 'yuǧadu' hunaaka
and other lexical verbs

ṯammaẗa

word order

6= 12%

9= 18%

3= 6%

other lexical 11= 22%
verbs
21= 42%

Hussein

6= 12%

19= 38%

13= 26%

8= 16%

4= 8%

Total

9

40

24

14

13 = 100

Jabra

yuǧadu

Table2reveals that the Arabic existentials: 'hunaaka', and 'ṯammaẗa', constitute only 38% of the
data, whereas the exploitation of other devices such as full lexical verbs and word order constitutes
62%. This fact indicates that in the majority of cases, the two translators avoid the use of 'hunaaka'
and 'ṯammaẗa'. In what follows, I will examine how each of the devices mentioned in Table2is
dealt with in the two texts under study.
7.1.1. 'Yuǧadu'
The verb'yuǧadu= exist' and its variant morphological forms (tuǧadu, waǧadna,naǧidu…etc),
constitute 6% in Jabra and 12% in Hussein,i.e., 18% in the 100 instances. Examples:
(15) They walked on for some way in silence, under the trees.Then he said slowly, as if afraid:
'There is life which belongs to death, and there is life which isn't death' (Lawrence,1960 , p. 208).
Saraa
ba ͑ ḍa- l - masafaẗi ṣamit-ayni tạhta - l -ašǧari ṯumma qala
walked-they some DEF distance silent-both under DEF trees then saidmuta'niyan ka'na-hu ẖa'f : tuǧadu ḥayaẗ-un taẖusu - l - mawta wa tuǧadu
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
181
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

slowly as if-he
afraid exist life –NOM belong DEF death and exist
ḥayaẗ-un laysat mawt – an
life NOM not death ACC ( Hussein, 1990 p. 343)
'…there exists life which belongs to death, and there exists life which is not death.'
In (15), it is possible to use 'hunaaka' or 'ṯammaẗa' instead of 'tuǧadu' (fem. form of 'yuǧadu'), but
it seems that the translator prefers 'tuǧadu' for both instances of the 'there' in order to render
faithfully the essence of the original English sentence.
(16) 'If there is no love, what is there?' she cried almost jeering (Lawrence,p.162)
hatafa-t bima yašbahu –l – istihza'a in lam yakun hunaaka ḥub- un fama
cried-she as resemble DEF jeering if not is
there
love-NOM what
- l- laḏi yuǧadu?
DEF that exist ( Hussein,1990, p. 269)
'… if there is no love, what is there?'
The second 'there' in (16) is rendered as 'yuǧadu' apparently to avoid the repetition of 'hunaaka',
and also to emphasize the content of the question: what is there? as 'yuǧadu' explicitly expresses
'existence'. What is interesting here is that 'yuǧadu' in this position can't be replaced by 'ṯammaẗa'
without reorganizing the structure to get:
'in lam yakun hunaaka ḥubun, fa ṯammaẗa maḏa?
if there is no love, then what is there?'
(17) And whereas in 'Ulysses' there is only one parallel, in this book there is a whole set
(Wilson,1961,p. 187).
Wa baynama waǧad-na fi yulsees muwaziy –an waḥid –an naǧidu fi haḏa:
and whereas found we in Ulysses parallel ACC one ACC we find in this
-l- kitab -l- ǧadid maǧmu ͑ a mutakamila min-l-muwaziyati.
DEF book DEF new set whole
from
DEF parallels (Jabra, 1976,p. 183).
'And whereas we found in 'Ulysses' one parallel, we find in this new book a set of parallels”
In (17), the structure of the English sentence is:locative+there+be+NP; it is related to the normal
pattern: there+be+NP+locative. In the Arabic version, we observe that 'naǧidu=we find' precedes
the locative phrase 'fi haḏa –l-kitab=in this book' obviously to emphasize the core information
element,i.e., 'this new book'.I think this method aids the information to flow effectively.
7.1.2. Other lexical verbs
Table 2demonstrates that 40% of 'there' sentences in the sample texts are translated by using full
lexical verbs indicating, explicitly or implicitly, appearance or existence on the scene (see
Breivik,1981:18). Most of these verbs are similar to the lexical verbs used, instead of 'be' in the
English 'there' sentences. The following are examples of such verbs used in the texts without
resorting to 'hunaaka'or 'ṯammaẗa.
(18) Then, sure enough, there came a note from him, asking if she would come to tea with
Gudrun to his rooms in town (Lawrence , p., 160).
ṯumma ta'akada–l-amru iḏ waradat risalaẗ-un min–hu yad͑ u –ha fi–ha li
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

182

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

then sure
DEF matter as came letter NOM from him asking her in it to
tanawili a šayifi maskani–hi bi-l- madinaẗi mustaṣhibaẗ –an gudrun
have DEF tea in house his in DEF town with ACC Gudrun (Hussein,.265).
'Then the matter became sure, as a letter came from him inviting her and Gudrun to tea at his room
in town.'
In (18), the particle ' iḏ =as ' together with the verb ' waradat=came ' replaces 'there'. In Arabic,
this particle usually introduces a verbal element,i.e., it has a representative function similar to that
of 'there' in English.
(19) There had already set in, about the middle of the century, quite independent of the theory of
Evolution
a
reaction
against
the
sentimentality
and
the
looseness
of
Romanticism,…(Wilson,,p.,13).
fa fi awasiṭi –l–qarni aẖaḍa yatabalwaru radu fi͑ lin mustaqilan͑ n
in middle DEF century began crystallize reaction
independent from
naẓariyaẗi- l – taṭawiri wa- l - irtiqa' ḍida miui͑ati
- l –romansiyaẗi
theory DEF evolution and DEF rising against sentimentality DEF romanticism
wa ẖalẖalati –ha
and looseness its (Jabra,p.13)
'In the middle of the century, a reaction began to crystallize, independent…'
A reordering is taking place in (19). The phrase 'fafiawasiṭi –l- qarni=in the middle of the century'
is fronted as a theme. Quirk et al., (1985) define thematic fronting as "the achievement of marked
theme by moving into initial position an item which is otherwise unusual there."(p, 1377) In
Arabic, as said in section (1), this structure helps to avoid starting the sentence with an indefinite
expression. The verb 'yatabalwaru=crystalize' is exploited to embody the existence of 'radu fi ͑
lin=a reaction'.
(20) There is a conflict here which cannot be evaded and Yeats, even in his earliest period, is
unceasingly aware of this conflict (Wilson,p.34).
Huna yakmunu ṣira͑ -un la nastaṭi͑ u taǧanubu-hu wa yeats ḥatta fi awali
here exist conflict NOM not can we evade it and Yeats even in early
bawakiri-hi yaš ru
͑ ͑ bi-hi dunama inqiṭa ͑
period his he feel of it without ceasing (Jabra,p.34).
'Here exists a conflict which we cannot evade…'
In (20), the original English sentence is basically of this type: there+be+indef.NP, whereas the
rendered version is of the type: place+a lexical verb+indef.NP. The locative 'huna=here' in the
initial position serves to avoid using an indefinite expression at the beginning of a sentence, but it
also makes a change in the information structure. In the English sentence, 'a conflict' is considered
as the given information, and 'here' as the new one, whereas in the Arabic sentence, 'huna' is the
given information and 'ṣira ͑ un' is the new. In this text, the translator resorts to the verb
'yakmunu=exist' as it plays a major role in showing the existence of 'a conflict'.
(21) There was a shout from the people (Lawrence, p.20).
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

183

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

fa -inṭalaqa hutaf –un min-l- ǧami͑ i
particle came shout NOM from DEF all (Hussein,p.34).
Here, the characteristic of Arabic as being basically a verb initial language is invested by using the
particle 'fa' plus the verb 'inṭalaqa=came'.This particle is used to introduce an element in a
sequence and together with the verb serves as a point of departure from which the sentence is
developed toward the real subject: 'hutaf-un=shout'.
(22) Yet, there has never been a poet who enjoyed the sensuous world with more gusto than Valéry
or who solidly bodied it forth (Wilson,p.65).
Wa ma ͑ a ḏalika fa la ͑ala – na la nalqa ša ͑ra –an aẖara yatamata ͑u
and with that part. perhaps we not find poet ACC another enjoy
b
-l- ͑alami ḥissi
bi - ḥararaẗin ašadu min ḥararaẗi valery aw ṣawara
prep. DEF world sensuous with warmth more from warmth Valery or pictured
-hu bi-taǧasudin aqwa
it with depiction stronger ( Jabra,p.64 )
'Yet, perhaps we don't find another poet…'
In (22), the word 'nalqa=we find' replaces 'there'. But this option for 'nalqa' with only the negative
particle ' la=no' makes the English 'never' lose its emphatic sense in Arabic. However, the
information structure of the original sentence is almost maintained.
7.2Hunaaka
'Hunaaka' is found 13 times (26%) in Hussein and 11 times (22%) in Jabra. Examples (23-26)
show how this word is used.
(23) At these two opposite poles of the circle, human life is impossible: there exist only anti podal
types of supernatural beings. But along the circumference of the circle, between these two ultrahuman poles, there occur twenty-six phases which cover all possible types of human personality
(Wilson,p.47).
wa ˓ nda haḏayn – l- quṭbayni min– l -da'ra takunu ḥayaẗu – l - insani
and at
these DEF poles from DEF circle is
life DEF human
mustaḥila wa laysa hunaaka ila aanmaṭun mutaḍada min ka'natin ẖariqa
impossible and not there
only types
anti
from creatures super
walakin ͑la muḥiṭ
- l- da'ra bayna haḏayn - l - quṭbayni – l –
conj. but on circumference DEF circle between these DEF poles DEF
ẖariqayni lil insane hunaaka situn wa ͑ ̌sruna marḥalaẗ – an tašmalu alsuper of
human there
six and twenty phase
ACC cover DEF
anmaṭa – l – mumkina kuluha lil šaẖsiya- l – insaniya
types DEF possible all of personality DEF human (Jabra,p.47).
'And at these two…there is only anti podal…, there are twenty-six phases…'
The first 'there' in (23) is translated using 'hunaaka' together with the negative particle 'laysa=not',
though it is acceptable to translate the verb 'exist' by saying: 'tuǧadu faqaṭ anmaṭun
mutaḏada=exist only anti podal types.' The second 'there' also realizes as 'hunaaka'+ NP, i.e., the
verb 'occur' is not rendered and the resultant structure is similar to the English bare existential:
'There are twenty-six phases….'
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

184

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

(24) 'There are my sons-in-law' she went on, in a sort of monologue.'Now Laura's got married,
there's another.(Lawrence,p.27).
ṯumma maḍa – t tataḥadaṯu bima yašbahu –l– ḥadiṯa ila– l – ˍdati hunaaka:
then went she talking
in sort of
DEF talking to DEF self there
aṣhar
-i wa ha hiya laura qad tazawaǧ – t fa ḥalla ṣihrun
sons-in-law my and now she Laura has married she conj.replaced son-in-law
aẖar
another ( Hussein,p.45 )
'Then , she went on in a sort of monologue, 'There are my son's-in-law and now Laura's got
married, there's another son-in-law"
The first 'there' in (24) is rendered as 'hunaaka' but the second one as 'ḥalla', a semantically rich
verb referring to someone or something which comes into being. This verb is preceded by the
conjunction 'fa' which, besides its usual function here (see 21), serves as a focusing element
emphasizing the existence of a new son-in-law.
(25) 'Of course, there are children-' said Ursula doubtfully (Lawrence,p.9)
ama ursula fa qala –t murtabaẗ –an hunaaka – l – aṭfalu tab ͑an
as for Ursula conj. said she doubtfully ACC there DEF children of course (Hussein,p.17)
'As for Ursula, she said doubtfully,'There are the children,of course."
In the source language, 'there' is preceded by the focusing phrase 'of course', whereas in the Arabic
version the 'hunaaka' sentence is preceded by the focusing phrase 'am aursula=as for Ursula' and
'tab ͑ an=of course' is moved to the end. In spite of this minor change, the main focus of the
sentence is maintained.
(26) 'To know, that is yours all.That is your life- you have only this, this knowledge',he
cried.'There is only one tree;there is only one fruit, in your mouth(Lawrence,p.43).
fa hataf –a qa'l-an
an ta͑lami haḏa huwa anti kuliki haḏa
conj.shouted-he saying ACC to know-you this is you all you this
ẖayaruki
la tamlukina siwa haḏa siwa haḏihi – l – ma ͑ rifa hunaaka
choice-your not possess-you only this only this DEF knowledge there
šaǧarat –un waḥidaẗ –un faqaṭ ṯammaẗa ṯamaraẗ –un waḥidaẗ –un faqaṭ fi
tree NOM one NOM only there
fruit
NOM one NOM only in
famiki
mouth-your ( Hussein,p.70 )
'…There is only one tree; there is only fruit, in your mouth.'
Again, in (26), 'there' is used twice. Here 'ṯammaẗa' can be replaced by 'hunaaka', but it seems that
the translator tries to avoid the repetition of this word. However, there are cases where these two
words can't be replaced by each other without making changes in the structure of the sentence (see
29).
7.3 Ṯammaẗa
As table (2) exhibits Hussein uses 'ṯammaẗa' 8 times (16%) and Jabra, 6 times (12%). Examples:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

185

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

(27) 'There is', he asserts in his early essays on the symbolism of Shelley, "for every man some
one scene, some one picture that is the image of his secret life, for wisdom first speaks in images…"
(Wilson,p.40).
fi maqali –hi – l - mubakir ͑ n ramziyaẗ šely naǧidu – hu yaqulu li kulli
in essay his DEF early on symbolism Shelley we find him saying for every
imri'n ṯammaẗa mašhad –un waḥid –un muġamaraẗ –un waḥidaẗ –un ṣuratman there
scene NOM one NOM adventure NOM one NOM picture
un
waḥidat –un hiya ṣuraẗu ḥayati –hi - l - ẖafiya li'anna - l - ḥikmaẗa
NOM one
NOM is
picture life his DEF secret because DEF wisdom
tanṭiqu awala –an bi - l - ṣuwari
speak first ACC by DEF pictures ( Jabra,p. 40 )
'In his early essays on the symbolism of Shelley, we find him saying: for every man, there is one
scene…'
In (27), Wilson splits the 'there' sentence by inserting the focal clause 'he asserts….' In translation,
Jabra thematizes the PP 'likuli 'mri'n=for every man' and presents the sentence as:
PP+ṯammaẗa+NP. By this change, the translator creates a cohesive text in Arabic. Concerning the
use of 'ṯammaẗa', one can consider it, together with ‘hunaaka’, an optional element here, since it is
possible to translate the sentence without using them, a case preferred by the purists.
(28) There seemed a dual consciousness running in him. He was thinking vigorously of something
he read in the newspaper, and at the same time, his eye ran over the surface of the life round him,
and he missed nothing (Lawrence,p.58).
Kana ṯammaẗa fi qararaẗi nafsi –hi wa ͑ y-an ͑ la ma yaluḥ faqad kana
was there
in side self him consciousness two
seem part. was
yufakiru
maliy-an
fi šay'in ma qara'a –hu fi a ṣaḥifaẗi wa fi
he thinking vigorously ACC in something read he it in DEF newspaper and in
-l- waqti ͑ynihi kanat ͑ ynu –hu taḥumani ͑ ala awǧuhi- l - ḥayäti ḥawla –hu
DEF time same was eye his ran over on
surface DEF life round him
wa lam yafut –hu ayušay'
and notmissed him anything (Hussein,p.95).
'There seemed a dual consciousness in the depth of his heart….'
In (28), the phrase ' ͑la ma̱yaluḥ', the equivalent of the English verb 'seem', is movedto the end of
the Arabic sentence, and 'kana=was' is used to show past tense. Again'ṯammaẗa' can be optional
here,i.e., without it, the sentence reads: kana fi qararati nafsihi wa ͑ yan. In this case, the verb
'kana' embodies the sense of existence.
(29) There is a curious fascination about becoming gradually acquainted with a character whom
we know only from the inside and from his dreams(Wilson,p.188).
ṯammaẗa siḥr
-un ġarib
-un
naḥisu -hu bi 'ṭila ͑ ina
there fascination NOM curious NOM we feel it by acquaint we
šay'an fa šay'an ͑ la nawaḥi šaẖsiyaẗ–in la na ͑ rifu –ha illa min –l– daẖili
gradually on aspects
character GENnot we know it only from DEF inside
wa min aḥlami –ha
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

186

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

and from dreams its ( Jabra,p.184 )
'We feel a curious fascination by acquainting ourselves with a character…'
Unlike (28), the use of 'ṯammaẗa' in (29) is obligatory. It can be replaced by 'hunaaka', but it cannot
be omitted without changing the structure. For instance, it is possible to exploit the verb in
'naḥisu=we feel' to get:naḥisu bi siḥrin ġaribin bi'ṭila ͑ ina…'we feel a curious fascination by
acquainting ourselves…'
7.4 Word order
The flexibility of word order in Arabic allows it to readjust the elements of a sentence in order to
achieve different communicative effects, and also to avoid starting a sentence with an indefinite
noun phrase (see example 2). Nine existential sentences (18%) depending on word order are
attested in Jabra and four (8%) in Hussein. The following are examples of the use of this device in
the sample texts.
(30) And there is more substance in Valéry than in Mallarmé(Wilson,p.64).
wa fi valery
madaẗ–un akṯaru mima fi malarme
and inValéry substance NOM more than in Mallarmé (Jabra,p.63).
'And there is more substance in Valéry than in Mallarmé́.'
In (30), the translator does not opt for 'hunaaka' or 'ṯ̱ ammäta'. He prefers to reorder the elements
of the sentence to avoid mentioning an indefinite phrase at the beginning of the sentence. Here,
there is also a change in the information structure. The ‘new’ information of the original sentence
is thematized as 'given' and the subject 'madaẗun=substance' is driven to the end as 'new'
information.
(31) 'I'm not afraid of anything except black-beetles', said Minette, looking up suddenly and staring
with her round eyes, on which there seemed an unseeing film of flame, fully upon Gerald
(Lawrence,p.76).
qala -t minet innani la ut ͑ abu min ayi šay'n͑ ada- l – ẖanafis -l –
said she Minnet I am not afraid from anything except DEF beetles DEF
sud wa hiya tarfa ͑ u waǧha –ha fuǧ'at-an
tuḥadiqu fi ̌gerald bi
black and she lifting face her suddenly ACC staring at Gerald with
kamili͑ aynay –ha - l– mudawaratayni allatayni badat ͑ alayhima ̇gašawaẗu
full
eyes her DEF round
which
seemed on them film
lahab -in la tura
flame GEN not seen ( Hussein, p.127 )
'… on which there seemed an unseeing…'
Example (31) needs an extended context in order to understand how the readjustment of the
linguistic elements helps to avoid using 'hunaaka' or 'ṯammaẗa' for 'there'; rather it exploits the
sense of existence in the word 'badat=seemed' to achieve what 'there' achieves in English. As a
matter of fact, using 'hunaaka' with 'badat' is not possible, but 'ṯammaẗa' can be employed: '…
allatayni badat ͑ alayhima ṯammaẗa ġašawaẗu lahabin…', though it sounds rather clumsy.
(32) There is a good deal in Dante's morality which he never got out of the scholastics as, for all
we know,there may be a good deal in Lucretius which he never got out of Epicurus. (Wilson,p.
100 )
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

187

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

fi aẖlaqiyaẗi danti – l – kaṯiru
mima lam ya'ẖuḏ –hu qaṭ͑an - l inmorality Dante DEF a good deal which not get it never from DEF
falasifa - l- madrasiyiin kama anna fi loqrits rubama – l- kaṯiru
philosophers DEF scholastics as emphatic in Lucretius may be DEF more
mima lam ya'ẖuḏ – hu qaṭ ͑ an abiqur
which not get it never from Epicurus (Jabra,p.100).
'In Dante's morality, there is a good deal which he never got out of scholastics as there may be a
good deal in Lucretius which he never got out of Epicurus.'In (32), it is quite acceptable to use
'ṯammaẗa' or 'hunaaka', but the translator resorts to reordering the constituents of the sentence, a
case in which the communicative core, the phrase 'fi aẖlaqiyaẗi danti=in Dante's morality' is moved
to the initial position as'given' information, and 'al kaṯiru=a good deal' realizes as 'new'
information. We also note here that the preposition 'fi=in' embodies the sense of existence.
8. Findings and discussion
The data of this study have shown that English 'there' can be translated into Arabic using, mainly,
the words 'hunaaka' and 'ṯammaẗa'. However, the sample examples of the 'there' sentences reveal
that only 38% of these instances are rendered by using the above two words. The relative flexibility
of word order in Arabic enables it to express the content of 'there' sentences by either reordering
the elements of the sentence or using a rich lexical verb to refer to the existence of someone or
something. The decision of the translator to use either 'hunaaka' or 'ṯammaẗa' may not be purely
syntactic; rather, the discourse functions,the rhetorical, thematic or stylistic aspects, may play a
role in this decision. Therefore, it seems that some of the functions which are characteristics of the
English existential 'there' sentences can be displayed in Arabic using different strategies. For
example, for (33), we can have more than one possibility concerning information structure, as
shown in a, b, c, and d:
(33) 'There is something', he says, 'of an old wives' tale in fine literature (Wilson,p.40).
A. yaqulu"fi rawa' ͑ – l –adabi šay'un
min ḥikayati– l -͑aga'zi"
he says in fine DEF literature something from tales DEF old wives (Jabra,p.4o). He says,''In fine
literature, there is something of old wives' tales."
B. yaqulu"ṯammaẗa šay'un min ḥikayati – l - ͑ aga'zifi rawa' ͑ - l – adabi"
he says there something from tales DEF old wives in fine DEF literature.
He says, "There is something of old wives' tales in fine literature."
C. yaqulu " hunaakafi rawa’ ͑ - l – adabišay'unmin ḥikayati – l - ͑ aga'zi":
hesays there in fineDEF literature something from talesDEF old wives.
He says, "There is in fine literature something of old wives' tales."
D. yaqulu yuǧadu šay'un min ḥikayati - l - ͑ aǧa'zi fi rawa' ͑ - l-adabi.
he says exist something from tales DEF old wives in fine DEF literature.
He says, "There exists something of old wives' tales in fine literature."
Sentence (33) could be translated as (a) in which Jabra renders 'there' exploiting the word order
device. He moves the locative phrase 'fi rawa' ͑ -l- adabi=in fine literature' to the beginning of the
sentence to become the 'given' information, and positions the phrase'̌say'un min ḥikayat-l͑aǧa'zi=something of old wives' tale' at the end as 'new' information. Another choice is (b) where
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

188

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

the role of 'given' and 'new' is reversed and 'hunaaka' stands for 'there'. In (c) 'fi rawa' ͑ -l- adabi=in
fine literature' is introduced by 'hunaaka' as 'given' information. Finally, in (d) the verb
'yuǧadu=exist' is used to replace 'there'. What these possibilities show is that the translator has the
choice to thematize any of the two phrases in (33), and also to use 'hunaaka', 'ṯammaẗa' or'yuǧadu'
for 'there', or do without them altogether.
Among other interesting cases in the translated data, the following attract attention.
First, cases of 'there-less' sentences in the source language which are translated using'ṯammaẗa';
and second, the cases where the use of 'hunaaka' and ṯammaẗa' is either obligatory or optional.
Examples (34) and (35) illustrate these cases.
(34) The sisters were crossing a black path through a dark, soiled field. On the left, was a large
landscape, a valley with collieries and opposite hills with cornfields and woods all blackened with
distance, as if seen through a veil of crape. White and black smoke rose up in steady columns,
magic within the dark air. Near at hand came the long rows of dwellings, approaching curved up
the hill-scope, in straight lines along the brow of the hill (Lawrence,p.12).
kanat – l - uẖt - an ta ͑aburani mamar – an aswad ͑ ͑ bra ḥaqlin muẓlim - in
was DEF sister two crossing
path ACC black through field dark GEN
mutasiẖ ṯammaẗa ͑ alaǧihäti – l – yasari saq
͑ -un
wasi ͑ - un wa
soiled
there
on side DEF left landscapeNOM large NOM and
wad - in
ḏu manaǧimi faḥm– in wa tilal –in muqabila –ha fi -ha
valley GEN with collieries
GEN and hills GEN opposite them in them
ġabat – un wa ḥuqulu ḥinta aḍafa bu ͑ du - l – masafaẗi ͑ alay -ha
woods NOM and fields grain added remoteness DEF distance on them
lawn – an aswad ka'ana –ha tura ͑ bra qina ͑ -in min – l – kreb wa
color ACC black as if they seen through veil GEN from DEF crape and
kana duẖan –un
abyaḍ wa aswad yartafi͑ u ͑aliy–an fi a ͑midat –in
was smoke NOM white and black rise up ACC in columns GEN
mustaqira k- sihri fi -l –hawa' – l –muẓlimi wa ṯammaẗa͑ an kaṯab ta'ti
steady as magic in DEF air DEF dark and there from near come
a
ṣufuf - l – ṭawila lil masakini fi ẖuṭuṭ– in mustaqima ͑ ala ṭuli ǧabhaẗ
DEF rows DEF long of dwellings in lines GEN straight
on along brow
- l – tali
DEF hill ( Hussein,p.21 )
'The sisters were crossing a black path through a dark, soiled field. There was on the left….'
…'There was, near at hand, long rows….' What is happening in (34) is that the clause: 'on the left
was a large landscape…' is a variation of the usual pattern, there+be+NP+locative: 'There was a
large landscape on the left.' Hussein translates the clause by inserting 'ṯammaẗa' in the Arabic
version primarily to mark the subject 'saq͑ un'=landscape' as existing and also as a representative
element. Furthermore, 'kana=was' could be used here instead of 'ṯammaẗa'. The order of the
elements is acceptable since the indefinite noun phrase is not introduced at the beginning of the
construction. The sentence beginning with 'near at hand…' is also translated by introducing it with
'ṯammaẗa', though without 'ṯammaẗa', it will read well.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

189

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

Again it seems that the use of 'tammaẗa' here serves to bring something to the reader's awareness.
(35) But in the newspaper office, for the first time, a general atmosphere begins to be created,
beyond the specific minds of the characters, by punctuating the text with newspaper heads which
announce the incidents in the narrative (Wilson, p. 167).
wa lakin naǧid – u fi maktab-l -ǧaridaẗi li awali marraẗ –in anna
conj. but we find in office DEF newspaper for first time GEN emphatic
ṯammaẗa ǧaw
-an ͑amma -an aẖaḏa- l – mu'alifu
yaẖliq –hu
there atmosphere ACC general ACC began DEF author
create it
mutaẖatiy – an aḏhana – l – šaẖsiyati biḏati bi- tarsi͑ - l – naṣi bi
beyond ACC minds DEFcharacters specific bypunctuation DEF text with
͑ anawin ǧara'diya tu ͑linu ḥawadiṯi – l – qiṣati
heads
newspaper announce incidents DEF story (Jabra,p.165).
'But we find in the newspaper office, for the first time, that there is a general atmosphere the author
began to create…'
In (35), the English passive form is translated as an active form in Arabic. Arabic, as a matter of
fact, prefers the active form to the passive form, in many cases. The insertion of 'ṯammaẗa' here is
optional since the phrase 'naǧidu=we find', which gives the sense of existence, is used in the
beginning of the construction. What is apparent here is that Jabra tries to emphasize the existence
of the 'general atmosphere' in the office.
9. Conclusion
The present study has examined English existential 'there' sentences and how they are translated
into Arabic. It is shown that these sentences can be rendered adequately not only by using words
such as 'hunaaka' and 'ṯammaẗa', but also--and in many cases preferably--by means of other
devices. In cases where the translator is free to choose between 'hunaaka'/'ṯammaẗa', among other
devices, his decision not to use either of these words, must serve to present a better translation.
This is carried out through first, exploiting the relatively flexible word order of Arabic; and second,
using full lexical verbs more frequently than English does in 'there' constructions.It is found that
the syntactic restrictions are not the only reason for the fact that many 'there' sentences are not
translated using 'hunaaka' and 'ṯammaẗa', the discourse and stylistic levels play a role in the
translator`s decision to use other means. In some cases, the use of 'hunaaka'/'ṯammaẗa' is shown to
be optional while in others to be obligatory, unless an alternative structure is produced.Major
translational changes affecting the information structure of the texts, are not found in the target
language. Finally, the analysis of the texts has revealed that compared with English, fewer
existential sentences are found in Arabic.

About the author
Irfan Said: is an Assistant Professor holding M.A. in linguistics from London University, and
author of a number of articles in the fields of applied linguistics, second language teaching, and
contrastive linguistics, and has translated a number of books from English into Arabic. From
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

190

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Translating English Existential 'there' Sentences into Arabic

Said

1980 to 2010 he taught at Al Mustansiriya University of Baghdad. He joined Cihan University in
2010. ORCiD ID https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0086-8956
References
Aziz, .Y. (1995). Existential Sentences in Arabic-English Translation.Meta XL (1): 47-53.
Breivik, L. (1981). On the Interpretation of Existential There.Language 57: 1-25
Collins, P. (2001). "Some Discourse Functions of Existentials in English".Proceedings of the 2001
Conference
of
the
Australian
Linguistic
Society.
1-6.htt://linguistics.
Anu.edu.au/ALS2001/proceedings.html
Creissles,D.(May, 2014) "Existential Predication in Typological Perspectives".
www.deniscreissels.fr./Creissels-Exist.Pred.accessed November 3,2014
Doherty, M.(2002). Language Processing in Discourse: A Key to Felicitous Translation. London:
Routledge.
Hassan, A.(1974).Al Naḥwu Al Wafi[A Comprehensive Grammar of Arabic].Vol.1, Tehran:
Intisharat Nasir Khasraw.
Hussein, A. (1990). Nis'un Asˇikat ( translation ).Baghdad: AL-Ma'moon House.
Jabra,I. (1976 ). Qala't Aksil.( translation ). Baghdad : Dar Al Hurriya.
Lawrence,D.H. (1960 ).Women in Love. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Quirk, R.,Greenbaum,S.,Leech,G.,&Svartvik,J. (eds). (1985). AComprehensive Grammar of the
English Language. London: Longman..
Rando, E.,& Napoli,D., (1978). Definiteness in There-sentences.Language,54:300-313.
Wilson,E.(1961). Axel's Castle.Glasgow:Fontana.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

191

