Third-Party Policing Approaches against Organized Crime:
∗
an Evaluation of the Yakuza Exclusion Ordinances
Tetsuya Hoshino†

Takuma Kamada‡

Published in Journal of Quantitative Criminology §
Abstract
Objective: Third-party policing (TPP) refers to police efforts to persuade or coerce
third parties to take some responsibility for crime control and prevention. The Yakuza
Exclusion Ordinances (YEOs) of Japan aim to combat organized crime syndicates—
the yakuza. Consistent with the principles of TPP, the YEOs prohibit third parties
(i.e., non-yakuza individuals) from providing any benefit to the yakuza. We argue
that the effectiveness of the YEOs may depend on the strategic relationship among
yakuza syndicates, where yakuza syndicates choose their power strategically to gain
advantages over competition among rival yakuza syndicates.
Methods: We use unique data on the yakuza and construct a regional concentration index of yakuza syndicates. Exploiting prefecture-level variation in the YEOs’
enactment dates, we apply a difference-in-differences approach, while allowing for heterogeneity of the YEOs’ effect by the concentration of yakuza syndicates.
Results: The YEOs decrease the number of yakuza members and the effect of YEOs
is greater in regions with lower concentration levels of yakuza syndicates. Given that
yakuza members decrease by about 30% during the period of our study, our estimates
suggest that the YEOs on average contribute to about 20% of a recent reduction of
yakuza members.
Conclusions: The YEOs are related to TPP strategies that rely on coercive techniques, and thus our results suggest the effectiveness of TPP strategies against organized crime. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the YEOs’ effect suggests the effectiveness of enforcement policies that intensively target regions with lower concentration of
organized crime.
Keywords: Third-party policing, organized crime, illegal markets, quasi-experiment
∗

Names in alphabetical order; we contributed equally to this study. We thank Daniel DellaPosta, Corina
Graif, Noboru Hirosue, Hajime Katayama, Hanae Katayama, Yoshiki Kobayashi, Thomas A. Lougrhran,
Yutaka Maeda, Mark Moore, Jun Nakabayashi, Kentaro Nakajima, Holly Nguyen, Wayne Osgood, Brian
Phillips, Barry Ruback, Peter Reuter, Tomoyori Saito, Yoshimichi Sato, Stephanie M. Scott, Nobuo Suzuki,
Christopher Winship, Letian Zhang, and the participants at the 38th Annual APPAM Fall Research Conference, Osaka University, Pennsylvania State University, and Tohoku University for their helpful comments
and discussion. We also thank the editor and three anonymous referees for their comments. Kamada would
like to thank Grant-in-Aid from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Fellows (26-5010). The usual
disclaimer applies.
†
Department of Economics, ITAM. Email: tetsuya.hoshino@itam.mx
‡
Corresponding author. Osaka School of International Public Policy, Osaka University. Email:
kamada@osipp.osaka-u.ac.jp
§
Publisher Version.

1

1

Introduction

Crime control and prevention are central interests in the field of criminology, and many
policing strategies have been proposed and implemented. Third-party policing (TPP) is an
emergent policing strategy that relies on resources and institutions other than the police to
address crime problems (Weisburd and Majmundar, 2018). More specifically, TPP refers
to police efforts to persuade or coerce third parties—for instance, non-offending individuals
who the police believe influence those participating in the target crime—to take some responsibility for crime control and prevention. TPP strategies have certain advantages over
traditional policing strategies. When only the police address crime problems, their control
capacity may be limited, but the TPP strategies may expand the capacity by mobilizing third
parties (Mazerolle and Ransley, 2004). Previous studies have suggested the effectiveness of
TPP for combating street-level crime and disorder, at least in the short term (Weisburd and
Majmundar, 2018). While the principles of TPP can be directed at types of crime other than
street-level crime, such as white-collar crime and terrorism (Mazerolle and Ransley, 2006),
less is known about the effectiveness of TPP in combating organized crime. It is not obvious
whether and, if so, how the principles of TPP operate when they are applied to organized
crime. Third parties may not be willing to take responsibility for addressing organized crime
in partnership with the police due to a fear of potential retaliation by members of criminal
organizations.
In this paper, we take an initial step toward understanding the effect of a TPP-related
strategy on organized crime. In particular, we study the effect of the Yakuza Exclusion
Ordinances (YEOs). The YEOs are ordinances that were recently introduced in Japan
to regulate Japanese criminal organizations: the yakuza. We use “yakuza” as a general
term referring to Japanese criminal organizations or their members. The yakuza have many
legal and illegal income sources, including extortion, protection rackets, interference in civil
disputes, and the construction of public works. Therefore, the yakuza’s economic activities
are based on relationships with non-yakuza individuals and companies (henceforth, nonyakuza). The YEOs aim to sever the economic association between the yakuza and nonyakuza, thereby indirectly weakening the yakuza’s economy (which is expected to aid nonyazuka in maintaining peace within their communities, as well as developing their business
activities). Specifically, the YEOs prohibit non-yakuza from acting in ways that may benefit
the yakuza. For example, non-yakuza are banned from receiving extra-state protection from
yakuza members, renting apartments to them, and opening bank accounts for them. The
YEOs are expected to increase the cost of belonging to the yakuza. To involve non-yakuza
in the control of yakuza, the YEOs impose sanctions on non-yakuza if they do not abide by

2

the regulations.
We propose that the YEOs can be interpreted as a TPP-related strategy. The concept
underlying the YEOs can be described as “yakuza versus the police in partnership with nonyakuza.” That is, the YEOs attempt to address the yakuza in partnership with non-yakuza—
i.e., third parties—who could aid yakuza in their activities through the aforementioned types
of economic association. Thus, the YEOs can be situated as a TPP-related strategy that
targets specific offenders (yakuza members) in partnership with third parties (non-yakuza).
The partnership is built on the aforementioned coercive techniques. The YEOs alter the
routine behaviors of non-yakuza to help them control the yakuza and reduce underlying
criminal opportunity structures that allow yakuza activities to persist. We revisit this point
in Section 2, elaborating on how the YEOs are, at least conceptually, related to TPP.
While the YEOs impose sanctions on non-yakuza to combat the yakuza, we argue that
the effectiveness of the YEOs may depend on regional conflict and competition among rival
yakuza syndicates. The intuition behind this idea is “strategic relationship” among yakuza
syndicates. Crime syndicates can be considered to be rational and strategic agents in the
sense that when they make a decision, they take into account how rival crime syndicates will
respond (e.g., Dell, 2015). Therefore, whether yakuza members defect from their syndicates
potentially depends not only on the YEOs, but also on the extent of potential regional
conflict and competition with their rival syndicates.
To estimate the YEOs’ effect, we take a difference-in-differences (DiD) approach, exploiting variation in the enactment dates of the YEOs across prefectures. To account for the
regional competition among rival yakuza syndicates, we construct a regional concentration
index of yakuza syndicates, which we call a yakuza concentration index (YCI). Using this
design, we examine (i) the YEOs’ effect on the number of yakuza members and (ii) the
heterogeneity of the YEOs’ effect by YCI.
Our study is important and unique for several reasons. First, unlike many other countries, Japan does not prohibit citizens from organizing or joining the yakuza, upholding the
Freedom of Association article (Article 21) of the Japanese constitution. This feature allows
us to obtain unique data on the number of yakuza members. Second, while quantitative
analyses of organized crime tend to focus on violence as a means of understanding shifts in
the activity of criminal organizations, especially in the context of drug-related crime (e.g.,
Dell, 2015), we examine the size of organized crime, that is, the number of yakuza members.
Third, there has been a little investigation into the effect of TPP strategies on organized
crime; rather, research has primarily focused on how agencies maintain partnerships (e.g.,
Ayling, 2017; Kleemans and Huisman, 2015). Examining the effect, we will provide key
policy implications.
3

2
2.1

Yakuza Exclusion Ordinances
Background on the Yakuza

We provide background information about the yakuza that is necessary to understand our
research design. This review is not comprehensive. For a more comprehensive review, see,
for example, Hill (2003, 2004).
Economic Activities of the Yakuza. There are several strands of economic activities—
both legal and illegal—in which the yakuza engage. Among the illegal economic activities,
the yakuza’s main traditional income sources are as follows: extortion, the distribution of
methamphetamine, gambling, and illegal bookmaking (National Police Agency, 2009). However, the yakuza’s economic activities—both legal and illegal income sources—vary according
to the social landscape and time period. The yakuza’s contemporary economic activities, for
instance, are more diverse than their past activities (National Police Agency, 2015).
Ever since the Japanese economic boom in the 1950s, the yakuza have been engaged in
protection racketeering to make money illegally (mikajimeryō) from business entities such as
the sex industry. They have also made money illegally from gambling and extortion. Since
the economic boom, the yakuza have had an enormous influence over the Japanese infrastructure and construction sectors. The yakuza’s economic activity grew in the 1970s and
1980s, and since then, the yakuza have been referred to as the economic yakuza (Hill, 2003,
2004). For instance, they have benefited from lending money at illegally high interest rates
and from serving as corporate blackmailers (sōkaiya) who abuse the rights of stakeholders
to extort money. They have also interfered with civil disputes (minbō). Since official legal
processes are often slow and costly, some non-yakuza have chosen to have the yakuza resolve
their problems (Milhaupt and West, 2000). The yakuza also targeted the construction of
nuclear reactors. Nuclear reactors entail large site-specific investments, offering the yakuza
a lucrative target. The level of extortion increases when a utility announces plans to build
a reactor (Ramseyer, 2016). Behind all of these activities is the threat of violence.
We draw the following two conclusions from this section. First, the yakuza have a number
of legal and illegal income sources. The yakuza are associated with the non-yakuza in
many ways, and this association may be either voluntary or involuntary. This economic
association motivates a policing strategy that attempts to keep non-yakuza away from the
yakuza. Second, the yakuza’s economic activities may vary with the social landscape and
time period.

4

Yakuza Syndicates. Despite their involvement in illegal activities, it is not illegal to
organize or join yakuza syndicates in Japan. This fact creates a sharp distinction between
Japan and many other countries in which it is illegal to organize or join crime syndicates. It
is true that the yakuza traditionally have been socially tolerated in Japan, at least to some
extent, but the recent victimization of non-yakuza by the yakuza have led the government
to tighten its restrictions on the yakuza.
One of the regulations is the Anti-Yakuza Laws (Bōryokudan Taisaku Hō), enacted in
1992. Under these laws, 21 yakuza syndicates are “designated” based on a set of criteria
during the period of this study. The criteria for the designation are that (i) the yakuza
syndicate has a hierarchical organizational structure, (ii) its members use violence to make
money, and (iii) its members have criminal records. As of 2009 (before the introduction of
the YEOs), there were 82,600 yakuza members in total, and approximately 96% of them
belonged to one of the designated yakuza syndicates. This percentage did not change over
the period of our study (National Police Agency, 2009, 2014). Moreover, data on the yakuza
syndicates are usually restricted to the designated ones. Hence, we focus on the designated
yakuza syndicates and refer to them simply as yakuza.1

2.2

Yakuza Exclusion Ordinances as Third-Party Policing

We introduce the Yakuza Exclusion Ordinances (YEOs) and discuss the conceptual relationship between TPP strategies and the YEOs. To begin, we review TPP strategies.
Third-Party Policing. TPP attempts to control and prevent crime by mobilizing nonoffending persons, organizations, and community members whom the police identify as useful
levers in controlling the target crime (Mazerolle and Ransley, 2006). There are three parties
involved: the police, the target of the crime control or prevention, and an external entity—
namely, a third party—with whom the police partner to address the crime. The target of
TPP may be specific offenders (e.g., gang members and drug dealers), specific locations (e.g.,
crime hot spots), crime victims, or criminogenic situations. The key concept governing TPP
is that the police address the target crime indirectly through a partnership with a third party.
Another defining feature of TPP is its legal basis—which may include municipal ordinances,
mandatory reporting, or conduct licensing—that shapes police efforts to incorporate third
parties into the labor of crime management (Mazerolle and Ransley, 2006). In mobilizing
third parties, TPP attempts to alter the third parties’ routine behaviors to control the target
problem or reduce underlying criminogenic conditions that cause, escalate, and sustain the
1

There used to be 22 designated yakuza syndicates, but in 2011, 2 of them, both of which operated only
in Okinawa, merged.

5

problem of interest. Through the partnership, pulled by legal levers, with third parties, TPP
is expected to expand the control capacity and manage the target problem (Weisburd and
Majmundar, 2018).
For TPP to work effectively, partnerships with third parties are crucial. Techniques to
involve third parties vary in nature from collaborative to coercive (Mazerolle et al., 2013).
On the one hand, TPP can involve voluntary and cooperative partnerships between the
police and third parties. In this type of partnership, the police may engage in cooperative
consultation with third parties to persuade them to take responsibility for crime control
and prevention. On the other hand, TPP may rely on coercive techniques. One of the
fundamental challenges of TPP is to overcome third-party resistance, as not all individuals
are willing to cooperate with the police (Buerger, 2014). In this case, the police may initiate
actions that coerce third parties to cooperate. Such actions may include issuing citations to
non-compliant individuals and initiating prosecution against violators to obtain court-forced
compliance (Mazerolle and Ransley, 2004).
While existing evidence on TPP centers on street-level crimes, the principles of TPP can
also be applied to terrorism, tax evasion, and white-collar crime (Mazerolle and Ransley,
2006). Approaches similar to TPP that are designed to combat organized crime recently have
been applied in Europe. An example of such an approach is a multi-agency approach in which
government agencies other than the police address problems in partnership with one another
by sharing information across different agencies (e.g., Bjelland and Vestby, 2017; Webster,
2015); this kind of approach is also referred to the administrative approach to organized crime
(e.g., Ayling, 2017; Kleemans and Huisman, 2015; Peters and Spapens, 2015). For instance,
because real estate transactions could provide criminal organizations with opportunities for
money laundering, commercial exploitation, and the illegal drug production, the Red Light
District project aimed to regain control over the exploitation of property (Kleemans and
Huisman, 2015). To this end, a multi-agency approach was taken to facilitate informationsharing and cooperation among the Red Light District team, which consists of city councilors,
the public administration, police, and tax authorities.
In addition to the multi-agency approach that relies on a voluntary partnership between
agencies, there are anti-association laws that prohibit non-criminal citizens from associating
with members of criminal organizations. These anti-association laws are, in spirit, similar
to the YEOs. Ayling (2017) discusses three types of anti-association laws in the context
of Australia: control orders, consorting laws, and proscriptions on the public gathering
of members of criminal organizations. For instance, seeking to make it more difficult for
criminal organizations to engage in planned criminal activity and to prevent individuals from
strengthening their ties with the organizations, the consorting laws make it a criminal offense
6

to associate with members of declared criminal organizations. However, the effectiveness of
these laws is less known.
Yakuza Exclusion Ordinances. Japan recently increased its enforcement against the
yakuza by introducing the YEOs.2 The basic concept underlying the YEOs is “society
versus the yakuza.” This approach is a contrast to the more traditional approach based
on the concept of “the police versus the yakuza.” In the traditional approach, the police
attempt to regulate the yakuza directly, for instance, by severely punishing yakuza members
who commit crimes. In contrast, the YEOs involve non-yakuza individuals and companies
in addressing the yakuza problem. We propose that the YEOs can be considered, at least
conceptually, as a TPP approach. TPP involves three parties—the police, a targeted crime,
and a third party. Similarly, the YEOs involve the police, the yakuza as a target, and the
non-yakuza as a third party.
The YEOs are prefecture-level ordinances that are enacted by the local government of
each prefecture. By prohibiting non-yakuza from providing any benefit to the yakuza, the
YEOs aim to eliminate the yakuza’s income flow and to weaken the yakuza, thereby helping
non-yakuza to live peaceful lives as well as soundly develop their business activities. For
example, the YEOs ban non-yakuza from receiving extra-state protection by yakuza members. The YEOs also prohibit non-yakuza from renting houses, apartments, or offices to
yakuza members and opening bank accounts on their behalf as well as selling insurance to
them. Thus, the YEOs attempt to alter the routine behaviors of non-yakuza to eliminate
economic opportunities for the yakuza. As previously mentioned, it is not illegal to be a
yakuza member in Japan, but the YEOs marginalize the yakuza by prohibiting non-yakuza
from associating with them. Since membership in the yakuza is essentially an underlying
crime opportunity, the YEOs can be interpreted as an effort to reduce underlying criminal
opportunity structures that allow yakuza activities to persist.
While non-yakuza are prohibited from providing benefits that may aid in yakuza activities, they nevertheless may be at a high risk of experiencing retaliation from yakuza
members if they comply with the prohibition. This fear of retaliation may tempt the nonyakuza into associating with yakuza members. According to Buerger (2014), one of the
fundamental challenges of TPP is overcoming such resistance. To aid in implementation,
the YEOs impose penalties on non-yakuza who associate with yakuza members. This coer2
In 2007, the Minister of Justice announced guidelines to reduce victimization (e.g., citizens, corporations,
and governments) by the yakuza. The guidelines emphasize the importance of avoiding associating with the
yakuza in any way, given that the association between the yakuza and non-yakuza may serve as income
sources for the yakuza. Since this announcement was made, strategies for combating the yakuza have sought
to emphasize severing the association.

7

cive engagement technique may create a dilemma for the non-yakuza. If they comply with
the YEOs, they may face retaliation from the yakuza, but if they violate the prohibition,
they may be subject to YEO-imposed penalties. For instance, business owners in violation
of the YEOs’ prohibition risk their names being revealed to the public, which may cost them
their credibility and which may make it more difficult for them to transact with banks. They
may also be prohibited from bidding on public construction projects. In addition, they may
be subject to imprisonment and fines.
To better understand the partnership practice, we give an instance in which coercive
techniques were used to implement the YEOs. The Onigiri Club is a golf club consisting
of 70 construction companies in Fukuoka prefecture. The managers of nine construction
companies of the Onigiri Club played golf in 2010. It was later discovered that they had
played golf with the leaders of yakuza syndicates together. In 2011, the Fukuoka Police
Department reported this fact to the local government of Fukuoka and announced the names
of these construction companies on the website of the Fukuoka Police Department. Upon
finding out, the local government of Fukuoka took measures against these nine construction
companies and prohibited them from working on public construction projects. As a result,
two out of the nine went bankrupt. Such a sanction served as a coercive technique that
deterred third parties from violating the proscription of the YEOs.
This sanction is an illustration of the YEOs’ concept of “society versus the yakuza.” Only
non-yakuza constructors who played golf with yakuza members experienced severe penalties;
yakuza members themselves did not. By associating—even personally—with yakuza, nonyakuza may risk being labeled as persons having such a relationship with the yakuza. Such a
relationship indicates that the yakuza are substantially involved in the person’s management,
and therefore the person could suffer from severe social sanction. In this image of the society
versus yakuza, such “government-manufactured” ostracism coerces non-yakuza into doing
what YEOs suggest is their duty as third parties.
It is, in general, difficult to quantify the actual enforcement levels of the YEOs. However,
we believe that this concern does not present a serious problem in estimating the YEOs’
effect. The National Police Agency reports the number of violators of the YEOs, and these
numbers seem to be stable (with a slight increase from 62 to 71) during the period of our
study. This by itself suggests that the YEOs are, at least to some extent, enforced. Of
course, it is impossible to show the non-existence of the dark figures of crime. There may
be more violators of the YEOs, but the possibility of dark figures does not nullify the effect
of the YEOs. If, hypothetically, the YEOs had not been enforced properly and only a few,
or even no, non-yakuza had obeyed the YEOs, then the YEOs would have had a negligible
effect; in other words, the introduction of the YEOs would not change any variables as long
8

as other factors were controlled. Thus, if the YEOs significantly reduce the number of yakuza
members, we can interpret this effect as evidence that the YEOs are well enforced.
Finally, we note that the YEOs are prefecture-level ordinances. Japan consists of 47
prefectures, and prefectures are the first level of jurisdiction and administrative division.
This is the unit of analysis in our study. TPP practices generally operate at micro-spatial
levels, but YEOs are measured at the prefecture level. This is the unit of analysis we used
in our study. When investigating TPP practices in relation to hot spot- or individual-level
disorder and drug markets, finer spatial units are most appropriate, as they account for
environmental and physical conditions in neighborhoods. In contrast, the YEOs consider
social interaction between the yakuza and non-yakuza, which is independent of the spatial
units used. The contents of the YEOs are slightly different from prefecture to prefecture,
but the basic concepts remain the same across all the prefectures.3

2.3

Hypotheses

The Effect of the YEOs. The YEOs aim to increase the cost of belonging to the yakuza,
thereby raising the incentive for yakuza members to defect from their yakuza syndicates.
First, the YEOs aim to cause financial damage to the yakuza by eliminating their income
flow from non-yakuza. Drawing on the rational choice theory of crimes (Becker, 1968),
we argue that this financial damage increases the likelihood that yakuza members defect
from yakuza syndicates because this makes it difficult for yakuza members to obtain money
as they did before. Additionally, consistent with situational crime prevention approaches
(Clark, 1997; Cornish and Clarke, 2003), prohibiting non-yakuza from renting apartments
to the yakuza and from opening bank accounts for them makes the yakuza’s lives difficult,
thereby reducing underlying criminal opportunities for the yakuza’s activities. Through
these financial and non-financial channels, the YEOs increase the cost of belonging to the
yakuza. Figure 1 shows the change in the number of yakuza members.4 The YEOs were
3

There are some differences across prefectures. Under the YEOs, non-yakuza who make contracts are
required to check whether the other parties to the contracts are related to yakuza. The relationship that has
to be checked differs across prefectures. In a few prefectures, non-yakuza need to check only whether the
other parties to contracts are yakuza members. Yet in Tokyo, non-yakuza need to check whether the other
parties have been closely associated with the yakuza. This requirement in Tokyo is stringent, but in many
other prefectures, non-yakuza are still required to ask the other parties to their contracts if at least five years
have passed since they retired from their yakuza syndicates. This rule is often called a five-year rule.
4
This figure is based on the data by National Police Agency (2015). The reported number of yakuza
members is the number reported in December of each year. For readers’ convenience, we report these numbers
as the number of yakuza members in the subsequent years (e.g., the number in 2011 is the number as of
December 2010). There are two types of yakuza members: regular members, who belong to particular yakuza
syndicates; semi-regular members, who do not belong to but are allied with particular yakuza syndicates.
Figure 1 plots the change in the total number.

9

Figure 1: Change in Number of Yakuza Members
90,000

Number of Yakuza Members

80,000
70,000
60,000

YEOs were enacted during this period

50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000

Before YEO

After YEO

10,000
0
‘01 ‘02 ‘03 ‘04 ‘05 ‘06 ‘07 ‘08 ‘09 ‘10

‘11

‘12 ‘13 ‘14 ‘15

enacted during the period marked in the figure by the two dashed lines.5 The number of
yakuza members had been stably more than 80,000 before the YEOs, but once the YEOs
were enacted, the number of yakuza members dropped dramatically, with roughly 30,000
reductions in the five years. This is equivalent to an approximately 30% reduction. Our first
interest is to identify the the effect of the YEOs on the number of yakuza members.
Hypothesis 1. The YEOs decrease the number of yakuza members.

Heterogeneity of the YEOs’ Effect. Whether yakuza members defect may depend on
the “strategic relationship” among yakuza syndicates. Like usual (legal) markets, illegal
markets normally function under intense competition. Like other criminal organizations,
yakuza syndicates are profit-maximizers, as the term economic yakuza indicates (Hill, 2003,
2004). Yakuza syndicates behave as economic organizations that engage in both legal and
illegal business activities. It is then reasonable to expect that potential competition among
yakuza syndicates crucially affects regional market conditions.
Crime syndicates can be considered to be rational and strategic in the sense that when
they make a decision, they take into account how rival yakuza syndicates will respond (e.g.,
Dell, 2015). In the current context, yakuza syndicates choose their “power” strategically to
gain advantages over the competition; that is, their rival yakuza syndicates. The question
thus is: How should power be defined in this context? In usual (legal) markets, it is assumed
that economic firms choose their capital and labor, where capital is often interpreted as the
5

The reason that the enactment dates are spread over about two years is that the YEOs are prefecturelevel ordinances and the enactment dates vary from prefecture to prefecture.

10

level of technology adopted and labor as the number of workers, and where capital is fixed
in the short term. Since it usually takes time to change capital levels, it is fairly standard,
in economics, to assume that only labor levels can be controlled in the short term (e.g.,
Mas-Colell et al., 1995). This observation carries over to our context. Since our analysis
focuses on the short term, we assume that yakuza syndicates change only their labor force
(i.e., their numbers of members). An immediate consequence of this assumption is that a
yakuza syndicate attempts to keep its labor force large for potential competition against other
yakuza syndicates. Another possible reason why a yakuza syndicate may attempt to keep its
labor force large is that there may be high demand for the yakuza or yakuza activities (e.g.,
high demand for drugs or protection rackets). Such high demand may discourage yakuza
members from resigning from their yakuza syndicates. In either case, it is suggested that a
decrease in the labor force is disadvantageous to a given yakuza syndicate, especially if it is
operating in a region with many rival yakuza syndicates.6
From this argument, we hypothesize that in more yakuza-concentrated regions (with
higher YCI), yakuza syndicates need to maintain their power; otherwise, they would be
more likely to be disadvantageous in (potential) competition against other yakuza syndicates. In contrast, in a less yakuza-concentrated regions (with lower YCI), yakuza syndicates have weaker incentives to maintain their power. That is, multiple yakuza syndicates,
as strategic actors, mutually reinforce their power. This strategic relationship is called
strategic complements in game theory; accordingly, the power (i.e., the number of yakuza
members) will be clustered (Bulow et al., 1985). This observation is translated into more
yakuza members retiring from yakuza syndicates if the yakuza syndicates are operating in
less yakuza-concentrated regions under the YEOs. Indeed, as illustrated in Figure 2, the
YCI distribution is regionally clustered (where the darker colored prefectures are exposed to
higher concentrations of yakuza syndicates).
Hypothesis 2. The YEOs’ effect on the number of yakuza members is stronger in less
yakuza-concentrated regions (regions with lower YCI).
6

To keep order, a yakuza syndicate may use violence against its members who violate its norms, even
cutting off the offending members’ fingers. In the yakuza world, finger chopping can represent punishment
or sincere apology and remorse. This tradition has been on the decline in recent years, but it remains in
some areas. In recent years, yakuza members have increasingly been forced to pay money as a penalty. If
they cannot pay, they may be punished violently.

11

Figure 2: Prefecture-level Yakuza Concentration Index

3

Data and Identification Strategy

3.1

Data

Enactment Dates of YEOs. The YEOs are prefecture-level ordinances, and the enactment dates vary across prefectures. The enactment dates are listed in Table 1.7 While the
majority of prefectures enacted the YEOs in April of 2011, the other prefectures enacted the
YEOs between April of 2010 to January of 2012. To identify the YEOs’ effect, we exploit
the differences in the enactment timings of the YEOs across prefectures, while allowing the
YEOs’ effect to vary by YCI, as will be discussed in Section 3.2.
Yakuza Members. Since the National Police Agency (NPA) reports the number of yakuza
members only at the national level, we requested prefecture-level data from the Prefectural
Police Departments. According to the Japanese Organized Crime Division of the NPA, the
7

In several prefectures, the YEOs were amended after their introduction. For example, Akita enacted
YEOs in March 2011 and then amended them in July 2011. As we are interested in the TPP-like aspect of
the YEOs, we define the enactment date as the date at which the clauses to regulate non-yakuza activity
were incorporated. Accordingly, we define the Akita enactment date as July 2011. The YEOs were similarly
amended in Tottori, Fukuoka, and Saga.

12

Table 1: Enactment Dates of YEOs
Prefecture
Hokkaido
Aomori
Iwate
Miyagi
Akita
Yamagata
Fukushima
Tokyo
Ibaraki
Tochigi
Gunma
Saitama
Chiba
Kanagawa
Nigata
Yamanashi

Enactment
Apr.
Jul.
Jul.
Apr.
Jul.
Aug.
Jul.
Oct.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Aug.
Sep.
Apr.
Aug.
Apr.

2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011

Prefecture
Nagano
Shizuoka
Toyama
Ishikawa
Fukui
Gifu
Aichi
Mie
Shiga
Kyoto
Osaka
Hyogo
Nara
Wakayama
Tottori
Shimane

Enactment
Sep.
Aug.
Aug.
Aug.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Aug.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Jul.
Jul.
Apr.
Apr.

2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011

Prefecture

Enactment

Okayama
Hiroshima
Yamaguchi
Tokushima
Kagawa
Ehime
Kochi
Fukuoka
Saga
Nagasaki
Kumamoto
Oita
Miyazaki
Kagoshima
Okinawa

Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Aug.
Apr.
Apr.
Jan.
Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
Aug.
Apr.
Oct.

2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2010
2011
2010
2012
2010
2011
2011
2011
2010
2011

police draw on many sources to confirm whether a member has defected from his yakuza
syndicate. For example, the police take into account expulsion letters and interviews with
other members or arrested members. Expulsion letters are notifications issued by a yakuza
syndicate when its member defects from the syndicate, to prevent the defecting member from
transferring to another yakuza syndicate. However, the notifications may not be enough for
the police to count the individual as a yakuza dropout. The police need supporting evidence,
which can be obtained through the investigation of yakuza offices and the interviews. These
processes allow the police to track the actual numbers of yakuza members.
We obtained data on the number of yakuza members on 37 out of 47 prefectures from
2008 to 2013. Our main analysis uses the data with missing values, but we test the robustness
of our results using the multiple imputation procedure in Appendix A. The provided data
contain the number of yakuza members in each of these prefectures at the yearly level. Our
main analysis is based on the year-level panel data, but we also provide estimates using
month-level imputed data by linear interpolation in Appendix A. The outcome variable of
interest is the yakuza rates, which are defined as the number of yakuza members per 100,000
residents. The average yakuza rate across all the prefectures is 45. During the period from
2008 to 2013, the average yakuza rate declined from 52 to 37, or approximately by 29%. The
number of our observations is 207 (37 prefectures × 6 years, minus approximately the 5%
missing data in the 37 prefectures).

13

Yakuza Concentration Index. To construct a prefecture-level concentration index of
yakuza syndicates—called the Yakuza Concentration Index (YCI)—we use two kinds of
data: (i) the number of yakuza syndicates operating in each prefecture; and (ii) the number
of members in each yakuza syndicate. As explained below, to construct the YCI we use the
information prior to the enactment of the YEOs across prefectures. Both data are available
in National Police Agency (2009).
We define prefecture-level YCI in a manner similar to the Hirschman-Herfindahl index.
Let G be the set of all 21 (designated) yakuza syndicates, and let spg be the “share” of
yakuza syndicate g ∈ G in prefecture p, which is defined below. It would be desirable to
use data on the number of members of each yakuza syndicate in each prefecture to calculate
the share, but such data do not exist. We thus need to estimate these figures. For now, let
us assume that the members of each yakuza syndicate g are distributed over the prefectures
where the syndicate operates proportionally to the population of each of the prefectures. (To
examine the robustness of our estimation, we will modify this assumption in Appendix A.)
Since we know the total number of members of each yakuza syndicate, we can calculate the
share spg under this assumption. Let Pg be the set of prefectures where yakuza syndicate
g operates, and let qp be the population in prefecture p. For a yakuza syndicate g, the
population ratio of prefecture p ∈ Pg to all the prefectures in which yakuza syndicate g
P
operates equals qp / p0 ∈Pg qp0 . Hence, the estimated number of members of yakuza syndicate
g in prefecture p, denoted Ngp , is the total number of members of yakuza syndicate g times
P
the population ratio qp / p0 ∈Pg qp0 . We define the share of yakuza syndicate g in prefecture
P
p by spg = Ngp / g0 ∈Gp Ng0 p if g ∈ Gp and spg = 0 if g 6∈ Gp , where Gp is the set of yakuza
P
syndicates that operate in prefecture p. By definition, 0 ≤ spg ≤ 1 and g spg = 1 for each
p, g (since there is at least one yakuza syndicate in every prefecture). Given these shares,
P
we define the YCI of prefecture p by Y CIp = 1 − g∈G s2pg . Note that Y CIp = 0 if there is
only one syndicate in prefecture p and Y CIp increases in the number of yakuza syndicates
in prefecture p.
We treat the YCI as time-independent, measured using the data prior to the enactment of
the YEOs. The reason why we define the YCI in this manner is to avoid potential statistical
biases. To see this, suppose that the YCI is time-dependent. If the YEOs reduce yakuza
members, then the YCI may be affected by the YEOs and is considered as a post-treatment
covariate, a variable that is affected by a treatment. From a causal inference standpoint,
conditioning on a post-treatment covariate can induce post-treatment bias, which estimates
treatment effects among a group, whose post-treatment covariate is not affected by treatment
(e.g., Rosenbaum, 1984; Montgomery et al., 2018). By defining the YCI in the said manner,

14

we can avoid this problem.8
Control Variables. We control for a host of observed covariates. First, we control for
demographic and socioeconomic variables: the proportion of males, the proportion of individuals aged 15-24, the proportion of individuals aged 25-34, the proportion of individuals
aged over 65, the proportion of foreign people, population density, the unemployment rate,
welfare recipients per 1,000 inhabitants, and GDP. We also control for crime variables: police
per 1,000 inhabitants, the log of overall crime rates (violent crime and property crime). The
data on demographic, socioeconomic, and police variables are publicly available on e-Stat (a
portal site for Japanese Government Statistics). See Appendix D for the summary statistics
of these control variables.

3.2

Identification Strategy

Difference-in-Differences Strategy. We discuss the empirical strategies whereby we
isolate the YEOs’ effect on the yakuza. In the absence of randomized control trials, it is
challenging to identify the YEOs’ effect. Naı̈ve comparison of outcomes between prefectures
with and without YEOs may be misleading and the estimates may be biased because those
prefectures are likely to be different at both observable and unobservable levels. In the
context of the current study, the timing of the YEOs’ enactment may constitute non-random
selection. For example, if the rise of yakuza activity is a major concern in a particular
prefecture, the YEOs may be more likely to be introduced in that prefecture than in other
prefectures where yakuza activity is not a major issue. Thus, the construction of appropriate
counterfactual groups is necessary to estimate the YEOs’ effect. We apply a difference-indifferences (DiD) estimation, which compares (i) outcomes before and after the introduction
of the YEOs and (ii) outcomes between prefectures that have introduced the YEOs and
prefectures that have not. In particular, we exploit time variations in the enactment dates
of the YEOs. Moreover, we allow for treatment effect heterogeneity by a cross-sectional
variation of YCI. Taken together, our main regression model is:
ypt = β1 Y EOpt + β2 Y EOpt × Y CIp + ηXpt + µp + ξt +

X

δpr ρr t + εpt .

(1)

r∈R
8

In Appendix A, we conduct several robustness checks using alternative indices. First, we use a timedependent YCI. Second, we use alternative definitions of yakuza shares spg and a resulting YCI. Third, we
use alternative indices for the regional competition among rival yakuza syndicates. Our empirical results are
robust to all these specifications.

15

Here, ypt is the log of yakuza rates, which we define as the number of yakuza members per
100,000 inhabitants in prefecture p at time t. Y EOpt is a treatment dummy that equals
1 if the YEOs are in effect in prefecture p at time t and 0 otherwise.Y CIp is the YCI of
prefecture p. For the reason discussed above, we treat the YCI as a time-independent variable
constructed from the data prior to the enactment of the YEOs. Y EOpt × Y CIp allows for
heterogeneity of the effect of the YEOs with respect to the YCI. Xpt are controls. While
we include a host of time-dependent covariates, we examine the robustness of the results
to ensure that post-treatment bias is not a severe issue in Appendix A. µp is a prefecture
fixed effect, which captures time-invariant unobservables, such as the yakuza culture and
non-yakuza individuals’ attitudes toward the yazuka. ξt is a year fixed effect, which controls
P
for common time-specific effects on all prefectures.
r δpr ρr t captures region-specific time
trends, which capture regional unobservables that vary over time. It is important to capture
such regional unobservables since the YCI are regionally clustered (Figure 2). In this study,
Japan is divided into seven regions: Hokkaido-Tohoku, Kanto, Chubu, Kansai, Chugoku,
Shikoku, and Kyushu-Okinawa. Let R be the set of these regions. δpr is a treatment dummy
that equals 1 if prefecture p is in region r and 0 otherwise. ρr is a region-specific time trend.
εpt is an idiosyncratic error. We use weighted least squares. Standard errors are clustered
at the prefecture level to adjust for serial correlation within the same prefecture (Bertrand
et al., 2004).
Event-Study Analysis. We study the dynamics of the YEOs’ effects on the outcome by
examining the three years before the enactment of the YEOs and the two years following
the YEOs’ enactment. This study design is referred to as an event-study design (Wing
et al., 2018). It has two purposes. First, we indirectly test the parallel trend assumption by
including leads for treatment indicators (before the YEOs). The parallel trend assumption is
the identification assumption for the DiD design. It states that in the absence of treatment,
treated and control groups follow similar trends concerning the outcome of interest (e.g.,
Angrist and Pischke, 2008). This assumption could be violated, however, if the YEOs’
enactment reflected public concern about the high levels of yakuza activity. If the parallel
trend assumption holds, the coefficients for the years before the YEOs’ enactment should be
small in magnitude or close to zero. Thus, this exercise serves as a placebo test. Second,
we examine whether the YEOs’ effects persist some time after the YEOs’ enactment by
including lagged treatment indicators (after the YEOs). The lagged indicators allow us to
explore whether a decrease in the yakuza rates persists after the YEOs’ enactment. If the
YEOs’ effects are persistent, the coefficients for the years following the YEOs’ enactment
should be large in magnitude and statistically significant.
16

Here is the regression model for the event-study design:
ypt =

3
X

0
ατ Y EOp,t+τ
+ βY EOpt × Y CIp + ηXpt + µp + ξt +

X

τ =−2

δpr ρr t + εpt ,

(2)

r∈R

with normalization α1 = 0. Following Autor (2003), let the treatment indicators for 1-2
leads and 1 lag of the YEOs take the value of 1 for the relevant year and the value of 0
0
= 1 for all t two or more years later than the YEOs’ enactment in
otherwise. Let Y EOp,t−2
0
prefecture p (a 2-year or more lag indication), and let Y EOp,t+3
= 1 for all t two or more
years earlier than the YEOs’ enactment in prefecture p (a 3-year or more lead indicator). We
impose a parameter constraint on the one-year lead treatment indicator, which then serves
as a reference year. Therefore, estimates for other lead and lag indicators are interpreted as
the effects of the YEOs in comparison to this reference period. That is, the coefficient ατ
measures the effect of the (−τ )-year lag effect of the YEO if τ < 0 and the τ -year lead effect
if τ > 0, in comparison to τ = 1.

4
4.1

Results
The Effect of the YEOs on Yakuza Members

We study the YEOs’ effect on the numbers of yakuza members. Recall that our outcome
is the log of yakuza rates (i.e., the number of yakuza members per 100,000 inhabitants),
so that the interpretation is a percentage change as a response to the YEOs. In Table
2, we report our estimates. We consider the following four specifications: Column (1) no
region-specific trends; Column (2) region-specific linear trends; Column (3) region-specific
quadratic trends; and Column (4) both linear and quadratic trends. The coefficients of the
YEOs are significantly negative in all these specifications. Note that they equal the YEOs’
effect evaluated at Y CIp = 0. In other words, in prefectures with one yakuza syndicate, the
YEOs decrease the yakuza rates by approximately 15-20% depending on the specification.
From 2008 to 2013, the yakuza rates declined approximately by 32% in prefectures with YCI
= zero. Therefore, our estimates suggest that the YEOs account for 47-59% of the reduction
in yakuza rates in prefectures with YCI = zero during this period. The coefficients of
Y EOpt × Y CIp are significantly positive, which suggests that the YEOs’ effect decreases as
the YCI increases. The total effect of the YEOs in prefecture p is given by β1 + β2 Y CIp . The
nationwide total effect is obtained by replacing Y CIp with its nationwide average of 0.392.
Using this formula, we find that the YEOs reduce the yakuza rates by approximately 5-7%.
Given that the yakuza rates on average decreased by 29% from 2008 to 2013, our estimates
17

suggest that the YEOs account for approximately 17-24% of the recent reduction.
Based on the specification in Column (4), Figure 3 illustrates the heterogeneity of the
YEOs’ effect by the YCI in two ways. First, the solid line, together with the gray band,
indicates the marginal effect of the YEOs on the yakuza rates with the 95% CIs, when we
treat the YCI as a continuous variable. Second, the two dots, with the black dashed lines,
indicate the marginal effect of the YEOs on the yakuza rates evaluated at the low YCI
(less than or equal to the median) and at the high YCI (greater than the median).9 These
results are consistent across both specifications in that the effect of the YEOs is greater in
prefectures with lower YCI. Because the two point estimates indicated by the dots and the
dashed lines are on the solid line corresponding to the regression (1), it is suggested that the
two specifications are consistent with each other (Hainmueller et al., 2019).

4.2

Event-Study Analysis

Figure 4 reports the estimates of the event-study analyses with 90% confidence intervals.
The left panel illustrates the YEOs’ effect on the yakuza rates conditional on the YCI taking
the value of zero. Analogously, the right panel illustrates the YEOs’ effect conditional on
the YCI taking the mean value. For the purpose of simplicity, we transform the YCI to
the corresponding grand-mean centered variables and replace the YCI in equation (2) with
the grand-mean centered YCI.10 As illustrated in Figures 3, the YEOs’ effect decrease in
the YCI and thus are not statistically significant at high YCI values. Therefore, we only
provide graphical evidence up to the mean value of the YCI. Recall that this analysis has
two purposes. First, it examines the trend of the outcome in years leading to the enactment
of the YEOs by including the lead treatment indicators, labeled as “before YEO” in the
figures. If the parallel trends assumption is satisfied, the coefficients of the lead treatment
indicators should be close to zero. Since the future treatment status (i.e., the lead treatment
indicators) should have no significant effects if the treatments had causal effects, the null
effects of the lead treatment indicators serve as a placebo test. Second, the analysis examines
the trend of the outcome in years following the enactment of the YEOs by including the lag
treatment indicators, labeled as “after YEO” in the figures. This explores whether the YEOs
effect persist for the 2 years following the YEOs’ enactment.
9

The represented estimates correspond to the estimates of δ1 and δ2 in the following regression:
X
ypt = δ1 Y EOpt × Lowp + δ2 Y EOpt × Highp + ηXpt + µp + ξt +
δpr ρr t + εpt ,
r∈R

where Lowp denotes the low YCI (less than or equal to the median) and Highp denotes the high YCI (greater
than the median). This equation does not include the main term of the YEOs to avoid multicollinearity.
10
That is, we take the mean of the YCI variables and subtract this mean from each YCI variable.

18

Table 2: The Effect of the YEOs on Yakuza Rates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.222***
(0.048)
0.384***
(0.077)

-0.163***
(0.053)
0.258***
(0.077)

-0.174***
(0.052)
0.273***
(0.077)

-0.162***
(0.054)
0.272***
(0.080)

-0.071**
(0.023)

-0.062**
(0.029)

-0.067**
(0.029)

-0.055*
(0.029)

0.978
X
X
X
No
207

0.982
X
X
X
Linear
207

0.982
X
X
X
Quadratic
207

0.982
X
X
X
Both
207

Dependent Variable: ln Yakuza Rates
YEO
YEO × YCI

Overall Effects

Adjusted R-squared
Control Variables
Prefecture Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Region-specific Trends
Observations

Notes: The yakuza rates are the number of yakuza members per 100,000 inhabitants. Control variables are the proportion of males, the proportion of individuals
aged 15-24, the proportion of individuals aged 25-34, the proportion of individuals
aged over 65, the proportion of foreign people, population density, the unemployment rate, welfare recipients per 1,000 inhabitants, GDP, police per 1,000 inhabitants, the log of overall crime rates. Data Sources: the data on the number of
yakuza members are from prefectural police departments, and the data on other
control variables from e-Stat. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
prefecture level. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **,
and *, respectively.

Figure 4 illustrates that the coefficients ατ for the lead treatment indicators (i.e., before
YEO) are close to zero, but as soon as the YEOs are enacted, the coefficients ατ for the
lagged treatment indicators (i.e., after YEO) decrease sharply. That is, the coefficients of
the lead treatment indicators are not statistically significant. The pretreatment trends by
themselves appear to be unable to explain the change of the yakuza rates. It supports the
parallel trend assumption in our DiD analyses.

4.3

Permutation Test

To ensure that the estimated effect of the YEOs is causal, rather than spurious, we conduct
a permutation test (e.g., Abadie et al., 2010, 2015). In this exercise, we randomly vary the
enactment dates of the YEOs across prefectures, and we call the randomly assigned enactment dates placebo treatments. The intuition behind this exercise is that if the estimated
19

Figure 3: Marginal Effect of YEOs on Yakuza Rates with 95% CIs

Marginal Effect of YEO on Yakuza Rates

.1

0

-.1

-.2

-.3

-.4
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

YCI

Notes: The yakuza rates are the number of yakuza members per 100,000 inhabitants. Histogram: the
distribution of YCI along the x-axis. Estimates indicated by the solid line and the gray band:
the marginal effect of the YEOs on the yakuza rates by the continuous YCI with 95% CIs. Two point
estimates indicated in the dots and the dashed lines: the marginal effect of the YEOs on the yakuza
rates by low YCI (less than or equal to the median) and high YCI (greater than the median) with 95% CIs.
Control variables: see Table 2. Data Sources: see Table 2.

effect of the YEOs is causal, then the estimates that are derived from the placebo treatments
should not have significant effects. For this test, we redraw placebo treatments randomly
and reestimate placebo treatment effects. We iterate this process 10,000 times.
Figure 5 shows the resulting distributions of the estimated placebo coefficients. The top
panel shows the result when YCI is evaluated at zero, and the bottom panel shows the
result when YCI is evaluated at the mean. For the latter, to simplify the computation, we
re-estimate the coefficient of the YEOs in equation (1), using the grand-mean centered YCI.
In each panel, the dashed red line indicates the lower 5% of the distribution of the placebo
coefficients: −0.004 when the YCI takes the value of zero (top panel) and −0.019 when the
YCI takes the mean value (bottom panel). Our preferred estimates of the YEOs taken from
Column (4) in Table 2 indicate −0.162 when the YCI takes the value of zero and −0.055
when the YCI takes the mean value. If the YEOs’ effect is causal, the estimated coefficients
reported in Table 2 should be larger than the placebo coefficients and thus be in the left tail
of the distribution of the placebo coefficients. Indeed, this is exactly what Figure 5 shows.

20

Figure 4: Event-Study Analysis of YEOs’ Effect on Yakuza Rates
Before YEO

After YEO

Before YEO

.2

0

Estimated Coefficients

Estimated Coefficients

.2

-.2

-.4

After YEO

0

-.2

-.4

-.6

-.6
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

-3

Years Relative to YEO

-2

-1

0

1

2

Years Relative to YEO

YEOs’ Effect Evaluated at YCI = Zero

YEOs’ Effect Evaluated at YCI = Mean

Notes: The yakuza rates are the number of yakuza members per 100,000 inhabitants. Control variables:
see Table 2. Data Sources: see Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the prefecture
level.

Thus, it is unlikely that the estimated effects of the YEOs are driven by randomness or
idiosyncrasy.

5

Discussion and Conclusion

Our study contributes to the literature on TPP as well as organized crime and provides
several implications. First, we study the effect of TPP on organized crime. Evidence of
TPP’s effects on street-level crime has been found (Weisburd and Majmundar, 2018), but
its effects on organized crime are not well known. The TPP literature has paid attention
to street-level crime because the systematic assessment of TPP practices has been devoted
to street-level crime, but it is recognized that further research is necessary to understand
the use and effectiveness of TPP in other areas of regulation, as stated in Mazerolle and
Ransley (2006). Moreover, studies on multi-agency approaches to organized crime generally
focus on partnerships across agencies and the development thereof (Bjelland and Vestby,
2017; Kleemans and Huisman, 2015). We also note that there are strategies similar to the
YEOs in that they prohibit non-criminal citizens to associate with members of criminal
organizations (Nelen and Siegel, 2017). However, our study is the first to evaluate the effect
of a TPP-related strategy on the second party (the yakuza in our case).
Our evidence suggests that the YEOs are an effective countermeasure against the yakuza.
The number of yakuza members dropped by approximately 30% during the period of our
21

Figure 5: Permutation Test: Yakuza Rates
Evaluated YCI = Zero
-0.004
150

Density

100

50

0
-.01

-.005

0

.005

.01

Distribution of Placebo Coefficients

Evaluated at YCI = Mean
-0.019

40

Density

30

20

10

0
-.04

-.02

0

.02

.04

Distribution of Placebo Coefficients

Notes: Dashed red line: Estimates derived from placebo treatments. Estimated effects of the YEOs:
-0.162 (evaluated YCI = Zero); -0.055 (evaluated YCI = Mean). Permutation test: 10,000 times. Con-

trol variables: see Table 2. Data Sources: see Table 2

study; our estimates suggest that the YEOs account for roughly 26% of this recent reduction
in the number of yakuza members. This result is notable, given that third parties may
not be willing to cooperate with the police due to fear of potential retaliation by criminal
organizations. As in the case of the Onigiri Club, under the coercive techniques utilized
by the YEOs, the cost of violating the YEOs may be greater (for third parties) than the
potential cost of retaliation by criminal organizations. We have seen that the YEOs are,

22

at least conceptually, related to TPP characterized by coercive techniques. Given this, our
results support the effectiveness of TPP against organized crime.
Second, our results about the heterogeneity of the YEOs’ effect by the YCI provide both
theoretical and policy implications. The results suggest that the effectiveness of the YEOs
may be affected by the strategic relationship between yakuza syndicates. When criminal
organizations compete with one another, these relationships may serve as a powerful tool
to leverage in the competition. Specifically, we argue that concentrated attack on a few
criminal organizations is more effective than dilute attack on many. This is because the concentrated attack is expected to weaken a particular criminal organization, which, through
strategic relationship, discourages neighboring rival criminal organizations from maintaining
(costly) strategic power, such as workforce. In other words, the concentrated attack is expected to cause the domino effect, via the strategic relationship, that weakens more criminal
organizations.
Third, our study contributes to research on organized crime. Quantitative evidence of
interventions against organized crime is scarce because of the difficulty in measuring organized crime reduction (Levi and Maguire, 2004). Existing quantitative analyses of criminal
organizations mainly focus on violence to understand how their activities change as a response to interventions against them (e.g., Dell, 2015; Dickenson, 2014; Phillips, 2015). In
contrast, we use unique data on the change in the number of yakuza members to directly
estimate the effect of interventions against organized crime on the number of organized crime
participants.
Our results survive a variety of robustness tests. They are robust to an alternative identification assumption, post-treatment bias, and alternative indices for regional competition
among yakuza syndicates. They also pass a recent DiD correction method (Goodman-Bacon,
2018). See Appendix A. While the robustness exercises increase internal validity, we caution
that our estimates cannot be interpreted as strictly causal in the absence of randomized
control trials.
We note several limitations of our research design. First, local governments’ decisions to
enact the YEOs may not be completely at random. For instance, the local governments may
take into consideration local yakuza activity. Fukuoka is the first prefecture that enacted
the YEO because of elevated yakuza conflicts. That being said, since there was a nationwide movement to introduce the YEOs, we believe that the local governments likely had
little discretion. Moreover, our placebo test in the event-study design also suggests that the
treatment effect is not driven by the preexisting conditions of the number of yakuza members. Second, our DiD application, like most existing applications, exploits variation across
groups of units that receive treatment at different times. In our context, as the YEOs were
23

introduced at different times in different prefectures, there might be poor cross-sectional
variation for prefectures that enacted the YEOs at later times. Third, our analysis focuses
on the short-term effects of the YEOs. While our event-study analysis shows that the YEOs’
effect persists at least 2 years after the enactment, our paper does not analyze the long-term
effects of the YEOs, simply because of the data limitation. Further analysis, based on longer
periods, needs to be carried out to ensure external validity.
Despite these limitations, our study suggests that the principles of TPP are generally
an effective countermeasure against organized crime, though they may result in unintended
consequences. Further research on this topic is necessary to assess the external validity of
the effects of TPP on organized crime.

References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic control methods for
comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program.” Journal
of the American statistical Association 105:493–505.
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2015. “Comparative politics and the
synthetic control method.” American Journal of Political Science 59:495–510.
Angrist, Joshua D and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s
companion. Princeton university press.
Autor, David H. 2003. “Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to the
growth of employment outsourcing.” Journal of Labor Economics 21:1–42.
Ayling, Julie. 2017. “Combating organized crime Aussie-style: from law enforcement to prevention.”
In Contemporary Organized Crime, pp. 189–212. Springer.
Bang, Heejung and James M Robins. 2005. “Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal
inference models.” Biometrics 61:962–973.
Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and punishment: An economic approach.” Journal of Political
Economy 76:169–217.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:249–275.
Bjelland, Heidi Fischer and Annette Vestby. 2017. “‘It’s about using the full sanction catalogue’:
on boundary negotiations in a multi-agency organised crime investigation.” Policing and society
27:655–670.
Buerger, Michael E. 2014. “Third-Party Policing.” In Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal
Justice, pp. 5221–5232. Springer.
Bulow, Jeremy I, John D Geanakoplos, and Paul D Klemperer. 1985. “Multimarket oligopoly:
Strategic substitutes and complements.” Journal of Political Economy 93:488–511.

24

Clark, Ronald V. 1997. “Situational crime prevention.” Successful Case Studies, Harrow and
Heston Publishers, 2th Edition, Guilderland, New York .
Cornish, Derek Blaikie and Ronald V Clarke. 2003. “Opportunities, precipitators and criminal
decisions: A reply to Wortley’s critique of situational crime prevention.” Crime prevention
studies 16:41–96.
Dell, Melissa. 2015. “Trafficking networks and the Mexican Drug War.” American Economic
Review 105:1738–1779.
Dickenson, Matthew. 2014. “The impact of leadership removal on Mexican drug trafficking organizations.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 30:651–676.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. “Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.”
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hainmueller, Jens, Jonathan Mummolo, and Yiqing Xu. 2019. “How much should we trust estimates
from multiplicative interaction models? Simple tools to improve empirical practice.” Political
Analysis 27:163–192.
Hill, Peter. 2004. “The changing face of the Yakuza.” Global Crime 6:97–116.
Hill, Peter BE. 2003. The Japanese mafia: Yakuza, law, and the state. Oxford University Press.
Kleemans, Edward R and Wim Huisman. 2015. “Multi-agency approaches in ‘criminogenic’settings:
the case of the Amsterdam Red Light District.” Crime, law and social change 64:247–261.
Levi, Michael and Mike Maguire. 2004. “Reducing and preventing organised crime: An evidencebased critique.” Crime, Law and Social Change 41:397–469.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Dennis Whinston, Jerry R Green, et al. 1995. Microeconomic theory,
volume 1. Oxford university press New York.
Mazerolle, Lorraine, Elizabeth Eggins, and Angela Higginson. 2013. “Third party policing for
reducing crime and disorder: A systematic review.” The Campbell Collaboration .
Mazerolle, Lorraine and Janet Ransley. 2004. “Third party policing: prospects, challenges and
implications for regulators.” Regulation: Enforcement and Compliance, Research and public
policy series pp. 61–76.
Mazerolle, Lorraine and Janet Ransley. 2006. Third party policing. Cambridge University Press.
Milhaupt, Curtis J and Mark D West. 2000. “The dark side of private ordering: an institutional
and empirical analysis of organized crime.” The University of Chicago Law Review pp. 41–98.
Montalvo, Jose G and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2005. “Ethnic diversity and economic development.”
Journal of Development Economics 76:293–323.
Montgomery, Jacob M, Brendan Nyhan, and Michelle Torres. 2018. “How conditioning on posttreatment variables can ruin your experiment and what to do about it.” American Journal of
Political Science 62:760–775.
National Police Agency. 2009. “Trends in the Yakuza (Boryokudan Josei).” .

25

National Police Agency. 2014. “Trends in the Yakuza (Boryokudan Josei).” .
National Police Agency. 2015. “White Paper on Police: Special Issue on the Yakuza (Keisatsu
Hakusho).” .
Nelen, Hans and Dina Siegel. 2017. Contemporary Organized Crime: Developments, Challenges
and Responses, volume 16. Springer.
Peters, Maaike and Antonius Spapens. 2015. “The administrative approach in the Netherlands.”
Administrative approaches to prevent and tackle crime: Legal possibilities and practical application in EU Member States pp. 265–306.
Phillips, Brian J. 2015. “How does leadership decapitation affect violence? The case of drug
trafficking organizations in Mexico.” Journal of Politics 77:324–336.
Ramseyer, J Mark. 2016. “Nuclear Power and the Mob: Extortion in Japan.” Journal of Empirical
Legal Studies 13:487–515.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 1984. “The consequences of adjustment for a concomitant variable that has
been affected by the treatment.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (General)
147:656–666.
Rubin, Donald B. 1987. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys, volume . John Wiley &
Sons.
Webster, Julianne. 2015. “Effective third-party policing partnerships or missed opportunities?”
Policing and society 25:97–114.
Weisburd, David and Malay K. Majmundar. 2018. Proactive policing: Effects on crime and communities. National Academies Press.
Wing, Coady, Kosali Simon, and Ricardo A Bello-Gomez. 2018. “Designing difference in difference
studies: best practices for public health policy research.” Annual review of public health 39.

26

ONLINE APPENDIX (Not for Publication)
A

Robustness Check

We demonstrate the robustness of our empirical results. All these results are reported in
Table A1.
Estimation Method: Column (1). We test the robustness to estimation methods. We
report the OLS estimation results. Regressors are no longer weighted by the prefecture
population. We obtain qualitatively similar results.
Alternative Identification Assumption: Column (2). We check the robustness of
our main results under an alternative identification assumption. Column (2) reports the
estimates from a Doubly-Robust Difference-in-Differences estimator. We first calculate a
propensity score as the conditional probability of the YEOs via a logistic regression model
and then generate Inverse Probability Treatment Weighting (IPTW) for the YEOs. We
then run a DiD model with IPTW. The Doubly-Robust estimator is robust in the sense that
the estimates are consistent as long as (i) the propensity score is correctly specified or (ii)
the regression model is correctly specified (Bang and Robins, 2005). Since propensity score
models assume selection on observables and DiD models assume selection on unobservables,
Doubly-Robust DiD are robust to both selections on observables and unobservables. Our
results are robust to this alternative identification assumption.
Post-Treatment Bias: Column (3). We include a host of time-dependent covariates,
including police per 1,000 inhabitants and the log of overall crime rates. One potential concern is that the YEOs could potentially affect both crime and police resources either directly
or indirectly, which may induce post-treatment bias (e.g., Rosenbaum, 1984; Montgomery
et al., 2018). Column (3) reports the estimates from a DiD estimation that includes the interaction between baseline covariates measured at the baseline (i.e., prior to the enactment
of the YEOs) and year fixed effects, adjusting for how baseline covariates differentially affect
the outcome from year to year. Since all covariates are measured prior to the enactment
of the YEOs, this specification alleviates potential concern about post-treatment bias. We
exclude region specific time trends.
Goodman-Bacon Correction: Column (4). We exploit differential timing in the enactment of the YEOs across prefectures. Goodman-Bacon (2018) shows that treatment

27

effects may be biased when units receive treatment at different times and treatment effects
change over time. We apply the Goodman-Bacon correction method in Column (4). The
results suggest that when evaluated at YCI = zero, the YEO’s effect is qualitatively the
same. However, when evaluated at YCI = mean, the YEO’s effect is no longer statistically
significant. We estimate the latter effect, using the grand-mean centered YCI.
Alternative Definitions of YCI: Columns (5) to (9). We use alternative definitions of
YCI. To compute YCI, we need to compute the share spg of yakuza syndicate g in prefecture
p. In the main text, we assume that the members of yakuza syndicate g are distributed
proportionally to the population in prefecture p where yakuza syndicate g operates. For
notational convenience, let Y CI pop denote the YCI that we have used so far.
First, we consider time-dependent YCI. So far we have treated that YCI as time-independent
variables, in order to avoid post-treatment bias. To test whether our results are robust to
this restriction, we modify regression model (1) as follows: add the (time-dependent) nonpop
interaction term Y CIpt
and replace time-independent Y EOpt ×Y CIppop with time-dependent
pop
Y EOpt × Y CIpt
. As shown in Column (5), our results are robust. The estimated coefficient
pop
of Y CIpt is negative and not statistically significant. This is likely because (i) YCI does
not change much over time during this period and (ii) we control for region specific linear
time trends, so that region specific linear time trends absorb much variation.
Now we recompute the share spg based on alternative assumptions. First, suppose that
the members of yakuza syndicate g are distributed equally among all prefectures in which
yakuza syndicate g operates. Let snaive
denote the share that is calculated in this way, and let
pg
Y CIpnaive be the resulting YCI. Second, suppose that the members of yakuza syndicate g are
distributed proportionally to the population density of prefecture p in which yakuza syndicate
g operates. Let sdensity
denote the share that is calculated in this way, and let Y CIpdensity
pg
denote the resulting YCI. Using these two variants of YCI, we redo our estimation. As shown
in Columns (6) and (7), our results are robust to the specifications.
Lastly, we use alternative indices for the regional competition among rival yakuza syndicates (instead of the YCI). First, we define the yakuza’s presence based on the Ethnic
Polarization index (Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2005) for Column (8). Second, we simply
use the raw number of yakuza syndicates operating in each prefecture for YCI for Column
(9). As shown in the two columns, our results are qualitatively similar and robust.
Amendment of Anti-Yakuza Laws: Column (10). The Anti-Yakuza Laws, which are
nationwide laws, were amended in October 2012. Since our estimation strategy is based on
the DiD approach which exploits the prefectural variation, the amendment of the nationwide

28

laws should not affect our results, and this is why we did not take into account.
Here we examine this assumption. Let the treatment dummy AY Lt be equal to 1 before
the amendment and to 0 after the amendment. We add, to regression model (1), a noninteraction term AY Lt and an interaction term AY Lt × Y CIppop . Either term is insignificant
but the two elements of interest, Y EOpt and Y EOpt × Y CIppop , remain significant.
Tohoku Earthquake: Column (11). Japan experienced the Tohoku Earthquake on
March 11, 2011. It is often said that yakuza members engaged in business in the affected
areas after the earthquake. For example, some of them participated in the repair of nuclear
reactors (Ramseyer, 2016) and in the restoration of the affected areas. These economic
opportunities might affect yakuza activities. A simple way to eliminate potential effects of
the earthquake is to exclude prefectures that were affected by this earthquake (i.e., Miyagi,
Iwate, Fukushima, Ibaraki, Tochigi, Chiba, and Kanagawa) from our dataset. Even using
this subsample, we still obtain qualitatively the same results.
Multiple Imputation and Monthly Level Data: Columns (12) and (13). Lastly,
we examine the robustness of our estimation to potential errors in the outcome measurement
in our data. First, the provided data on the yakuza is based on 37 out of 47 prefectures.
To deal with missing data (10 prefectures and about 5% of the data is missing among the
37 prefectures), we conduct multiple imputations with 10 replications. The results using
this variable are combined estimates from the 10 imputations, applying Rubin’s rule (Rubin,
1987). Multiple implications rest on the missing-at-random assumption. To indirectly examine this, we conduct a diagnostic test that suggests whether the missingness of the yakuza
data does not vary systematically across prefectures conditional on observable covariates
included in our model. Therefore, the missing-at-random assumption is likely satisfied conditional on the observed covariates (Appendix C).
Second, the annual data on the number of yakuza members is linearly interpolated to
the month level and missing data is dealt with multiple imputations. We run two robustness
tests to potential concerns related to the measurement. In the first test, we use the linearly
interpolated data but we do not impute the missing data; in the second test, we use the (nonimputed) annual data, instead of month-level interpolated data. We report the estimation
results in Columns (12) and (13), and the results are robust to both alternative measures.

29

30
207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.180***
(0.050)
0.334***
(0.082)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.200***
(0.060)
0.227*
(0.121)

(2)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.242***
(0.056)
0.408***
(0.091)

(3)

(5)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.048
(0.423)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

0.268***
(0.078)
-0.530
(1.049)

-0.179*** -0.163***
(0.495)
(0.055)

(4)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

0.256***
(0.076)

-0.158***
(0.054)

(6)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

0.272***
(0.079)

-0.162***
(0.054)

(7)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

0.211***
(0.069)

-0.167***
(0.059)

(8)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

0.026**
(0.012)

-0.124*
(0.061)

(9)

(11)

207
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.079
(0.200)
0.147*
(0.085)
165
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.115* -0.163***
(0.060)
(0.054)
0.203** 0.316***
(0.092)
(0.085)

(10)

285
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.272**
(0.129)
0.409**
(0.154)

(12)

2,484
Yes
Yes
Yes
Both

-0.135***
(0.040)
0.189***
(0.054)

(13)

Notes: The yakuza rates are the number of yakuza members per 100,000 inhabitants. Control variables are the proportion of males, the proportion of individuals aged 15-24, the proportion of individuals aged 25-34, the proportion of individuals aged over 65, the proportion of foreign individuals, divorce-to-marriage ratio, population density, the unemployment rate,
welfare recipients per 1,000 inhabitants, GDP, police per 1,000 inhabitants, the log of overall crime rates. Data Sources: data on the number of yakuza members are obtained from
prefectural police departments; and other control variables are obtained from e-Stat. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the prefecture level. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

Observations
Prefecture Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Control Variables
Region Specific Trends

AYL × YCIpop

AYL

YEO × # of Syndicates

YEO × EP

YEO × YCIDens

YEO × YCIN aive

YCIpop (Time Dependent)

YEO × YCIpop (Time Dependent)

YEO Evaluated at YCI = Mean

YEO × YCIpop

YEO

(1)

Table A1: Robustness of Effect of the YEOs on Yakuza Rates

B

Designated Yakuza Syndicates

Under the Anti-Yakuza Laws, twenty-one yakuza syndicates are “designated” during the
period of the study. The criteria for the designation is that a yakuza syndicate has a
hierarchical organizational structure, that its members use violence to earn money, and that
its members have criminal records. Table A2 lists up all the designated yakuza syndicates.
#pref. of influence is the number of prefectures in which the particular yakuza syndicate
operates.11
Table A2: Designated Yakuza Syndicates
yakuza syndicate

#pref. of influence

Yamaguchi-gumi
Inagawa-kai
Sumiyoshi-kai
Kudō-kai
Kyokuryu-kai
Aizukotetsu-kai
Kyōsei-kai
Gōda-ikka
Kozakura-ikka
Asano-gumi
Dōjin-kai

45
19
18
3
1
2
1
3
1
2
4

yakuza syndicate
Shinwa-kai
Sōai-kai
Kyokudō-kai
Taishū-kai
Sakaume-gumi
Kyokutō-kai
Azuma-gumi
Matsuba-kai
Fukuhaku-kai
Namikawamutsumi-kai

#pref. of influence
1
2
5
1
1
15
1
10
4
6

Data Sources: National Police Agency (2009)

C

Missing-at-Random Assumption for Yakuza Data

Our data on the number of yakuza members is based on 37 out of 47 prefectures. To
deal with missing data, we use multiple imputations, which rests on the missing-at-random
assumption. One potential concern is whether these 37 prefectures are selected randomly or
not. We conduct a diagnostic test. We define a binary outcome: 1 if a prefecture reported
the data; and 0 otherwise. We then run a diagnostic test by regressing this binary outcome
on observed covariates. Table A3 reports the result: none of the coefficients is statistically
significant. This suggests that reporting the data on the number of yakuza members is not
11

There were twenty-two designated yakuza syndicates, but in 2011, two of them, both of which operated
only in Okinawa, merged.

31

systematically different across observed covariates, suggesting that the data is likely missing
at random, conditional on observed covariates. Given this, we employ multiple imputations,
where we impute missing values 10 times based on random draws from a distribution of
possibilities (Rubin, 1987).
Table A3: Missing-at-Random Assumption for Yakuza Data
Dependent Variable

Yakuza Data Reported

YEO
YEO × YCI
Proportion of Males
Proportion of Aged 15-24
Proportion of Aged 25-34
Proportion of Aged 65+
Proportion of Foreign People
Unemployment Rates
Welfare Recipients per 1,000 Inhabitants
GDP
Population Density
Police per 1,000 Inhabitants
Log of Overall Crime Rates

Observations

0.048
(0.119)
0.114
(0.195)
4.524
(13.265)
10.515
(13.466)
5.189
(14.286)
4.067
(6.776)
7.262
(16.620)
0.148
(0.119)
0.004
(0.014)
0.004
(0.009)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.182
(0.266)
-0.107
(0.124)

282

Notes: Yakuza data reported indicates whether a prefecture reported
data on yakuza membership. Control variables: see Table 2. Data
Sources: see Table 2. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

32

D

Summary Statistics of Outcome and Control Variables
Table A4: Summary Statistics of Outcome and Control Variables
Mean

Std. Dev.

45.725

20.399

Proportion of Males

0.482

0.010

Proportion Aged 15-24

0.096

0.008

Proportion Aged 25-34

0.112

0.012

Proportion Aged 65+

0.251

0.028

Proportion of Foreign People

0.012

0.007

653.677

1159.631

4.271

0.796

Welfare Recipients per 1,000 Inhabitants

12.934

6.814

GDP (trillion)

11.253

15.594

1.859

0.307

10.366

5.0444

Outcome Variables:
Yakuza Rates
Control Variables:

Population Density
Unemployment Rate

Police per 1,000 Inhabitants
Overall Crime Rates

Notes: The yakuza rates are the numbers of yakuza members per
100,000 inhabitants. Data Sources: data on the number of yakuza
members are obtained from prefectural police departments; data on overall crime rates (overall violent crime and overall property crime) are obtained from the NPA; other control variables are obtained from e-Stat.

33

