Global Norms vs. Global Actors: International Politics, Muslim Identity, and Support for Shari’a

Brandon Gorman1
Department of Sociology, University at Albany, State University of New York

1

Direct correspondence to Brandon Gorman, Department of Sociology, 341 Arts and Sciences

Building, 1400 Washington Avenue, University at Albany, State University of New York,
bgorman@albany.edu. Funding for data collection was provided by a long-term research
fellowship from the American Institute for Maghrib Studies. I thank Chris Bail, Shawn Bauldry,
Lisa Baranik, Lamia and Jalel Ben Temessek, Neal Caren, Shane Elliott, Chéma Gargouri,
Ahmed Hamza, Amaney Jamal, Ali Kadivar, Ahsan Kamal, Charlie Kurzman, Laura Nelson,
Jessica Pearlman, Andrew Perrin, David Rigby, Charles Seguin, Didem Türkoğlu, and Hajar
Yazdiha for their invaluable support. Hamza Ben Mehrez provided able research assistance for
this project.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 1
Abstract
Many scholars argue that local cultures are an impediment to the diffusion of “global” norms.
Others point out that local populations domesticate global cultural elements by integrating them
into pre-existing cultures, generating hybridized systems. In the current study, I argue that local
cultures are not necessarily impediments to cultural change and hybridization is only one aspect
of cultural domestication. Instead, I find that individuals attribute global norms to local cultural
objects as a means for disassociating putatively universal norms from the powerful actors that
dominate international politics. I illustrate this process using the case of support for shariʿa
(sometimes called Islamic law) in majority-Muslim countries. Results of multi-method analyses
show that, with the exception of attitudes about gender roles and sexuality, Muslims who support
implementing shariʿa do not systematically object to many so-called global norms; in fact, they
may express more enthusiasm about democracy, tolerance for people of other religions,
optimism about scientific advances, and concern for environmental preservation than those who
oppose implementing shariʿa. Likewise, many Muslims assert their full participation in global
society on terms not dictated by Western actors by repackaging ostensibly universal norms as
components of the unambiguously local shariʿa.

Keywords
shariʿa, global society, symbolic boundaries, mixed methods, Middle East and North Africa

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 2
Introduction
In the early 21st century, domestic and international political disputes often involve
references to a set of cultural norms including democracy, tolerance, environmentalism, science
promotion, and women’s rights. According to some scholars, this reflects an unprecedented
global convergence wherein humanity “has become a single ‘international society’” (Boli and
Thomas 1997:171–72; see also: Meyer et al. 1997) that “no one in any corner of the world
whatsoever can avoid” (Beck 2011:1352; see also: Canclini 2014). From this theoretical vantage
point, pre-existing “alternative meaning systems” inhibit the adoption of so-called global norms
(Boyle, McMorris, and Gómez 2002:26; Boyle and Meyer 1998:218–19; Carruthers and
Halliday 2006:573), prompting populations to either reject aspects of global culture or hybridize
them with local cultures (Pope and Meyer 2016: 291-294). However, cultural norms – both local
and global – are internally incoherent and situationally-specific (Swidler 2013), casting doubt on
the assertion that local meaning systems necessarily produce resistance to global norms.
Many of the actors that are in positions to define belonging to global society, including
scholars, activists, Western politicians, and international organizations, identify shariʿa –
sometimes called Islamic law – as among the primary competing meaning systems complicating
global cultural diffusion (Abiad 2008; Boyle et al. 2002; Eltantawi 2017; Kendhammer 2013b,
2013a; Korteweg 2008; Boyle and Meyer 1998). Previous empirical scholarship has largely
treated shariʿa as a unitary belief system, using survey data to explore how adherence to shariʿa
structures individual values and attitudes (Ciftci 2012; Davis and Robinson 2006; Moaddel and
Karabenick 2008). Yet, an influential body of scholarship has found that belief systems are better
understood as markers of belonging to (and distance from) social collectivities than indicators of
value differences (Barth 1969; Brubaker 2015; Gauchat 2012; Iyengar, Sood, and Lelkes 2012;

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 3
Malka and Lelkes 2010; Mason 2018; Nicholson 2012; Perrin, Roos, and Gauchat 2014).
Drawing on this scholarship, the current study investigates how individual Muslims employ
shariʿa as a flexible cultural tool for expressing their desire to fully participate in global society
on their own terms by analyzing three data sources: two cross-national surveys describing
responses from over 30,000 Muslims across 16 countries and data from semi-structured
cognitive interviews with fifty Tunisians between 2013 and 2014.
Results indicate that Muslims who support implementing shariʿa do not adhere to a
coherent set of traditionalist values, systematically object to global norms, or lack a desire to
participate in modern, global society. They may, in fact, be more enthusiastic about democracy,
tolerant of people of other religions, pro-science, and concerned with environmental preservation
than Muslims who do not support implementing shariʿa. Instead, ardent shariʿa supporters tend
to hold reservations about the actions and intentions of the international community and its most
influential members, feel that Muslims and Islamic concepts are purposefully marginalized by
powerful global actors, and claim that shariʿa anticipates and subsumes key global norms. This
suggests that local communities domesticate global norms not only through hybridization and
appropriation, but also by disassociating these norms from the powerful and unpopular global
actors that promote them. Explicitly linking local cultural objects to ostensibly universal norms
and identities allows non-Western populations to assert their full participation in global society
on terms not dictated by foreign actors they view as hostile and exploitative.
Boundaries, Beliefs, and Belonging in World Society
Empirical studies show a trend toward global homogenization of cultural practices
around a set of norms including democracy, environmentalism, science promotion, religious
tolerance, and women’s rights. While there is disagreement on whether international

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 4
organizations (Hafner-Burton and Tsutsui 2005; Longhofer and Schofer 2010), the most
powerful members of the global community (Barrett, Kurzman, and Shanahan 2010; Carruthers
and Halliday 2006:534), or advances in transportation and communication technology (Canclini
2014) are driving its diffusion, individuals and governments increasingly espouse the norms
associated with this global culture, even when they have little ability or intention of
implementing them (Cole and Ramirez 2013). Scholars in the world society tradition in
sociology argue that the pressure to conform to global cultural norms is so great that people
around the world “most avidly sacrifice their traditional cultural identities and adopt… models
reflecting standard global values” with “voluntaristic eagerness” (Meyer 2010:12).
However, not everyone seeks conformity with global culture and inclusion in global
society. Scholars in the world society and related traditions see the existence of “alternative
meaning systems” (Boyle et al. 2002:26) as the primary barrier to global cultural isomorphism
by providing values and identities that are not “linked to exogenous universal principles” or “the
international community” (Boyle and Meyer 1998:118; see also: Boyle, Kim, and Longhofer
2015; Inglehart and Baker 2000). While there are many meaning systems that purportedly
encourage adherents to resist inclusion in global society, scholars in this area argue that “Islam
has served as a base of resistance to a number of global norms” by “[bolstering] individuals’
acceptance of ‘traditional’ norms over the norms promoted by the international community”
(Boyle et al. 2002:16; see also: Ahmad 2001; Boyle and Meyer 1998:218–19; Tibi 1988).
Indeed, the question of compatibility between Islamic cultures and cultural trends emanating
from the West has fueled scholarly debates for decades (e.g., Fish 2011; Huntington 1997).
Taking an interpretive approach, others argue that local populations actively reconcile
local and foreign cultural elements through a variety of domestication processes (Pope and

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 5
Meyer 2016:291–94). A large body of scholarship has shown that local populations bring foreign
elements into compliance with local cultures via hybridization and appropriation, wherein
individuals and organizations “select the elements of tradition and modernity that appeal to them
and reject those that do not” (Harkness and Khaled 2014:591; see also: Appadurai 1996;
Czarniawska and Joerges 1996; Gorman 2016; Harkness 2012). While this scholarship more
accurately reflects the dynamic interplay between local and foreign cultures by considering the
accounts and experiences of individuals, it still considers a presumed clash between local and
global cultural elements as the primary catalyst for these processes.
These arguments are widespread in studies on global cultural diffusion and rest on a
social ontology that understands the social world as comprised of clearly delimited groups with
unique cultures, resulting in de facto differences in values that must be reconciled as these
groups come into contact. However, an influential body of scholarship on collective
identification finds that social groups may not necessarily be separated by fundamentally
different cultures but, instead, by “boundary objects” – cultural objects that serve as markers of
distinction but are not always indicative of value differences (Barth 1969). Previous research has
shown that people use cultural objects like food (DellaPosta, Shi, and Macy 2015), clothing
(Lamont 1992), health behaviors (Beisel and Kay 2004), and political beliefs (Iyengar et al.
2012; Perrin et al. 2014) as boundary objects to distinguish between, and define the terms of
belonging to, social categories. Thus, differences in belief systems may provide little insight into
the content of social and political claims (Brubaker 2015:105); rather, professing (or rejecting) a
belief system is one method people use to signal belonging to (and distance from) salient social
categories (Gauchat 2012; Malka and Lelkes 2010; Mason 2018; Nicholson 2012).
Whether and how boundary objects – and distinctions between the social categories they

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 6
separate – become salient is a function of the struggle over the categorical divisions of society
and the hierarchical ordering of social groups they entail (Wimmer 2008). Powerful actors
function as gatekeepers for dominant social categories by “systematically [valorizing] dominant
positions, dispositions, and forms of cultural capital while devalorizing and… stigmatizing
others” (Brubaker 2015:38–39), thus controlling the “prizes” of belonging to these categories:
honor, prestige, and access to resources (Wimmer 2013:5). Aside from formal exclusion of
subordinate groups, these actors reinforce inequalities between social categories by intensifying
or creating symbolic boundaries marked by boundary objects that highlight these groups’ cultural
inferiority vis-à-vis dominant groups (Wimmer 2013:103). Relevant boundary objects are often
symbolically important, and their public stigmatization produces “chronic and routine affronts to
[the] dignity” of targeted groups (Brubaker 2004:112, 2015:139). As a result, some members of
subordinate groups abandon stigmatized boundary markers in an attempt to gain acceptance from
dominant groups (Wimmer 2008:986, 2013:31) while others embrace these boundary objects and
emphasize dominant groups’ shortcomings in an attempt to disrupt the hierarchical ordering of
social categories (e.g., Lamont and Molnár 2001; Morris 1999; Nagel 1995; Takezawa 1994).
By shifting the analytical focus from the content of cultural systems to the relationship
between the groups associated with these systems, this approach highlights the role of power in
global cultural diffusion. This is largely absent in “alternative meaning system” approaches to
interactions between local and global cultural objects despite empirical evidence that Western
countries dominate global politics, institutional networks, and normmaking (Beckfield 2010;
Carruthers and Halliday 2006:534; Gorman and Seguin 2015; Hughes et al. 2009). These
countries are uniquely capable of setting the terms of membership in global society, often
drawing the boundary between “global” and “traditional” using cultural features of non-Western

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 7
peoples as “negative exemplars” of global culture (Barrett et al. 2010; Halliday, Block-Lieb, and
Carruthers 2010:90–93; Merry 2006). There are real consequences for being placed on the
“traditional” side of this boundary: those who fail to conform to the Western-dominated global
cultural framework risk marginalization, stigmatization, public shaming, and even economic and
military coercion by global actors (Al-Ali and Pratt 2009; Halliday 2009; Von Hippel 2000).
The role of Western hegemony in defining the boundaries of global society is not lost on
people subject to its definitional power. In the contemporary era of near-ubiquitous global
interconnection, derision and hostility directed at subordinate groups by powerful global actors
“quickly move into local repertoires of irony, anger, humor, and resistance” (Appadurai 1996:7).
Repeated exposure to disparaging messages may drive local populations to distance themselves
from powerful global actors by criticizing these actors and associating stigmatized boundary
objects with the global norms they promote (Boyle and Carbone-López 2006:441; Ivković and
Hagan 2006). Historical research in Latin America, for example, shows that international
campaigns against traditional drug use led to the widespread demonization of the key actors
driving criminalization and the adoption of discourses that celebrated these substances as
solutions to global challenges – even among non-users (Grisaffi 2010; Metaal 2014). In what
follows, I use the example of support for shariʿa among Muslims to show how local populations
domesticate global norms not only by hybridizing their content, but also by disassociating these
norms from the powerful actors that police and promote them. This allows members of
subordinate groups to embrace aspects of global culture on their own terms and challenge the
social hierarchy espoused by globally-dominant actors.
Shariʿa in Global Culture
Shariʿa, sometimes called Islamic law, refers to the principles revealed in Islamic texts

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 8
and traditions that many Muslims believe ensure the public good (Esposito and DeLong-Bas
2018:13). Shariʿa is open to many interpretations and has been implemented in a variety of ways
(Coulson 1964). For Islamic fundamentalists and extremists, shariʿa is a total institution defined
(in part) in opposition to Western cultural norms (Al-Bannāʼ 1978; Quṭb 1990). Islamic
modernists, by contrast, believe that shariʿa should be relegated to the private sphere (Kurzman
2002), and those with liberal interpretations argue that it demands human rights, women’s rights,
tolerance, and democracy (Kurzman 1998). Still others believe that adherence to shariʿa requires
supporting rule of law by upholding the law of the land (Esposito and DeLong-Bas 2018:33).
That shariʿa has been used by groups ranging from terrorists to modern states to justify practices
ranging from female genital mutilation to women’s empowerment suggest it has no fixed
meaning and that support for shariʿa neither necessarily entails opposition to global norms nor
precludes a desire to belong to global society.
Despite the diversity of interpretations among Muslims, Western politicians, international
organizations, and human rights activists tend to associate shariʿa with stonings, floggings,
forced marriages, and worse (Abiad 2008; Eltantawi 2017; Korteweg 2008), and to depict it as
exceptionally “anti-modern, fundamentalist, illiberal and un-democratic” (Casanova 2007:65; see
also: An-Naʻīm 2011). Since the 9/11 attacks, fear of “creeping” shariʿa has become part of
mainstream politics in the United States and Europe (Esposito and DeLong-Bas 2018).
International organizations have characterized the Muslim world as a “desert of non-compliance”
due in large part to provisions that refer to shariʿa (Modirzadeh 2006:192) and have
unambiguously condemned its application, even when implemented democratically
(Kendhammer 2013a) and the most sensationalized aspects of some shariʿa-based penal codes –
including floggings, amputations, and stonings – do not occur (Kendhammer 2013b). Even more

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 9
benign discussions of shariʿa among global actors tend to define it as illegitimate: in a 2008 letter
to the Security Council, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted with concern that wartime
chaos was forcing Afghans to “revert” to shariʿa (Ban 2008:7). The use of this sacred cultural
object as a boundary object for distinguishing between “global” and “traditional” Muslims
reinforces global discourses that stigmatize “Muslim” as a social category (Brubaker 2015:46).
Historical studies suggest that the delegitimization of Islamic concepts among powerful
global actors has led some Muslims to seek to create an alternative global culture based on
Islamic principles as they understand them. Since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights in 1948, for example, there have been various attempts, beginning with the
Universal Islamic Declaration of Human Rights in 1981, to outline a specifically “Islamic”
declaration of human rights, all of which emphasize the centrality of shariʿa (Mayer 2007;
Moosa 2000). Case studies in majority-Muslim contexts similarly suggest that some individuals
and organizations that work towards the implementation of global norms like women’s and
human rights couch their interests in the framework of shariʿa rather than (or in addition to) the
language of international organizations (Kendhammer 2013a:482; Salime 2011:37–39).
I argue that shariʿa, rather than a component of a coherent ideology, is a boundary object
that many Muslims use to distance global norms from powerful global actors that promote them.
Celebrating shariʿa and associating it with global norms allows Muslims to embrace these norms
on their own terms, challenge the dominant hierarchical ordering of social categories in global
society, and distinguish themselves from Western countries and international organizations that
they perceive as hostile toward Muslims.
Methods and Data
I use a multi-method design to explore the relationship between support for shariʿa and

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 10
attitudes about global norms and actors among individual Muslims. First, I test for statistical
relationships between support for shariʿa and key independent variables using regression models
with country-level fixed effects. I analyze two sources of data: 1) the second and third waves of
the Arab Barometer (AB) survey, which include data on over 26,000 Muslim respondents across
thirteen Arab countries – Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco,
Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, and Yemen – between 2010 and 2014 and, 2) the fourth
wave2 of the World Values Survey (WVS) with responses from approximately 8,000 Muslims
across six majority-Muslim countries – Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Jordan, Nigeria, and Saudi
Arabia – between 1999 and 2004. In general, I analyze variables that exist across all of these
datasets to maximize comparability. I drop non-Muslim respondents from both samples.
I use qualitative results from fifty semi-structured interviews that I conducted in Tunisia
between August 2013 and March 2014 to triangulate findings from the statistical analyses and
provide depth of interpretation to survey responses (Small 2011). Tunisia’s unique features make
it an excellent case to pair with the survey data. First, its legacy of state-sponsored assertive
secularism modeled on French laïcité galvanized religiously-based resistance to foreign actors
and cultural norms (e.g., Haugbølle and Cavatorta 2011). As a result, Tunisia is home to many
fundamentalist and extremist organizations, as illustrated by its per capita rate of citizens joining
ISIS – the highest in the world (Benmelech and Klor 2016). Second, the political openings and
the Islamist electoral victories following the 2011 uprisings thrust the role of shariʿa in Tunisia
into the center of a global debate (Tibi 2013). As such, while driven by local factors, Tunisians’

2

Only these waves contain survey items measuring attitudes about shariʿa, global norms, and the

international community broadly construed.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 11
attitudes are also attuned to larger discussions about shariʿa around the world.
I conducted interviews using cognitive interviewing techniques, which involve asking
respondents to answer a set of survey items along with open-ended follow-up questions designed
to provide insight into their perceptions of the survey items and justifications for their answers
(Gorman 2015). By allowing respondents to explain their attitudes about shariʿa in their own
words, these data allow me to examine, rather than ascribe, the content of these attitudes. Most
interviews were conducted in Tunisian Arabic, with a handful in English at the request of the
respondent. I chose interview respondents using a combination of convenience and purposive
sampling (Teddlie and Yu 2007) designed to capture the full range of support for shariʿa, with
self-described ultraconservative Salafists oversampled. Respondents ranged in age from 22 to 64
years (mean=33.32), were 60 percent men (N=30) and 40 percent women (N=20), and most had
some college education (80%, N=40). This interview sample is more educated than the Tunisian
population as a whole – according to the most recent AB data, 20% of Tunisians under age 65
have a college degree while 30% completed secondary school.
Quantitative Data and Method
Dependent Variable: Who Supports Shariʿa?
The dependent variable for the statistical models is support for shariʿa. For the AB data, I
construct an index using four survey items presenting respondents with the statement that the
government and parliament3 should enact: 1) laws; 2) penal laws; 3) personal status laws and; 4)

3

In Saudi Arabia, survey items refer to the Shūrā Council rather than parliament.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 12
inheritance laws in accordance with shariʿa, with five-item Likert response scales.4 Because the
resulting summative index is negatively skewed, I transform the values into their reflected square
roots before z-standardizing to better approximate normality.5 Any missing indicator results in a
missing index score (8%, N=2,190).
There is only one relevant survey item in the WVS data. It presents respondents with the
statement “The government and parliament should implement only the laws of the shariʿa,” with
a five-item Likert response scale. Figure 1 presents the distribution of the dependent variables in
both datasets. While shariʿa is widely popular, there is considerable variation in attitudes.
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Control Variables: Religiosity and Demographics
Some scholars argue more religious and religiously orthodox Muslims should be more
supportive of shariʿa (Davis and Robinson 2006; Moaddel and Karabenick 2008; Potrafke 2012).
I control for religiosity in both datasets by employing a variable capturing self-reported
religiosity6 with responses ranging from “not religious” to “religious.”7
If shariʿa is a constitutive feature of a coherent pre- or anti-modern ideology, support for

4

Cronbach’s alpha (a=0.85) and fit statics from a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) indicate

that these items measure a single construct (c2[1]=121.64, p<0.001, CFI=0.99, SRMR=0.01).
5

The transformation for individual i is: 𝑌" = $𝐾 − 𝑋" where Yi is the transformed dependent

variable, K is a constant, and Xi is the original value of the dependent variable.
6

Supplemental analyses indicate that other items measuring religious belief and practice have

similar relationships with support for shariʿa; including them does not substantively alter results.
7

There are three response categories for this item in the AB and two in the WVS.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 13
it should be most prevalent among older and less educated individuals who are less exposed to
global cultural trends (Boyle et al. 2002). On the other hand, some studies indicate that young
men with a moderate amount of education are most likely to support shariʿa (Ibrahim 1980;
Tessler 1997). To control for these relationships, I include five demographic variables in all
models: age in decades, a binary variable indicating some college education,8 a binary variable
indicating that a respondent is a woman, a binary variable indicating residence in an urban area,9
and a variable measuring household income in deciles centered at the country mean.
Independent Variables: Attitudes About Global Norms
Some scholarship conceptualizes religious political concepts like shariʿa as components
of totalizing meaning systems that inspire their adherents to reject foreign cultural objects. To
date, some prominent scholars have specified the myriad aspects of global culture that arguably
run counter to shariʿa and preclude many Muslims’ full participation in global society. These
range from abstract principles like individualism (Juergensmeyer 2008), capitalism (Barber
1995), democracy (Potrafke 2012), human rights (Moosa 2000), religious tolerance (Schwedler
2011), trust in science (Hameed 2008), environmentalism (Foltz, Denny, and Baharuddin
2003:25, 258–59), and women’s empowerment (Fish 2011), to cultural objects including “fine
arts, novels, [and] music” (Roy 2007:74). This suggests that Muslims who support implementing
shariʿa may be more likely to object to global norms and resist inclusion in global society than
those who do not.

8

This variable was recoded due to differences in response categories across countries.

9

In the AB data, urban/rural classification was predetermined by the survey researchers. In the

WVS data, I classify residents areas with populations of at least 100,000 people as an urban.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 14
While an ideal analysis would examine the relationship between support for shariʿa and
all of these norms, existing data include measures on only five. In the AB data, I measure
religious tolerance using a survey item that asks respondents whether they believe that religious
minorities should be allowed to freely practice their religion. In the WVS data, I measure trust in
science using a survey item that asks respondents whether they think scientific advances are
harmful, helpful, or somewhere in between, and support for environmentalism using a binary
survey item that asks respondents whether they prioritize protecting the environment over
economic growth. In both the AB and WVS data, I measure attitudes about women’s
empowerment using a survey item that asks respondents whether they think men make better
political leaders than women10 and attitudes about democracy using a survey item11 that asks
respondents whether they think that democracy is better than any other political system. All
questions except environmentalism and trust in science have four-item Likert response scales and
all response categories are coded such that higher values indicate more favorable attitudes.
Independent Variables: Attitudes About Global Actors
Others posit that support for shariʿa is a form of resistance against political, economic,
and military domination at the hands of foreign actors that marginalize and subordinate Muslims
(Ayoob 2005; Jamal 2012). Here, support for shariʿa is, in part, an outcome of these actors’

10

This is the only survey item on attitudes toward women’s empowerment that is shared across

the WVS and both waves of the AB. Supplemental analyses indicate that alternative variables
tend to have similar empirical relationships with support for shariʿa.
11

There is an analogous question which asks respondents to what extent they think democracy is

a “good” political system. Results of models using this alternative question are near-identical.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 15
historical mistreatment of Muslims and backing of oppressive secular-autocratic domestic
regimes, and supporting it “makes a clearly anti-Western statement” (Peters 2005:145; see also:
Kurzman 2011). This suggests that individuals who have reservations about global actors and
their influence on Muslims are more likely to support shariʿa than those that do not. While
scholarship in this area explicitly ties support for shariʿa with global power dynamics, it often
considers attitudes toward global actors synonymous with attitudes toward the cultural objects
these actors promote (e.g., An-Naʻīm 2011). I argue that Muslims may support shariʿa as a means
of embracing global norms by disassociating them from hostile global actors.
To measure reservations about the international community in the AB data, I use three
survey items. The first asks whether external calls for reform are illegitimate, with a three
category response scale characterizing these as “acceptable,” “acceptable with conditions,” or
“unacceptable.” The second measures feelings of global dependency, asking respondents whether
they believe foreign interference is an obstacle to reform in their countries, with a four-item
Likert response scale. Finally, I construct a z-standardized additive index of perceived hypocrisy
among global actors using two questions that ask respondents about the influence they believe
the United States and European Union have had on the development of democracy in their
countries, with a five-item response scale ranging from “very positive” to “very negative.”12
In the WVS data, I measure reservations about global actors using survey items that tap
respondents’ opinions about the United Nations. First, I use a question asking for the
respondent’s confidence in the UN, with a four-item response scale ranging from “none at all” to
“a great deal.” Second, I construct a z-standardized additive index measuring respondents’ desire

12

a=0.88; CFA fit indices: c2[1]=334.69, p<0.001, CFI=0.98, SRMR=0.02.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 16
for the UN to determine policies in five policy areas – aid to developing countries,
environmental protection, international peacekeeping, refugees, and human rights – using a
series of questions that ask respondents which institutions they believe should decide policies in
these areas: national governments, national governments with UN coordination, or the UN
only.13 For both variables, higher scores indicate more pro-UN attitudes.
Models
For the AB data, I estimate linear regression models with country- and wave-level fixed
effects. For the WVS data, I estimate ordered logistic regression models with country-level fixed
effects.14 All models include sampling weights to replicate nationally-representative samples and
employ robust standard errors. Following standard practice, missing data were imputed using
iterative chained equations, creating ten imputations per dataset with all variables transformed
before imputing (Von Hippel 2009).15 I report results of both bivariate and multivariate analyses
to assess the potential impact of multicollinearity on model results.
Statistical Results
Table 1 presents the results of the linear regression models using the AB data. Table 2

13

a=0.68; CFA fit indices: c2[5]=590.60, p<0.001, CFI=0.95, SRMR=0.04.

14

Including fixed effects terms in these nonlinear regression models is unlikely to produce

biased estimates data because the WVS data contain thousands of observations per country. I
also ran a series of fixed-effects linear regression models with substantively similar results.
15

Listwise deletion results in dropping 50% of AB observations and 38% of WVS observations.

Most dropped observations have missing values for a single variable, and no variable accounts
for the majority of these missing values.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 17
presents the results of the ordered logistic regression models using the WVS data.
[TABLES 1 & 2 ABOUT HERE]
Control Variables
Religiosity is significantly and positively related to support for shariʿa in all models. Age
is not statistically significantly associated with support for shariʿa in any multivariate model. For
gender and education, the results of models using the different datasets are inconsistent – the AB
models suggest that women and people with college educations may be more likely to support
shariʿa while the WVS models show a statistically null relationship between gender and support
for shariʿa and indicate that college-educated individuals may be less likely to support shariʿa.
The discrepancy in the effect of college education is not due to the inclusion of non-Arab
countries in the WVS data – supplemental analyses indicate that the association between
education and support for shariʿa is statistically null in all three cases. Instead, for the three Arab
countries that appear in both datasets (Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia), null or negative
associations in the WVS data give way to positive and statistically significant associations in the
AB data. This is likely a result of the changing global political context: the decade and a half
separating the two surveys saw the rise of the US-led Global War on Terror and subsequent
intensification of “Muslim” as a salient social category. Though a full investigation of the impact
of survey timing on support for shariʿa is beyond the scope of this study, the consistent
associations between support for shariʿa and attitudes about global norms and actors discussed
below indicates that these relationships are not artifacts of a specific time period or context.
Attitudes About Global Norms
The results for the variables measuring attitudes toward global norms are mixed.
Consistent with previous literature, positive attitudes about women's empowerment are

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 18
significantly and negatively associated with support for shariʿa in all models. Among the other
variables, however, a different pattern emerges. In models using both datasets, support for
democracy is positively and significantly associated with support for shariʿa. Similarly, religious
tolerance is positively and significantly associated with support for shariʿa in all AB models and
both trust in science and environmentalism are positively and significantly associated with
support for shariʿa in all WVS models. These results indicate that support for shariʿa does not
necessarily entail a rejection of global society and may, in fact, be associated with greater
enthusiasm for some global norms (at least in principal).
Attitudes About Global Actors
In contrast with the mixed effects of attitudes toward specific global norms, all of the
models suggest that support for shariʿa is associated with skepticism about global and Western
actors. The AB models indicate that individuals who believe that foreign interference is an
obstacle to reform and that Western countries are insincere in promoting democracy are more
likely to support shariʿa. Feeling that external calls for reform are illegitimate is positively and
significantly related to support for shariʿa in the bivariate AB model but loses its statistical
significance at the p<0.05 level when other measures of attitudes toward global actors are added
to the multivariate model. The coefficients show that, holding the other variables constant at their
means, a respondent with the least supportive attitudes towards the international community
scores approximately 18 percent higher on the dependent variable than one with the most
supportive attitudes. Taken together, these variables have a larger effect on support for shariʿa
than religiosity: moving from the lowest to highest scores for that variable is associated with a 11
percent increase in the support for shariʿa index. Figure 2 illustrates this association.
[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 19
Results of the WVS models indicate that individuals who express confidence in the UN
in general as well as in specific policy areas are less likely to support shariʿa. Figure 3 illustrates
the results of the ordinal logistic regression model (Table 2) by showing the predicted
probabilities of belonging to each category of the dependent variable given high and low values
of independent variables measuring religiosity and reservations about the UN with other
variables held constant at their means. The figure shows that respondents who express the
greatest reservations about the UN are about 13 percent more likely to “strongly agree” with
implementing shariʿa than respondents who express the least. This is smaller than the effect of
religiosity, which is associated with a 17 percent increase.
[FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]
Qualitative Method and Results
While the results of statistical analyses using two unrelated sources of data provide
sufficient evidence to reject the hypothesis that shariʿa is associated with a wholesale dismissal
of global norms and renunciation of global society, it is possible that the observed associations
between support for shariʿa and reservations about global actors are a result of some omitted
third variable. The fifty cognitive interviews, in which respondents were asked to justify their
responses to closed-ended survey questions about implementing shariʿa, provide internal validity
for these findings by offering depth of interpretation to the survey responses.
Because it was designed to probe attitudes about the relationship between shariʿa and
democracy, the interview schedule did not contain any questions about international
organizations, multinational corporations, or foreign countries. However, discussions of
international organizations and the most powerful states in the international system emerged
spontaneously in many of the interviews as respondents justified their support for shariʿa or lack

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 20
thereof. Roughly half of the respondents (26 out of 50 total interviews) answered that they
“agreed” or “strongly agreed” with implementing shariʿa. I analyze the content of these interview
data by grouping respondent attitudes into one or more of the four following substantive
categories: positive assessments of global actors, negative assessments of global actors, positive
assessments of global norms, and negative assessments of global norms. A boundary object
theory of shariʿa leads us to expect that respondents who support its implementation should be
more likely to express reservations about global actors than the cultural norms they promote.
While there was widespread agreement among the respondents that, to quote Salim, an
electrician in his late twenties who had recently returned to Bizerte from working in Libya,
“shariʿa touches all domains of life,” the interview responses show that it is open to a wide
variety of interpretations. While some, like Abderrahmen, an imam at a prominent mosque in
Kairouan, emphasized polygamy as central to shariʿa, others like Darine, a self-declared “student
of progressive Islam” in her early twenties from Tunis, decried these as “wrong interpretations”
of unscrupulous people “using shariʿa for political purposes.” The vast majority of respondents
across the political spectrum agreed in their assessment that most of the actors who claimed to
implement shariʿa were, by their definitions, violating it. Ibrahim, a self-described Salafist in his
mid-twenties who owns a media store in downtown Bizerte, expressed the widespread sentiment
that Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states are “among worst violators of shariʿa” going on to say that
“Israel is closer to the shariʿa than they are.” Abdelaziz, a high school administrator in his midthirties and brother of the official spokesperson for an outlawed Islamist group in Tunisia,
similarly lamented that, “when people hear shariʿa they think of Al-Qaʿida and the Taliban, but
these people do not implement shariʿa.”
How, then, did the interview respondents understand shariʿa? Ali, a store manager in his

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 21
mid-thirties from Kairouan, exemplified the prevailing theme that “shariʿa means building a
society where people can live together.” All but one of the shariʿa supporters I interviewed (25
out of 26) supported this position by making positive associations between shariʿa and global
norms. Among the most popular were democracy, science promotion, and religious tolerance.
Sami, a bearded college student in his early twenties who is deeply involved in Islamist
mobilization in his hometown of Bizerte, was one such respondent. During our interview, Sami
described the position of his political action group as follows:
“We want to recognize Muslim values in everything, in civil society, in the unions and
syndicates, in cafes and on the football field. This is why we don’t want to separate religion from
politics. As a Muslim, I should work to enhance liberties and freedoms, to further scientific
progress, to find a balance between economic development and the prohibition of interest.
Muslims can be an example for the world in every way! This is why we want shariʿa.”
Other respondents, such as Ibrahim, privileged his trust in science over his religious identity,
saying that scientists are “people who work hard to advance scientific progress, so I trust them
even if they’re not Muslims.”
Consistent with previous research, however, respondents’ understandings of global norms
often differed from those of Western and global actors. As in the results of the quantitative
analyses, interview respondents who supported shariʿa tended to take issue with Western
conceptions of rights related to gender and sexuality. Salim, for example, said:
In the shariʿa women are given many rights and protections. In the Western conception, women
are not given their rights or afforded their full value. Women are not protected in the West, and
there are a lot of problems […] if you look to countries where homosexuality and fornication are
prohibited, they have fewer problems with parentless children or sexually transmitted diseases.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 22
While many respondents who opposed implementing shariʿa justified their opposition in
reference to women’s rights, others like Khamisa, a secretary in her mid-twenties from Sousse,
argued that a correct interpretation of shariʿa would “liberate women and given them equal rights
to men.” Other responses, however, indicate that reservations about women’s empowerment and
the rights of sexual minorities are widespread among all sectors of the Tunisian population.
Fatima, an entrepreneur, secularist, and self-described feminist in her late forties from Sfax,
echoed the most conservative shariʿa supporters when she said: “I’m for the emancipation of
women, […] but nobody should give up their natural roles to go out and do whatever they want.”
Consistent with my expectations, all of the shariʿa supporters I interviewed justified their
support by claiming that shariʿa anticipates and subsumes key global norms. Chokri, a college
student in his late twenties studying in Tunis, echoed Sami when he said that shariʿa “calls for
liberty, freedom, justice, and many other modern values.” Abderrahmen enthusiastically
described religious tolerance as “the core” and “essence” of shariʿa, laughing as he described
competing interpretations as the ignorant preoccupations of “fanatics” who value “long beards”
and “Afghani clothes” over the “true shariʿa.” This tendency was most pronounced among
respondents who were strongly committed to shariʿa. Afef, a very conservative computer
technician in her early twenties, said during our brief interview that “most of the constitutions in
the world follow shariʿa” by emphasizing “tolerance of difference, freedom from coercion, and
majority rule.” Abdelaziz similarly stated that shariʿa was responsible for “the birth of the social
security system long before it was ever implemented in Europe.” Still others attributed global
norms like racial tolerance, self-determination, and environmentalism to shariʿa.
Not all shariʿa supporters I interviewed gave positive evaluations of global norms. Omar,
a retiree in his mid-sixties and prominent Salafist from Bizerte, was one such respondent. During

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 23
our interview, Omar refused global norms like democracy, human rights, and women’s rights. In
many instances, he justified this refusal not because he considered a given norm as an alien
imposition, but rather because he considered it an incomplete imitation of an idea that has its
roots in shariʿa. For example, he said of democracy:
“Shariʿa contains democracy, it is more democratic than democracy. In shariʿa you have the
right to criticize your leader and hold him accountable for his actions and how he treats the
people. Shariʿa does not need democracy. Democracy came from shariʿa.”
He went on to explain his rejection of democracy and human rights in terms of Western domestic
and foreign policies:
“I have been all over the world. I know the US from Boston to Miami and New Orleans. I’ve
been all over Europe and […] nobody has their human rights in those places. […] There are 49
million Americans living in poverty. You should take care of those people, not impose yourself on
people in other countries.”
According to Omar and many others, shariʿa is the only system that embodies the norms that
global actors promote, including “freedom,” “liberty,” “education,” and “scientific
advancement,” and the only way to ultimately eliminate “hatred, inequality, and jealousy” and
achieve “world peace.”
Omar was not alone in his criticism. Among the shariʿa supporters I interviewed, a
substantial majority (19 out of 26) offered negative assessments of global actors. Many
respondents justified their views on the premise that Western countries and international
organizations fail to live up to their own standards. Among the most common critiques was the
global rejection of the democratic election of Hamas in Gaza in 2006. According to Faisal, a
motorcycle mechanic from Bizerte in his late twenties, this illustrates how global norms like

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 24
democracy are “used for the geostrategic interests of the American empire and its proxies like
France, NGOs, and the UN.” Others like Salim were keen to criticize international organizations
for their perceived hypocrisy:
“Concerning associations that look after human rights, they look after the rights of Christians
and ethnic minorities and urgently apply pressure to protect these people’s rights. But when it
comes to the rights of Muslim people who are killed by the millions in Myanmar-Burma, Iraq,
and other countries, we don’t see any action.”
I found the link between global actors, global norms, and shariʿa most clearly during my
conversation with Aymen, a self-described Salafist in his mid-twenties. When I met Aymen, he
had recently quit a high paying job in the tourism industry out of religious conviction. To him,
implementing shariʿa meant creating a political system that works on behalf of its people rather
than hostile or uncaring external actors. He explained:
“Today [the government] taxes Tunisian Muslims more than they tax Western investors. So you,
for example, you’re American. You can come to Tunisia and open a company and hire Tunisians
to work. You pay 30% in taxes. But the Tunisians, the Muslims, who work for you, they pay 90%
of their income in taxes. […] This benefits people like [George W.] Bush, who is responsible for
killing Muslims […] while talking about human rights. Where are [our] human rights?”
According to Aymen, a government based on shariʿa is the best way to “fight for the cause of the
weak” and “protect the people.”
All of the shariʿa supporters I interviewed were concerned with the way it is represented
in global culture; many saw this as an element of an ongoing campaign to subordinate Muslims
vis-à-vis the West. Aymen, who was highly critical of many global norms, offered the
observation that “the Americans are fighting to prevent shariʿa” as one of his justifications for

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 25
supporting it. Salim similarly argued that shariʿa had never truly been implemented because
foreign domination had prevented Muslims “from being able to build a system of our own.”
Even respondents who described shariʿa as largely compatible with global norms held this view:
Chokri said that the United States and China are united in their desire “not to awaken the theory
of shariʿa.” Marwa, an optimistic college student in her early twenties who described shariʿa as
entirely compatible with global norms including women’s rights, thought that self-interested
outsiders deliberately spread misinformation about shariʿa:
“Shariʿa means following the example of the Prophet, peace be upon him. […] He was tolerant
[of minorities], considerate of everyone’s needs, and made decisions for his community using
dialogue and persuasion, not coercion. […] If we search for [these] true values of shariʿa
around the world we will find them in developed and modern countries. The people that say if
you follow shariʿa, they will cut off your hand, or men will marry four wives, or if you fornicate
you will be whipped, they just say this to make people fear Muslims and our shariʿa.”
Finally, many respondents who opposed implementing shariʿa justified their opposition
in terms of a desire to maintain legitimacy in global society. Seif, a college student living in
Tunis, responded that shariʿa is not an “internationally legitimate political system,” describing it
as too “irrational” and “emotional” to meet global standards of “objective rationality.” Manel, a
medical doctor in her late fifties employed by an INGO in Sfax, vehemently opposed
implementing shariʿa, saying that she would support an Islamist politician only:
“…if he had a progressive interpretation of shariʿa that did not contradict international law and
universal values. If someone gave me that kind of interpretation of shariʿa, I wouldn’t see him as
a religious person. I would see him as a universal human being who is applying the universal
values of humanity.”

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 26
Others expressed concern that applying shariʿa would endanger Tunisia’s status in the
international community. Oussama, a teacher in his mid-forties who lived in Tunis, feared that
implementing shariʿa could make Tunisia a global outcast along the lines of Somalia, Iran, or
Sudan. Rym, a college student in her early twenties, was similarly concerned that applying
shariʿa would damage Tunisia’s “good relations” with its neighbors.
Summary of Results
The multi-method approach employed in this study combines surveys, which are high on
external validity, with interviews, which are high on internal validity (Small 2011:63–66).
Consistency in results of statistical models using responses from nearly 35,000 Muslims
spanning 16 countries over a decade and a half suggest that observed patterns from the
qualitative analyses are likely not limited to the Tunisians I interviewed in 2013 and 2014.
Likewise, the qualitative analyses offer a depth of interpretation that supports the statistical
results by showing that: 1) many Muslims do not understand shariʿa as a coherent belief system,
2) individuals who support shariʿa neither necessarily object to global norms nor refuse to
participate in global society, and 3) nevertheless, shariʿa supporters tend express unprompted
reservations about Western and global actors. This suggests that the association between support
for shariʿa and reservations about global actors in the statistical models is not an artifact of the
survey data or modeling strategy. Finally, by investigating rather than ascribing the content
attitudes about shariʿa, interview results show how respondents engage in active ideological
work, disassociating global norms and identities from the actors that promote them by arguing
that shariʿa anticipates and subsumes key aspects of global culture.
Discussion and Conclusions
Previous scholarship has suggested that popular support for local belief systems like

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 27
shariʿa represents a traditionalist holdout from the global trend toward cultural isomorphism. The
current study proposes that support for shariʿa does not necessarily imply an ideological clash
between global culture and an “alternative meaning system” based in Islam but rather is
associated with feelings of exclusion and victimization by powerful global actors. My findings
support this claim. While shariʿa supporters tend to be less than enthusiastic about women’s
empowerment, they do not see a contradiction between shariʿa and a host of other global norms
including democracy, religious tolerance, trust in science, and environmentalism. Instead, it
appears that shariʿa supporters take issue with the way that international organizations and other
powerful global actors neglect and marginalize Muslims: statistical results indicate that
individuals who hold reservations about international organizations are significantly more likely
to support shariʿa net of religiosity, and content analyses of cognitive interviews show that many
respondents linked their support for shariʿa with general support for global norms and (without
prompting) distrust for the most powerful members of the world polity.
These results suggest that, in an international environment that has consistently kept
majority-Muslim societies in subordinate positions since the mandate era of the League of
Nations and continues to delegitimate shariʿa and other Islamic political concepts, shariʿa
operates as a contextually-situated boundary marker rather than a coherent ideology. Support for
shariʿa is thus one way of taking a stance on the perceived historical mistreatment of Muslims
that does not necessarily preclude embracing attitudes and identities that are consistent with
global culture. As a result, many Muslims appropriate global norms – with some important
exceptions for gender and sexuality – using the language of shariʿa. This ideological work, which
is given added emphasis by dominant discourses that equate shariʿa with cultural inferiority and
barbarism, disassociates global norms from the actors most closely associated with them.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 28
The results of the current study indicate that support for shariʿa is associated with positive
assessments of (most) global norms and negative assessments of (many) global actors. However,
existing data provide little information about variation in exposure to the discourses and
activities of global actors, the mechanism through which I theorize derision and hostility towards
Muslims generates support for shariʿa as individuals seek to embrace global norms while
distancing themselves from these actors. This is a common issue in world society research,
which rarely investigates diffusion of global norms at the individual level. As such, future
research might take an experimental approach, exposing some individuals to negative messages
about Muslims and shariʿa drawn from global and Western discourses in order to determine the
effect of this exposure on attitudes. Researchers might also investigate differences in support for
shariʿa between majority-Muslim countries based on their positions in global networks, domestic
regimes’ use of shariʿa as a discursive tool, or level of social fragmentation along religious lines.
It may also be fruitful to compare attitudes of Muslims in majority-Muslim contexts with those
in the West.
On the other hand, these results also indicate that there is an association between support
for shariʿa and resistance to women’s empowerment as understood by Western and global actors.
While this provides evidence that the “alternative meaning system” approach to interactions
between global and local cultures may hold in this substantive domain, it is not clear that
adherence to shariʿa is the ultimate cause of this resistance. A number of studies have shown that
patriarchal attitudes in many majority-Muslim societies may result from localized factors
including kinship structures that have little to do with religious belief (e.g., Harkness 2012),
macroeconomic structures (e.g., Ross 2008), or even foreign domination (e.g., Esposito and
DeLong-Bas 2018:105, 110, 128–29). While a full investigation of this important topic is beyond

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 29
the scope of this study, these results align with scholarship that shows that attitudes about gender
norms may be especially resistant to change (e.g., Charles 2011). Future researchers might
investigate how Muslim women themselves understand shariʿa and its implications their roles in
society vis-à-vis Western and international discourses of women’s empowerment.
We already know that people elevate cultural objects and practices in response to critical
external identifications. This insight is often overlooked in world society and related scholarship,
where pre-existing cultural norms are understood as complicating cultural diffusion processes.
The present study shows that, rather than representing a hold-out to cultural diffusion processes,
support for support for local cultural objects may, instead, be a component of these processes as
members of subordinated groups use stigmatized boundary objects to simultaneously embrace
global norms and respond to claims of cultural inferiority leveled by dominant actors. This
suggests that, in a global society dominated by Western interests and cultural features, adherence
to local belief systems may facilitate, rather than hinder, the diffusion of global norms.
References
Abiad, Nisrine. 2008. Sharia, Muslim States and International Human Rights Treaty
Obligations. London: British Institute of International and Comparative Law.
Ahmad, Ali. 2001. “The Role of Islamic Law in the Contemporary World Order.” Journal of
Islamic Law & Culture (157):157–72.
Al-Ali, Nadje and Nicola Pratt. 2009. What Kind of Liberation?: Women and the Occupation of
Iraq. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Al-Bannāʼ, Ḥasan. 1978. Five Tracts of Ḥasan Al-Bannāʼ (1906-1949). Berkeley: University of
California Press.
An-Naʻīm, ʻAbdullahi A. 2011. Muslims and Global Justice. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 30
Ayoob, Mohammed. 2005. “The Future of Political Islam: The Importance of External
Variables.” International Affairs 81(5):951–961.
Ban, Ki-moon. 2008. Letter Dated 1 February 2008 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council. New York: United Nations Security Council.
Barber, Benjamin. 1995. Jihad vs. McWorld. New York: Times Books.
Barrett, Deborah, Charles Kurzman, and Suzanne Shanahan. 2010. “For Export Only: Diffusion
Professionals and Population Policy.” Social Forces 88(3):1183–1207.
Barth, Fredrik. 1969. Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. London: Allen & Unwin.
Beck, Ulrich. 2011. “Cosmopolitanism as Imagined Communities of Global Risk.” American
Behavioral Scientist 55(10):1346–61.
Beckfield, Jason. 2010. “The Social Structure of the World Polity.” American Journal of
Sociology 115(4):1018–68.
Beisel, Nicola and Tamara Kay. 2004. “Abortion, Race, and Gender in Nineteenth-Century
America.” American Sociological Review 69(4):498–518.
Benmelech, Efraim and Esteban F. Klor. 2016. What Explains the Flow of Foreign Fighters to
ISIS? National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved April 3, 2018
(http://www.nber.org/papers/w22190).
Boli, John and George M. Thomas. 1997. “World Culture in the World Polity: A Century of
International Non-Governmental Organization.” American Sociological Review
62(2):171–90.
Boyle, Elizabeth H., Minzee Kim, and Wesley Longhofer. 2015. “Abortion Liberalization in
World Society, 1960-2009.” American Journal of Sociology 121(3):882–913.
Boyle, Elizabeth Heger and Kristin Carbone-López. 2006. “Movement Frames and African
Women’s Explanations for Opposing Female Genital Cutting.” International Journal of
Comparative Sociology 47(6):435–65.
Boyle, Elizabeth Heger, Barbara J. McMorris, and Mayra Gómez. 2002. “Local Conformity to
International Norms: The Case of Female Genital Cutting.” International Sociology
17(1):5–33.
Boyle, Elizabeth Heger and John W. Meyer. 1998. “Modern Law as a Secularized and Global
Model: Implications for the Sociology of Law.” Soziale Welt 49(3):213–32.
Brubaker, Rogers. 2004. Ethnicity without Groups. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Brubaker, Rogers. 2015. Grounds for Difference. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Canclini, Néstor García. 2014. Imagined Globalization. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 31
Carruthers, Bruce G. and Terence C. Halliday. 2006. “Negotiating Globalization: Global Scripts
and Intermediation in the Construction of Asian Insolvency Regimes.” Law & Social
Inquiry 31(3):521–84.
Casanova, José. 2007. “Immigration and the New Religious Pluralism: A European
Union/United States Comparison.” Pp. 59–84 in Democracy and the New Religious
Pluralism, edited by T. Banchoff. New York: Oxford University Press.
Charles, Maria. 2011. “A World of Difference: International Trends in Women’s Economic
Status.” Annual Review of Sociology 37(1):355–71.
Ciftci, Sabri. 2012. “Secular-Islamist Cleavage, Values, and Support for Democracy and Shari’a
in the Arab World.” Political Research Quarterly 66(4):781–93.
Cole, Wade M. and Francisco O. Ramirez. 2013. “Conditional Decoupling: Assessing the Impact
of National Human Rights Institutions, 1981 to 2004.” American Sociological Review
78(4):702–25.
Coulson, Noel. 1964. A History of Islamic Law. Edinburgh, UK: University Press.
Czarniawska, Barbara and Bernward Joerges. 1996. “Travels of Ideas.” Pp. 13–48 in Translating
Organizational Change, edited by B. Czarniawska and G. Sevón. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter & Co.
Davis, Nancy J. and Robert V. Robinson. 2006. “The Egalitarian Face of Islamic Orthodoxy:
Support for Islamic Law and Economic Justice in Seven Muslim-Majority Nations.”
American Sociological Review 71(2):167–90.
DellaPosta, Daniel, Yongren Shi, and Michael Macy. 2015. “Why Do Liberals Drink Lattes?”
American Journal of Sociology 120(5):1473–1511.
Eltantawi, Sarah. 2017. Shari’ah on Trial: Northern Nigeria’s Islamic Revolution. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Esposito, John L. and Natana J. DeLong-Bas. 2018. Shariah: What Everyone Needs to Know.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Fish, M. Steven. 2011. Are Muslims Distinctive? New York: Oxford University Press.
Foltz, Richard C., Frederick M. Denny, and Azizan Baharuddin, eds. 2003. Islam and Ecology: A
Bestowed Trust. Cambridge: Center for the Study of World Religions, Harvard Divinity
School.
Gauchat, Gordon. 2012. “Politicization of Science in the Public Sphere: A Study of Public Trust
in the United States, 1974 to 2010.” American Sociological Review 77(2):167–87.
Gorman, Brandon. 2016. “Appropriating Democracy in North Africa.” International Journal of
Comparative Sociology 57(5):288–309.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 32
Gorman, Brandon. 2015. “The Case for Cognitive Interviewing in the Post-Arab Spring
Environment.” Middle East Law and Governance 7(1):50–60.
Gorman, Brandon and Charles Seguin. 2015. “Reporting the International System: Attention to
Foreign Leaders in the US News Media, 1950-2008.” Social Forces 94(2):775–99.
Grisaffi, Thomas. 2010. “We Are Originarios... ‘We Just Aren’t from Here’: Coca Leaf and
Identity Politics in the Chapare, Bolivia.” Bulletin of Latin American Research
29(4):425–39.
Hafner-Burton, Emilie M. and Kiyoteru Tsutsui. 2005. “Human Rights in a Globalizing World:
The Paradox of Empty Promises.” American Journal of Sociology 110(5):1373–1411.
Halliday, Terence C. 2009. “Recursivity of Global Normmaking: A Sociolegal Agenda.” Annual
Review of Law and Social Science 5(1):263–89.
Halliday, Terence C., Susan Block-Lieb, and Bruce G. Carruthers. 2010. “Rhetorical
Legitimation: Global Scripts as Strategic Devices of International Organizations.” SocioEconomic Review 8(1):77–112.
Hameed, Salman. 2008. “Bracing for Islamic Creationism.” Science 322(5908):1637–1638.
Harkness, Geoff. 2012. “Out of Bounds: Cultural Barriers to Female Sports Participation in
Qatar.” The International Journal of the History of Sport 29(15):2162–83.
Harkness, Geoff and Rana Khaled. 2014. “Modern Traditionalism: Consanguineous Marriage in
Qatar.” Journal of Marriage and Family 76(3):587–603.
Haugbølle, Rikke Hostrup and Francesco Cavatorta. 2011. “Will the Real Tunisian Opposition
Please Stand Up?” British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 38(3):323–41.
Hughes, Melanie M., Lindsey Peterson, Jill Ann Harrison, and Pamela Paxton. 2009. “Power and
Relation in the World Polity: The INGO Network Country Score, 1978–1998.” Social
Forces 87(4):1711–42.
Huntington, Samuel P. 1997. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Ibrahim, Saad Eddin. 1980. “Anatomy of Egypt’s Militant Islamic Groups: Methodological Note
and Preliminary Findings.” International Journal of Middle East Studies 12(4):423–453.
Inglehart, Ronald and Wayne E. Baker. 2000. “Modernization, Cultural Change, and the
Persistence of Traditional Values.” American Sociological Review 65(1):19–51.
Ivković, Sanja Kutnjak and John Hagan. 2006. “The Politics of Punishment and the Siege of
Sarajevo: Toward a Conflict Theory of Perceived International (In)Justice.” Law &
Society Review 40(2):369–410.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 33
Iyengar, Shanto, Gaurav Sood, and Yphtach Lelkes. 2012. “Affect, Not Ideology: A Social
Identity Perspective on Polarization.” Public Opinion Quarterly 76(3):405–31.
Jamal, Amaney. 2012. Of Empires and Citizens: Pro-American Democracy or No Democracy at
All? Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Juergensmeyer, Mark. 2008. Global Rebellion: Religious Challenges to the Secular State, from
Christian Militias to Al Qaeda. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kendhammer, Brandon. 2013a. “Islam and the Language of Human Rights in Nigeria: ‘Rights
Talk’ and Religion in Domestic Politics.” Journal of Human Rights 12(4):469–490.
Kendhammer, Brandon. 2013b. “The Sharia Controversy in Northern Nigeria and the Politics of
Islamic Law in New and Uncertain Democracies.” Comparative Politics 45(3):291–311.
Korteweg, Anna C. 2008. “The Sharia Debate in Ontario: Gender, Islam, and Representations of
Muslim Women’s Agency.” Gender & Society 22(4):434–54.
Kurzman, Charles. 1998. Liberal Islam. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kurzman, Charles. 2002. Modernist Islam, 1840-1940. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kurzman, Charles. 2011. The Missing Martyrs: Why There Are so Few Muslim Terrorists. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Lamont, Michèle. 1992. Money, Morals, and Manners: The Culture of the French and American
Upper-Middle Class. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamont, Michèle and Virág Molnár. 2001. “How Blacks Use Consumption to Shape Their
Collective Identity: Evidence from Marketing Specialists.” Journal of Consumer Culture
1(1):31–45.
Longhofer, Wesley and Evan Schofer. 2010. “National and Global Origins of Environmental
Association.” American Sociological Review 75(4):505–33.
Malka, Ariel and Yphtach Lelkes. 2010. “More than Ideology: Conservative–Liberal Identity and
Receptivity to Political Cues.” Social Justice Research 23(2–3):156–88.
Mason, Lilliana. 2018. Uncivil Agreement: How Politics Became Our Identity. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Mayer, Ann. 2007. Islam and Human Rights. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Merry, Sally Engle. 2006. Human Rights and Gender Violence: Translating International Law
into Local Justice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Metaal, Pien. 2014. “Coca in Debate: The Contradiction and Conflict between the UN Drug
Conventions and the Real World.” Pp. 25–44 in Prohibition, Religious Freedom, and

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 34
Human Rights: Regulating Traditional Drug Use, edited by B. C. Labate and C. Cavnar.
New York: Springer.
Meyer, John W. 2010. “World Society, Institutional Theories, and the Actor.” Annual Review of
Sociology 36(1):1–20.
Meyer, John W., John Boli, George M. Thomas, and Francisco O. Ramirez. 1997. “World
Society and the Nation-State.” American Journal of Sociology 103(1):144–81.
Moaddel, Mansoor and Stuart A. Karabenick. 2008. “Religious Fundamentalism among Young
Muslims in Egypt and Saudi Arabia.” Social Forces 86(4):1675–1710.
Modirzadeh, Naz K. 2006. “Taking Islamic Law Seriously: INGOs and the Battle for Muslim
Hearts and Minds.” Harvard Human Rights Journal 19:191–233.
Moosa, Ebrahim. 2000. “The Dilemma of Islamic Rights Schemes.” The Journal of Law and
Religion 15(1/2):185–215.
Morris, Aldon D. 1999. “A Retrospective on the Civil Rights Movement: Political and
Intellectual Landmarks.” Annual Review of Sociology 25:517–539.
Nagel, Joane. 1995. “American Indian Ethnic Revival: Politics and the Resurgence of Identity.”
American Sociological Review 60(6):947–65.
Nicholson, Stephen P. 2012. “Polarizing Cues.” American Journal of Political Science 56(1):52–
66.
Perrin, Andrew J., J. Micah Roos, and Gordon W. Gauchat. 2014. “From Coalition to Constraint:
Modes of Thought in Contemporary American Conservatism.” Sociological Forum
29(2):285–300.
Peters, Rudolph. 2005. Crime and Punishment in Islamic Law: Theory and Practice from the
Sixteenth to the Twenty-First Century. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pope, Shawn and John W. Meyer. 2016. “Local Variation in World Society: Six Characteristics
of Global Diffusion.” European Journal of Cultural and Political Sociology 3(2–3):280–
305.
Potrafke, Niklas. 2012. “Islam and Democracy.” Public Choice 151(1):185–92.
Quṭb, Sayyid. 1990. Milestones. Indianapolis, IN: American Trust.
Ross, Michael L. 2008. “Oil, Islam, and Women.” American Political Science Review
102(1):107–23.
Roy, Olivier. 2007. Secularism Confronts Islam. New York: Columbia University Press.

Global Norms vs. Global Actors 35
Salime, Zakia. 2011. Between Feminism and Islam: Human Rights and Sharia Law in Morocco.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Schwedler, Jillian. 2011. “Can Islamists Become Moderates?” World Politics 63(2):347–76.
Small, Mario Luis. 2011. “How to Conduct a Mixed Methods Study: Recent Trends in a Rapidly
Growing Literature.” Annual Review of Sociology 37(1):57–86.
Swidler, Ann. 2013. Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Takezawa, Yasuko. 1994. Breaking the Silence: Redress and Japanese American Ethnicity.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Teddlie, Charles and Fen Yu. 2007. “Mixed Methods Sampling: A Typology with Examples.”
Journal of Mixed Methods Research 1(1):77–100.
Tessler, Mark. 1997. “The Origins of Popular Support for Islamist Movements.” Pp. 93–127 in
Islam, Democracy, and the State in North Africa, edited by J. P. Entelis. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Tibi, Bassam. 1988. The Crisis of Modern Islam: A Preindustrial Culture in the ScientificTechnological Age. Salt Lake City, UT: University of Utah Press.
Tibi, Bassam. 2013. The Sharia State: Arab Spring and Democratization. New York: Routledge.
Von Hippel, Karin. 2000. Democracy by Force: US Military Intervention in the Post-Cold War
World. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Von Hippel, Paul T. 2009. “How to Impute Interactions, Squares, and Other Transformed
Variables.” Sociological Methodology 39(1):265–91.
Wimmer, Andreas. 2013. Ethnic Boundary Making. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wimmer, Andreas. 2008. “The Making and Unmaking of Ethnic Boundaries: A Multilevel
Process Theory.” American Journal of Sociology 113(4):970–1022.

Tables 1
Table 1: Fixed Effects Regressions on Support for Shari’a (AB)
(1)
Bivariate

(2)
Multivariate

0.203***
(0.025)
0.004
(0.011)
0.068*
(0.026)
0.023
(0.021)
-0.004
(0.037)
-0.005
(0.005)

0.197***
(0.021)
-0.012
(0.009)
0.079**
(0.022)
0.051*
(0.020)
-0.001
(0.030)
-0.005
(0.004)

-0.131***
(0.022)
0.095***
(0.024)
0.046**
(0.015)

-0.124***
(0.019)
0.090***
(0.022)
0.034*
(0.015)

0.127***
(0.020)
IC Illegitimate
0.074***
(0.019)
Western Hypocrisy
0.092***
(0.017)
N
26,252
Countries
13
†p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

0.093***
(0.019)
0.038†
(0.020)
0.073***
(0.016)
26,252
13

Controls
Religiosity
Age
College
Woman
Urban
Household Income
Global Norms
Women’s Empowerment
Democracy
Religious Tolerance
Global Actors
Dependency

Note: Column (1) contains results of ten separate bivariate models regressing each independent
and control variable on the support for shari’a index, column (2) contains results of a single
model including all independent and control variables. All models employ country- and wavelevel fixed effects and robust standard errors clustered around country-waves.

Tables 2
Table 2: Ordered Logistic Regressions with Country-Level Fixed Effects on Support for
Shari’a (WVS)

Controls
Religiosity
Age
College
Woman
Urban
Household Income
Global Norms
Women’s Empowerment
Democracy
Trust in Science
Environmentalism
Global Actors
UN Confidence
UN Policy Index
N
Countries
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

(1)
Bivariate

(2)
Multivariate

0.759***
(0.082)
0.052**
(0.016)
-0.181***
(0.054)
-0.116**
(0.043)
-0.093
(0.057)
-0.011
(0.010)

0.745***
(0.082)
0.021
(0.017)
-0.151**
(0.057)
-0.037
(0.046)
-0.020
(0.060)
0.007
(0.011)

-0.385***
(0.029)
0.134***
(0.034)
0.161***
(0.038)
0.143**
(0.045)

-0.366***
(0.029)
0.144***
(0.033)
0.121**
(0.040)
0.145***
(0.045)

-0.090***
(0.026)
-0.081***
(0.023)
8,402
6

-0.089***
(0.027)
-0.066**
(0.023)
8,402
6

Note: Column (1) contains results of ten separate bivariate models regressing each independent
and control variable on the support for shari’a index, column (2) contains results of a single
model including all independent and control variables. All models employ country-level fixed
effects and robust standard errors.

Figures 1
Figure 1: Histograms Describing Dependent Variables

Note: The AB histogram presents transformed and standardized values. The distribution of the
raw additive index is similar to the distribution of the WVS survey item.

Figures 2
Figure 2: Effect of Religiosity and Reservations About Global Actors on Support for
Shari’a Index (AB)

Note: This figure compares the cumulative effect of moving from the lowest to highest values for
each independent variable on the shari’a index, with 95% confidence intervals. The figure shows
that the religiosity variable has the largest effect of any single variable (11% increase in
predicted value), followed by dependency (8%), perceived hypocrisy among global actors (7%)
and feeling that external calls for reform are illegitimate (3%).

Figures 3
Figure 3: Effects of Religiosity and Reservations About the UN on Predicted Probabilities
of Ordinal Support for Shari’a Variable (WVS)

Note: This figure compares the cumulative effect of moving from the lowest to highest values for
religiosity and the set of independent variables measuring attitudes toward the UN on the
probability of belonging to each category of the support for shari’a variable. The latter variables
are recoded such that higher values indicate more reserved attitudes about the UN.

