Brazil’s Missing Infants:
Zika risk changes reproductive behavior∗
M ARCOS A. R ANGEL

J ENNA N OBLES

Duke University

University of Wisconsin, Madison

and BREAD
A MAR H AMOUDI
University of Wisconsin, Madison

First version: Apr 2017
This version: Dec 2019
Abstract
Zika virus epidemics have potential large-scale population effects. Controlled studies of
mice and non-human primates indicate Zika affects fecundity, raising concerns about miscarriage in human populations. In regions of Brazil, Zika risk peaked months before residents
learned about the epidemic and its relation to congenital anomalies. This spatiotemporal variation supports analysis of both biological effects of Zika infection on fertility and the effects
of learning about Zika risk on reproductive behavior. Causal inference techniques used with
vital statistics indicate that the epidemic caused reductions of approximately one-quarter in
birth cohort size 18 months after Zika infection risk peaked, but 10 months after public health
messages advocated childbearing delay. The evidence is consistent with small, but not statistically detectable, biological reductions in fecundity, as well as large strategic changes in
reproductive behavior to temporally align childbearing with reduced risk to infant health. The
behavioral effects are larger for more educated and older women, which may reflect facilitated
access to information and to family planning services within high-risk, mosquito-infested urban locations, as well as perceptions about the opportunity costs of risks to pregnancy and
infant survival.
JEL:J13, O15, I15, I18, I12
Keywords: Zika, fecundity, fertility, avoidance, tempo effects
∗

Corresponding author: Rangel (marcos.rangel@duke.edu). 302 Towerview Rd., Rubenstein Hall, Office 262,
Durham-NC, 27708. The authors thank Elizabeth Frankenberg, Sarah Hayford, Malia Jones, Giovanna Merli, Seth
Sanders, Duncan Thomas, Romina Tome, Jenny Trinitapoli, Abby Weitzman, PAA 2017 Meeting participants and
two anonymous referees for comments and suggestions. Funding support was provided by NICHD (1R03HD09281801), the University of Wisconsin-Madison Graduate School, the Center for Demography and Ecology at Wisconsin
(NICHD P2C HD047873), and the Sanford School of Public Policys Pilot Project Fund. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

1

