Article

Beyond the Paris Agreement: Intellectual Property,
Innovation Policy, and Climate Justice
Matthew Rimmer
Professor of Intellectual Property and Innovation, Faculty of Law, Queensland University of Technology, 2
George St, Brisbane City QLD 4000, Australia; matthew.rimmer@qut.edu.au
Received: 11 December 2018; Accepted: 6 February 2019; Published: 18 February 2019

Abstract: The multidisciplinary field of climate law and justice needs to address the topic of
intellectual property, climate finance, and technology transfer to ensure effective global action on
climate change. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 1992 (UNFCCC)
established a foundation for the development, application and diffusion of low-carbon technologies.
Against this background, it is useful to analyse how the Paris Agreement 2015 deals with the subject
of intellectual property, technology transfer, and climate change. While there was discussion of a
number of options for intellectual property and climate change, the final Paris Agreement 2015
contains no text on intellectual property. There is text, though, on technology transfer. The Paris
Agreement 2015 relies upon technology networks and alliances in order to promote the diffusion and
dissemination of green technologies. In order to achieve technology transfer, there has been an effort
to rely on a number of formal technology networks, alliances, and public–private partnerships—
including the UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN); the World Intellectual
Property Organization’s WIPO GREEN; Mission Innovation; the Breakthrough Energy Coalition;
and the International Solar Alliance. There have been grand hopes and ambitions in respect of these
collaborative and co-operative ventures. However, there have also been significant challenges in
terms of funding, support, and operation. In a case of innovation policy pluralism, there also seems
to be a significant level of overlap and duplication between the diverse international initiatives.
There have been concerns about whether such technology networks are effective, efficient,
adaptable, and accountable. There is a need to better align intellectual property, innovation policy,
and technology transfer in order to achieve access to clean energy and climate justice under the
framework of the Paris Agreement 2015. At a conceptual level, philosophical discussions about
climate justice should be grounded in pragmatic considerations about intellectual property and
technology transfer. An intellectual property mechanism is necessary to provide for research,
development, and deployment of clean technologies. There is a need to ensure that the technology
mechanism of the Paris Agreement 2015 can enable the research, development, and diffusion of clean
technologies at a scale to address the global challenges of climate change.
Keywords: intellectual property; technology transfer; innovation law; innovation policy; climate
law; climate justice; climate finance

1. Introduction
There has been a longstanding debate in international climate talks about public policy settings
in respect of intellectual property, technology transfer, and climate change. As Shabalala (2016) has
observed, ‘The development and diffusion of technologies is a fundamental and necessary element
to ensuring that standards of living are maintained and poverty continues to be reduced as global
warming is mitigated and weather impacts are minimised’.
Indeed, there was significant discussion about intellectual property and environmentally sound
technologies in the initial negotiations, which led to the formation of the United Nations Framework
Laws 2019, 8, 7; doi:10.3390/laws8010007

www.mdpi.com/journal/laws

Laws 2019, 8, 7

2 of 24

Convention on Climate Change 1992 (UNFCCC).1 In recent times, the topic was debated as part of the
negotiations of the Copenhagen Accord 2009, the Cancún Agreements 2010, the Durban Decisions 2011,
the Doha Climate Gateway 2012, the Warsaw Opportunity 2013, and the Lima Call for Climate Action 2014.2
The topic of intellectual property and climate change was debated in the Paris climate negotiations—
but the final Paris Agreement 2015 only addresses the topic of technology transfer. While there has
been some limited agreement in relation to technology transfer, there has also been an impasse in
respect of intellectual property.
Intellectual property plays a significant role in the debate over the regulation of the environment,
biodiversity, and climate change. Patent law provides exclusive rights in respect of scientific
inventions—including in the fields of climate adaptation technology and climate mitigation
technology (Lane 2011; Sarnoff 2016c). There have been significant patent disputes over clean
technologies—such as climate-ready crops (Rimmer 2012),3 hybrid vehicles,4 and a range of other
subject matters. There have also been complex issues relating to management of patent rights in terms
of ownership and licensing (Wishart 2018). Moreover, there has a discussion about the application of
patent flexibilities to clean technologies—including public sector licensing, patent pools, compulsory
licensing, technology transfer, and parallel importation.
Under designs law, there has also been conflict over green technologies—such as electric
vehicles (Sainsbury 2018). 5 Trade mark law offers recognition for eco-labels under certification
trademarks (Chon 2009, 2014, 2018; Chon et al. 2018). Consumer law provides remedies in respect of
misleading and deceptive conduct—such as greenwashing. Notably, competition and consumer
regulators have taken action over the controversy of Volkswagen’s ‘Dieselgate’ (Pearse 2012; Ewing
2017; Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 2016).6
Increasingly, trade secrets have played a role in green technologies (Sandeen and Levine 2016;
Sumanadasa 2018). The United States Government has taken action over the appropriation of trade
secrets by Chinese entities from flagship renewable energy companies, such as SolarWorld and the
American Superconductor Corporation.7 Copyright law and database protection also play a role in
the regulation of access to environmental information and data (Derclaye 2014; Cunningham 2014;
Cunningham, 2018; Hyland-Wood 2018). There are also significant connections between intellectual
property, plant breeders’ rights, access to genetic resources, and Indigenous knowledge (McManis

1

2

3

4
5

6

7

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 1992, Opened for signature 9 May 1992, 1771 UNTS
107 (entered into force 21 March 1994).
Copenhagen Accord 2009, UN Doc. FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/L.9 (18 December 2009); Cancún Agreements 2010,
Outcome of the Work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-Term Cooperative Action Under the Convention, CP.16,
http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/cop_16/application/pdf/cop16_lca.pdf and Outcome of the Work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol at its Fifteenth Session, /CMP.6 http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/cop_16/application/pdf/cop16_kp.pdf; Durban Decisions 2011,
CP.17, http://unfccc.int/meetings/durban_nov_2011/meeting/6245/php/view/decisions.php; Doha Climate
Gateway 2012, COP. 18/CM 18, https://unfccc.int/key_steps/doha_climate_gateway/items/7389.php Warsaw
Opportunity 2013, CP. 19, http://unfccc.int/meetings/warsaw_nov_2013/meeting/7649.php and Lima Call for
Climate Action 2014, CP. 20, http://unfccc.int/meetings/lima_dec_2014/meeting/8141/php/view/decisions.php
In Monsanto v The Controller of Patents & Designs, Trademark and Geographical Indications (2013),
OA/02/2012/PT/DEL, India’s Intellectual Property Appellate Board dismissed an appeal by Monsanto over
the Patent Office’s rejection of a patent application for a transgenic plant with increased stress tolerance.
Toyota Motor Corporation v. Paice LLC 128 S. Ct 2430 (Mem) U.S. (2008).
Nikola Corporation v. Tesla Inc., United States District Court for the District of Arizona (2018), Case 2:18-cv01344-GMS.
There are a number of Australian class actions over ‘Dieselgate’ – including Cantor v Audi Australia Pty Ltd
NSD1307/2015; Dalton & Anor v Volkswagen AG & Anor, Federal Court of Australia, NSD1459/2015; Richardson
v Audi AG and Audi Australia Pty Ltd NSD1472/2015; Roe v Skoda Auto a.s, Volkswagen AG and Volkswagen Group
Australia Pty Ltd NSD1473/2015; and Tolentino v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd, Federal Court of
Australia, NSD1308/2015.
U.S. v Wang Dong et al. (W. D. Pa, 1 May 2014); and U.S. v. Sinovel Wind Group Co Ltd, et al (2018), U.S. District
Court, Western District of Wisconsin, No. 13-cr-00084.

Laws 2019, 8, 7

3 of 24

and Ong 2018; Adhikari and Lawson 2018; Savaresi 2018). Intellectual property litigation may well
be an important new form of climate litigation (Congressional Research Service 2017).
This article is part of a growing literature on intellectual property, technology transfer, and
climate change (Rimmer 2011). There have been a number of significant contributions in this stillemerging field. Lane (2011) considered intellectual property management and litigation in respect of
green technologies. Brown (2013) explored the topic of intellectual property and environmental
technologies. Menell and Tran (2014) edited a compilation of influential works in the field of
intellectual property, innovation, and the environment. Sarnoff (2016b) also edited a research
collection on the debate over intellectual property, clean technologies, and climate change. Zhuang
(2017) examined intellectual property, international trade law, and climate change. Baker, Jayadev,
and Stiglitz (2017) considered the interlinkages between intellectual property, sustainable
development, and climate change. Chon et al. (2018) investigated the use of public–private
partnerships in respect of intellectual property—including in the field of green technologies.
International climate lawyers have also considered intellectual property as part of the growing
discipline of international climate law and international environmental law (Farber and Peeters 2016;
Klein et al. 2017).
Innovation law and policy also have an important role to play in respect of climate change. The
relationship between intellectual property and innovation policy is a complex one (Bessen 2015).
Often, there are various combinations of intellectual property and innovation policy—with matching,
mixing, and layering (Hemel and Ouellette 2018). As Sarnoff (2016a) has observed, there should be a
better framework for the analysis of innovation policy, in the context of intellectual property and
climate change. Sarnoff (2016a, pp. 221–22) recommends:
As we move forward, we also will need to better evaluate the choices that we make to avoid
wasting massive resources and missing opportunities when seeking to generate desperately
needed innovation outputs. In particular, we need to understand and track the outputs
better, interrogate and evaluate the internal cultures of both private entities and public
bureaucracies, and match decision making with developing theoretical and empirical
analyses.
He has highlighted ‘the importance of comparative analysis of public and private institutions
and of their innovation-relevant features’ (Sarnoff 2016a). A 2018 Nobel Laureate in Economics,
Nordhaus (2013), emphasised the need to develop suitable innovation laws and policies to encourage
the research, development, and deployment of clean technologies.
The International Council on Human Rights Policy (2016) has stressed that matters of technology
transfer are critical to debates over climate change, human rights, and climate justice. The Council
observes that technology transfer has a variety of political, ethical, and practical dimensions. The
Council discusses the nexus between intellectual property, technology transfer, human rights, and
climate justice:
Technology transfer is needed both to help poorer and more vulnerable countries and
communities adapt to the now inevitable consequences of climate change in the short term, and
to assist them in moving on to low-carbon development pathways in the long term. Highlighting
the human rights benefits of technological interventions may create a space for re-framing and
circumventing the unsustainable dynamic that has largely characterized debate of this subject.
Human rights offer a strong ethical and legal basis from which technology transfer may be
approached (The International Council on Human Rights Policy 2016, p. 126).
The Council (2016, p. 127) stresses: ‘Technology transfer in the UNFCCC also has a practical
dimension—it is impossible to imagine dealing effectively with the global problem of climate change
if advanced technologies are not made available where they are most needed.’ It is essential that the
multidisciplinary field of climate law and justice adequately and sufficiently address the topic of
intellectual property, technology development, and climate change (Farber and Peeters 2016). Shue
(2014, p. 211) has observed that ‘choices about which nations are to bear the current costs of
technological transitions obviously implicate international fairness.’ Phelan (2018) analysed the

Laws 2019, 8, 7

4 of 24

human rights dimensions of intellectual property and climate change. As Ghosh (2011) has pointed
out, intellectual property needs to take into account matters of intergenerational equity and justice.
International legal scholarship needs to grapple with questions of innovation in the Anthropocene
(Stephens 2018). Visions of climate justice will remain unfulfilled if matters of technology are
neglected.
This article provides a critical evaluation of the co-operative models of intellectual property and
technology transfer promoted at the Paris international climate negotiations. Drawing upon the
approach and methodology of the Productivity Commission (2016), this study considers whether the
measures are effective, efficient, adaptable, and accountable. This article has an eight-part structure
(including the introduction and the conclusion). Part 2 considers the debate over the Paris Agreement
2015; the failure to achieve consensus in respect of intellectual property policy options; and the text
on technology transfer. Part 3 considers the evolution of the UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre
and Network and its operation. Part 4 focuses on the establishment of the World Intellectual Property
Organization’s WIPO GREEN initiative. Part 5 explores the Mission Innovation project announced at
the Paris climate talks. Part 6 focuses on the Breakthrough Energy Coalition established under the
leadership of Bill Gates. Part 7 examines the International Solar Alliance, which has been developed
by India and France. The conclusion in Part 8 calls for a better co-ordinated approach to intellectual
property and climate change. Arguably, there is a need for a more systematic approach to intellectual
property and clean technologies in order to promote larger goals of climate justice, human rights, and
sustainable development.
2. Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer under the Paris Agreement 2015
The preamble to the Paris Agreement 2015 recognises ‘the need for an effective and progressive
response to the urgent threat of climate change on the basis of the best available scientific
knowledge.’8 The preamble highlights the need to take ‘full account of the specific needs and special
situations of the least developed countries with regard to funding and transfer of technology.’ The
preamble highlights ‘the principle of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances.’
In this context, there was significant debate about whether the Paris Agreement 2015 would
resolve outstanding issues in respect of intellectual property, technology transfer, and climate
change.
The Paris Climate Talks considered a number of issues related to intellectual property,
technology transfer, finance, and climate change. According to leaked documents, the European
Union sought to block the inclusion of explicit text on intellectual property and trade in the
international climate negotiations (Corporate Europe Observatory 2015). United States industry
associations lobbied the United States delegation to push for strong protection of intellectual property
rights in the international climate talks (NECEC 2015). In contrast to the position of such developed
countries, India pushed for the adoption of intellectual property flexibilities in the final agreement
(Gupta 2015). Indeed, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi (2015) emphasised in his speech at the
Paris Climate Talks:
We need an ambitious technology initiative, driven by a public purpose, not just market
incentives. This includes intellectual property. For this, we need to scale up Green Climate
Fund that will improve access to technology and intellectual property.
A number of other middle powers—such as China, Brazil, and South Africa (members of the
BRICS/BASIC group)—also advocated for wider forms of technology transfer. Developing countries
in the Group of 77 pushed for the adoption of intellectual property flexibilities. Least developed

8

Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, opened for signature 12
December 2015 (entered into force 4 November 2016) (in UNFCCC, Report of the Conference of the Parties
on its Twenty-First Session, Addendum, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, 29 January 2016).

Laws 2019, 8, 7

5 of 24

countries, small island states, and countries vulnerable to climate change expressed the desire for
clean technologies to be available in the public domain.
The Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action (2015) had developed
a wide range of public policy options in respect of intellectual property and climate change.
Draft Article 56.3 laid down a number of options. The first option called for a number of
possibilities to facilitate technology transfer. India played a key role as the architect and advocate of
this option. Item A recommended that developed countries ‘provide financial resources to address
barriers caused by intellectual property rights (IPRs) and facilitate access to and the deployment of
technology, including inter alia, by utilizing the Financial Mechanism and/or the establishment of a
funding window under the Green Climate Fund/the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism.’
Item B asked for ‘an international mechanism on IPRs to be established to facilitate access to and the
deployment of technology to [developing country Parties].’
Item C promoted other arrangements to be established to address intellectual property rights—
such as ‘collaborative research and development, shareware, commitments related to humanitarian
or preferential licensing, fully paid-up or joint licensing schemes, preferential rates and patent pools.’
Even the corporate sector has become quite interested in models of sharing clean technologies. There
has been much excitement about Elon Musk’s announcement in respect of the open licensing of
Tesla’s electric vehicles, batteries, and other clean technologies (Rimmer 2018).
Item D suggested that ‘funds from the Green Climate Fund will be utilized to meet the full costs
of intellectual property rights (IPRs) of environmentally sound technologies and know-how and such
technologies will be provided to developing country Parties free of cost in order to enhance their
actions to address climate change and its adverse impacts.’ Such co-operative models of intellectual
property echo some of the mechanisms established in the field of public health in relation to
biotechnology and access to medicines.9 However, unlike in the field of public health, there was a
lack of agreement amongst nation states on the suitability of such co-operative mechanisms.
The second option was that ‘Parties recognize that IPRs create an enabling environment for the
promotion of technology innovation in environmentally sound technologies.’ This option
represented the view of developed countries, industry associations, and multinational companies
that there should be strong protection of intellectual property under the Paris Agreement 2015.
The third option favoured by developed countries was that ‘IPRs are not to be addressed in this
agreement.’ The United States and the European Union, in particular, were of the view that other
venues were better equipped to deal with questions about intellectual property and climate change.
The fourth option was for ‘Developed country Parties to make available Intellectual Property
(IP) through multilateral institutions as public good, through purchase of intellectual property.’ Least
developed countries, small island states, and countries vulnerable to climate change were particularly
interested in public interest approaches to intellectual property.
The Paris Agreement 2015, though, did not resolve some of the tensions and conflicts between the
nation states.10 None of these mooted options were embedded in the final text.
In the end, there was a lack of consensus amongst the negotiating parties on intellectual property
and climate change in the final text of the Paris Agreement 2015.
There is some extensive text, more generally, about technology research, development, and
dissemination in the Paris Agreement 2015. Article 10 of the Paris Agreement 2015 addresses the topic
of technology. Article 10.1 lays down a general principle: ‘Parties share a long-term vision on the
importance of fully realizing technology development and transfer in order to improve resilience to
climate change and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions’. Article 10.2 emphasises: ‘Parties, noting the
importance of technology for the implementation of mitigation and adaptation actions under this
9

10

The United Nations Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines, Promoting Innovation and
Access to Health Technologies, Geneva: The United Nations, 2016, http://www.unsgaccessmeds.org/finalreport/
Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, opened for signature 12
December 2015 (entered into force 4 November 2016) (in UNFCCC, Report of the Conference of the Parties
on its Twenty-First Session, Addendum, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, 29 January 2016).

Laws 2019, 8, 7

6 of 24

Agreement and recognizing existing technology deployment and dissemination efforts, shall
strengthen cooperative action on technology development and transfer.’ Article 10.3 states: ‘The
Technology Mechanism established under the Convention shall serve this Agreement.’ Article 10.4
observes: ‘A technology framework is hereby established to provide overarching guidance to the
work of the Technology Mechanism in promoting and facilitating enhanced action on technology
development and transfer in order to support the implementation of this Agreement, in pursuit of
the long-term vision referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.’ Article 10.5 provides a longer
articulation of the issue:
Accelerating, encouraging and enabling innovation is critical for an effective, long-term
global response to climate change and promoting economic growth and sustainable
development. Such effort shall be, as appropriate, supported, including by the Technology
Mechanism and, through financial means, by the Financial Mechanism of the Convention,
for collaborative approaches to research and development, and facilitating access to
technology, in particular for early stages of the technology cycle, to developing country
Parties.
Article 10.6 notes: ‘Support, including financial support, shall be provided to developing country
Parties for the implementation of this Article, including for strengthening cooperative action on
technology development and transfer at different stages of the technology cycle, with a view to
achieving a balance between support for mitigation and adaptation.’ Article 10.6 comments: ‘The
global stocktake referred to in Article 14 shall take into account available information on efforts
related to support on technology development and transfer for developing country Parties.’
The Paris Climate Talks also saw a number of announcements on innovation—including
Mission Innovation, the Breakthrough Energy Coalition, and the International Solar Alliance. In order
to achieve technology transfer, there has been an effort to rely on a number of formal technology
networks—including the UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network; WIPO GREEN;
Mission Innovation; the Breakthrough Energy Coalition; and the International Solar Alliance. There
have been high hopes and ambitions in respect of these collaborative and co-operative ventures.
However, there have also been significant challenges in terms of funding, support, and operation.
There also seems to be a significant level of overlap and duplication between a variety of different
ventures.
3. UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network
The Technology Mechanism is meant to play a pivotal role in encouraging research,
development, and diffusion of clean technologies to address climate change mitigation and
adaptation. However, it is argued, the institution has struggled to realise its full potential and fulfil
the ambitions for technology development, collaboration, and transfer.
At the Copenhagen negotiations, India and the United Kingdom’s Carbon Trust pushed for the
establishment of a network of climate innovation centres as a compromise option for nation states
(Rimmer 2011). The Copenhagen Accord 2009 took up the proposal. The Technology Mechanism was
established at the Cancún Agreements 2010 and was then reinforced in the Durban Decisions 2011, the
Doha Climate Gateway 2012, the Warsaw Opportunity 2013, and the Lima Call for Climate Action 2014.
The United Nations Environment Programme was selected to be the host of the hub of the UNFCCC
Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN).11 The CTCN includes 11 consortium institutions
and a strategic partner in the Norwegian-based DNV GL.
Ultimately, the Paris Agreement 2015 relies on the existing infrastructure of the Technology
Mechanism of the CTCN (even though the mechanism has been slow to come into full operation).
The role of the Paris Agreement 2015 is to provide a technology framework in respect of technology
development and transfer. The regime also seeks to provide climate assistance. The system also seeks
to provide technical information about clean technologies. There remains a significant debate about

11

UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network, https://www.ctc-n.org/

Laws 2019, 8, 7

7 of 24

whether the Technology Mechanism is fulfilling its goals in stimulating clean technology
development and diffusion.
The Technology Executive Committee (2017) has highlighted the need to enhance financing for
the research, development, and demonstration of climate technologies. The Committee has taken into
account data in respect of patents relating to clean technologies:
Data on patent applications is another way to examine R&D activity. The rate of increase of
patent applications for biofuels, solar PV, and wind is far higher than that of overall patents
for all fields during the past decade. Patent applications for agriculture and water supply
also increased rapidly between 1990 and 2010. Furthermore, RD&D programmes help to
build professional networks among researchers and organizations that advance the
industry. In addition, research focused on other goals may also improve climate
technologies. However, it is important to note that not all patents result in a commercialized
product or service and that these developments take time (Technology Executive
Committee 2017, p. 7).
There is a brief consideration of empirical research on intellectual property and climate
technologies (Dechezleprêtre et al. 2011, 2016). The larger focus is on enhancing the finance and
increasing the effectiveness of research, development, and demonstration of clean technologies.
There has also been concern about whether the principles of fairness, equity, and justice have
informed the decision-making of the CTCN. The approach of the International Council on Human
Rights Policy (2016) is to link discussions of technology transfer with larger concerns about climate
justice and human rights.
The Technology Executive Committee and the UNFCCC CTCN (2017) provided an honest
appraisal of their performance in 2017. There was an emphasis on the need for innovation in respect
of climate technologies at COP23:
To achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement, there is a pressing need to accelerate and
strengthen technological innovation so that it can deliver environmentally and socially
sound, cost-effective and better-performing climate technologies on a larger and more
widespread scale. But there is no ‘one size fits all’ approach. Different innovation
approaches are needed.
The Technology Executive Committee stressed the need ‘(a) To prioritize resources (human,
institutional and financial) for such innovation efforts, in accordance with their needs, priorities and
capacities;’ ‘(b) To enhance public and private partnership in the RD&D of climate technologies by
increasing expenditure for it and providing a clear policy signal of a long-term commitment to act on
climate change’; ‘(c) To strengthen national systems of innovation and enabling environments,
including through market creation and expansion and capacity- building;’ ‘(d) To enhance existing
and build new collaborative initiatives for climate technology innovation, including for sharing
expertise, good practices and lessons learned’; ‘(e) To create an inclusive innovation process that
involves all key stakeholders, facilitating the incorporation of diverse and relevant expertise,
knowledge and views and generating awareness of the benefits and impacts;’ and ‘(f) To
acknowledge and protect indigenous and local knowledge and technologies and incorporate them in
their national innovation systems.’
The CTCN observed: ‘With the CTCN fully operational, both the number of requests and their
progression by stage of development has increased each month, and responses to over 24 requests
for technical assistance have been successfully implemented.’ There has been a steady rise in
applications for membership of the network—with 377 applications accepted. The CTCN
commented:
The CTCN is actively engaging with the GEF and multilateral development banks and their
regional climate technology transfer and finance centres. Collaborative activities with
multilateral development banks include the implementation of technical assistance
requests with scalable investment potential.

Laws 2019, 8, 7

8 of 24

The organisation has increasingly relied on its network for support: ‘The CTCN has increasingly
drawn on the expertise of its Network members to respond to requests for technical assistance
received from developing countries and it anticipates that this trend will continue.’
The CTCN has acknowledged challenges in terms of its lean organisational structure. The CTCN
has highlighted that there have been funding issues and problems: ‘Securing sustained funding to
enable the CTCN to continue to deliver on its mandates is an issue of concern’. The organisation
elaborates that the CTCN has struggled to raise enough funds from bilateral donors, network
members, and the Financial Mechanism:
The raising of funds for CTCN operations has clearly been a challenge, with the CTCN only
achieving half of its originally planned five-year USD 100 million budget. The CTCN is
becoming more proficient at raising funds from various sources, but the task nevertheless
remains challenging and, at times, the limited funds raised have affected the level of the
CTCN operations. Compounding this situation is the fact that the fundraising environment
is becoming more competitive.
The CTCN has obtained some funding from the Green Climate Fund, but that has been labourintensive and has increased the timeline for projects. The report also notes that the organisation has
often been limited to the provision of technical assistance. There are real questions about whether the
CTCN will able to accelerate the clean technology revolution on a shoestring budget.
The 2017 Progress Report of the UN CTCN (2017) highlights its role in terms of providing
technical assistance, knowledge sharing, and collaboration and networking. The progress report
observes: ‘Technology transfer does not take place in a vacuum’ (CTCN 2017, p. 14) It stresses: ‘The
performance of a given technology is dependent on a wide range of factors including the objectives
and capacity of a country, adequate information and decision-making tools, enabling environments
and access to adequate finance for technology deployment and up-scaling’ (CTCN 2017, p. 14).
Strikingly, the report is focused on questions of technology deployment rather than necessarily
research and development. It is noticeable that the annual report does not address intellectual
property rights in general or specifically in relation to patent law, plant breeders’ rights, and other
forms of intellectual property.
There have also been concerns that the CTCN have supported research and development into
dubious, unproven technologies—such as so-called ‘clean coal’ technologies related to carbon
capture and storage (Kelly 2018).
In her book on Intellectual Property Rights and Climate Change, Wei Zhuang noted that there were
efforts in COP22 to reinforce the Technology Mechanism:
With a view to enhancing the development and transfer of EST’s, the COP-22 adopted
several decisions in Marrakesh in November 2016, including (1) Decision—/CP.22
Enhancing climate technology development and transfer through the Technology
Mechanism and (2) Decision—/CP.22: Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and
the Financial Mechanism of the Convention (Zhuang 2017, pp. 95–96).
Moreover, she noted that the European Union and its members, and a number of developed
countries, such as Canada, the United States, Switzerland, and Japan, ‘pledged more than $23 million
to support technology transfer in developing countries through Climate Technology Centre and
Network with a view to accelerating the development and transfer of innovative ESTs’ (Zhuang 2017,
p. 96). The Trump Administration, though, has shown little enthusiasm for funding international
climate institutions.
The Marrakech Action Proclamation for our Climate and Sustainable Development 2016 stressed: ‘We
call for an increase in the volume, flow and access to finance for climate projects, alongside improved
capacity and technology, including from developed to developing countries.’ 12
12

Marrakech
Climate
Change
Conference,
COP
22,
November
2016,
http://unfccc.int/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/meeting/9567/php/view/decisions.php#c Marrakech Action

Laws 2019, 8, 7

9 of 24

At the Bonn Climate Conference in 2017 (COP 23), there was a review of the effective
implementation of the CTCN.13 There was a decision on enhancing climate technology development
and transfer through the Technology Mechanism. 14 There remain questions about whether the
Technology Mechanism of the CTCN is effective, efficient, adaptable, and accountable (given its
modest funding and its scale). As such, there has been consideration of alternative mechanisms for
technology transfer.
At the Katowice climate negotiations in 2018 (COP 24), the Katowice Climate Package was
adopted.15 There was a further statement on enhancing climate technology development and transfer
through the Technology Mechanism. 16 There was also a statement on linkages between the
Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the UNFCCC.17 Nonetheless, developing
countries complained that the demand for greater development and transfer of technologies
remained an unresolved issue (Presna Latina 2018). There remained no resolution of the outstanding
issue of intellectual property and climate change.
Arguably, there should be a declaration on intellectual property and climate change—uniting
the approaches of the UNFCCC, WIPO, and the WTO. Such a declaration could deal with matters of
intellectual property management, protection, and enforcement. Moreover, such a declaration could
also deal with possible intellectual property flexibilities—such as public licensing, technology
transfer, compulsory licensing, parallel importation, and patent pools.
4. WIPO GREEN
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) has a long history of engagement with
questions about intellectual property and technology transfer (Maskus and Saggi 2014).18 The WIPO
Development Agenda has led to a certain level of engagement with matters in respect of intellectual
property, sustainable development, and the environment (de Beer 2009; Cimoli et al. 2014;
Bannerman 2016). 19 WIPO has sought to consider climate change as a global policy issue. 20 In
addition to the UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network, there has also been another
technology institution established under WIPO.
On Intellectual Property Day in 2009, Francis Gurry (2009), the Director-General of WIPO,
commented: ‘Human activity, including decades of technological development, has damaged our
planet’. He has maintained: ‘As human activity caused the problem, so too can human activity find
the solutions’. He has insisted: ‘Green innovation—the development and diffusion of technological
means to tackle climate change—is key to halting the depletion of the earth’s resources.’

13

14

15
16

17

18

19

20

Proclamation
for
Our
Climate
and
Sustainable
Development
2016,
http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/application/pdf/marrakech_action_proclamation.pdf
and
the
Marrakech
Partnership
for
Global
Climate
Action
2016
http://unfccc.int/files/paris_agreement/application/pdf/marrakech_partnership_for_global_climate_action.p
df
Decision 14/CP.23 Review of the Effective Implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network,
FCCC/CP/2017/11/Add.2, http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/cop23/eng/11a02.pdf#page=4
Decision 15/CP.23 Enhancing Climate Technology Development and Transfer Through The Technology Mechanism,
FCCC/CP/2017/11/Add.2, http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/cop23/eng/11a02.pdf#page=6
Katowice Climate Package 2018, COP 24, https://unfccc.int/decisions_katowice
COP 24 Enhancing Climate Technology Development and Transfer Through The Technology Mechanism,
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cp24_auv_tm.pdf
COP
24
Linkages
between
the
Technology
Mechanism
and
the
Financial
Mechanism
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cp24_auv_TM%20FM.pdf
World Intellectual Property Organization, ‘Supporting Technology and Knowledge Transfer’,
http://www.wipo.int/patents/en/technology/index.html
World
Intellectual
Property
Organization
Development
Agenda
http://www.wipo.int/ipdevelopment/en/agenda/
World
Intellectual
Property
Organization,
‘Climate
Change
and
IP’.
http://www.wipo.int/policy/en/climate_change/

Laws 2019, 8, 7

10 of 24

There has been a larger discussion about the role of WIPO in the furtherance of the United
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. Gurry (2017) has spoken about the intersection between
intellectual property and the sustainable development goals (SDGs). He emphasised that there is a
strong connection between intellectual property and SDG 9 dealing with industry, innovation, and
infrastructure. Gurry also observed that innovation has an impact on a number of other SDGs—
including SDG 2 Zero Hunger, SDG 3 Good Health and Well-Being, SDG 6 Clean Water and
Sanitation, SDG 7 Affordable and Clean Energy, SDG 8 Decent Work and Economic Growth, SDG 11
Sustainable Cities and Communities, and SDG 11 Climate action. He also suggests that innovation as
a policy can assist in realising other SDGs—notably SDG 1 No Poverty, SDG 8 Decent work and
economic growth, SDG 14 life below water, and SDG 15 Life on Land. Moreover, SDG 17 is a modality
in terms of partnerships for the goals.
Gurry’s key policy initiative has been to establish the institutional mechanism of WIPO GREEN
in 2013. It is intended to be an interactive marketplace that promotes innovation and diffusion of
green technologies. WIPO GREEN articulates its role in these terms:
Addressing climate change and achieving sustainable development is dependent on
economic growth that works with, rather than against, the environment. Innovative green
technology solutions can help by allowing us to do more with less—be it alternative energy
production, using technology to save energy, new forms of transportation or greener forms
of agriculture or forestry. The challenge is enhance the environment for innovation, while
enabling speedier diffusion of these new green technologies to all parts of the world,
including to developing countries where the need is particularly great.21
WIPO GREEN has a database and network to enable connections with technology and service
providers. WIPO GREEN says that it provides ‘a practical, market-based contribution to the
challenges presented by climate change.’
There has been debate and discussion over the performance of WIPO GREEN thus far (Rimmer
2014). The role and function of WIPO GREEN has been evolving over time (WIPO 2016).22 Gurry has
stressed: ‘WIPO GREEN is an important initiative in the context of supporting innovation, technology
development and transfer through collaborative approaches, as highlighted by the Paris Agreement’
(WIPO 2016).
Since its establishment in 2014, WIPO GREEN has evolved. The network has grown to 82
partners in 2017. WIPO GREEN has developed technology databases—with Asia IP Exchange, the
Association of University Technology Managers, the Danish Patent and Trademark Office, the EcoPatent Commons (although that is now defunct), IPNexus, and TechnologieAllianz. WIPO GREEN
has undertaken case studies on green lanterns, paraffin cookstoves, waterless toilets, home solar
systems, and green biobeds. The new Canadian Government of Justin Trudeau sought to collaborate
with WIPO GREEN in 2017 (WIPO 2017). There remain questions about whether WIPO GREEN is an
efficient, effective, and adaptable model to accelerate innovation and diffusion of green technologies
at scale.
In 2019, WIPO was positive about its contribution with WIPO GREEN, emphasising that 3000
technology entries had been listed in its online market (Harris 2019). Gurry stressed: ‘This important
public-private partnership is an expression of WIPO’s unique ability to convene a wide range of
stakeholders in pursuit of a common goal’ (Harris 2019). He insisted that the initiative had been
productive: ‘In this instance, WIPO has organized an online marketplace with a wide range of green
technologies from a worldwide pool of contributors, ranging from small enterprises to Fortune 500
companies, to facilitate new connections in addressing climate change’ (Harris 2019). WIPO GREEN
emphasised that major companies such as Fujitsu, Siemens, and Haier had participated in the online
marketplace.

21
22

WIPO GREEN, https://www3.wipo.int/wipogreen/en/
World Intellectual Property Organization, WIPO GREEN – Year in Review 2016, Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization, 2016, http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_greenreport_2016.pdf

Laws 2019, 8, 7

11 of 24

Given the enormity of the climate challenges, WIPO GREEN needs to scale up further if it is
going to achieve its aims and goals. There is also a need to ensure that there is external evaluation of
the performance of the Technology Mechanism—as well as the usual internal oversight.
In terms of public policy, WIPO has been quiet in terms of the substantial public policy options
in respect of intellectual property, technology transfer, and climate change. In the lead-up to the Paris
Agreement 2015, WIPO released a Global Challenges Report, looking at the role of intellectual
property in innovation and diffusion of green technologies (Lybecker and Lohse 2015).This study
stressed that: ‘Environmental innovation is key to addressing the global challenge of climate change’
(Lybecker and Lohse 2015, p. 31). This report contended that: ‘Robust IP protection and a sound
enabling policy environment in particular can afford innovators the security to invest in the
development of relevant technologies as well as their transfer and diffusion on an international scale,
in particular to low- and middle-income countries’ (Lybecker and Lohse 2015, p. 31). The report
added that ‘complementary policy interventions’ aim ‘to create the conditions that are necessary for
the development, diffusion and transfer of green technologies’ (Lybecker and Lohse 2015, p. 31). The
study is noncommittal about the choice of research and development, and environmental policies:
‘The most effective mechanism depends on a range of factors, such as the type of technology, the
maturity of the market, competing technologies, the lifecycle stage of the technology, as well as the
risks and uncertainty surrounding the process of technology development’ (Lybecker and Lohse
2015, p. 31).
There has been a concern that WIPO has pursued a technocratic vision of intellectual property
and sustainable development. Bannerman (2018) maintained that WIPO needs adopt a much more
substantive vision of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Amongst other things, this
would require a greater engagement with intellectual property and access to clean energy.
5. Mission Innovation
Nobel Laureate Joseph Stiglitz has been critical of governments and international organisations,
only relying on intellectual property rights as an incentive for research and development for new
technologies. He has been an advocate of prize-based models of encouraging research and
development as an alternative or a supplement to intellectual property in the area of public health
and access to essential medicines (Stiglitz 2007). Stiglitz and his collaborators have considered the
benefits and drawbacks of financing mechanisms—looking at direct financing, and prize financing
(Baker et al. 2017).
In the field of clean technologies, there has been experimentation with environmental prizes,
such as the H-Prize (encouraging research into hydrogen), the L-Prize (relating to energy efficient
lighting), and the Progressive Insurance Automotive X Prize (concerning green cars) (Rimmer 2011,
pp. 343–76). There has been a larger discussion about alternative models which could encourage
further research and development and deployment of clean technologies.
At the Paris Agreement 2015, there were a number of announcements of new technology networks
and alliances—one of which was a modified version of prize. Mission Innovation represented an
effort to develop large-scale international challenges to encourage the development of clean
technologies.
Mission Innovation was launched on the 30th November 2015 in Paris, France (Mission
Innovation 2015a). The initiative was supported by the Governments of Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, China, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Republic
of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Arab Emirates, and the United States of America. Mission Innovation observed: ‘While
important progress has been made in cost reduction and deployment of clean energy technologies,
the pace of innovation and the scale of transformation and dissemination remains significantly short
of what is needed’ (Mission Innovation 2015a).
Under the project, ‘participating countries have come together to launch Mission Innovation to
reinvigorate and accelerate public and private global clean energy innovation with the objective to
make clean energy widely affordable’ (Mission Innovation 2015a). The programme was intended to

Laws 2019, 8, 7

12 of 24

‘Double Governmental Investment in Clean Energy Innovation’ (Mission Innovation 2015a). Mission
Innovation promised that ‘this endeavour should help facilitate affordable access to critical
technologies.’ (Mission Innovation 2015a). The programme also highlighted the role of ‘Private Sector
and Business Leadership’ (Mission Innovation 2015a, Mission Innovation stressed: ‘Business needs
to play a vital role in the commercialization and cost-effectiveness of clean energy breakthroughs,
and participating countries commit to work closely with the private sector as it increases its
investment in the earlier-stage clean energy companies that emerge from government research and
development programs’ (Mission Innovation 2015a). In terms of implementation, ‘Participating
countries will build and improve technology innovation roadmaps and other tools to help in our
innovation efforts, to understand where research and development is already happening, and to
identify gaps and opportunities for new kinds of innovation’ (Mission Innovation 2015a). Moreover,
‘participating countries may also pursue joint research efforts through public-private partnerships as
well as joint research among participating countries’ (Mission Innovation 2015a). Moreover, the
participating countries agreed to information sharing in respect of their clean energy research.
Mission Innovation charts clean energy research and development investment by participating
countries (Mission Innovation 2015b).
Mission Innovation has established a number of innovation challenges, which have been aimed
at accelerating research, development, and demonstration in a range of technology areas (Mission
Innovation 2015c). There are seven innovation challenges. First, there was a Smart Grids Innovation
challenge to enable future grids that are powered by affordable, reliable decentralised renewable
electricity systems. There have been significant legal controversies around Smart Grids in terms of
intellectual property, information security, and privacy (Arnold 2018). Second, there was an off-grid
access to electricity innovation challenge. Third, there was a carbon capture innovation challenge.
Fourth, there was a sustainable biofuels innovation challenge. Fifth, there was a converting sunlight
innovation challenge. Sixth, there was a clean energy materials innovation challenge. Finally, there
was an affordable heating and cooling of buildings innovation challenge. Much like prize-based
innovation awards, these innovation challenges seem to be an alternative means of encouraging
research and development (in addition to the intellectual property regime) (Baker et al. 2017).
It is not clear how the various innovation challenges will deal with intellectual property. There
is a failure to match the innovation policy with a suitable intellectual property policy (Hemel and
Ouellette 2018).
Mission Innovation also has a focus on private sector engagement. Mission Innovation (2018b)
stresses: ‘Mission Innovation assists member governments with identifying opportunities and
engaging the private sector by exchanging information to improve understanding of clean energy
innovation needs and perspectives, and by encouraging investment to expand and enhance the
innovation pipeline.’
Mission Innovation has entered into letters of intent on collaboration with the International
Renewable Energy Agency and the International Energy Agency.
Mission Innovation still seems a nascent, immature venture. The Third Mission Innovation
Ministerial (MI-3) (2018) in May 2018 discussed steps to enhance public and private investment and
collaboration on clean energy research and innovation. The reported mid-term results seem very
much focused on the establishment of innovation challenges (Mission Innovation 2018). Mission
Innovation does seem to suffer from a level of duplication of existing institutions. In many ways, its
proposed role and function overlaps with that of the Green Climate Fund, CTCN, and WIPO GREEN.
Moreover, Mission Innovation fails to address some of the fundamental underlying policy and
practical issues surrounding intellectual property, clean technologies, and climate change. Thus far,
Mission Innovation does not seem to be an efficient, effective, adaptable, and accountable model to
accelerate innovation and diffusion of green technologies at scale.

Laws 2019, 8, 7

13 of 24

6. Breakthrough Energy Coalition
The Breakthrough Energy Coalition (the Coalition) is another partnership, which was formed at
the time of the Paris negotiations. The Coalition has been driven in particular by private investors
and has been led by Bill Gates.
At Microsoft, Bill Gates was an advocate of strong protection of intellectual property rights in
respect of information technology. His views of optimal protection of intellectual property have been
moderated since he became a philanthropist. At the Gates Foundation, Bill Gates and Melinda Gates
have been focused on innovation and sustainable development. In particular, they have been
concerned about education, nutrition, gender equality, and poverty. The Gates Foundation has
subscribed to a vision of ‘creative capitalism’ (Kinsley 2009).
Historically, the Gates Foundation took a rather noncommittal approach to clean technologies
and climate change—in contrast to its much stronger leadership role in respect of development areas,
such as agriculture, public health, and education (Rimmer 2010, 2015). In 2013, Bill Gates observed:
‘The foundation believes that climate change is a major issue facing all of us, particularly poor people
in developing countries, and we applaud the work that others are doing to help find solutions in this
area’ (Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 2013). He maintained: ‘While we do not fund efforts
specifically aimed at reducing carbon emissions, many of our global health and development grants
directly address problems that climate change creates or exacerbates’ (Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation 2013).
As a result of this rather equivocal position, the Gates Foundation was the subject of criticism in
respect of its credentials on climate action. In an article in The Nation, Naomi Klein (2013) expressed
concerns about the huge fossil fuel holdings of some charities, including the Gates Foundation, and
argued that this was inconsistent with public health goals. In her book, This Changes Everything, Klein
(2014) lamented: ‘Though he professes great concern about climate change, the Gates Foundation had
at least $1.2 billion invested in just two oil giants, BP and ExxonMobil, as of December 2013, and those
are only the beginning of his fossil fuel holdings.’ In her more recent book, No is Not Enough, Klein
(2017) reiterates her scepticism about billionaire philanthropists providing solutions in respect of
climate change.
In response to such criticism, the Gates Foundation has divested its entire holding in BP
(Carrington 2016). Mike McGinn—former Seattle Mayor and a leader in the Divest Gates campaign—
observed: ‘They’re moving their financial capital - now it’s time to use their moral capital and publicly
commit to divestment’ (Carrington 2016). He commented: ‘By taking a public stand, Bill and Melinda
Gates could help change the debate and speed up the international response to global warming’
(Carrington 2016).
As well as shifting his approach to investment in respect of fossil fuels, Bill Gates has also
evolved in terms of his position in respect of clean technologies. At the Paris Climate negotiations,
Gates seemed interested in making a stronger contribution towards boosting financial investment in
transformative energy technologies.
The Coalition—established by Bill Gates—was designed to encourage investment in clean
technologies. 23 The group includes Jeff Bezos (of Amazon), Marc Benioff, Richard Branson (of
Virgin), Reid Hoffman, Jack Ma, George Soros, Tom Steyer, Meg Whitman, Mark Zuckerberg (of
Facebook), and Nat Simons. The first institutional investor was the University of California. There
have been questions about the transparency, accountability, and governance of the Coalition—given
that it is composed of private philanthropists and investors.
In terms of its justification for its initiative, the Coalition maintained: ‘The existing system of
basic research, clean energy investment, regulatory frameworks, and subsidies fails to sufficiently
mobilize investment in truly transformative energy solutions for the future’.24 There seems to be an
underlying assumption here that existing international models for technology transfer and climate
finance have been unsuccessful. The Coalition insisted: ‘We can’t wait for the system to change

23
24

Breakthrough Energy Coalition, http://www.breakthroughenergycoalition.com/en/news.html
Breakthrough Energy Coalition, http://www.breakthroughenergycoalition.com/en/news.html

Laws 2019, 8, 7

14 of 24

through normal cycles.’ The Coalition contended that the market did not adequately support
innovative news for clean technology:
Experience indicates that even the most promising ideas face daunting commercialization
challenges and a nearly impassable Valley of Death between promising concept and viable
product, which neither government funding nor conventional private investment can
bridge. This collective failure can be addressed, in part, by a dramatically scaled-up public
research pipeline, linked to a different kind of private investor with a long-term
commitment to new technologies who is willing to put truly patient flexible risk capital to
work. These investors will certainly be motivated partly by the possibility of making big
returns over the long-term, but also by the criticality of an energy transition.
The Coalition promised: ‘We will form a network of private capital committed to building a
structure that will allow informed decisions to help accelerate the change to the advanced energy
future our planet needs.’
After 2 years of operation, Bill Gates elaborated on the investment focus of the Coalition:
Energy transitions take a long time, but there’s more urgency than ever to prevent the worst
impacts of climate change. We need new models of investment and new partnerships
between governments and a broad network of investors, companies, and energy customers.
Breakthrough Energy is designed to help facilitate those partnerships and bring more
energy products from the lab to the market more quickly (Fehrenbacher 2017).
The Coalition has expanded to include corporations, banks, and institutional investors—such as
GE, Microsoft, Virgin, Wells Fargo, and others. 25 It has announced five pilot public–private
collaborations with Canada, the European Commission, France, Mexico, and the United Kingdom.
One of the investment vehicles of the Coalition is Breakthrough Energy Ventures. 26 The
Breakthrough Energy Ventures have identified a number of grand challenges in five fields that are
the biggest contributors to global greenhouse gas emissions — electricity, transportation, agriculture,
manufacturing and building. Thus far, the organisation has identified several technical quests in
which research and development could help achieve an emission-free future. The investments of the
fund will take place over the next two decades (Condliffe 2016).
The Coalition will initially focus on energy storage, solar fuels, global micro-grids, zero-carbon
building materials, and geothermal energy (Fehrenbacher 2017). Gates (2017) has also stressed that
the Gates Foundation is also investing in areas that developing countries have said are crucial in
respect of agriculture, food security, and climate change. It is unclear how the Coalition and the Gates
Foundation will deal with intellectual property developed out of its philanthropic investments. While
Bill Gates has historically been a defender of strong intellectual property rights protection, the Gates
Foundation has increasingly adopted open access policies.27
Of late, Bill Gates (2018) had become much more focused on climate change as a global problem.
He emphasised in 2018: ‘We’ll need technological breakthroughs that let us run the economy—grow
food, make things, move people and goods, and so on—without emitting greenhouse gases.’ Gates
has maintained: ‘Entrepreneurs also need new market structures that will create incentives to bring
innovations out of the lab and into the market.’ He has suggested that ‘putting a price on pollution
that causes climate change will create a clear market signal that will help drive adoption of the
renewable sources of energy we can deploy today.’
There has been criticism of the initiative. Klein (2017), in particular, has been trenchantly critical
of billionaire-led initiatives on climate action—saying that they lack transparency and accountability.
She is of the view that such models are unlikely to achieve outcomes that value climate justice. There
has been uncertainty about the details of the initiative. The level of financial commitment of the
25
26
27

Breakthrough Energy, http://www.b-t.energy/coalition/who-we-are/
Breakthrough Energy Ventures http://www.b-t.energy/faq/
(Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation n.d.) Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Open Access Policy,
https://www.gatesfoundation.org/How-We-Work/General-Information/Open-Access-Policy

Laws 2019, 8, 7

15 of 24

investors—beyond Bill Gates—is still unclear. It also remains to be seen whether the investment of
the Coalition will be sufficient to adequately bolster government support and assistance in renewable
energy.
7. The International Solar Alliance
The International Solar Alliance (ISA) was launched by France and India at the Paris
international climate talks.28 The Framework Agreement on the Establishment of the International Solar
Alliance 2017 lays down the aims and objectives of the International Solar Alliance.29
A weakness of the Framework Agreement on the Establishment of the International Solar Alliance 2017
is that there is no discussion of intellectual property, law, and practice.
The ISA is ‘a common platform for cooperation among sun-rich countries lying fully or partially
between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn who are seeking to massively ramp up solar energy,
thereby helping to bend the global greenhouse emissions curve whilst providing clean and cheap
energy.’ The ISA has acquired the status of an international organisation. The headquarters for the
organisation are situated in Gurugram, in the periphery of New Delhi. The International Solar
Alliance has formed a partnership with the United Nations Development Programme and has sought
to supplement existing programmes on solar energy and facilitate technology transfer
(Chandrasekaran 2016). The international organisation aimed to ‘accelerate the deployment of solar
energy in 121 sun-rich countries situated between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn’
(Chandrasekaran 2016). The five key focus areas include the promotion of solar technologies; the
formulation of projects and programmes to promote solar applications; the development of
innovative financial mechanisms to reduce cost of capital; a common-knowledge e-Portal; and a
capacity building portal.
According to France, ‘23 countries have taken part in an ISA consultation on their priorities in
the fields of solar energy for agriculture and rural areas, solar mini-grids, rooftop installations and emobility’ (Chandrasekaran 2016). A hundred priority projects have been advanced to launch a first
phase of fundraising. The International Solar Alliance is focused on investment in solar energy: ‘To
make solar energy affordable for the poorest, the Alliance underscores the importance of channelling
capital, reducing costs through financial mechanisms, promoting universal access to energy and
supporting the creation of common standards to guarantee appropriate product quality in the use of
products by member countries’ (Chandrasekaran 2016), There are grand ambitions in terms of the
mobilisation of finance: ‘To achieve these objectives, the Alliance aims to implement financial
instruments to mobilize over $1 trillion in solar energy investment by 2030’ (Chandrasekaran 2016).
In March 2018, India hosted the first ISA summit (France Diplomatie 2018). Twenty-three Heads
of State expressed support for a common platform to work towards ambitious targets for clean energy
(The Economic Times 2018). India’s Prime Minister, Narendra Modi emphasised that the
development of solar energy would reduce the carbon footprint of the earth and also contribute
towards economic prosperity (Times of India 2018). He highlighted the importance of access to
affordable renewable energy. The French President Emmanuel Macron has been a strong advocate of
the ISA (Pasricha 2018) He stressed the need to remove obstacles in scaling up clean energy. ‘We only
have one planet, and we are sharing it’ (Pasricha 2018). Rwandan President Paul Kagame, chairman
of the African Union, observed that half the members of the ISA are African countries: ‘The sunniest
countries in the world should not lack for energy’ (Pasricha 2018).
After signing the Framework Agreement on the 18th July 2017 and tabling the proposal in
Parliament on the 4th September 2018, Australia joined the ISA in December 2017 (Turnbull et al.
2017). The Joint Standing Committee on Treaties (2017) considered the Framework Agreement on the
Establishment of the International Solar Alliance.

28
29

International Solar Alliance http://newsroom.unfccc.int/lpaa/renewable-energy/international-solar-alliance/
Framework Agreement on the Establishment of the International Solar Alliance (New Delhi, 18 July 2017)
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Treaties/SolarAlliance/Treaty_being_c
onsidered

Laws 2019, 8, 7

16 of 24

The National Interest Analysis (2017) noted: ‘Australia’s membership of the ISA will increase
opportunities for research linkages and commercialisation of new technologies.’ The National
Interest Analysis (2017) highlighted Australia’s expertise in solar energy—particularly noting the
work of public researchers at the Australian National University and the University of New South
Wales. The National Interest Analysis (2017) highlighted the advantages of membership of the
organisation for Australia: ‘ISA membership will provide an opportunity for Australia to deepen our
cooperation with key strategic partners, India and France, and reinforce our dialogue with other
members of the ISA.’ The National Interest Analysis (2017) also noted: ‘Ratification will highlight our
commitment to the Paris Agreement, including our support to help other countries achieve their
Nationally Determined Contributions.’ The National Interest Analysis (2017) also observed: ‘The ISA
can contribute to achieving the Paris Agreement goals, as it strives to promote solar technologies and
investment, develop innovative finance mechanisms and support capacity building.’ There was no
regulation impact statement accompanying the National Interest Analysis. There was no expectation
of any costs being associated with the body. There was no need for any accompanying legislation.
The Joint Standing Committee on Treaties (2017) heard evidence that the ISA would help to
promote the development of public–private partnerships. The Department of the Environment and
Energy told the Committee that there would be benefits in being a founder member:
As a founding member, Australia could influence the ISA’s governance arrangements and
could also have the opportunity to shape ISA’s forward direction from the outset. We
would work with other members to help ensure ISA complements the work of other
relevant international organisations to ensure that we don’t have crossover and overlap,
and we would also advocate for transparency in governance.
The Committee queried the balance between aid funding and industry development in respect
of the International Solar Alliance. The Department of the Environment and Energy maintained that
the role of the International Solar Alliance was to be a broker or facilitator, not a direct funder of
projects. The Joint Standing Committee on Treaties (2017) supported the ratification of the
Framework Agreement: ‘The Committee notes the aspirational nature of the Framework Agreement
and acknowledges that it opens the way for Australia to promote its expertise and experience in the
field of solar technology.’
Like some other new institutional initiatives, it is difficult to judge the performance of the
International Solar Alliance, because it has been slow to come into being. There seem to be issues in
terms of duplication—with the Green Climate Fund, CTCN, WIPO GREEN, the International Energy
Agency, and the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) performing similar roles. It
remains to be seen whether this flurry of new technology networks, alliances, and coalitions will be
successful in realising such goals and aspirations.
8. Conclusions
After the conclusion of the Paris Agreement 2015, there still remains a need to develop
international policies, rules, and practices on intellectual property, technology transfer, and climate
change. There have been some further efforts at COP22, COP23, and COP24 to boost climate finance
and technology transfer. 30 There has been no progress in developing international agreement on
policy settings for intellectual property, sustainable development, and climate change. There should
30

Marrakech
Climate
Change
Conference,
COP
22,
November
2016,
http://unfccc.int/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/meeting/9567/php/view/decisions.php#c;
Marrakech
Partnership
for
Global
Climate
Action
2016
http://unfccc.int/files/paris_agreement/application/pdf/marrakech_partnership_for_global_climate_action.p
df; Marrakech Action Proclamation for Our Climate and Sustainable Development 2016,
http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/application/pdf/marrakech_action_proclamation.pdf;
Fiji
Momentum
for
Implementation
2017,
Decision
1/
CP.23,
18
November
2017,
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/cop23/eng/l13.pdf; and Katowice Climate Package 2018, COP 24,
https://unfccc.int/decisions_katowice

Laws 2019, 8, 7

17 of 24

be a better process to evaluate, in an ongoing process, whether technology institutions, policies, and
measures are effective, efficient, adaptable, and accountable in the international climate framework
(Productivity Commission 2016).
At a conceptual level, this paper has sought to highlight the nexus between the philosophical
debate over climate justice and the pragmatic discussion over intellectual property, technology
transfer, and climate change. Brown (2018) has reflected that there is a need for greater engagement
on the debate over intellectual property, technology transfer, and climate change. She commented:
IP and climate change are intertwined. Technology and IP law have key, though not
determining, roles in the climate change landscape, at national, regional, and international
levels, in private and state hands (Brown 2018, p. 990).
Brown (2018, p. 990) laments that there has been a failure to adequately to consider such matters:
‘Yet the power conferred by IP law means that it would be misguided for the IP regime to be ignored,
for whatever reason, in climate change policymaking discussions; TRIPS Council and WIPO
discussions regarding climate change should continue and national IP laws should engage more with
climate change.’ If climate justice is to be achieved, there is a need for fair and equitable access to
clean technologies.
This paper has argued that there is a need for an intellectual property mechanism in respect of
international climate law—as well as a Technology Mechanism and a Finance Mechanism in the
Green Climate Fund. After the conclusion of the Paris Agreement 2015, there still remains a need to
develop international policies, rules, and practices on intellectual property, technology transfer, and
climate change. There have been some further efforts at COP22 and COP23 to boost climate finance
and technology transfer. There has been no progress in developing international agreement on policy
settings for intellectual property, sustainable development, and climate change. Correa (2016, p. 89)
has suggested that inspiration could be derived from the field of intellectual property, public health,
and access to medicines:
Should a declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and climate change be promoted to address
developing countries’ concerns on the subject? A WTO declaration on ESTs adopted by the
WTO Conference would have political value and help to orient States and stakeholders…
Although the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health only refers to access
to drugs, the confirmation of the ‘flexibilities’ contained in the Agreement equally applies
to other areas, including ESTs.
Such a declaration could help to provide a common approach across international institutions—
including the UNFCCC, the World Trade Organization, and the World Intellectual Property. A
declaration would help provide guidance on procedural matters in respect of intellectual property,
clean technologies, and climate change. A declaration would also assist in the delineation of
intellectual property flexibilities—such as public licensing, technology transfer, compulsory
licensing, parallel importation, and patent pools. A declaration would also be constructive in relation
to matters of the protection and enforcement of clean technologies, and environmentally sound
technologies. At the very least, there needs to be further international debate over intellectual
property, human rights, and climate justice (Correa 2013).
In order to promote technology transfer, there has been a reliance on a number of formal
technology networks and alliances—including the CTCN; WIPO GREEN; Mission Innovation; the
Breakthrough Energy Coalition; and the International Solar Alliance. There is a need to properly
evaluate climate change-related public-private partnerships (Sarnoff and Chon 2018). Thus far, such
initiatives have made some modest progress in terms of research and development and deployment
of clean technologies. Such technology projects have not addressed the outstanding issue of
intellectual property and climate change—either at a policy level, or at a much more practical level
of intellectual property management. Some commentators are sympathetic to mixed models of
innovation funding. Sarnoff (2016a) contends that ‘overlapping (or hybrid) approaches may
sometimes be needed to correct perverse incentives of either providing public financing or inducing
private financing’ (Sarnoff 2016a, p. 201). Likewise, Hemel and Ouellette (2018) have advocated

Laws 2019, 8, 7

18 of 24

innovation policy pluralism: ‘Innovation policy pluralism can frame conversations, encourage
experimentation, and enrich the menu of options available for producing and disseminating
knowledge goods.’ However, there has been significant overlap and duplication between these
initiatives and some pre-existing institutions. Some organisations such as CTCN have been
underfunded relative to their role and ambition. Furthermore, these co-operative efforts have not yet
evolved to a scale to adequately address the global problems of climate change. There is a need for
an effective, effective, adaptable, and accountable Technology Mechanism for clean technologies
embedded within the Paris Agreement 2015. There remains a gulf between the high aspirations and
principles of bureaucratic initiatives, and their performance. There is a need to encourage greater
grassroots contributions to technological change in order to challenge the hegemony of the fossil fuel
industry.
In her book on climate justice, Mary Robinson (2018, p. 117) reflected in the wake of the Paris
Agreement 2015 and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 2015: ‘We will all benefit if the
peoples of the developing world are supported with incremental finance and greater access to
technology, on a scale that the international community has often promised but has rarely managed
to deliver’. She stressed that climate finance and technology transfer should not be considered to be
merely aid or charity, observing: ‘In the fight to tackle climate change, it is enlightened self-interest’
(Robinson 2018, p. 117).
Funding: Rimmer was supported by an ARC Future Fellowship on ‘Intellectual Property and Climate Change:
Inventing Clean Technologies’ (2011–2015) (FT100100418).
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest

Appendix A. Cases
Cantor v Audi Australia Pty Ltd NSD1307/2015
Dalton & Anor v Volkswagen AG & Anor, Federal Court of Australia, NSD1459/2015
Monsanto v The Controller of Patents & Designs, Trademark and Geographical Indications (2013), OA/02/2012/PT/DEL
Nikola Corporation v. Tesla Inc., United States District Court for the District of Arizona (2018), Case 2:18-cv-01344GMS.
Richardson v Audi AG and Audi Australia Pty Ltd NSD1472/2015
Roe v Skoda Auto a.s, Volkswagen AG and Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd NSD1473/2015
Tolentino v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd, Federal Court of Australia, NSD1308/2015
Toyota Motor Corporation v. Paice LLC 128 S. Ct 2430 (Mem) U.S. (2008).
U.S. v. Sinovel Wind Group Co Ltd, et al. (2018), U.S. District Court, Western District of Wisconsin, No. 13-cr-00084.
U.S. v Wang Dong et al. (W. D. Pa, 1 May 2014)
Appendix B. International Treaties
Cancún Agreements 2010, Outcome of the Work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-Term Cooperative Action Under
the Convention, CP.16, http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/cop_16/application/pdf/cop16_lca.pdf
COP 24 Enhancing Climate Technology Development and Transfer through the Technology Mechanism,
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cp24_auv_tm.pdf
COP
24
Linkages
between
the
Technology
Mechanism
and
the
Financial
Mechanism,
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/cp24_auv_TM%20FM.pdf
Copenhagen Accord 2009, UN Doc. FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/L.9 (18 December 2009)
Decision 14/CP.23 Review of the Effective Implementation of the Climate Technology Centre and Network,
FCCC/CP/2017/11/Add.2, http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/cop23/eng/11a02.pdf#page=4
Decision 15/CP.23 Enhancing Climate Technology Development and Transfer through the Technology Mechanism,
FCCC/CP/2017/11/Add.2, http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/cop23/eng/11a02.pdf#page=6
Doha Climate Gateway 2012, COP. 18/CM 18, https://unfccc.int/key_steps/doha_climate_gateway/items/7389.php
Durban
Decisions
2011,
CP.17,
http://unfccc.int/meetings/durban_nov_2011/meeting/6245/php/view/decisions.php

Laws 2019, 8, 7

19 of 24

Fiji

Momentum
for
Implementation
2017,
Decision
1/
CP.23,
18
November
2017,
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/cop23/eng/l13.pdf
Framework Agreement on the Establishment of the International Solar Alliance (New Delhi, 18 July 2017)
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Treaties/SolarAlliance/Treaty_being_
considered
Katowice Climate Package 2018, COP 24, https://unfccc.int/decisions_katowice
Lima
Call
for
Climate
Action
2014,
CP.
20,
http://unfccc.int/meetings/lima_dec_2014/meeting/8141/php/view/decisions.php
Marrakech
Climate
Change
Conference,
COP
22,
November
2016,
http://unfccc.int/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/meeting/9567/php/view/decisions.php#c
Marrakech
Partnership
for
Global
Climate
Action
2016,
http://unfccc.int/files/paris_agreement/application/pdf/marrakech_partnership_for_global_climate_action
.pdf
Marrakech
Action
Proclamation
for
Our
Climate
and
Sustainable
Development
2016,
http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/application/pdf/marrakech_action_proclamation.pd
f
Outcome of the Work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol
at its Fifteenth Session, -/CMP.6, http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/cop_16/application/pdf/cop16_kp.pdf
Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, opened for signature 12 December
2015 (entered into force 4 November 2016) (in UNFCCC, Report of the Conference of the Parties on its
Twenty-First Session, Addendum, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, 29 January 2016).
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 1992, Opened for signature 9 May 1992, 1771 UNTS 107
(entered into force 21 March 1994).
Warsaw Opportunity 2013, CP. 19, http://unfccc.int/meetings/warsaw_nov_2013/meeting/7649.php
Appendix C. International Materials
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action, ‘Work of the Contact Group on item 3,
Negotiating
Text’,
12
February
2015,
http://unfccc.int/files/bodies/awg/application/pdf/negotiating_text_12022015@2200.pdf
International Solar Alliance http://newsroom.unfccc.int/lpaa/renewable-energy/international-solar-alliance/
National Interest Analysis [2017] ATNIA 24 with attachment on consultation Framework Agreement on the
establishment of the International Solar Alliance (New Delhi, 18 July 2017) [2017] ATNIF 28
Technology Executive Committee, Enhancing Financing for the Research, Development and Demonstration of
Clean
Technologies,
Working
Paper,
November
2017,
http://unfccc.int/ttclear/docs/TEC_RDD%20finance_FINAL.pdf
Technology Executive Committee and the UNFCCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network, Joint Annual
Report of the Technology Executive Committee and the Climate Technology Centre and Network for 2017,
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/sb/eng/03.pdf
UNFCCC Climate Technology Centre and Network, https://www.ctc-n.org/
The United Nations Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines, Promoting Innovation and
Access to Health Technologies, Geneva: The United Nations, 2016, http://www.unsgaccessmeds.org/finalreport/
United Nations Climate Technology Centre and Network, Technology: Accelerating Climate Action on the Ground:
2017 Progress Report, Copenhagen: United Nations Climate Technology Centre and Network, 2017,
https://www.ctc-n.org/file/19725/download?token=Di4zx0QR
The United Nations Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines, Promoting Innovation and
Access to Health Technologies, Geneva: The United Nations, 2016, http://www.unsgaccessmeds.org/finalreport/
WIPO GREEN, https://www3.wipo.int/wipogreen/en/
World Intellectual Property Organization, ‘Supporting Technology and Knowledge Transfer’,
http://www.wipo.int/patents/en/technology/index.html
World
Intellectual
Property
Organization
Development
Agenda
http://www.wipo.int/ipdevelopment/en/agenda/

Laws 2019, 8, 7

20 of 24

World
Intellectual
Property
Organization,
‘Climate
Change
and
IP’.
http://www.wipo.int/policy/en/climate_change/
World Intellectual Property Organization, WIPO GREEN—Year in Review 2016, Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization, 2017, http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_greenreport_2016.pdf
World Intellectual Property Organization, ‘WIPO and Canada Sign MOU on Green Tech Innovation’, Press
Release, 6 July 2017, https://www3.wipo.int/wipogreen/en/news/2017/news_0009.html

References
Adhikari, Kamalesh, and Charles Lawson. 2018. Biodiversity, Genetic Resources and Intellectual Property:
Developments in Access and Benefit Sharing. New York and London: Routledge.
Arnold, Bruce. 2018. Environmental Sousveillance, Citizen Science and Smart Grids. In Intellectual Property and
Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer. Singapore: Springer, pp.
375–98.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. 2016. ACCC Takes Action Against Volkswagen Over
Diesel Emission Claims. Available online: https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/accc-takes-actionagainst-volkswagen-over-diesel-emission-claims (accessed on 1 September 2016).
Baker, Dean, Arjun Jayadev, and Joseph Stiglitz. 2017. Innovation, Intellectual Property, and Development: A Better
Set of Approaches for the 21st Century. Available online: http://ip-unit.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/IPfor-21st-Century-EN.pdf (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Bannerman, Sara. 2016. International Copyright and Access to Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bannerman, Sara. 2018. A Sustainable Development Agenda for the World Intellectual Property Organization:
Networked Governance and Public-Private Partnerships. In The Cambridge Handbook of Public-Private
Partnerships, Intellectual Property Governance, and Sustainable Development. Edited by Margaret Chon, Pedro
Roffe and Ahmed Abdel-Latif. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 157–75.
Bessen, James. 2015. Learning by Doing: The Real Connection between Innovation, Wages, and Wealth. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. n.d. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Open Access Policy. Available online:
https://www.gatesfoundation.org/ns/500.html (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Bell & Melinda Gates Foundation. 2013. Who We Are. Available online: https://www.gatesfoundation.org/WhoWe-Are/General-Information/Foundation-FAQ (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Brown, Abbe. 2013. Environmental Technologies, Intellectual Property and Climate Change: Accessing, Obtaining and
Protecting. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Brown, Abbe. 2018. Intellectual Property and Climate Change. In The Oxford Handbook of Intellectual Property Law.
Edited by Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss and Justine Pila. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 958–90.
Carrington, Damian. 2016. Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Divests Entire Holding in BP. The Guardian, May
12.
Chandrasekaran, Kaavya. 2016. International Solar Alliance Gathers Steam, Summit in New Delhi Net Month.
The Economic Times, March 23.
Chon, Margaret. 2009. Marks of Rectitude. Fordham Law Review 77: 2311–51.
Chon, Margaret. 2014. Slow Logo: Brand Citizenship in Global Value Networks. UC Davis Law Review 47: 935–
68.
Chon, Margaret. 2018. Trademark Goodwill and Green Global Value Networks. In Intellectual Property and Clean
Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer. Singapore: Springer, pp. 275–
99.
Chon, Margaret, Pedro Roffe, and Ahmed Abdel-Latif. 2018. The Cambridge Handbook of Public-Private
Partnerships, Intellectual Property Governance, and Sustainable Development. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Cimoli, Mario, Giovanni Dosi, Keith Maskus, Ruth Okediji, and Jerome Reichman. 2014. Intellectual Property
Rights: Legal and Economic Challenges for Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Condliffe, Jamie. 2016. ‘Bill Gates’s $1Billion Fund Will Back Radical Clean Energy ideas. MIT Technology Review,
December 12.
Congressional Research Service. 2017. U.S. Climate Regulation and Selected Legal Issues. Washington, DC: US
Congress.

Laws 2019, 8, 7

21 of 24

Corporate Europe Observatory. 2015. UNFCCC and Trade-Related Issues and Intellectual Property. TPC.
Available
online:
http://corporateeurope.org/sites/default/files/attachments/trade_and_climate__trade_policy_committee.pdf (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Correa, Carlos. 2013. Innovation and Technology Transfer of Environmentally Sound Technologies: The Need
to Engage in a Substantive Debate. Review of European, Comparative and International Environmental Law 22:
54–61.
Correa, Carlos. 2016. Intellectual Property Rights under the UNFCCC: Without Response to Developing
Countries’ Concerns. In Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Climate Change. Edited by Joshua
Sarnoff. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 74–91.
Cunningham, Robert. 2014. Information Environmentalism: A Governance Framework for Intellectual Property Rights.
Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Cunningham, Robert. 2018. Climate Change and Open Data: An Information Environmentalism Perspective. In
Intellectual Property and Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer.
Singapore: Springer, pp. 449–72.
de Beer, Jeremy. 2009. Implementing the World Intellectual Property Organization’s Development Agenda. Ottawa:
Wilifrid Laurier University Press, CIGI, IDRC.
Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, Matthieu Glachant, Ivan Haščič, Nick Johnstone and Yann Ménière. 2011. Invention
and Transfer of Climate Change Mitigation Technologies: A Global Analysis. Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 5: 109–30.
Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, Ralf Martin, and Samuela Bassi. 2016. Climate Change Policy, Innovation and Growth.
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment and Global Green Growth Institute.
Available online: http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publication/climate-change-policy-innovationand-growth/ (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Derclaye, Estelle. 2014. The Role of Copyright in the Protection of the Environment and the Fight against Climate
Change is the Current Copyright System Adequate. WIPO Journal 5: 152–62.
Ewing, Jack. 2017. Faster, Higher, Farther: The Inside Story of the Volkswagen. London: Bantam Press.
Farber, Daniel, and Marjan Peeters. 2016. Climate Change Law. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Fehrenbacher, Katie. 2017. Breakthrough Energy Ventures Unveils Its 5-Part Investment Strategy. Green Tech
Media, December 15.
France Diplomatie. 2018. The First International Solar Alliance Summit. Press Release, March 11.
Gates, Bill. 2017. 4 Signs of Progress on Climate Change. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Available online:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/4-signs-progress-climate-change-bill-gates/?published=t&trk=v-feed
(accessed on 14 December 2017).
Gates,
Bill.
2018.
Why
I
Support
Initiative
1631.
GatesNotes.
Available
online:
https://www.gatesnotes.com/energy/why-I-support-initiative1631?WT.mc_id=20181103143300_Yeson1631_BG-TW&WT.tsrc=BGTW&linkId=59099764 (accessed on 9
October 2018).
Ghosh, Shubha. 2011. Why Intergenerational Equity. Wisconsin Law Review 103: 103–9.
Gupta, Joydeep. 2015. India Offers Two Options for UN Climate Deal. India Climate Dialogue. Available online:
http://indiaclimatedialogue.net/2015/02/03/india-offers-two-options-un-climate-deal/ (accessed on 3
February 2015).
Gurry, Francis. 2009. IP Day—Director General’s Message. Available online: http://www.wipo.int/ipoutreach/en/ipday/2009/dg_message_09.html (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Gurry, Francis. 2017. WIPO and the Sustainable Development Goals’, World Intellectual Property Organization.
Available
online:
http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/aboutwipo/en/dgo/speeches/pdf/wipo_sdgs_022017.pdf (accessed on 9 February 2017).
Harris, Edward. 2019. WIPO GREEN: 3,000-Plus Tech Entries in Online Market for Climate-Friendly
Technologies.
WIPO
Media
Center.
Available
online:
https://www.wipo.int/pressroom/en/news/2019/news_0001.html (accessed on 15 January 2019).
Hemel, Daniel, and Lisa Larrimore Ouellette. 2018. Innovation Policy Pluralism. Yale Law Journal 128: 544.
Hyland-Wood, Bernadette. 2018. Open Government Data in an Age of Growing Hostility Towards Science. In
Intellectual Property and Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer.
Singapore: Springer, pp. 473–514.

Laws 2019, 8, 7

22 of 24

Joint Standing Committee on Treaties. 2017. Framework Agreement on the Establishment of the International Solar
Alliance.
Report
17.
Available
online:
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Treaties/SolarAlliance/Treaty_being_
considered (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Kelly, Sharon. 2018. How America’s Clean Coal Dream Unravelled. The Guardian, March 2.
Kinsley, Michael. 2009. Creative Capitalism: A Conversation with Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and Other Economic
Leaders. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Klein, Naomi. 2014. This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs The Climate. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Klein, Naomi. 2017. No Is Not Enough: Defeating the New Shock Politics. London: Allen Lane, Penguin Books.
Klein, Daniel, Maria Pia Carazo, Meinhard Doelle, Jane Bulmer, and Andrew Higham. 2017. The Paris Agreement
on Climate Change: Analysis and Commentary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Klein, Naomi. 2013. Time for Big Green to Go Fossil Free. The Nation, May 1.
Lane, Eric. 2011. Clean Tech Intellectual Property: Eco-Marks, Green Patents, and Green Innovation, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Latina, Prensa. 2018. No Solution at COP24 for Technology Transfer Request. 13 December 2018. Available
online:
https://www.plenglish.com/index.php?o=rn&id=36835&SEO=no-solution-at-cop24-fortechnology-transfer-request (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Lybecker, Kristina and Sebastian Lohse. 2015. Innovation and Diffusion of Green Technologies: The Role of Intellectual
Property and Other Enabling Factors. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization. Available online:
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_rep_gc_2015_1.pdf (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Maskus, Keith, and Kamal Saggi. 2014. International Technology Transfer: An Analysis from the Perspective of
Developing Countries’. CDIP/14/INF/11. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization. Available
online: http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/mdocs/en/cdip_14/cdip_14_inf_11.pdf (accessed on 1 February
2019)
McManis, Charles and Burton Ong. 2018. Routledge Handbook of Biodiversity and the Law. London and New York:
Routledge.
Menell, Peter, and Sarah Tran. 2014. Intellectual Property, Innovation and the Environment. Cheltenham and
Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Mission Innovation. 2015a. Available online: http://mission-innovation.net/joint-statement/ (accessed on 1
February 2019).
Mission Innovation. 2015b. ‘Baseline and Doubling Plans’. Available online: http://mission-innovation.net/ourwork/baseline-and-doubling-plans/ (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Mission Innovation. 2015c. Innovation Challenges. Available online: http://mission-innovation.net/ourwork/innovation-challenges/ (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Mission Innovation. 2018a. Innovation Challenges: Midterm Results. Available online: http://missioninnovation.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/mission-innovation-infographic.pdf (accessed on 1 February
2019).
Mission Innovation. 2018b. Private Sector Engagement. Available online: http://mission-innovation.net/ourwork/private-sector-engagement/ (accessed on 1 February 2019).
Modi, Narendra, 2015. Full Speech at the Opening of Climate Change Conference in Paris. International Business
Times, December 1.
NECEC. 2015. Re: U.S. IPR and the COP21 Climate Negotiation. Available online:
file:///C:/Users/mdpi/AppData/Local/Temp/2015-12-07%20%20US%20Multiassociation%20Letter%20COP21%20-%20final.pdf (accessed on 7 December 2015).
Nordhaus, William. 2013. The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a Warming World. New Haven
and London: Yale University Press.
Pasricha, Anjana. 2018. India, France Call for Affordable Solar Technology to Address Climate Change. Voice of
America, March 11.
Pearse, Guy. 2012. Greenwash: Big Brands and Carbon Scams. Melbourne: Black Inc.
Phelan, Alexandra. 2018. Climate Change and Human Rights: Intellectual Property Challenges and
Opportunities. In Intellectual Property and Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by
Matthew Rimmer. Singapore: Springer, pp. 115–48.
Productivity Commission. 2016. Intellectual Property Arrangements, Productivity Commission Inquiry Report No. 78.
Melbourne: Productivity Commission.

Laws 2019, 8, 7

23 of 24

Rimmer, Matthew. 2010. The Lazarus Effect: The (RED) Campaign, and Creative Capitalism. In Incentives for
Global Public Health: Patent Law and Access to Medicines. Edited by Thomas Pogge, Matthew Rimmer and
Kim Rubenstein. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 313–40.
Rimmer, Matthew. 2011. Intellectual Property and Climate Change: Inventing Clean Technologies. Cheltenham and
Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Rimmer, Matthew. 2012. Climate-Ready Crops: Intellectual Property, Agriculture, and Climate Change. In
Intellectual Property and Emerging Technologies: The New Biology. Edited by Matthew Rimmer and Alison
McLennan. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 320–60.
Rimmer, Matthew. 2014. Intellectual Property and Global Warming: Fossil Fuels and Climate Justice. In The
Sage Handbook of Intellectual Property. Edited by Matthew David and Debora Halbert. London: Sage
Publications, pp. 727–53.
Rimmer, Matthew. 2015. Can the Gates Foundation be convinced to dump Fossil Fuels. The Conversation,
March 20.
Rimmer, Matthew. 2018. Elon Musk’s Open Innovation: Tesla, Intellectual Property, and Climate Change. In
Intellectual Property and Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer.
Singapore: Springer, pp. 515–51.
Robinson, Mary. 2018. Climate Justice: Hope, Resilience, and the Fight for a Sustainable Future. London: Bloomsbury.
Sainsbury, Maree. 2018. The Power of Visual Appeal: Designs Law and Clean Energy. In Intellectual Property and
Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer. Singapore: Springer, pp.
323–40.
Sandeen, Sharon, and David Levine. 2016. Trade Secrets and Climate Change: Uncovering Secret Solutions to
the Problem of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. In Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Climate Change.
Edited by Joshua Sarnoff. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 352–68.
Sarnoff, Joshua. 2016a. Government Choices in Innovation Funding. In Research Handbook on Intellectual Property
and Climate Change. Edited by in Joshua Sarnoff. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 200–33.
Sarnoff, Joshua. 2016b. Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Climate Change. Cheltenham and
Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Sarnoff, Joshua. 2016c. Patents and Climate Change. In Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Climate
Change. Edited by in Joshua Sarnoff. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 334–51.
Sarnoff, Joshua, and Margaret Chon. 2018. Innovation Law and Policy Choices for Climate Change-Related
Public-Private Partnerships. In The Cambridge Handbook of Public-Private Partnerships, Intellectual Property
Governance, and Sustainable Development. Edited by Margaret Chon, Pedro Roffe and Ahmed Abdel-Latif.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 245–88.
Savaresi, Annalisa. 2018. Traditional Knowledge and Climate Change: A New Legal Frontier. Journal of Human
Rights and the Environment 13: 32–50.
Shabalala, Dalindyebo. 2016. Technology Transfer for Climate Change and Developing Country Viewpoints on
Historical Responsibility and Common But Differentiated Responsibilities. In Research Handbook on
Intellectual Property and Climate Change. Edited by Joshua Sarnoff. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward
Elgar, pp. 172–99.
Shue, Henry. 2014. Climate Justice: Vulnerability and Protection. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 211.
Stephens, Tim. 2018. What is the point of International Environmental Law Scholarship in the Anthropocene? In
Perspectives on Environmental Law Scholarship: Essays on Purpose, Shape and Direction. Edited by Ole W.
Pedersen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 121–39.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2007. Prizes, Not Patents. Project Syndicate, March 6.
Sumanadasa, Darshana. 2018. Protecting and Promoting Clean Energy Innovation through the Trade Secrets
Regime: Issues and Implications. In Intellectual Property and Clean Energy: The Paris Agreement and Climate
Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer. Singapore: Springer, pp. 399–424.
The Economic Times. 2018. 23 Heads of State Hail International Solar Alliance. The Economic Times, March 11.
The International Council on Human Rights Policy. 2016. Beyond Technology Transfer: Protecting Human
Rights in a Climate-Constrained World. In Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Climate Change.
Edited by Joshua Sarnoff. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 126–57.
Third Mission Innovation Ministerial (MI-3). 2018. May. Available online: http://mission-innovation.net/mi-3/
(accessed on 1 February 2019).

Laws 2019, 8, 7

24 of 24

Times of India. 2018. PM Modi speaks at the first summit of International Solar Alliance: Key points. Times of
India, March 11.
Turnbull, Malcolm, Julie Bishop, and Josh Frydenberg. 2017. Australia Joins International Solar Alliance Press
Release,
6.
December
2017.
Available
online:
https://foreignminister.gov.au/releases/Pages/2017/jb_mr_171206.aspx?w=tb1CaGpkPX%2FlS0K%2Bg9Z
KEg%3D%3D (accessed on 1 February 2019)
Wishart, Kane. 2018. Management of Intellectual Property in Australia’s Clean Technology Sector: Challenges
and Opportunities in an Uncertain Regulatory Environment. In Intellectual Property and Clean Energy: The
Paris Agreement and Climate Justice. Edited by Matthew Rimmer. Singapore: Springer, pp. 177–206.
Zhuang, Wei. 2017. Intellectual Property Rights and Climate Change: Interpreting the TRIPS Agreement for
Environmentally Sound Technologies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

© 2019 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

