Proceedings of the 44th Annual Conference on Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology
CAA2016—Oceans of Data/ Mieko Matsumoto and Espen Uleberg (eds)

An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making in
the Spatially and Temporally Variable South African Paleoscape
Colin D. Wren1*, Chloe Atwater2, Kim Hill2, Marco A. Janssen2,
Jan C. De Vynck3, and Curtis W. Marean2,3
Department of Anthropology, University of Colorado - Colorado Springs
School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University
3
Centre for Coastal Paleosciences, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University
Corresponding author: cwren@uccs.edu
1

2

Abstract
Even a simple human foraging system has a large number of moving parts. Foragers require a complex decision making process to effectively exploit the spatially and temporally variable resources in an environment. Here we present an agent-based
modelling framework, based in optimal foraging theory, for agent foragers to make mobility and foraging decisions by weighing
expected caloric returns against geographic and social factors, and forecasted future return rates.
We apply our Paleoscape model to a spatially explicit South African coastal landscape to better understand the human foraging
system of the Middle Stone Age, when foragers began systematically exploiting a wide variety of flora and fauna in both terrestrial and inter-tidal environments. We also discuss the broader importance of agent-based models of foraging systems for a wide
variety of archaeological research questions.

Keywords: agent-based modelling, optimal-foraging theory, middle stone age, marine foraging
Project purpose and background

manufacture, and ochre for pigment at 162 ka (Marean
et al., 2007; Brown et al., 2009), and some of the earliest
beads at 72 ka (Henshilwood et al., 2004), among many
others. As such, the context for these behavioural
changes has come under close scrutiny as they relate
to both the behavioural evolution of our species, as well
as our expansion out of Africa into the rest of the world
relatively shortly after this pivotal period. The context
must be conceived broadly to encompass the climate,
ecology, and human social behaviour. In previously
published articles we have spelled out this broad
research project in detail, including the significant
progress made so far (Marean et al., 2015; Shook et al.,
2015).

A basic tenet of the behavioural ecological approach
to anthropology is that local ecology, the density and
distribution of resources in time and space, determine
optimal patterns of economic exploitation of resources.
Those optimal foraging, mobility, and grouping patterns
then constrain all other aspects of social behaviour,
and interact with mating patterns and social norms to
produce the core behaviours of society. As such, it is of
primary importance that anthropologists develop and
test hypotheses about how resource patterning results
in basic human economic patterns.
The Paleoscape project was conceived of as a detailed and
empirical attempt to reconstruct the hunter-gatherer
system during several temporal phases in a coastal
South African region. From the outset of the Paleoscape
project, we have used optimal-foraging theory (OFT) as
a theoretical base with well-established literature to
design our agent-based modelling approach (see also
Lake, 2000; 2001). The aim is to use this reconstruction
to explore a large number of hypotheses related to
human behavioural change. Pinnacle Point, Blombos
Cave, and Klasies River Mouth are a set of South African
coastal archaeological sites and localities well known
for behavioural firsts for Homo sapiens; the earliest use
of shellfish for food, heat—treatment of stone for lithic

The model described in this paper has a rather broad
purpose, but is intentionally designed in a rather simple
way. This paper will present our reasoning behind the
development of this model, its design and current
implementation with a particular emphasis on the core
mechanism, and an illustration of its potential results.
A larger treatment of the empirical data, model runs,
and its broader implications for the archaeological
record is currently in preparation.
The Agent-Based Model (ABM) described below serves
as an endpoint in the collection of a large amount
of empirical data collected from specially designed
507

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo

Figure 1. Computational workflow of the Paleoscape Project. Climate, vegetation, and human foraging models are connected
using established theory to simulate past human—environment systems during several different temporal phases (reproduced
from Shook et al., 2015, Figure 1).

As noted above, OFT is a set of simple models offering
a coherent framework for understanding how and why
different foraging choices are made within a resource
landscape. OFT assumes foragers make choices which
maximize a specified fitness-related currency (such
as calories) given a known set of available resources,
time constraints, costs, and benefits. In these cases OFT
models help predict which resources will be collected,
how much time should be spent collecting, how many
species should be hunted, and so on (Stephens and
Krebs, 1986; Winterhalder and Smith, 1981). OFT
rigorously defines entities such as habitats, resource
patches, and prey items which will be important for our
modelling approach. Janssen and Hill (2014) describe
in detail the limitations of classic OFT for modelling
foraging systems and the advantages of using an ABM
approach. For example, the cumulative effects of
foraging over long—time scales is better suited to ABM
than an algebraic OFT model, as is the effects of inter—
group interactions. The ABM framework also allows
us to experiment with decision making algorithms
designed to reflect different behavioural assumptions
and to evaluate their relative effects.

fieldwork and literature reviews (Figure 1). As such,
the ABM must be both detailed and flexible enough to
accommodate this.
Foraging as base ABM type
An additional purpose of this paper is to outline the
importance of a key agent based modelling subject for
archaeological research; that of a foraging system. A
foraging system is the pattern of mobility and collecting
decisions hunter—gatherer groups follow to collect
the resources they need: food, water, shelter, stone
and other materials for making tools, wood for fuel,
and even ochre for pigment production. This should
not be surprising given the importance of foraging to
interpreting behaviour from the archaeological record.
However, this commonality has not been explicitly
highlighted in archaeological ABMs to our knowledge.
We argue here that the foraging ABM is a kind of base
ABM type that underlies questions related to hunter—
gatherers’ settlement and mobility patterns at the local
scale, dispersal at regional and global scale, humanenvironment interactions, behavioural and biological
evolution, inter-group interaction, exchange systems,
coping with risk from climatic and ecological change,
among many others (see Lake, 2014 for a survey of
published applications). Since foraging underlies all of
these research questions, there should be a systematic
focus on the commonalities between the agent-based
modelling efforts related to addressing these questions.
We will present a beginning to that effort here.

Using OFT as a theoretical base has also helped to guide
our empirical data collection efforts by determining
what data is needed to reconstruct and evaluate a
specific foraging system. Over the past few years, this
has led our broader research team to a large number
of field and literature surveys into the amount of time
required to search, gather, and process resources, travel
508

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making

Box 1. (a) Consider a small toy landscape with two terrestrial habitats (green)
and one coastal habitat (white) with different return rates in kcal/h. (b) In a
six hour foraging day the camp could stay put or move to the coast for a bigger
return rate. (c) The hour lost in travel and the two hour low tide limit the
potential advantage of this coastal trip but is still worth the move especially
once adjacent terrestrial resources are harvested after the low tide. (d) For
another camp at a further distance, the trip is not worth it (e) unless that camp
is able to anticipate several days of high returns during the Spring tide.

known resource. Secondly, resources are temporally
variable requiring agents to not only assess the current
resource state, but also to predict when resources will
be available before they actually are. This is particularly
important given the dramatically different return rates
of shellfish based on tide heights driven by lunar cycles
(Marean, 2010, 2011, 2014; De Vynck et al., 2016a), but
also relates to the seasonal availability of plants, and
migratory patterns of some terrestrial mammals.
Thirdly, foragers are social and are embedded in
systems of cooperation and food sharing within and
between groups (Janssen and Hill, 2014, 2016).

speeds, and the caloric returns of resources in the
study region including shellfish (De Vynck et al., 2016a),
plants (Singles et al., 2016a;2016b; De Vynck et al., 2016b;
2016c), and terrestrial mammals.
How do you model a forager?
To blend OFT with the ABM, we base agent decision
making on an algorithm designed to make optimal
foraging decisions based on maximizing caloric returns
within the available daily foraging time (for a similar
approach see Lake, 2000, 2001). However, there are a
number of complicating factors which are generally
relevant to hunter-gather foraging systems, as well as
to our agents’ decision making in particular. Firstly,
resources are spatially variable requiring the agents
to account for the net caloric return after travel to a

Data
A fuller treatment of the data gathering efforts involved
in the Paleoscape project is currently in preparation.
509

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo
Here we will simply outline that we have divided up the
study region into ecological zones and are undertaking
a systematic survey of plant, shellfish, and terrestrial
mammal food resources, as well as additional resources
such as wood for fuel and raw material for tool
making. In each case, through literature reviews and
specifically designed in—field experiments with KhoiSan descendants of the region, we have collected data
on caloric return rates, and searching and processing
times for parameterising the ABM (see table S2 and
methodologies in De Vynck et al., 2016a; 2016b; 2016c;
Singels et al., 2016a; 2016b). Although the current model
uses a pre-agricultural Holocene habitat distribution
map as a proxy for the interglacial Middle Stone Age, we
are also running simulations of different climate states,
and shifting ecological patterns in order to simulate
foraging during other temporal phases (Marean et al.,
2015; Shook et al., 2015).

foraging time spent and left per day, calories acquired
and shared, resources available, those left, and the time
until they are replenished (see SOM).
A much smaller part of the code is the mechanism
through which the foragers and camps make their
mobility decisions with the purpose of maximizing
net caloric returns. As there are several complicating
factors to be accounted for by this mechanism, outlined
above, we shall start simply and build up to the full
description of the camp’s decision making algorithm
(see also Box 1).
Spatial variability
As noted, each cell has a value associated with its return
rate (kcal/hour) based on the habitat type. Within a
certain perceptual distance, camps assess the different
return rates and are able to determine which cells
have the largest caloric return for the available hours
of foraging time. Since some of these cells are more
distant than others, travel time needs to be factored
into the mechanism. Often, foraging models will
subtract a given amount for the caloric effort required
to move (e.g. Lake, 2001). In our model, we focus on a
larger factor, which is that the more distant the cell, the
more time is spent on travel and thus lost to collecting
resources. We therefore subtract the required travel
time from the available foraging time in the calculation
of net caloric return. Like the marginal value theorem
in OFT (Winterhalder and Smith, 1981), the net caloric
return after travel to a targeted cell must be greater
than the caloric return of the currently occupied cell
to justify moving.

The model
The ABM is programmed using the Netlogo toolkit
(Wilensky, 1999), and its basic structure has been
adapted from a published model based on the hunting
patterns of Ache foragers of Paraguay (Janssen and Hill,
2014; 2016). Like the Ache model, the ABM is made up
of three entities, each with their own set of behaviours
and variables: cells, camps, and foragers (see SOM for
a full model description using the ODD+D protocol).
The parameterisation of the model has not been copied
from the Ache case study.
The 60,000 cells of the ABM’s gridded landscape each
represent 1 hectare of habitat with one of 14 defined
types. Nine are terrestrial ecological types and an
additional four are coastal types. Each type is assigned
an average caloric return value in kcal/hour units based
on our empirical research into available food resources.
For the purpose of this paper this includes just shellfish
for coastal cells and plant resources for terrestrial cells.
Terrestrial mammal hunting is being incorporated into
a future iteration of the model and the data currently
being compiled.

Temporal variability
In a recent paper, De Vynck et al. (2016a) empirically
demonstrated Marean’s (2010) hypothesis that coastal
shellfish are a calorically valuable resource but only
if the tides are favourable. The return rate of shellfish
varies with two cycles, firstly a daily high-low cycle
of ~12 hours with the highest returns lasting only
during the two lowest hours of tide, twice per day. In
winter only one low tide is harvestable in daylight, in
summer a second low tide might be available during
daylight. For simplicity, we assume that shellfish are
only harvestable for the first two hours each day, with
the rest of the foraging day being spent on nearby
terrestrial resources. In a future version of the model,
summer’s second daily low tide may be included as well.

Mobility decisions are made at two temporal scales
represented by the camps and the foragers. Camps
represent the collective decision making of the foragers
and are used for tracking food sharing and average
returns of foragers. The camps select and move to a
new location at the beginning of each day as a mobility
target for the forgers who are members of that camp.
The foragers then spend their day making many fine
spatial and temporal scale movements to maximize
their individual caloric returns.

A second cycle occurs over ~15 days where full and
new moons create additional amplitude of tidal height
change known as Spring tides. De Vynck et al. (2016a)
demonstrated that high caloric returns are only
available around these Spring tides and only for about

A large proportion of the model’s code and the variables
of the three entities are dedicated to the accounting of
510

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making
5 days out of every 15 day lunar half-cycle. The ABM
cells are updated according to these cycles to reflect the
currently available net return rates. Terrestrial plant
resources will be similarly updated to reflect seasonal
changes when the data has been fully collated (De
Vynck et al., 2016b, 2016c; Singels et al., 2016a, 2016b).

(1)
where V is the present value of a caloric return A after a
delay of D (in days), and k is the discount rate parameter
(Kirby et al., 2002).

Temporal foresight and time discounting

Decision making algorithm summary

We noted that travel time is subtracted from available
foraging time to arrive at the net caloric return. This
could reduce the attractiveness of a high return cell
that is at considerable distance. However, the balance
of the equation changes if more days of foraging are
accounted for. As mentioned, the Spring tide lasts for
~5 five days (or at least for two hours out of each of
five days) and subtracting the travel time needs only
to occur on the first of those days. We therefore sum
the net caloric return over a given number of days of
foresight.

In summary, the core mechanism of the Paleoscape ABM
is a decision making algorithm whereby camps make a
prediction about which cell will maximize net caloric
returns for its foragers. The algorithm accounts for
spatial and temporal variability in resource availability
and is able to weigh the spatial and temporal distance
against return rates to make the optimal foraging
decision for the group. The foragers, since the temporal
scale of their decisions is shorter (i.e. fractions of hours)
and their spatial range smaller (moving between one
hectare cells and perceiving only a small radius around
their current location), use a simplified algorithm
without temporal foresight and time discounting. The
only temporal variability applied by foragers is the
above mentioned limitation of only being able to forage
for shellfish during the first two hours of their day.

It is advantageous to know when the Spring tide has
arrived, but it is even more advantageous to know
when it will arrive. This temporal forecasting of a
given number of days of foresight has the additional
advantage of allowing foragers to arrive as the Spring
tide, or other high value resources, becomes available
rather than beginning to travel towards it when
it arrives and missing the first day or two of high
returns. Foragers do not need to be in visual range of
the coast to forecast the arrival of the Spring tide. One
simple method they may use is to judge by the cycle
of lunar phases, another is a more complex calculation
involving converting solar days to lunar days. However,
the method used is less important than noting that it is
possible from far inland.

The above series of factors to be incorporated into
a decision making algorithm makes what seems like
a very simple task, picking the cell with the highest
return, much more complicated. However, by basing
our approach on OFT and rolling it into one simple core
mechanism, our model attempts to avoid many of the
pitfalls of an overly complex and un-analysable model.
Runs and model dynamics

The final aspect to temporal forecasting to be included is
that calories today are comparatively worth more than
the same number of calories in the future. This concept,
known as time discounting, has been documented in
economic contexts (Rogers, 1994) as well as in several
ethnographic contexts (Kirby et al., 2002; Rosati et al.,
2007; Salali and Migliano, 2015). Several equations exist
for calculating the present value of future resources, but
the hyperbolic equation (Eq. 1) has been demonstrated
to most closely match experimental data (Kirby et al.,
2002). The discount rate k, that is how steep is the falloff of value with time, varies experimentally, but tends
to range between 0.01 and 0.25. Thus rather than simply
summing the resources over several days of foresight,
we calculate the present value of future calories
according to Eq. 1 before summing them. The primary
effect of time discounting in our foraging system is to
prevent arriving several days before a resource actually
appears (e.g. arriving two days before the Spring tide).

Reporting our analysis of the South African Middle
Stone Age foraging system is not the primary
purpose of this paper, but a few examples will serve
to illustrate the functioning of the model, its decision
making algorithm, and its potential for addressing
archaeological research questions. It is important to
note that the parameterisation of the model (Table S1),
and thus all the conclusions below as well, is preliminary
as empirical field studies are still underway. Another
paper is in preparation that will more fully discuss
parameterisation and results of a broader range of
model runs.
One of the simplest research questions we have
amounts to a detailed account of the carrying capacity.
What is the largest viable population size of the South
African Cape Floristic Region (CFR) during MIS 5e? This
requires not just accounting for consumable resources,
but their spatial and temporal distribution, and their
sustainability as resources over repeated years of
511

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo

Figure 2. As the population size increases, the average caloric
intake of foragers decreases and the proportion of their diet
coming from shellfish increases. Foragers are modelled to
collect more calories than they personally require (limit set
to 5000 kcal/day in these runs) to share with others.

Figure 3. As foragers use temporal foresight to anticipate
temporally variable resources like shellfish, they increase the
proportion of marine resources in their diet. In these runs,
temporal discounting was calculated using k = 0.1.

foraging. By conducting runs of the ABM with different
population sizes (Figure 2), we can evaluate the longterm viability of different sized populations and the
make-up of their diet. To account for stochasticity, we
completed five replicate runs of each population size.

increased the average calorie intake of the population.
Beyond just demonstrating that the temporal foresight
part of our algorithm works as intended, this may show
a tangible caloric benefit of the cognitive capacity
previously suggested by Marean (2015).

It is unsurprising that the average caloric intake of
foragers declines with increased population size.
However, it is of interest that the proportion of the
diet coming from shellfish tends to increase as the
population size increases. This suggests that marine
resources could be an important fall—back food either
when the population is pushing against the limits of
the carrying capacity of the plant resource base, as has
been suggested during the Late Stone Age (Marean,
2014), or during short—term decreases in plant food
availability (not modelled at present). Marean (2015)
has argued that marine resources are a dense and
predictable resource. We have shown here that they
are also more temporally, if not spatially, abundant
since they are replenished on each spring tide (every 15
days), whereas once plant resources are depleted from a
given patch they won’t regrow until the following year.

Discussion
In this paper we have developed an agent-based model
of the foraging system of Middle Stone Age coastal
South Africa near the archaeological sites of Pinnacle
Point, Blombos Cave, and Klasies River Mouth. The ABM
is designed around a decision making algorithm based
on optimal foraging theory principles and ethnographic
observations. The design allows the model to be both
rigorously empirically grounded in a large amount of
field data specially collected as inputs to the model,
and simple enough to be clearly analysable. The core
mechanism of our model is both complex enough to
capture the multiple factors involved in optimally
selecting sub-hourly foraging decisions within a
spatially and temporally heterogeneous resource
landscape and flexible enough to be applied to multiple
archaeological or ethnographic case studies.

We then repeated the above runs of population
size variation but with the ability to predict when
resources will become available over a period of 5 days
(particularly shellfish availability based on tidal cycles).

The model outputs have been designed to facilitate
comparisons to the published faunal records by
allowing comparison between simulated and observed
archaeological records of frequency of specific shellfish
and mammal species.

From Figure 3 we can see that increasing temporal
foresight has led to an increase in the proportion of the
diet coming from shellfish. For the larger population
sizes, when plant resources are becoming depleted
across the whole landscape, temporal foresight has also

We also have emphasised the importance of appropriate
theory to ground the bottom-up design of ABMs built
to test archaeological research questions. While levels
512

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making
of abstraction are required for any modelling (or
explanatory) endeavour, some ABMs have not been as
rigorously based in theory as they might have been. OFT
can provide this basis not just to ABMs with foraging
related research questions, but also those focused on
the downstream effects of foraging related mobility
including: dispersal, population dynamics, inter-group
interaction, territoriality, and human-environment
interactions. Using this approach has multiple benefits
including better comparability among different ABMs,
a more systematic basis for the evaluation of model
code and results, and comparability to related research
in ethnography and ecology.

was for developing quantitative methods but is not
relevant here). Here we have been striving towards
both goals, but by using a bottom—up approach based
in OFT, we are avoiding problems of circular reasoning.
The Paleoscape model can both help to test explicit
hypotheses derived from archaeological inference,
and help to generate new insights and hypotheses to
be addressed using archaeological data by observing
unexpected or emergent model dynamics.
Conclusion
Janssen and Hill (2014, 2016) demonstrated that an
ABM approach that is carefully grounded in optimal
foraging theory can closely replicate ethnographically
observed foraging returns of a group of hunters. They
also demonstrated that social aspects, like the size of
cooperative hunting groups were partly the result
of optimizing caloric returns while minimizing risk
through food sharing.

The decision making algorithm presented here will
become more complex as other resources desired
by hunter—gatherers are added, such as terrestrial
mammal hunting, wood for fuel, raw materials for
making tools, fresh water, and ochre for pigment. The
present algorithm has established a common currency
of calories as a way of making different food resources
directly comparable. This approach presents some
limitations given some other resources, as well as the
physiological requirements for certain proportions
of macro-nutrients, are not available in every food
resource. Future iterations of the model will address
this limitation using established theory from OFT (Hill,
1988).

In this paper we demonstrate that this approach can
also be fruitfully applied to the past where direct
ethnographic observation is not possible. Here we
describe the decision making algorithm and broad
design principles of our model. We present some
of the possible model outputs such as the expected
proportions of different food resources, effects of
changing population size, and the effect of future
planning on foraging returns. Future work will
greatly expand the range of questions to be explored,
including questions related to systems of food sharing,
formal tests of hypotheses related to Middle and Late
Stone Age foraging behaviour, direct comparisons
to archaeological assemblage change over time, and
predictions of inter—group interaction, territoriality,
and defence.

Although not an initially articulated goal, it is worth
noting that the use of this ABM approach within the
larger South African Paleoscape research program
has led to several new insights and lines of research,
as well as novel published work (De Vynck et al., 2016a;
2016b; 2016c; Singels et al., 2016a; 2016b). For example,
the combination of an OFT—based approach and ABM
development has helped to redesign plant and shellfish
sampling protocols. Initially, sampling was focused on
the caloric return rates of different resources. However,
ABM development has pointed towards the importance
of other variables such as walking speed, search times
per habitat, and area observed per linear transect.

This formalised framework for investigating past
human behavioural hypotheses has been laid out in
previously published work (Marean et al., 2015) and
after several years of cooperative research, it is paying
off. Palaeoclimate models inform paleo-vegetation
distribution models which inform the resource-scapes
applied to our ABM (Shook et al., 2015). Using this
multi-level approach, each grounded in established
data, method, and theory we plan to extensively test
old hypotheses and generate many new ones.

Rather than being a separate research project, ABM
development has been integrated into the broader
research goals of the project. In synthesising works,
Premo (2010) and Lake (2010, 2014) have classified
archaeological ABMs by two very distinct goals;
hypothesis testing and hypothesis generating (a third

513

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo

APPENDIX
Model description

to harvest, current state of depletion, and time until
replenishment based on its type. The total landscape
is 60,000 hectares, with a fraction of that representing
inaccessible ocean.

This supplement is a description of our model following
the Overview Design Details + Decision (ODD+D) Protocol
initially described by Grimm et al. (2006, 2010) and later
updated by Müller et al. (2012) to incorporate human
decision making.

The return rates of these coastal cells cycle between
two values, one for regular and Neap tides which last
for 10 days, and one for Spring tides which last 5 days.
The spatial and temporal distribution of resource
abundance over the landscape influences the pattern
of mobility and the proportions of resources collected.

This version of the model is used in Authors (2016)
“An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision
Making in the Spatially and Temporally Variable South
African Palaeoscape” in 44th Computer Applications
and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology Conference
(CAA2016), Oslo, Norway.

Overview

Like the Ache hunting model, there are two types of
agents, namely foragers and camps. Camps may move
at the beginning of each day but have a limited mobility
range. Camps make mobility decisions designed to
maximize caloric returns for the group over a given
number of days. Foragers are individual people, each
a member of specific camp, who have a time budget
in hours that are available each day. Foragers make
their own mobility and resource harvesting decisions
designed to maximize their caloric returns during the
time they have left in their day. Foragers’ time budgets
are reduced by fractions of hours during harvesting
and while walking between cells. Camp and forager
variables are used to keep track of time left and
kilocalories collected.

Purpose

Process overview and scheduling

The purpose of this model is to explore the dynamics
of a human foraging system including the exploration
of decision making rules for camps and foragers. The
landscape and food resources relate to the Middle Stone
Age of coastal South Africa during an interglacial phase
such as MIS 5e. Several specific research questions
will be addressed with the model including maximum
sustainable population size, role of inter–tidal foraging
in the diet and its impact on mobility patterns, and the
impact of future planning. In addition, the process of
model development is closely linked to complementary
research on the impact of climatic and ecological
changes on past human populations.
Entities, state variables, and scales

Each time step represents one day. At the beginning of
the day, cells and camps are updated. A 15 day tidal cycle
advances by one day and if in the last 5 days of this,
return rates are updated to reflect Spring tide resource
availability even if it had been harvested during the
previous 10 days. Depleted terrestrial cells decrease
their time until regrowth by one day and if at zero,
their return rate is replenished. The camps then use a
decision making algorithm to decide on their location
for the end of the day. The maximum range of this move
is 75% of a day’s walk from their previous location but
may be a much shorter distance. If the selected cell is
within range they will move to it, if it is beyond their
range they will move as far as they can in the direction
of that cell.

There are three types of entities in the model: cells and
two types of agents. Cells each represent one hectare
of a foraging landscape. A georeferenced raster map
of a section of South Africa is imported with values
representing one of 14 terrestrial and coastal habitat
types. Each cell is assigned associated variables relating
to the caloric return rates of harvesting, time required

Foragers then begin a loop where they make mobility
and harvesting decisions with the time they have left
in their day. During each iteration of the loop, foragers
in random order estimate the time required to walk
directly to their assigned camp. If their time left is
greater, they make a mobility decision designed to
maximize their daily caloric return. After moving to a

The model is an adapted version of Janssen and Hill’s
(2014, 2016) model of the hunting system among Ache
hunter–gatherers. Like Janssen and Hill, the current
model is explicitly based on principles of Optimal
Foraging Theory (for an alternative approach to
blending OFT and ABM in a foraging model see Lake,
2000, 2001). The principle difference is that the present
model is designed for plant and shellfish harvesting
rather than hunting. This leads to a cascade of
differences in how mobility decisions are made.

514

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making
Design concepts

cell, they subtract their travel time. They harvest 20%
of the resources of that cell, reflecting a linear 100 m
transect with 10 m visible on either side, and subtract
the time expended in harvesting that resource. We
assume that foragers are able to observe a previous
forager’s transect and thus, the return rate of each cell
remains constant until it is completely depleted (Figure
S1). If their travel time to camp is less than or equal to
their time left, they move one cell towards their camp
and do not harvest resources. Foragers repeat this loop
until they run out of foraging time. As harvest times are
different per habitat, foragers are asynchronous during
each day. When all foragers have used up their time and
returned to camp average caloric returns are calculated
by each camp.

Theoretical and empirical background
The model design is based on Optimal Foraging Theory
(OFT) and implemented according to OFT’s definitions
of habitats, patches, and prey (Stephens and Krebs, 1986;
Janssen and Hill, 2014, 2016). Habitats are geographical
regions with consistent characteristics such that a
statistically constant pattern of food resources will be
encountered. This leads to an average expected return
rate for individuals searching that habitat. Patches
are smaller units of habitat with a finite number of
resources. On the time scale relevant to daily foraging,
patches may be depleted as their return rate relative
to other patches drops. In our model we assume a
systematic search per patch, which means that the
return rate per patch remains constant until that cell’s
resources have been completely exhausted at which
point no other resources are available. While our
field research has shown that certain plant resources
do appear in concentrated clumps only a few meters
across, at the scale of a hectare an individual forager
has a reasonably consistent return rate given a habitat
specific amount of searching and processing time. In
the current implementation, there are no prey species.

Upon being fully harvested, terrestrial cells set a
counter to 365 days. This counter is decreased each day
to simulate plant regrowth and as cells reach zero, their
resources are replenished. More detailed plant surveys
are underway in South Africa and additional details
regarding seasonal plant cycles or differing regrowth
rates will be incorporated into a future model.

While the broad framework of the model is based on
OFT and ethnographic observations, some model details
have been incorporated that are specific to South
Africa. For example, water availability has not been
included as a constraint on camp location decisions. A
paper on this subject is in preparation, but preliminary
data suggests that water sources are relatively well
distributed across the landscape and therefore would
not have been as important a constraint in most
habitats as in some other regions (Cowling and Mars,
personal communications). We have worked closely
with a variety of researchers with knowledge of South
African archaeology, ethnography, ecology, botany, and
marine biology to ensure the relevant factors are being
considered in the decision making framework of camps
and foragers.
Individual decision making

Figure S1. Schematic of a forager agent systematically
searching a single cell (solid arrow). By not overlapping
the swaths (we assume they are able to recognize previous
foragers’ harvesting activities) they maintain a constant
return rate over five passes across the cell. Alternatively,
the forager could decide after the first pass that the
neighbouring cell has a higher return rate and move there
(dashed arrow). That would leave the cell with the same
return rate but 20% less harvestable time available to future
foragers.

Camps and foragers make similar decisions designed
to maximize their caloric return given their available
time. In each case, the agent assesses individual patches
with the assumption that its neighbouring patches will
be similar. That is, the return rate of a cell is multiplied
by up to several days of foraging time even though
that patch may be fully exploited in a fraction of that
time. This is a reasonable, though not strictly accurate,
heuristic that we use for computational efficiency.
This heuristic introduces some uncertainty into the
estimated return for camps and foragers since the
neighboring cells may not have the same return rate or
515

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo
may be depleted. We assume that camps and foragers
have prior experience in this landscape and thus know
the condition of cells in the landscape. No partial
memory aspect is included. See below for details.

Heterogeneity (agents)

Learning

Stochasticity

Camps and foragers do not learn or adapt their decision
making strategies in this version of the model.

The order in which camps move, and foragers move and
forage, is randomized. Since each forager is indirectly
affected by the distribution of available resources, there
is a minimal impact of this randomization. In certain
rare circumstances, a forager is not able to move to or
towards the cell they determine to have the highest
net return due to an uninhabitable cell being in the
way (such as an ocean). In these cases, foragers move
to a randomly selected cell in their immediate 8-cell
neighbourhood to help them continue moving.

Agents are not heterogeneous in their state variables or
processes. All agents use the same decision algorithm.

Individual sensing
In their decision making algorithm, camps use the daily
foraging budget, distances to assessed cells, return
rate of all cells, and whether a cell is depleted or not.
In assessing the return rate, camps also understand
the impact of the tidal cycles on return rates, and may
forecast the high return Spring tides several days in
advance. Although not explicitly modeled, camps are
assumed to have global knowledge of current return
rates through information exchange and experience.

Observation
Output variables will vary based on the specific
research question being evaluated. The model accounts
for time spent and calories collected per forager, per
camp, and per cell. These may then be aggregated into
average caloric returns, days without food, and ratios of
different food types (e.g. plant vs marine, or per habitat
type). Mobility characteristics such as frequency of
camp movement, distance traveled per camp or forager,
and time spent in proximity to the coast may also be
measured.

Foragers keep track of how much time they have left
in their day, the distance to their camp and how much
time it will take to travel there, how many kilocalories
they have collected so far that day, and the current
return rate of patches within a specified radius and
coastal patches even if they are outside of the radius.
Individual prediction
Although not explicitly modeled, camps and foragers
are assumed to have knowledge of the tidally affected
coastal return rates through the observation of lunar
phases. This also allows camps to anticipate the arrival
of the Spring tide. A future version of the model will
incorporate data from seasonal plant phenology for
predicting the availability of plant resources as well.

Details

Interaction

Initialization

Camp and forager interaction is indirect as their
mobility decisions are affected by other foragers’
depletion of resources. However, the location of other
foragers and camps are not factored into mobility
decisions.

During the setup procedure, variable settings are read
from the user interface to determine which landscape
will be used, and how many camps and foragers there
will be. Setup assigns return rates and harvesting times
to all cells based on their habitat type. Several other
accounting variables are set to zero such as calories
collected and distance traveled. Additionally, if a
number of days of foresight are being used, a temporal
multiplier is calculated using the hyperbolic timediscounting formula. All terrestrial cells are set to be
full of resources which results in the first year of the
simulation being more productive than subsequent
years.

Implementation details
The model is implemented in Netlogo 5.3.1 and
may be downloaded from the author’s CoMSES.net
account1(Wren, 2016).

Collectives
Camps consist of a number of foragers who begin their
day at the previous day’s camp location, and end their
day at the new camp site. Average caloric returns are
calculated both for individual foragers as well as for
camps under an assumption of food sharing. Foragers
are assigned a camp on initialization of the model and
do not change camps.

1

516

https://www.comses.net/codebases/5356/releases/1.0.0/

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making
Input data

from fieldwork in South Africa. For example, walking
speeds through different habitats are being recorded
during the process of plant surveying. The amount of
harvesting time available to foragers is estimated from
ethnographic sources including Hill’s work with Ache
foragers of Paraguay (Janssen and Hill, 2014, 2016)
and this is consistent with Hadza foragers in nearby
Tanzania (Hawkes et al., 1997). One exception to these
two sources is the camp mobility distance which is
calculated as a percentage of a day’s walk (Eq. S3).

Habitat data
The habitat map consists of two data sources. Vector
GIS layers of terrestrial habitats were taken from a
digital appendix to Mucina and Rutherford (2006) and
converted into raster format at one hectare resolution.
This pre-agricultural Holocene distribution is used as
a proxy for the interglacial Middle Stone Age. Climate
and vegetation simulations are underway to model
habitats for other climate phases.

Submodels

The coastline of the study region were walked in order
to sample underlying geology. De Vynck et al. (2016a)
found that shellfish return rates varied consistently
with underlying geology and used this as the basis for
differentiating returns rates among other variables. We
used GPS data from this coastline survey and combined
it with the terrestrial data to create a raster model of all
habitats at 1 hectare resolution divided into 14 distinct
habitat types.

Here we discuss the details of the forager and camp
mobility decisions, the tidal cycle, and including our
implementation of forecasting return rates over several
days.
Camp decision algorithm
Camps assess all cells then select the cell which has the
maximum net caloric return determined by Eq. S1. If
the cell is a coastal cell, an adjustment is made as the
return rate is different for the two hours of lowest tide
at the beginning of the day versus the remaining hours.
In this case, the first two hours (minus travel time) are
multiplied by the low tide return rate, followed by the
remaining hours multiplied by a randomly selected
adjacent terrestrial cell (which are generally higher
than the high tide return rate).

Details of field experiments in coastal shellfish foraging
are documented in De Vynck et al. (2016a), and in
plant foraging in De Vynck et al. (2016b, 2016c) with
some additional caloric data from Singels et al. (2016a,
2016b). Note that the values in the table are estimated
given currently available data, but that more rigorous
estimates are underway.
Parameter values

Available time may also be multiplied over a specified
number of days of foresight to reflect future planning.
In these cases, the caloric returns of future days are
discounted according to a hyperbolic time discounting

Other parameter values are either estimated from
ethnographic sources or are actively being derived

Return rate
(kcal/hr)

Habitat ID Habitat Name

Harvest time
(hours/ha)

1

Freshwater wetlands

2000

17.9

2

Alluvial vegetation

1160

13.4

3

Strandveld

1200

1.17

4

Saline vegetation

0

0.83

5

Renosterveld

100

0.67

6

Sand Fynbos

1020

0.72

8

Albany Thicket

100

0.65

9
10

Limestone Fynbos

470

0.70

Aeolianite

1450(l)/250(h)

1.5

11

Sandy beach

150(l)/250(h)

1.5

12

TMS Boulders

1100(l)/250(h)

1.5

13

TMS Rocky Headlands

1100(l)/250(h)

1.5

14

TMS Wave Cut Platforms

1100(l)/250(h)

1.5

Table S1. Return rates and harvest times per habitat type. Habitat IDs 10 or more are coastal habitats
which have different return rates for the lowest (l) two hours of tide vs. the rest of the day (h).

517

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo

Figure S2. Screenshot of the Netlogo raster landscape where habitats are colour scaled according
to their caloric return rates (lighter shades = higher returns). This view is during a neap tide when
coastal returns rates are low (black).

Parameter

Description

Default value

Value range

nragents
nrcamps

Number of foragers per camp

7

1-30

Number of camps

3

1-30

Walk-speed (km/hr)

Speed foragers will walk when
not harvesting resources

2

1-5

Camp-mobility

Maximum distance a camp
may travel per day

Eq. S3

n/a

Vision-forager (cells)

Distance in hectare cells that
a forager sees when making a
mobility choice

10

5-75

Vision-camp (cells)

Distance in cells that a camp
sees when making a mobility
choice (if global-knowledge
is off)

50

1-50

Global-knowledge?

Switch to determine if camps
have knowledge of all cells, or
only ones within the visioncamp radius

True

True/False

Map-zone

Selects the full region or
different sub-zones of the
study area

z2 (Pinnacle Point)

z1 (Vleesbaai), z2, or full

Max-kcal-collect (kcal)

Maximum number of
resources a forager will collect
in a day

5000

1000-5000

Days-of-foresight

Number of days camps will
forecast return rates over

1

1-5

Discount-rate

k in Eq. S2. Controls the
steepness of the fall-off in
value with days of foresight

0.1

0.01, 0.1, 0.25

Table S2. Default values and ranges for other parameters used in the model.

518

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making
formula (Eq. S2). The discount rate parameter (k)
determines the fall—off rate of value with number of
days in the future.
Net caloric return = ((discounted_return) *
hours_per_day – (distance / camp_mobility *
hours_per_day * current_return_rate)

A tidal—cycle procedure updates the return rates of
coastal cells at the beginning of each model day. If a
coastal cell is fully depleted during a non—Spring day,
it will be replenished to the full return rate on the first
Spring tide day to reflect foraging lower in the intertidal zone. If a cell is fully depleted during a Spring tide
day, that cell will not be replenished until the beginning
of the next Spring tide (i.e. will remain at zero return
rate during the 10 days of non-Spring tides). Although
this replenishment rate may seem surprising, our
fieldwork has demonstrated that inter-tidal return
rates are sustainable at this rate (De Vynck, personal
communication).

(S1)

where camp_mobility is defined by Eq. S3 and discounted_
return represents the summed returns over a defined
number of days of foresight (df)
(S2)
where A is the caloric return after a delay of D (in days),
and k is the discount rate parameter and

To allow for forecasting return rates over a number
of days of foresight, a list of return rates over the 15
day cycle is first established based on whether or not
the cell is currently depleted. The position in the list
is determined by where on the tidal cycle the current
day rests, and then a sublist of based on the number
of days of foresight under consideration is extracted.
The discounted return formula (eq. S1) is then applied
but using the different return rates for Spring tides and
non-Spring tides instead of a fixed return rate.

camp_moblility = daily_time_budget * walk_speed * 10 * 0.75
which assumes that the maximum distance the camp
can move in one day is 75% of a day’s constant walking.
Forager decision algorithm
Like camps, foragers assess cells (within a visual range)
and select the cell with the maximum net caloric
return (Eq. S4). The algorithm similarly subtracts travel
time and adjusts for the low and high tides. The only
difference is that foragers’ available time is based on
how much time they have left in their day and no future
days are accounted for.

References
Brown, K.S., Marean, C.W., Herries, A.I., Jacobs, Z.,
Tribolo, C., Braun, D., Roberts, D.L., Meyer, M.C., and
Bernatchez, J. (2009) ‘Fire as an engineering tool of
early modern humans’, Science 325 (5942), pp. 859–
862. doi: 10.1126/science.1175028.
De Vynck, J.C., Anderson, R., Atwater, C., Cowling, R.M.,
Fisher, E.C., Marean, C.W., Walker, R.S., and Hill, K.
(2016a) ‘Return rates from intertidal foraging from
Blombos Cave to Pinnacle Point: understanding
early human economies’, Journal of Human
Evolution, 92 (March), pp. 101–115. doi: 10.1016/j.
jhevol.2016.01.008.
De Vynck, J.C., Cowling, R.M., Potts, A.J., and Marean, C.W.
(2016b) ‘Seasonal availability of edible underground
and aboveground carbohydrate resources to human
foragers on the Cape south coast, South Africa’,
PeerJ, 4:e1679. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1679.
De Vynck, J.C., Van Wyk, B.-E., and Cowling, R.M. (2016c)
‘Indigenous edible plant use by contemporary
Khoe-San descendants of South Africa’s Cape South
Coast’, South African Journal of Botany, 102 (January),
pp. 60–69. doi: 10.1016/j.sajb.2015.09.002.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., Bastiansen, F., Eliassen, S., Ginot,
V., Giske, J., Goss-Custard, J., Grand, T., Heinz, S.K.,
Huse, G., Huth, A., Jepsen, J.U., Jørgensen, C., Mooij,
W.M., Müller, B., Pe’er, G., Piou, C., Railsback, S.F.,
Robbins, A.M., Robbins, M.M., Rossmanith, E., Rüger,
N., Strand, E., Souissi, S., Stillman, R.A., Vabø, R.,
Visser, U., and DeAngelis, D.L. (2006) ‘A standard

Net_caloric_return = (current_return_rate * time_left) –
(S3)
(distance * time_walk_cell)
where time_walk_cell is the time in hours needed to walk
100 m as calculated from the walk_speed.
(S4)
Lunar tidal cycle and forecasting
The ~15 day lunar cycle has a dramatic effect on the
return rates of inter-tidal shellfish availability such
that only around the Spring tides, are foragers able
to get a sufficiently high caloric return to justify the
risk of acquiring the resource. De Vynck et al. (2016a)
demonstrated that under the best combination of
conditions return rates could exceed 3000 kcal/hr.
However, waves along this coastline can be powerful
and could sweep foragers off slippery rocks into the
ocean making the lower return rates during nonSpring tides much less attractive. Our intertidal
foraging experiments during different parts of the
lunar cycle and under a variety of weather and forager
characteristics have led us to determine that only 5
days out of each 15 day cycle have high return rates,
with the other 10 being much lower.

519

M. Matsumoto and E. Uleberg (eds): Oceans of Data, CAA2016 Oslo
protocol for describing individual-based and agentbased models’, Ecological Modelling, 198 (1–2), pp.
115–126. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2006.04.023.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D.L., Polhill, J.G., Giske,
J., and Railsback, S.F. (2010) ‘The ODD protocol: a
review and first update’, Ecological Modelling, 221 (23),
pp. 2760–2768. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.08.019.
Hawkes, K., O’Connell, J.F., and Blurton Jones,
N.G. (1997) ‘Hadza women’s time allocation,
offspring provisioning, and the evolution of long
postmenopausal life spans’, Current Anthropology, 38
(4), pp. 551–577.
Henshilwood, C., d’Errico, F., Vanhaeren, M., van
Niekerk, K., and Jacobs, Z. (2004) ‘Middle Stone Age
shell beads from South Africa’, Science, 304 (5669), p.
404. doi: 10.1126/science.1095905.
Hill, K. (1988) ‘Macronutrient modifications of optimal
foraging theory: an approach using indifference
curves applied to some modern foragers’, Human
Ecology, 16 (2), pp. 157–197. doi: 10.1007/BF00888091.
Janssen, M.A. and Hill, K. (2014) ‘Benefits of grouping
and cooperative hunting among Ache hunter–
gatherers: insights from an agent-based foraging
model’, Human Ecology, 42 (6), pp. 823–835. doi:
10.1007/s10745-014-9693-1.
Janssen, M.A. and Hill, K. (2016) ‘An agent-based model
of resource distribution on hunter-gatherer foraging
strategies: clumped habitats favor lower mobility,
but result in higher foraging returns’, in Barceló,
J.A. and Del Castillo, F. (eds) Simulating prehistoric
and ancient worlds. Basel: Springer International
Publishing, pp. 159–174. Series: Computational
Social Sciences. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-31481-5_3.
Kirby, K.N., Godoy, R., Reyes-Garcı ́a, V., Byron, E., Apaza,
L., Leonard, W., Pérez, E., Vadez, V., and Wilkie, D.
(2002) ‘Correlates of delay—discount rates: evidence
from Tsimane’ Amerindians of the Bolivian rain
forest’, Journal of Economic Psychology, 23 (3), pp. 291–
316. doi: 10.1016/S0167-4870(02)00078-8.
Lake, M.W. (2000) ‘MAGICAL computer simulation of
Mesolithic foraging’, in Kohler, T.A. and Gumerman,
G.J. (eds) Dynamics in human and primate societies.
Agent-based modeling of social and spatial processes.
New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 107–143.
Series: Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of
Complexity.
Lake, M.W. (2001) ‘The use of pedestrian modelling
in archaeology, with an example from the study
of cultural learning’, Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, 28 (3), pp. 385–403. doi: 10.1068/
b2726.
Lake, M.W. (2010) ‘The uncertain future of simulating
the past’, in Costopoulos, A. and Lake, M.W. (eds)
Simulating change: archaeology into the twenty-first
century. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, pp.
12–20.

Lake, M.W. (2014) ‘Trends in archaeological simulation’,
Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory, 21 (2), pp.
258–287. doi: 10.1007/s10816-013-9188-1.
Marean, C.W. (2010) ‘Pinnacle Point Cave 13B (Western
Cape Province, South Africa) in context: The Cape
Floral kingdom, shellfish, and modern human
origins’, Journal of Human Evolution, 59 (3–4), pp. 425–
443. doi: 10.1016/j.jhevol.2010.07.011.
Marean, C.W. (2011) ‘Coastal South Africa and the
coevolution of the modern human lineage and
the coastal adaptation’, in Bicho, N., Haws, J.A.,
and Davis, L.G. (eds) Trekking the shore. Changing
coastlines and the antiquity of coastal settlement. New
York: Springer, pp. 421–440. Series: International
Contributions to Archaeology. doi: 10.1007/978-14419-8219-3_18.
Marean, C.W. (2014) ‘The origins and significance of
coastal resource use in Africa and Western Eurasia’,
Journal of Human Evolution, 77 (December), pp. 17–40.
doi: 10.1016/j.jhevol.2014.02.025.
Marean, C.W. (2015) ‘An Evolutionary anthropological
perspective on modern human origins’, Annual
Review of Anthropology, 44 (October), pp. 533–556.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-anthro-102313-025954.
Marean, C.W., Anderson, R.J., Bar-Matthews, M., Braun,
K., Cawthra, H.C., Cowling, R.M., Engelbrecht, F.,
Esler, K.J., Fisher, E., Franklin, J., Hill, K., Janssen,
M., Potts, A.J., and Zahn, R. (2015) ‘A new research
strategy for integrating studies of paleoclimate,
paleoenvironment,
and
paleoanthropology’,
Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews,
24 (2), pp. 62–72. doi: 10.1002/evan.21443.
Marean, C.W., Bar-Matthews, M., Bernatchez, J., Fisher,
E., Goldberg, P., Herries, A.I.R., Jacobs, Z., Jerardino,
A., Karkanas, P., Minichillo, T., Nilssen, P.J.,
Thompson, E., Watts, I., and Williams, H.M. (2007)
‘Early human use of marine resources and pigment
in South Africa during the Middle Pleistocene’,
Nature, 449 (7164), pp. 905–908. doi: 10.1038/
nature06204.
Mucina, L. and Rutherford, M.C. (eds) (2006) The
vegetation of South Africa, Lesoto and Swaziland.
Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity
Institute. Series: Strelitzia 19.
Müller, B., Bohn, F., Dreßler, G., Groeneveld, J., Klassert,
C., Martin, R., Schlüter, M., Schulze, J., Weise, H.,
and Schwarz, N. (2013) ‘Describing human decisions
in agent-based models—ODD + D, an extension
of the ODD protocol’, Environmental Modelling &
Software, 48 (October), pp. 37–48. doi: 10.1016/j.
envsoft.2013.06.003.
Premo, L.S. (2010) ‘Equifinality and explanation: the
role of agent-based modeling in postpositivist
archaeology’, in Costopoulos, A. and Lake, M.W.
(eds) Simulating change: archaeology into the twentyfirst century. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press,

520

C. Wren et al: An Agent-Based Approach to Weighted Decision Making
pp. 28–37. Series: Foundations of Archaeological
Inquiry.
Rogers, A.R. (1994) ‘Evolution of time preference by
natural selection’, The American Economic Review, 84
(3), pp. 460–481.
Rosati, A.G., Stevens, J.R., Hare, B., and Hauser, M.D.
(2007) ‘The evolutionary origins of human patience:
temporal preferences in chimpanzees, bonobos, and
human adults’, Current Biology, 17 (19), pp. 1663–
1668. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.08.033.
Salali, G.D. and Migliano, A.B. (2015) ‘Future discounting
in Congo Basin hunter—gatherers declines with
socio-economic transitions’, PLOS ONE, 10 (9),
e0137806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137806.
Shook, E., Wren, C., Marean, C.W., Potts, A.J., Franklin,
J., Engelbrecht, F., O’Neal, D., Janssen, M., Fisher, E.,
Hill, K., Esler, K.J., Cowling, R.M., Scheiter, S., and
Moncrieff, G. (2015) ‘Paleoscape model of coastal
South Africa during modern human origins: progress
in scaling and coupling climate, vegetation, and
agent-based models on XSEDE’, in Proceedings of the
XSEDE15 Conference: Scientific Advancements Enabled
by Enhanced Cyberinfrastructure. New York: ACM. doi:
10.1145/2792745.2792747.
Singels, E., Esler, K.J., Cowling, R.M., Potts, A.J., and
De Vynck, J. (2016a) ‘The role of geophytes in

stone-age hunter—gatherer diets’, Quaternary
International, 404 (Part B), pp. 210–211. doi: 10.1016/j.
quaint.2015.08.208.
Singels, E., Potts, A.J., Cowling, R.M., Marean, C.W.,
De Vynck, J., and Esler, K.J. (2016b) ‘Foraging
potential of underground storage organ plants in
the southern Cape, South Africa’, Journal of Human
Evolution, 101 (December), pp. 79–89. doi: 10.1016/j.
jhevol.2016.09.008.
Stephens, D.W. and Krebs, J.R. (1986) Foraging theory.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Winterhalder, B. and Smith, E.A. (eds) (1981) Huntergatherer foraging strategies: ethnographic and
archeological analyses. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. Series: Prehistoric Archaeology and Ecology.
Wilensky, U. (1999) NetLogo Home Page [Version: NetLogo
6.0.4]. Evanston IL: Center for Connected Learning
and Computor-Based Modeling, Northwestern
University. Available at: htpp://ccl.northwestern.
edu/netlogo/ (Accessed: 24 April 2018).
Wren, C. (2016) An agent-based approach to weighted
decision making in the spatially and temporally variable
South African Paleoscape [Version 1.0.0]. CoMSES
Computational Model Library. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.25937/r2qq-fn02 (Accessed: 16 July
2018).

521

522

