Heuristic framework design in the field of digital literacy: A case study
based on the Mozilla Web Literacy Map.
Daniel Domínguez Figaredo
National Distance Education University (UNED), Faculty of Education, Madrid, Spain //
ddominguez@edu.uned.es
M.ª Paz Trillo Miravalles
National Distance Education University (UNED), Faculty of Education, Madrid, Spain //
mptrillo@edu.uned.es
Abstract:
The use of skill frameworks has become commonplace in the field of digital literacy. These
frameworks are based preferentially on conceptual approaches, which leads to biases when
applied in practice. Here, we present a study with an alternate focus: the skills proposed in the
frameworks are connected with user behavior and heuristics are employed to group these skills.
The objectives of the study were to: (1) achieve a greater coherence between the skills
incorporated in these frameworks and user behavior, and (2) identify and reliably organize the
clusters of skills that form frameworks. The study consisted of collecting data from a group of
students about their practices within the skills of the Mozilla Web Literacy Map. The data was
then grouped via factor analysis. The results were then contrasted with the initial organization
of the Mozilla framework. The gap between the theoretical definition of a skill and individual
behaviors was found to be more pronounced in the case of those skills whose definitions
included a wider range of concepts and practices. This study opens a discussion into the scope
and suitability of the method used here to generate heuristic dimensions by managing
information from social behaviors.
Keywords: Heuristic method, skills frameworks, behavior based skills, theoretical biases,
digital literacy.

1. Introduction: Design limitations of digital skill frameworks
Digital literacy is defined as a proficiency in the technologies and devices commonly found in
connected societies. The range of social practices and habits that are mediated digitally are
constantly expanding, therefore being digitally literate is becoming more important. As a
consequence, both formal and non-formal educational institutions are offering digital literacy
courses and workshops with increasing frequency.
Pre-established frameworks are used to define the competencies students should acquire in
order to become digitally literate. These frameworks are also used to decide the nature of the
learning content and which indicators to use in evaluating proficiency. Using these frameworks
has become more common over the last few years as the use of competency-based learning
approach has become widespread.
Despite their importance in education planning, competency-based frameworks are constructed
using a methodology with significant limitations and biases. Competency-based frameworks
are designed by first identifying the skills that should be acquired by the students. In most
digital learning frameworks, this design process consists of conceptually defining these skills,
using the contributions of expert panels as guide (Ferrari, 2013; Redmond, Lock, & Smart,
1

2018). However, an important criticism of the conceptual focus has been that conceptual
approximations of skills are limited to the extent they are not contrasted with the behaviors that
these skills represent (Eshet-Alkalai, 2004; Markauskaite, 2006; Ng, 2012). An alternate
approach to defining digital skills is to contrast the authentic behaviors of technology users and
their practices in open, unguided contexts. Based on the analysis of the practices, patterns of
common actions are identified. In addition, skills that can be linked to these actions are
identified (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012; Viberg & Grönlund, 2017). In this way, an
understanding of user behavior is incorporated into the framework design. Most importantly,
this approach puts into context the actions undertaken when acquiring digital skills.
The Mozilla Web Literacy Map (MWLM) is a well-known framework whose design is based
on user practices. According to Chung and Bond (2017), the majority of the concepts embedded
in the Web Literacy Map are being addressed in current digital literacies standards1. In addition
the skills specifically related to web use are incorporated into this framework. Together, this
makes the MWLM a suitable reference for investigating the design of digital literacy
frameworks that are based on user practices. Indeed, with the goal of better understanding these
digital literacy frameworks that are based on user practices, the MWLM is used in the present
study as the reference for analyzing how well its definitions of skills correspond with the user
behaviors within in the fields of actions of these skills.
Taking into the consideration past results (Domínguez & Trillo, 2014; Domínguez, 2017), the
objective of this study is to regroup the competencies in the Mozilla framework using a
heuristic methodology based on the observed behavioral norms of a group of users. The results
will clarify some of the uncertainties surrounding the skills that should form part of a
framework and how to group these skills so that they correspond to empirical observations of
user practices.
2. The Web Literacy Map viewed as a practice-based framework
Web literacy can be considered a subset of digital literacy. Achieving web literacy requires the
acquisition of the set of skills necessary for using the services and functionalities that Internet
graphical interfaces provide in different configurations (Belshaw & Hilliger, 2015; Authors,
2017; Surman, 2015). The MWLM is a framework that names and defines the set of skills
necessary for becoming literate. This framework relies on an approximation that is centered on
user practices. The Mozilla Foundation developed a web literacy map based on the results from
focus group studies and related research into educational practices. The purpose of the literacy
map was to package the language and practices in order to make training in the field of web
literacy more accessible. A series of focus groups were carried out to help identify which skills
should be included in the map. These focus groups consisted of in-person interviews and
meetings with many stakeholders, such as school teachers and educators, scientists, community
1

The sample of workforce and learning standards examined to better understand what essential digital literacy
skills were included or missing in the MWLM comprised the following (Chung & Bond, 2017): American Library
Association’s 2011 Digital Literacy definition; Common Core State Standards and Next Generation Science
Standards; International Society for Technology in Education 2016 Standards for Students; National Assessment
of Educational Progress 2014 Engineering and Technology Literacy Framework; European Union’s 2013 Digital
Competencies Framework; United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s 2013 Global
Media and Information Literacy Framework; Partnership for 21st Century Learning 21st Century Skills
Framework; and United States Department of Education’s 2016 Employability Skills Framework.
2

members, web and technology advocates and experts, and international leaders in emerging
markets and digital learning initiatives. In addition, past research into the on-the-ground
educational practices of various countries was reviewed. This research had been carried out in
local communities in India, Kenya, Bangladesh, and Chicago (De Reynal & Richter, 2016;
Mozilla, n.d., 2015). Finally, the map was made more applicable to purely educational contexts
by establishing links between those digital skills that had been identified and included in the
map and those skills that formed part of formal study plans, professional development training,
credentials, and other formal and non-formal educational tools (Chung, Bond, & O’Byrne,
2016). Taken together, this meant that a map had been developed which was accessible and
that responded to the needs of a variety of stakeholders. Similar to the standards of conventional
competencies, the Mozilla map can be applied in the many contexts such as curriculum design,
credential schemes, professional development plans, and other initiatives for teaching people
the skills they need to participate online and off.
Despite the people oriented nature of the MWLM, it has some of the same drawbacks that other
educational frameworks have. According to Belshaw (2017), one of the most common errors
when dealing with digital literacy (of which web literacy is a part) is to equate surface-level,
procedural skills with depth of thinking and understanding. Using digital tools is believed to
lead automatically to an understanding of the actions carried out. This relationship may not
always hold. Issues also surround the questions of how to design skills that belong to a
particular framework and how to group these skills in clusters in a way that suggests
relationships between these skills. The skills that form part of the Mozilla framework stem
from an analysis of user practices. Nevertheless, the framework resorts to conceptual constructs
such as “read”, “write”, and, “participate”, in order to group these skills. These notions are
relics of previous versions of the MWLM. These past versions depended on a greater
conceptual load in their approach to skills and the clusters used to group them (Belshaw &
Hilliger, 2015; Belshaw, Smith, & Mozilla, 2015).
As digital experiences become more embedded in everyday life, it becomes more difficult to
delimit the specific fields of action of technologically mediated social practices. Therefore, it
has become increasingly necessary to develop robust theoretical and analytical frameworks to
underpin research into people’s digital and multimodal literacy practices.
3. A heuristic approach to designing digital skill frameworks
Heuristics are cognitive shortcuts that let an individual evaluate a situation on the basis of one
or more basic rules. The advantage of a heuristic is that it reduces the cognitive load of making
a decision based on a full evaluation of a broad and complex set of solutions while still taking
into account the circumstances that arise in that context. In this study, heuristics are defined
according to the bounded rationality model (Kahneman, 2003, 2012; Klaes & Sent, 2005), and
cognitive science models (Hutchins, 1995). Here, heuristics are used as methodological tools
for developing competency frameworks. The objective is to develop a method for identifying
and grouping skills according to a framework that corresponds to authentic behaviors.
In order to define a heuristic framework, it is necessary to analyze both people’s practices and
the cognitive processes that lay behind these practices. This double validation approach
sidesteps the determinism that characterizes past conceptual models. In contrast to laboratory
models, the theories of rationality posit that in authentic environments, multiple variables affect
3

the actions that are carried out. In these cases, people apply rapid and cognitively inexpensive
decision mechanisms called heuristics, in order to adapt to and exploit the contextual
requirements of the environment (Evans, 2006; Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011; March, 2002).
In learning theories, behaviors are usually dimensionalized as a way of operationalizing the
variables that describe a subject’s performance in specific situations. For example, in the
specific field of connected learning in digital spaces, heuristics and frameworks have often
been used to analyze the processes underlying the student behaviors that observed in
technologically mediated situations (Authors, 2014; Wang, Chen, & Anderson, 2014).
The heuristic approach overcomes the excessively reductionist vision that is inherent to the
design of these types of frameworks. It is widely accepted that, in formal skill frameworks,
once a group of experts defines a competence, people that are proficient in that field will behave
in accordance with that definition. However, in practice, the definition of a competence does
not affect behavior so directly. People reach a threshold where their behavior matches a
particular competence. They reach this threshold in a “procedural” and contextualized way. In
addition, a level of proficiency is subject to certain thresholds as well (Adams & Wu, 2002;
Weinert, 2001). One issue with traditional digital literacy programs is that they tend to be based
on the view that skills are separate from domain knowledge (Caulfield, 2016)2. However,
domain knowledge has been shown to be a function of both prior knowledge and the capacity
to apply this knowledge to new situations and contexts (Moos & Azevedo, 2009).
4. Research approach
As mentioned, heuristics had not been widely explored as a method for grouping the practical
activities described in the competency frameworks. Therefore a primary goal of this study was
to validate the heuristic approach for designing these frameworks in the context of web literacy.
Here we analyzed the relationship between the Internet behaviors of a group of users, on the
one hand, and behavior-based definitions of the skill frameworks used to teach web literacy
skills, on the other. The heuristic method consisted of grouping the practices that formed part
of a concrete digital literacy framework and then checking for consistency between the
grouping and user behavior in authentic scenarios.
The methodology was developed in three steps:
4.1. Analysis of web practices
In order to analyze the practices on the web, a sample of National Distance Education
University graduate and undergraduate social science students was taken (n = 193; men: 20,2%;
women: 79,8%; age: 36,2 years). This study was approved by the University Review Board.
Consent was obtained from all the participants in the study. The data was collected via
questionnaire about web practices as defined by the MWLM (Chung, Bond, & O'Byrne, 2016).

2

For example, this is true of programs that rely on checklists
(http://ucsd.libguides.com/preuss/webeval),
RADCAB
(http://www.radcab.com/),
(http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/english/allwrite3/seyler/ssite/seyler/se03/cars.mhtml).
4

like
and

CRAAP
CARS

Every dimension on the questionnaire corresponded to a web-use competency. The
questionnaire items referred to the skills that related to each particular competency. The items
were chosen based on the criteria laid out in the MWLM (see Table 1)3.
Table 1: Questionnaire structure and dimensions.
Dimensions / Competencies

Items / Skills

1. Read

1.1.1 Evaluate — Comparing information
1.1.2 Evaluate — Identifying author
1.2.1 Synthesize — Integrating information
1.2.2 Synthesize — Combining information
1.3.1 Navigate — Using hyperlinks
1.3.2 Navigate — Manipulating URLs
1.4.1 Search — Using search engines
1.4.2 Search — Using keywords

2. Write

2.1.1 Design — Creating digital content
2.1.2 Design — Modifying from feedback
2.2.1 Code — Developing for problem-solving
2.2.2 Code — Developing for building information
2.3.1 Compose — Organizing information
2.3.2 Compose — Creating web resources
2.4.1 Revise — Reviewing digital content
2.4.2 Revise — Evaluating the purpose of the work
2.5.1 Remix — Identifying openly-licensed work
2.5.2 Remix — Modifying openly-licensed work

3. Participate

3.1.1 Connect — Participating in online discussions
3.1.2 Connect — Making sense of the terminology of online
communities
3.2.1 Protect — Managing privacy of digital identity
3.2.2 Protect — Understanding consequences of sharing data
3.3.1 Open Practice — Distinguishing between open and closed
licensing
3.3.2 Open Practice — Contributing using appropriate licensing
3.4.1 Contribute — Connecting and learning online
3.4.2 Contribute — Configuring notifications to keep up-to-date
3.5.1 Share — Giving others access to digital content
3.5.2 Share — Understanding the needs of audiences

The questionnaire contained 28 items. Responses were made on a five-point Likert scale: from
1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The items had an approximately normal distribution.

3

The theory underlying the Mozilla map clearly distinguishes between skills and competences. A skill is a
controlled activity that a person has learned to do. Skills have objective thresholds: the skill level in a particular
field can be confirmed through testing. A competency, on the other hand, is a group of skills required for a
predefined purpose. Competency assessments are subjective in nature. Carrying out an assessment requires the
prior definition of the criteria for considering a person “competent” in a particular subject and context (Mozilla,
2013).
5

4.2. Establishing heuristic patterns
The heuristic patterns used to group the Mozilla map skills were first determined using a
methodology that had previously been applied in the validation of the “familiarity heuristic”
(Monin, 2003; Monin & Oppenheimer, 2005). This methodology had also been applied in past
skill frameworks that had been constructed in a way that was based on user practices (Authors,
2014; Authors, 2017). An exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was applied in order to group the
variables of the questionnaire according to affinity level. The affinity level was determined in
terms of statistical correlation. The factors resulting from the analysis and their composition
were compared with the MWLM. Afterwards, we analyzed the correlations between the
variables within the factors found to be inconsistent with the MWLM. We then explored
possible explanations for these inconsistencies.
4.3. Contrasting patterns
The EFA patterns were contrasted with the expected MWLM patterns. The factors from the
EFA grouped the user web practices according to level of correlation. The patterns were
contrasted by analyzing the inconsistencies between the variables making up the factors of the
questionnaire and the variables of the MWLM. Some of the EFA patterns deviated from the
expected patterns. The variables of the factors that did not correspond to the expected MWLM
groupings were analyzed further. Alternative models were explored by testing other possible
correlations. This method was used to establish a rational criterion for grouping the skills into
a framework in a way that took into account patterns in user practices and a criterion for making
generalizations that could be applied to other cases.
5. Results
As in past studies of this type (Authors, 2017), we began with an EFA with the aim of
elucidating the internal structure of the variables found in the questionnaire. The factors found
in the primary dimensions of the MWLM were analyzed first. These primary dimensions were:
read, write, and participate. Afterwards, a global analysis was carried out taking into account
all the sub-dimensions of the framework, i.e, evaluate, synthesize, navigate, search, design,
code, compose, revise, remix, connect, protect, open practice, contribute and share.
5.1. The “Read” Dimension
An analysis of factors in the dimension “Read” resulted in a grouping of skills that generally
corresponded to the MWLM (see Table 2). However, an exception was observed with the skill
“Search, using keywords”. This skill weakly correlated with the factors forming part of the
skills “Navigate” (.204) and “Evaluate” (.277).

6

Table 2: The pattern matrix applied for the variable “Read”.
Factor
1

2

3

1.1.1 Evaluate — Comparing information

.526

1.1.2 Evaluate — Identifying author

.726

1.2.1 Synthesize — Integrating information

.572

1.2.2 Synthesize — Combining information

.927

1.3.1 Navigate — Using hyperlinks

.510

1.3.2 Navigate — Manipulating URLs

.804

1.4.1 Search — Using search engines

4

.825

1.4.2 Search — Using keywords

.204

.277

Note: Extraction method used: Principal Axis Factoring. Rotation method used: Promax with Kaiser
Normalization. The rotation converged within 6 iterations.

An analysis of the skills subsumed under the competence “Read” revealed that “Search, using
keywords” skill most strongly correlated with “Navigate, manipulating URLs” (r = .289, p <
.0001). In contrast, the Mozilla model stated that the skill “Search, using keywords” positively
correlated with “Search, using search engines”. However, in our analysis, these two variables
correlated weakly (r = .232, p < .001). Meanwhile, the skill “Search, using search engines”
correlated moderately with the skill “Navigate, using hyperlinks” ability (r = .410, p < .0001).
Together, these results suggested a possible overlap between the “Search” and “Navigate” type
skills. Using keywords to search and access web sites and the action of manipulating URLs
could be considered both part of the same domain knowledge. A similar outcome would be
expected in an analysis of the domain knowledge related to search engine use and hyperlinks.
5.2. The Dimension “Write”
Factoring of the variables of the dimension “Write” revealed some delocalization in some of
the skills. This was especially true of the two “Design” skills (see Table 3). The variable
“Design, creating digital content” was not grouped within the same factor as the “Design,
modifying from feedback” variable, but instead correlated strongly with the skill “Compose”
(.941). Meanwhile, the variable “Design, modifying from feedback” was isolated as a single
factor (.701).

7

Table 3: The pattern matrix applied for the variable “Write”.
Factor
1
2.1.1 Design — Creating digital content

2

3

4

5

.941

2.1.2 Design — Modifying from feedback

.701

2.2.1 Code — Developing for problem-solving

.846

2.2.2 Code — Developing for building information

.787

2.3.1 Compose — Organizing information

.519

2.3.2 Compose — Creating web resources

.676

.226

2.4.1 Revise — Reviewing digital content

.911

2.4.2 Revise — Evaluating the purpose of the work

.202

2.5.1 Remix — Identifying openly-licensed work

.953

2.5.2 Remix — Modifying openly-licensed work

.651

.291

Note: Extraction method used: Principal Axis Factoring. Rotation method used: Promax with Kaiser
Normalization. The rotation converged within 6 iterations.

Furthermore, the skill “Design, creating digital content” most strongly correlated with the skill
“Compose, creating web resources” (r = .703, p < .0001). The skill “Design, modifying from
feedback” correlated primarily with the skill “Revise, reviewing digital content” skill (r = .614,
p < .0001).
These results demonstrated that the creation of digital content and the creation of web resources
could be defined together as a single skill lying between “Design” and “Compose”. Likewise,
modifying web content using information about how digital content is used and reviewed
would form part of a competency that would lie between “Design” and “Revise”.
5.3. The Dimension “Participate”
The analysis of the dimension “Participate” resulted in factors with an organization that
diverged sharply from the original model. There were no factors that grouped the skills
according to the MWLM (see Table 4). Factor 1 grouped the skills of “Connect”, “Contribute”,
and “Share”. Factor 2 grouped the skills of “Connect”, “Protect”, and “Open practice”. Factor
3 grouped the skills of “Protect” and “Contribute”. Factor 4 grouped the skills of “Open
practice”, and “Contribute”. Factor 5 only consisted of the skill “Share, understanding the needs
of audiences”.

8

Table 4: The pattern matrix applied to the variable “Participate”.
Factor
1
3. 1.1 Connect — Participating in online discussions

.753

3. 1.2 Connect — Making sense of online communities
terminology

.562

2

3

4

5

.221

3.2.1 Protect — Managing privacy of digital identity

.748

3.2.2 Protect — Understanding consequences of sharing data

.792

3.3.1 Open Practice — Distinguishing between open and
closed licensing

.713

3.3.2 Open Practice — Contributing using appropriate
licensing

.799

3.4.1 Contribute — Connecting and learning online

.469

3.4.2 Contribute — Configuring notifications to keep up-todate

.280

3.5.1 Share — Giving others access to digital content

.633

3.5.2 Share — Understanding the needs of audiences

.801

.215
.452

.337

Note: Extraction method used: Principal Axis Factoring. Rotation method used: Promax with Kaiser
Normalization. The rotation converged within 6 iterations.

When analyzing those skills that were present in more than one factor, we found that “Connect,
making sense of online communities terminology” correlated most strongly with “Share,
understanding the needs of audiences” (r = .490, p < .0001). The skill “Contribute, connecting
and learning online” also correlated most strongly with “Share, understanding the needs of
audiences” (r = .523, p < .0001). The skill “Contribute, configuring notifications to keep upto-date” correlated most profoundly with the skill “Protect, managing privacy of digital
identity” (r = .445, p < .0001). Finally, the skill “Share, understanding the needs of audiences”
most strongly correlated with its homolog “Share, giving others access to digital content” (r =
.575, p < .0001).
It was impossible to determine a consistent pattern that could be used to group skills according
to their affinity with one another. The competency “Participate” contained within it a set of
skills shaped by complex meanings and diverse domain fields. This complexity and diversity
resulted in a high level of variability both conceptual and concrete in nature.
6. Discussion
The MWLM is the web skills framework that has the most practical design. However, the
MWLM organizes skills in a manner that is purely conceptual, a limitation observed in most
digital literacy skill frameworks. The purpose of this study was to overcome this limitation in
9

framework design. A heuristic methodology was employed in this study. This methodology
consisted of grouping skills in the framework as a function of web user behavior. We propose
that behavioral heuristics could appropriately be used more broadly as a method for grouping
the practices that are integral to frameworks.
It is important to point out that the heuristics employed do not stem from categories constructed
by “experts” as is the case with usability heuristics. On the contrary, the heuristics are derived
from a direct behavioral analysis of users in authentic scenarios. However, it is important to
note that focusing on individuals —that is, on their practices— as opposed to taking into
account the broader ecology describing situations of social interaction, could limit the value of
using heuristics to compose comprehensive frameworks. Such is the case with competency
frameworks (see Forlizzi, 2008 for a discussion of case of heuristic-based design).
It is also true that using heuristics to model or design frameworks can be viewed as an
approximation for extremely reductionist behavior. Nevertheless, the use of heuristics permits
a more granular framing of problems, as well as possible solutions, than do more conventional
approaches (Lockton, Harrison, Cain, Stanton, & Jennings, 2013). Indeed, in the case of skill
frameworks, it is possible to establish a stronger link between skills and the behavior of users
than is usual with conceptual approaches. This is because, in conceptual approaches, there is
no reliable way to contrast the framework with how users behave in authentic situations.
Nevertheless, reducing behaviors to heuristic dimensions carries the risk of oversimplification.
One way to mitigate this risk would be to develop multiple levels of abstraction to describe the
user behavior through data that is derived directly from observed practices. Developing these
levels of abstraction would most likely be accomplished through triangulation, i.e., composing
more informed representations via multiple research methods. Nevertheless, it is possible to
analyze behavioral heuristics using descriptive statistics (comparing cases and correlating
means) of small samples (n < 100). This possibility was demonstrated by the work of Monin
and Oppenheimer (2005), on which this study is based.
Using factor analysis to construct heuristics is a widely validated method (Darlington, 2004;
Darlington & Hayes, 2017; Kahneman & Frederick, 2002; Thompson, 2004). Factor analysis
can also provide hints about where to find meaningful causal relationships. This is true even if
we assume that it is possible to make more than one interpretation of the same factored data in
the same way and that the factor analysis may fail to identify causality. The strengths and
weaknesses of employing combined factorial and correlational analysis to order heuristics are
also known (Wallace, 2005). This information suggests that a further analysis may be required
in order to fully take into account the differences in the competency frameworks as a whole.
One of the advantages of this combined method is that it not only generates information for
improving the strategy of heuristic organization, but also demonstrates which problems
differentially affect each strategy.
Defining the skills which should form part of a particular framework is a task which requires a
more complex approximation methodology, e.g., triangulation method. If one wants to
“design” a framework, for example, by grouping abilities according to rational and evidencebased criteria, then using the empirically observed user behavior as a starting point adds value.
In this case, it is the design process and not the skill set which determines the framework. The
framework benefits directly from research that is based on individual practices. This is one of

10

the main contributions that a heuristic grouping approximation can have in the study of
frameworks which promote individual web literacy.
7. Conclusions
Heuristics can be used to organize individual behavior patterns into nodes and dimensions that
can be used to help explain these behaviors in certain contexts. When applied to the design of
competency frameworks, heuristics can also help group skills by taking into consideration the
actual user behavior during a particular task that requires one or more competencies. The
present study provides new evidence to support this line of research. The data presented
reinforce the idea that behavioral heuristics can be used to explain the way that users carry out
actions associated with a particular competency and skill framework. Specifically, heuristics
help design these frameworks by justifying how practices are grouped according to affinity
level. Affinity level is measured in terms of correlation strength. Therefore, the projected
behaviors can, in a practical (rather than merely conceptual) sense, be apportioned into skill
frameworks.
The MWLM served as the reference for this study. The results revealed two tendencies. First,
rational and user-based skill groupings were complicated by highly abstract skill definitions.
For example, this was true for those skills subsumed under competency “participate”. Second,
relevant tendencies were observed with the more concrete competencies “read” and “write. The
“search”, “navigate”, and “design” skills were grouped in a way that diverged from the Mozilla
framework.
At the same time, these concrete findings are consistent with leading trends in digital literacy.
In broader terms, this study confirms the difficulty of proposing digital literacy frameworks
that are as robust as the classic reading/writing and math literacy frameworks (Belshaw, 2012;
Olsson & Edman-Stålbrant, 2008; Ventimiglia & Pullman, 2016). More specifically, the
ephemeral nature of technologies that support web activities and digital spaces makes it
difficult to identify behaviors that are robust enough to correlate with concrete abilities and
practice. This difficulty has been especially apparent among those skills that are dependent on
evolving web access technologies. For example, the most unstable competency is “participate”.
This competency is also the one most dependent on changes in interfacing technologies and
the programming codes which channel interface inputs and outputs. Likewise, the authors of
the MWLM (Chung & Bond, 2017) point out that the skills in “participate” differ the most in
the context of digital literacy. As a consequence, it is difficult to identify the fields of action of
completely novel skills. Chung and Bond (2017) point out the uniqueness of “open practice”,
however, we have found that rest of the skills in “participate” are unstable as well. The
theoretical approach followed here for introducing these skills doesn’t directly fit well with
user web practices. This is because the behaviors do not fit precisely into the conceptual ranges
of these skills. This is especially true of the “open practice” phenomenon, which facilitates the
use of resources, as well as the contribution of resources. “Open practice” also leads to a more
web transparent and accessible web.
More analyses using more diverse methods are doubtless necessary for validating the data
collected here. Nevertheless, this study reinforces many of the presuppositions we had of using
heuristic models to design competency frameworks. Significantly, new and interesting lines of
inquiry have been opened in the specific field of digital literacy web skill groupings.
11

Data statement
The processed data can be taken directly from the paper. For more in-depth study of the raw
data of the study, please contact the authors. In the study, no personal data was requested, so it
was not necessary to anonymize the data or manage them under safe conditions.

References
Adams, R., & Wu, M. (2002). PISA 2000 Technical Report. Paris: OECD Publications.
Anderson, T., & Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-based research: a decade of progress in education
research. Educational Researcher, 41(16), 16–25.
Belshaw, D. (2012). What is ‘digital literacy’? A Pragmatic investigation. (Doctoral
dissertation, Durham University, UK). Retrieved from http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/3446/
Belshaw, D., & Hilliger, L. (2015). Web Literacy Map. A map of the skills and competencies
people need to read, write and participate effectively on the web. Retrieved from
https://wiki.mozilla.org/Learning/WebLiteracyStandard
Belshaw, D., Smith, K. L., & Mozilla (2015). Why Mozilla cares about Web Literacy. White
Paper. Retrieved from http://mozilla.github.io/webmaker-whitepaper/
Belshaw, D. (2017, April 21). Can digital literacy be deconstructed into learnable units? [Web
log post]. Retrieved from http://literaci.es/deconstructed-units
Caulfield, M. A. (2016, December 19). Yes, Digital Literacy. But Which One? [Web log post].
Retrieved from https://hapgood.us/2016/12/19/yes-digital-literacy-but-which-one/
Chung, A., Bond, I., & O’Byrne, W. I. (2016). Web Literacy 2.0. Retrieved from
https://mozilla.github.io/content/web-lit-whitepaper/
Chung, A., & Bond, I. (2017, February 11). What Web Literacy Skills are Missing from
Learning Standards? [Web log post]. Retrieved from https://medium.com/read-writeparticipate/what-essential-web-skills-are-missing-from-current-learning-standards66e1b6e99c72
Darlington,
R.
B.
(2004).
Factor
Analysis.
Retrieved
from
http://node101.psych.cornell.edu/Darlington/factor.htm
Darlington, R. B., & Hayes, A. F. (2017). Regression analysis and linear models: Concepts,
applications, and implementation. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
De Reynal, L., & Richter, B. (2016). Stepping Into Digital Life. The Digital Skills Observatory
Research Report. Retrieved from http://mzl.la/dso-final-report
Domínguez, D., & Trillo, P. (2014). Learning Competences in Open Mobile Environments: A
Comparative Analysis Between Formal and Non-Formal Spaces. Open Praxis, 6(3), 235–244.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5944/openpraxis.6.3.131
Domínguez, D. (2017). Heuristics and Web Skills Acquisition in Open Learning Environments.
Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 20 (4), 102–111. Retrieved from https://www.jets.net/ETS/journals/20_4/10.pdf
Eshet-Alkalai, Y. (2004). Digital literacy: a conceptual framework for survival in the digital
era. Journal of Multimedia and Hypermedia, 13(1), 93–106.
Evans, J. (2006). The heuristic-analytical theory of reasoning: extension and evaluation.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(3), 378–395.

12

Ferrari, A. (2013). DIGCOMP: A Framework for Developing and Understanding Digital
Competence in Europe. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
https://doi.org/10.2788/52966
Forlizzi, J. (2008). The product ecology: Understanding social product use and supporting
design culture. International Journal of Design, 2(1), 11–20.
Gigerenzer, G., & Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic Decision Making. Annual Review of
Psychology, 62, 451–482. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-120709-145346
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in
Intuitive Judgment. In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and Biases:
The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (pp. 49–81). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality.
American Psychologist, 58, 697–720.
Kahneman, D. (2012). Thinking Fast and Slow. London: Penguin Group.
Klaes, M., & Sent, E-M. (2005). A conceptual history of the emergence of bounded rationality.
History of Political Economy, 37(1), 27–59.
Lockton, D., Harrison, D. J., Cain, R., Stanton, N. A., & Jennings, P. (2013). Exploring
problem-framing through behavioural heuristics. International Journal of Design, 7(1), 37–53.
Retrieved from http://ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/1254/560
March, B. (2002). Heuristics as Social Tools. News Ideas in Psychology, 20, 49–57.
Markauskaite, L. (2006). Towards an integrated analytical framework of information and
communications technology literacy: from intended to implemented and achieved dimensions.
Information Research, 11(3), 252–280.
Monin, B. (2003). The Warm Glow Heuristic: When Liking Leads to Familiarity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(6), 1035–1048. https://doi.org/10.1037/00223514.85.6.1035
Monin, B., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2005). Correlated Averages vs. Averaged Correlations:
Demonstrating the Warm Glow Heuristic Beyond Aggregation. Social Cognition, 23(3), 257–
278. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2005.23.3.257
Moos, D. C., & Azevedo, R. (2009). Self-efficacy and prior domain knowledge: to what extent
does monitoring mediate their relationship with hypermedia learning? Metacognition and
Learning, 4(3), 197–216. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11409-009-9045-5
Mozilla
(n.d.).
Digital
Skills
Observatory.
Retrieved
from
https://mozillafoundation.github.io/digital-skills-observatory/
Mozilla
(2013).
Mozilla
Web
Literacies
white
paper.
Retrieved
from
https://wiki.mozilla.org/Learning/WebLiteracyStandard/Legacy/WebLiteraciesWhitePaper
Mozilla (2015). A Locally Relevant Web Early Research & Recommendations. Retrieved from
https://webmaker-dist.s3.amazonaws.com/reports/research.pdf
Ng, W. (2012). Can we teach digital natives digital literacy? Computers & Education, 59(3),
1065–1078. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.04.016
Olsson, L., & Edman-Stålbrant, E. (2008). Digital literacy as a challenge for Teacher
Education. Implications for educational frameworks and learning environments. In M. Kendall
& B. Samways (Eds.), Learning to Live in the Knowledge Society (pp. 11–18). Boston:
Springer.
13

Redmond, P., Lock, J. V., & Smart, V. (2018). Pre-service teachers’ perspectives of
cyberbullying.
Computers
&
Education,
119,
1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2017.12.004
Surman, M. (2015, June 3). The essence of web literacy [Web log post]. Retrieved from
https://marksurman.commons.ca/2015/06/03/the-essence-of-web-literacy/
Thompson, B. (2004). Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis: Understanding concepts
and applications. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Viberg, O., & Grönlund, Å. (2017). Understanding students’ learning practices: challenges for
design and integration of mobile technology into distance education. Learning, Media and
Technology, 42(3), 357–377. https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2016.1088869
Ventimiglia, P., & Pullman, G. (2016). From Written to Digital: The New Literacy.
EDUCAUSE review, 51(2). Retrieved from https://er.educause.edu/articles/2016/3/fromwritten-to-digital-the-new-literacy
Wallace, R. J. (2005). Factor Analytic Studies of CSP Heuristics. In P. Van Beek (Ed.),
Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - CP 2005 (pp. 712–726). Berlin:
Springer.
Wang, Z., Chen, L., & Anderson, T. (2014). A framework for interaction and cognitive
engagement in connectivist learning contexts. The International Review of Research in Open
and
Distance
Learning,
15(2).
Retrieved
from
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/1709/2838
Weinert, F. (2001). Concept of competence: a conceptual clarification. In D. S. Rychen & L.
H. Salganik (Eds.), Defining and Selecting Key Competencies (pp. 45–66). Gottingen: Hogrefe
& Huber Publishers.

14

