Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019

Pp. 99-112

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.7

Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods in Thai and Vietnamese Universities

Wariyaporn Tieocharoen
Language Institute
Thammasat University, Bangkok, Thailand
Sucharat Rimkeeratikul
Language Institute
Thammasat University, Bangkok, Thailand

Abstract
The main purpose of this research is to investigate language learning strategy use of Vietnamese
and Thai university students using Oxford’s Strategy Inventory for Language Learning (SILL).
One main objective of the research was to compare different six aspects of language learning
strategies (memory, cognitive, compensation, metacognitive, affective, and social) between Thai
and Vietnamese students. The main research question was to learn about learning strategies Thai
and Vietnamese university students used. The data of research were collected from 116 English
major Thai university students and 174 English major Vietnamese students, using the SILL
developed by Oxford (1990) as the instrument and interviews from 16 lecturers from Vietnam and
Thailand. The findings revealed statistically significant differences in memory, cognitive,
affective, and social strategies between Thai and Vietnamese students. The interview data were
used to gain insight into the findings of the questionnaires. The findings of the research can be
beneficial to teachers and educators who are involved in the education of both countries, providing
better understanding of different aspects of language learning strategies used in learning English.
Keywords: language learning strategies, teaching methods, Thailand , university students, Vietnam
Cite as: Tieocharoen, W., & Rimkeeratikul, S. (2019). Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods
in Thai and Vietnamese Universities. Arab World English Journal, 10 (3) 99-112.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.7

99

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

Introduction
As the use of English expands in countries where it is not an official language, it has
become known as ‘a medium’ among people who are from different backgrounds. Due to its
significance, English has been brought into early education for students (Trần, 2013). As a result,
teaching English has drastically impacted many countries over a short period of time, especially
within Asia. Moreover, different methods and approaches have been adopted for English language
teaching and learning in Association of Southeast Asian Nations(ASEAN). Within the association,
Vietnam has become one of the most successful countries in English teaching. According to
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), Vietnam ranked 17th, and Thailand
ranked 50th (National Center for Education Statistics, 2013). Only one percent of Thai students
are fluent in speaking, listening, reading, and writing, giving Thai students a very low proficiency.
Moreover, many factors affect how students acquire a language, and learners’ strategies
are a significant part of how successful students can be. Language learning strategies do not stand
alone when they come to their roles. They involve numerous other factors associated with
language learners. Students try to use different learning strategies for their learning (Shen, 1989;
Lewis & McCook, 2002). An investigation of a relationship between learners and language
learning strategies help clarify how learners learn. Also, it explains how each learner responds to
factors related to their learning. Therefore, it is essential to reveal the similarities and differences
in the learning strategies used in Thai and Vietnamese universities in second language (L2)
students’ learning.
Research Objectives
This current research is designed to investigate language learning strategies that university
students in Thailand and Vietnam employ in learning English using the SILL by Oxford (1990).
The context of Thai and Vietnamese universities is quite different. In fact, Vietnam is known as a
leading country in English language learning and teaching (Van Van, 2009).
Research Questions
The research was addressed using two research questions, which were answered using
both quantitative and qualitative data:
RQ 1: What are the perceived learning strategies of Thai and Vietnamese university students?
RQ 2: What are the teaching methods teachers use that affect students’ learning strategies in
Thai and Vietnamese classrooms?
Literature Review
Thailand
Unfortunately, Thailand has been reported as having a very low proficiency in English
(Kitjaroonchai & Kitjaroonchai, 2012). This is a major concern for the government, and the Thai
Ministry of Education (MOE) is tasked with ensuring Thai learners become more competent in
English. However, teaching methodology in classrooms has not been a concern to the government.
Within Thailand, current educational reform plans are to provide 12-year compulsory and free
education to Thai citizens (OBEC, 2008). The curriculum is created by the government, and it
includes English subjects taught by native English teachers at primary and secondary levels
(Varavarn, 2005).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

100

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

For government schools, most English classes are taught by Thai teachers and EnglishThai translation is frequently used in class. Often times, teachers focus on form and don’t
adequately teach its functions or pragmatics system. Teaching is generally recognized as teacherfronted, so classes utilize one-way communication as teachers transfer the knowledge to the
students. Thai students are expected to show respect to teachers and carefully pay attention in
class. Thus, questioning and causing arguments rarely occurs in Thai classrooms. Second,
showing respect to people also leads to students obeying and not questioning their teachers.
Together, these two key concepts may minimize obstacles in classrooms. However, there is a
major concern around the interaction and rapport of teachers and students as well as teaching
methodology used in classrooms (Mulder, 1996). Different teaching methodology use in Thai and
Vietnamese classrooms has impacts on students’ learning.
Problems of English Teaching and Learning in Thailand
Studies indicated a major contributor to Thailand’s low proficiency was the use of
unqualified and poorly trained non-native English teachers. “According to a survey from the
University of Cambridge, it was found that a full 60% of Thai teachers had knowledge of English
and only 20% were teaching class-levels for which they were both qualified and competent.”
(Noom-Ura, 2013).
If unaddressed, this is likely to become more challenging for English
language teaching in Thailand, especially when other interfering factors are considered. Along
with the teacher’s proficiency, other factors that could interfere with improving English in
Thailand include a learner’s native tongue, attitude, limited knowledge of English, poor learning
environment, and restricted support. Thai learners, similar to learners in other Asian countries, are
generally shy and reserved in language classrooms (Bray, 2009; Zhenhui, 2001). This trait does
not support communicative classrooms. Therefore, it is essential for Thai teachers to have a
knowledge and understanding of the English language and teaching pedagogy.
Vietnam
One major issue that has been raised for many decades in Vietnam is who should teach
English--native English speakers or non-native English speakers (Bright, 2012; LaBelle, 2007). A
study conducted in Vietnam showed that having native English-speaking teachers could help
students become more successful (Walkinshow & Duong, 2012). Also, native speakers are
considered as the standard of acceptable language (Walkinshaw & Oanh, 2014). Students who
learn with native English teachers believe that they are encouraged more, and they feel more
comfortable speaking because native English teachers are seen as friendly (Benke & Medgyes,
2005). On the other hand, non-native English teachers can help students learn because they are
able to identify difficulties students have (Ketch & Santana-Williamson, 2002; Medgyes, 1992).
Therefore, teachers in Vietnam use various teaching methods in classrooms to help students,
besides the Grammar-Translation Method. This could be one of the reasons why Vietnamese
students have higher English proficiency than students among ASEAN countries (Cook, 1999). A
study about Vietnamese teachers revealed that teachers considered the cultural context as well as
using a variety of teaching approaches in their classrooms. Le Ha (2004) supported this by
mentioning “This moral sentiment has been consolidated and encouraged by Vietnamese society's
respect and love for teachers and the teaching profession.”. Many Western teachers view teaching
in Vietnam as ‘traditional’, meaning teachers provide advanced knowledge as one-way
communication instead of adopting ‘Communicative Language Teaching’ (Trần, 2013). Recently,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

101

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

the government has taken a learner-centered approach into consideration. Engaging the students
to actively participate in language learning can lead to greater success in learning English (Van
Dang, 2006).
Problems and Barriers to English Teaching and Learning in Vietnam
Even though the success in English teaching and learning in Vietnam appears to go beyond
other Asian countries, it is important to be aware of how Vietnamese students participate in
classrooms. Learners’ views are often not taken into consideration when teachers make decisions
about materials, methodologies, and curricula. A lack of acknowledging this has brought failure
to language innovation projects in the past in Vietnam because teachers use inappropriate practices
in the classroom. Moreover, learners become less successful when they are pushed to learn in
ways that they do not find helpful (Allwright & Bailey, 1991; Lewis, 1996).
Learning Strategies
Based on previous definitions of language learning strategies, the following definition was
synthesized for the purpose of this research: language learning strategies are conscious behaviors,
processes, and techniques learners employ in language-related tasks to improve their language
competence using English input and output.
There are five basic types of classifications of language learning strategies which can be
identified as (1) classifications related to research of successful language learners, (2)
classifications formed on psychological functions, (3) classifications associated with a background
of linguistics, (4) classifications related to language skills, and (5) classifications hinged on a
variety of learning styles (Vlčková et al., 2013). The number of classifications covers a wide range
of unclear concepts of learning strategies which helps to illustrate a major problem in strategy
research. For language teachers, differences in learning strategies among students cannot be
avoided, but it is a teachers’ responsibility to find out what works well for their students.
A Review of Research in Learning Strategies in SLA
Without question, learning strategies research has seen a great deal of progress over the
years. Early work lacked useful descriptions of the types of strategies, and it also did not focus on
cognitive aspects and variables that affected strategy use (Nambiar, 2009). Therefore, researchers
have attempted to figure out ways to describe and understand more about the learning strategies
of individuals. With this in mind, the strategy called ‘think-aloud’ protocols whereby students
have to verbally express their thoughts while they were doing tasks (Ericsson & Simon, 1980). By
using these protocols, the researchers are able to evaluate students’ logical thinking (Nambiar,
2009). Along with these protocols, a number of researchers in the field use the SILL developed
by Oxford (1990) to collect data on learning strategy use from individual learners. The
questionnaire is comprised of four functional groups of learning strategies: cognitive,
metacognitive, affective, and social (Abhakorn, 2008; Chamot, 2004). Through the use of the
SILL, researchers in Ireland reported that learners with higher proficiency used learning strategies
to achieve their learning goals (Bruen, 2001). Based on their results, the researchers suggested
that it is worthwhile to understand how relevant proficiency levels and learning strategies are, and
how the use of learning strategies by each individual could help classroom teachers to promote
students’ learning.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

102

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

According to the related research and literature review on language learning strategies
above, it appears that the researchers aimed to explore how language proficiency influenced use
of learning strategies. Besides using the Strategy Inventory of Language Learning (SILL), it might
be worth looking at another dimension related to students’ English proficiency achieved, which
includes teachers’ teaching methodology in classrooms.
Teaching Methods in Thailand and Vietnam
In this research, four major teaching methods that are widely used in both countries are
reviewed. They are the Grammar-Translation Method, the Direct Method, the Communicative
Language Teaching Approach, and the Collaborative Teaching Approach.
Grammar-Translation Method
The main purpose of the Grammar-Translation Method is to motivate individual learners
to gain knowledge of reading skills by studying grammar and interpreting texts with the use of a
dictionary (Mondal, 2012). The main concepts of the Grammar-Translation Method (CelceMurcia, 1991) include (1) teachers use the mother tongue to teach L2, (2) grammatical rules are
taught explicitly with clear explanation, (3) the content of the text is not the focus, and it is used
mainly for grammatical analysis exercises, (4) pronunciation is mostly ignored, (5) lists of isolated
vocabulary are taught, (6) grammatical rules and instruction focus on form, (7) students are asked
to translate texts word for word, and (8) teachers drill a lot of sentences in the target language and
students have to translate into their native tongue.
Although this method has been used widely, and it accommodates teachers to improve
students’ learning, there are advantages and disadvantages to its use in classrooms. The
advantages are (1) learners are able to recognize features in L2 and study L2 very well as this
method focuses on grammar and vocabulary, (2) learners’ reading skills can be highly improved
because this method uses texts as its main materials, (3) teachers use their native tongue to teach
so students are able to understand the teachers precisely. On the other hand, the disadvantages of
this teaching method are (1) this method provides little emphasis on communication; (2) students
do not have an opportunity to produce their own sentences or develop their creativity; and (3)
students do not have a chance to use the target language in all four skills (speaking, listening,
reading, and writing).
The Direct Method
In the United States, one of the most successful language schools, Berlitz, adapted the
Direct Method and called it “the Berlitz Method” (Richards & Rodgers, 1986). The main
concepts of the Direct Method are (1) students should not use their native tongues in classrooms,
(2) grammar should not be explicitly taught, (3) teachers should not explain or translate, but
demonstrate, (4) teachers should create an environment to help students understand meanings
(e.g., pictures or realia), (5) accurate grammar points and pronunciation are emphasized, and (6)
students use L2 for communication in the form of questioning and answering the questions in
pairs or in groups. Teachers who apply the Direct Method in classrooms promote students in
communicating with L2 in order to learn L2 naturally. Also, students are less passive than the
Grammar Translation Method as they work in pairs and groups.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

103

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

The advantages of this method are (1) students are familiar with a real command of L2, (2)
this method is interesting to students as it emphasizes using pictures, objects, demonstrations, etc.,
(3) students get a chance to speak and write. Disadvantages include (1) some words cannot be
translated directly so it takes a lot of time for teachers to explain, (2) this method might not be
suitable for large classes since it depends on the needs of individual students, (3) teachers need to
be well-trained in order to use this method effectively.
Communicative Language Teaching Approach
Unlike the Grammar Translation Method or the Audio-lingual Method, the Communicative
Language Teaching Approach emphasizes the understanding of the target language. Therefore,
teachers have to select learning activities that can engage students in authentic language usage.
Furthermore, the Communicative Language Teaching Approach can be distinguished in two
separate ways which are a weak and a strong version. The weak version highlights the importance
of preparing students to use the target language through communication with language learning
activities. The strong version emphasizes developing L2 through in-class learning activities which
are similar to the real world (Molina, Cañado & Agulló, 2013).
Advantages of Communicative Language Teaching are (1) students are able to understand
communication skills through real contexts, (2) activities are interesting since they are related to
the students’ lives and experiences, (3) this method allows teachers and students to communicate
so their relationship is interactive. Disadvantages are (1) this approach is not appropriate for large
classes because activities are designed to be applied to small groups of students, (2) this approach
focuses on fluency, not accuracy, and weaker students may struggle as they do not have enough
knowledge in the target language, (3) the Communicative Language Teaching Approach does not
focus on reading and writing as much as it should.
Collaborative Teaching Approach
The Collaborative Teaching approach serves as an important shift away from typical
classrooms. Through this approach, students are motivated to work in group discussions and
engage in active tasks. As well, a teacher is considered as a person who coaches students in their
learning process (Smith & MacGregor, 1992). However, traditional classroom activities such as
lecturing and note-taking process do not entirely disappear in collaborative classrooms.
The main concepts of the Collaborative Teaching approach include (1) students share
knowledge, questions, and solutions in order to achieve tasks, (2) teachers are facilitators and don’t
take full control in classrooms, (3) both teachers and students have opportunities to share
knowledge and ideas, (4) classroom tasks are relevant to real situations where students can relate.
Advantages of the Collaborative Teaching approach are (1) students are motivated to learn
by trying to achieve goals, (2) students develop social skills and get to share ideas with other
students in their groups, (3) activities encourage students to communicate through L2 so students
get an opportunity to practice, (4) it allows more flexibility of instructional time for students.
Disadvantages are (1) weaker students may need to try to catch up with other students, (2) there is
loss of instructional independence, and (3) students may get confused with their roles in group
work.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

104

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

The Framework of the SILL
This particular research is respectively related to the most widely used taxonomies of
second language learning strategies: O’Malley and Chamot’s (1990) and Oxford’s (1990).
O’Malley and Chamot (1990) classify language learning strategies into three groups, which were
adapted from cognitive concepts of learning by Brown and Palincsar (1982). On the other hand,
Oxford (1990) only categorize them into two groups, which then contained three subgroups each.
Within her taxonomy, Oxford (1990) attempts to combine all kinds of L2 learning strategy aspects
with all four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking). Along with this, she also took into
account communicative as well as linguistic aspects. Based on her taxonomy, Oxford (1990)
established the SILL, and it included six aspects to classify learning strategies students use:
memory, cognitive, compensation, metacognition, affective, and social.
Methodology
In this research, there were two phrases guided by the two research questions.
Phase I: The first phase was a quantitative phase, a questionnaire was administered and responses
were recorded as numerical data.
Phase II: The second phase was a qualitative phase; the teacher interviews were conducted. Since
in-depth data of language learning strategy use was also required, sixteen Thai and Vietnamese
teachers were interviewed to learn their various teaching methods.
Structure of the Questionnaire
For this study, the questionnaire was translated into Thai and Vietnamese. The questionnaires
comprised of three parts. The first part was questions to ask about the personal information of the
students. The second part was open-ended questions asking about teachers’ teaching methodology.
The last part was Oxford’s (1990) Strategy Inventory for Language Learning (SILL). This part
includes 50 closed-ended questions on learning strategies.
Before administering the questionnaires for a pilot study, the Item-Objective Congruence
(IOC) was used to evaluate the questionnaire by using a score range from -1 to +1. The items with
scores lower than 0.5 were cut from the questionnaire and the items with scores higher than 0.5
were reserved in the questionnaire. In this process, the questionnaire was checked by three experts
with Ph.D. degrees and many years of teaching experience in the teaching field from three different
universities.
Students
Two groups of university students were chosen from one university in Vietnam and one in
Thailand. The sampling technique used was purposive sampling as the students had to meet the
criteria. Both Thai and Vietnamese students and universities had to meet four main criteria. First,
both universities were public universities and they offered English majors. The students had to
take similar English courses, especially in their third and fourth year. Second, the number of
students in both universities was almost the same. There were about 150 students for the third- and
fourth-year programs in both universities. Third, the locations of the universities were not in the
capital cities, so facilities and learning environments were very similar. Finally, the English
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

105

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

courses at both Thai and Vietnamese universities focused on English skills, rather than knowledge.
The students shared common knowledge and skills in English.
Participants
Lecturers
Eight Thai and eight Vietnamese lecturers of English were interviewed in this research.
The lecturers in this research had at least one year of teaching experience and mainly taught
English major classes to the students who participated in the research. The lecturers were from
the same universities as the students.
Results and Discussion
Research Questions
RQ 1: What learning strategies of Thai and Vietnamese university students use?
The questionnaires were collected from 116 Thai university students and 174 Vietnamese
university students to see how different they are. Frequencies of responses from 50 questions on
the questionnaire were compared. The data were categorized into six learning strategy usage
classifications. Each participant responded to 50 questions of SILL were based on a Likert scale
(1 = never true of me to 5 = always or almost always).
In order to analyze the results, students’ strategy use in each aspect of the SILL was initially
examined, and then the overall strategy use of both Thai and Vietnamese university students was
analyzed. The data analysis adopted in the research was the t-test.
Table 1 Comparison between Vietnamese and Thai university students
Classification

Mean

df

t

Sig
(2-tailed)

P

Thai

Vietnamese

Memory

3.20

3.35

274

2.08

0.04

0.01*

Cognitive

3.39

3.50

282

1.63

0.10

0.04*

Compensation

3.42

3.26

288

-2.08

0.04

0.81

Metacognitive

3.65

3.72

288

0.89

0.04

0.20

Affective

3.65

3.39

278

7.29

0

0.01*

Social

3.79

3.56

270

-2.61

0.01

0.00*

Total

3.39

3.48

p ≤ 0.05
As shown in Table 1, the t-test analysis was conducted to compare learning strategy use
between Thai and Vietnamese university students. Four classifications (memory, cognitive,
affective, social) were statistically significant. The results of analysis indicate statistically
Arab World English Journal
106
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

significant differences among students occur in memory (p=0.01), cognitive (p=0.04), affective
(p=0.01), and social (p=0.00) strategies, while there is no statistically significant difference in
compensation (p = 0.81) and metacognitive (p = 0.20) strategies.
The t-test analysis reveals that each classification differed, even though the responses in
both groups were very similar in the overall results. In addition, there were significant differences
in certain classifications, which suggested the use of a variety of learning strategies among the
students.
Based on the research findings, the overall responses of the questionnaires revealed
Vietnamese students used learning strategies more than Thai students. As for the means of the
memory classification and the cognitive classification, Vietnamese students had higher means.
This could indicate the more frequent use of these two strategies of Vietnamese students. On the
other hand, Thai students showed higher means of affective and social classifications. Thai
students used affective and social strategies more than Vietnamese students.
RQ 2: What are the teaching methods teachers use that affect students’ learning strategies in
Thai and Vietnamese classrooms?
Teaching methods in both Thailand and Vietnam were found to be very similar, and they
include the Grammar-Translation Method, the Direct Method, the Communicative Language
Teaching Approach, and the Collaborative Teaching Approach.
Thai teachers
In Thai classrooms, the analysis showed that only the Grammar-Translation Method and
the Communicative Language Teaching Approach were commonly used. Teachers also reported
using Thai and asking students to translate. The main reason why the Thai teachers had students
translate is possibly because many Thai students had low English proficiency, and it was difficult
for them to understand content. Since the main purpose of the Grammar-Translation Method is to
teach grammar explicitly with L1, and students are not expected to learn pronunciation, the method
worked better for Thai students (Celce-Murcia, 1991). Another approach found in the Thai
classrooms was the Communicative Language Teaching Approach — an approach that requires
authentic materials and communication activities associated with real-world language (Wesche &
Skehan, 2002; Molina, Canado&Agullo, 2013). In some cases, Thai teachers used Facebook as a
teaching tool, so the students could relate lessons to their own experience in order to achieve goals.
Vietnamese teachers
While the Thai teachers applied two teaching methods or approaches in memory, the
Vietnamese teachers used the Grammar-Translation Method, the Direct Method, and the
Collaborative Teaching Approach. In regard to the Direct Method, almost every teacher used
English to communicate with their students in class to create an L2 learning environment (Richards
& Rodgers, 1986). The teachers did not focus much on teaching grammar and taught it implicitly
through class activities. In addition, students were encouraged to work in groups to exchange
ideas. This approach is called the Collaborative Teaching Approach, which allows both teachers
and students to exchange ideas (Rockwood, 1995; Lai, 2011). Giving students chances to share
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

107

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

and exchange opinions encourages them to think beyond what they know. As well, they can gain
new knowledge from other learners. Along with the two methods mentioned above, some
Vietnamese teachers also reported using the Grammar-Translation Method in lessons. Since not
all students learn the exact same ways, it is important for teachers to provide a wide range of class
activities for each individual student.
In response to the interview questions, the Thai and Vietnamese teachers reported engaging
all four teaching methods or approaches to promote their students’ cognitive strategies. Moreover,
there were some similar perspectives between countries. For instance, the teachers from both
countries thought students should work together to brainstorm ideas and have group discussions
on various topics. When working in groups, the teachers noticed the brighter students were group
leaders and told the other students what they needed to do to help. For the students who were not
as confident, group work was found to encourage them to interact and ask other students in their
group for help. Overall, it seems using the Collaborative Teaching Approach helped to increase
the knowledge of students through interactions among themselves. However, it is not the typical
teaching method in Thailand and Vietnam, which both rely on one-way communication (Webb,
1993).
Despite the most frequently used strategies, the responses of the open-ended question
asking students about classroom activities revealed that their teachers did not use activities which
involved metacognitive strategies in either country. Regarding the metacognitive aspect of
strategy use, the interview results revealed similar responses from Thai and Vietnamese teachers.
When asked about students correcting their own mistakes, Thai and Vietnamese teachers suggested
that students with lower English proficiency often made mistakes and did not realize making them
without teachers’ guidance. In contrast, some students with high proficiency were able to correct
their own mistakes right away. One explanation is that both Thai and Vietnamese classrooms tend
to be teacher-centered. The students are used to having teachers lead the class. The students with
low English proficiency had poor background knowledge of English. Therefore, they were not
able to recognize their own mistakes without teachers’ assistance. While the students with higher
English proficiency had stronger background knowledge, they were able to figure out what
mistakes they made. For Thailand and Vietnam, this difference was also connected to the cultural
background of the students, especially in Vietnam. For the Vietnamese, teachers give importance
to perfection, meaning students should not make mistakes. In regard to paying attention to other
students when they speak English, both Thai and Vietnamese teachers felt they were responsible
for making sure students paid attention to other classmates. Some teachers provided lists of
questions or asked them to share their opinions, and others kept reminding students to listen and
show some respect. In relation to this, there was a contrast between the students’ responses in the
questionnaire and the teacher interviews regarding metacognitive strategies. The students felt they
used the strategies, but the teachers felt they were responsible for getting students to pay attention
to them. Regardless, it is obvious that the teachers should provide class activities which support
metacognitive learning strategies to increase students’ learning abilities.
Overall, the t-test results revealed four strategy classifications were statistically significant,
which were memory, cognitive, affective, and social. This could signify a higher competency of
the Vietnamese students in terms of L2 learning in memory and cognitive classifications based on
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

108

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

the means. While Thai students had a higher competency in affective and social classifications,
the means of the two classifications of Thai students were higher than Vietnamese students. This
difference in competency is important since the aim of language teaching and learning is to
improve language competency of learners with the use of the Common European Framework of
Reference (CEFR) (Van Van, 2011; Nguyen, 2014). With CEFR in mind, Vietnamese teachers
focus on perfecting students’ L2 skills instead of having students learn from their own mistakes
(Murray, 2010). One of the main reasons to use CEFR could involve improving education to the
higher level, which means they aim to bring higher standards to students and teachers in the
country. Along with this, the Vietnamese government shapes the curriculum and teaching
methodology based on a learner-centered approach, meaning students are engaged actively in
lessons (William & Burden, 1997).
In brief, the findings of the questionnaire showed the Vietnamese students had a high
frequency of language strategy use while the Thai students had a medium frequency. However,
some methods and approaches were not relevant to class activities. One method which both Thai
and Vietnamese teachers shared was the Grammar Translation Method as they believed students
should understand meanings of the content they were being taught. One classification not found in
the responses for both questions was compensation. This is understandable since the classroom
activities did not fit compensation classification. It is possible that both the Thai and Vietnamese
teachers may not have given the students tasks that required them to guess as much as they should
have, which would have encouraged the use of compensation. Moreover, it is believed that using
cooperative learning approaches can promote and improve students’ L2 learning (Sarobol, 2012;
Morrisson, 2009). Therefore, both Thai and Vietnamese teachers gear towards using group work
such as group discussions and presentations.
Limitations and suggestions for further studies
The results of this research certainly revealed differences in learning strategy use between
Thai and Vietnamese university students, as well as differences in the teaching methods of Thai
and Vietnamese teachers. To carry out this research, limitations ,and suggestions for further
studies have been noticeable as follows;
1. This study might be limited in terms of generalizability since convenient and purposive
sampling techniques were used in the research. Having more participants from universities in
various areas of Thailand and Vietnam can help findings to become more generalizable.
2. Self-rating questionnaires are based on individual respondents. Therefore, using a
variety of research tools might help to obtain more reliable data. Further studies may need to
consider using the observation technique or focus group as well.
3. Instead of investigating only differences of strategy use between Thai and Vietnamese
students, determining other factors related to strategy use would be helpful. For example,
demographic differences of individual students and teachers such as gender, age, beliefs,
educational background, cultural experiences, and learning goals could also provide insight into
learning styles and teaching methods.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

109

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

Conclusion
This current research has helped to further the understanding of the language learning
strategy field, especially in regard to Vietnam and Thailand. The main contribution of the research
is the six classifications of the language learning strategies employed by Thai and Vietnamese
university students.
More specifically, the findings of the questionnaire showed the Vietnamese students used
language strategies more than Thai students. Statistically, the comparison between the Thai and
Vietnamese students indicated differences among four classifications which included memory,
cognitive, affective, and social strategies. From the interview responses, the Thai and Vietnamese
teachers were found to use different teaching methods and approaches in their classrooms.
However, some methods and approaches were not relevant to class activities. Based on the issues
identified in this study, five suggestions were made to improve future research in the field. They
were: (1) include more qualitative work to find out more about language learning strategy use of
the students; (2) expand the number of participants to obtain stronger data; (3) obtain more
information from teachers; (4) find more factors that can influence strategy use; and (5) analyze
data of language proficiency to support self-reported responses from the SILL.
In summary, the findings of this research might help provide people in the education with
more insights into the different teachers’ teaching methodologies and students’ learning strategies
as they can apply the knowledge and utilize it in classroom settings. Moreover, Thai teachers
could adapt teaching methodology from Vietnam to improve English teaching in Thai classrooms.
About the Authors:
Wariyaporn Tieocharoen has a Bachelor’s degree in TESOL Education from Brigham Young
University (Hawaii) and a Master’s degree in Secondary Education from Indiana University (South
Bend). ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5885-1591
Sucharat Rimkeeratikul, Ph.D is an associate professor at Language Institute at Thammasat
University, Bangkok, Thailand. She has researched and published in the areas of ESP and
communication apprehension.
References
Abhakorn, J. (2008). The implications of learner strategies for second or foreign language
teaching. ARECLS, 5, 186-204.
Allwright, D., & Bailey, K. M. (1991). Focus on the language classroom: An introduction to
classroom research for language teachers. Cambridge University Press.
Benke, E. &Medgyes, P. (2005). Differences in teaching behaviour between native and nonnative teachers: as seen by the learners. In E. Luluda (ed.) Non-Native Teachers. New
York: Springer, 195-216.
Bray, L., & Australia, S. (2009). Cultural dimensions for a foreigner teaching English in a Thai
university (Doctoral dissertation, Australian Council of TESOL Associations).
Bright, D. (2012). Native English-speaking teachers in Vietnam: Professional identities and
discourses of colonialism. TESOL in Context: Journal of ACTA [P], 3, 1-9.
Brown, A. L., &Palincsar, A. S. (1982). Inducing strategic learning from texts by means of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

110

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

informed, self-control training. Topics in Learning & Learning Disabilities, 2(1), 1-17.
Bruen, J. (2001). Strategies for success: Profiling the effective learner of German. Foreign
Language Annals, 34(3), 216-225.
Celce-Murcia,M.(1991). Grammar pedagogy in second and foreign language teaching. TESOL
Quarterly, 25(3), 459-478.
Chamot, A. U. (2004). Issues in language learning strategy research and teaching. Electronic
journal of foreign language teaching, 1(1), 14-26.
Cook, V. (1999). Going beyond the native speaker in language teaching. TESOL quarterly,
33(2), 185-209.
Crookes, G., & Schmidt, R. W. (1991). Motivation: Reopening the research agenda. Language
learning, 41(4), 469-512.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1980). Verbal reports as data. Psychological Review, 87(3),
215-251.
Jersabek, A. (2010). Why Western Approaches fail in Asia: a Classroom Action Research on
Developing Creative Processes and Knowledge Sharing Abilities. In IICS (pp. 164-169).
Ketch, K., & Santana-Williamson, E. (2002). ESL students’ attitudes toward native – and nonnative-native-speaking instructors’ accents. CATESOL Journal, 14(1) 60-64.
Kitjaroonchai, N., & Kitjaroonchai, T.(2012). Motivation Toward English Language Learning of
Thai Students Majoring in English at Asia-Pacific International University. Catalyst, 7(1).
LaBelle, J. T. (2007). Vietnamese American Experiences of English Language Learning: Ethnic
Acceptance and Prejudice. Education Faculty Research and Publications, 64.
Lai, E. (2011). Collaboration: A literature review (Vol. 2). Pearson Research Report.
Le Ha, P. (2004). University Classrooms in Vietnam: Contesting the Stereotypes. ELT Journal,
58(1), 50-57.
Lewis, M., & McCook, F. (2002). Cultures of teaching: Voices from Vietnam. ELT journal,
56(2), 146-153.
Lewis, R. (1996). Indonesian students’ learning styles. EA Journal, 14(2), 27-32.
Medgyes, P. (1992). Native or non-native: Who's worth more?. ELT Journal. 46. 340-349.
10.1093/elt/46.4.340.
Molina, G. T., Cañado, M. L. P., & Agulló, G. L. (2013). Current approaches and teaching
methods. Bilingual programmes. Chapter 4 Handbookdefinitivo.
Mondal, A. K. (2012). A comparative study of grammar translation method and communicative
approach in teaching English language. New York Science Journal, 5(5), 86-93.
Mulder, N. (1996). Inside Thai society: Interpretations of everyday life. Periplus Editions.
Nambiar, R. (2009). Learning Strategy Research--Where Are We Now. Reading Matrix: An
International Online Journal, 9(2,132-149).
Noom-Ura, S. (2013). English-teaching problems in Thailand and Thai teachers’ professional
development needs. English Language Teaching, 6(11), p139.
Office of the Basic Education Commission (OBEC). (2008). Basic education core curriculum
B.E.
2551 (A.D. 2008). Bangkok: Ministry of Education.
O'Malley, J. M., & Chamot, A. U. (1990). Learning strategies in second language acquisition.
Cambridge University Press.
Oxford, R.L. (1990). Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know. New York:
New
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

111

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Learning Strategies and Teaching Methods

Tieocharoen & Rimkeeratikul

bury House.
Pagram, P., &Pagram, J. (2006). Issues in e-learning: A Thai case study. The Electronic Journal
of Information Systems in Developing Countries, 26.
Richards, J. C.& Rodgers, T.S. (1986): Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching: A
Description and Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rockwood, H. (1995). "Cooperative and collaborative learning" The national
teaching & learning forum, 4 (6), 8-9.
Shen, F. (1989). The classroom and the wider culture: Identity as a key to learning English
composition. College composition and communication, 40(4), 459-466.
Smith, B. L., & MacGregor, J. T. (1992). What is collaborative learning.
Thongprasert, N., & Burn, J. (2003). Identifying Strategies For Effective Virtual Education
Delivery In Thailand. PACIS 2003 Proceedings, 23.
Trần, T. T. (2013). Limitation on the development of skills in higher education in Vietnam. Higher
Education, 65(5), 631-644.
Van Dang, H. (2006). Learner-Centeredness and EFL Instruction in Vietnam: A Case
Study. International Education Journal, 7(4), 598-610.
Van Van, H. O. A. N. G. (2009). The current situation and issues of the teaching of English in
Vietnam. 立命館言語文化研究, 22(1).
Varanvarn, K. (2005). Thailand’s experience in addressing the challenges of secondary education
development. Thai Ministry of Education. PPT slideshow. Retrieved from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources
Vlčková, K., Berger, J., &Völkle, M. (2013). Classification theories of foreign language learning
strategies: an exploratory analysis. Studia paedagogica, 18(4), 93-113.
Walkinshaw, I., & Duong, O. H. (2012). Native- and Non-Native Speaking English Teachers in
Vietnam: Weighing the Benefits. Tesl-Ej, 16(3).
Walkinshaw, I., &Oanh, D. H. (2014). Native and Non-Native English Language Teachers.
SAGE Open, 4(2), 2158244014534451.
Wesche, M., & Skehan, P. (2002). Communicative teaching, content-based instruction,
and task-based learning. Handbook of applied linguistics, 207-228.
Zhenhui, R. (2001). Matching teaching styles with learning styles in East Asian contexts. The
Internet TESL Journal, 7(7), 1-9.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

112

