"x"
"1" "BOOK REVIEW:"
"2" "ECONOMIC THOUGHT: A BRIEF HISTORY"
"3" "BY HEINZ D. KURZ"
"4" "REVIEWED  BY"
"5" "DAVID ANDREWS *"
"6" "*   Economics,  State University of New York at Oswego . Contact:"
"7" "david.andrews@oswego.edu"
"8" "This  “preprint”  is the accepted typescript of  a book review  that  is  forthcoming in revised form, after minor editorial changes, in the  Journal of the History of Economic Thought  (ISSN: 1053-8372), volume 4 1  (201 9 ),  March  issue.  Copyright to the journal’s articles is held by the History of Economics Society (HES), whose exclusive licensee and publisher for the journal  is Cambridge University Press ( https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-the-history-of-economic-thought ).   This  preprint  may be used only for private research and study and is not to be distributed further."
"9" "The preprint may be cited as follows:"
"10" "Andrews, David .  Review of “ Economic Thought: A Brief History ”   b y Heinz D.  Kurz .  Journal of the History of Economic Thought  41 (1) (forthcoming). Preprint at  SocArXiv ,  osf.io/preprints/ socarxiv"
"11" "T o write a brief history of economic thought involve s  difficult decisions about what topics  to include  and how much to simplify  them .  Heinz  Kurz’s  new history of economic  thought,   first published in  a  German   series  of short works  aimed  at the  non-specialist  reader ,  later  expanded somewhat and   modified for the U.S.  audience ,  is no  exception ,  treating  a large number of  topics , but considering each one  quite briefly ,  focusing on  ideas and  theories  without  providing  a great deal of historical context.   The   selection  of topics  might be termed conventional,  but  Kurz’s   book stands out in several ways from the growing field of competitors in this market ."
"12" "Kurz   is  a leading representative of  the neo-Ricardian school,  that group of scholars  inspired by  the writings of  Piero  Sraffa ,  and this history  reflects that perspective.   The book does not advocate for neo-Ricardian positions,  mentioning   the neo-Ricardian school   briefly  (with  no reference in the index) and   mentioning   Sraffa  only slightly more  often — on   eight  pages according to the index. The book  does, however,  present a neo-Ricardian interpretation of  a variety of issues,  a welcome  alternative  to  standard neoclassical histories."
"13" "Sraffa  claimed that the Classical  economic theory of Adam Smith and David Ricardo  had been “submerged and forgotten”  (Sraffa 1960: v),  conc ealed as the result of a  tendency to view   it  through  the incompatible  lens provided by   the   later  marginal theory   of value and distribution  which came to prominence late in the nineteenth century.  He  took the view that the classical theory  wa s not simply a precursor to the marginal theory,  as the neoclassical interpretation holds, but a distinct  alternative   suitable  to serve as the basis  for a critique of  marginal  theory . He did not  explain  the nature of his intended  critique in detail, but provided a clue with his demonstration  that  the  measure of capital required by the  marginal theory  as it had been  propounded  up to that time  is  logically   inconsistent , a point  on  which even Paul Samuelson came to agree ."
"14" "Neo- Ricardians  have therefore been concerned to excavate the classical theory  and to locate it relative to earlier and later writers .  The opening section of the book  might be understood as a summary  the  basic  r esults  of this research  in   chapter s  on  the  classical  theory ,   Marx, the  marginalists  and  Alfred  Marshall .  Even the chapter on early  (pre-classical)  economics reflects  the  neo-Ricardian approach. M any histories of economics begin with the seventeenth or even the eighteenth century. Others take the story back to the ancient Greeks.  Kurz  goes back all the way to the stone age , discussing   tablets inscribed with harvest infor mation in ancient Mesopotamia, making  the point  that  people  first must  produce their means of  subsistence,  with complex   economic thought  coextensive with civilization,  reflecting t he materialism Sraffa derived from the classical writers."
"15" "Kurz’s  classical theory  is   a  noble rather than  a  dismal  science ,  a classical theory  acc laiming  the power of free markets  while   recognizing  the necessity of  regulating that power .  Kurz’s  classical theory   anticipates Marx , but  it is  decidedly  liberal ,  individualistic  but  cognizant of  the inherently social character of production  characterized by  division of labor . It is   a classical theory born of the Enlightenment, committed to the  rigorous and objective  ap plication of science  to economic life in order to  improve the human condition ."
"16" "Kurz   treats  Marx   as  a humanist and scientist ,   condemning  the  ab use of Marx ’s writings  as a political touchstone  by  the Soviet Union in particular.   With great respect and sympathy, but never uncritically,  Kurz  presents   the  labor theory of value,  the  theory of surplus value,  the transformation problem,  the falling rate of profit,  reproduction and   alienation .  Kurz   also suggests  the  interesting  hypothesis   that Marx’s study  of  the development of capitalism in  America  may be related to  his  failure to publish  volume s  of his  Capital   beyond  the first ."
"17" "The  book treats the rise of  marginalism   as a challenge to  the classical theory , as it was by the early  marginalists ,   unlike the neoclassicals who view the marginal theory as an  extension and development   of classical theory .  In addition to  William Stanley  Jevons,  Carl  Menger  and  Leon  Walras ,  Kurz  addresses  continental  forerunners of the marginal theory  and  the  M ethodenstreit . Alfred Marshall gets his own short chapter , in recognition of his  large role in Sraffa’s thought   and  his influence  on the form  modern microeconomics has  taken  today, especially with respect to partial equilibrium analysis, the distinction between the long period and the short period, and the theory of supply and demand. In this context  Kurz  presents Sraffa’s criticism of Marshall’s laws of increasing and decreasing returns."
"18" "Between the chapter on Marshall and the cha pter on Keynes  are three chapters dealing with several early twentieth century discussion s. The first focuses on  Francis  Ysidro   Edgeworth,  Vilfredo  Pareto,  Arthur Cecil  Pigou and the socialist calculation debate, including  the contributions of  Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek.  The following chapter  begins with the American Institu tionalist  school  and delves into questions of monopoli stic and oligop olistic competition, including  brief discussion s  of  Ronald Coase and John Nash . The next chapter is devoted to Joseph Schumpeter, with particular attention given to the idea of creative destruction, innovation and long waves of economic development."
"19" "The  two chapters comprising the  nex t section of the book include  more consideration of  historical context than others,   one focusing  on Keynes’s  the ory, the other   on  development of macroeconomics , or the “Reaction s  to Keynes.”   Kurz’s  interpretation of Keynes   leans post-Keynesian ,   emphasizing  Keynes ’s role  a s a  critic of orthodoxy, with t he principle of ef fective  demand taking  center stage.  Wage rigidity or stickiness  appear s  only in the followi ng chapter in a section on the neoclassical synthesis.   Other “reactions”  include IS-LM, post-Keynesianism, monetarism, new classicism, new neoclassicism and the new neoclassical synthesis."
"20" "The  book also stands out in the  final  section consisting  of  two chapters  on  later twentieth century developments .   Like the section on  the early twentieth century, this final section  has little to do with neo- Ricardianism .  M any  histories do not cover this period despite its enormous importance for understanding the shape of early twenty-first century economics. In addition to Samuelson, the penultimate chapter discusses John Hicks, Kenneth Arrow and Amartya Sen. The final chapter considers “Developments in selected fields,” with sections on game theory,  capital theory (with a discussion of the Cambridge capital controversy),  growth theory, spatial and urban economics, the new economic geography,  public choice,  behavioral and experimental economics, the new institutional economics and financial market theory .  In my view, the biggest gap in coverage is the cursory discussion of the development of econometrics."
"21" "A brief history of economics requires a high degree of simplification and scholars, myself included, will find details of interpretation on which to disagree, but  Kurz’s  selection and presentation of material, informed by his impressive scholarship, is clear and judicious.  This book will appeal to several different audiences. It would useful for the general reader interested in an introduction to the history of economic thought. It would be an excellent choice for a graduate student or scholar in a related field interested in how the field of economics came to have the shape it has today. The sections on the classical theory, Marx , the  marginalists  and Marshall  will be of interest to anyone interested in  an alternative t o the  conventional approach, especially  to  those interested in  Sraffa or the neo-Ricardian perspective.   I think this book will be widely read and deservedly so."
"22" "Reference"
"23" "Sraffa, P., 1960.  Production of Commodities by Means of Commodi ties: Prelude to a Critique of  Economic Theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
