Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.22

Pp.259-270

The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test on Saudi Students’ Performance

Nesreen Alahmadi
Faculty of Art and Humanities
Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia
Musaad Alrahaili
Faculty of Art and Humanities
Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia
Doniazad Alshraideh
Faculty of Education.
Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
The current research takes place at the English language department at Taibah University, Saudi
Arabia, where all students are enrolled in undergraduate studies and must study English language
course as a core module in their first year. One of the most challenging tests faced by Saudi
students in their studies, is the summative speaking test. The test is consisting of three tasks in
which students required to go through them all. Accordingly, there is a need to seek approaches to
enhance students’ performance in the speaking test. In other words, formative assessment has not
been used to overcome the challenges faced by the Saudi students at Taibah University in the
speaking test. This research aims to investigate whether a formative speaking assessment has a
significant impact on students’ performance in the summative test. Also, it aims to monitor student
learning and to provide constructive feedback that can be used by teachers to improve students’
learning and help the students to identify their strengths and weaknesses in speaking skills. This
study concludes that formative assessment helps Saudi students to overcome the challenges they
face in speaking test. It is also recommend constructive feedback to improve their speaking
performance.
Keywords: Constructive Feedback, Formative Assessment, Speaking Performance, Speaking
skill, Summative Assessment
Cite as: Alahmadi, N., Alrahaili, M., & Alshraideh, D. (2019). The Impact of the Formative
Assessment in Speaking Test on Saudi Students’ Performance. Arab World English Journal, 10
(1) 259-270. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.22

259

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

1.Introduction
The field of education in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) has been developed noticeablely,
as teaching English has taken a new positive shape. It is quite satisfactory that teachers and students
are aware of the importance of the English Language, and tremendous efforts have been made at
every level of education to impart proficiency among students. Halliday's (2004) indicates that
language has developed "to talk about what is happening, what will happen, and what has happened
(the ideational meta-function); to interact and/or express a point of view (the interpersonal metafunction) and to turn the output of (these) into a coherent whole (the textual meta-function), (p.30).
Much emphasis is given to improve students’ English communication skills. Speaking is one of
the four skills that students should master in order to communicate properly and effectively. Ur
(1996) in her study of language teaching, indicates that speaking is one of the most important skill
intuitively, and people who know a language are referred to as ‘speakers’ of that language, as if
speaking included all other kinds of knowledge; and many if not most foreign languages learners
are interested in learning to speak, Harmer (2001) clarifies that if a person is able to speak a
language, it means that he\she possesses the knowledge of the target language’s features and has
the ability to process information when required. On the other hand, there should be a way to
assess students’ speaking skill in order to evaluate their performance. Black and William (2006)
assert that “assessment in education must serve the purpose of supporting learning” (p. 9). Many
studies have shown that assessments serve teaching learning process in different ways. Hanna &
Dettmer, (2004) also, define assessment as a process of gathering information about teaching and
learning process that enables instructors to evaluate students’ performance.
The current research emphasizes the evaluation of Saudi students’ performance who study
English language course as a core modules at their first year in their undergraduates study. The
course is a pre-requisite for medical and science programs at Taibah University. The course aims
to take students from the A1Level of CEFR (The common European Framework of Reference for
Language) entrance ability and exit them at the B1 language level based on the CEFR language
levels scale. As a part of English language assessment procedures for measuring students’ English
proficiency in the four language skills, Saudi students are required to take four English-speaking
tests over two semesters. Speaking tests are initially summative which is considered to be one of
the most challenging tasks for students. This research aims to answer the following questions:
What is the impact of the formative assessment in speaking tests on students’ performance? Does
formative speaking assessment help the students to identify their weaknesses and strengths?
2. Background
2.1 Assessments and Feedback
Assessment is a process of gathering information systematically. It is an essential element in the
teaching-learning process that enables teachers to evaluate their methods of teaching and provides
them with the required information regarding the learners’ progress. Huhta (as cited in
Spolsky&Hult, 2008) refers to assessment as “all kinds of procedures used to assess individuals
(e.g., informal observations, self-assessments, quizzes, interviews, tests)” (p. 469). Teachers
should assess their students frequently in order to monitor their improvement and measure their
ability to master the essential skills. When teachers consider an assessment task, they usually have
some questions in their mind such as: “When and how often shall we assess the students?”, or “How
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

260

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

should we conduct an assessment procedure?” The question of “What” and “Why” rarely comes
to teachers’ mind (Bachman & Palmer, 2010).
Teachers have many reasons for being interested in using feedback in their teaching
practices. They are likely to be interested to know generally, what they are doing and how teaching
should be done. Feedback refers to specific information that teachers provide to their students
related to the task or learning process. The purpose is to fill in the gap between what the student
understands and what is aimed to be finally understood (Hattie & Timperley, 2007). It provides
teachers with a whole picture of their good practice and improvements they may achieve in
teaching. Others teachers need feedback to be able to document the quality of their teaching skills.
Research has shown that either type of feedback is better than none, and that, the more information
is provided in the feedback, the greater is the impact on the resulting performance measured (Olina
& Sullivan, 2002; Whyte, Karolick, Nielsen, Elder, & Hawley, 1995). Learners also need feedback
to gain a better achievement in their summative assessment and also to help improve attendance
and retention of learning. Akter, (2010) proves that giving feedback to learners on their
performance is an essential aspect of effective teaching. Feedback can either be positive or
negative and may serve not only to show learners how well they have performed but also to
motivate them and build a supportive classroom climate.
2.2 Differences Between Formative and Summative Assessment
Assessment is vital to the education process. Schools, universities and Ministries or departments
of education may use summative assessments and evaluations. In addition, assessment may also
serve a formative function. In classrooms, formative assessment refers to frequent, interactive
assessments of student’s progress and understanding to identify learners’ needs and adjust teaching
appropriately. “Teachers using formative assessment approaches and techniques are better
prepared to meet diverse students’ needs”. (Burner, 1996, p2)
Formative assessment methods are necessary to raise overall levels of student’s achievement.
Quantitative and qualitative research on formative assessment are proved as one of the most
important interventions for promoting high-performance ever studied. Black and Wiliam(1998)
concluded that:
formative assessment does improve learning. The gains in achievement appear to be quite
considerable, and as noted earlier, among the largest ever reported for educational
interventions. As an illustration of just how big these gains are, an effect size of 0.7, if it
could be achieved on a nation-wide scale, would be equivalent to raising the mathematics
attainment score of an ‘average’ country like England, New Zealand or the United States
into the ‘top five’ after the Pacific Rim countries of Singapore, Korea, Japan and Hong
Kong. (p. 61)
These findings provide a strong foundation for further research on effective teaching, learning and
assessment strategies. On the other hand, the aim of the summative assessment is usually focus on
evaluating students’ learning at the end of instructional units, lessons, or course specifications and
syllables. It is frequently comparing it against some particular test specifications or standard
checklists. Consequently, Summative assessments are often considered to be a high stakes form
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

261

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

of assessment, which means it been recognized as a “high point value assessment”. Some examples
of summative assessments include; final or midterm exams, graduation projects, scientific papers
or writing compositions. Generally, gathered information from summative assessments has a
profound influence on students’ development or faculty members to reflect on their own teaching
in the future.
2.2.1 Formative Assessment
Formative assessment has been interpreted in many ways. Black and Wiliam (1998) define it as
the whole activities undertaken by teachers, and/or by their students, which provide information
that can be used as feedback to modify the teaching and learning activities in which they are
engaged. Formative assessment can be used to facilitate the learning process in the classroom, and
it might help the students in their learning. Tahir, Tariq, Mubashira and Rabbia (2012) state that
formative assessment is a diagnostic use of assessment that provides feedback to teachers and
students throughout instructions. Marsh (2007) claims that formative testing is a kind of strategies,
which is designed to identify learner’s learning difficulties in order to provide remediation
procedures to enhance the performance of the majority of students. The information provided to
the students must be used in order for the assessment to be described as a formative one. The
Assessment Reform Group (ARG) describes formative assessment as the process of looking for
and interpreting evidence for teachers and their learners to decide where the learners fit in their
learning, where they need to go, and how best to get there (Assessment Reform Group, 2007).
Kathy (2013) also claims that formative testing aims for an analysis of learners’ learning
difficulties to improve their academic achievement.
2.2.2 Summative Assessment
According to Black, Harrison, Lee, Marshall, Wiliam (2003), summative assessment is given
periodically to determine at a particular point in time what students know and do not know.
Summative assessment comes after the learning has been completed and provides information and
feedback that sums up the teaching and learning process. Typically, no more formal learning is
taking place at this stage, other than incidental learning which might take place through the
completion of projects and assignments. For Scriven (1967), summative evaluation provided
information to judge the general value of an educational program (as compared with some
alternative), whereas the results of formative evaluation were targeted to facilitate the educational
program. According to Shepard (2006), a summative assessment should fulfill its main purpose of
documenting what students know and can do but, if carefully crafted, should also successfully
meet a secondary purpose of support for learning. Yorke (2003) defines summative assessment as
evaluation of the extent to which students meet the course’s objectives through a midterm or final
examination. Summative assessment has been contrasted with the formative one, which has its
roots in the field of program evaluation. According to Atkin, Black, & Coffey (2005), summative
assessment is an assessment given at the end of a learning period to conclude if learning occurred,
and often to place some value (score) on how much learning had occurred or to quantify how much
a learner knows about the subject matter.
2.3 Applying Formative and Summative Assessments in Education
Recent research suggests that taking tests can enhance learning by strengthening the representation
of information retrieved during the test, and it also slows the rate of forgetting (Rohrer and Pashler,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

262

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

2010). Many studies and research have been conducted to show the effect of assessments on
teaching. Dhindsa, Omar, and Waldrip (2007) claim that examining students’ perceptions of
assessment stimulate them to develop an authentic assessment approach that “rewards genuine
effort and in-depth learning rather than measuring luck” (p. 1262). Assessment in education is an
essential tool of the 20th century. Scriven (1967) proposes the use of “Formative and Summative”
assessment to distinguish between the roles of evaluation. Hence, an assessment is perceived to
serve two different purposes: 1) informative, to improve teaching and learning process, and, 2)
summative to measure students’ achievement. (p. 4). In order to investigate the effect of formative
assessment on students’ achievement in secondary school Mathematics, Moysore (2015)
conducted a study to evaluate the effectiveness of the formative assessment; the experimental
research design was employed in that study. One hundred and twenty (120) Mathematics students
in secondary II Art classes in two public schools in Iseyin Local Government of Oyo State, Nigeria
were selected through purposive technique made up the study sample. Findings from analysis
revealed that formative assessment has a strong significant difference in the mean achievement
score of Mathematics students that are exposed to it (t = 36.54, p =000) while there is no significant
difference in the mean achievement scores of student who are not exposed to formative assessment
(t=2.053, p = 0.045). Feedback used as part of formative assessment helps learners become aware
of any gaps that exist between their anticipated goal and their existing knowledge, understanding,
or skill and guides them through actions necessary to obtain the goal (Sadler, 2005). Ross (2005)
used a mixed methods approach, which included self-assessment as a form of formative
assessment, to study Japanese undergraduates who were enrolled in a two-year, sixteen course
English for academic purposes program. Analyses showed that formative assessments produced
higher language proficiency growth than those who were assessed by summative assessments only.
Also, it revealed that even though formative assessment can produce substantive increases in
achievement and proficiency growth, this impact might be domain-dependent, e.g., language
listening comprehension improvement. However, this research is an attempt to focus on the impact
of formative assessment in the speaking test on Students’ performance.
However, the course of the current study is a skill-based course that focuses on developing
the general and academic language skills of the first-year English language students at the English
language department, Taibah University. The major aim of this specific course is to develop
students’ language skills and competencies by exposing them to a variety of general and academic
contexts at the beginner, elementary and advanced elementary language levels. In addition, the
course builds the students' abilities in the language area through equipping them with a wide range
of vocabulary and grammatical structures. Moreover the course develops the learners' cognitive
skills such as analyzing, criticizing, synthesizing, and evaluate what students need at the university
stage.
As a part of the English department assessment procedures for measuring students’ English
proficiency in the four language skills, the students are required to take multiple summative
speaking tests during the academic year. English Speaking tests in this case study is considered to
be one of the most thought-provoking tasks for Saudi students. To overcome the challenge of the
speaking test faced by students, the English Language Department (ELD) administration provides
teachers with three materials as a part of test preparation: test specification with examples,
practices with model answers and exercises for teachers. All teachers are encouraged to share these
materials with their students. Therefore, this research been conducted to evaluate the formative
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

263

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

assessment based on the materials provided by the English language department in order to
facilitate students’ learning and help them in the speaking test.
3. Research Methodology
A class of 30 first-year female students at the English Language department was divided randomly
into two groups; controlled group and uncontrolled group. Each group has 15 students. Controlled
group refers to the students who do not receive formative assessment while the uncontrolled group
refers to the students who receive both formative and summative speaking tests. All students are
homogeneous in terms of their education, ethnicity and age.
3.1 Description of Assessments Tasks
Both formative and summative speaking assessments are of three tasks; two teachers assess each
student. The assessment begins with a one minute ungraded introductory chat between the assessor
and the student. In this part of the test, the assessor greets the student and confirms the student’s
name and ID number. The assessor then explains the format of the assessment to the student. This
speaking assessment consists of three tasks: a dialogue, a description of a picture, and a reaction
to a situation.
3.1.1 Task 1: A dialogue
In this part of the test, students have two-way discussion with the two assessors about the themes
and topics covered in the book as part of the English language curriculum. The assessors explain
to the student the format of this part by saying, in this first part, I am going to ask you some
questions, and I would like you answer them in full sentences. Do you understand?.
3.1.2 Task 2: A description of A Picture
In this part of the test, the assessor starts saying to the students, I will give you a picture, and I
want you to describe what you see in the picture. I would like you to speak about what you see for
about one minute. Students are required to describe a picture, based on the themes and topics
covered in the book.
3.1.3 Task 3: A reaction to A Situation
In this part of the test, the assessor tells the student, I will describe a situation to you, and I want
you to respond with one or two sentences to the situation. Are you ready? Students are required to
respond to a particular situation, based on the themes and topics covered in the course book. The
assessor randomly selects a different question for each task. Students are not given the chance to
change any question.
The test takes six minutes and weights 10 scores. Two assessors assess students’
performances in the three tasks. Based on a unified rubric designed and accredited by the ELD
administration. Students are assessed on the range, accuracy, fluency, interaction, and coherence.
It is worth noting that the uncontrolled group was given feedback about taking the formative
assessment and their weakness and strength areas were pointed out.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

264

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

4. Data Analysis and Findings
For analytical purposes, the students’ scores were computed in continuous numerical variables
range from one to ten values in which one refers to fail, and ten refers to excellence. The data of
the formative assessment has been collected one week before administering the summative
speaking test. All data have been processed by the statistical package for the social science (SPSS).
Some analytical procedures have been used to investigate whether a formative assessment has a
positive impact on the summative assessment such as frequency, means, standard deviation and
One-Way ANOVA.
4.1 Descriptive Statistics:
Table (1) shows that the uncontrolled group’s scores in the summative speaking test are very high.
The majority of the students get A+. On the other hand, Table (2) indicates that the students’
scores are distributed across all grades from A+ to F.
Table (1): Students’ scores
group)
Students’
Frequen
Grades
cy
C+
1
B+
1
A
1
A+
12
Total
15

in speaking summative test (Uncontrolled
Percent
6.7
6.7
6.7
80.0
100.0

Valid
Percent
6.7
6.7
6.7
80.0
100.0

Cumulative
Percent
6.7
13.3
20.0
100.0

Table (2): Students’ scores in speaking summative test (Controlled
group)
Students’
Frequenc Percent Valid
Cumulative
Grades
y
Percent
Percent
F+
1
6.7
6.7
6.7
D
2
13.3
13.3
20.0
C+
3
20.0
20.0
40.0
B+
2
13.3
13.3
53.3
A
2
13.3
13.3
66.7
A+
5
33.3
33.3
100.0
Total
15
100.0
100.0
These results are supported with focused group discussion. The majority of the students of the
uncontrolled group demonstrated that formative assessment and the feedback that they received
helped them to overcome three main issues related to the speaking test, which are (accuracy,
fluency and coherence)
4.2 Comparing Means Statistics
One-way ANOVA analysis was conducted to investigate whether the means of controlled
group’s scores differ significantly from the scores of uncontrolled group. Table (3) and (4) shows
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

265

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

that there was a significant effect of formative assessment on students’ scores in the summative
speaking test at the p<. 05 level [F (1, 7.76) = 4.68, p = 0.01].
Table (3): Scores of students in the summative speaking test as a function of
controlled and uncontrolled groups

Summativ
e speaking
test

Between
Groups
Within
Groups
Total

Sum of
Squares
36.300

df
1

Mean
Square
36.300

131.067

28

4.681

167.367

29

F

Sig.

7.76

.01

Table (4): Means of the scores of students in the summative speaking test as a
function of controlled and uncontrolled groups
N
Mean
Std. D
Std.
95% Confidence
Error
Interval for Mean
Lower
Upper
Bound
Bound
Controlled group
15
7.33
2.845
.735
5.76
8.91
Uncontrolled group
15
9.53
1.125
.291
8.91
10.16
Total
30
8.43
2.402
.439
7.54
9.33
Mod Fixed
2.164
.395
7.62
9.24
el
Effects
Random
1.100
-5.5422.41
Effects
Note: Formative assessment of uncontrolled group (mean= 7.40 and standard
deviation=1.68
These results are supported with focused group discussion. The majority of the students of the
uncontrolled group demonstrated that formative assessment and the feedback that they have
received help them to overcome the same issues mentioned above related to the speaking test.
5.Discussion
The figures mentioned above indicate the value of the formative assessment. The results clearly
show an improvement in the overall performance of the speaking test, which resulted in gaining
higher marks for students in the “uncontrolled group”. Interestingly, students who were given
feedback in their formative assessment were able to perform better than the “controlled group” in
terms of accuracy and coherence. On the other hand, the study’ results indicate a significant
difference in student’s performance in the speaking test for the controlled group, as the students in
this group had taken only the summative assessment without any feedback. Recent contributions
to the literature show that there is a transition from the conventional summative assessment
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

266

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

approach of language learning outcomes to gradually integrating formative assessments, but this
is only a continuing process (Davison, 2004).
Therefore, the process of the formative assessment, which included in this study, indicates
that when students are aware of their strengths and weaknesses they were able to perform better in
their speaking test. It is a process through which they find out about their learning. The process
involves them in recognizing, evaluating, and reacting to their own learning outcome. Students did
reflect on their own performance, as well as they have received constructive feedback from their
teacher such as pointing out their language errors, e.g. (grammatical and phonological errors).
Formative assessment outcome in this study is also an indication of the importance of proper
feedback to students in which teachers find out about the effectiveness of the learning process.
Accordingly, Chickering and Gamson (1991) claim that frequent feedback as a result of formative
assessments can keep students on task by helping to identify areas in which the student is not
performing well. It can be viewed as the process by which teachers gather assessment information
about the students’ learning and then respond to promote further learning and better performance.
For example, assessment should contribute to instructions and learning. However, assessment after
the instructions are over, does not allow the assessment to contribute to any instructional decisions.
This can conclude to what extent can students master some amount of content. Thus, assessment
must be a continuous process that facilitates “on-line” instructional decision-making in the
classroom. (Gitomer & Duschl, 1995, p. 307).
6.Limitations
The size of the sample was small. The results of the study cannot be assumed to be generalizable
to other populations beyond this group of subjects. Rather, this study should be considered as an
exploratory investigation that has the goal of identifying possible issues and trends for further
research.
7.Conclusion
The discussion raised in this study shows the value of the formative assessment. The results clearly
indicate an improvement in the overall performance of the speaking test which resulted in gaining
higher marks for students in the “uncontrolled group”.
Referring to the findings of this study, it could be concluded that when the formative
assessment is implied, it improves the students’ performance in the speaking skills and also enables
them to understand the contents of the subject properly, which is better than the use of summative
test only. In addition, formative assessment tested in this case study plays a crucial role in
enhancing students’ learning process by giving continues structured feedback.
Moreover, formative assessment places an emphasis on the process of teaching and
learning, and actively involving students in that process through stressing the importance and the
impact of formative assessment, which is identified in this research. The purpose of this research
is to highlight whether students’ performance will be affected or not when undertakes this type of
assessment and when students provided with constructive feedback, in comparison to students who
undertake the summative assessment only. Assessment in general, accounts for "supporting
learning (formative), certifying the achievement or potential of individuals (summative), and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

267

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

evaluating the quality of educational institutions or programs (evaluative)" (Wiliam,& Thompson
2008).
However, both formative and summative assessment influences learning. In other words,
to improve learning outcomes, we need to consider not only the teaching and learning activities,
but also the assessment tasks (Gipps & James, 1998). Additionally, the extent to which formative
assessment improves learning outcomes is now being recognized. For example, Black and Wiliam
(1998), in their review of classroom assessment, boldly state: that formative assessment does
improve learning. The gains in achievement appear to be quite considerable, and as noted earlier,
amongst the largest ever reported for educational interventions. (p. 61)
To sum up, the value of formative assessment in this research was briefly introduced in
order to highlight its importance to the teachers’ existing practice, as well as to raise students’
awareness of their English speaking competence. Moreover, formative assessment is a practical
method that enables students to learn English effectively as well as to adjust and reflect on their
own learning by the constructive feedback received. It also expands and deepens their knowledge
of the language as they are supposed to be assessed regularly and thoroughly.
About the Authors:
Dr. Nesreen Alahmadi is an Assistant Professor at Tibah University. She received her
P.hD in Applied linguistics, School of Languages, Culture, and Societies at Leeds
University, United Kingdom. Her research interests include, Second Language
Acquisition and English Language Teaching and Learning.
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2211-5813
Dr. Musaad Alrahaili is an Assistant Professor at Tibah University. He received his MA
and P.hD from the University of Newcastle, Australia. His teaching interests include
Sociolinguistics, Discourse Analysis and Pragmatics.
Dr. Doniazad AlShraideh is an Assistant Professor at Taibah University. She received her
Ph.D. in English Language Curriculum and Instruction Specification/TEFL from Yarmouk
University, Jordan. Her research interests include, English Teaching Methods and Language
Learning. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8461-5955

References
Akter, L. (2010). Teacher talk time in ESL classrooms in Bangladesh (Doctoral dissertation,
BRAC University).
Atkin, J., Black, P., & Coffey, J. (Eds.) (2005). Classroom Assessment and the National Science
Education Standards. Committee on Classroom Assessment and the National Science
Education Standards, Center for Education, National Research Council. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Assessment Reform Group. (2007). Assessment for learning. Retrieved on March 11, 2010, from
http://www.assessment-reform-group.org/ASF.html
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

268

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

Bachman, L.& Palmer, A. (2010). Language Assessment in Practice. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Black, P., Harrison, C., Lee, C., Marshall, B., & Wiliam, D. (2003) Assessment for Learning:
Putting it into practice. Berkshire, England: Open University Press.
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education:
principles, policy & practice, 5(1), 7-74.
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (2006). Assessment for learning in the classroom. Assessment and
learning, 9-25.
Bruner, J. (1996), The Culture of Education, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Chickering, A. W. & Gamson Z. F.(Eds.). (1991). Applying the seven principles for good
practice in undergraduate education. San Fransisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Davison, C. (2004). The contradictory culture of teacher-based assessment: ESL teacher
assessment practices in Australian and Hong Kong secondary schools. Language
Testing, 21(3), 305-334.
Dhindsa, H. S., Omar, K., & Waldrip, B. (2007). Upper secondary Bruneian science students’
perceptions of assessment. International Journal of Science Education, 29(10), 1261-1280.
Gitomer, D. H., & Duschl, R. A. (1995). Moving toward a portfolio culture in science education.
Learning science in the schools: Research reforming practice, 299-326.
Hanna, G. S., & Dettmer, P. A. (2004). Assessment for effective teaching: Using contextadaptive planning. Boston, MA: Pearson A&B
Harmer, Jeremy. (2001). The practice of English language teaching. Harlow: Longman.
Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of educational research,
77(1), 81-112.
Halliday, M.A.K. (2004). An Introduction To Functional Grammar. Oxford University
Press.
Huhta, A. (2008). Diagnostic and Formative Assessment. In Spolsky, B. and Hult, F. M. (Ed.)
(2008). The Handbook of Educational Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kathy Dyer (2013) 22 Essay Assessment Technique for Measuring In Teaching Learning .Grow
.The Education blog www .nwea.org 1-22 Essay formative Assessment.
Marsh, C. J. (2007). A critical analysis of the use of formative assessment in schools.
Educational research for policy and practice, 6(1), 25-29.
Moyosore,O.A.(2015). The Effect of Formative Assessment on Student’s Achievement In
Secondary School Mathematics. International Journal of Education and Research, 3(10),
481-490.
Natriello, G. (1987). The impact of evaluation processes on students. Educational Psychologist,
22(2), 155-175.
Olina, Z., & Sullivan, H. J. (2002). Effects of classroom evaluation strategies on student
achievement and attitudes. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50(3),
61-75.
Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2010). Recent research on human learning challenges conventional
instructional strategies. Educational Researcher, 39(5), 406-412.
Ross, S. J. (2005). The impact of assessment method on foreign language proficiency growth.
Applied linguistics, 26(3), 317-342.
Sadler, D. R. (2005). Interpretations of criteria‐based assessment and grading in higher
education. Assessment &Evaluation in Higher Education, 30(2), 175-194.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

269

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Impact of the Formative Assessment in Speaking Test

Alahmadi, Alrahaili & Alshraideh

Scriven, M. (1967). The methodology of evaluation. In Perspectives of curriculum evaluation,
ed. R.W. Tyler, R.M. Gagne, and M. Scriven, 39–83. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Shepard, L.A. (2006). Classroom assessment. In Educational measurement, 4th ed., ed. R.L.
Brennan, 623–46. Westport, CT: American Council on Education/Praeger.
Mehmood, T., Hussain, T., Khalid, M., & Azam, R. (2012). Impact of formative assessment on
academic achievement of secondary school students. International Journal of Business
and Social Science, 3(17).
Ur, P. (1996). A course in language teaching: practice and theory [M] Cambridge University
Press.
Whyte, M. M., Karolick, D. M., Nielsen, M. C., Elder, G. D., & Hawley, W. T. (1995).
Cognitive styles and feedback in computer-assisted instruction. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 12(2), 195-203.
Weir, C. J. (2005). Language testing and validation: An evidence-based approach. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan
Wiliam, D., & Thompson, M. (2008). Integrating assessment with learning: What will it take to
make it work? In C. A. Dwyer (Ed.). The future of assessment: Shaping teaching and
learning. (pp. 53-82). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Yorke, M. (2003). Formative assessment in higher education: Moves towards theory and the
enhancement of pedagogic practice. Higher education, 45(4), 477-501.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

270

