Running head: COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

Communication networks do not explain the growth or survival of early-stage peer production
projects

Jeremy Foote
Northwestern University
Aaron Shaw
Northwestern University
Benjamin Mako Hill
University of Washington

1

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

Abstract
Communication enables coordination and social integration in collaborative groups. In the
contexts of work groups and teams, prior research finds that more dense and integrated
communication structures support better performance. We explore the relationship between
communication structure and group performance in a population of early-stage peer production
wiki communities engaged in the collaborative production of shared information resources. We
theorize that there is an especially strong need for coordination and social integration in small,
newly formed online communities, and that communities with relatively more integrative
communication networks will be more successful. We test this theory by measuring
communication network structure and group outcomes in a population of 1,002 nascent wikis.
Contrary to prior literature and our expectations, we find a very weak relationship between
communication structure and collaborative performance. We suggest a number of explanations,
including the role of shared artifacts in coordinating work and integrating newcomers.
Keywords: peer production, group formation, social network analysis, online communities

2

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

3

Communication networks do not explain the growth or survival of early-stage peer production
projects
Introduction
Work teams perform best when members of the team are socially integrated and when the
team is efficient in coordinating its activities. A large body of research has shown that socially
integrated and effective coordination are enabled by and reflected in patterns of communication.
High performing teams have communication networks which are more dense, less hierarchical,
and more integrative (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Cummings & Cross, 2003; Reagans &
Zuckerman, 2001).
Nearly all of this research has studied work groups consisting of paid employees, typically
coordinating face-to-face on projects which they are assigned to. The Internet has made new ways
of organizing production possible that produce enormously valuable information goods without
firms, payment, task allocation, or face-to-face interactions. What do productive communication
structures look like for these groups?
Commons-based peer production communities like those that produce Wikipedia and
open-source software are engaged in complex information resource creation and organization.
However, they are composed primarily of unpaid volunteers with minimal formal hierarchy who
rarely meet face-to-face. If successful work groups require dense, integrative networks even when
working and talking face-to-face, it seems like integrative structures would be even more
important for group performance when communication happens only via text and when group
members can leave at any time without financial or career consequences. These patterns of
communication should be particularly important in newly formed groups, which engage in
establishing norms and priorities (Tuckman, 1965).
We use an extensive population of new peer production projects—1,002 online wikis from
Wikia—to identify the network communication structures that are associated with higher rates of
community productivity and longevity. Surprisingly, we find that network structure does not
predict the performance of networked organizations producing networked artifacts. We find that

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

4

neither productivity nor longevity have a discernible relationship with measures of integrative
network structure. We discuss two ways in which the affordances of peer production might
explain the results we find. First, early-stage wikis may require less coordination and social
integration than work groups. Second, peer production groups can coordinate via artifacts in ways
that traditional work groups may not be able to. This “stigmergic” coordination allows them to
coordinate work and priorities without direct communication. Our findings suggest that these
affordances allow peer production groups to work together and survive without the social
structures previous research has suggested as necessary for small groups to function.

Coordination & Social Integration in Organizations

Many groups and organizations use communication to engage in complex coordination and
information-sharing activities that advance their collective goals. An input-process-output (I-P-O)
model of team functioning provides a framework for understanding this, where the inputs are the
attributes, knowledge, and resources of team members, the process includes the interaction
between team members, such as information sharing, social influence, and communication, and
the output includes the work produced as well as changes to the team members or their relations
to one another (Ilgen, Hollenbeck, Johnson, & Jundt, 2005; Mathieu, Maynard, Rapp, & Gilson,
2008).
Two of the most important aspects of the ‘process’ portion of the I-P-O model are
coordination and social integration. Coordination involves linking together different actors
towards collective tasks (Van De Ven, Delbecq, & Koenig, 1976). The amount and type of
coordination needed depends on the tasks a group is engaged in. For example, more
interdependent processes require more coordination (Tushman, 1979; Van De Ven et al., 1976).
One type of coordination occurs at the organization level, allowing teams to build a shared
understanding of their goals and what needs to be done (Mathieu, Heffner, Goodwin, Salas, &
Cannon-Bowers, 2000). Another type of coordination occurs at the resource level, as team

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

5

members learn who has various resources or capabilities and how to access these resources
(Kotlarsky, van den Hooff, & Houtman, 2015; Wegner, 1987).
While different communication network structures can work better for different group or
task types, dense, fairly egalitarian, well-integrated networks allow information to flow efficiently
(Katz, Lazer, Arrow, & Contractor, 2005). These structures may be especially important in
groups collaborating over computer-mediated communication channels since these groups often
have more difficulties coordinating their work (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; P. J. Hinds & Bailey,
2003; Kotlarsky et al., 2015) and creating shared understanding (P. J. Hinds & Mortensen, 2005).
Building shared understanding requires social integration, which is the second important
group process. Virtual teams, work groups, and other collaborative groups are social
organizations whose ability to process inputs relates to their degree of social cohesion.
Communication is especially important in helping to create social integration (Gibbs, Kim, & Ki,
2016). Through communication, new members learn about group norms and expectations and
start to identify as a member of the group (Scott, 2007). When group members see group
membership as a key part of their identity they are more willing to sacrifice their own goals in
order to contribute to the group’s goals (Van Knippenberg, 2000). This social integration tends to
support effective and long-lasting collaboration.
Inclusive, integrative communication structures allow for and reflect effective patterns of
coordination and social integration. A large body of empirical research by communication,
organization, and psychology scholars has studied the relationship between communication
patterns and group performance in firm-based work groups and distributed or virtual teams.
Overall, this research finds that highly integrated communication structures correlate with better
task performance (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Cummings & Cross, 2003; P. J. Hinds & Kiesler,
2002; Reagans, Zuckerman, & McEvily, 2004).
It is much less clear how these results might apply to other types of teams. Because nearly
all of the previous research has studied firm-based teams, Cummings and Cross (2003) call for a
better understanding of “. . . informal organizations where there are performance goals, yet there

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

6

are not constraints from formal hierarchy or other cultural norms that impose structures” (p. 209).
Our work takes up that call.

Communication networks in commons-based peer production
Specifically, we consider the relationship between communication networks and
performance in the context of commons-based peer production (CBPP). Coined by Benkler
(2002), “commons-based peer production” describes a mode of organizing the creation of publicly
accessibly information goods through the mass aggregation of many small contributions. The
most well-known examples of CBPP are Wikipedia and open-source software like GNU/Linux
and Firefox. These projects have been able to coordinate the efforts of hundreds of thousands of
volunteers to create products that often outcompete market-based alternatives (Benkler, 2006).
CBPP projects differ from firm-based work groups along a number of important
dimensions, including organizational structure, membership composition, and communication
tools (Benkler, 2016). In terms of organizational structure, CBPP projects rarely have clear,
formal governance or management hierarchies when they begin. While a small number of users
have technological tools (e.g., for banning vandals), these users do not typically make
assignments or organize tasks. In terms of membership, CBPP participants are primarily
volunteers who can come or go at will, rather than paid employees. Finally, communication in
these projects typically happens through text-based, computer-mediated channels rather than
face-to-face, which makes coordination both more important and more difficult (DeSanctis &
Monge, 1998; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Wiesenfeld, Raghuram, & Garud, 1998).
At first blush, it seems like this open, participatory structure would lead to similarly
egalitarian structures of communication and participation resembling the integrative networks
characteristic of effective work groups and virtual teams. However, prior research indicates that
many of the largest CBPP projects possess extremely unequal levels of participation with a group
of core contributors who make most of the contributions, supplemented by a “long tail” of more
peripheral contributors who each add very little (Keegan, Gergle, & Contractor, 2013; Matei &

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

7

Britt, 2017; Schweik & English, 2012). Similar patterns characterize the communication
networks of these mature projects, with sparse networks which have many contributors on the
periphery (Crowston, Wei, Li, & Howison, 2006) and high levels of hierarchy (Crowston &
Howison, 2006). These patterns likely stem from the incredibly low barriers to entry and exit in
CBPP which allow for incredibly low-commitment contributions, a dynamic which simply
doesn’t exist for firm-based groups.

However, this research suffers from a few limitations. First, it is descriptive rather than
inferential. That is, it does not typically seek to understand the relationship between differences in
network structures and project outcomes. These studies provide evidence that CBPP is less
integrative than work groups, but that does not mean that relatively less integrative CBPP projects
are more or less successful. There have been exceptions to this limitation, and a few papers have
compared community structures across projects. In this research, equality of participation and
network density typically have a negative relationship with performance and community growth
(D. Hinds & Lee, 2009; Qin, Cunningham, & Salter-Townshend, 2015; Roth, Taraborelli, &
Gilbert, 2008).

Even these papers often suffer from the second limitation, which is a focus on relatively
mature communities that have already produced substantial resources. While some work includes
smaller communities (e.g. Kittur & Kraut, 2010; Roth et al., 2008; Schweik & English, 2012) or
considers early stages of peer production projects directly (e.g. Foote, Gergle, & Shaw, 2017),
only one small-scale study has explicitly examined the structure of early communities (D. Hinds
& Lee, 2009). The typical focus on popular, mature projects may explain the prevalence of
hierarchical, sparse, and unequal networks in the CBPP literature. As we discuss more extensively
in the next section, there are a number of reasons to believe that early-stage communities differ
from large-scale projects in ways that predict a greater need for integrative networks.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

8

Communication in nascent peer production communities
Our approach looks at a population of projects when they are at the same early stage. While
the largest CBPP communities boast millions of participants, most CBPP communities never
grow larger than a few members (Schweik & English, 2012). If we want to understand the way
that CBPP works—and when it doesn’t—we should focus much more attention on early projects.
Studying only the relatively rare large and successful projects “selects on the dependent variable.”
How might we expect coordination and social integration processes to occur in early-stage CBPP
and what sorts of communication structures would reflect productive and long-lasting
communities? The empirical evidence, primarily from lage-scale CBPP projects, suggests that
dense communication networks are weakly, but negatively, associated with performance (Qin
et al., 2015; Roth et al., 2008). While it is tempting to assume that these findings are common to
all CBPP, there are a number of theoretical and empirical reasons to believe that early-stage
projects have a different composition of members and different objectives than mature projects.
First, organizational theories suggest that groups go through different stages with different
communicative needs. For example, Tuckman (1965) claims that early groups go through stages
of orientation and norm creation before they can successfully cooperate. How, when, and whether
these group formation stages happen in CBPP is not well understood, but empirical work suggests
that CBPP communities do engage in different types of work at different stages. For example,
Schweik and English (2012) find that open source software projects experience phases of growth,
maturity, and decline. Distinct patterns of leadership, governance arrangements, and collective
behavior characterize each phase and explain variation in project outcomes. Related research has
found that as they grow communities become more structured (Kittur & Kraut, 2010; Shaw &
Hill, 2014; TeBlunthuis, Shaw, & Hill, 2018). This theoretical and empirical evidence suggests
that early-stage communities have different sets of needs such as norm-formation and
goal-setting, which should require inclusive, broad conversations among group members.
Second, early-stage projects are likely composed of contributors who differ from later
users. CBPP projects have often been characterized as public goods and subject to theories of

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

9

collective action. According to these theories, early contributions often have a lower
benefit-to-cost ratio (Marwell & Oliver, 1993; Monge et al., 1998). For example, in our context
wiki founders must choose a name for the wiki, create navigation pages, and recruit contributors.
None of these activities directly contribute to the good of a shared information artifact. In public
goods like these, we would expect that more interested and more resource-rich individuals will
choose to make early contributions (Marwell & Oliver, 1993). Indeed, empirical work provides
some evidence that contributors to new CBPP communities are more active and experienced than
others (Foote & Contractor, 2018). Related CBPP research shows the importance of having a core
group like this to coordinate work and integrate newcomers (Kittur & Kraut, 2010). Those who
have been integrated are more willing to contribute toward group goals (Kittur, Pendleton, &
Kraut, 2009) and are more likely to continue participating in the community (Halfaker, Geiger, &
Terveen, 2014).
These theories suggest that members of nascent online communities are a more dedicated
set of participants engaged in work that requires more interdependence than mature projects.
Therefore, we expect early-stage CBPP projects to benefit from integrative communication
structures similar to those found in effective work groups. We use these insights to present a
number of hypotheses about the relationship between communication structures and project
success.
Scholars have measured success in CBPP communities in different ways, from membership
growth to artifact quality to contribution amount (Howison, Inoue, & Crowston, 2006; Roth et al.,
2008; Schweik & English, 2012; H. Zhu, Kraut, & Kittur, 2012). We focus on two outcomes
which wiki founders reported as most important to them: the creation of information
(productivity) and building a long-lasting community (longevity) (Foote et al., 2017). These
outcomes also match up with the processes we have hypothesized as important, with coordination
processes relating more closely to productivity and social integration relating more to community
longevity. Communication structure can also be characterized in many different ways. We borrow
from the communication and management literature on teams and networks to identify four

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

10

features of communication structure: centralization, density, hierarchy, and periphery size. We
discuss how each feature relates to coordination and social integration and make hypotheses about
how each might relate to productivity and longevity in early-stage CBPP projects.

Centralization
Centralization refers to variance in how many others each person in a network is connected
to. When a few people are much more connected than others, centralization is high. While higher
variance in contributions correlates with CBPP community productivity (Kittur & Kraut, 2010;
Qin et al., 2015), theories of group formation suggest that highly centralized communities will
have difficulty in forming shared norms and coordinating who knows what.
H1a: Centralization will have a negative relationship with productivity.
By definition, a highly centralized community has many members who are are not well
connected to others and therefore have less opportunity to become socially integrated. People
who are not integrated are likely to leave the community.
H1b: Centralization will have a negative relationship with longevity

Hierarchy
Hierarchy in networks refers to how circular communication flows are. Hierarchy is high
when communication only moves one way. The intuition is that a network is hierarchical if
commands and communication move in one direction but not the other. While hierarchy may
reflect organization, it typically indicates problematic coordination and socialization processes,
such as contributors who aren’t willing to talk to each other. Hierarchy has been found to have a
negative association with work group outcomes (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Cummings & Cross,
2003). While absolute hierarchy in CBPP is quite high due to low exit costs (Crowston &
Howison, 2006), theory and empirical evidence from work groups lead us to predict that:
H2a: Hierarchy will have a negative relationship with productivity.
H2b: Hierarchy will have a negative relationship with longevity.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

11

Core membership
Peripheral contributors bring valuable information into CBPP communities (Gorbatâi,
2014; Ransbotham & Kane, 2011) and large peripheries may signal the popularity and importance
of the project, encouraging others to contribute (Zhang & Zhu, 2011). On the other hand,
productive work groups have most of their members in the core, allowing them to integrate ideas
from all team members. We expect that nascent communities more closely resemble these smaller
teams, and the increased need for coordination and consensus at this early stage of CBPP lead us
to predict that a strong core is vital for coordinating and encouraging contributions.
H3a: Core membership size will have a positive relationship with productivity.
Group longevity requires a subset of members who continue to participate over time, and
this willingness to participate is increased through social integration (Van Knippenberg, 2000).
Core membership is one of the closest analogs to social integration: groups where many members
have relationships with many others are likely to be socially integrated and committed to the
project.
H3b: Core membership size will have a positive relationship with community longevity
Density
In dense networks, many people are connected to each other. It seems like density should
always contribute to coordination and social integration. Indeed, in work groups density is
generally, albeit weakly, associated with better performance (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Reagans
& Zuckerman, 2001). However, in both early-stage open source software (D. Hinds & Lee, 2009)
and Wikipedia “project” groups (Qin et al., 2015), density has a negative relationship with
productivity. One explanation is that maintaining a strong, dense social network may take time
away from actually contributing to the artifact (Qin et al., 2015). This empirical evidence from
such a similar population of communities leads us to hypothesize that, especially after controlling
for hierarchy and core membership, higher density will be costly to coordination and productivity.
H4a: Density will have a negative relationship with productivity.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

12

On the other hand, if high density is an indicator of “too much” socializing, then we would
expect that members with high density will be more socially integrated. While they may be less
likely to contribute to group productivity, theory suggests that they will also be less likely to leave
the community and the project will be less likely to dissolve.
H4b: Density will have a positive relationship with longevity.
Data & Measures
Our data comes from a population of online communities working to produce wikis that are
hosted by the firm Wikia. The term “wiki” refers to both the type of software which facilitates the
collaborative creation and distribution of information resources as well as the resource produced.
While Wikipedia is the most well-known instance of a wiki, there are hundreds of thousands of
other wiki communities, with varied goals, topics, and community structures.
Wikia was founded in 2004 by Jimmy Wales, a founder of Wikipedia, and Angela Beesley,
an active Wikipedia contributor. Like Wikipedia (and unlike other wiki hosting sites), all Wikia
wikis are publicly viewable and publicly editable. Wikia holds the largest sample of publicly
accessible and editable peer production wikis, many of which have widely divergent topics and
participation rates. This diversity and variance help ensure that the results of our analysis have
broader generalizability beyond analyses of a single community or a smaller scale comparison.
Additionally, the dataset we collected in April 2010 is the most complete set of Wikia wikis
available. In 2010, Wikia began deleting small, inactive wikis from the site thereby making it
difficult to evaluate questions about early-stage peer production projects.
In preparing the dataset for analysis, we applied several inclusion criteria. Before
constructing our measures, we removed all edits to these communities marked as having been
made by bots. While our focus is on new, small communities, in reality most communities never
grow large enough to be considered communities at all. Of over 76,000 wikis that we have data
for, only 1,268 had at least 700 non-bot edits to article pages1 as of April 2010. At the point when
1

Wikis have a number of “namespaces”, such as talk pages, user pages, and administrative pages. The primary
content of the wiki, such as articles, is typically located in the main namespace.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

13

700 edits had been made, the median number of participants in the communication network is 10,
a similar size to large work groups. We calculate our measures based on a “data snapshot” of all
of the edits made to a community at the point it received its 700th edit.2
Dependent Variables: Productivity and Longevity
To measure productivity, we count the total number of words added by contributors in the
first 700 non-reverted edits. The completeness and quality of the wiki is one of the primary goals
of early-stage contributors to CBPP (Foote et al., 2017) and this is one measure of how quickly
the wiki as an artifact is progressing. Because we look at the same number of edits for each wiki
(rather than, for example, the number of edits per month), this is also a rough measure of the
per-edit effort that participants put into the project. To measure longevity, we count the number of
months from the 700th edit to the start of the first 30-day period in which the wiki was edited by
fewer than two people.
Network Measures
Our measures of communication structure are based on behavioral traces of interaction
captured in the logs of each wiki. This provides a more objective measure of interaction than the
survey-based self-reports typical in studies of communication structure in work groups (e.g.,
Cummings & Cross, 2003). Both a strength and a weakness, this approach gives us a highly
accurate representation of the actual communication structure but does not capture the cognitive
understanding that users have of the network.
[Figure 1 here]
To construct measures of communication network structure, we first create communication
networks for each wiki. These networks attempt to capture interactions within the spaces
dedicated to conversational activities. These are the “talk” pages connected to every article, user,
or policy page on each wiki. Talk pages are used to discuss the page to which they are connected
2

In separate robustness checks reported in the online appendix, we ran models using snapshots at 500 and 900 edits
and found similar results.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

14

(see Figure 1). For example, a talk page connected to an article is typically used to discuss ways
that the article can be improved, although they can also be used as places to socialize or discuss a
topic. We create communication networks by looking at the edits to all of the talk pages for each
wiki. Although talk page edits are not always explicitly directed toward others, we consider
recent editors of the same page as the recipients of an edit. We create a directed tie in our network
from every talk page editor to the contributors of the previous five edits to that page. Additionally,
we create a directed tie when any contributor edits another’s “user talk” page. This is a public talk
page connected to a user’s account, typically used for interpersonal communication. We attempt
to measure communicative relationships rather than temporary interactions by only keeping edges
that represent at least two interactions (i.e., for a tie from i to j to exist, i would have to edit a
page after j or write on j’s user talk page at least twice). We create a network for each wiki at the
point that it had 700 edits.
We limit our analysis to communities which have at least four people in their
communication network, dropping 202 communities. Our rationale is that the network measures
we apply (described below) are not meaningful for smaller networks. We also remove 64 wikis
where the structure was so simple that our network measures could not be computed. This leaves
us with a total of 1,002 wiki networks, which we use to construct the following measures of
network structure.
Density is the number of ties between the N nodes in a given network divided by the
number of possible ties if every node was connected to every other node.
We follow Cummings and Cross (2003) by using the hierarchy measure defined by
Krackhardt (1994). We calculate hierarchy as the ratio of paths in the graph which are not
cyclical. For a given path from person vi to person vj , the path is cyclical if there also exists a
path from vj to vi .
We use a scaleable method of identifying core group membership, based on the same
theoretical construct in the work group literature (Cummings & Cross, 2003) and related to
measures of closure (e.g. Shen, Monge, & Williams, 2014). To measure core-periphery structure,

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

15

we calculate the “coreness” for each node. This is the largest k subgraph the node is in for which
all members of the subgraph have at least k ties with other members of the subgraph (Seidman,
1983).3 We identify contributors as being central (i.e., non-peripheral) if their coreness is at least
3, and measure the proportion of contributors who are central in each community, which we call
the core member ratio. When this measure is high, it means that many of the users are part of a
cohesive group, where all of the members of the group have interactions with others in the group.
We use two measures of centralization, indegree centralization, which is a measure of
inequality in how much each person is talked to, and betweenness centralization, which is a
measure of inequality in how often a person is in the shortest path between other people
(Freeman, Roeder, & Mulholland, 1980). These two measures capture two related but disticnt
ways in which a community might be centralized. Following Qin et al. (2015), for indegree
centralization we take the gini coefficient of the distribution of indegrees over nodes and for
betweenness centralization we take the gini of betweenness centrality scores.

Controls
Many network measures have a relationship with the size of the network. For example,
large networks typically have lower density, since the number of possible ties scales
exponentially. Therefore, we include a control measure for network size. We also include talk
edits and edge weight, two controls for the overall amount of activity between members, in order
to distinguish the structure of communication from the amount of communication. In order to
help control for time-varying factors that may have played a role in shaping the growth patterns of
particular wikis we include months since founding.
The popularity of wiki topics is a potential confound for the relationships we seek to
identify. For example, popular topics may attract more peripheral contributors than niche topics.
Without access to a direct measure of popularity, we rely on several proxies. First, we include
measures of how quickly the community is producing content. Specifically, we measure days to
3

More detail about this measure is provided in the online appendix.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

16

350 (700) edits. We also control for the number of total editors and active editors (editors with at
least ten edits). Finally, we include contribution inequality, a measure which has been found to be
an important predictor of performance in previous work on CBPP (Kittur & Kraut, 2010).
Analysis
We estimate the relationship between project structure and project outcomes by regressing
our project-level measures of productivity and community survival on our project-level measures
of network structure after the first 700 edits. Because our measures of productivity are all
over-dispersed counts, we use negative binomial linear regression to model productivity. To
estimate of community survival, we fit Cox proportional-hazards models. In each model, we
added polynomial terms for significant controls until model fits failed to improve based on
likelihood-ratio tests.
Our online appendix shows summary statistics for each of our variables. As is typical in
online communities, almost all of our count measures are highly skewed. To address this, we use
the natural log of momentum measures, the number of editors, and the network size measures in
all of our models. We also use the log of density.
Results
[Figure 2 here]
Figure 2 shows the results of the full model used to predict productivity, with 95%
bootstrapped confidence intervals.4 Surprisingly, we find that none of the network measures have
a significant relationship with productivity, and that including the network measures does not
improve the fit of the model based on AIC. The only possible relationship is for density (H4a),
which barely falls outside of our confidence interval (β = 0.32, CI [−0.022, 0.687]), but has a
significant relationship with productivity in one of our two robustness check datasets. If a real
relationship exists, it is very weak. We did not find evidence for H1a, H2a, or H3a, as neither
centralization measure (indegree centralization: β = −0.01, CI [−0.469, 0.366]; betweenness
4

Full regression results are available in the online appendix.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

17

centralization: β = −0.25, CI [−1.052, 0.435]), hierarchy (β = 0.01, CI [−0.314, 0.361]), nor the
core membership ratio (β = −0.19, CI [−0.529, 0.137]) explain variation in productivity. A
number of our controls were positively associated with productivity, namely the number of nodes
in the talk network, how long ago the wiki was founded, and the gini of edits per editor.
[Table 1 here]
Because interpreting these results can be difficult, table 1 visually depicts the relationships
between communication structure and productivity using actual networks as examples. The first
column shows a visualization of the communication network of a wiki at the first quartile of each
measure, the second shows a network at the third quartile, and the third column provides the
bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals of the model-predicted change in productivity when
moving from the first to the third quartile. We see that while wikis vary considerably in their
communication structure, the expected influence of these measures is slight and highly variable.
[Figure 3 here]
Our second set of results, predicting the longevity of a community, is presented in Figure
3.5 Again, the model including network measures surprisingly does not provide a better fit than
the controls-only model based on AIC and none of the network measures have a significant
relationship with the likelihood of survival. Indeed, we see that the only significant predictor of
survival is the number of different editors who contributed to the project.

Discussion
We hypothesized that nascent CBPP projects would benefit from structured conversation in
order to coordinate their work and in order to create a long-lasting community. However, our
results provide only very weak evidence that early communication structure predicts a group’s
productivity and no evidence that communication structure relates to longevity. These results are
surprising, but our sample is large enough that we should be able to detect even weak effects.
Studies of work groups that have presented statistically significant estimates of the relationship
5

A model allowing for time-varying measures produced similar results

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

18

between communication structure and performance have typically used datasets of less than 100
teams (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006). Even with a larger dataset and more statistical power, one
explanation for a null finding might be that the relationship in peer production is simply noisier
and more difficult to detect. This seems unlikely because our measures of network structure have
comparable variance to similar measures from the work group literature. For example, our
measure of hierarchy (µ = 0.47; SD = 0.24) ha a similar distribution to hierarchy measured by
Cummings and Cross (2003) in work groups (µ = 0.57; SD = 0.28) and our measure of density
(µ = 0.24; SD = 0.14) is smaller in this context but has similar variance to the density measured
by Wise (2014) in work groups (µ = 0.34; SD = 0.23). As a result, we believe that our sample of
over 1, 000 projects should have been more than adequate to identify relationships between
network structures and group outcomes similar in magnitude to those found in previous studies of
work groups and that any relationships that exist in our data are likely much weaker.
Overall, these findings suggest two surprising features of early-stage CBPP projects: First,
they do not require structured communication in order to coordinate their work, and second,
social integration does not increase project-level productivity or longevity. This is different from
finding that CBPP projects are unstructured: there was a large amount of variation along each of
our measures of network structure. What we found was that there is no strong relationship
between structural measures and either of our outcomes. We discuss possible explanations for
these findings below.

Stigmergic coordination
CBPP projects and wikis in particular may require less communication in order to
coordinate for a few reasons. The first is that work is organized around a shared, continuously
updated artifact. The pages on Wikipedia, for example, are updated as soon as an editor makes an
edit. This affordance allows CBPP contributors to use the artifact itself to perform “stigmergic”
coordination. Stigmergy is a concept that comes from research on social insects like ants and
refers to coordination that happens through modifying the environment (e.g., an ant’s pheromone

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

19

trail) rather than through direct communication. Bolici, Howison, and Crowston (2016) describe
how this concept can apply to CBPP. For example, the state of the artifact can act as a signal for
resource matching. Those with special knowledge or skills don’t necessarily need to
communicate in order to be told about a need – they can simply see a need and contribute
(Benkler, 2006; Kane & Ransbotham, 2016).
[Figure 4 here]
More directly, users can leave explicit or implicit signals of needs in the artifact itself
(D. Hinds & Lee, 2009). Changes to wikis can coordinate work, negotiate norms, and integrate
newcomers. Some edits are explicitly stigmergic in that they provide trails for others to follow.
For example, by creating a link to a non-existing page, a contributor can signal the need for
someone to create that page. Figure 4 shows a more subtle example of how edits can coordinate
and provide norm instruction. Wikia provides this interface, which shows how a page has
changed over time. In this example, the user DolAmroth123 has taken the “(aged 41)” content
added by Roberto4554 and moved it into its own spot in a pre-defined template. Without explicit
communication, this edit by DolAmroth123 both enforces a norm about how information should
be organized and teaches Roberto4554 (and others who see the page) about how to use the
template feature of the website.
Our findings about the relative unimportance of structured communication, combined with
theories of stigmergic communication and coordination, suggest that there may exist a tradeoff
between social structure and project structure. When the structure of a project is explicit and the
goals are well-defined, as in many early-stage CBPP projects, then there are few social
interdependencies. Many simple coordination tasks can be performed through the wiki itself and
thus do not require complex social structures. This theory suggests an explanation for findings in
the CBPP literature that projects tend to become more structured and hierarchical over time
(Halfaker, Geiger, Morgan, & Riedl, 2013; Shaw & Hill, 2014; TeBlunthuis et al., 2018). In
contrast with work groups, the work of a typical CBPP project is fairly well-delineated in early
stages and higher-level coordination and decision making about the purpose or goals of the

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

20

organization may simply not be needed. As projects grow and become more complex, it is more
difficult to signal needs through the artifact and structured coordination is needed.

Limits of social integration

We hypothesized that projects with highly integrative networks would encourage high
levels of contributions and that communities with high hierarchy, for example, would not be as
productive. However, we found no relationship between these measures and productivity. Even
more surprisingly, we find no evidence that communication structure has any relationship to a
community’s longevity. This suggests that either social integration does not matter very much in
the context of peer production or that wiki talk page networks are not capturing the socialization
and socializing that is happening. For example, users might be socializing face-to-face or using
other online platforms. While we cannot dismiss the latter out of hand, it is evident that talk pages
are being used by communities for communication and coordination. Looking at our data, we find
that communities make a median of 89 edits to talk pages. This is a large enough number of
contributions to suggest that a substantial portion of communication happens through these
channels.
How can we reconcile findings about the importance of social integration in work groups
(Cummings & Cross, 2003) and large peer production projects (Bryant, Forte, & Bruckman,
2005; Halfaker et al., 2013) with our finding that communication structure does not help to
predict nascent CBPP project survival? One possible explanation is that the effect of social
integration increases over time. In larger projects like Wikipedia new contributors are less
motivated by social motivations (Bryant et al., 2005). In a new wiki project everyone is a new
contributor, so early social structure may not matter much.
Another interpretation is that socialization is less important in voluntary, non-professional
communities like CBPP. If contributors are committed to the goals of the project, then the
marginal influence of social integration will be low. In short, in work group settings strong social

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

21

cohesion may be needed to encourage everyone to contribute. However, when everyone is already
eager to contribute, social motivation may be less important.

And what about the theory that early groups would need to communicate more in order to
create norms and goals? Our results suggest that in CBPP this sort of negotiation may be
unnecessary. On Wikia, as in many other CBPP contexts, new communities are either explicitly
or implicitly part of a larger ecosystem. It is likely that new communities start with a set of
default norms, based on acceptable behavior in related projects. In addition, wikis have a fairly
explicit, visible, and unchangeable goal from the moment they are created. For example, the wiki
at lordoftherings.wikia.com will be focused around Lord of the Rings content; there is very little
room for negotiation of high-level goals. Finally, unlike in a work team where participants have
contractual obligations to the organization, the cost of exit from peer production is incredibly low.
Instead of “storming” and “norming” (Tuckman, 1965), those who disagree with the goals of a
wiki may be more likely to create a new project or simply not edit at all. By changing the relative
cost of leaving, CBPP may encourage people to choose “exit” rather than “voice” (Hirschman,
1970). A complementary implication is that the affordances of CBPP may make it difficult for
projects to succeed when goals are not clear and must be negotiated. Indeed, Hill (2011) argues
that a well-defined goal helped Wikipedia succeed where other attempts to build an online
encyclopedia fell short.

Overall, our results do not support our hypotheses and contradict the theoretical predictions
we derived from prior literature. Instead of telling the story of work groups operating in a new
environment, our findings suggest that early-stage CBPP projects operate very differently. While
we believe that stigmergy and a highly motivated set of participants are plausible explanations for
our findings, more empirical work is needed to understand why structures of communication in
early-stage wikis do not predict project-level outcomes.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

22

Threats to Validity & Limitations
While our study benefits from using a large population of wikis across a number of different
domains, it is still possible that our findings may reflect idiosyncrasies of the software platforms
and user interface configurations of Wikia wikis. Other online communities have different goals,
norms, and affordances. For example, wiki talk pages are hard to find and use. In some cases,
users may not even be aware of all messages added to the site by others and so some ties may not
represent direct communication. Interfaces that make communication more visible and intuitive
might lead to different results.
Additionally, the analysis presented here is based on digital trace data taken from a single
platform and is subject to the sorts of caveats that apply to other similar studies. For example, it
does not capture interactions that occur “off-wiki” either in face-to-face meetings, or through
other technological systems. A related problem is that Wikia is a pseudonymous system. The
same individual might edit from multiple accounts or sometimes edit anonymously but we treat
each of these separate accounts as a different individual – potentially undermining the precision
of several of our measures.
Finally, this paper is a cross-sectional look at wikis at one point in their lifecycle. Many
theories and findings about groups suggest that they adapt and change over time (including our
finding that nascent groups do not resemble large CBPP projects). Future work should investigate
the ways that communication networks evolve as communities grow and age.
Conclusion
In a large-scale study of over 1,000 online wikis engaged in peer production, we find that
communication network structures are poor predictors of both community productivity and
longevity. These findings contradict results from earlier studies of offline work groups and teams
as well as our theory-derived hypotheses that integrative communication structures would support
effective nascent peer production projects. A number of theories suggested that these sorts of
structures would support effective groups in any context. Indeed, theories about the formation of

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

23

norms and social identity suggest that integrative structures should be especially important in
nascent online peer production projects, which organize the collaborative, interdependent work of
small groups of people with limited formal hierarchies, roles, or assignments. Our findings do not
support our hypotheses and undermine these earlier theoretical claims.
Our findings suggest that the relationship of communication structure to effective
collaboration and organization is not universal but contingent. While all groups require
coordination and undergo social influence, groups composed of different types of people or
working in different technological contexts may have different communicative needs. We suggest
two primary explanations. First, volunteers who already have an interest in a project may require
less social integration than employees. Second, the technical affordances and narrow scope of
wikis allow participants to coordinate via stigmergic clues in the artifact itself.
While the presence of stigmergic coordination in CBPP projects is fairly well-known, our
results suggest that affordances which allow for stigmergic coordination might reduce the need
for social structures and can influence the ways that groups interact. When project goals are clear
and narrow, a shared artifact can act as a tool for communicating and negotiating norms and
priorities, reducing the need for explicit communication and coordination.
Online Supplements
Additional details about measures and analysis, as well as results from robustness tests, are
available in the online appendix. All of the code and data needed to replicate our study will be
provided in a Harvard Dataverse repository.
Acknowledgements
Omitted for review

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

24

References
Balkundi, P. & Harrison, D. A. (2006). Ties, leaders, and time in teams: Strong inference about
network structure’s effects on team viability and performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 49(1), 49–68. doi:10.5465/amj.2006.20785500
Benkler, Y. (2002). Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and "The Nature of the Firm". The Yale Law
Journal, 112(3), 369. doi:10.2307/1562247
Benkler, Y. (2006). The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets and
freedom. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Benkler, Y. (2016). Peer production and cooperation. In J. M. Bauer & M. Latzer (Eds.),
Handbook on the Economics of the Internet (pp. 91–119). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Bolici, F., Howison, J., & Crowston, K. (2016). Stigmergic coordination in FLOSS development
teams: Integrating explicit and implicit mechanisms. Cognitive Systems Research. Special
Issue of Cognitive Systems Research – Human-Human Stigmergy, 38, 14–22.
doi:10.1016/j.cogsys.2015.12.003
Bryant, S. L., Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2005). Becoming Wikipedian: transformation of
participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In Proceedings of the 2005
International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 1–10).
GROUP ’05. New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1099203.1099205
Crowston, K. & Howison, J. (2006). Hierarchy and centralization in free and open source
software team communications. Knowledge, Technology & Policy, 18(4), 65–85.
doi:10.1007/s12130-006-1004-8
Crowston, K., Wei, K., Li, Q., & Howison, J. (2006). Core and periphery in free/libre and open
source software team communications. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, 2006. HICSS ’06 (Vol. 6, 118a–118a).
doi:10.1109/HICSS.2006.101
Cummings, J. N. & Cross, R. (2003). Structural properties of work groups and their consequences
for performance. Social Networks, 25(3), 197–210. doi:10.1016/S0378-8733(02)00049-7

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

25

DeSanctis, G. & Monge, P. R. (1998). Communication processes for virtual organizations.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 3(4).
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.1998.tb00083.x
Foote, J. & Contractor, N. (2018). The behavior and network position of peer production
founders. In G. Chowdhury, J. McLeod, V. Gillet, & P. Willett (Eds.), iConference 2018:
Transforming Digital Worlds (pp. 99–106). Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-78105-1_12
Foote, J., Gergle, D., & Shaw, A. (2017). Starting online communities: motivations and goals of
wiki founders. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’17) (pp. 6376–6380). New York, NY: ACM.
doi:10.1145/3025453.3025639
Freeman, L. C., Roeder, D., & Mulholland, R. R. (1980). Centrality in social networks: II.
Experimental results. Social networks, 2(2), 119–141.
Gibbs, J. L., Kim, H., & Ki, S. (2016). Investigating the role of control and support mechanisms
in members’ sense of virtual community. Communication Research.
doi:10.1177/0093650216644023
Gibson, C. B. & Gibbs, J. L. (2006). Unpacking the concept of virtuality: The effects of
geographic dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national diversity on
team innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51(3), 451–495.
doi:10.2189/asqu.51.3.451
Gorbatâi, A. D. (2014). The paradox of novice contributions to collective production: Evidence
from Wikipedia.
Halfaker, A., Geiger, R. S., Morgan, J. T., & Riedl, J. (2013). The rise and decline of an open
collaboration system: how Wikipedia’s reaction to popularity is causing its decline.
American Behavioral Scientist, 57(5), 664–688. doi:10.1177/0002764212469365
Halfaker, A., Geiger, R. S., & Terveen, L. G. (2014). Snuggle: Designing for Efficient
Socialization and Ideological Critique. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

26

Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 311–320). CHI ’14. New York, NY, USA:
ACM. doi:10.1145/2556288.2557313
Hill, B. M. (2011). Almost Wikipedia: What Eight Collaborative Encyclopedia Projects Reveal
About Mechanisms of Collective Action. In Berkman Center for Internet and Society
Luncheon Series Presentation. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Hinds, D. & Lee, R. M. (2009). Communication Network Characteristics of Open Source
Communities. International Journal of Open Source Software and Processes, 1(4), 26–48.
doi:10.4018/jossp.2009100102
Hinds, P. J. & Bailey, D. E. (2003). Out of Sight, Out of Sync: Understanding Conflict in
Distributed Teams. Organization Science, 14(6), 615–632.
doi:10.1287/orsc.14.6.615.24872
Hinds, P. J. & Kiesler, S. (Eds.). (2002). Distributed work. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hinds, P. J. & Mortensen, M. (2005). Understanding Conflict in Geographically Distributed
Teams: The Moderating Effects of Shared Identity, Shared Context, and Spontaneous
Communication. Organization Science, 16(3), 290–307. doi:10.1287/orsc.1050.0122
Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations,
and States. Harvard University Press.
Howison, J., Inoue, K., & Crowston, K. (2006). Social dynamics of free and open source team
communications. In Open Source Systems (pp. 319–330). Springer.
Ilgen, D. R., Hollenbeck, J. R., Johnson, M., & Jundt, D. (2005). Teams in Organizations: From
Input-Process-Output Models to IMOI Models. Annual Review of Psychology, 56(1),
517–543. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070250
Kane, G. C. & Ransbotham, S. (2016). Content and Collaboration: An Affiliation Network
Approach to Information Quality in Online Peer Production Communities. Information
Systems Research, 27(2), 424–439. doi:10.1287/isre.2016.0622

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

27

Katz, N., Lazer, D., Arrow, H., & Contractor, N. (2005). The network perspective on small
groups. Theories of small groups: Interdisciplinary perspectives, 277–312.
doi:10.4135/9781483328935.n8
Keegan, B., Gergle, D., & Contractor, N. (2013). Hot Off the Wiki Structures and Dynamics of
Wikipedia’s Coverage of Breaking News Events. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(5),
595–622. doi:10.1177/0002764212469367
Kittur, A. & Kraut, R. E. (2010). Beyond Wikipedia: Coordination and conflict in online
production groups. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ’10) (pp. 215–224). New York, NY: ACM.
doi:10.1145/1718918.1718959
Kittur, A., Pendleton, B., & Kraut, R. E. (2009). Herding the Cats: The Influence of Groups in
Coordinating Peer Production. In Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wikis
and Open Collaboration (7:1–7:9). WikiSym ’09. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
doi:10.1145/1641309.1641321
Kotlarsky, J., van den Hooff, B., & Houtman, L. (2015). Are We on the Same Page? Knowledge
Boundaries and Transactive Memory System Development in Cross-Functional Teams.
Communication Research, 42(3), 319–344. doi:10.1177/0093650212469402
Krackhardt, D. (1994). Graph theoretical dimensions of informal organizations. In K. M. Carley
& M. J. Prietula (Eds.), Computational organization theory (pp. 89–111).
Marwell, G. & Oliver, P. (1993). The critical mass in collective action: A micro-social theory.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Matei, S. A. & Britt, B. C. (2017). Structural differentiation in social media: adhocracy, entropy,
and the "1 % effect". Lecture Notes in Social Networks. Springer.
Mathieu, J. E., Heffner, T. S., Goodwin, G. F., Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (2000). The
influence of shared mental models on team process and performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 85(2), 273–283. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.85.2.273

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

28

Mathieu, J. E., Maynard, M. T., Rapp, T., & Gilson, L. (2008). Team Effectiveness 1997-2007: A
Review of Recent Advancements and a Glimpse Into the Future. Journal of Management,
34(3), 410–476. doi:10.1177/0149206308316061
Monge, P. R., Fulk, J., Kalman, M. E., Flanagin, A. J., Parnassa, C., & Rumsey, S. (1998).
Production of collective action in alliance-based interorganizational communication and
information systems. Organization Science, 9(3), 411–433. doi:10.1287/orsc.9.3.411
Qin, X., Cunningham, P., & Salter-Townshend, M. (2015). The influence of network structures of
Wikipedia discussion pages on the efficiency of WikiProjects. Social Networks, 43, 1–15.
doi:10.1016/j.socnet.2015.04.002
Ransbotham, S. & Kane, G. C. (2011). Membership turnover and collaboration success in online
communities: Explaining rises and falls from grace in Wikipedia. MIS Quarterly, 35(3),
613.
Reagans, R. & Zuckerman, E. W. (2001). Networks, Diversity, and Productivity: The Social
Capital of Corporate R&D Teams. Organization Science, 12(4), 502–517.
doi:10.1287/orsc.12.4.502.10637
Reagans, R., Zuckerman, E., & McEvily, B. (2004). How to Make the Team: Social Networks vs.
Demography as Criteria for Designing Effective Teams. Administrative Science Quarterly,
49(1), 101–133. doi:10.2307/4131457
Roth, C., Taraborelli, D., & Gilbert, N. (2008). Measuring wiki viability: An empirical
assessment of the social dynamics of a large sample of wikis. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Symposium on Wikis (27:1–27:5). WikiSym ’08. New York, NY: ACM.
doi:10.1145/1822258.1822294
Schweik, C. M. & English, R. C. (2012). Internet success: A study of open-source software
commons. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Scott, C. R. (2007). Communication and Social Identity Theory: Existing and Potential
Connections in Organizational Identification Research. Communication Studies, 58(2),
123–138. doi:10.1080/10510970701341063

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

29

Seidman, S. B. (1983). Network structure and minimum degree. Social networks, 5(3), 269–287.
doi:10.1016/0378-8733(83)90028-X
Shaw, A. & Hill, B. M. (2014). Laboratories of oligarchy? How the iron law extends to peer
production. Journal of Communication, 64(2), 215–238. doi:10.1111/jcom.12082
Shen, C., Monge, P. R., & Williams, D. (2014). Virtual brokerage and closure: Network structure
and social capital in a massively multiplayer online game. Communication Research, 41(4),
459–480. doi:10.1177/0093650212455197
TeBlunthuis, N., Shaw, A., & Hill, B. M. (2018). Revisiting "The rise and decline" in a population
of peer production projects. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI ’18) (355:1–355:7). New York, NY: ACM.
doi:10.1145/3173574.3173929
Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological Bulletin, 63(6),
384–399. doi:10.1037/h0022100
Tushman, M. L. (1979). Work Characteristics and Subunit Communication Structure: A
Contingency Analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24(1), 82–98.
doi:10.2307/2989877
Van De Ven, A. H., Delbecq, A. L., & Koenig, R. (1976). Determinants of Coordination Modes
within Organizations. American Sociological Review, 41(2), 322–338.
doi:10.2307/2094477
Van Knippenberg, D. (2000). Work Motivation and Performance: A Social Identity Perspective.
Applied Psychology, 49(3), 357–371. doi:10.1111/1464-0597.00020
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive Memory: A Contemporary Analysis of the Group Mind. In
Theories of Group Behavior (pp. 185–208). Springer Series in Social Psychology. Springer,
New York, NY. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-4634-3_9
Wiesenfeld, B. M., Raghuram, S., & Garud, R. (1998). Communication Patterns as Determinants
of Organizational Identification in a Virtual Organization. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 3(4). doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.1998.tb00081.x

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

Wise, S. (2014). Can a team have too much cohesion? The dark side to network density.
European Management Journal, 32(5), 703–711. doi:10.1016/j.emj.2013.12.005
Zhang, X. & Zhu, F. (2011). Group size and incentives to contribute: A natural experiment at
chinese Wikipedia. The American Economic Review, 101(4), 1601–1615.
doi:10.2307/23045913
Zhu, H., Kraut, R. E., & Kittur, A. (2012). Effectiveness of Shared Leadership in Online
Communities. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (pp. 407–416). CSCW ’12. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
doi:10.1145/2145204.2145269

30

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION
25th percentile 75th percentile

31
∆ Productivity [95% CI]

Density

-1.7% – 68.0%

Hierarchy

-10.0% – 12.5%

Core Ratio

-27.6% – 8.5%

Degree
tion

-8.8% – 7.2%

Centraliza-

Betweenness
tralization

Cen-

-11.6% – 5.1%

Table 1
Networks at the 1st and 3rd quartile of each measure; 95% confidence interval of predicted
change in productivity when moving form 1st to 3rd quartile.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

32

Figure 1. Example of a talk page from the Lord of the Rings wiki. Users discuss the article’s topic
and how to improve the article.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

33

Figure 2. Scaled regression coefficients predicting the number of non-reverted words added in the
first 700 edits. Polynomial control terms are excluded for clarity.

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

Figure 3. Scaled regression coefficients predicting the length of a wiki’s survival. Polynomial
control terms are excluded for clarity.

34

COMMUNICATION NETWORKS AND PEER PRODUCTION

35

Figure 4. User DolAmroth123 moves information into a pre-defined template. This shows other
users where and how information should be organized on this wiki without any explicit
coordination or communication.

