Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.31

Pp. 420-432

Exploring Academic Writing Needs of Indonesian EFL Undergraduate Students
Ratnawati
English Education Program, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education
Galuh University, Ciamis, Indonesia
Didih Faridah
English Education Program, Faculty of Teacher Training and Education
Galuh University, Ciamis, Indonesia
Syafiul Anam
English Department, Faculty of Languages and Arts
Universitas Negeri Surabaya
Surabaya, Indonesia
Pratiwi Retnaningdyah
English Department, Faculty of Languages and Arts
Universitas Negeri Surabaya
Surabaya, Indonesia
Abstract
Academic writing is noteworthy competence to be accomplished for English as a foreign language
(EFL) students to fulfill their academic needs at the university. To do so, Indonesian tertiary
universities accommodate and foster this competence using academic writing course. The study,
therefore, sought to look into: 1. what undergraduate EFL students’ perceptions of the importance
of academic writing to their current study and future career, 2. what the students’ perceptions of
the difficulties of academic writing, 3. what the students’ attitudes towards their previous and
future academic writing courses. The present study investigates students’ needs emerging in
academic writing during classroom practices to gain insightful and profound perspectives for
forthcoming needs of the course. Data were collected through a five scaled questionnaire of need
analysis distributed to thirty-four EFL students from a private university, and a focus group
interview involving nine participants. Results indicate 61% (Mdifficulties=3.05) of students faced
difficulties in both general skills and language problems of academic writing and a new course
was expected to provide moves/steps for writing the sections in a research article. The present
study then suggests that e-database resources are needed for academic papers models and
references hence its efficiency and flexibility in prospective academic writing.
Keywords: academic writing, EFL students, need analysis
Cite as: Ratnawati, R., Faridah, D., Anam, S., Retnaningdyah, P. (2018). Exploring Academic Writing
Needs of Indonesian EFL Undergraduate Students. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 420-432.

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.31

420

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

Introduction
The Necessity of Academic Writing
Academic writing contributes crucial roles for students’ academic purposes; papers,
assignments, exercises and thesis for meeting their academic needs (Aunurrahman, Hamied, &
Emilia, 2017; Ariyanti, 2016; Soehadi, 2008; Husin & Nurbayani, 2017; Sriwichai & Inpin,
2018;Yasuda 2014;Gillett, Hammond, & Martala, 2009). The experts agree that academic writing
as a skill required for academic context has a significant impact on the scope of students’ written
academic papers in a university context to meet their degree. Van de Poel & Gasiorek (2012) note
some projects which staked one’s skill of writing in academic discourse essays, projects, lecture
notes, theses, and a research paper. Thus, students must have some skills of writing such as
organizing words in a sentence, developing ideas in a paragraph, using proper grammar and
punctuation to compose their writing. Giridharan (2012) assumes that by mastering academic
writing, students will see their academic success since the quality of an individual’s written work
determines his/her scholarship and acceptance in university. Similar viewpoint from Bailey (2003)
which also elaborates that academic writing is designed to students at English medium colleges
and universities for guiding and preparing them to compose academic essays and other written
exam assignments with fulfilling conventions in style, referencing and organization of their essay.
In an academic setting, written academic works deserve getting priority from practitioners because
several students’ projects such as research report, essay, examination questions, dissertation thesis
to their practical application are commonly requested upon courses (Sağlamel & Kayaoğlu,
2015). Thus, academic writing influences beneficial roles to the students’ needs so that it should
be developed in formal instructional settings at tertiary education.
The Difficulties of Academic Writing
Despite its urgency in an academic context, students might come across difficulties in
academic writing. Research has demonstrated the challenges encountered by students in higher
education. In the process of writing, they have to generate, outline new ideas and compose them
in a proper academic essay with their capability for achieving new situations of educational setting.
Van de Poel & Gasiorek (2012) further assert that learning to write primarily in academic context
is considered the problematic skill to compete for students both English as a second or foreign
language. Ariyanti (2016) argues that the contextual translation competence became troublesome
for EFL students in Indonesia when writing an academic essay. Consequently, most of the
students’ academic essays do not make sense with addressee language and their writing are
unreadable especially for native speakers. Yasuda (2014) contents that writing instruction in Japan
has merely focused on decontextualized contents while encouraging students to be a good writer
who should transform their meaning into a contextualized essay has been ignored. He further
suggests that future directions for EFL writing instruction should help students develop their realworld communication skills. Issues in teaching and learning writing are comparable across East
Asian EFL contexts, and writing practitioners in East Asian countries need to cross the border to
develop theories and pedagogies that accommodate the unique needs of EFL writers in East Asian
contexts. Then, Bian & Wang (2016) argue that undergraduate students experienced processoriented difficulties throughout the process of academic writing such as generating ideas,
outlining, paraphrasing, and summarizing. They also encountered product-related problems such
as inappropriate style of writing, referencing, and citation. Gillett, Hammond, & Martala (2009)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

421

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

claim that complex, formal, objective, hedged, a precise and accurate language which is also
considered difficult to be taught to students in academic writing.
Need Analysis of Academic Writing
Needs analysis (NA) is a preliminary step in developing or reforming the existing course.
It provides information about what learners already know and what they need to know. Nation &
Macalister (2010) and Long (2005) divide need analysis into necessities (what students need to
learn), lack (what students’ problems throughout learning) and wants (what students wish to learn).
Several studies (Cai and Kong, 2013; Fadda, 2012; Evans & Green, 2007; Al-Saadi & Samuel,
2013) explored the need analysis of academic writing from different contexts. These studies
indicated that students faced difficulties on the process of composing their essays starting
generating ideas, outlining process, and producing the written work. The language problems such
as failing to distinguish spoken and written English, use academic vocabularies, grammar, and
style, therefore, impeded to their essay in academic context. Apart from students’ internal problem,
these findings pointed out that the style of classroom instructions unguided students to write
effectively and academically.
Although several studies have sought to analyze students’ needs of English for Academic
Purposes (EAP), none of them has looked specifically into the academic writing of EFL
undergraduate students. Evans & Green (2007) and Al-Saadi & Samuel (2013) conducted a largescale survey on English for Academic Purposes (EAP) for undergraduate students. Both studies
analyzed general skills concerning productive skills and acquisition, and the specific problems
from a course offered as the most important point were not identified in detail. However, Cai &
Kong (2013) conducted a need analysis research on postgraduate students which discussed in detail
the students’ language problems especially in writing skill and the quality of academic writing
course offered, and specific betterment action from the course was elaborated in general. The
present study, therefore, attempted to provide an in-depth exploration of EFL students’ perceptions
towards learning academic writing, their current difficulties in academic writing skills, their
biggest concerns and wishes in learning academic writing, and their previous and prospective new
academic writing courses.
Methods
Participants
The present research involved thirty-four EFL students who took the academic writing
course in the fifth semester at a private university in Ciamis, West Java, Indonesia. They were
from a heterogenous background including proficiency, gender, and education. They consisted of
24 female and five male students who previously graduated from private and state senior high
schools. Moreover, to facilitate students’ need of improving their language proficiency to the
expected level, the students ought to attend language practicums. These programs are designed to
provide students’ extra need of language practice which they have not met yet in regular classroom
meeting and achieve department’s goal setting for average TOEFL score (above 475 for passing
grade). Technically, at the end of the semester for every program, the examinations are conducted
to let students know their current proficiency. The tests cover listening, speaking, reading, writing,
and language with concerning both of macro and micro skills. Also, passing some courses such as
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

422

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

general English writing, writing for functional text, business writing, and creative writing is the
prerequisite for taking the academic writing course.
Need Analysis Questionnaire
To obtain quantitative data about students’ needs of academic writing, an online
questionnaire using Google Form tool was administered to the participants. It used a five-point
scale, from the lowest (least important/very difficult/least preferable) to the highest (most
important/very easy/ most preferable). The questionnaire asked about their personal information
(i.e., name, gender, and age) and three parts of sequenced questions. The first part deals with the
students’ perceptions of the importance of academic writing (necessities). Besides the information
above the questionnaire also elicited data about their interest in learning academic writing and
main text types which should be learned in the entire course. In addition, the second part enquires
the lack of the course or students’ difficulties faced in learning it throughout one semester. Some
questions elicit on the provided classroom activities, applied techniques in writing for academic
purposes, and designed materials. The third part asks students’ wants or wishes in learning toward
future academic writing. It tapped into students’ choices on the learning activities such as
classroom activities (teacher-centered learning, student oral presentation, drills, and soon) and
designed materials (textbook, supplementary handbook, e-resources, and digital library). After
data were collected, the internal consistency of the reliability of the questionnaire calculated using
Cronbach alpha. Cronbach alpha indicated that part 1 (difficulties) had a high level of reliability
at α = .846, part 2 (students’ preference) pointed out level of reliability at α = .703, part 3 (teaching
activities frequencies) showed level of reliability at α = .826. Likewise, the reliability level for the
three parts combined is high, at α = .792. Based on these results, it may be assumed that the
questionnaire was reliable to be used.
Focus Group Interview
A focus group interview was conducted to attain in-depth information about students’
perceptions of academic writing and support the previous responses from the questionnaire. The
interview involved nine students who have chosen purposively. Besides, two other senior students
were chosen to be moderator and documentary assistant, who was firstly trained and briefed, to
lead the interview process in a comfortable and relaxed situation. The interview was also
conducted in Indonesian or even Sundanese language and all the interviews were then transcribed
to English. The interview lasted about three hours which asked several questions as supported as
at NA questionnaire with some follow-up questions for obtaining deeper information. To gain an
intended result, the collected data was analyzed thematically which was concerned with
highlighting, examining, and classifying the data recorded to proper and decided themes.
Findings and Discussion
Research Question 1: The Importance of Academic Writing for Current Needs and Future
Career (students’ needs)
The first research question aimed to examine how the students perceive the importance of
academic writing for current needs and their future career. An analysis of the questionnaire and
focus-group interview provided the data to answer this question. The descriptive statistics data
from the students’ questionnaire responses were presented first. Next, the qualitative data from the
interview were presented to support students’ information from the questionnaire. Turning first to
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

423

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

questionnaire findings, the mean scores for these two items are high (M=4.24 SD=.85) and
(M=4.47 SD=.61) respectively, indicating that they strongly agree with the statements on the
perceptions of the importance of academic writing both to the current study and future career.
However, their high awareness of its importance is not in line with their interest or inner pleasure
of academic writing, which is slightly lower than their needs (M=3.29 SD=1.12). Data from group
interview supported their perceptions of the academic writing importance for a future career,
especially related to the Indonesian government demand for research publication as part of the
teacher or lecturer certification and professional development. In addition to educating, teachers
are required to do research about their classes and publish academic articles via seminars,
workshops, and journals. Even though the government policy on the language used in research
article for English teachers in primary to senior high-level education is Indonesian, the skills of
academic writing can be implemented well in their papers. On the other hand, students assumed
that the teachers did not give much interest in academic writing because it was difficult and needed
extra effort, especially dealing with diction, grammar, and technical problems. Also, it was such
an unusual activity to be implemented in their daily life.
Generally, the findings agree with the results from previous studies of EFL students
(Evans & Green, 2007; Cai & Kong 2013) that academic writing is an important skill for their
study, graduation requirements, and future career yet they lacked interest. Moreover, Cai & Kong
(2013, p. 9) study highlighted that students’ interest in academic writing was slightly low. Hence
most students actually dislike using academic language, as it is “too formal and structured, and has
little space for free writing. This is supported by the interview results that academic essay really
needs hard work to express the writer’s opinion and ideas in a written form by using appropriate
academic vocabulary and styles. They argued that writing an academic essay spent much time and
effort throughout the writing process and generally found it difficult to communicate their ideas
appropriately.
Regarding the students’ priority in learning text types and materials of an academic
writing course, most of the participants chose research papers/report as their main choice (75.6%),
followed by paraphrasing articles (63.3 %). All the choices above 50 % indicated that text types
and materials of academic writing are important to their academic needs, except stating the facts,
statistics, and citation as the lowest option since the previous course provided the similar material,
but the review of material is needed. This finding provides similar results from Evans & Green's
(2007) study which emphasized that writing research papers/report is one of the most important
tasks in academic writing for non-native English undergraduates, but the current course did not
provide a literature review and writing for the body section during a semester.
Research Question 2: Students’ Perceptions of the Difficulties of Academic Writing for
Students (Students’ Lack)
The second research question sought to look into students’ perceptions of the difficulties
of academic writing. From the findings, most of the items were rated above 3, meaning that
provided academic writing activities are difficult for students. Otherwise, the three items were
assumed to be easy activities to do during a course. As presented in Table 1, the most difficult
academic activity is students’ experience in using proper grammar, like correct tenses, agreements,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

424

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

reporting verbs and preposition in item 10 (M=3.48 SD=.99) and the most comfortable item related
to writing references/bibliography in academic writing (M=2.67 SD=.87) in item 6.
Turning to the discussion of the items in detail, item 1 asked students’ activities about their
academic planning essays (brainstorming, free writing, clustering, and listing), and students rated
some natural skills to be implemented in academic writing (M=2.91 SD=0.93). They argued that
planning to start writing was a natural skill due to the richness of resources. Dessy (pseudonym)
made one comment for this point:
My favorite activity in writing class is generating ideas, I can apply some
techniques such as brainstorming, free writing, listing, and mind mapping. After I got the
assignment/project from my lecturers, I directly browse some articles related to my
project in Google. (Dessy, focus group interview, April 2018)
Emili (pseudonym), in particular, added the comment on where she commonly searched some
articles to get some ideas:
Emili: If I did not find a suitable topic in Google, I also tried to find at academia.edu,
scribd.com, English journals, other universities digital libraries, and academic websites.
Interviewer: How did you get started to download or search your intended topic?
Emili: I registered first and logged in to the account, as far as I experienced, these websites
are free for limited downloads for each day.
Interviewer: Have you ever stuck in generating ideas? What did you do?
Emili: Exactly…sometimes I was difficult in getting ideas because there were no articles
matched with my project. I went to the campus library and discussed to my classmates
about the project. (Emili, focus group interview, April 2018)
Item 2 enquired students’ difficulties in writing a paragraph in a suitable order. Students assumed
that structuring some sentences into a proper order was perceived as an easy activity during the
course which was indicated from the rating value (M=2.88 SD=.81). Otherwise, item 3 asked about
cohesiveness and coherence in writing a paragraph. The finding indicated that students
experienced difficult activities (M=3.18 SD=.76). Another item which queried on activity about
statistical style on presenting data also implied difficult activity to be implemented in classroom
practices (M=3,15 SD=.74). Likewise, in item 7 ways of expressing ideas in English was
considered a difficult skill (M=3.15 SD=.92), indicating that they got problems in communicating
their ideas well (item 8, M=3.15SD=.93) since they had academic problems on vocabularies,
languages, grammar, and style (item 9, M=3.03 SD=.97). They were stuck in transforming their
ideas into a written one. These findings agree with what Hinkel (2003) revealed that students faced
lexical and stylistic aspects of academic writing in research from other EAP settings where nonnative English speakers were required to write.
In general, the present study gave support to the findings of the previous studies (Evans &
Green, 2007; Cai & Kong, 2013; Hinkel, 2003; Al-Saadi & Samuel, 2013; & Fadda, 2012)
highlighting students’ language-related problems.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

425

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

Table 1. Students’ difficulties in academic writing (easy-difficult)
Item
1 The technique of generating ideas (brainstorming, free
writing, clustering, and listing.
2 Writing the paragraph into suitable order (topic sentence,
supporting sentences and concluding sentence).
3 Writing your paragraph coherently and cohesively.
4 Summarizing/ Paraphrasing.
5 Presenting data on statistical style.
6 References/Bibliography.
7 Expressing ideas in correct English.
8 Linking your sentences smoothly.
9 Using proper academic languages, styles and vocabulary.
10 Proper grammar such as correct tenses, agreements, reporting
verbs and preposition.

N

M

SD

34

2.91 0.93

34

2.88 0.81

34
34
34
34
34
34
34

3.18
2.91
3.15
2.67
3.15
3.15
3.03

34

3.48 0.99

076
0.9
0.74
0.87
0.86
0.93
0.97

Present Course Reflection
The present study demonstrated lack of academic writing in classroom practices. The output
of an academic writing course should be an academic paper and provides students with preparation
for writing a research paper. Unfortunately it was not the case. It ignored the technical skills on
content and structure of academic research paper such as writing introduction, searching for
appropriate literature using databases and library resources, referring to sources, reviewing and
critiquing the previous research and creating a research space (gap), designing the research
methods, writing the methods section, summarizing and presenting the data, commentaries and
discussions on the data, proofreading written assignments. Unlike in Hongkong, Mainland China,
and Saudi Arabia, the academic writing course in this study had a different policy related to
curriculum. After deepening the understanding of gamut globally academic writing, the current
study will deal with some further actions. First, merging the courses will be a further action to be
taken in the forthcoming curriculum. The previous curriculum of the subject’s university has a
research proposal writing course which aims at preparing students’ research proposal. Otherwise,
the current academic writing did not provide skills as global needed. For the prospective course,
academic writing should be straightforward on the global needs of preparing students in composing
research article/paper and teaching the academic writing skills and its language needs. In parallel
with the previous action, the head of study program will add time allotment of the course to
accommodate class needs.
Research Question 3: Students’ Perceptions on Previous and Future Academic Writing Courses
The third research question focused on students’ experience of the implementation from
the previous academic writing course and their expectation of prospective academic writing. The
comparison between the frequency ratings of both previous and future academic writing is
presented in Table 2 and Table 3. The questionnaire consisted of three sections: academic writing
materials preferences, frequencies of teaching activities, and the students’ wants of a new academic
writing course. The research results pointed out that throughout classroom practices, the lecturer
tended to prefer key text books in academic writing for teaching and learning process (M=3.91
SD=.1) to other resources or supplementary handouts. To support it, focus group interviews also
Arab World English Journal
426
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

revealed that their lecturer often used their textbook during classroom meeting including materials,
exercises, and tasks after class-meeting. In a contrast perspective, students experienced boredom
to learn different materials delivered in the same and monotonous way.
Table 2. Teaching materials of academic writing (least preferable-most preferable)
Item
N
M
SD
1 The key textbook used in class
34 3.91 0.1
2 Other supplementary handouts
34 2.74 1.02
3 Other supplementary authentic research papers as models
34 2.88 0.89
4 Supplementary exercises
34 2.91 0.1
Regarding the teaching activities frequencies, as presented in Table 3, teacher-centered lectures
were still a dominant method in the current academic writing course (M=3,91 SD=1.16), it was
followed by students’ oral presentation and group discussion on tasks (M=3,56 and M=3,50
respectively). Further, most interviewees stated that one of the favourite activities during
classroom processes was students’ oral presentation in which they were challenged to prepare
materials for presenting it in front of their classmates. The question and answer session during the
presentation made them apprehensive since the students in charge of presentation had to respond
to their mates’ questions. In addition to the activity’s prevalence in academic writing, academic
writing drills and its references were most frequently taught (M=3.85 and M=3.52 respectively).
Otherwise, several activities had a lack of academic language activities such as grammar,
vocabulary, and proof-reading assignments (M=2.62, M=2.76 and M=2.01 respectively).
Table 3. Teaching activities of academic writing (least frequent-most frequent)
Item
N
M
1 Teacher-centred lectures
34 3.91
2 Student oral presentation
34 3.56
3 Group discussions on task
34 3.50
4 Academic Grammar drills
34 2.62
5 Academic vocabulary drills
34 2.76
6 Academic writing drills
34 3.85
7 Academic writing references drills
34 3.52
8 Proof-reading written assignments
34 2.01

SD
1.16
1.11
0.96
0.95
1.02
0.99
0.98
0.73

After the discussion of students’ experience of academic writing, this part concerned the students’
expectation toward forthcoming new look of academic writing. As presented in Table 4, regarding
teaching materials, the students argued that the use of textbooks was primarily crucial to their
learning process because they need to get academic materials from the textbooks. From the finding,
it figures out that 60% of research participants expected the use of textbooks to be continued in
the future course. In addition, research papers as the supplementary handout were preferred by the
participants as they needed a model (53 % out of 100%). The interview data also revealed that by
analysing and reading more research papers, students obtained more models as their background
knowledge before initiating their paper writing. However, the supplementary exercises did not
need to be attached throughout writing class since they have found the textbook. Most of the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

427

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

participants mentioned that their textbook was full of exercises to be completed in every meeting
and their lecturer often gave them tasks related to meeting materials. For them, writing tasks were
time consuming and they might not deal with additional tasks or assignment.
An additional comment also came from Sasa (pseudonym), one of the participants:
The supplementary tasks from other books were not needed anymore because I really need
model research papers as my references in writing my academic papers or essay (Sasa,
Focus group comment, April 2018).
Related to the students’ expectation of teaching activities in academic writing course, students
preferred several activities which will be offered such as student oral presentation, group
discussions on task, and drillings to teacher-centred learning. (27 % out of 100% from research
participants). Based on the interview comment, teacher-centred learning didn't allow students to
participate actively so that they got bored and demotivated during teaching and learning process.
Turning to the language needs for the new academic writing course, all the aspects were needed
for their forthcoming course because the result of the current findings from students’ difficulties
and their expectation of academic writing was informative. Evans & Green, (2007) and Cai &
Kong (2013) also elaborated that undergraduate and masters students faced difficulties. As
highlighted in Evans & Green's (2007, p. 11) study, students found more difficulties related to the
language rather than the content or structure of academic texts.
In relation to writing organization and content, academic writing in the previous course did
not prepare students for writing a research paper because the subsequent course focused on a
research paper. Dealing with the global need of academic writing, the prospective course should
equip students with skills to organize the main body which is well-structured in academic papers
including some text types: the experiment set up, method, findings/result, case study, and
discussion (Bailey, 2003). Moreover, academic writing closely related to scientific articles should
introduce students in writing as IMRAD structure: introduction, method, result, and discussion
(Hartley, 2008).
Additionally, peer proof-reading assignment had been applied in the previous academic
writing course although it was rarely used. The evidence suggests that 69% of the participants
needed proof-reading due to the inaccuracy of last proof-reading assignments. As the interview
data suggested, the interviewer asked students to proofread their classmates’ essays in terms of
punctuation, grammar, and spelling. One of the students confirmed that the proof-reading activity
was already done, but the essay still could not be read well. According to Bailey (2003, p.48 ),
some common error types were word ending, punctuation, tense, vocabulary, spelling,
singular/plural, style, missing words and unnecessary words. The new course of academic writing
would be provided with this systematic activity on the call for action.
Finally, searching the information throughout the academic writing course was highly
needed by students for gaining optimum information. As the questionnaire data indicated, students
responded 81 % and 75 % respectively for finding academic resources and using e-database
activities for the forthcoming course. To support this finding, they also wished that the new course
would provide them not only with paper-based resources, but also e-resources such as e-books,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

428

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

links, video, exercises and assignment because of their efficiency and flexibility (Focus group
comments).
Table 4. Students’ wants to learn in new academic writing course
Category
Teaching
materials

Teaching
activities

Language

Writing and
Organization

Searching for
Information

Percentage
(%)
The key textbook used in class
60
Other supplementary handouts
34
Other supplementary authentic research papers as
53
models
Supplementary exercises
27
Teacher-centered lectures
27
Student oral presentation
65
Group discussions on task
67
Academic grammar drills
70
Academic vocabulary drills
85
Academic writing drills
92
Academic writing references drills
90
Academic language
64
Coherence and cohesion
67
Academic style
75
Writing introduction
72
Writing literature review
76
Writing research methodology
70
Commenting and summarizing findings
78
Referring to sources
70
Writing conclusion
73
Proof-reading written assignments
69
Finding academic resources
81
Using E-database and exercise
75

Call for Actions
This part focuses on what elements, aspects, and skills must be offered to students which
they neither encounter nor apply them optimally in the previous course. First, the proof-reading
assignment is considered a crucial activity that should be provided to the students. According to
Bailey (2003, p. 48), this activity is important and the final part of the writing process. As the
previous data suggested, this activity was rarely conducted in an academic writing class as figured
out in Table 3 (M=2.01 SD = .73). For the new academic writing course, proof-reading
assignments should be regular and systemic after classroom meeting. This part will be conducted
every two weeks consisting of two rounds: the first round is lecturer’s proof reading on content
and organization and the second round is peer editing focusing on the mechanics, grammar, and
vocabularies. Also, these activities will be monitored well by the lecturer.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

429

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

Second, writing organization and content are the most crucial skills to be taught to students.
On the other hand, the previous course did not teach these skills to the students. Students learned
argumentative essay, opinion essay, descriptive essay, statistical (stating the facts, statistics, and
graph) essay, and references/bibliography but lecturers did not teach research paper sections such
as introduction, method, discussion. After doing this evaluative process, some needed skills and
aspects of the prospective new course were incorporated into the new curriculum. The new course
of academic writing will accommodate students’ needs of time allotment and research paper
output. As the interviewees contended, adding the time allotment might be the solution for the
students’ problems. In addition, the new course of academic writing will prepare students for
writing a research paper so the overlapping course contents will be eliminated and another course
which is integrated to the academic writing such methodological design course will be put in the
previous semester or in the sequence of the academic writing course.
Finally, using e-database and exercise will be new for an academic writing course for its
efficiency and flexibility. So, students can start their migration from paper-based sources to edatabase and practices. Some interviewees claimed that such migration would please them because
they did not need to copy textbooks, research journals, and print out their assignments. Besides,
regarding efficiency, the interviewees underlined the flexible use of it in completing their
assignments and reading materials.
Conclusion
The results of the present study implied that certain needs of academic writing include
necessities, lack and wants. From the questionnaire and focus group interview data, EFL students’
needs especially in a private university in learning academic writing have been elaborated. In
addition to identifying target needs, necessities and difficulties, this present study specifically
sought to examine students’ perceptions and attitudes (wants) towards their previous academic
writing courses and prospective new courses. The students found difficulties in academic writing
because they were not taught the necessary skills in their previous academic writing course. The
use of proper grammar such as correct tenses, agreements, reporting verbs, and preposition are
perceived as the most difficult throughout the academic writing course. The other difficult
activities of writing were expressing ideas correctly and choosing the appropriate academic
language. In their previous course, students were not taught how to write each section of a research
paper with appropriate moves/steps and infrequently introduced to academic language features and
styles. Consequently, in a proposed new course, they would be taught these aspects. In addition,
providing e-database and exercises will be the new feature of prospective new course due to the
students’ needs of paperless and its flexibility. This present study should be conducted in a wider
area of education in Indonesia, so other investigations are recommended to elicit note worthing
related to the area of academic writing.
About the Authors:
Ratnawati is full time lecturer in the English Education Program at Faculty of Teacher Training
and Education of Galuh University, Ciamis, Indonesia. Her current research interests include
Technology Enhanced Language Learning, English Language Teaching for EFL, and
Multiliteracies in Language Learning. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1548-4787.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

430

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

Didih Faridah is senior lecturer on English Language Teaching for EFL, Technology Enhanced
Language Learning and Academic Writing. She holds an MA in ELT from Universitas Sebelas
Maret Surakarta. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5597-7503.
Syafiul Anam is senior lecturer on English for Specific Purposes (ESP) and language learning
strategies. He holds a PhD in TESOL from University of Canberra, Australia with the research
topic on self-regulation in L2 learning. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4687-856X
Pratiwi Retnaningdyah is senior lecturer on Media, Identity, and literacy practices. She took a
Master’s degree program (M.Hum) in American Studies at Gadjah Mada University, Yogyakarta.
Recently she just completed her PhD in Cultural Studies at the School of Culture and
Communication, the University of Melbourne. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2282-1953
References
Al-Saadi, S. H., & Samuel, M. S. (2013). An analysis of the writing needs of Omani EFL
students for the development of grade 11 English program. ASIAN EFL Journal, 15(1), 24–
63.
Ariyanti. (2016). The teaching of EFL writing in Indonesia. Dinamika Ilmu, 16(2), 263–277.
https://doi.org/10.21093/di.v16i2.274.
Aunurrahman, A., Hamied, F. A., & Emilia, E. (2017). Exploring the tertiary EFL students’
academic writing competencies. Indonesian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 7(1), 72–79.
Bailey, S. (2003). Academic writing: a practical guide for students.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203464120
Bian, X., & Wang, X. (2016). Chinese EFL undergraduates’ academic writing: rhetorical
difficulties and suggestions. Indonesian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 20–29.
Cai, L. J., & Kong, H. (2013). Students ’ perceptions of academic writing : a needs analysis of
EAP in China. Language Education in Asia, 4(1), 5–22.
Evans, S., & Green, C. (2007). Why EAP is necessary: Asurvey of Hong Kong tertiary students.
Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(1), 3–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2006.11.005.
Fadda, H. Al. (2012). Difficulties in academic writing : From the perspective of King Saud
University postgraduate students. English Language Teaching, 5(3), 123–130.
https://doi.org/10.5539/elt.v5n3p123.
Gillett, A., Hammond, A., & Martala, M. (2009). Inside track: Successful acacemic writing (First
edition). England: Pearson Education.
Giridharan, B. (2012). Identifying gaps in academic writing of ESL students. US-China
Education Review, 6, 578–587.
Hartley, J. (2008). Academic writing and publishing: A practical handbook (First Edition).
Oxon: Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203927984
Hinkel, E. L. I. (2003). Simplicity without elegance : Features of sentences in. TESOL Quarterly,
37(2), 275–301.
Long, M. H. (2005). Second language needs analysis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Nation, I. S. P., & Macalister, J. (2010). Language curriculum design. Oxon: Routledge.
Van de Poel, K., & Gasiorek, J. (2012). Effects of an efficacy-focused approach to academic
writing on students ’ perceptions of themselves as writers. Journal of English for Academic
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

431

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Exploring Academic Writing Needs

Ratnawati, Faridah, Anam & Retnaningdyah

Purposes. 11(4), 294–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.07.003
Sağlamel, H., & Kayaoğlu, M. N. (2015). English major students ’ perceptions of academic
writing : A struggle between writing to learn and learning to write. Journal of History
Culture and Art Research, 4(3), 37–52. https://doi.org/10.7596/taksad.v4i3.477
Husin, M.H., & Nurbayani, E. (2017). The ability of Indonesian EFL learners in writing
academic papers. Dinamika Ilmu, 17(172), 237–250. https://doi.org/10.21093/di.v17i2.725
Soehadi, G. (2008). In becoming EFL writing teacher: A diary study. K@Ta, 9(2), 141–157.
https://doi.org/10.9744/kata.9.2.141-157
Sriwichai, C., & Inpin, B. (2018). A development of the writing instructional model based on
blended and self-directed learning to promote EFL university students ’ writing ability and
self-directed learning. ASEAN Journal of Education, 4(1), 121–140.
Yasuda, S. (2014). Issues in teaching and learning EFL writing in East Asian contexts: The case
of Japan. Asian EFL Journal, 16(4), 150–187.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

432

