Message Received? The Role of Emotion, Race, and Politics in
Social Movement Perceptions and Support
Lauren Valentino, Duke University
D. Adam Nicholson, Indiana University

Acknowledgements:
The authors wish to thank Stephen Benard; Long Doan, Fabio Rojas; Lynn Smith Lovin; Dawn
Robinson; Stephen Vaisey; Joan Valentino; the Duke University Culture and Cognition
Workshop; the Indiana University Politics, Economy, and Culture Workshop; and the Center for
Research on Race and Ethnicity in Society (CRRES) at Indiana University.

Keywords:
social movements, race and ethnicity, culture and cognition, politics, emotions

Corresponding author:
D. Adam Nicholson
Department of Sociology Department of Sociology
744 Ballantine Hall
1020 E. Kirkwood Ave.
Bloomington, IN 47405-7103
Email: nicholda@indiana.edu

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

ABSTRACT
Scholars have long studied how social movements frame and deliver their messages, yet much
less is known about how these “signals” are received by the public. In this study, we ask whether
and how social movement members’ characteristics interact with a bystander’s to influence
whether they support a particular protest movement. In addition, we examine how perceived
likelihood of violence mediates these outcomes. We test five competing models based on
previous theories of emotion, race, and political views in social movement support. To adjudicate
between these frameworks, we conduct an experiment using a 2x2 factorial design in which
participants read a news story about a protest accompanied by an image of a neutral/angry,
white/Black protestor, measuring three types of social movement support. Results provide
support for the politicized race model: a Black protestor is more motivating for liberals’ social
movement support, while a white protestor is more motivating for conservatives. Both liberals
and conservatives are more likely to associate the protest with violence after seeing a Black
protestor compared to a white one. Racialized perceptions of violence explain part of
conservatives’ hesitancy to support the movement when seeing a Black protestor and inhibits
part of the otherwise-positive effect of seeing a Black protestor for liberals.
BACKGROUND
Social movements are important engines of social change. One key way social
movements effect this change is by shifting or amplifying public opinion (Amenta et al. 2010;
Agnone 2007; Giugni 1998; Burstein 1985). Elected politicians in representative democracies
are sensitive to public opinion (Soroka and Wlezien 2010), and successful social movement
organizations leverage this interest to meet their goals (Fassiotto and Soule 2017; Wouters and
Walgrave 2017).
2

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Given the important intermediary role of public opinion in the way social movements
engender concrete change, much social movement research has focused on the strategies social
movement organizations undertake to convince bystanders that the movement is legitimate and
its cause worth supporting. This line of work is the focus of the highly generative research
program that examines collective action frames – a research program which has highlighted the
discursive and strategic techniques social movements use to convince others that the issue they
have identified is indeed problematic, that the solution they are offering is indeed viable, and that
supporting the movement will indeed help to bring about the solution to the problem (see
Benford and Snow 2000 for a review).
While we now know much about the “signal” side of the process – that is, how social
movement actors engage in this framing work –, researchers are just beginning to turn their
analytic focus to the “receiver” side of the process – that is, how the public understands and
interprets these various signals. Studies of how social movements influence policymakers find
that factors like the clarity of a social movement’s message, perceived unity among a
movement’s members, and the size of protest events are important in shaping whether and how
political decision-makers take resultant action (Fassiotto and Soule 2017; Wouters and Walgrave
2017). Moving beyond policymakers to the general public, Andrews, Beyerlein, and Farnum
(2016) find that a person’s exposure to nearby protest events and the politics of the community in
which they are embedded shaped individuals’ views on the Civil Rights movement.
As mobilization research begins to examine the way a movement’s “signals” are
received, two key theoretical insights remind us that “the public” should not be considered a
monolithic entity in terms of their receptiveness to a social movement. The first insight is the
notion of “resonance,” which highlights the fact that a collective action frame is most likely to be

3

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

convincing when it resonates with an individual’s own experience (Snow and Benford 1988). By
extension, it is reasonable to expect that certain collective action frames will align with certain
segments of the public but not others (McDonnell, Bail, and Tavory 2017; Snow et al. 1986).
The second insight comes from political mediation theory. Political mediation theory argues that
a social movement’s impact will be a function of its organizational features (such as its tactics)
as well as the external environment in which the social movement occurs (such as the political
context) (Amenta 2006).
As it stands, movement scholars know relatively little about the extent to which different
segments of the population “receive” the different “signals” put out by social movements. In
their recent review of this literature, Amenta and coauthors (2010) issued a call for scholars to
“take into account nonmovement factors influential in politics and posit interactive effects
among movements, their strategies, and political contextual conditions” (pp. 301). The present
study is a first step at filling that gap by examining the extent to which the interaction between a
social movement’s characteristics and bystander characteristics influence public opinion about a
given social movement. The first research question we will address in this study concerns the
question of how social movement signals and messages are received: how do social movement
characteristics impact levels of public support for the movement? Relatedly, we investigate the
resonance/political mediation postulate by asking are some social movement characteristics
more effective for certain bystanders than others?
A second shortcoming of the prior research on how social movements signals are
received relates to the question of tactical efficacy. Many scholars now argue that nondisruptive,
nonviolent social movement strategies are the most likely to garner popular support and
engender change (e.g. Simpson, Willer, and Feinberg 2018; Feinberg, Willer, and Kovacheff

4

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

2017; King and Smith 2011; Rojas 2006). Yet emergent work suggests that the very perception
of which social movements and tactics are considered “disruptive” is rooted in social histories.
For instance, Davenport, Soule, and Armstrong (2011) find that Black protests are more likely
than white protests to incur a police presence, and that police are more likely to take action –
including making arrests and using force – at protests with Black attendees than at predominantly
white protests. As the authors note, “protesters’ race is a critical piece of information that
policing agents have at their disposal when deciding how to respond” (pp. 153). Isaac (2008)
points out how the Civil Rights movement has since been subjected to revisionist history in
which movement leaders’ more subversive tactics were edited out of the cultural narrative and
collective memory. Contemporary protests involving Blacks are likely to be presented in the
media as violent, disorganized riots (Campbell et al. 2004). This all suggests that the very
perception of “disruptiveness” of a particular tactic or social movement is subject to perceptual
factors such as its members’ racial identity. Thus, the third research question of this study asks
how do social movement characteristics/bystander characteristics impact how violent the
movement is perceived to be? And relatedly, do these perceptions of violence explain part of
the effect of social movement characteristics/bystander characteristics on social movement
support?
The media plays a central role in the way social movements are represented and,
ultimately, understood by the public (Castells 2015). Increasingly, this media representation of
social movements occurs in an online milieu, such as the internet, which can in turn prove
instrumental for support and mobilization (Bond et al. 2012; González-Bailón et al. 2011; Van
Laer and Van Aelst 2010; Diani 2000). In this study, we hone in on the question of how media
representations of social movements online generate reactions from the public (see also Lewis,

5

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Gray, and Meierhenrich 2014). Online environments are inherently micro-interactional (Golder
and Macy 2014), and thus provide a window into how exposure to a particular individual
member of a social movement can influence an individual bystander. They therefore implore us
to consider the “receiver” side of the micromobilization “signal” process (Snow et al. 1986).
In what follows, we discuss three micro-level characteristics of a social movement that
prior research suggests are potentially salient when a social movement emits a “signal.” Here we
draw not only on research from the study of social movements, but also social psychology
theories of interpersonal contact and race. We then turn to bystander characteristics, where once
again we draw not only on social movements research, but insights from political sociology as
well. Finally, we consider what existing work in the movements and collective action literature
tells us about how violence impacts social movement support, and what factors may shape the
very perception of violence in the first place.
SOCIAL MOVEMENT CHARACTERISTICS
Although there are undoubtedly many aspects of social movements that may be salient
for the public in determining whether or not to support it (cf Fassiotto and Soule 2017; Wouters
and Walgrave 2017; Andrews et al. 2016), we focus our attention on two key, micro-level factors
that the prior mobilization literature suggests may be relevant for garnering support, sympathy,
and outrage for a social movement’s cause: emotion and race. Each of these factors leads us to
derive a model with a subsequent prediction for how it will influence the public’s reception of
the social movement’s cause.
The Emotion Model
The expression of emotions is generally seen as a positive force for garnering support and
recruiting bystanders to become participants by highlighting injustices that need rectifying

6

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

(Goodwin, Jasper, and Polletta 2009, 2000; Snow, Zurcher, and Eckland-Olson 1980). Research
in this area finds that emotions may function as an accelerator, increasing the speed at which
support for a social movement translates into action (van Stekelenburg and Klandermans 2013),
while “framing” studies such as Gould’s (2009) and Nepstad and Smith’s (2001) find that
activists strategically manage and use anger and moral outrage to encourage bystanders to
empathize with and provide material and nonmaterial support.
Studies of emotion and social movements tend to conclude that anger or frustration over
injustice is a necessary prerequisite for political mobilization (Flam and King 2005; Aminzade
and McAdam 2002; Jasper 1998; Gamson 1992). Researchers in the area of affect similarly
conclude that “anger may help mobilize behaviors that are directed toward positive social ends”
(Feschbach 1986: 123-4). While early scholars of social movements generally failed to assign
any explanatory importance to emotion, recent scholarship has begun to see emotion “not simply
as a characteristic feature of emergent collective action, but as a necessary causal component of
any explanatory theory” of collective action (McAdam 2017:201). Specific to social movements
involving race, Banks (2016) finds that anger plays an important role in motivating whites to
take political action regarding affirmative action policies or Confederate-era commemoration.
Given how the prior research on social movements and on affect has highlighted the importance
of emotion in evoking sympathy and galvanizing people to action, the emotion model thus would
predict a social movement member’s emotional display – in particular, anger – increases a
bystander’s support for that movement’s cause:
H1: A social movement member’s display of emotions influences a bystander’s social
movement support.

7

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

The Race Model
Drawing from literature on racism and racial animus, the race model predicts that the race
of the protestor will shape bystander support for the movement. Racial prejudice plays a large
role in social interactions, both consciously and implicitly. Scholars have documented that, when
possible, whites tend select into schools away from Black populations (Goyette 2008; Saporito
and Lareau 1999). This same pattern is observed in housing, where researchers find that
avoidance of predominantly Black neighborhoods is a prominent mechanism upholding
residential segregation (Quillian 2002; Farley et al. 1994). Testing competing hypotheses, Bobo
and Zubrinsky (1996) find that residential segregation is best explained by racial prejudice,
rather than perceived economic status or in-group preference. Indeed, extensive work on aversive
racism demonstrates that white Americans are generally inclined to avoid interactions with
minority groups, specifically Blacks, when possible (Pearson, Dovidio, and Gaertner 2009;
Dovidio and Gaertner 2004; Gaertner and Dovidio 1986).
Anti-Black sentiment is not always overt and is racial prejudice is sometimes expressed
subconsciously. In a study of online dating, Anderson et al. (2014) found that even when users
expressed no racial preference in romantic partners, they demonstrated strong same race
preferences in their behaviors. Other times, racial prejudice is masked by stereotypical thinking
or alternative explanations for racial inequality (Feagin and O'Brien 2004; Bobo, Kluegal, and
Smith 1997; Sears et al. 1997). For example, much racial animus is due to negative stereotypes
that Black Americans are unwilling to help themselves and therefore undeserving of assistance
(Sears and Henry 2003; Virtanen and Huddy 1998). In a meta-analysis on whites’ interracial
helping behavior covering 31 experiments over 40 years of work, Saucier, Miller, and Doucet
(2005) found a stable pattern of discrimination reflective of aversive racism, in which whites

8

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

most often preferred to help other whites. These negative associations and aversive behaviors can
have substantial effects on political outcomes. For example, based on previous voting patterns
and the density of racially charged Google searches, Stephens-Davidowitz (2014) estimates that
anti-Black racial animus cost Barack Obama an estimated 4 percentage points of the national
popular vote in both the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections. Based on the extant literature on
anti-Black racism, prejudice, and aversion, we expect that Black protestors in particular will be
less likely to garner support for their cause.
H2: A social movement member’s race influences a bystander’s social movement support.
The Racialized Emotion Model
The racialized emotion model of social movement support builds on the emotion model
(H1), but incorporates insights from the literature on emotion and social structure. These
literatures suggest that effects of emotional displays may in fact depend on the identity of the
person expressing them. For example, Hochschild’s (1983, 1979) concept of emotion work
posits that individuals actively manage their feelings in response to social structure. Specifically,
“feeling rules” are the expectations we hold of certain actors to perform particular emotions
given their location in social-structural space. In other words, displays of emotion are subject to
interpretation, and this interpretation is socially informed. Thus, an actor’s emotion is variably
interpreted by others depending on the identity of the actor displaying that emotion (Turner and
Stets 2005; Thoits 1989).
In particular, the racialized emotion model posits that a social movement member’s race
interacts with the emotion displayed, based on evidence that emotions are perceived differently
depending upon the race of the actor. Schwalbe et al. (2000) argue that, “sustaining a system of
inequality, one that generates destabilizing feelings of anger, resentment, sympathy, and despair,

9

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

requires that emotions be managed” (p. 434). Given the extent of documented racial inequalities,
one might expect to discover policing of emotional expressions by marginalized groups. Indeed,
recently emerging research in the field of sociology of emotion builds upon the concept of
“feeling rules” and finds that there are cultural expectations regarding the performance of
emotion that are specific to one’s race or gender.
For instance, Wingfield (2010) finds that displaying anger, frustration, or annoyance is
viewed as inappropriate when a Black worker – particularly a Black man – expresses this
emotion. According to Wingfield, a stereotype exists in which “a middle class, educated African
American male, who despite his economic and occupational success, perceives racial
discrimination everywhere and consequently is enraged” (2007:12). In order to avoid being
perceived as the stereotypical angry Black man, these individuals must strenuously adhere to
“racialized feeling rules” that prohibit expressions of anger and acknowledgement of race-based
inequities (Wingfield 2010). Doan (2016) uses a series of experiments to find that race and
gender influence expectations regarding what emotions an individual should display. Examining
race, gender, and emotion on college campuses, Wilkins (2012) finds feelings of anger and
resentment toward unequal outcomes can be dismissed by others because they are seen as
inappropriate in intensity, timing, or for the situation.
The racialized emotion model suggests that Black social movement members may be
subject to racialized feeling rules as these expressions may not be seen as “appropriate” displays
of emotion (Shields 2005) and that these members are subject to positive or negative sanctions
based on the extent to which they are judged to be fulfilling their “appropriate” roles, partially
indicated by their displays of emotion (Turner 2007) in line with expectations of their identities
(Robinson and Smith-Lovin 1999). The racialized emotion model therefore extends this

10

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

prediction to social movement support by hypothesizing that there is an interaction between a
social movement member’s race and display of emotion in terms of how this influences ultimate
support for the movement’s cause.
H3: The effect of a social movement member’s display of emotion on a bystander’s social
movement support will depend on the social movement member’s race.
BYSTANDER CHARACTERISTICS
Once again, there are many bystander-level characteristics that are known predictors of
support for and ultimate participation in political movements (Schussman and Soule 2005).
Following the insights from resonance/frame alignment theory and political mediation theory, we
are primarily concerned with which aspects of bystanders may interact with social movement
characteristics. Indeed, we expect that some micro-level social movement features are more or
less effective for different bystanders, particularly when it comes to a bystander’s political
orientation.
The Politicized Emotion Model
We further build on H1 (the emotion model) by noting that recent work in political
polarization shows strong ideological divisions among Americans. Some scholars argue that
these political differences are deeply rooted in psychological differences between those on the
Left and those on the Right (Kruglanski 2013; Jost et al. 2003a, 2003b) and that these differences
permeate nearly every aspect of our public and private lives (Jost 2006). For example, Lakoff
(1997), observing differences in political metaphors, found that whereas conservatives adhere to
a “strict father” model of moral discipline, liberals prefer a “nurturing parent.” Jost (2006) finds
a clear tendency for conservatives to score higher on measures of dogmatism, intolerance of
ambiguity, needs for order, structure, and closure, and to be lower in openness to experience and

11

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

integrative complexity than moderates and liberals. Similarly, Carney et al. (2008) conclude that
liberals are generally more open-minded in their pursuit of creativity, novelty, and diversity,
whereas conservatives tend to pursue lives that are more orderly, conventional, and better
organized. On average, conservatives are more likely than liberals to fear crime, terrorism, and
death (e.g., Jost et al., 2003a; Wilson, 1973), and to perceive the world as a dangerous place
(Altemeyer 1998; Duckitt 2001).
Indeed, scholars have attributed the tendency of conservatives to hold more prejudicial
attitudes toward members of deviant or stigmatized groups than liberals at least partially to
elevated levels of threat and need for order (Cunningham et al. 2004; Duckitt 2001; Whitley
1999; Altemeyer 1998, 1988; Sidanius et al. 1996; Adorno et al. 1950). Furthermore, findings
from work on Moral Foundations Theory finds that liberals and conservatives attend to different
affective or moral cues in their environment, such as harm or disgust (Graham, Haidt, and Nosek
2009). Given this literature on the affective roots of political schisms in the contemporary United
States, the politicized emotion model predicts that liberal bystanders will be swayed toward
social movement support by certain emotion(s), whereas this same emotional display would
dissuade a comparable conservative bystander. Moreover, people of different political
orientations may find a social movement more or less legitimate and threatening, depending on
the emotion conveyed by the movement’s members.
H4: The effect of a social movement member’s display of emotion on a bystander’s social
movement support will depend on the bystander’s political ideology.
The Politicized Race Model
The politicized race model builds on the race model (H2), but also recognizes the
importance of including a bystander’s own political view in the effect of race on social

12

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

movement support. Race is highly politicized in the United States (Luttig, Federico, and Lavine
2017; Omi and Winant 2014; Novkov 2008; Hutchings and Valentino 2004); thus we might
expect that a social movement member’s racial identity plays a (de)motivating role in soliciting
social movement support, depending on a bystander’s own political views.
Indeed, there are both theoretical and empirical reasons to expect the race of the social
movement participant to affect outcomes differently based on political ideology. Carmines and
Stimson (1989) argue that American politics began to polarize around issues of race during the
time of the Civil Rights Movement, while Valentino and Sears (2005) highlight racial
conservatism as a driving factor in the Southern shift to the Republican Party. While the
Democratic Party has voiced support for race-conscious positions, the GOP has employed a
“color blind” approach in order to capture the support of white voters anxious about racial
change (Olson 2008). Despite the so-called “color blind” approach, scholars argue there remains
a “race-conscious policy alliance” (King 2011). Rather than overt racial positions, conservative
politicians employ “dog whistles” (Lopez 2015) or appeal to calls for “law and order”
(Murakawa 2008) in order to build a base fueled by white backlash to racial and ethnic
minorities (Abrajano and Hajnal 2015). Using this coded language enables candidates to activate
negative racial stereotypes without violating sentiments of equality or norms of socially
acceptable public discourse (Berinsky 1999; Kuklinski et al. 1997a).
Mendelberg (2001) shows the power of such strategies. She demonstrates that when
policy issues such as crime are paired with subtle cues, such as a picture of a Black man, heavily
racialized opinions and evaluations emerge. In line with previous work, which has demonstrated
that liberals and conservatives react differently to primes involving race (Nail, Harton, and

13

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Decker 2003), the politicized race model predicts that liberals and conservatives will have
differing responses to the race of the social movement participant.
H5: The effect of a social movement member’s race on a bystander’s social movement support
will depend on the bystander’s political ideology.
PERCEPTIONS OF VIOLENCE
Research on social movement support finds that extreme tactics or disruptive protests are
actually demotivating because they inhibit popular support or decrease likelihood of achieving
the movement’s goals (Feinberg, Willer, and Kovacheff 2017; King and Smith 2011; Stephan
and Chenoweth 2008; Rojas 2007, 2006). Thomas and Louis (2014) found that reports of highly
disruptive protest activities, such as those that included reference to violent acts, diminished
support for protest groups. Wasow (2017) found that, in the 1960s, areas in which violent civil
rights protests occurred saw decreased Democratic vote share among whites, while areas with
more nonviolent protests saw an increase in Democratic vote share. Most recently, Simpson,
Willer, and Feinberg (2018) found that the use of violence not only led to decreased support for a
movement’s cause but can also increase support for opposition groups. There is thus strong prior
evidence leading us to expect that extreme or violent tactics are demotivating for social
movement support. We expect to replicate this finding in the current study:
H6: If bystanders perceive that a social movement event is likely to become violent, they will be
less likely to support it.
We will build on this line of work by arguing that whether a social movement is seen as
extreme or disruptive depends - at least in part - on how members of that social movement are
perceived. In particular, we expect that a social movement member’s race influences perceptions

14

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

of violence. We contend that Black participants are more likely to be associated with perceptions
of violence.
Indeed, Blackness and violence are linked for many Americans due to cultural influences
including television, movies, music, and newspapers provide a constant barrage of information
that often depicts Blacks as violent (Cosby 1994; Gray 1989). Public perceptions of crime are
highly racialized and the association between Blacks and violent crimes is strong and is
perpetuated by the media (Hurwitz and Peffley 1997). According to Quillian and Pager (2001),
the percentage of young Black men in a neighborhood is positively associated with perceptions
of the neighborhood crime level, even after controlling for multiple measures of crime rates and
other neighborhood characteristics. Similarly, research on social disorder finds that people are
more likely to perceive neighborhoods to be in a state of disarray when the neighborhood is
predominated by Black Americans (Sampson and Raudenbush 2004).
Insights from social psychology highlight the implicit cognitive association individuals
often make between weapons and Black Americans (Payne 2001). These associations have
dangerous consequences. Using a video game to test “the police officer’s dilemma,” Correll et al.
(2002) put participants in “shoot” or “don’t shoot” scenarios and found that participants made the
decision to fire on an armed target more quickly when that target was Black, choose not to shoot
more quickly when that target was white. Kahn and Davies (2011) corroborate these findings,
showing that Blacks are prone to shooter bias and that, in fact, the likelihood of being mistakenly
shot increases with darker skin tones. Moreover, these racial stereotypes are readily activated.
Kubota and Ito (2014) find that viewing a Black, angry face strengthens the implicit association
between Black Americans and violence and Eberhardt et al. (2004) find that simply seeing a
Black face triggers racial stereotypes.

15

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

This research all highlights an important point: the very perceptions of extreme tactics,
disruptive protests, or social disarray are likely rooted in deeply embedded cultural associations
between race and violence or disorder. We therefore expect that the race of the social movement
member plays an important role in the likelihood of violence associated with a social movement
event such as a protest.2 Thus, if support is found for a social movement model that incorporates
race (the race model [H2], the racialized emotion model [H3], or the politicized race model
[H5]), the racialized perceptions of violence prediction expects that part of any negative impact
of viewing a Black participant on social movement support can be explained by the association
bystanders make between Blackness and violence.
H7: Bystanders are more likely to perceive that the social movement event will end in violence
when they see a Black participant than if they see a white one, and this explains part of the role
of race on social movement support.
We depict this potential relationship in the path diagram below, Figure 1. In a social
movement model with race, we expect race to have both a direct effect on support, as well as an
indirect which flows through perceived violence.

Figure 1. Predicted Mediation Effect of Race on Support Through Perceived Violence

16

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

DATA AND METHODS
To test these hypotheses, we employ a survey experiment, a common technique in
political science and used by sociologists who are interested in beliefs and judgments (Gaines,
Kuklinski, and Quirk 2006; Jasso 2006). In a survey experiment, participants are presented with
randomly assigned manipulations, and their response to the manipulation is measured. In this
way, the causal effect of the manipulation on an outcome can be established (Webster and Sell
2007). The present survey experiment has two elements which are manipulated: emotion (neutral
versus angry) and race (white versus Black), to create a two-by-two factorial design.
Experimental Manipulation
The experimental manipulation is four variations of a vignette in which the race and/or
emotion of the actor are varied. The vignette is a brief news story about police shootings of
unarmed teenagers, and subsequent protests around the nation,3 accompanied by a photo of a
protestor. The emotion and race of the protestor are the only factors that vary between the four
conditions (see Figures A1-A4 in Appendix A); the news story remained identical in all
conditions. Pre-testing of the photos ensured that there were no confounding differences across
the images such as attractiveness, nor were there any problems with respondents being able to
identify the race of the person in the image.4
Participants were forced to spend at least 15 seconds reading the news story and
observing the photo before they were permitted to advance to the social movement perception
and support questions. Once they advanced to these questions, they were not allowed to go back
to the news story or photo and were forced instead to rely on their initial impressions.
Outcomes: Measuring Social Movement Support and Perceptions

17

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Participants were asked about their support for a social movement related to the event,
their perceptions of protest, their recall and interpretation of the event and accompanying photo,
and their demographic information. To examine support for the social movement, we rely on
three kinds of measures: one behavioral, one attitudinal, and one prospective behavioral.5 For the
behavioral measure of support, respondents were presented with the option of signing a petition
in support of the social movement being depicted in the news story (see Appendix B for text of
petition). We sought to maximize external validity and believability by using language from an
actual Change.org petition.6
For the attitudinal measure of support, we asked participants how justified they believed
the protestors are in taking this action (response options ranged from 1-5, where 1 = “not at all
justified in their protest,” and 5 = “completely justified in their protest”). For the prospective
behavioral measure of support, we asked how likely participants would be to attend a local rally
to support the protestors’ cause (response options ranged from 1-5, where 1 = “I would definitely
not attend,” and 5 = “I would definitely attend”). For the perceptual measure (tests of Hypotheses
6 and 7), we asked participants how likely a protest like this one could become violent (response
options ranged from 1-5, where 1 = “extremely unlikely” and 5 = “extremely likely”).
Sample Source and Quality
The data for this survey experiment were collected via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(MTurk). Mturk is a data source increasingly used by social scientists for experimental research.
Studies of the Mturk data pool have found that its samples are relatively high quality and diverse,
similar to those gathered through random-digit dialing and internet survey techniques (Weinberg,
Freese, and McElhattan 2014; Goodman, Cryder, and Cheema 2013; Simons and Chabis 2012;
Paolacci, Chandler, and Ipeirotis 2010). The analytic sample for this study (N=2,821) is fairly

18

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

representative of the American population in terms of demographic characteristics (see Table 1
below). Compared to the U.S. population generally, our sample is slightly more male, slightly
more white, somewhat less religious, somewhat more educated, similar in terms of income, and
somewhat less conservative (see Table A1 in Appendix C for comparison of study sample to
U.S. population).
Table 1. Descriptive statistics of study sample
Overall
Female1
White1
Age
Protestant1
College degree1
Household income
Conservatism2
Proportion of sample
1
2

.466
.744
34.6
.277
.536
56213
3.40
-

White
Neutral
.457
.730
34.3
.280
.549
55171
3.33
.251

Black
Neutral
.473
.754
35.0
.294
.514
53214
3.40
.251

White
Angry
.451
.732
34.5
.248
.556
58023
3.65
.250

Black
Angry
.481
.760
34.5
.286
.524
58485
3.49
.248

Numbers presented represent proportion falling in this category.
Conservatism is measured on a scale from 1-7, where 1 = “extremely liberal” and 7 = “extremely conservative”

Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four conditions (white neutral protestor
condition N = 708, Black neutral protestor condition N = 709, white angry protestor condition N
= 704, Black angry protestor condition N = 700). To verify whether participants were paying
close attention and therefore actually absorbing the information provided in the manipulations,
we included an attention check question, asking what the reason is that people are protesting.
Twenty-two participants failed the attention check (0.8% of the sample); therefore, their results
are excluded from all subsequent analyses. Chi-square and ANOVA tests revealed no significant
differences between experimental conditions on these demographic characteristics. This indicates
that the randomization was successful, and that any observed differences between conditions are
likely due to the experimental manipulation, rather than background differences between
participants.

19

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Analytic Approach
To test the various theorized models of social movement support (Hypotheses 1-5), we
modeled each of the three elements of support as a function of the characteristics of the protestor
and/or bystander, as implied by each model. Signing the petition is modeled using probit
regression; how justified the protestor is, and the likelihood of attending a future rally is modeled
using linear regression.7 We adjudicate between the hypothesized models (Hypotheses 1-5) by
using parsimonious measures of model fit, Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) (Raftery 1995), as well as examining whether there are significant
differences between conditions in each model. Once the best-fitting model is selected, we present
the results from the experimental manipulations for that model. In order to test the mediating
effects of perceived emotion and perceived violence (Hypotheses 6 and 7), we use generalized
structural equation modeling to identify the proportion of the total negative/positive impact that
each mediator has on the observed effects, with multiple group analysis to account for the
potential interaction of bystander political orientation with experimental condition.
RESULTS
To examine which theorized model best explains social movement support, we begin by
assessing model fit statistics for the five possible models across all three measures of social
movement support. Table 2 below displays model fit statistics for all of the outcomes. The
lowest AIC and BIC values occur for the politicized race model for probability of signing the
petition, how justified the protest is, and likelihood of attending a future rally. The BIC
differences between the politicized race model and the next best model range from 7 to 12,
indicating ‘strong’ to ‘very strong’ evidence that the politicized race model is a better fit than the
others (Raftery 1995:138-9). The consistency of results across all three outcomes suggests that

20

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

regardless of how one operationalizes social movement support – using a behavioral measure, an
attitudinal measure, or a prospective behavioral measure – the politicized race model best
explains social movement support for this vignette, in line with Hypothesis 5: that the race of the
protestor matters for social movement support, and this effect depends on a bystander’s own
political ideology.
Table 2. Model Comparisons for Three Measures of Social Movement Support
Model

Emotion

Race

Signed Petition
AIC
2020.968
2020.067
BIC
2032.387
2031.486
LL
-1008.484
-1008.033
N
2230
2230
Protest Justified
AIC
6617.956
6617.859
BIC
6629.375
6629.278
LL
-3306.978
-3306.929
N
2230
2230
Likelihood of Attending Future Rally
AIC
7027.781
7028.527
BIC
7039.201
7039.946
LL
-3511.89
-3512.263
N
2230
2230

Racialized
emotion

Politicized
emotion

Politicized
race

2024.026
2046.865
-1008.013
2230

1953.261
1976.1
-972.6304
2230

1941.052
1963.891
-966.526
2230

6615.295
6638.134
-3303.647
2230

5940.2
5963.039
-2966.1
2230

5933.063
5955.902
-2962.531
2230

7031.123
7053.962
-3511.562
2230

6627.169
6650.008
-3309.584
2230

6618.496
6641.335
-3305.248
2230

NOTE: Smaller values of AIC and BIC are preferred. Best-fitting model for each measure is in bold.

Effect of Social Movement & Bystander Characteristics on Support
We begin by briefly describing the patterns of findings for the four models that do not fit
the data as well as the politicized race model. For the emotion model, we find no differences
between the “angry” and “neutral” conditions for any of the three outcomes. We see a similar
pattern for the race model: there are no significant differences between the Black and white
condition in terms of support. When looking at the racialized emotion model, we find that Black
angry protesters did cause bystanders to perceive the protest as less justified compared to both
Black neutral protestors (p = .012) and white angry protestors (p = .012), yet there was no
21

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

significant difference between any of the Black angry/white angry/Black neutral/white neutral
protestors on the other two measures. Finally, the politicized emotion model results demonstrate
that the effect of seeing an angry protester did not significantly differ between conservatives and
liberals for any of the three types of support. Overall, results from the emotion model, race
model, and racialized emotion model reveal few differences between conditions.
We next present results from the politicized race model for each of the three outcome
measures. This model specified a different effect of protestor’s race on social movement support
depending on whether the bystander is a liberal or a conservative.8 Figure 2 below shows the
probability of signing a petition across protestor’s race, by political ideology.
Figure 2. Likelihood of Signing Petition

22

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

The effect of a protestor’s race on likelihood of signing the petition is statistically
significant for both conservatives and liberals, though the effects go in opposite directions. For
conservatives, viewing a Black protestor decreases likelihood of signing the petition relative to
seeing a white protestor: 10% of conservatives signed the petition when the news story contained
an image of a white protestor, whereas only 5% signed when the news story depicted a Black
protestor (X2 = 6.02, p = .014). Among liberals, the pattern is reversed: 19% signed when the
news story was accompanied by an image of a white protestor, compared to 24% of liberals who
signed the petition when seeing a Black image (X2 = 5.91, p = .015). Unsurprisingly, the
difference in effects of protestor’s race between conservatives and liberals is statistically
significant (X2 = 10.39, p = .001). We next examine the attitudinal outcome, how justified the
protest is judged to be, in Figure 3 below.

23

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Figure 3. Protest Justified

Reading a news story with a photograph of a Black protestor leads conservative
respondents to see the protest as less justified than when they read a news story with a
photograph of a white protestor (F = 7.58, p = .006). Conservative respondents rated the
justification of the protest with a mean score of 3.455 when seeing the white protestor, versus
3.268 when seeing the Black protestor. This corresponds to a .175 standard deviation penalty
among conservatives for the Black protestor in terms of how justified the protest is judged to be.
By contrast, the race of the protestor makes no significant difference in how justified liberals rate
the protest (F = 0.59, p = .441). They rated the protest as a 4.508 in terms of justification, on
average, when the story’s image included a white protestor, versus an average rating of 4.544
24

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

when the story’s image included a Black protestor, a “boost” for Black protestors of .036
standard deviations which we cannot conclude as statistically different from 0. However, the
formal test shows that the difference between these effects is statistically significant (F = 7.29, p
= .007), consonant with the politicized race model’s prediction. Lastly, we turn to the prospective
behavioral outcome, how likely respondents say they would be to attend a similar rally, in Figure
4.
Figure 4. Likelihood of Attending a Protest

For self-reported likelihood of attending a similar rally to the one mentioned in the news
story (rated on a Likert scale that ranges from 1 to 5), we observe that the race of the protestor
impacts both conservatives (F = 5.07, p = .024) and liberals (F = 4.49, p = .034). For

25

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

conservatives, seeing a Black protestor decreases the likelihood a respondent reports they will
attend a similar rally, shifting the mean likelihood of attending from 1.804 for the white protestor
to 1.630 for the Black protestor. This represents a .152 standard deviation penalty for the Black
protestor image among conservatives in terms of prospective attendance at a similar protest
event. For liberals, seeing a Black protestor alongside the news story increases the likelihood a
respondent reports they will attend a similar rally from 2.670 for the white protestor image up to
2.786 for the Black protestor image. This represents a .100 standard deviation boost in social
movement support for the Black protestor among liberals. Once again, the Wald test finds that
the difference in these two effects is statistically significant (F = 9.36, p = .002).9
To summarize the results thus far, our experimental findings are consistent with the
politicized race model: the three measures of social movement support show starkly different
effects of a protestor’s race for liberal bystanders and conservative bystanders. Liberals’ social
movement support was significantly enhanced when seeing a Black protestor relative to a white
one, and conservatives’ social movement support was significantly depressed when seeing a
Black protestor as opposed to a white protestor.
Perceptions of Violence and their Role in Explaining Social Movement Support
We now turn to the role of perceived violence on social movement support. We begin by
testing Hypothesis 6: that expecting the protest to end violently impedes social movement
support. Table 3 below demonstrates that perceived violence has a significant, negative impact
on all three measures of support, precisely as we expected.
Table 3. Effect of Perceived Violence on Social Movement Support
Perceived
violence
Constant

Sign petitiona
-.170*** (.028)

Protest justifiedb
-.349*** (.018)

Attend rallyb
-.310*** (.018)

-1.030*** (.029)

-

-

26

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

NOTE: N=2,821. * p < .05 ** p < . 01 *** p < .001 (two-tailed tests).
shown. b Fully standardized OLS coefficients shown.

a

Z-scores of the latent variable (probit)

To what extent does this effect depend on a person’s political views? Figure 5 depicts
these effects for conservatives and liberals separately. We see that the impact of violence on
social movement support is much larger for conservatives in terms of likelihood of signing the
petition (X2 = 46.35, p < .001), seeing the protest as justified (X2 = 612.95, p < .001), and chances
of attending a future rally (X2 = 283.74, p < .001). Thus, perceived violence plays a much larger
role in conservatives’ decision to support a social movement’s cause than it does liberals’.
Figure 5. Effect of Perceptions of Violence by Political Views

To what extent are these perceptions of violence racialized? Figure 6 below reveals that
exposure to a Black protestor is significantly more likely to lead to the belief that the protest will
end in violence than exposure to a white protestor (F = 13.14, p < .001). However, the effect has
27

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

a similar magnitude for conservatives and liberals, and thus we cannot conclude that racialized
perceptions of violence vary between political groups (F = 0.55, p = .457).
Figure 6. Perceptions of Violence by Protestor Race

Hypothesis 7 predicted that perceptions of violence explain some of the effect of race on
social movement support. To begin, we examine the viability of the politicized race model in this
mediation framework by formally testing whether a multiple group analysis is warranted (Acock
2013). Likelihood-ratio tests of constrained pathways (in essence, a race model) versus
unconstrained pathways (the politicized race model) support the unconstrained specification for
all three outcomes (sign petition X2 = 302.26, p < .001, protest justified X2 = 1021.4, p < .001,
attend rally X2 = 559.12, p < .001). We therefore present results separately for conservatives and

28

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

liberals to assess the extent to which racialized perceptions of violence mediate social movement
support. Table 4 below depicts these effects for conservatives.
Table 4. Role of Perceived Violence in Effect of Black Protestor on Social Movement Support
for Conservatives

Total
effect
Direct
effect
Indirect
effect

Sign petition
Probit
% of
coefficient effect
explained
-.346*
10.2%
(.152)
-.311*
(.149)
-.035*
(.017)

Protest justified
OLS
% of
coefficient effect
explained
-.187*
39.0%
(.082)
-.114
(.077)
-.073**
(.027)

Attend rally
OLS
% of
coefficient effect
explained
-.178**
27.5%
(.068)
-.129+
(.067)
-.049*
(.021)

NOTE: N=729. Standard errors are produced from bootstrapped estimates of 200 replications. Reference category is
white protestor. + p < .10 * p < .05 ** p < . 01 *** p < .001 (two-tailed tests). % of effect explained = (indirect
effect / total effect).

For conservatives, reading a news story with a Black protestor’s image has a negative
impact, and the association between Blackness and perceived violence works to explain part of
that effect. 10.2% of the total negative effect of seeing a Black protestor on probability of signing
the petition can be attributed to perceiving that the Black protestor will lead to violence. In terms
of the impact of seeing a Black protestor on how justified the protest is deemed to be, 39.0% of
the total negative effect can be attributed to perceiving that the Black protestor will lead to
violence. In fact, the direct effect of viewing a Black protestor on judging the protest to be
justified drops below conventional significance once the indirect effect of Black through
violence is modeled, suggesting that the association between the Black protestor and violence is
particularly important for explaining conservatives’ lack of social movement support by this
measure. Lastly, 27.5% of the total negative effect of seeing a Black protestor on likelihood of
attending a similar rally can be attributed to perceiving that the Black protestor will lead to
violence.
29

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

We next explore the potentially mediating impact of racialized perceptions of violence
for liberals. Results in Table 5 below demonstrate evidence of a suppressor effect: expecting the
protest to end in violence when seeing a Black protestor has a dampening effect on the
otherwise-positive effect of being exposed to a Black protestor’s image for liberals. This is
further evidenced in the diminished size of the total effect compared to the direct effect in all
three outcome measures.
Table 5. Role of Perceived Violence in Effect of Black Protestor on Social Movement Support
for Liberals

Total
effect
Direct
effect
Indirect
effect

Sign petition
Probit
% of
coefficient effect
inhibited
.177*
7.1%
(.078)
.191*
(.078)
-.014+
(.008)

Protest justified
OLS
% of
coefficient effect
inhibited
.036
33.3%
(.041)
.054
(.039)
-.018*
(.008)

Attend rally
OLS
% of
coefficient effect
inhibited
.117*
17.6%
(.053)
.142**
(.053)
-.025*
(.011)

NOTE: N=1,501. Standard errors are produced from bootstrapped estimates of 200 replications. Reference category
is white protestor. + p < .10 * p < .05 ** p < . 01 *** p < .001 (two-tailed tests). % of effect inhibited = 1 - (total
effect / direct effect).

For liberals, 7.1% of the total positive effect of seeing a Black protestor on probability of
signing the petition is inhibited by the perception that the Black protestor will lead to violence. In
terms of the role of viewing a Black protestor on the impact of considering the protest justified,
33.3% of the total positive effect is inhibited by the perception that the Black protestor will lead
to violence. In fact, the weakly positive direct effect of seeing a Black protestor on judging the
protest to be justified is offset by a small but significant negative indirect effect of seeing the
Black protestor through the perceived violence effect. Finally, 17.6% of the total positive effect
of seeing a Black protestor on likelihood of attending a future rally is inhibited by the perception
that the Black protestor will lead to violence.
30

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

To summarize the results concerning perceptions of violence and their role in explaining
social movement support, we found that perceived violence does impede social movement
support. However, these perceptions are shaped by two important factors. Conservatives are far
more likely than liberals to be dissuaded from supporting a cause as a result of this perceived
violence. Black protestors are much more likely to lead to the perception that the protest will end
violently than will white protestors. Our mediation analyses revealed that perceived violence
associated with a Black face explains an important part of the negative impact of seeing a Black
protestor on social movement support, and this was particularly the case for conservatives. Our
predicted path diagram (Figure 1) was indeed correct. For conservatives, this perception of
violence that is linked to Blackness explains some of the net negative effect of seeing a Black
protestor on social movement support. For liberals, this racialized perception of violence takes
the form of a suppressor effect, inhibiting part of an otherwise-positive effect of viewing a Black
protestor on the three measures of support. For both conservatives and liberals, the association
between the Black image and violence seems to play an especially important role in the neutral
(for liberals) or negative (for conservatives) impact of the Black protestor on how justified the
protest is deemed to be. For conservatives, we see that perceptions concerning the Black
protestor explain why this political group is particularly dissuaded from future rally attendance
when they see a Black protestor, whereas liberals’ future rally attendance is much less
determined by racialized perceptions of violence.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This study is part of a burgeoning line of work that seeks to shift the analytic focus from
understanding how social movements frame their message to understanding how social
movements’ messages are received by the broader public. We tested five models of social

31

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

movement support that we hypothesized may be operating in a micromobilization context such
as an online media depiction of a protest. Using a survey experiment, we provided bystanders
with three potential ways of showing their support for a movement’s cause: an observed
behavior, an attitude, and a prospective behavior. Our results provided strong support for the
politicized race model which hypothesized an interaction between a social movement member’s
race and a bystander’s political views. We found that conservatives are more dissuaded from
supporting the cause when reading a news story about a protest that includes a photograph of a
Black protestor as opposed to a white one, whereas liberals are more persuaded by a Black
protestor relative to a white one.
Our findings reiterate the framework put forth by resonance and political mediation
scholars (McDonell et al. 2017; Amenta et al. 2010; Amenta 2006; Snow and Benford 1988;
Snow et al. 1986). In fact, although the race model initially revealed no effect of protestor race
on social movement support, the politicized race model demonstrates that the seeming lack of
effect was due to countervailing patterns among conservative bystanders and liberal bystanders.
These heterogeneous effects highlight the importance of taking seriously resonance and political
mediation’s postulate that social movements’ frames may resonate with certain people and not
others, and that the efficacy of these signals depends upon the political context in which they are
received. Indeed, the present political context of the U.S. is one which is highly politically
polarized, particularly around issues of race (Valentino and Sears 2005; Carmines and Stimson
1989).
We also tested the extent to which social movement characteristics and bystander
characteristics shape perceptions of violence related to the movement. While most prior work has
assumed that violent tactics lead to lower support – a finding which we replicate here –, our

32

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

study is among the first to test which factors shape this very perception of social movementrelated violence. We found that conservatives in particular are deterred from supporting a social
movement by their expectation that it will entail violence. Moreover, we found that exposure to a
Black social movement member leads to a greater expectation among bystanders that the protest
will end violently, regardless of one’s political ideology. Racialized perceptions of violence
explained an important part of conservatives’ hesitancy to support a movement picturing a Black
protestor. Meanwhile, liberals would be even more supportive of Black-depicted social
movements, were it not for their racialized perceptions of violence. Nevertheless, the boost
enjoyed by Black protestors relative to white ones outweighs this racialized violence effect for
liberals’ likelihood of signing the petition and attending a future rally.
It seems that conservatives’ greater expectation of the protest ending in violence could
explain why they are less likely to plan to attend a future social movement event when seeing a
Black participant: perhaps their perceived violence is related to fear of bodily harm at such an
event. However, this explanation is tempered by the fact that the association between Blackness
and violence also explains part of why conservatives are less likely to sign the petition when
reading a news story with a Black social movement member and are less likely to see the protest
as justified. These dynamics suggest that it is not merely a fear of bodily harm that keeps
conservatives from participating in the social movement, but that it is also an avoidance of any
social movement in which Black people are participants – regardless of whether participation
involves in-person or offline modes of support.
This study has important implications for the social movement literature. As we did not
find support for a model that included emotion, our findings go against the notion that social
movements convince bystanders to join their cause by expressing grievances through emotional

33

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

displays. Nevertheless, it may be possible that expression of emotions – anger in particular – is
important for promoting sympathy, empathy, and solidarity within the ranks of the movement’s
existing members. The impact of emotion across this member/bystander distinction is an
opportunity for future work. From a methodological perspective, this study is part of a growing
trend of research employing experimental methods to study social movements (see also Simpson
et al. 2018; Feinberg et al. 2017). Experimental approaches are particularly useful for testing the
dynamics that other researchers have uncovered using case studies or observational data.
Experiments such as this one allow us to test the causal efficacy of social movement strategies in
an isolated way, and to assess their relative potential in garnering public support.
The present study also has important implications for the political polarization and race
literatures. The diverging impact of the Black protestor’s photograph for liberals and
conservatives on social movement support represents yet another way that contemporary
Americans appear to view – and react to – public phenomena in strikingly different ways. Our
findings, however, suggest that this divergence – at least regarding the political event at the heart
of this case study – is more rooted in race than affect. Furthermore, we witness racial inequality
in a new domain: political support. This inequality presents as a boost for Black social movement
participants among liberals, and a penalty for Black participants among conservatives. We also
find that the cultural association between Blackness and violence extends beyond neighborhoods
and schools and applies to social movements as well.
The effects we observe in this experiment are relatively modest in size. Nonetheless, it is
quite striking that merely being exposed to a photograph of a different-raced protestor in an
otherwise identical news story for a few seconds can yield divergent levels of social movement
support and entirely different perceptions of the protest. We would therefore expect that further

34

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

exposure to depictions of social movement participants – longer duration of exposure (e.g. media
segments, full news stories with multiple photographs), different kinds of exposure (e.g. inperson or online interaction with actual social movement participants) – will produce even more
pronounced effects than those we witnessed here.
Several features of this study limit its conclusions and generalizability. For one, the
vignette we used to present the news story involved a protest around “police departments’ use of
force.” Although the news story never mentioned race, it is likely that this particular political
event evoked racialized assumptions pertaining to this issue in the minds of the respondents.
Future work should expand the scope of social movements to other domains. Perhaps the
politicized race model applies to the case study here because Black people are often perceived as
the victims of the very issue which sparked the movement. Further studies may require us to
broaden our conclusions to a more abstract model in which certain bystanders are most likely to
be persuaded to join a social movement when the visible protestors are those most affected by
the issue. Second, the study’s sample is not a representative sample of all Americans. While this
does not threaten the experimental validity of the manipulations’ impacts on the observed
outcomes, it does suggest that the size of the differences between liberals and conservatives may
not be wholly accurate. If anything, we expect that our estimates given here may understate these
differences. Indeed, conservatives are underrepresented on Mturk – and in our sample –, and we
expect that social conservatives in particular are underrepresented on Mturk – in our sample
religious respondents were particularly underrepresented. A future study using nationally
representative data would provide more precise estimates of the exact difference in the race
effects for social movement support and perceptions between liberals and conservatives.

35

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Further work in this area should incorporate additional features of social movement
members’ identities to understand these potential impacts on social movement support and
perceptions of the movement. In particular, we wonder to what extent the dynamics we observed
are specific to social movement members who are white and black men. Does the gender of the
participant – and potentially other identities, such as sexuality or religion, or other racial groups
beyond the Black/white dichotomy – intersect to further inhibit or enhance social movement
support (Mirchandani 2003)? Given the additional pressure placed upon Black women to combat
racial injustice (Wilkins 2012), we believe the incorporation of gender is key to relevant future
work in this area.
In this sociopolitical era in which social movements are forming around racial issues –
such as the Black Lives Matter movement – understanding how various factors influence
bystanders’ support of social movements and their public reception becomes increasingly
important. This study is the first step in a program that aims to examine how sociodemographic
characteristics combine with other known factors to influence how people perceive and
contribute to political movements. This work is a clarion call to social movement scholars to
acknowledge that perceptions of social movement members – including associations of violence
– may play an important role in whether a bystander decides to support or join the movement.
Moreover, this study contributes to the social movements and race literatures by reinforcing the
notion that perceptions of “extreme” or “disruptive” tactics – such as violence – are rooted in oftimplicit associations related to race.
Our intent with this work is not to further police the comportment of social movement
members (see Obasogie and Newman 2016), but rather, to turn the lens on the potential
supporters of the social movement and the broader context in which these messages are received.

36

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

The present study highlights how depictions of social movement participants activate particular
stereotypes within certain segments of the population. Our hope is that experimental work such
as this will further expose the latent cultural perceptions and associations that draw people
toward or deter them from social movements. By revealing these biases, our aim is that
bystanders will better interrogate their own assumptions as they decide whether to support a
social movement’s cause and that researchers will incorporate awareness of these biases into a
more complex understanding of how social movements garner support.

37

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper
NOTES

1

Marby and Kiecoly (2005) find that Blacks Americans neither feel nor express more anger than

whites, despite a lower average sense of control and higher mistrust.
2

In fact, whether a social movement event is labeled as a “protest” or a “riot” may depend –

among other things – on the race of the participants depicted in it (see also Jeffries, Turner, and
Morris 1971).
3

The news story makes no mention of race or emotion involved in the protests or the inciting

incidents leading to the protests. Thus, any association participants make regarding race or
emotion comes purely from the photo accompanying it.
4

Facial Action Coding System (FACS) coding by outside researchers who were blind to our

hypotheses indicated that the two models’ faces did not substantively differ in how angry they
appeared to be. FACS involves coding an individual’s muscle movements as they change from a
baseline (neutral) state to an expression of emotion; thus it is relatively immune to racialized
perceptions of emotion (see Ekman and Rosenberg 1997).
5

Using behavioral measures as outcomes has been shown to combat the potential problem of

social desirability bias which is well known in social science research that aims to uncover racial
attitudes and behavior (Krumpal 2013).
6

No actual information was retained from this petition-signing procedure. During debriefing at

the end of the experiment, participants were informed that they had not actually signed a petition.
7

Model fit results lead to the same conclusion when these latter two measures are modeled using

ordered logistic regression rather than linear regression: politicized race is the best-fitting model.

38

Message Received?
8

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

All models excluded respondents who identify as “moderate” in their political views (N=586),

since model comparisons using AIC and BIC require identical estimation samples. Experimental
results including moderates are presented in Appendix D.
9

We also conducted analyses using the politicized race model in which we exclude all Black

participants in the experiments since they are more likely to identify as liberal than conservative.
Results that exclude Black participants do not substantively different results from those
presented here, suggesting that the politicized race effects we observe are not merely attributable
to racial in-group effects (see Appendix E).

39

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper
REFERENCES

Abrajano, Marisa and Zoltan L. Hajnal. 2015. White Backlash: Immigration, Race, and
American Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Acock, Alan C. 2013. Discovering Structural Equation Modeling Using Stata. New York, NY:
Stata Press.
Adorno, Theodor W., Else Frenkel-Brunswik, Daniel Levinson, and Nevitt Sanford. 1950. The
Authoritarian Personality. New York, NY: Harper & Brothers.
Altemeyer, Bob. 1988. Enemies of Freedom: Understanding Right-Wing Authoritarianism. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Altemeyer, Bob. 1998. “The Other ‘Authoritarian Personality.’” Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology 30:47–92.
Amenta, Edwin. 2006. When Movements Matter: The Townsend Plan and the Rise of Social
Security. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Amenta, Edwin, Neal Caren, Elizabeth Chiarello, and Yang Su. 2010. "The Political
Consequences of Social Movements." Annual Review of Sociology 36:287-307.
Aminzade, Ron and Doug McAdam. 2002. “Emotions and Contentious Politics.” Mobilization:
An International Quarterly 7(2):107–9.
Anderson, Ashtom, Sharad Goel, Gregory Huber, Neil Malhotra, and Duncan J. Watts. 2014.
“Political Ideology and Racial Preferences in Online Dating.” Sociological Science 1:28–40.
Andrews, Kenneth T., Kraig Beyerlein, and Tuneka Tucker Farnum. 2016. "The Legitimacy of
Protest: Explaining White Southerners' Attitudes Toward the Civil Rights Movements."
Social Forces 94(3):1021-1044.
Banks, Antoine J. 2016. Anger and Racial Politics: The Emotional Foundation of Racial
Attitudes in America. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Benford, Robert D. 1987. "Framing Activity, Meaning, and Social-Movement Participation: The
Nuclear-Disarmament Movement." Ph.D, University of Texas.
Benford, Robert D. and David A. Snow. 2000. “Framing Processes and Social Movements: An
Overview and Assessment.” Annual Review of Sociology 26(1):611–39.
Bobo, Lawrence, James R. Kluegel, and Ryan A. Smith. 1997. “Laissez-Faire Racism: The
Crystallization of a Kinder, Gentler, Antiblack Ideology.” Pp. 15–42 in Racial Attitudes in
the 1990’s: Continuity and Change, edited by Steven A. Tuch and Jack K. Martin.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Bobo, Lawrence and Camille L. Zubrinsky. 1996. “Attitudes on Residential Integration:
Perceived Status Differences, Mere in-Group Preference, or Racial Prejudice?” Social
Forces 74(3):883–909.
Burstein, Paul. 1985. Discrimination, Jobs, and Politics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
40

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Campbell, Shannon, Phil Chidester, Jamel Bell, and Jason Royer. 2004. "Remote control: How
Mass Media Delgitimize Rioting as Social Protest." Race, Gender & Class. 11(1):158-176.
Carmines, Edward G. and James A. Stimson. 1989. Issue Evolution: Race and the
Transformation of American Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Carney, Dana R., John T. Jost, Samuel D. Gosling, and Jeff Potter. 2008. “The Secret Lives of
Liberals and Conservatives: Personality Profiles, Interaction Styles, and the Things They
Leave behind.” Political Psychology 29(6):807–40.
Castells, Manuel. 2015. Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age.
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Cunningham, William A., John B. Nezlek, and Mahzarin R. Banaji. 2004. “Implicit and Explicit
Ethnocentrism: Revisiting the Ideologies of Prejudice.” Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 30(10):1332–46.
Davenport, Christian, Sarah A. Soule, and David A. Armstrong. 2011. "Protesting While Black?
The Differential Policing of American Activism, 1960 to 1990." American Sociological
Review 76(1):152-178.
Diani, Mario. 2000. "Social Movement Networks Virtual and Real." Information,
Communication & Society 3(3):386-401.
Duckitt, John. 2001. "A Dual-Process Cognitive-Motivational Theory of Ideology and
Prejudice." Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 33:41-113.
Doan, Long. 2016. “How Do Racial and Gender Beliefs Affect Emotions?” PhD dissertation,
Department of Sociology, University of Indiana, Bloomington.
Dovidio, John F. and Samuel L. Gaertner. 2004. “Aversive Racism.” Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology 36:1–52.
Ekman, Paul and Erika L. Rosenberg. 1997. What the Face Reveals: Basic and Applied Studies
of Spontaneous Expression Using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Farley, Reynolds, Charlotte Steeh, Maria Krysan, Tara Jackson, and Keith Reeves. 1994.
“Stereotypes and Segregation: Neighborhoods in the Detroit Area.” American Journal of
Sociology 100(3):750–80.
Fassiotto, Magali and Sarah A. Soule. 2017. "Loud and Clear: The Effect of Protest Signals on
Congressional Attention." Mobilization 22(1): 17-38.
Feagin, Joe R. and Eileen O’Brien. 2004. White Men on Race: Power, Privilege, and the Shaping
of Cultural Consciousness. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Feinberg, Matthew, Robb Willer, and Chloe Kovacheff. 2017. “Extreme Protest Tactics Reduce
Popular Support for Social Movements.” Rottman School of Management Working Paper
No. 2911177. Retrieved August 12, 2017
(https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2911177).

41

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Flam, Helena and Debra King. 2007. Emotions and Social Movements. New York, NY:
Routledge.
Gaertner, Samuel L. and John F. Dovidio. 1986. The Aversive Form of Racism. New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Gaines, Brian J., James H. Kuklinski, and Paul J. Quirk. 2006. “The Logic of the Survey
Experiment Reexamined.” Political Analysis 15(1):1–20.
Gamson, William A. 1992. Talking Politics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Giugni, Marco G. 1998. "Was it Worth the Effort? The Outcomes and Consequences of Social
Movements." Annual Review of Sociology 24:371-393.
Golder, Scott A. and Michael W. Macy. 2014. "Digital Footprints: Opportunities and Challenges
for Online Social Research." Annual Review of Sociology 40:129-152.
González-Bailón, Sandra, Javier Borge-Holthofer, Alejandro Rivero, and Yami Moreno. 2011.
"The Dynamics of Protest Recruitment through an Online Network." Scientific Reports 1.
Goodman, Joseph K., Cynthia E. Cryder, and Amar Cheema. 2013. “Data Collection in a Flat
World: The Strengths and Weaknesses of Mechanical Turk Samples.” Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making 26(3):213–24.
Goodwin, Jeff, James Jasper, and Francesca Polletta. 2009. Passionate Politics: Emotions and
Social Movements. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Goodwin, Jeff, James Jasper, and Francesca Polletta. 2000. “The Return of the Repressed: The
Fall and Rise of Emotions in Social Movement Theory.” Mobilization: An International
Quarterly 5(1):65–83.
Gould, Deborah B. 2009. Moving Politics: Emotion and ACT UP’s Fight against AIDS. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Goyette, Kimberly A. 2008. “Race, Social Background, and School Choice Options 1.” Equity
and Excellence in Education 41(1):114–29.
Graham, Jesse, Jonathan Haidt, and Brian A. Nosek. 2009. “Liberals and Conservatives Rely on
Different Sets of Moral Foundations.” Journal Of Personality and Social Psychology
96(5):1029-46.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 1979. “Emotion Work, Feeling Rules, and Social Structure.”
American Journal of Sociology 85(3):551–75.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 2012[1983]. The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human
Feeling. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hutchings, Vincent L. and Nicholas A. Valentino. 2004. “The Centrality of Race in American
Politics.” Annual Review of Political Science 7:383–408.
Isaac, Larry. 2008. "Movement of Movements: Culture Moves in the Long Civil Rights
Struggle." Social Forces 87(1):33-63.
Jasper, James M. 1998. “The Emotions of Protest: Affective and Reactive Emotions in and
42

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

around Social Movements.” Sociological Forum 13(3):397-424.
Jasso, Guillermina. 2006. “Factorial Survey Methods for Studying Beliefs and Judgments.”
Sociological Methods and Research 34(3):334–423.
Jeffries, Vincent, Ralph H. Turner, and Richard T. Morris. 1971. “The Public Perception of the
Watts Riot as Social Protest.” American Sociological Review 36(3):443–51.
Jost, John T. 2006. “The End of the End of Ideology.” American Psychologist 61(7):1-7
Jost, John T., Jack Glaser, Arie W. Kruglanski, and Frank J. Sulloway. 2003a. “Exceptions That
Prove the Rule--Using a Theory of Motivated Social Cognition to Account for Ideological
Incongruities and Political Anomalies: Reply to Greenberg and Jonas (2003).”
Psychological Bulletin 129(3):383–93
Jost, John T., Jack Glaser, Arie W. Kruglanski, and Frank J. Sulloway. 2003b. “Political
Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition.” Psychological Bulletin 129(3):339–75
King, Brayden G. 2011. "The Tactical Disruptiveness of Social Movements: Sources of Market
and Mediated Disruption in Corporate Boycotts." Social Problems 58(4):491-517.
King, Desmond S. and Rogers M. Smith. 2011. Still a House Divided: Race and Politics in
Obama’s America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kruglanski, Arie W. 2013. The Psychology of Closed Mindedness. New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Krumpal, Ivar. 2013. "Determinants of Social Desirability Bias in Sensitive Surveys: A
Literature Review." Quality & Quantity 47(4):2025-2047.
Kuklinski, James H., Michael D. Cobb, and Martin Gilens. 1997. “Racial Prejudice and Attitudes
Toward Affirmative Action.” American Journal of Political Science 41(2):402–19.
Lakoff, George. 1997. Moral Politics: What Conservatives Know That Liberals Don’t. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lewis, Kevin, Kurt Gray, and Jens Meierhenrich. 2014. "The Structure of Online Activism."
Sociological Science. DOI 10.15195/v1.a1
López, Ian Haney. 2015. Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented
Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Luttig, Matthew D., Christopher M. Federico, and Howard G. Lavine. 2017. “Supporters and
Opponents of Donald Trump Respond Differently to Racial Cues: An Experimental
Analysis.” Research and Politics 4(4):1-8.
Marby, J. Beth and K. Jill Kicolt. 2005. "Anger in Black and White: Race, Alienation, and
Anger." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 46(1):85-101.
McAdam, Doug. 2017. “Social Movement Theory and the Prospects for Climate Change
Activism in the United States.” Annual Review of Political Science 20:189–208.
McDonnell, Terence E., Christopher A. Bail, and Iddo Tavory. 2017. "A Theory of Resonance."
Sociological Theory. 35(1):1-14.
43

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Mendelberg, Tali. 2001. The Race Card: Campaign Strategy, Implicit Messages, and the Norm
of Equality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mirchandani, Kiran. 2003. “Challenging Racial Silences in Studies of Emotion Work:
Contributions from Anti-Racist Feminist Theory.” Organization Studies 24(5):721–42.
Murakawa, Naomi. 2008. “The Origins of the Carceral Crisis: Racial Order as ‘law and Order’ in
Postwar American Politics.” Pp. 235-55 in Race and American Political Development.
Edited by Joseph Lowndes, Julie Novkov, and Dorian Tod Warren. New York, NY:
Routledge
Nail, Paul R., Helen C. Harton, and Brian P. Decker. 2003. “Political Orientation and Modern
versus Aversive Racism: Tests of Dovidio and Gaertner’s (1998) Integrated Model.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84(4):754-70.
Nepstad, Sharon Erickson and Christian Smith. 2001. “The Social Structure of Moral Outrage in
Recruitment to the US Central America Peace Movement.” Pp. 158-74 in Passionate
Politics: Emotions and Social Movements. Edited by Jeff Goodwin, James M. Jasper, and
Francesca Polletta. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Novkov, Julie. 2008. “Rethinking Race in American Politics.” Political Research Quarterly
61(4):649–59.
Obasogie, Osagie K. and Zachary Newman. 2016. “Black Lives Matter and Respectability
Politics in Local News Accounts of Officer-Involved Civilian Deaths: An Early Empirical
Assessment.” Wisconsin Law Review 3:541–74.
Olson, Joel. 2008. “Whiteness and the Polarization of American Politics.” Political Research
Quarterly 61(4):704–18.
Omi, Michael and Howard Winant. 2014. Racial Formation in the United States. New York,
NY: Routledge.
Paolacci, Gabriele, Jesse Chandler, and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. 2010. “Running Experiments on
Amazon Mechanical Turk.” Judgment and Decision Making 5(5):411-419.
Pearson, Adam R., John F. Dovidio, and Samuel L. Gaertner. 2009. “The Nature of
Contemporary Prejudice: Insights from Aversive Racism.” Social and Personality
Psychology Compass 3(3):314–38.
Quillian, Lincoln. 2002. “Why Is Black–White Residential Segregation so Persistent?: Evidence
on Three Theories from Migration Data.” Social Science Research 31(2):197–229.
Raftery, Adrian E. 1995. “Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research.” Sociological
Methodology 25:111–63.
Robinson, Dawn T. and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1999. “Emotion Display as a Strategy for Identity
Negotiation.” Motivation and Emotion 23(2):73–104.
Rojas, Fabio. 2006. “Social Movement Tactics, Organizational Change and the Spread of
African-American Studies.” Social Forces 84(4):2147–66.
Rojas, Fabio. 2007. From Black Power to Black Studies: How a Radical Social Movement
44

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Became an Academic Discipline. Baltimore, MD: JHU Press.
Saporito, Salvatore and Annette Lareau. 1999. “School Selection as a Process: The Multiple
Dimensions of Race in Framing Educational Choice.” Social Problems 46(3):418–39.
Saucier, Donald A., Carol T. Miller, and Nicole Doucet. 2005. “Differences in Helping Whites
and Blacks: A Meta-Analysis.” Personality and Social Psychology Review 9(1):2–16.
Schussman, Alan and Sarah A. Soule. 2005. “Process and Protest: Accounting for Individual
Protest Participation.” Social Forces 84(2):1083–1108.
Schwalbe, Michael, Daphne Holden, Douglas Schrock, Sandra Godwin, Shealy Thompson, and
Michele Wolkomir. 2000. “Generic Processes in the Reproduction of Inequality: An
Interactionist Analysis.” Social Forces 79(2):419–52.
Sears, David O. and Patrick J. Henry. 2003. “The Origins of Symbolic Racism.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 85(2):259–75.
Sears, David O., Colette Van Laar, Mary Carrillo, and Rick Kosterman. 1997. “Is It Really
Racism?: The Origins of White Americans’ Opposition to Race-Targeted Policies.” The
Public Opinion Quarterly 61(1):16–53.
Shields, Stephanie A. 2005. “The Politics of Emotion in Everyday Life:‘ Appropriate’ Emotion
and Claims on Identity.” Review of General Psychology 9(1):3–15.
Sidanius, Jim, Felicia Pratto, and Lawrence Bobo. 1996. “Racism, Conservatism, Affirmative
Action, and Intellectual Sophistication: A Matter of Principled Conservatism or Group
Dominance?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 70(3):476–90.
Simons, Daniel J. and Christopher F. Chabris. 2012. “Common (Mis) Beliefs about Memory: A
Replication and Comparison of Telephone and Mechanical Turk Survey Methods.” PloS
One 7(12):e51876.
Simpson, Brent, Robb Willer, and Matthew Feinberg. 2018. "Does Violent Protest Backfire?
Testing a Theory of Public Reactions to Activist Violence." Socius 4:1-14.
Snow, David A., Louis A. Zurcher, Jr., and Sheldon Eckland-Olson. 1980. "Social Networks and
Social Movements: A Microstructural Approach to Differential Recruitment." American
Sociological Review 45(5):787-801.
Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven K. Worden, and Robert D. Benford. 1986.
"Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Participation." American
Sociological Review 51(4):464-481.
Snow, David A. and Robert D. Benford. 1988. "Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant
Mobilization." International Social Movements Research 1:197-217.
Soroka, Stuart N. and Christopher Wlezien. 2010. Degrees of Democracy: Politics, Public
Opinion, and Policy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stephan, Maria J., and Erica Chenoweth. 2008. “Why Civil Resistance Works: The Strategic
Logic of Nonviolent Conflict.” International Security 33(1):7–44
45

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth. 2014. “The Cost of Racial Animus on a Black Candidate: Evidence
Using Google Search Data.” Journal of Public Economics 118:26–40.
Thoits, Peggy A. 1989. “The Sociology of Emotions.” Annual Review of Sociology 15:317–42.
Thomas, Emma F., and Winnifred R. Louis. 2014. “When Will Collective Action Be Effective?
Violent and Non-violent Protests Differentially Influence Perceptions of Legitimacy and
Efficacy among Sympathizers.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 40(2):263–76.
Turner, Jonathan H. 2007. Human Emotions: A Sociological Theory. London, UK: Taylor and
Francis.
Turner, Jonathan H. and Jan E. Stets. 2005. The Sociology of Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Valentino, Nicholas A. and David O. Sears. 2005. “Old Times There Are Not Forgotten: Race
and Partisan Realignment in the Contemporary South.” American Journal of Political
Science 49(3):672–88.
Van Laer Jeroen and Peter Van Aelst. 2010. "Internet and Social Movement Action Repertoires:
Opportunities and Limitations." Information, Communication & Society 13(8):1146-1171.
Van Stekelenburg, Jacquelien and Bert Klandermans. 2013. “The Social Psychology of Protest.”
Current Sociology 61(5–6):886–905.
Virtanen, Simo V and Leonie Huddy. 1998. “Old-Fashioned Racism and New Forms of Racial
Prejudice.” The Journal of Politics 60(2):311–32.
Wasow, Omar. 2017. “Do Protests Matter? Evidence from the 1960s Black Insurgency.”
Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
Webster, Murray and Jane Sell. 2014. Laboratory Experiments in the Social Sciences. Waltham,
MA: Elsevier.
Weinberg, Jill D., Jeremy Freese, and David McElhattan. 2014. “Comparing Data Characteristics
and Results of an Online Factorial Survey between a Population-Based and a CrowdsourceRecruited Sample.” Sociological Science 1:292–310.
Whitley Jr, Bernard E. 1999. “Right-Wing Authoritarianism, Social Dominance Orientation, and
Prejudice.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77(1):126.
Wilkins, Amy. 2012. “‘Not Out to Start a Revolution’ Race, Gender, and Emotional Restraint
among Black University Men.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 41(1):34–65.
Wilson, Glenn D. 1973. The Psychology of Conservatism. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Williams, David R. and Ruth Williams-Morris. 2000. “Racism and Mental Health: The African
American Experience.” Ethnicity and Health 5(3–4):243–68.
Wingfield, Adia Harvey. 2007. “The Modern Mammy and the Angry Black Man: African
American Professionals’ Experiences with Gendered Racism in the Workplace.” Race,
Gender, & Class 14(1/2):196–212.
Wingfield, Adia Harvey. 2010. “Are Some Emotions Marked‘ whites Only’? Racialized Feeling
46

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Rules in Professional Workplaces.” Social Problems 57(2):251–68.
Wouters, Ruud and Stefaan Walgrave. 2017. "Demonstrating Power: How Protest Persuades
Political Representatives." American Sociological Review 82(2):361-383.

47

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper
APPENDIX A: Experimental Manipulations

Figure A1. Neutral White Manipulation

Figure A2. Angry White Manipulation

48

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

Figure A3. Neutral Black Manipulation

Figure A4. Angry Black Manipulation

49

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

APPENDIX B: Text of Petition Used in Behavioral Outcome

Figure A5. Petition

If you would like to sign the following petition from Change.org to urge the federal government
to require every police department that receives federal aid to report shootings of unarmed
teenagers to the FBI, please provide your information below. Otherwise, you may continue to the
next question.

50

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper

APPENDIX C: Study Sample Demographics Compared to U.S. Population

Table A1. Study Sample Demographics Compared to U.S. Population

Female1
White1
Age
Protestant1
College degree1
Household income
Conservatism2

Study
sample
.466
.744
34.6
.277
.536
56213
3.40

US
population
.508
.731
37.8
.474
.306
55775
4.08

NOTE: 1 Numbers presented represent proportion falling in this category.
2

Conservatism is measured on a scale from 1-7, where 1 = “extremely liberal” and 7 = “extremely conservative”

US figures are drawn from 2015 American Community Survey; religious affiliation and political
views are drawn from 2016 General Social Survey. US age and household income values shown
are the median.

51

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper
APPENDIX D: Results for Moderates

Table A2. Effects for Political Groups Including Moderates
Sign
petitiona
Black
protestor
(conservative
bystander)
White
protestor
(moderate
bystander)
Black
protestor
(moderate
bystander)
White
protestor
(liberal
bystander)
Black
protestor
(liberal
bystander)
Constant
N

Protest
justifiedb

Attend
rallyb

Perceived
violenceb

-.347* (.140)

-.187** (.069)

-.178* (.079)

.196* (.076)

-.118 (.139)

.501*** (.074)

.299*** (.085)

-.290*** (.081)

.151 (.129)

.424*** (.073)

.297*** (.085)

-.176* (.080)

.379*** (.105)

1.053*** (.060)

.866*** (.069)

-.703*** (.066)

.556*** (.104)

1.090*** (.060)

.982*** (.069)

-.577*** (.066)

1.804*** (.057)
2816

3.804*** 9.054)
2816

-1.269*** (.091) 3.455*** (.049)
2816
2816

NOTE: Reference category is white protestor (conservative bystander). * p < .05 ** p < . 01 *** p < .001 (twotailed tests). a Z-scores of the latent variable (probit) shown. b OLS coefficients shown.

52

Message Received?

Valentino & Nicholson working paper
APPENDIX E: Results Excluding Black Participants

Table A3. Effects With and Without Black Bystanders
Sign petitiona
Protest justifiedb
Attend rallyb
All
No Black All
No Black All
No Black
bystanders bystanders bystanders bystanders bystanders bystanders
Black
protestor
(conservative
bystander)
White
protestor
(liberal
bystander)
Black
protestor
(liberal
bystander)
Constant
N

-.347*
(.140)

-.334*
(.144)

-.187**
(.068)

-.150*
(.069)

-.180*
(.079)

-.159*
(.079)

.379***
(.105)

.384***
(.109)

1.053***
(.059)

1.090***
(.061)

.866***
(.069)

.868***
(.070

.556***
(.104)

.556***
(.108)

1.090***
(.059)

1.143***
(.061)

.982***
(.069)

1.007***
(.070)

-1.269***
(.091)
2230

-1.29***
(.094)
2073

3.455***
(.049)
2230

3.394***
(.050)
2073

1.804***
(.057)
2230

1.758***
(.057)
2073

NOTE: Reference category is white protestor (conservative bystander). * p < .05 ** p < . 01 *** p < .001 (twotailed tests). a Z-scores of the latent variable (probit) shown. b OLS coefficients shown.

53

