The Location where Narmer probably buried
Bohai,Xu
Address: Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, China
Abstract: In Bamboo Annals, Yu (禹) was depicted as having big nose
and mouth(虎鼻大口，两耳参镂), so this resembles Limestone head of
the king Narmer . And in my point of view, tomb of King Qa’a resembles a
particular burial system – “Huangchangticou”(黄肠题凑). Since human
Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups O be found in Egypt, but no in the
others in the image in the paper, I speculate that there must be a
“indigenous people” in the Liangzhu area to return to Egypt with the
fleet. From the paper , I speculate that the eagle in a statue of a man,
dating from Yue State (越国) and the eagles in Fanshan Cemetery and
Yaoshan Hill, the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City (良渚古城遗址反
山墓地和瑶山), resemble the God Horus in Egypt. I can also get a
conclusion that Zhejiang(浙江)(including Yuhang(余杭)and Shaoxing(绍
兴)) was once Egypt’s colony. From the paper, I can get a conclusion that
Mojiaoshan Terrace (莫角山台地) resembles the Ziggurat of Ur and Anu
Ziggurat, Uruk (modern Warka) in function and shape. In my point of
view, Narmer's tomb in Umm el-Qa'ab near Abydos in Upper Egypt is
a cenotaph of his. And from the paper, I can conclude that the
“grass-wrapped

silt”

discovered

by

Liangzhu

archaeologists

in

Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City has the same shape, size and use

of building materials as the mud bricks used in the construction of cities,
palaces and tombs during Narmer’s period of ancient Egypt, so I can
conclude that the territory of Liangzhu culture (including Yuhang(余
杭)and Shaoxing(绍兴)) was once Egypt’s colony. From the paper, I can
find the prototype of the square-shape (the shape of "Hui"(回), a
Chinese character) altars on Mt. Yaoshan and Mt. Huiguanshan from
Dendera zodiac. From the paper, I can conclude that the divine emblem
unearthed from Tomb M12, Fanshan cemetery indicates that the owner
of the tomb was probably the governor of ancient Egypt. Since Fanshan
(反山) is an artificially piled up mastaba shape like mound and it is larger
than any other tombs of mastabas of the kings in ancient Egypt, I can get
a hypothesis that Yu (Narmer) died while on a hunting tour to the
eastern frontier of his empire, and chose Fanshan (反山) as his tomb at
first , but for some unknown reasons, he buried in Yu mausoleum (大禹
陵) , Mount Kuaiji (会稽山) , south of present-day Shaoxing (绍兴).

Narmer was an ancient Egyptian king of the Early Dynastic
Period(Wilkinson 1999, p. 67), circa 3100-3050 BC. He probably was the
successor to the Protodynastic king Ka, or possibly Scorpion. Some
consider him the unifier of Egypt and founder of the First Dynasty, and in
turn the first king of a unified Egypt.

Verso of Narmer Palette

Limestone head of a king. Thought by Petrie to be Narmer . Bought by Petrie in Cairo,
Egypt. 1st Dynasty .

The complete spelling of Narmer's name consists of the hieroglyphs
for a catfish (n'r) (Wilkinson 1999, p. 67) and a chisel (mr), hence the reading
"Narmer" (using the rebus principle). This word is sometimes translated
as "raging catfish"( Redford 1986, pp. 136, n.10). However, there is no
consensus on this reading. Other translations include ″angry, fighting,
fierceful, painful, furious, bad, evil, biting, menacing″, or "stinging
catfish"(Pätznick 2009, pp. 308, n.8; Leprohon 2013, p. 22; Clayton 1994, p. 16).
Some scholars have taken entirely different approaches to reading the
name that do not include "catfish" in the name at all, but these
approaches have not been generally accepted.

Horus name of Narmer

Rather than incorporating both hieroglyphs, Narmer's name is often
shown in an abbreviated form with just the catfish symbol, sometimes
stylized, even, in some cases, represented by just a horizontal line
related
(Raffaele
Raffaele 2003, pp. 110, n. 46)
46 . This simplified spelling appears to be rel
to the formality of the context. In every case thatt a serekh is shown on a
work of stone, or an official seal impression, it has both symbols. But, in
most cases, where the name is shown
shown on a piece of pottery or a rock
inscription, just the catfish, or a simplified version of it appears.

Serekhs bearing the rebus symbols n'r (catfish) and mr (chisel) inside, being the
phonetic representation of Narmer's name.

Name of Narmer in serekh

Naqada Label reconstruction
Garstang 1905, p. 62, fig3

Two necropolis sealings, found in 1985 and 1991 in Abydos, in or near
the tombs of Den (Dreyer 1987) and Qa'a (Dreyer et al. 1996, pp. 72–73, fig. 6,
pl.4b-c) , show Narmer as the first king on each list, followed by Hor-Aha.

The Qa'a sealing lists all eight of the kings of what scholars now call the
First Dynasty in the correct order, starting with Narmer. These necropolis
sealings are strong evidence that Narmer was the first king of the First
Dynasty (Cervelló-Autuori 2008, pp. 887–899).

Necropolis seal impression of Qa'a
Dreyer 1987, p. 36, fig.3

The famous Narmer Palette, discovered by James E. Quibell in the
1897–1898 season at Hierakonpolis (Quibell 1898, pp. 81–84, pl. XII-XIII),
shows Narmer wearing the crown of Upper Egypt on one side of the
palette, and the crown of Lower Egypt on the other side, giving rise to
the theory that Narmer unified the two lands (Gardiner 1961, pp. 403–404).
Since its discovery, however, it has been debated whether the Narmer
Palette represents an actual historic event or is purely symbolic. Of
course, the Narmer Palette could represent an actual historical event
while at the same time having a symbolic significance.
In 1993, Günter Dreyer discovered a "year label" of Narmer at Abydos,
depicting the same event that is depicted on the Narmer Palette. In the
First Dynasty, years were identified by the name of the king and an
important event that occurred in that year. A "year label" was typically
attached to a container of goods and included the name of the king, a
description or representation of the event that identified the year, and a
description of the attached goods. This year label shows that the Narmer
Palette depicts an actual historical event (Dreyer 2000). Support for this
conclusion (in addition to Dreyer) includes Wilkinson (Wilkinson 1999, p. 68)
and Davies & Friedman (Davies & Friedman 1998, p. 35). Although this
interpretation of the year label is the dominant opinion among
Egyptologists, there are exceptions including Baines (Baines 2008, p. 23)

and Wengrow (Wengrow 2006, p. 204).
Archaeological evidence suggests that Egypt was at least partially
unified during the reigns of Ka and Iry-Hor (Narmer's immediate
predecessors), and perhaps as early as Scorpion I (several generations
before Iry-Hor). Tax collection is probably documented for Ka (Dreyer,
Hartung & Pumpenmeier 1993, p. 56, fig. 12) and Iry-Hor (Kahl 2007, p. 13). The

evidence for a role for Scorpion I in Lower Egypt comes from his tomb Uj
in Abydos (Upper Egypt), where labels were found identifying goods
from Lower Egypt (Dreyer 2011, p. 135). These are not tax documents,
however, so they are probably indications of trade rather than
subjugation. There is a substantial difference in the quantity and
distribution of inscriptions with the names of those earlier kings in Lower
Egypt and Canaan (which was reached through Lower Egypt), compared
to the inscriptions of Narmer. Ka's inscriptions have been found in three
sites in Lower Egypt and one in Canaan (Jiménez-Serrano 2007, p. 370, table 8).
Iry-Hor inscriptions have also been found in two sites in Lower Egypt and
one in Canaan (Jiménez-Serrano 2007, p. 370, table 8 and Ciałowicz 2011, pp.
63–64). This must be compared to Narmer, whose serekhs have been

found in ten sites in Lower Egypt and nine sites in Canaan. This
demonstrates a qualitative difference between Narmer's role in Lower
Egypt compared to his two immediate predecessors. There is no
evidence in Lower Egypt of any Upper Egyptian king's presence before

Iry-Hor. The archaeological evidence suggest that the unification began
before Narmer, but was completed by him through the conquest of a
polity in the North-West Delta as depicted on the Narmer Palette (Heagy
2014, pp. 73–74).

Narmer Palette

Drawing (front and back) of Narmer Palette

The Narmer Macehead

Narmer Macehead (drawing). The design shows captives being presented to Pharaoh
Narmer enthroned in a naos. Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.
The scene depicts a ceremony in which captives and plunder are presented to King
Narmer , who is enthroned beneath a canopy on a stepped platform. He wears the

Red Crown of Lower Egypt, holds a flail, and is wrapped in a long cloak. To the left,
Narmer's name is written inside a representation of the palace facade (the serekh)
surmounted by a falcon. At the bottom is a record of animal and human plunder;
400,000 cattle, 1,422,000 goats, and 120,000 captives (Millet 1990, pp. 53-59).

The importance that Narmer attached to his "unification" of Egypt is
shown by the fact that it is commemorated not only on the Narmer
Palette, but on a cylinder seal (Quibell 1900, p. 7, pl. XV.7), the Narmer Year
Label (Dreyer 2000), and the Narmer Boxes (Dreyer 2016) ; and the
consequences of the event are commemorated on the Narmer
Macehead (Quibell 1900, pp. 8–9, pls. XXV, XXVIB). The importance of the
unification to ancient Egyptians is shown by the fact that Narmer is
shown as the first king on the two necropolis seals, and under the name
Menes, the first king in the later King Lists. Although there is
archaeological evidence of a few kings before Narmer, none of them is
mentioned in any of those sources. It can be accurately said that from
the point of view of Ancient Egyptians, history began with Narmer and
the unification of Egypt, and that everything before him was relegated to
the realm of myth.
Narmer and Hor-Aha's names were both found in what is believed to
be Neithhotep's tomb, which led Egyptologists to conclude that she was
Narmer's queen and mother of Hor-Aha(Tyldesley 2006, pp. 26–29).
Neithhotep's name means "Neith is satisfied". This suggests that she was
a princess of Lower Egypt (based on the fact that Neith is the patron
goddess of Sais in the Western Delta, exactly the area Narmer conquered

to complete the unification of Egypt), and that this was a marriage to
consolidate the two regions of Egypt (Tyldesley 2006, pp. 26–29). The fact
that her tomb is in Naqada, in Upper Egypt, has led some to the
conclusion that she was a descendent of the predynastic rulers of
Naqada who ruled prior to its incorporation into a united Upper
Egypt(Wilkinson 1999, p. 70). It has also been suggested that the Narmer
Macehead commemorates this wedding (Emery 1961, pp. 44–47). However,
the discovery in 2012 of rock inscriptions in Sinai by Pierre Tallet (Tallet
2015) raise questions about whether she was really Narmer's wife.

Feeling tired? Now let us back to China. Yu the Great (大禹), was a
legendary ruler in ancient China famed for his introduction of flood
control, inaugurating dynastic rule in China by establishing the Xia
dynasty, and for his upright moral character (Mungello, David E. (2009) and
戴逸, 龔書鐸. [2002] (2003) 中国通史. 史前 夏 商 西周. Intelligence press.
ISBN 962-8792-80-6. p 40).

The dates proposed for Yu's reign predate the oldest-known written
records in China, the oracle bones of the late Shang dynasty, by nearly a
millennium (Underhill, Anne P., ed. (2013).). No inscriptions on artifacts from
the proposed era of Yu, nor the later oracle bones, make any mention of
Yu; he does not appear in inscriptions until vessels dating to the Western
Zhou period (c. 1045–771 BC). The lack of anything remotely close to
contemporary documentary evidence has led to some controversy over
the historicity of Yu. Proponents of the historicity of Yu theorise that

stories about his life and reign were transmitted orally in various areas of
China until they were recorded in the Zhou dynasty (Allan, Sarah (1991)),
while opponents believe the figure existed in legend in a different
form—as a god or mythical animal—in the Xia dynasty, and morphed
into a human figure by the start of the Zhou dynasty. Many of the stories
about Yu were collected in Sima Qian's famous Records of the Grand
Historian. Yu and other "sage-kings" of Ancient China were lauded for
their virtues and morals by Confucius and other Chinese teachers(戴逸,
龔書鐸. [2002] (2003) 中国通史. 史前 夏 商 西周. Intelligence press. ISBN
962-8792-80-6. p 36).

Yu (禹) is one of the few Chinese rulers posthumously honored with
the epithet "the Great". While in Bamboo Annals, Yu (禹) was depicted
as having big nose and mouth(虎鼻大口，两耳参镂). So this resembles
Limestone head of the king Narmer , as the image above.

Song Dynasty depiction of Yu

According to several ancient Chinese records, Yu ( 禹 ) was the
eight-times-great-grandson of the Yellow Emperor ( 黄 帝 ): Yu's
father, Gun (鲧), was the five-times-great-grandson of Emperor Zhuanxu
(颛顼); Zhuanxu's father, Changyi (昌意), was the second son of the
Yellow Emperor (Book of Han (律曆志) chapter; Book of Lineages (世本); 戴逸,
龔書鐸. [2002] (2003) 中国通史. 史前 夏 商 西周. Intelligence press. ISBN
962-8792-80-6. p 38; Zynews.com ). Yu's mother was of the Youxin clan

named either Nüzhi (女志) or Nüxi (女嬉). His clan name is Si (姒) while

his personal name is Wenming (文命), according to the Records of the
Grand Historian.

Han dynasty depiction of Yu

When Yu was a child, his father Gun moved the people east toward
the Central Plain. King Yao(尧) enfeoffed Gun as lord of Chong, usually
identified as the middle peak of Mount Song. Yu is thus believed to have
grown up on the slopes of Mount Song, just south of the Yellow River
(Hubeiwater.gov.cn). He later married a woman from Mount Tu (涂山) who

is generally referred to as Tushan-shi (涂山氏; 'Lady Tushan'). They had a
son named Qi(启), a name literally meaning "revelation"(Wang Hengwei 王
恒伟. (2006) Zhongguo Lishi Jiangtang 中国历史讲堂 #1 Yuan Gu Zhi Chunqiu 远

古至春秋. Zhonghua Shuju 中华书局. ISBN 962-8885-24-3. p 18).

Qi the Chinese King

Now, let's go back to the Yu(禹) question. The picture below shows the
portrait of Yu(禹).

Portrait of Yu-禹 (Narmer)

And the images below are archaeological
a
timeline of ancient Egypt
and Xia Dynasty(夏朝)). The timeline starts from the beginning of aancient
Egypt to the end of the First Dynasty of ancient
ncient Egypt. There are about
several kings.

Scorpion I corresponds to the Yellow Emperor(黄帝)

Partial
artial pattern and inscription of Scorpion I’s scepter

The oldest "挚" name

The name of King Iry-Hor
Iry
of Dynasty 0 is “尧”

The name of King Ka/Sekhen of Dynasty 0 is “舜”

The oldest 女“娇”name

The prototype of“启”

Ivory label bearing the serekh of Hor-Aha
Hor

The King List of Predynastic Period of ancient Egypt

The King List of the First Dynasty of ancient Egypt

Now let us back to Egypt. Umm El Qaʻāb (sometimes romanised Umm
El Gaʻab, Arabic: ‫ )أم اﻟﻘﻌﺎب‬is a necropolis of the Early Dynastic Period
(Tombs of kings of the First and Second Dynasty) kings at Abydos, Egypt (Toby
Wilkinson, Early Dynastic Egypt, Routledge, 1999). Its modern name means

"Mother of Pots" as the whole area is littered with the broken pot shards
of offerings made in earlier times.
The area was a site of veneration and worship in ancient Egypt, and by
the time of the Middle Kingdom, at least one of the royal tombs was

excavated and rebuilt for the priests of Osiris (Shaw, Ian. The Oxford History
of Ancient Egypt. p. 67. Oxford University Press. 2000. ISBN 0-19-280458-8).

General view of Umm El Qa'ab, showing littering of pots

Image of Abydos

Umm el-Qa’ab

Source: Wilkinson, Early Dynastic Egypt,, p. 232, fig. 7.1.

Image of Umm al-Qa’ab

Plan of the Cemetery at Umm al-Qa'ab,
al Qa'ab, with human sacrifices in it

The Cemetery at Umm al-Qa'ab of early dynasty and the first Dynasty, with human
sacrifices in it

Umm el-Qa'ab was used as a burial ground serving the elite ruling the
area of Abydos since early Predynastic times, from at least the Naqada I
period, ca. 3800 BC. It was the royal cemetery during the 1st
Dynasty and was also used by the two last kings of the 2nd Dynasty,
confirming Manetho’s statement that the early kings of Egypt originated
from This, near Abydos.
The area has been divided into two cemeteries, U and B. Cemetery U
is dated to the Predynastic era and includes the famous tomb U-j, which
belonged to a powerful ruler whose influence may perhaps have
extended as far as Lower-Egypt. This tomb has yielded some inscribed

tablets, which are believed to be the oldest known examples of writing
to mankind. One of the tables
tables may have contained an early writing of the
name of Bubastis, a city located in the western Delta. If this writing is
correct, then the owner of tomb U-j
U j must at least have had trading
contacts with Lower-Egypt.
Egypt.

Several inscribed bone tags from tomb U-j
U at Umm el-Qa’ab,
Qa’ab, the oldest examples of
writing known to mankind.
Source: Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology Website.
Website

Cemetery B is dated to the Early Dynastic Period,, and was exclusively
used by the royal family. The tombs are significantly larger than those in
cemetery U. The increasing size of the tombs hints at the increasing
wealth and power of the ruling family and at the better mastery of crafts.
Even though each royal tomb is different from the other, they all share
the same basic structure, which consists of a large, square pit dug into
the ground, lined with mudbrick walls. This pit was used as the main
burial room. It was often surrounded by additional chambers, at a

slightly higher level than the burial room itself. In the tombs
of Djer and Djet, these rooms open off the central chamber. From the
tomb of Meretneith onwards, they would surround the burial chamber,
without interconnecting.
From the reign of Djet onwards, the superstructure of the tombs
appears to have consisted of a hidden mound over the main burial
chamber and a larger mound covering the entire tomb. There are
indications that the large mound may also have hidden the subsidiary
tombs which, starting from the reign of Aha, extended from or
surrounded most 1st Dynasty royal tombs. If this is indeed the case, then
it is clear that the subsidiary burials all occurred at the same time as the
royal burial.
Several tombs appear to be associated with mudbrick enclosures, built
more to the east, close to the rim of cultivation. The largest and most
famous of these enclosures, known today as Shunet el-Zebib, is dated to
the reign of Khasekhemwi, the last king of the 2nd Dynasty.
And a mastaba or pr-djt (meaning "house of eternity" or "eternal
house" in Ancient Egyptian) is a type of ancient Egyptian tomb in the
form of a flat-roofed, rectangular structure with inward sloping sides,
constructed out of mud-bricks (from the Nile River). These edifices
marked the burial sites of many eminent Egyptians during Egypt's Early
Dynastic Period and Old Kingdom. In the Old Kingdom epoch, local kings

began to be buried in pyramids instead of in mastabas, although
non-royal use of mastabas continued for over a thousand years.
Egyptologists

call

word ‫" ﻣﺼﻄﺒﺔ‬stone

these

tombs mastaba,

from

the

Arabic

bench"("Mastaba Tomb of Perneb". Met Museum.

Retrieved 22 October 2016).

A mastaba

Old Kingdom Mastaba at Meidum

The afterlife was an important part of Ancient Egyptian religion. This is
reflected in their architecture and most prominently by the enormous
amounts of time, money, and labour involved in the building of tombs
(Hamlin, Talbot (1954).). Ancient Egyptians believed the soul could live only

if the body was preserved from corruption and depredation as well as
fed (Badawy, Alexander (1966). ).
Starting in the Predynastic era and continuing into the later dynasties,
the ancient Egyptians developed increasingly complex and effective
methods for preserving and protecting the bodies of the dead. They
buried their dead in pit graves dug out from the sand; the body placed
on a mat, usually along with some items believed to help them in the
afterlife. The first tomb structure which the Egyptians developed was
the mastaba, composed of earthen bricks made from soil along the Nile.
As the remains were not in contact with the dry desert sand,
natural mummification could not take place; therefore the Egyptians
devised a system of artificial mummification (Ancient Egypt and the Near East.
Cambridge: MIT Press. 1966. p. 7). Until at least the Old Period or First

Intermediate Period, only high officials and royalty would be buried in
these mastabas (BBC. "mastabas". BBC. Retrieved 29 May 2013).
When seen from a distance, a flat-topped mastaba does resemble a
bench. Historians speculate that the Egyptians may have borrowed
architectural ideas from Mesopotamia, since at the time they were both

building similar structures (Gascone, Bamber. "History of architecture". History
of the world).

The above-ground structure of a mastaba is rectangular in shape with
inward-sloping sides and a flat roof. The exterior building materials were
initially bricks made of the sun-dried mud readily available from the Nile
River. Even after more durable materials such as stone came into use, all
but

the

most

important

monumental

structures

were

built

from mudbricks ( R., C. L. (1913) ). Mastabas were often about four times as
long as they were wide, and many rose to at least 30 feet in height. They
were oriented North-South, which the Egyptians believed was essential
for access to the afterlife. The above-ground structure had space for a
small offering chapel equipped with a false door. Priests and family
members brought food and other offerings for the soul, or ba, of the
deceased, which had to be maintained in order to continue to exist in
the afterlife.

Structure of a mastaba

Inside the mastaba, a deep chamber was dug into the ground and
lined with stone and bricks. The burial chambers were cut deep, until
they passed the bedrock, and were lined with wood (BBC. "Mastabas". bbc.
Retrieved 29 May 2013). A second hidden chamber called a serdab(‫)ﺳ رداب‬,

from the Persian word for "cellar" (Bard, K. A. (1999). Encyclopedia of the
Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0415185899), was

used to store anything that may have been considered essential for the
comfort of the deceased in the afterlife, such as beer, cereal, grain,
clothes, and precious items ( Lewis, Ralph. "Burial practices, and Mummies".
Rosicrucian Museum). The mastaba housed a statue of the deceased that

was hidden within the masonry for its protection. High up the walls of
the serdab were small openings that would allow the ba to leave and
return to the body (represented by the statue); Ancient Egyptians
believed the ba had to return to its body or it would die. These openings
"were not meant for viewing the statue but rather for allowing the
fragrance of burning incense, and possibly the spells spoken in rituals, to
reach the statue"(Arnold, Dorothea (1999)).
The mastaba was the standard type of tomb in pre-dynastic and early
dynastic Egypt for both the pharaoh and the social elite. The ancient city
of Abydos was the location chosen for many of the cenotaphs. The royal
cemetery

was

at Saqqara,

overlooking

times, Memphis (Fletcher, Banister (1996)).

the

capital

of

early

Mastabas evolved over the early dynastic period. During the 1st
Dynasty, a mastaba was constructed simulating house plans of several
rooms, a central one containing the sarcophagus and others surrounding
it to receive the abundant funerary offerings. The whole was built in a
shallow pit above which a brick superstructure covering a broad area.
The typical 2nd and 3rd Dynasty mastabas was the 'stairway mastaba',
the tomb chamber of which sank deeper than before and was connected
to the top with an inclined shaft and stairs (Fletcher, Banister (1996)).
Even after pharaohs began to construct pyramids for their tombs in
the 3rd Dynasty, members of the nobility continued to be buried in
mastaba tombs. This is especially evident on the Giza Plateau, where at
least 150 mastaba tombs have been constructed alongside the pyramids
(Davis, Ben (1997)).

Map of the Giza Plateau,
Plateau, showing the mastabas constructed within the complex

In the 4th Dynasty (c. 2613 to 2494 BC), mastabas,
astabas, then, were
developed with the addition of offering chapels and vertical shafts. 5th
Dynasty mastabas had elaborate chapels consisting of several rooms,
columned halls and 'serdab
serdab'.'. The actual tomb chamber was built below
the south-end
end of mastaba, connected by a slanting passage to a stairway
emerging in the center of a columned hall or court.
Mastabas are still well attested in the Middle Kingdom. Here they had
a revival. They were often solid structures with the decoration only on

the outside (Arnold, D. (2008)).
By the time of the New Kingdom (which began with the 18th
Dynasty around 1550 BC), "the mastaba becomes rare, being largely
superseded by the independent pyramid chapel above a burial chamber"
(Badawy, Alexander (1966)).

And the excavations at Abusir South have already uncovered many
tombs that have added valuable information to the general knowledge of
the development of the Old Kingdom society, its burial and funeral habits,
and last but not least social relations and their impact on the lives of
ancient Egyptian officials. One of the latest discoveries is the tomb of
Kaisebi (AS 76) and the adjoining structure of Ptahwer (AS 76b), which
are located to the south of the anonymous mastaba (AS 54) lying on the
most prominent spot of the whole Abusir South area (for more
information on this tomb, see Bárta 2010 and Jirásková 2011). Kaisebi
and Ptahwer built their tombs between this huge mastaba (AS 54) and a
recently discovered 18.5 m long boat, both dated to the end of the Third
Dynasty.
Research in this area was initiated in 2014, when the southern wall of
AS 54 was being cleaned. By that time, the northern façades of three
new mastabas had come to light, divided from AS 54 by a narrow
corridor running in the east-west direction. They were labelled AS 76
(the westernmost), AS 77 (the central), and AS 78 (the easternmost). The
excavation of the structures was planned for the spring season of 2015

but lasted until the end of that year. AS 77 and AS 78 were family mud
brick mastabas, whereas AS 76 was built of limestone.
Tomb AS 76 was constructed in two phases. The first one consisted of
a rather small rectangular mastaba with a chapel (fig. 1), an external
niche, a serdab, and two shafts. Later on, the original structure was
enlarged by an annexe (AS 76b) attached to the eastern wall of AS 76,
which included another offering place and two burial shafts (fig. 2).

Fig. 1 Kaisebi’s chapel with an offering stand in situ shortly after its discovery in the
spring season of 2015 (photo M. Frouz)

Fig. 2 Plan of the area south of tomb AS 54 with the three mastabas and other
structures excavated in 2015 (drawing M. Bárta, L. Jirásková, M. Odler, M. Peterková
Hlouchová, J. Turek, L. Vařeková)

Table 1 Holders of the title

, “the elder of the judicial/audience hall”

whose names occurred at the Abusir necropolis during the Old Kingdom (V. Dulíková)

Fig. 3 Shafts in the core of the original mastaba of AS 76, numbered as Shafts 1 and 4
(drawing V. Dulíková, M. Peterková Hlouchová, L. Vařeková)

Fig. 4, A disturbed human burial in the burial chamber of Shaft 2 in tomb AS 76b,
presumably belonging to the owner of the annexe (photo M. Frouz, drawing M. Odler,
M. Peterková Hlouchová, L. Vařeková)

The image of the above Fig.4

And for his burial, Horus Aha stayed at Umm el-Qa’ab, and had his
tomb built right next to the pits that are believed to have been used
for Narmer’s burial. Aha’s tomb is substantially larger than Narmer’s,
which has led some researchers to believe that not Narmer but Aha is to
be identified as the near-legendary founder of the united Egypt, Menes.
Aha’s tomb consists of 3 large, slightly rectangular pits in a row, now
numbered B19, B15 and B10. The pits B17/18, believed to be Narmer’s
tomb, are located to the north of pits B19 and B15. The pits are lined

with walls ranging between 1.5 to 2.1 metres in thickness. There is no
connection between the pits, although it is possible that they shared a
common superstructure.

A view on the three principal pits of Aha’s tomb.
Source: Starozytny Egypt - Nekropola Abydos.

Subsidiary Graves of the Tomb of Aha, with human sacrifices in them

To the east of B10, and extending the line of pits that make up Aha’s
tomb, are two smaller pits (B13 and B14), and a series of 34 subsidiary
tombs laid out in 3 parallel rows. The subsidiary tombs are seen as
evidence for retainer sacrifice, a gruesome practice of burying some of
the king’s staff along with him, that appears to have started under Aha
and would be maintained until the end of the 1st Dynasty.
Benerib, one of Aha’s wives, is believed to have been buried in pit B14.
If this is indeed the case, it is likely that her burial happened at the same
time as Aha’s, which could indicate that she was ritually put to death to
be buried alongside her husband. It is also possible that she predeceased
her husband and was laid to rest in what was to become part of Aha’s
tomb.
Djer built his tomb at Umm el-Qa’ab at some distance to the west of
that of his predecessor, Aha. Petrie, one of the archaeologists who
excavated the tomb, gave it the designation of “Tomb O”.
Contrary to Aha’s tomb, Djer’s consisted of one single pit measuring
13.2 by 11.8 metres internally and a depth of 2.7 metres. The sides of
the pit are lined with 2.6 metre thick walls. Several smaller chambers
were built agains the north, east and west walls, but not against the
south wall. It is the first royal tomb of the 1st Dynasty to have an internal
structure.

A view on Djer’s tomb shows the thick walls as well as the tomb’s internal structure.
Source: Hadas Newsletter Archive.
Archive

Among several objects found inside the tomb was a mummified arm,
assumed to have belonged either to the king himself
himself or, more likely, to
one of his queens. One of the oldest known artificially mummified
human remains, the arm wore 4 bracelets, one of which consisted of a
string of Djer’s Horus-names.
names.

Four bracelets were found on a mummified arm inside the tomb of D
Djer.
Source: Tiradriti, Egyptian Treasures, p. 42

318 subsidiary graves, some with stelae identifying the owners, were

found surrounding the king’s tomb. The fact that some individuals were
named, points to them having had some prestige, if not in life, then in
death. It is not certain if all subsidiary burials happened at the same time,
and were the result of retainer sacrifice or not.
For some reason, later tradition, started at the latest during the 18th
Dynasty, considered this tomb to be the tomb of Osiris, the god of the
dead, who had one of his most important cult centres in Abydos.
Horus Djet was buried in a tomb at Umm el-Qa’ab, to the southwest of
the tomb of Djer, his predecessor. Petrie, one of the archaeologists who
excavated the tomb, gave it the designation of “Tomb Z”.
The king’s tomb consisted of a single pit, measuring 9.3 by 11.9 metres
internally, slightly smaller than the tomb of Djer. The wall thickness
varies between 0.8 and 1.05 metres.
As was the case with Djer, there are several smaller chambers built
against the north, east and west walls.
There are 174 subsidiary graves surrounding the tomb in a pattern
somewhat reminiscent of Djer’s subsidiary graves. The overall look of the
plan and layout of Djet’s tomb gives the impression of being a copy of
Djer’s.
Several stelae engraved with the king’s Horus name were found
connected to the tomb.

A First Dynasty Abydos mastaba

King Djet’s Tomb Z at Abydos and Mastaba 3504

Mastaba 3504 (Sekhemka-Sedj)

Mastaba 3504 and Djet’s Tomb at Abydos

Mastaba 3504 and Djet’s Tomb at Abydos

An impressive tomb was dug out into the ground for Merneith right
next to her probable husband’s tomb at Umm el-Qa’ab. It was labeled
Tomb Y by Petrie, one of the main archaeologists who worked on the site
and is the most lavish Early Dynastic queen’s tomb at Umm el-Qa’ab.
The tomb itself measures 8.9 by 6.3 metres internally. Its walls vary in
thickness between 1.3 and 1.6 metres. Eight storage rooms were built
against all four walls and were found filled with pottery. The actual burial
chamber was dug deeper than the storage rooms.
A stela with the name of Merneith was found in the burial chamber.

A stela with the name of Merneith

The queen’s tomb is surrounded by 41 subsidiary graves. This is
significantly less than was the case with her husband or her son,
indicating that she may have had less servants or that she shared some
with her husband and son.
A seal impression listing kings buried at Umm el-Qa’ab
el Qa’ab from Narmer to
Den, ends with the name of Merneith, commemorating her role as
regent during her son’s childhood.

Reconstruction drawing of the tomb of Merneith showing that the tomb had a
superstructure.

Den continued the move south at Umm el-Qa’ab for the location of his
tomb, labeled “Tomb T” by Petrie, building it to the southeast of the
tombs of Den and Merneith. That his tomb was located next to both the
tombs of Djet and Merneith, could perhaps confirm that Djet was his
father, with historical sources already having
having confirmed Merneith as his
mother.
As was the case with the tombs of his predecessors and mother, Den’s
tomb consisted of a pit dug into the ground. It measures 15.2 by 8.5
metres internally, surrounded by mudbrick walls between 2.1 and 3.8
metres thick,
ck, making it the second largest royal tomb of the 1st Dynasty.
Unlike the tombs of his predecessors, however, Den’s tomb features a
23.77 metres long staircase descending down into the burial chamber
from the northeast. The staircase consisted of 2 parts, probably

separated by a wooden door. A second feature that was new to the royal
tombs, was that the floor was made of granite.

Tomb of Den

Among the finds in the tomb were 20 year labels, recording rituals and
events that occurred during Den’s reign.
136 subsidiary graves were found surrounding the tomb, mainly on
the north, east and west sides, and substantially less on the south side.
In one of the graves a stela for a dwarf named Ser-Inpu,
Ser Inpu, was found.

The tomb of Den at Umm el-Qa’ab
el Qa’ab was surrounded by 136 subsidiary tombs.

The Tomb of Den as it appears today
toda

Jewellery from the Tomb of Den

Linen wrapped arm from the Tomb of Den at Abydos

Seal impressions of officials discovered at Saqqara and Abydos, part 1.

Horus Anedjib chose to build his tomb, labeled “Tomb X” by Petrie, to
the northwest of Merneith’s tomb, and to the southwest of the
subsidiary graves of the tomb of Horus Djet at Umm el-Qa’ab. In doing so,

he broke the chronological placement of tombs from Aha to Den, that
gradually moved to south. Whether he did this out of practical
considerations, or because he felt more related to Horus Djet than
to Den is not known.

Anedjib’s Tomb

The tomb itself consists of two chambers dug into the ground,
surrounded by walls varying in thickness between 1.3 and 1.6 metres.
The burial chamber, entered through a descending staircase coming from
the northeast, measures 6.8 by 4.4 metres, making it one of the smallest
royal tombs of the 1st Dynasty.
64 subsidiary graves are laid out around the king’s tomb.

Tomb of Anedjib

Semerkhet had his tomb, labeled “Tomb U” by its finder, Petrie, built
to the south of Den’s at Umm el-Qa’ab,, on the opposite side of the axis
of the tombs of Den and Anedjib,, and continuing the motion south that
was started with the tomb of Djer.. This could be seen as an indication
that, if Anedjib built his tomb away from Den’s because he didn’t feel
closely related to him, Semerkhet wanted to stress a connection with
Den.

Tomb of Semerkhet

As was the case with the tombs of Djer, Djet, Merneith and Den,
Semerkhet’s tomb consisted of a single pit dug into the ground,
surrounded by walls that vary in thickness between 1.5 and 1.8 metres.
This too marks a change compared to Anedjib’s tomb, that consisted of
two chambers, and a return to a slightly older tradition. The burial
chamber is entered through a descending passage coming from the
northeast, rather than via a staircase as was the case with the tombs of
Den and Anedjib.
64 subsidiary graves were built directly
directly against the king’s tomb. The
larger graves were dug in a single row against the southeast side of the
main tomb, while the slightly smaller ones were laid out in two rows
against
ainst the other sides of the main tomb. That the subsidiary graves
were built directly against the king’s tomb was an innovation.

A stela with the name of Semerkhet

Seal impressions of officials discovered at Saqqara and Abydos, part 2.

Horus Qa’a built his tomb, labeled “Tomb Q” by Petrie, to the south of
Den’s tomb and the southwest of the tomb of Semerkhet at Umm
el-Qa’ab.. The location of the tomb may show an affiliation to either Den
or Semerkhet, or it may have been the result of purely practical
considerations.

Plan of tomb of King Qa’a, Abydos , First Dynasty

The burial chamber is a rectangular pit measuring 10 by 5 metres. It is
entered through a descending
scending stairway coming from the northwest.

The tomb of Horus Qa’a seen from the southeast to the northwest. The king’s tomb is

located in the middle while most of the smaller, surrounding chambers were
subsidiary graves.

The tomb is surrounded by 26 subsidiary graves, one belonging to the
high official Sabef. The way the subsidiary tombs are laid out around and
connected to the king’s tomb makes it likely that all burial occurred at
the same time, suggestive of the practice of retainer sacrifice.
There are indications that the tomb was built in several phases, with
fairly long periods without building activity. This would confirm that Qa’a
may have had a long reign. There are also indications that the tomb may
have been entered by robbers shortly after the king’s burial, and that it
was re-closed by Qa’a’s successor Hotepsekhemwi.
This tomb may be connected to the funerary enclosure of Deir Sitt
Damiana. While in my point of view, tomb of King Qa’a resembles a
particular burial system – “Huangchangticou”(黄肠题凑). According to
historical records, “Ticou”(题凑) structure in tomb burial existed no later
than the Warring States period, but there is no physical evidence. The
existing

Han

archaeological

materials

showed

that

the

basic

characteristic of “Ticou”(题凑) structure is tile layers upon tile layers by
stacking vertically. There is often no tenon; the second is that "wood are
introverted”, that is, square wood stacked around the wall was in a
vertical direction against the wall wood in the same side in the coffin
room. If it was seen from the inside, only the head of square wood were
in sight. The name of “Ticou” was, then, derived in this particular way.

“Huangchang”(黄肠) was the pine wood used in making “Ticou”.

An example of “Huangchangticou”(黄肠题凑)

“Huangchangticou”(黄 肠 题 凑 ) was popular in the Qin and Han
dynasties, and was applied less after Han Dynasty. It was mainly used
when emperors and their wives, as well as the emperor's minions
franchise were died. Due to its high standards and short popular period,
it is rare. So far, there were only ten more unearthed “Huangchangticou”
tomb burials. In all the same type of tomb burials, those of Liuxu(刘胥)
and the queen in Guangling are the best preserved ones. They have the
most complex structures.
The previous site of Guangling King's Tomb was located in Shenju
Mountain, Tianshan Village, Gaoyou City, which is 45km northwest of
Yangzhou City. The tomb, discovered in 1979 during cutting into the

mountain,

was

the

resting

place

of

Liu

Xu( 刘 胥 ),

the

first Guangling King(广陵王), and has the history of over 2,000 years.
Guangling King's Tomb is featured by complex structure, careful layout,
and grand scale, and is one of the rare "Huang Chang Ti Cou"
timber-chambered tombs in Han Dynasty that are well preserved.

Guangling King's Tomb, one of the rare "Huang Chang Ti Cou" timber-chambered
tombs in Han Dynasty

The Queen's Tomb is also a "Huang Chang Ti Cou" tomb and was relocated to
Yangzhou City together with Guangling King's Tomb. After
After relocation, the Queen's
Tomb is 50m east of Guangling King's Tomb. The two tombs form a joint tomb.

And the table below is the mastabas of the kings in ancient Egypt.

Mastabas of the kings in ancient Egypt

About 1.5 km away to the north of Umm al-Qa’ab,
Qa’ab, by the edge of the
farmland, are the remains of an enormous double-walled,
double walled, mud brick
enclosure known as Shunet ez-Zebib
ez
(‘the storehouse of raisins’). It is the
only one standing of a group of such enclosures, all broadly similar in

layout if not in scale. The earliest datable enclosure (in fact, a group of
three small enclosures) belongs to Aha, the founder of the First Dynasty
but there are others that may be even earlier.

Shunet ez-Zebib

Abydos Enclosures. ©GoogleEarth

The inner wall of the Shunet ez-Zebib was over 5 metres thick and
survives to a height of 11 metres in places. The façade was made up of a

series of recessed panels, which would seem to have been inspired by
the characteristic Mesopotamian device of alternating niches and
buttresses. It is assumed that this was done to create patterns of light
and shade that would break the monotony of a solid façade in a land of
intense sunshine (particularly since the wall face was plastered and
then whitewashed). However, in this instance the wall was screened by
an outer wall, which would have concealed the effect if it had risen to
anything like the same height. Perhaps a more likely source of inspiration
were the woven mats and bundles of reeds that made up the walls of
ordinary Egyptian houses of the period.

Shunet ez-Zebib. Excavations

The entire structure was some 133.5 metres long and 77.7 metres
across, covering an area of just over a hectare and was oriented with its
corners to the cardinal points of the compass. There was a rather
elaborate entrance with an antechamber in the northwest wall, close to
the north corner, another (with an indirect approach) by the eastern
corner, and a simpler one near the southern corner. All of these were

blocked up soon after the edifice was finished.
finished. Because of the massive
scale of the structure, nineteenth century scholars believed it was a fort
but this is clearly not the case—unless
case unless the ancient Egyptians were in the
habit of building forts and then immediately blocking all access.

Plan of the Enclosure of Khasekhemwy at Abydos

Satellite map of the above

Pottery Offerings next to Peribsen's Enclosure

Over the course of the last century, evidence of at least 10 other
enclosures has come to light, all sharing the same orientation. Ayrton
himself discovered one belonging to Peribsen, Khasekhemwy’s
immediate predecessor and the only other member of the Second
Dynasty to have his tomb at Abydos. The rest are First Dynasty or earlier
and there is a good chance that others will be found since the only ones
where the owner can be identified belong to Aha, Djer, Djet and Queen
Merneith. Most of the First Dynasty compounds were originally located
on the basis of the subsidiary burials that surround them and have
produced little in the way of internal features. Where they have been
found, the entrances are located in the same places as at
Khasekhemwy’s— the eastern and northern corners—and chapels have

been located just where you would expect them in most of them.

Plan of Enclosures at Abydos

The most recent excavations have also resulted in the discovery of
three additional enclosures, surrounded by subsidiary graves and sharing
the same alignment as the ones already known. Inscriptions on pots and
clay sealings found in the graves showed that the enclosures dated to
the reign of Aha. They were substantially smaller than their
successors—the
the largest (Aha I) covering
covering a mere 700 square metres
versus well over a hectare (10,373 square metres) for Khasekhemwy’s.
Each had an entrance in the south end of the northeast wall and Aha I
had another at the opposite end. Each of them had a chapel
chapel—the one in
Aha I is near the eastern entrance, where you would expect, but in the

case of the other two it is at the other end of the building. Of course,
space was limited and the explanation may be as simple as that.

Excavation of the Aha I Enclosure

The Aha Enclosures

Abydos Royal Enclosures, West of Kom es-Sultan
(Talbezirke, Funerary enclosures, Open Courts)

Saqqara (Arabic: ‫ﺳﻘﺎرة‬, Egyptian Arabic pronunciation: [sɑʔˈʔɑːɾɑ]), also
spelled Sakkara or Saccara in English /səˈkɑːrə/, is a vast, ancient burial
ground

in Egypt,

serving

as

the necropolis for

the Ancient

Egyptian capital, Memphis (Fernandez, I., J. Becker, S. Gillies. "Places: 796289136
(Saqqarah)". Pleiades. Retrieved March 22, 2013). Saqqara features numerous

pyramids, including

the world-famous Step pyramid of Djoser,

sometimes referred to as the Step Tomb due to its rectangular base, as
well as a number of mastabas (Arabic word meaning 'bench'). Located
some 30 km (19 mi) south of modern-day Cairo, Saqqara covers an area
of around 7 by 1.5 km (4.35 by 0.93 mi).

Saqqara in Egypt

At Saqqara, the oldest complete stone building complex known in
history was built: Djoser's
Djoser step pyramid, built during the Third Dynasty
Dynasty.
Another 16 Egyptian kings built pyramids at Saqqara, which are now in
various states of preservation or dilapidation. High officials added private
funeral monuments to this necropolis during the entire pharaonic period
period.
It remained an important complex for non-royal
non royal burials and cult
ceremonies

for

more

than

3,000 years,

into Ptolemaic and Roman times.
And the images below are the mastabas at Saqqara.

well

First Dynasty mastabas in North Saqqara

The First Dynasty Saqqara necropolis

A First Dynasty Saqqara mastaba

Plans of the Saqqara mastabas 3507(Hermeit) and 3038(Anedjib) compared with the
plan of the Djoser complex

Saqqara, Mastaba 3038 (Nebetka)

Saqqara Tomb S3500

Reconstruction drawing of Pyramid of Djoser, Saqqara

Hyperdiffusionism refers to hypotheses suggesting that certain
historical technologies or ideas originated with a single people
or civilization before their adoption by other cultures. Thus, all great
civilizations that share similar cultural practices, such as construction
of pyramids, derived them from a single common progenitor. According
to its proponents, examples of hyperdiffusion can be found in religious
practices, cultural technologies, megalithic monuments, and lost ancient
civilizations.
Heliolithic Culture, as Grafton Elliot Smith refers to it, consists of
cultural practices such as megaliths. Similar designs and methods of

construction of such pieces have what seem like a linear geographical
distribution. These heliolithic cultures can refer to religious customs that
share distinctive practices, such as the worship of a Solar Deity. As this
trope is seen in numerous belief systems, Smith believes it is diffused
from one ancient civilization (Smith 1929, p. 132).
Mummification, as believed by G. Elliot Smith, is a prime example of
how religious customs prove the diffusion of cultures (Smith 1929, 21). He
believes that only an advanced civilization, such as Egypt, could create
such a peculiar belief that then spread by way of ancient mariners (Smith
1929, 133-134).

Grafton Elliot Smith: Map of Hyperdiffusionism from Egypt, 1929

And Haplogroup Q or Q-M242 is a Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup. It
has one primary subclade, Haplogroup Q1 (L232/S432), which includes
numerous subclades that have been sampled and identified in males

among modern populations. In my point of view, the speculation of
migration of Haplogroup Q is the following below:

The speculation of migration of Haplogroup Q

The subclades of Haplogroup Q with their defining mutation(s),
according to the 2011 ISOGG tree are provided below.



Q M242
Q1 P36.2, L232, L273, L274
 Q1a MEH2
 Q1a1 M120, M265/N14
 Q1a2 M25, M143
 Q1a3 L56, L57, M346, L528
 Q1a3a L53, L54, L55, L213, L331
 Q1a3a1 M3
 Q1a3a1a M19
 Q1a3a1b M194
 Q1a3a1c M199, P106, P292
 Q1a3a2 L191
 Q1a3a3 L330, L334
 Q1a3a3a L329, L332, L333
 Q1a3b M323
 Q1a3c L527, L529
 Q1b L275, L314
 Q1b1 M378/Page100, L214, L215/Page82



Q1b1a L245
 Q1b1a1 L272.1

And that is the information of Egyptian Gene:

And that is the image of the world ancestry of the Egyptian Gene：

In the image above, green circle means strong match, brown means
weak match, red means no match, transparent means no match possible.

Notice that China also has a certain mark of this Egyptian Gene.(In the
area of ancient Liangzhu Culture (良渚文化)
(
-nowadays
nowadays in Yuhang(
Yuhang(余杭)
and Shaoxing(绍兴)).
Listed below are the human Y-chromosome
chromosome DNA haplogroups found in
various ethnic groups and populations from Africa .

Now let us back to China. According to a paper, the Y ch
chromosome
haplogroup of DNA from ancient East Asians was examined,
amined, in order to
genetically link them to modern populations.
popul
Fifty-six
six human remains
were sampled from five
ve archaeological
archaeological sites, primarily along the Yangtze
River. The highly ethnic-related
ethnic
Y chromo-some
some diversity is one of the
best materials to describe the relationships (Su et al. 1999
1999; Shi et al.
2005). The Y chromosome
mosome haplogroup
haplogr
patterns
tterns are quite di
different
among different
erent ethnic groups. In this paper, we present Y SNP data of 48
ancient samples
amples from China, mostly along Yangtze River, to provide a
survey on the genetic diversity of the prehistory populations in this
region.
The samples collected in this paper were from five
ve sites: Maqiao,

Xindili, Wucheng, Daxi, and Taosi. Most of the samples belonged to four
different cultures: Daxi C. was the earliest, followed by the Longshan C.
and Liangzhu C. around the same period, and finally, by Wucheng C., the
latest in the Shang Dynasty of the Bronze Age. These cultures were most
representative for the prehistory of China. Some samples from the same
necropolises that belonged to the historical time (later than 841 BC in
China) were also collected for comparison. Most of them belonged to
the Han Dynasty. The remains of the same culture were sampled from
different necropolises, avoiding the bias of relative samples.

Locations of the archaeological sites, cultures and the distributions of Y SNP
haplogroups

For some of the samples, not all of the five SNPs could be amplified,
thus haplogroups could not be determined if no mutated alleles were
found. However, most individuals were successfully amplified, and the

haplogroups were determined for half of them. Therefore, at least 62.5%
of the individual remains (30 out of 48) belong to O haplogroup, which is
still the major haplogroup of today’s East Asians. These ancient results,
consequently, did not differ from the modern populations. The resulting
DNA types thus made “phylogenetic sense” (the Y chromosome
haplogroup structure), helping to verify the authenticity of the ancient
DNA. The previously reported results of ancient Y chromosome were all
obtained from samples preserved in cold environments (Keyser-Tracqui
et al. 2003; Ricaut et al. 2005; Kuch et al. 2007; Bouakaze et al. 2007).
In two sites of Liangzhu Culture, only O1 haplogroup were found, and
the frequencies of O1 in two sites were almost the same. That indicated
the ancient people of these two sites belonged to the same population.
The historical samples from the same sites did not differ from the
prehistoric samples in the haplogroup patterns. Even modern
populations in this area around Shanghai contain a large proportion of
O1 haplogroup (Wen et al. 2004). The consistency of the Y haplogroup
pattern in this area, from the Neolithic Age to modern times, reveals that
the population might not have been replaced. O1 reaches the highest
frequencies in the Taiwan aborigines, and also in Daic speaking
populations in the southwest China (Li 2005). Therefore, it is also
possible that there are some close relationships among Taiwan
aborigines, Daic speakers and the ancient Liangzhu Culture populations.

A high frequency of O3d was only found in Daxi Culture. O3d is very
rare in modern populations; Hmong-Mien populations have been found
to contain a small proportion of O3d (Feng 2007). Since O3d occurs at
low frequency in the Hmong-Mien, the ancient people of Daxi Culture
might be the ancestors of the modern populations of Hmong-Mien. The
absence of O3d in the historical samples from the Daxi site (it might not
have been found because of the small sample size), and the migration of
modern Hmong-Mien populations to the southwest might indicate that
the prehistoric population in the Three Gorges area has been replaced.

Case counts of Y SNP haplogroups of the archaeological sites

Among three sites—Wucheng, Daxi and Taosi—O3* and O2a were
shared. And O3* is most common in modern East Asians, and O2a can
been found in different populations in southwestern China. Besides,

there were still some genetic differences between the populations in the
areas of Yangtze River and the Yellow River, as O2a was not found from
the Taosi site.
O1 was not found out of Liangzhu Culture, bringing a noticeable
genetic difference between coastal and inland populations, which can
still be observed in modern populations. O1 distributes along the coast
of East Asia, from Manchuria in the north to Malaysia and Indonesia in
the south (Su et al. 1999; Li 2005; Zhang et al. 2007). This distribution
may indicate that there were at least two different migration routes for
the early peopling of East Asia. Hardly any genetic flows could be
observed between the coastal route and the inland route in the
prehistoric peoples. So in my point of view, this may demonstrate that
hyperdiffusionism from Egypt by Grafton Elliot Smith.
Now why is human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups O be found in
Egypt, but no in the others in the image above? I speculate that there
must be a “indigenous people” in the Liangzhu area to return to Egypt
with the fleet. This phenomenon was very common in the history of
Egypt. The ancient Egyptian fleet often brought back some animals and
plant species, including ethnic groups, back to Egypt from other places.
During the eighteenth dynasty of Egypt, when Thutmose III conquered a
place in the West Asia region, he took the nobles and princes of this
place back to Egypt and educated them in Egypt.

The statue below was a man from "Baiyue" (百越). Also had a eagle in
the front:

An statue of a man, dating from State of Yue, located in the State Museum of
Zhejiang province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

The eagle unearthed in Fanshan Cemetery, the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City,
Yuhang District, Zhejiang, China

Bird-shaped jade ornament (the eagle) unearthed from tombs of Fanshan Site, the

Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City(良渚古城遗址), front side

The reverse of the above

The eagle unearthed in Yaoshan Hill(瑶山), the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu
City(良渚古城遗址), front side

The back side of the eagle above

And Horus is one of the most significant ancient Egyptian deities. He

was worshipped from at least the late prehistoric Egypt until
the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Roman Egypt. He was most often depicted as
a falcon, most likely a lanner falcon or peregrine falcon, or as a man with
a falcon head. Horus is recorded in Egyptian hieroglyphs as ḥr.w "Falcon";
the pronunciation has been reconstructed as ħaːruw. Addi onal
meanings are thought to have been "the distant one" or "one who is
above, over".

Horus may be shown as a falcon on the Narmer Palette, dating from
about the 31st century BC.
The image below is Horus, Louvre, Shen rings in his grasp:

Amulet representing a ram-headed falcon. Ancient Egypt, 1254 BC (26th year of the

reign of Ramses II, XIXth Egyptian dynasty), found on the mummy of an Apis bull in
the Serapaeum of Memphis at Saqqara. Gold, lapis, turquoise and cornelian.

The statue below is God Horus as a falcon:

God Horus as a falcon wearing the Double Crown of Egypt. 27th dynasty. State
Museum of Egyptian Art, Munich

So from the above, I speculate that the eagle in a statue of a man,
dating from Yue State (越国) and the eagles in Fanshan Cemetery and
Yaoshan Hill, the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City (良渚古城遗址反
山墓地和瑶山), resemble the God Horus in Egypt. I can also get a
conclusion that Zhejiang(浙江)(including Yuhang(余杭)and Shaoxing(绍
兴)) was once Egypt’s colony.
And the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City was the centre of power
and belief of an early regional state in the Circum-Taihu Lake Area. It is
located on a plain criss-crossed by river networks in the eastern foothills
of the Tianmu Mountains in the Yangtze River Basin on the southeast

coast of China.
The property is composed of four areas: Area of Yaoshan Site; Area of
High-dam at the Mouth of the Valley; Area of Low-dam on the Plain –
Causeway in Front of the Mountains; and Area of City Site.

Aerial view 1 of the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City (from southwest to
northeast)

Aerial view 2 of the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City (from southwest to
northeast)

The Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City

Topographic Map of Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City

Sketch Map of Distribution of Liangzhu Archaeological Site

Comparison of dates of major sites of Liangzhu Archaeological Site

The Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City (良渚古城遗址) reveals an
early regional state with rice-cultivating agriculture as its economic base,

and social differentiation and a unified belief system, which existed in
the Late Neolithic period in China. With a series of sites, including the
City Site built during ca. 3300-2300 BCE, the Peripheral Water
Conservancy System with complex functions and socially-graded
cemeteries (including an altar), and the excavated objects represented
by series of jade artefacts symbolizing the belief system, as well as its
early age, the property represents the remarkable contributions made by
the Yangtze River Basin to the origins of Chinese civilization. In addition,
the pattern and functional zoning of the capital, together with the
characteristics of the settlements of the Liangzhu culture and of the
Outer City with the terraces, support strongly the value of the property.

Distribution Map of Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City and other Contemporary
Remains in the Surrounding

Distribution of sites of Liangzhu culture in Yuhang area

Schematic Diagram of the History of Water System in Liangzhu Area

Location of Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City in the Core Zone of Liangzhu
Culture

Distribution Map of Main Sites with Indication of Social Hierarchy of the Liangzhu

Culture

Distribution Map of Main Sites of the Liangzhu Culture

And Mojiaoshan Terrace (莫角山台地) is located in the north of the
center of City Site, and stands due south and north. It is in a shape of
rectangular frustum, with four distinct borders. It is about 630 m long
from east to west, and about 450m wide, with an area of 300,000 ㎡.The
relative altitude is 9-15 m and the sea level elevation is 10-18m. The
terrace is artificially stacked, taking advantage of the natural terrain,
which was built by paving green silt at the bottom and stacked upon it
pure yellow clay or grass-wrapped silt.

Aerial View of Terrace in the Palace Area (GD) (South to North, 2017)

Distribution Map of Terraces in the Palace Area(GD)

Aerial View of Mojiaoshan Terrace (GD1) (Northwest to Southeast, 2017)

Mojiaoshan

Mojiaoshan Terrace

Distribution of remains at terraces of Mojiaoshan Palace Area and picture of the
palace restored through imagination

The Large Mojiaoshan foundation is located northeast to the
Gushangding platform. It is the largest palace foundation on the
Gushangding platform, surrounded by a circle of 4-15 meters wide and
0.6-1.5 meters deep ditch. The ditch was abandoned in the late phases
of the Liangzhu culture, whereafter was converted into stone walls to
reinforce the defense. Very likely the Large Mojiaoshan palace ranked
the highest level in the city. Upon the Large Mojiaoshan, there were 7
house foundations discovered distributed in two rows aligned in the
north-south direction. Each of them was approximately 300 to 900
square meters sized.
The Small Mojiaoshan is located in the northwest of the Gushangding
platform, which is the smallest scaled palace among the Mojiaoshan
palatial area. The foundation was 90 meters long from the east to the
west, 40 meters wide from the north to the south, covering a size of
approximately 3500 square meters. The excavation result shows that
there were 4 Liangzhu cultural house foundations in total on the top of

the small Mojiaoshan hill which belonged to two different periods.
Among them, one house foundation, dating back to the early phase, was
25.5 meters long from the east to the west and 15.5 meters wide from
the north to the south, covering an area of 380 square meters. Three
house foundations of the late phase were aligned in the east-west
direction, the sizes of which were relatively small. The discovery of these
remnants demonstrates the settlement layout and the house type within
the palatial area.

Aerial View of Large Mojiaoshan Foundation (GD1-1) (Southeast to Northwest, 2017)

Picture of Large Mojiaoshan (right) and Small Mojiaoshan (left) restored through
Imagination

The Wuguishan foundation is located in the southwest of the
Gushangding platform. It is unfortunately severely destroyed and
consequently only its general outline can be recognized. The bottom
foundation was 130 meters long from the east to the west, 67 m wide
from the north to the south, covering an area of 8500 square meters.
None Liangzhu cultural remnants were found on the top of it due to the
poor preservation.
There was a large-scale sandy soil square located in the centre of the
Gushangding platform, which covered almost 70,000 square meters. The
sandy soil square was constructed with alternating layers of sand and
mud. The construction was hard which implies that it very likely served
an important ritual venue. 9 house foundations were found located in
the south and east parts of the square, the sizes of which ranged from
200 to 500 square meters with well arrangement.
And

the Ziggurat (or Great

Ziggurat) of

Ur is

a Neo-Sumerian ziggurat in what was the city of Ur near Nasiriyah, in

present-day Dhi Qar Province,
Province Iraq.. The structure was built during
the Early Bronze Age (21st century BCE)
BCE) but had crumbled to ruins by the
6th century BCE of the Neo-Babylonian period, when it was restored by
King Nabonidus.

Partially reconstructed facade and the access
acc
staircase of the Ziggurat
iggurat of Ur. The
actual remains of the Neo-Babylonian
Neo Babylonian structure can be seen at the top.

The Ziggurat of Ur in Iraq

The ziggurat was built by King Ur-Nammu who dedicated the great
ziggurat of Ur in honour of Nanna/Sîn, in approximately the 21st century
BCE (short chronology) during the Third Dynasty of Ur ("The Ziggurat of
Ur". British Museum. Retrieved 24 November 2017). The massive step pyramid

measured 64 m (210 ft) in length, 45 m (148 ft) in width and over 30 m
(98 ft) in height. The height is speculative, as only the foundations of the
Sumerian ziggurat have survived.

Reconstruction of Ur-Nammu's ziggurat, based on the 1939 reconstruction by
Woolley (vol. V, fig. 1.4)

The ziggurat was a piece in a temple complex that served as an
administrative center for the city, and which was a shrine of the moon
god Nanna, the patron deity of Ur (Gardner, Helen; Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya,
Christin J. (2005)).

The construction of the ziggurat was finished in the 21st century BCE

by King Shulgi, who, in order to win the allegiance of cities, proclaimed
himself a god.
The remains of the ziggurat consist of a three-layered solid mass of
mud brick faced with burnt bricks set in bitumen. The lowest layer
corresponds to the original construction of Ur-Nammu, while the two
upper layers are part of the Neo-Babylonian restorations ( Woolley, C.
Leonard (1972) [1939].).

Besides, Uruk (modern Warka in Iraq)—where city life began more
than five thousand years ago and where the first writing emerged—was
clearly one of the most important places in southern Mesopotamia.
Within Uruk, the greatest monument was the Anu Ziggurat on which the
White Temple was built. Dating to the late 4th millennium B.C.E. (the
Late Uruk Period, or Uruk III) and dedicated to the sky god Anu, this
temple would have towered well above (approximately 40 feet) the flat
plain of Uruk, and been visible from a great distance—even over the
defensive walls of the city.

Archaeological site at Uruk (modern Warka) in Iraq

Ziggurats are made of mud-bricks—the building material of choice in
the Near East, as stone is rare. Ziggurats were not only a visual focal
point of the city, they were a symbolic one, as well—they were at the
heart of the theocratic political system (a theocracy is a type of
government where a god is recognized as the ruler, and the state officials
operate on the god’s behalf). So, seeing the ziggurat towering above the
city, one made a visual connection to the god or goddess honored there,
but also recognized that deity's political authority.

Remains of the Anu Ziggurat, Uruk (modern Warka), c. 3517-3358 B.C.E.

The sides of the ziggurat were very broad and sloping but broken up
by recessed stripes or bands from top to bottom, which would have
made a stunning pattern in morning or afternoon sunlight. The only way
up to the top of the ziggurat was via a steep stairway that led to a ramp
that wrapped around the north end of the Ziggurat and brought one to
the temple entrance. The flat top of the ziggurat was coated with
bitumen (asphalt—a tar or pitch-like material similar to what is used for
road paving) and overlaid with brick, for a firm and waterproof
foundation for the White temple. The temple gets its name for the fact
that it was entirely white washed inside and out, which would have given
it a dazzling brightness in strong sunlight.

Digital reconstruction of the White Temple and ziggurat, Uruk (modern Warka),
c. 3517-3358 B.C.E. © artefacts-berlin.de; scientific material: German Archaeological
Institute

The White temple was rectangular, measuring 17.5 x 22.3 meters and,
at its corners, oriented to the cardinal points. It is a typical Uruk “high
temple (Hochtempel)” type with a tri-partite plan: a long rectangular
central hall with rooms on either side (plan). The White Temple had
three entrances, none of which faced the ziggurat ramp directly. Visitors
would have needed to walk around the temple, appreciating its bright
façade and the powerful view, and likely gained access to the interior in a
“bent axis” approach (where one would have to turn 90 degrees to
face the altar), a typical arrangement for Ancient Near Eastern temples.

Digital reconstruction of the two-story version of the White Temple, Uruk (modern
Warka), c, 3517-3358 B.C.E.

Section through the central hall of the "White Temple," digital reconstruction of the
interior of the two-story version White Temple, Uruk (modern Warka), c, 3517-3358
B.C.E.

Interior view of the two-story version of the "White Temple," Digital reconstruction
of the White Temple, Uruk (modern Warka), c, 3517-3358 B.C.E.

To the north of the White Temple there was a broad flat terrace, at the
center of which archaeologists found a huge pit with traces of fire (2.2 x
2.7m) and a loop cut from a massive boulder. Most interestingly, a
system of shallow bitumen-coated conduits were discovered. These ran
from the southeast and southwest of the terrace edges and entered the
temple through the southeast and southwest doors. Archaeologists
conjecture that liquids would have flowed from the terrace to collect in a
pit in the center hall of the temple.
So from the above, I can get a conclusion that Mojiaoshan Terrace (莫
角山台地) resembles the Ziggurat of Ur and Anu Ziggurat, Uruk (modern
Warka) in function and shape.
And the image below is the technique of grass-wrapped silt.

Single-piece grass-wrapped silt retrieved from southwestern slope of Gushangding
(古尚顶)

Restoration of production process of grass-wrapped silt

In situ preservation and complete extraction of grass-wrapped silt

In situ preservation and complete extraction of grass-wrapped silt

Cross section plan of the northern wall of eastern slope of Mojiaoshan

Ridge-shaped structure shown in the cross section profile of the northern wall of
eastern slope of Gushangding

Cross section profile of eastern slope of Gushangding and stacked layers of
grass-wrapped silt with yellow clay

Dissecting excavation of ash ditch G9 (from south to north)

Cross section profile of grass-wrapped silt remains in ash ditch G9

Details of grass-wrapped silt remains in ash ditch G9

Dissecting excavation of ash pit G9 in eastern slope of Gushangding
Now

let

us

go

back

to

Egypt.

Narmer's

tomb

in Umm

el-Qa'ab near Abydos in Upper Egypt consists of two joined chambers
(B17

and

B18),

lined

in

mud

brick.

Although

both Émile

Amélineau and Petrie excavated tombs B17 and B18, it was only in 1964
that Kaiser identified them as being Narmer's (Kaiser 1964, pp. 96–102, fig.2.).
Narmer's tomb is located next to the tombs of Ka, who likely ruled Upper

Egypt just before Narmer, and Hor-Aha,, who was his immediate
successor. However, many Egyptian archaeologists
ists believe that this is
probably not his true tomb. The scale and architecture of this tomb d
does
not match the strong Narmer’s
Na
rule. In my point of view, this is
a cenotaph of Narmer.
And

the

images

below

are

Narmer's

tomb

in Umm

el-Qa'ab near Abydos in Upper Egypt , have you seen the grass
grass-wrapped
silt?

The grass-wrapped
wrapped silt in Narmer's tomb in Umm el-Qa'ab
Qa'ab

Narmer's tomb in Umm el-Qa'ab

A 3D portrayal of Narmer’s
Narmer tomb (actually is a cenotaph of Narmer )

And the image below is the brick making model in ancient Egypt.

Ancient Egyptian painted wooden model of three men making bricks, 12th Dynasty,
Beni Hasan tomb 275, British Museum

And thee images below are brick-making
brick
in ancient Egypt.

Brick-making in Ancient Egypt

Forced Labourers of the Semitic Race Making and Carrying Bricks
ricks. (Tomb of
Rekhmara at Thebes)

So from the paper above, I can conclude that the
t “grass-wrapped
wrapped silt
silt”
discovered by Liangzhu archaeologists in Archaeological Ruins of
Liangzhu City has the same shape, size and use of building materials as
the mud bricks used in the construction of cities, palaces and tombs
during Narmer’ss period of ancient Egypt, and wheth
whether the
manufacturing process was done with molds and dried,, n
need to be
discovered by Liangzhu archaeologists. I can also conclude that the
territory of Liangzhu culture (including Yuhang(余杭)and
)and Shaoxing(
Shaoxing(绍兴))
was once Egypt’ss colony.
And the texts below are Area of Yaoshan (瑶山)) Site and Area of

Huiguanshan (汇观山) Site.

After many years' observation and research, Liu Bin, the discover of
Liangzhu Ancient Town and researcher from Zhejiang Historical Relics
Research Institute, recently held the view that the strange square-shape
(the shape of "Hui"(回), a Chinese character) altars on Mt. Yaoshan (瑶山)
and Mt. Huiguanshan (汇观山) were very likely served as a platform for
observing the year. All the winter solstice, summer solstice, spring
equinox and autumnal equinox can be observed through the sunshine
and correctly and regularly found out on the square-shape altars.
There are strange square-shape altars on both Mt. Yaoshan and Mt.
Huiguanshan.
In 1987, the Liangzhu Culture Altar was firstly found on the peak of Mt.
Yaoshan. With the main part in the dipper-shape structure, the alter
basically faces the southern and northern direction, with east-west
length about 24m and south-north width about 18m; the flat natural
mountain bed rock can be seen on the top of the 400-square-meter altar,
which was built and chiseled flat and neat through meticulous manual
work. What is obscure is that there is a square-shape marl earth frame,

with south-north length of outer frame about 11m and east-west width
of outer frame about 10m, south-north length of inner frame about
7.6m, east-west width of inner frame about 6m and with depth of
0.65m-0.85m, which was constructed through the trenching and earth
filling way. It is measured its four angles are 45°, 135°, 225° and 305°
north by east, respectively.
In 1991, an altar, which is similar to the shape of the altar found on
the Mt. Yaoshan, was discovered on Mt. Huiguanshan in Pingyao, where
is about 5km from the newly found Liangzhu Ancient Town. The main
part of the restored rectangular dipper-shape alter on Mt. Huiguanshan,
with top covering approximately 1500sqm, east-west length of top about
35m and south-north width of top about 27.5m, is towards the south
and north direction. A square-shape marl earth frame, with south-north
length of outer frame about 13.5m and east-west width of outer frame
about 12m, south-north length of inner frame about 9.5m, east-west
width of inner frame about 7m, width of surrounding trench of the
frame chiseled on the bed rock of 2.2m-2.5m and with depth of
0.1m-0.6m, was also constructed on the western part of the altar's top
through the trenching and earth filling way. It is measured its four angles
are 45°, 135°, 225° and 305° north by east as well.
The square-shape altar was probably used in observe the solar terms
of the year.

In the important days in solar terms including winter solstice, summer
solstice, spring equinox and autumnal equinox, Liu Bin would erect a
surveyor's pole in the center of the altar to as to observe the variation of
sun shadows and the sunset position. Through over two years' practical
observation and deliberation, Liu Bin found out that the altar should be
designed as a place for observing the astronomical phenomena,
recording the solar terms of year and making the time calendar.
In the winter solstice, the sunrise direction is just identical with the
direction of the two altars' southeastern angle, which is about 135°
north by east, while the sunset direction is just in coincidence with the
direction of the two altars' northeastern angle, which is about 225°. In
the summer solstice, the sunrise is just in the same direction with the
two altars' northeastern angle, which is about 45° north by east, while
the sunset direction is coincident with the direction of the two altars'
northwestern angle, which is about 305°.
In the spring equinox and autumnal equinox, the sun rises from the
east of the altar, which is about 90° north by east and sets from the west
of the altar, which is about 270°.
Liu Bin deemed that the correct law is evidently not a coincidence.
Apart from the dimension and angle, the position of the marl earth
frame on the altar was also elaborately designed and selected, for the
reason that event the same azimuths are in the different positions,

making the reference points of observed sunrise and sunset different.
According to the practical observation of Mt. Yaoshan and Mt.
Huiguanshan, if the marl earth frame was moved, the sunrise and sunset
will not be observed at the same angle due to the sheltering of mountain
ranges.
Besides being used in observing the movement of sun and the solar
terms of a year, the altars were also probably used in observing other
celestial bodies, including the moon and astronomic and atmospheric
changes.

Plan of Area of Yaoshan Site

Topographic map of Yaoshan Site

Topographic Map of Yaoshan Remains

Surrounding Natural Environment of Yaoshan Site

Panorama of Yaoshan Cemetery (Including Altar) (South to North , 1987)

Excavation of Yaoshan Site in 1987

Excavation of Yaoshan Site in 1997

Panorama of Yaoshan Cemetery (Including the Altar) Shot in 2017 (West to East)

Archaeological Plan and Profile Map of Yaoshan Cemetery (Including Altar)

North-South B-B’ Archeological Profile Map of Yaoshan Cemetery (Including Altar) (I)

East-West H-H’ and I-I’ Archeological Profile Map of Yaoshan Cemetery (Including
Altar) (II)

Stone Revements of Yaoshan Altar

Directions of the four corners of the two homocentric squares at Yaoshan Site

Huiguanshan Altar

General plan of Huiguanshan Site

Now

let

us

go

back

to

Egypt.

The

sculptured Dendera

zodiac (or Denderah zodiac) is a widely known Egyptian bas-relief from
the ceiling of the pronaos (or portico) of a chapel dedicated to Osiris in

the Hathor temple at Dendera, containing images of Taurus (the bull)
and the Libra (the scales). This chapel was begun in the late Ptolemaic
period;

its pronaos was

added

by

the

emperor Tiberius.

This

led Jean-François Champollion to date the relief to the Greco-Roman
period, but most of his contemporaries believed it to be of the New
Kingdom. The relief, which John H. Rogers characterised as "the only
complete map that we have of an ancient sky" (John H. Rogers, "Origins of
the ancient constellations: I. The Mesopotamian traditions", Journal of the British
Astronomical Association 108 (1998) 9–28) , has been conjectured to represent

the basis on which later astronomy systems were based ( Zodiac of Dendera,
epitome. (Exhibition, Leic. square). J. Haddon, 1825). It is now on display at

the Musée du Louvre, Paris.

The Dendera zodiac as displayed at the Louvre

The zodiac is a planisphere or map of the stars on a plane projection,
showing the 12 constellations of the zodiacal band forming 36 decans of
ten days each, and the planets. These decans are groups
of first-magnitude stars. These were used in the ancient Egyptian
calendar, which was based on lunar cycles of around 30 days and on
the heliacal rising of the star Sothis (Sirius).
Its representation of the zodiac in circular form is unique in ancient
Egyptian art. More typical are the rectangular zodiacs which decorate
the same temple's pronaos.
The celestial arch is represented by a disc held up by four pillars of the
sky in the form of women, between which are inserted falcon-headed
spirits. On the first ring 36 spirits represent the 360 days of the Egyptian
year.

Denderah zodiac with original colors (reconstructed)

On an inner circle, one finds constellations, showing the signs of the
zodiac. Some of these are represented in the same Greco-Roman
iconographic

forms

as

their

familiar

counterparts

(e.g.

the Ram, Taurus, Scorpio, and Capricorn, albeit most in odd orientations
in comparison to the conventions of ancient Greece and later
Arabic-Western developments), whilst others are shown in a more
Egyptian form: Aquarius is represented as the flood god Hapy, holding
two vases which gush water. Rogers noted the similarities of
unfamiliar iconology with the three surviving tablets of a Seleucid zodiac
and both relating to kudurru, "boundary-stone" representations: in short,
Rogers sees the Dendera zodiac as "a complete copy of the
Mesopotamian zodiac" ( Rogers (1998) p. 10 ).

Zodiaque de Denderah with the 48 constellations of Claudius Ptolemaus clearly
identified among the present 72 constellations on this Zodiac.

So from the paper above, you can find the prototype of the
square-shape (the shape of "Hui", a Chinese character) altars on Mt.
Yaoshan and Mt. Huiguanshan from Dendera zodiac.
Now let us go back to China. Fanshan (反山)is located northwest of
Mojiaoshan Palace and north of jiangjiashan inside the Liangzhu Ancient
City. It is about 120 m long from west to east, 80 m wide from north to
south, with an altitude of 12.4 m (subject to the latest survey) and a
relative height of about 5-6 m. It is an artificially piled up rectangular
mound of 4-6m.

Distribution of functional areas inside Liangzhu Ancient City

Distribution of remains of early Liangzhu culture period inside and outside the City

Distribution of remains of late Liangzhu culture period inside and outside the City

Location Diagram of Fanshan and Mojiaoshan
(Based on the topographic map of Liangzhu Archaeological Site by Zhejiang Provincial
Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology , April 1997)

Distribution plan of exploration units and trenches and drilling holes in Fanshan Site
(with references from Fanshan)
Fanshan

Fanshan

The Tombs of Fanshan

The Structure of Fanshan

A Distant View of the Western End of the Fanshan Cemetery and the Cross
Cross-section of
the Site

Local Part of the Cross-section of the Western Part of Fanshan Cemerery

The Eastern Part of the Fanshan Site

Excavation of Fanshan Site in the Summer of 1986 (from south to north)

Excavation of Fanshan Site in the Autumn of 1986 (from southeast to northwest)

Layout of Tombs in Fanshan Site (from south to north)

Layout of Tombs in Fanshan Site (from east to west)

Plan of Tombs and Other Relics of the Liangzhu Culture Period in Fanshan

And the text below is about Fanshan Cemetery.

Statistics of Tombs in Fanshan Cemetery (NC-MD1)
Data cited from: Archaeological Reports of Liangzhu Archaeologic SiteⅡ: Fanshan
(October 2005)

Aerial View of Tomb M12 in Fanshan Cemetery

Plan of Tomb M12 in Fanshan Cemetery

Rubbing of jade cong (Fanshan M12:98)

Jade cong (Fanshan M12:98) in the tomb

“Jade cong of the most classical shape and patterns” Unearthed from Fanshan
Cemetery (M12:98)

Divine emblem on jade cong (Fanshan M12:98)

Line graph of the divine emblem on jade cong (Fanshan M12:98)

And the image below is the resemblance between the divine emblem
of Liangzhu and the Pharaoh of ancient Egypt.

So from the image above, I can conclude that the divine emblem
unearthed from Tomb M12, Fanshan cemetery indicates that the owner
of the tomb was probably the governor of ancient Egypt. Besides,
Fanshan (反山)is about 120 m long from west to east, 80 m wide from
north to south, with an altitude of 12.4 m (subject to the latest survey)
and a relative height of about 5-6 m. It is larger than any other tombs of
mastabas of the kings in ancient Egypt. According to the Bamboo Annals,
Yu ruled the Xia Dynasty for forty-five years and, according to Yue
Jueshu (越绝书), he died from an illness (Bamboo Annals Xia chapter and
Chinaculture.org.

"Chinaculture.org Archived 2010-09-11

at

the Wayback

Machine." 大禹祭典. Retrieved on 2010-09-26.). It is said that he died at Mount

Kuaiji (会稽山), south of present-day Shaoxing (绍兴), while on a hunting
tour to the eastern frontier of his empire, and was buried there. The Yu
mausoleum (大禹陵) known today was first built in the 6th century AD
(Southern and Northern Dynasties period) in his honor. It is located four
kilometers southeast of Shaoxing city (China.org.cn. "China.org.cn." Yu
Mausoleum. Retrieved on 2010-09-26.). Most of the structure was rebuilt

many times in later periods. The three main parts of the mausoleum are
the Yu tomb (禹陵), temple (禹庙) and memorial (禹祠). ( lvyou.eco.gov.cn.
"lvyou.eco.gov.cn." 治水英雄大禹的葬地：大禹陵. Retrieved on 2010-09-26.). In

many statues he is seen carrying an ancient hoe (耒耜). A number of
emperors in imperial times travelled there to perform ceremonies in his
honor, notably Qin Shi Huang.

Yu mausoleum in Shaoxing

Yu temple in Yu mausoleum

Since Fanshan (反山) is an artificially piled up mastaba shape like
mound and it is larger than any other tombs of mastabas of the kings in
ancient Egypt, I can get a hypothesis that Yu (Narmer) died while on a
hunting tour to the eastern frontier of his empire, and chose Fanshan (反
山) as his tomb at first , but for some unknown reasons, he buried in Yu
mausoleum ( 大 禹 陵 ) ,

Mount Kuaiji ( 会 稽 山 ) , south of

present-day Shaoxing (绍兴). And After Shaokang (少康) rehabilitation,
the Yu’s descendant Shaokang’s (少康) son-Wuyu (无余) was sealed in
Kuaiji (会稽), enshrined Yu (禹), and created Yue State (越国). In Yuling
Village (禹陵村) of Shaoxing, the descendants of Yu (禹) have been
defended the Mausoleum till now according to legend. The ancient
Chinese character 越
hieroglyph:

(Yue) is completely an ancient Egyptian

References:
1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narmer
2. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0102virp.html (兵策儒剑
—鲧为那尔迈，禹为美尼斯)
3. https://www.slideserve.com/navid/key-concepts

4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yu_the_Great
5. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qi_of_Xia
6. https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__biz=MzAwNTU3OTM5MA==&mid=
2247486484&idx=1&sn=6942deecef9317122d29aba8e730f0d5&ch
ksm=9b1b3b05ac6cb21307f0aab933e9ad13308177375801a08465
c2db4f12ee73087f7c548e8954&scene=21#wechat_redirect ( 兵 策
儒剑—文明同源：从中国历史传说中的黄帝与古埃及蝎子王的
关系谈起)
7. Guangbao Liu “ Xia Dynasty of Eagle and Snake ” (刘光保，
《发现夏
朝》，中国发展出版社，2017 年 12 月)
8. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0102wmuz.html (兵策儒
剑—西奈半岛发现的 5000 年前象形文字见证夏朝建立历史
(5,000-Year-Old Hieroglyphs Discovered in Sinai Desert Revealed a
Period of History of the Establishment of the Chinese Xia Dynasty))
9. https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/DzAmMm2w4WQdWAXWKg878w (兵
策儒剑—我是如何发现良渚玉器上“鸟站祭坛”符号与古埃及
国王名字关联的)
10. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umm_el-Qa'ab
11. http://www.odysseyadventures.ca/articles/mastabas/abydos.html
12.http://ww.ancient-egypt.org/monuments/abydos-sacred-centre-of
/umm-el-qaab/index.html
13. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastaba

14.http://www.odysseyadventures.ca/articles/mastabas/mastabas01.
html
15.https://cn.bing.com/images/search?view=detailV2&ccid=aV%2bJE4
V8&id=842AF17E17A8F94E413D5839445B22D369701444&thid=OI
P.aV-JE4V8KBfdNFF0BO0vcwHaD-&mediaurl=https%3a%2f%2fc2.st
aticflickr.com%2f6%2f5007%2f5250507566_de32dfbd0c_z.jpg&exp
h=343&expw=640&q=tomb+mastaba+of+the+first+dynasty&simid
=608006074855262167&selectedIndex=158&ajaxhist=0
16. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322508698
17.http://www.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dy
nasty/horus-aha/tomb-of-horus-aha.html
18.http://www.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dy
nasty/horus-djer/tomb-o-at-umm-el-qaab.html
19.http://www.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dy
nasty/horus-djet/tomb-z-at-umm-el-qaab.html
20.https://www.academia.edu/39151804/Back_to_the_Mastaba_Tom
bs_of_the_First_Dynasty_at_Saqqara._Officials_or_Kings
21.https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301530710_On_the_o
wnership_of_the_Saqqara_mastabas_and_the_allotment_of_politi
cal_and_ideological_power_at_the_dawn_of_the_state
22. http://www.francescoraffaele.com/egypt/hesyra/Saqqara.htm
23.http://ww.ancient-egypt.org/who-is-who/m/merneith/tomb-y-at-u

mm-el-qaab.html
24.http://ww.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dyn
asty/horus-den/tomb-t-at-umm-el-qaab.html
25.http://www.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dy
nasty/horus-anedjib/tomb-x-at-umm-el-qaab.html
26. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Tomb_of_Anedjib
27.http://www.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dy
nasty/horus-sekhemhet/tomb-u-at-umm-el-qaab.html
28.https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Tomb_of_Semerkh
et
29.http://www.ancient-egypt.org/history/early-dynastic-period/1st-dy
nasty/horus-qaa/tomb-q-at-umm-el-qaab.html
30. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Tomb_of_Qa%27a
31. http://en.hanlingyuan.com/i/burialSystem.html
32. http://en.hanlingyuan.com/sarea/5.html
33. http://en.hanlingyuan.com/sarea/6.html
34. https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastaba
35.http://www.odysseyadventures.ca/articles/mastabas/funeraryEncl
osures.html
36.http://www.francescoraffaele.com/egypt/hesyra/Abydos-enclosure
s.htm
37. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saqqara

38. http://www.francescoraffaele.com/egypt/hesyra/Saqqara.htm
39.https://www.planetware.com/tourist-attractions-/necropolis-of-sa
qqara-egy-giza-saq.htm
40 . https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperdiffusionism_in_archaeology
41. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haplogroup_Q-M242
42. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f01010qvr.html (兵策儒
剑—Y-Q 系全球迁徙路线推测图)
43. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0101c9zz.html（兵策儒剑
—古埃及人 2 个常染标记基因在全世界的分布）
44. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Y-DNA_haplogroups_in_populations
_of_North_Africa
45. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/6180520_Y_chromoso
mes_of_Prehistoric_People_along_the_Yangtze_River
46. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0102y0dj.html
47. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yue_(state)
48. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horus
49. https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1592/
50. https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1592/documents/
51. https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1592/gallery/
52. http://www.kaogu.cn/en/News/New_discoveries/2017/0328/5761
5.html
53. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ziggurat_of_Ur

54. https://www.bilibili.com/video/av29272790/
55. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brick_making_model_B
M1.agr.jpg
56. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brick-making.png
57. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Forced_Labourers_of_th
e_Semitic_Race_stamping_out_Bricks_(1878)_-_TIMEA.jpg
58. http://www.naradalz.com/en/nearby/Index.aspx?nid=16
59. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denderah_zodiac_
60. https://www.khanacademy.org/humanities/ancient-art-civilization
s/ancient-near-east1/sumerian/a/white-temple-and-ziggurat-uruk
61. http://www.lzmuseum.cn/ShiPinXinShang/2019642111644.html
62. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0101cbyc.html

