Mainstreaming and superdiversity: Beyond more integration1
Fran Meissner
The emergent literature on mainstreaming immigrant integration frequently references
the term superdiversity. The diversification of migration is put forward as one rational
for implementing measures to support immigrant integration across policy fields and
across levels of policy making. Research into superdiversity has successfully increased
the recognition and study of the complex webs of multiple differentiations that
international migration entails and inscribes in local diversities. Superdiversity offers an
alternative to equating migration-related diversity with a multiplicity of putatively
cohesive origin or ethnic groups – indeed it helps move beyond category focused
approaches to making sense of migration-driven and migrant-led diversity (Meissner
2016; Ye 2016a).
Thinking through a superdiversity lens assists in accounting for contemporary
configurations of urban and increasingly also rural population dynamics by going beyond
cultural difference as a focal concern. Not directly targeting any putative group and
choosing to make migration-related diversity a concern across areas and levels of policy
making is promising. As this book documents, in practice it is not an easy feat. In this
chapter and against the backdrop of the afore gone empirical work, I ask how else,
beyond being a rational for mainstreaming, thinking about superdiversity might add to
the presented debates. I primarily advance the argument that a superdiversity lens is
uniquely placed to critically examine whether the goal of mainstreaming should be
integration.
I start the chapter with a brief introduction to superdiversity. I emphasise that the term
is not synonymous with more diversity and that the notion instead challenges
presumptions about more diversity requiring more integration work. In a second section
I reflect on the conclusions of the book’s empirical chapters to highlight a number of
fault-lines at odds with seeing mainstreaming integration - the way it is currently
implemented - as an adequate response to the emergence of superdiversity. I here come
to the conclusion that efforts to mainstream integration rarely respond to ideas about
complex interconnections of difference – a central facet of superdiversity. Instead what
integration means is left vague and the goal of integrating migrants becomes a maxim
and a putatively necessary characteristic of a good post-migration society.
In a third section I discuss why mainstreaming practices may suffer from the murkiness
of what integration in superdiverse contexts is or ought to be – it neglects the continued
stigma associated to the term and the effectiveness of invoking and measuring
integration. I thus shift the discussion’s focus to the connection between superdiversity
and integration. Should it be a given that the goals of mainstreamed policies are framed
in terms of integration? I propose that a superdiversity lens can also challenge us to
consider the merits of alternative prerogatives such as what I term convivial
Pre-Print Chapter published in: Scholten, P.; van Breugel, Ilona (Eds.) (2018): Mainstreaming Integration
Governance. New Trends in Migrant Integration Policies in Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
1

165

disintegration. I briefly explore how this might better suit the way everyday diversity is
practiced. I conclude the chapter by summarising the main points to highlight the
multiple ways in which linking superdiversity with mainstreaming practices can go
beyond thinking about more diversity needing more integration.

Superdiversity terminological clarifications

In this book superdiversity is primarily used to describe ‘a context of increasing
diversification’ (Scholten & van Breugel, Chapter 1, p. TBD). In my previous work I have
delineated three main ways of using superdiversity in applied research. One, as a way
to critically chose sets of variables and focal aspects included in investigations. These
have to go beyond commonly used categories of migrants. Two, superdiversity as a
context in which those variables are at play and finally superdiversity as a malleable
social scientific concept that can account for less static conceptions of migration-related
diversity (Meissner 2015). Vertovec (2016) has recently expanded and updated this
survey of uses and amongst others adds that a superdiversity lens compels innovative
thinking about ‘the social organisation of difference’. Keeping those multiple
applications of the term in mind, it is useful to consider what a diversification of diversity
entails, if it is thought about through a superdiversity lens (cf. Vertovec 2015b).
Assertions of increasing diversification often leave implicit what it is that is increased
and how. A very simplistic rational for mainstreaming integration might be that there is
more migration and thus more diversity and that this in turn also requires more
integration work. This simple link however should be avoided as it is at odds with the
themes and research challenges superdiversity research points to. At a global level Czika
and de Haas (2014) point out that the world has not become more migratory since the
1960’s. Instead migration has concentrated with people moving from more places to
fewer destinations. As a result, in the European context, an increasing number of cities
are inching their way to becoming minority majority cities, a process that has been noted
both for larger cities and smaller urban municipalities. At the same time there are many
urban centres that have seen an increase in their share of foreign born, but that remain
far from becoming majority minority cities. Local diversification trends are variable and
to be a useful concept superdiversity has to account for this.
In many national statistics the number of foreign born residents and their offspring has
increased over that past decades although often not with the same magnitude as
reported from different city contexts. The introduction of the term superdiversity was
motivated by those empirical shifts (Vertovec 2007). However, the analytical focus of
the term is on changing and complex patterns rather than on continuously increasing
levels of diversity. A diversification of origins and an increase in the count of resident
migrants, went hand in hand with other stratifications of migrant populations. One
superdiversity thesis, subject to empirical verification, is that the latter altered the
dynamics of diversity. Central factors include shifting legal provisions directed at
migrants, different settlement and moving on patterns, demographic differences in
migrant cohorts and how those cohorts engage differently in the labour market, in local
social networks and in transnational networks which all link ever more variegated
physically distant and close localities. With its focus on the interplay of board and
detailed aspects of migration-related differentiations, superdiversity research is often
166

concerned with processes through which migration related differences become habitual
in everyday socialites (Wise and Velayutham 2009; Vertovec 2015a; Wessendorf 2014).
Superdiversity is not only a useful lens to examine contexts that have experienced
exceptional increases in the numbers of foreign born. Whether there are moderate
levels or a lot of new migration, superdiversity highlights the notable entanglement of
many differentiations that both constrain and provide opportunities for migrants to
participate in local social, economic and political structures. As a concept the notion is
also useful to consider the social organisation of difference in contexts of moderate or
longstanding diversities. Comparative approaches expose how international migration
is part of multiple registers of social, cultural and regulatory complexity. Complexity the
way it is used in this chapter is about considering more variables but it is not about a
larger taxonomic dictionary of diversity, or about counting categories. Instead
complexities considered are about the dynamic ways in which often less category
focused differentiations – such as those deriving from the interplay between the
restrictiveness of immigration rules and movement dynamics - can be thought about as
being both co-dependent and as having an accumulated history in contemporary
configurations of diversity. This history derives from consecutive changes in how
migration and the possible ways through which migration alters social settings gained
situational social relevance (Mitchell 1987). It is in considering the simultaneity of
multiple differentiations that we get to the heart of superdiversity research.
Defining and talking about superdiversity entails paying attention to complexities in
contexts where the sum of differences cannot explain the social dynamics that
international migration entails. It is often a fear of small numbers that is framed in terms
of large threats and heightened levels of diversity (Appadurai 2006) – so long as this
continues difference will also continue to be eyed as disruptive and socially destabilising
– as a threat to integration. Yet at points more diversity may entail less antagonistic
differences than if relatively clear and contested cleavages dominate in social settings
(Brubaker 2008). Considering multidimensional differentiations poses new challenges
for addressing and understanding the implications of international migration in local
contexts. How those interconnections and their appropriation by migrants produce
sometimes unexpected and hard to predict feedback-loops is important for changes in
how diversity is perceived and how it is dealt with (Blommaert 2013). It has been noted
how remarkably well cities work despite their evident accumulation of difference
(Magnusson 2011).
More migrants and categories applied to those migrants is a clear implication of the
emergence of superdiversity, but it does not constitute what is at stake in thinking about
the term. Considering the multidimensionality of diversifications and how those
differentiations co-evolve and change over time is closer to what superdiversity can
conceptually capture and add to debates (Meissner 2016) – thus if superdiversity is used
as a rational for mainstreaming policies it is important to ask whether those complexities
are considered in innovating approaches for dealing with the implications of
international migration.
Importantly superdiversity was ‘proposed as a “summary term” to encapsulate a range
of […] changing variables surrounding migration patterns – and, significantly, their
interlinkages – which amount to a recognition of complexities that supersede previous
patterns and perceptions of migration-driven diversity’ (Meissner and Vertovec 2015,
167

542, emphasis added). With reference to changing approaches to governing diversity,
superdiversity thought about in this way - more as a concept than as a context - makes
it difficult to consider policy shifts as responding to superdiversity. In fact, the very
changes in policies discussed in the empirical chapters of this book directly impact on
the complexities of superdiversity. Mainstreaming integration and thereby
implementing sets of policy tools more broadly and at multiple levels of government
and through new governance structures, is itself a driver of superdiversity. At the same
time following this definition, it is a valid and important question to ask, whether
changed perceptions of diversity altered strategies for addressing the implications of
migration and in extension whether those changes are passable. The book’s empirical
chapters offer insights here and highlight a number of fault-lines at odds with seeing
mainstreaming integration - the way it is currently implemented - as an adequate
response to the emergence of superdiversity.
Superdiversity and its link to mainstreaming integration – reflecting on empirical chapters

How diversity is perceived and imagined (Vertovec 2012) is of particular importance for
integration policies which arguably, like migration policies, have to satisfy related and
sometimes contradictory standards of legitimacy (Boswell 2007; Jong 2015). As we have
just noted, superdiversity research aims to shift ideas about diversity away from thinking
about more diversity towards thinking about the complexities of diversity.
Mainstreaming integration efforts involves changes across different levels of
government (cf. Scholten & van Breugel, Chapter 1) and if superdiversity talk was a
rational for mainstreaming integration, it is reasonable to assume that there has to be
some recognition of those complexities also across levels of policy making. There is little
evidence that this is the case. The empirical work in this book shows instead that we find
a clear scalar shift in how much importance can be attributed to the recognition of
superdiversity in making the implications of migration a broad policy concern and
shifting who or what is targeted by policy initiatives.
At the urban level ideas about (super)diversity have been used to justify and implement
mainstreamed approaches to immigrant integration, bringing on board more
stakeholders and a more varied portfolio of policy areas (cf. Jóźwiak et Al., Chapter 3;
Jensen et Al., Chapter 4). At the same time similar trends at the national level are not
framed in terms of the complexities of diversity – instead here a clear shift towards
generic often socio-economically focused policy concerns are found to be of increasing
importance. Justifications for generic policy frames at the national level are promoted
by pointing to austerity and cost-effectiveness. As Helen McCarthy and colleagues
(Chapter 5) show, at the EU-level the commitment to using available instruments to
promote mainstreaming tools has been limited. Migration and its implications remains
a relevant topic at this level, however little in the analysis of Chapter 5 suggests that this
is because of the complexities of migration-driven diversity. Pressures to facilitate
sufficient adaptability of policy tools is paramount to ensure that implementation in
different national contexts and across different policy fields is made possible at all.
The evident hierarchy of importance attributed to superdiversity is not surprising, as
Jensen et Al. point out in their analysis: “the city […] constitutes the coalface of
integration where policy frames confront the lived reality of an increasingly diverse
population” (Chapter 4, p. TBD). Entanglements of multiple migration-related
168

differentiations noted in local contexts disappear in the abstractions of higher-level
frameworks. Whether mainstreaming happens in response to the recognition of
superdiversity would thus necessarily depend on how close those developing and
implementing efforts are to the practical needs that those integration efforts are
supposed to address. The chapter by Gidley and colleagues highlighting the crucial role
of street-level bureaucrats in implementing mainstreamed policies, offers a good
example to highlight the complexities that these actors can and have to accommodate.
It is clearly shown that many street-level bureaucrats by necessity cannot disregard the
co-relevance of multiple registers of diversity (social diversity, sexual diversity etc.)
which likely also involves recognising intricacies within those registers (however also
see: Boccagni, 2014). The alluded to hierarchy has the interesting side effect that
generic policy frames developed at the national level end up having an immigrant
integration focus at the local level (cf. Chapter 4). Considering the types of initiatives
described by Jensen et Al. as well as by Jóźwiak et Al. in reviewing how mainstreaming
is evident in city contexts, it is important to caution that even if policy approaches are
responsive to ideas about altered and heightened diversity, this is not always due to a
recognition of the multidimensionality of superdiversity. Regardless of whether diversity
is presented as an opportunity to be harnessed or as a challenge that needs to be
addressed, central concerns often remain with questions of multi-ethnicity rather than
with incorporating additional stratifications of difference. Efforts in multiple European
cities described by Jensen show that mainstreaming in local contexts while not targeting
any specific origin group, often remains based on the idea that the disintegrative
potential of international migration is caused by insufficient contact and understanding
between people of different origin groups (cf. Schönwälder 2016). Where migrants are
from and ethno-cultural differences remain central in community cohesion and
intercultural approaches even if the debates are shifted away from directly targeting
specific origin groups.
Ethnic and cultural differences play an important part in understanding and making
sense of post-migration societies – and superdiverse contexts are often marked by the
everydayness of this type of diversity (Wessendorf 2014). A recognition of the
simultaneous stratifications along other migration-related differentiations however are
rarely subject of relevant policies. One example that serves to support this is the fact
that few city governments are aware of, or actively seek to understand, the spatial
distribution of migrants who moved through different immigration channels. This is
surprising given the connection between legal status and the socio-economic outcomes
of migrants (Söhn 2013). Recent increases in refugee migrations and imminent
questions about where in cities new residents will find more sustainable housing, have
increased sensitivities in this area (Bolzoni, Gargiulo, and Manocchi 2015). To date these
mostly fail to address how refugee migrations together with other migrations add to
multiple speeds of change in local diversity configurations and in how diversity is
differently experienced and conflict prone in those uniquely configured contexts (for
two exceptions see: Phillimore 2013; Biehl 2014).
What types of policies then are considered as examples of mainstreaming integration?
The Polish and Spanish comparison representing the empirical case of mainstreaming in
new-migration contexts (Chapter 3) presents examples where practices are changed in
light of heightened diversity but not necessarily in response to superdiversity. Observed
adaptations in approaches towards migrant integration and how more actors,
169

particularly NGOs, take on mainstreamed integration responsibilities exclusively
respond to the presence of more migrants and changes in ethnic, cultural and linguistic
diversity. The authors show that while those changed approaches to dealing with the
implications of international migration can be described as ‘mainstreaming by accident’,
they also show, in analysing the Polish case, that this may lead to exclusionary practices
as particular migrants, such as seasonal workers are not targeted by the described
initiatives. This reflects that short term but also intra-EU migrants are often not
considered as part of the integration paradigm (Collet 2013). Which is why some
advocate that to more fully take advantage of mainstreaming integration concerns, it is
necessary to pay attention to ‘mobility proofing’ and ‘diversity proofing’ policies
(Benton, McCarthy, and Collet 2015).
To be clear, addressing questions about language competences especially in school
contexts is important – empirical work suggests that language acquisition is highly
relevant for navigating destination contexts (e.g. Hoehne and Michalowski 2016). The
example of language support used in the Polish case study is however useful to explain
why there is a mismatch between responding to more immigration and responding to
superdiversity. What is mainstreamed in practice – the acquisition of the host-country’s
language and ideas about mono- and bi-lingualism – disregards and maybe even
discounts the increasing importance of polylanguaging and how degrees of fluency and
situational mobilisation and creolisation of language have strong integrative and
simultaneously disintegrative potential. A rapidly growing literature on linguistic
superdiversity would certainly point us in this direction (Arnaut et al. 2016; Silverstein
2015; Hogan-Brun 2012). Those tendencies however may simply be outside of the reach
of clear and easy to explain policy interventions that can be provided by scarcely funded
actors (Boccagni 2014). In thinking about the transformation of generic policy frames in
terms of integration it is a non-negligible risk that what is mainstreamed are tools that
were developed with older ideas about dealing with difference in mind. These often
respond only to smoothing over singular differences rather than engaging with the corelevance of multiple and intricately linked differentiations.
It is thus not entirely clear whether presented practices of mainstreaming integration
do respond to a need for whole society approaches, at least not, if we presume that
addressing everyone also has to be sensitive to the everyday complexities of diversity.
This is also relevant for discussing the argument that to mainstream integration policies
it is necessary to pay attention to the ‘dilemma of recognition’ which was introduced in
the first chapter of this book. Doing so in theory demands that mainstreaming entails a
vigilant attention to both more generic as well as (non-group) targeted approaches. We
can note that efforts described as building on this prerogative are not necessarily
successful. With the presented empirical examples, the interconnectedness of multiple
differentiations and how they play out in specific contexts appears poorly addressed in
making decisions about when, who or what to target. Simone and colleagues (Chapter
2) show that shifting policies to area or needs based targets is not in and of itself a solid
strategy to counter pre-existing stigma and structural barriers faced by different
migrants. In terms of superdiversity the relevant question might be in how far
mainstreamed and devolved policy approaches can be successful if other policies push
exclusionary agendas (Gebhardt 2015).

170

Area based targeting is not performed in a policy vacuum and approaches that result in
proxy-targeting putative groups are likely to not respond to the complexities of
superdiversity. As the empirical analysis indicates, a lack of sensitivity for how policy is
calibrated risks developing tools that poorly benefit anyone. Such practices carry the
added danger of further reducing openness towards needed redistributive efforts,
which are linked to attitudes towards migration in general (Dancygier and Donnelly
2013; Bauböck and Scholten 2016). This would reinforce the interlinkages of
differentiations and how migrants contribute to social change and why I suggested that
considering mainstreaming as a driver of superdiversity may be more useful than to see
superdiversity as a rational for mainstreaming. The French case offers the most alarming
example of why cautiousness about the effectiveness of shifting from ethnic groups to
other putative categories via proxy targets is in order (Bozec and Simon 2014).
Needs based proxies, face similar difficulties, as forecasting where policies have to steer
their focus requires high levels of flexibility that may still not bridge the gap between
experienced and presumed needs (Phillimore 2015a). Changes in patterns of diversity
often result in previously not considered scenarios – uncertainty is a core element of
complex social configurations. It is this uncertainty that ideally needs to become part of
mainstreaming efforts if they are to adequately respond to superdiversity. Based on the
empirical materials it is not entirely clear if this is feasible or if the needed flexibility
poses new and different challenges for dealing with diversity. There are evident
difficulties in devising policies that are general enough to work across levels of
government and areas of policy making but that at the same time can respond to the
specificities of superdiverse contexts. Further, proxy approaches expose the importance
of highlighting that anti-discrimination measures and measures designed to foster
equality and support in emergent and variegated arrival structures, do not always sit
easily together under the umbrella term integration (Bozec and Simon 2014). The
danger of dilution of problems is then another non-negligible issue.
Beyond these concerns what is interesting in reviewing the researched policy shifts is
that at each level considered there appears to be consensus that if there is something
that needs to be done in response to international migration and heightened levels of
diversity, it has to be integration. This suggests that integration as a goal has become a
maxim, a leitmotiv, in what needs to be done to counter the inequities migration entails
and to foster a good postmigration society. Some - but certainly not all - of the
migration-linked differentiations that a superdiversity lens points to are subject to and
product of policy tools framed in terms of migrant integration (cf. MIPEX). The link
between superdiversity and integration debates is thus not surprising – yet given the
observations that mainstreaming in practice is so far not necessarily an adequate
response to dynamically changing configurations of diversity, it is important to question
whether those dynamics can be made compatible with the far from unproblematic
notion of integration.

Integration as a maxim?

As Scholten and van Breugel note in their introduction to this book, there have been
shifts in how integration policies are framed and implemented. Not least as multicultural
approaches have widely fallen out of favour (however see: Banting and Kymlicka 2013)
171

and ideas about assimilation have proven to be too one sided (Crul 2016). A turn towards
new understandings of integration and what it should entail (cf. Gidley 2012) offers
considerable extensions to earlier more rigid ideas that saw integration responsibilities
to rest exclusively with non-nationals. However, as the example of mainstreaming
integration at the EU level shows – what is mainstreamed may purposively be left open
for interpretation in different national and local contexts. Migrant integration even if
dispersed through multiple levels of policy making is subject to different policy frames
that are applied in local contexts (Caponio, Jubany Baucells, and Güell 2015). This
vagueness is relevant for what types of policy interventions are thought of as
mainstreaming integration and which goals they should achieve in light of altered
perceptions about diversity.
As I suggested at the end of the last section, integration stands somewhat as a maxim in
many debates which makes it prone to the dilution of policy priorities criticised at
various points in this book. Particularly in the popular debate it is common that
perceived or actual increases in migration go hand in hand with debates about how best
to integrate new migrants. Here integration stands as a goal that if reached is the beacon
of a good postmigration society. This preoccupation with integration can be explained
by considering how previous strategies for dealing with new migrants often precluded
meaningful participation and resulted in sometimes devastating differences that
disproportionally left many (but by no means all) non-nationals in socially and
economically disadvantaged positions. Emphasising integration, both of settled and new
or short-term migrants, then emphasises predictability by addressing and not repeating
the same mistakes. That some of the inequities pointed to in calling for more integration
may already be embedded in other policy realms – particularly those of regulating
migration – too easily disappears from debates if a unified goal of integration dominates
agendas.
Integration as a goal and maxim is certainly not equivalent with the many ways of
thinking about what challenges and dynamic changes in social configurations
international migration entails. Integration is then seen as a process with many
neglected dimensions (Catney, Finney, and Twigg 2011) or as having to be expanded
beyond policies targeting people directly or by proxy, to embedding integration by
generating change in institutions charged with mainstreamed policy interventions
(Phillimore 2015b; Benton, McCarthy, and Collet 2015). The latter efforts, which have
the most promise for substantially altering how integration ‘is done’ (also compare
Chapter 7), however remain mostly the exception rather than the rule. Instead ideas
about integration are often built on a rhetoric of a two-way processes in which ‘the
degree of change is almost always unequal, much greater on the immigrant side’ (Alba
and Foner 2016, 7).
In light of superdiversity this highlights at least two problems. First, integration as a goal
perpetuates the reproduction of an image of society where some are thought about as
needing to be integrated and others as doing the integrating (Schinkel 2013). It is not
surprising that this unhelpfully stirs animosities, both amongst those who never feel
integrated regardless of the efforts invested and for those who do feel that they have
reached the integration threshold but who neglect that the circumstances and contexts
of, for instance, learning the language or participating in the labour market are vastly
different for different migrants. The integration dichotomy has divisive characteristics.

172

Secondly but relatedly the goal of integration is difficult to align with uncertainties about
how the complex interconnections of difference play out in superdiverse contexts. As I
noted integration debates tend to be driven by suggesting certainties and the ability to
control the implications of international migration in local and supra-local settings.
Thinking about superdiversity however is not least about presuming that different
contexts subject to similar policy interventions can still diverge in their outcomes as
often a condition of ‘ceteris paribus’ – of all else being equal, cannot account for the
local complexities of diversity. Complexity is not least about an inability to trace initial
conditions. By implementing integration as a maxim it becomes possible to disregard
this very central aspect of complexity which consequently also does not find recognition
in the precision of policy goals – rendering them virtually unchallengeable even if their
content is relatively unclear.
With those two concerns in mind we may ask whether mainstreaming as a strategy for
mobility and diversity proofing policies should be framed in terms of integration at all?
Can we be as bold as to say that thinking about mainstreaming in light of superdiversity
challenges us to consider alternatives? Should integration be a beacon of what identifies
a good postmigration society or is a degree of disintegration permissible – maybe even
desirable? Let us think about the example of mobility proofing services and ‘adapting to
the realities of high population turn-over’ (Benton, McCarthy, and Collet 2015, 10).
Strictly speaking this is at odds with integration as a maxim because relevant socialites
are re-configured constantly. This arguably means that what was there before is, to a
degree, disintegrated and reassembled constantly and that this happens in light of the
multidimensional differentiations that are emblematic of superdiverse contexts. Even if
those contexts can be marked by a familiarity with difference, where at times new
strangers are perceived as familiar strangers (Ye 2016b), it is clear that high mobility
always entails at least minute changes which make it difficult to clearly define when and
how integration as a goal is reached to everyone’s satisfaction.
Measuring integration by the presence or absence of certain policies may say something
about intentions but not least because of the multiscale adaptations of policies it does
not necessarily say much about contextual outcomes. Processes of disintegration do not
have to go hand in hand with the perpetuation of inequities or with conflict prone social
settings – indeed disintegration may provide the disruptive spaces needed to find
convivial solutions and define inclusive goals. If what was there before is reconfigured
constantly and sometimes in bursts, this may also lead to what I here term ‘convivial
disintegration’. Considering research into superdiversity with a focus on when diversity
works we will note that this is by no means a rare occurrence (e.g.Amin; Wise and
Velayutham 2009; Wessendorf 2014).
The idea of conviviality is frequently emphasised in the literature that alludes to
superdiversity (e.g.Nowicka and Vertovec 2014; Wise and Noble 2016; Padilla, Azevedo,
and Olmos-Alcaraz 2015). Whilst often linked to the writings of Gilroy (2009) Wise and
Nobel (2016, 423) have recently suggested that conviviality ‘is part of an older and
broader concern with the ongoing question of how communities/ cultures/ societies/
nations “stick together”’. While they argue that thinking about conviviality moves
concern over cultural difference into the centre of analysis (Wise and Noble 2016, 424)
– I would suggest that from a superdiversity perspective it is precisely the co-relevance
of cultural aspects and other social, economic and regulatory differences and

173

importantly their simultaneity, which is moved into focus and highlights complexities in
contexts of diversified diversity (Hannerz 1992). Conviviality is no longer thought of as a
concept that can only account for positive encounters but in its multiple uses is giving
room to conflictual negotiations of difference and tensions that may persist or ebb and
flow in their intensity (Heil 2015). Some also link the notion to ideas about de-growth
and thus a critical appraisal of the objectives of policies more generally (Les
Convivialistes 2014). In relation to the analysis in this book those possibilities get to the
heart of why non-targeting might not exclusively be what is at stake and why unclear
policy goals are perpetuated by an emphasis on integration as a maxim without viable
alternatives.
Convivial disintegration is marked by a layering of differences and posits concerns over
how, when and where these take on salience. A superdiversity lens may thus – as I
already suggested in the introduction – point us towards considering the merits of
thinking less about integration as a goal and more about notions such as convivial
disintegration. Keeping the omnipresence of calls for integration in mind, finding new
ways to define what it is that needs to be mainstreamed seems sensible as it is out of
the question that concerns over the implications of international migration have
developed to be broadly relevant rather than marginal concerns. Thinking about
convivial disintegration allows for incorporating uncertainties and contextual
specificities in making the case for a boarder adoption of concerns with those
implications – both across levels of policy making and across policy portfolios. From this
perspective it may be possible to seek innovation in what it is that is mainstreamed
without losing sight of the specificities and tensions in local contexts and without
resorting to the dichotomous distinction between integrated and not integrated.
This does not mean losing sight of fostering a good postmigration society but it does
leave room for recognising that there is no one size fit all solution – even in light of
parallel processes of diversification. It is clear that little is won in replacing one term with
a combination of two others and more theorising will be necessary to fully develop the
notion of convivial disintegration. Yet in briefly introducing it here, I am proposing it as
something else that a superdiversity lens can add to the debates in this book – precisely
a reflexiveness about what it is that is being mainstreamed.
Conclusion

As I discussed in this chapter, beyond equating superdiversity with more diversity and
calling for mainstreamed approaches to handle those increases, there are two
arguments that in a more nuanced way link a recognition of superdiversity with
mainstreaming prerogatives. Firstly, if migration related-diversity is something that
increasingly defines social configurations in destination contexts – a thesis often
associated with thinking about superdiversity - then clearly approaches are needed that
account for the fact the migration-related diversities are relevant for all of society. This
tends to be expressed in policy initiatives that for example evoke city-citizenship to bring
various local stakeholders to the same table (eg. Amsterdam and Rotterdam two of the
UPSTREAM Cities). Secondly, channelling integration efforts by targeting origin groups
is no longer viable. This aligns with the post-ethnocentric positioning of superdiversity
research. Policy measures that are supposed to avert the presumed socially destabilising
effects of migration thus have to be addressed through other foci.
174

In the previous sections I first demonstrated why superdiversity is indeed incompatible
with ideas about more diversity requiring more integration and secondly explored how
those two latter points match mainstreaming integration prerogatives in practice. In
doing so I identified some mismatch between mainstreaming integration and thinking
about superdiversity. Based on this evaluation, , I thirdly elaborated on why I see the
crux of the mismatch in the presumption that what needs to be mainstreamed are
integration efforts – at least so long as it is not clear how integration is defined and used
an argument that rings in tune with the critically evaluated processes of policy dilution
going hand in hand with mainstreaming trends.
If we assume that the continued change and interplay of multiple differentiations – both
of which I presented as central to thinking about superdiversity - also inevitably mean
social rearrangements that entail some disintegration through the introduction of
novelty and newness (Phillimore 2015a) – then, so my final argument went, we should
think more about processes of disintegration and in particular consider that everyday
diversity may be better served by exploring modes of convivial disintegration. Generally,
it seems sensible to promote more openness to finding workable solutions to remove
barriers to convivial modes of sociality. In part this may be facilitated by asking what are
the interlinked differentiations at stake and to recognise the dual possibility of both the
integrating and simultaneously disintegrating potential of most measures applied. The
question this raises is whether this presents simply a call for reflexiveness about what is
mainstreamed or whether there is more to be learned in thinking convivial
disintegration further – I have a hunch that the latter is the case..

References
Alba, Richard, and Nancy Foner. 2016. “Integration's challenges and opportunities in the
Wealthy West.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 42 (1): 3–22.
doi:10.1080/1369183X.2015.1083770.
Amin, Ash. “Cities and the ethic of care for the stranger.”.
Appadurai, Arjun. 2006. Fear of small numbers: An essay on the geography of anger.
Public planet books. Durham: Duke University Press.
Arnaut, Karel, Jan Blommaert, Ben Rampton, and Massimiliano Spotti, eds. 2016.
Language and superdiversity. New York: Routledge.
Banting, Keith, and Will Kymlicka. 2013. “Is there really a retreat from multiculturalism
policies? New evidence from the multiculturalism policy index.” Comp Eur Polit 11 (5):
577–98. doi:10.1057/cep.2013.12.
Bauböck, Rainer, and Peter Scholten. 2016. “Introduction to the special issue: “Solidarity
in diverse societies: beyond neoliberal multiculturalism and welfare chauvinism”.” CMS
4 (1): 797. doi:10.1186/s40878-016-0025-z.
Benton, Meghan, Helen McCarthy, and Elizabeth Collet. 2015. “Into the Mainstream:
Rethinking public services for diverse and mobile populations.”.

175

Biehl, Kristen S. 2014. “Spatializing diversities, diversifying spaces: Housing experiences
and home space perceptions in a migrant hub of Istanbul.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 38
(4): 596–607. doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.980293.
Blommaert, Jan. 2013. Ethnography, superdiversity and linguistic landscapes: Chronicles
of complexity. Critical Language and Literacy Studies 18. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Boccagni, Paolo. 2014. “(Super)diversity and the migration–social work nexus: A new
lens on the field of access and inclusion?” Ethnic and Racial Studies 38 (4): 608–20.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.980291.
Bolzoni, Magda, Enrico Gargiulo, and Michele Manocchi. 2015. “The social
consequences of the denied access to housing for refugees in urban settings: The case
of Turin, Italy.” International Journal of Housing Policy 15 (4): 400–417.
doi:10.1080/14616718.2015.1053337.
Boswell, Christina. 2007. “Theorizing Migration Policy: Is There a Third Way?” Int
Migration Rev 41 (1): 75–100. doi:10.1111/j.1747-7379.2007.00057.x.
Bozec, Géraldine, and Patrick Simon, eds. 2014. Integration policies in France:
Mainstreaming to increase actions towards immigrants or to dilute them into social
policies?
Brubaker, Rogers. 2008. Nationalist politics and everyday ethnicity in a Transylvanian
town. [Pbk. ed.]. Princeton, N.J. Princeton University Press.
Caponio, Tiziana, Olga Jubany Baucells, and Berta Güell. 2015. “Civic integration policies
from below: Accounting for processes of convergence and divergence in four European
cities.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 39 (5): 878–95. doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.1080379.
Catney, Gemma, Nissa Finney, and Liz Twigg. 2011. “Diversity and the Complexities of
Ethnic Integration in the UK: Guest Editors' Introduction.” Journal of Intercultural Studies
32 (2): 107–14. doi:10.1080/07256868.2011.547171.
Collet, Elizabeth. 2013. “The integration needs of mobile EU citizens: Impediments and
opportunities.”.
Crul, Maurice. 2016. “Super-diversity vs. assimilation: How complex diversity in
majority–minority cities challenges the assumptions of assimilation.” Journal of Ethnic
and Migration Studies 42 (1): 54–68. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2015.1061425.
Czaika, Mathias, and Hein de Haas. 2014. “The Globalization of Migration: Has the World
Become More Migratory?” Int Migr Rev 48 (2): 283–323. doi:10.1111/imre.12095.
Dancygier, Rafaela M., and Michael J. Donnelly. 2013. “Sectoral Economies, Economic
Contexts, and Attitudes toward Immigration.” The journal of politics 75 (1).
doi:10.1017/S0022381612000849.
Gebhardt, Dirk. 2015. “When the state takes over: Civic integration programmes and the
role of cities in immigrant integration.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 42 (5):
742–58. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2015.1111132.

176

Gidley, Ben. 2012. “Five principles of integration: policies and inclusion.” Accessed
September 15, 2016. http://www.compas.ox.ac.uk/2012/five-principles-of-integrationpolicies-and-inclusion/.
Gilroy, Paul. 2009. After empire: Melancholia or convivial culture? Repr. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Hannerz, Ulf. 1992. Cultural complexity: Studies in the social organization of meaning.
New York, NY: Columbia Univ. Press.
Heil, Tilmann. 2015. “Conviviality: (Re)negotiating minimal consensus.” In Routledge
international handbook of diversity studies, edited by Steven Vertovec, 317–24.
Routledge international handbooks. New York: Routledge.
Hoehne, Jutta, and Ines Michalowski. 2016. “Long-Term Effects of Language Course
Timing on Language Acquisition and Social Contacts: Turkish and Moroccan Immigrants
in Western Europe.” Int Migr Rev 50 (1): 133–62. doi:10.1111/imre.12130.
Hogan-Brun, Gabrielle. 2012. “Language planning in urban spaces.” Current Issues in
Language Planning 13 (3): 145–47. doi:10.1080/14664208.2012.722378.
Jong, Sara de. 2015. “Converging logics? Managing migration and managing diversity.”
Journal
of
Ethnic
and
Migration
Studies
42
(3):
341–58.
doi:10.1080/1369183X.2015.1074857.
Les Convivialistes. 2014. Das konvivialistische Manifest: Für eine neue Kunst des
Zusammenlebens. Edited by Frank Adloff and Claus Leggewie. X-Texte zu Kultur und
Gesellschaft. Bielefeld: Transcript.
Magnusson, Warren. 2011. Politics of urbanism: Seeing like a city. Interventions.
London: Taylor & Francis Routledge.
Meissner, Fran. 2015. “Migration in migration-related diversity? The nexus between
superdiversity and migration studies.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 38 (4): 556–67.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.970209.
Meissner, Fran. 2016. Socialising with Diversity: Relational Diversity through a
Superdiversity Lens. 1st ed. 2016. Global Diversities. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Meissner, Fran, and Steven Vertovec. 2015. “Comparing super-diversity.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies 38 (4): 541–55. doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.980295.
Mitchell, J. C. “The situational Perspective.” In Mitchell 1987 – Cities, society, 1–33.
Nowicka, M., and S. Vertovec. 2014. “Comparing convivialities: Dreams and realities of
living-with-difference.” European Journal of Cultural Studies 17 (4): 341–56.
doi:10.1177/1367549413510414.
Padilla, Beatriz, Joana Azevedo, and Antonia Olmos-Alcaraz. 2015. “Superdiversity and
conviviality: Exploring frameworks for doing ethnography in Southern European
intercultural
cities.”
Ethnic
and
Racial
Studies
38
(4):
621–35.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.980294.

177

Phillimore, Jenny. 2013. “Housing, Home and Neighbourhood Renewal in the Era of
Superdiversity: Some Lessons from the West Midlands.” Housing Studies 28 (5): 682–
700. doi:10.1080/02673037.2013.758242.
Phillimore, Jenny. 2015a. “Delivering maternity services in an era of superdiversity: The
challenges of novelty and newness.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 38 (4): 568–82.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2015.980288.
Phillimore, Jenny. 2015b. “Embedded Integration and Organisational Change in Housing
Providers in the UK.” Social Policy & Society, 1–14. doi:10.1017/S1474746415000639.
Schinkel, Willem. 2013. “The imagination of ‘society’ in measurements of immigrant
integration.”
Ethnic
and
Racial
Studies
36
(7):
1142–61.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2013.783709.
Schönwälder, Karen. 2016. Diversity and contact: Immigration and social interaction in
German cities. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Silverstein, Michael. 2015. “How language communities intersect: Is “superdiversity” an
incremental or transformative condition?” Language & Communication 44: 7–18.
Söhn, Janina. 2013. “Unequal Welcome and Unequal Life Chances: How the State Shapes
Integration Opportunities of Immigrants.” Arch. eur. sociol. 54 (02): 295–326.
doi:10.1017/S0003975613000155.
Vertovec, Steven. 2007. “Super-diversity and its implications.” Ethnic and Racial Studies
30 (6): 1024–54. doi:10.1080/01419870701599465.
Vertovec, Steven. 2012. ““Diversity” and the Social Imaginary.” Arch. eur. sociol. 53 (03):
287–312. doi:10.1017/S000397561200015X.
Vertovec, Steven, ed. 2015a. Diversities Old and New. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Vertovec, Steven. 2015b. “Introduction: Migration, Cities, Diversities ‘Old’ and ‘New’.”
In Diversities Old and New, edited by Steven Vertovec, 1–22. London: Palgrave
Macmillan UK.
Vertovec, Steven. 2016. “Super-diversity as concept and approach: whence it came,
where it’s at, and whither it’s going.” ‘Super-Diversity: A Transatlantic Conversation’,
New
York,
April
4.
http://www.mmg.mpg.de/online-media/onlinelectures/2016/steven-vertovec-mpi-mmg-super-diversity-as-concept-and-approachwhence-it-came-where-its-at-and-whither-its-going/.
Wessendorf, Susanne. 2014. Commonplace diversity: social relations in a super-diverse
context: Social relations in a super-diverse context. Global Diversities. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Wise, Amanda, and Greg Noble. 2016. “Convivialities: An Orientation.” Journal of
Intercultural Studies 37 (5): 423–31. doi:10.1080/07256868.2016.1213786.
Wise, Amanda, and Selvaraj Velayutham. 2009. Everyday multiculturalism. Houndmills,
Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.

178

Ye, Junjia. 2016a. “Spatialising the politics of coexistence: Gui ju (规矩) in Singapore.”
Trans Inst Br Geogr 41 (1): 91–103. doi:10.1111/tran.12107.
Ye, Junjia. 2016b. “The ambivalence of familiarity: Understanding breathable diversity
through fleeting encounters in Singapore's Jurong West.” Area 48 (1): 77–83.
doi:10.1111/area.12237.

179

Beyond migrant integration.
Mainstreaming as a governance challenge
Peter Scholten and Ilona van Breugel (eds)

1

[Bios authors - add]

1. CONCEPTUALIZING MAINSTREAMING IN INTEGRATION GOVERNANCE – PETER
SCHOLTEN AND ILONA VAN BREUGEL
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
Background

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Conceptualising mainstreaming

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Outline of the book

Error! Bookmark not defined.

2. MAINSTREAMING AND REDEFINING THE IMMIGRANT INTEGRATION DEBATE IN OLD
MIGRATION COUNTRIES. A CASE STUDY OF FRANCE, THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE
NETHERLANDS – PATRICK SIMON
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
3. MAINSTREAMING BY ACCIDENT IN THE NEW-MIGRATION COUNTRIES: THE ROLE OF
NGOS IN SPAIN AND POLAND - IGNACY JÓŹWIAK, MARÍA SÁNCHEZ-DOMÍNGUEZ, DANIEL
SORANDO
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
Introduction

Error! Bookmark not defined.

The impact of international migration in Poland and Spain.

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Migrant integration policies in Poland and Spain.

Error! Bookmark not defined.

The effects of dependency on NGOs for immigrant integration.

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Conclusions: mainstreaming happens.

Error! Bookmark not defined.

4.

IMMIGRANT INTEGRATION MAINSTREAMING AT THE CITY LEVEL - OLE JENSEN
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.

Introduction

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Cities and diversity

Error! Bookmark not defined.

National and local policy frames

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Proxy strategies

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Diversity proofing

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Conclusion

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Bibliography:

Error! Bookmark not defined.

5. IMMIGRANT INTEGRATION MAINSTREAMING AT THE EU LEVEL - ELIZABETH
COLLETT, HELEN MCCARTHY AND MEGHAN BENTON ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
Introduction

Error! Bookmark not defined.

2

Mainstreaming Integration Policy across the European Commission

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Tools to promote mainstreaming

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Remaining Challenges

Error! Bookmark not defined.

The Impact of the Refugee Crisis

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Conclusion

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Bibliography

Error! Bookmark not defined.

6. THE POLITICS OF MAINSTREAMING: THE RATIONALE BEHIND MAINSTREAMING ILONA VAN BREUGEL AND PETER SCHOLTEN
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
Introduction

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Searching for the rationale behind mainstreaming

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Comparing types of mainstreaming

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Comparing mainstreaming processes

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Explaining mainstreaming

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Conclusions

Error! Bookmark not defined.

7. MAINSTREAMING IN PRACTICE; THE EFFICIENCIES AND DEFICIENCIES OF
MAINSTREAMING FOR STREET-LEVEL BUREAUCRATS - BEN GIDLEY, PETER SCHOLTEN AND
ILONA VAN BREUGEL
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
Introduction

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Integration governance at the street-bureaucrat level

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Methods

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Mainstreaming in Education

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Mainstreaming in Social cohesion

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Neighbourhood policy

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Analysis

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Conclusions

Error! Bookmark not defined.

8. THE DILUTION OF THE ULTIMATE GOAL? LESSONS FROM GENDER MAINSTREAMING
– PETRA MEIER
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
The prerequisites for gender mainstreaming and for mainstreaming integration policies
Bookmark not defined.

Error!

3

The assumption of social change in gender mainstreaming and what it says about integration policies
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Mainstreaming gender equality or integration and more emphasis on prerequisites
not defined.

Error! Bookmark

The understanding of gender or where gender mainstreaming and mainstreaming integration policies
finally meet
Error! Bookmark not defined.

10.
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION POLICIES IN THE MAINSTREAM – PATRICK SIMON ERROR!
BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
11.
MAINSTREAMING INTERCULTURALISM IN CITIES: POLICY PARADIGM CHANGE
AND FORMATION – RICHARD ZAPATA-BARRERO
ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.
Introduction: the Intercultural debate acquis: examining mainstreaming and interculturalism
magnetism.
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Framing the policy paradigm change: Beating three multicultural idols

Error! Bookmark not defined.

MIc policy paradigm main philosophy: problem-solving approach and the pragmatic turn on diversity
management
Error! Bookmark not defined.
MIc is a more appropriate framework for dealing with the complexity of current super-diverse
societies and transnational minds
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Conclusions: the advantages of MIc

Error! Bookmark not defined.

12.
MAINSTREAMING AND SUPERDIVERSITY: BEYOND MORE INTEGRATION- FRAN
MEISSNER [FIRST DRAFT]
165
Superdiversity terminological clarifications

166

Superdiversity and its link to mainstreaming integration – reflecting on empirical chapters

168

Integration as a maxim?

171

Conclusion

174

14.
CONCLUSIONS - PETER SCHOLTEN AND ILONA VAN BREUGEL ERROR! BOOKMARK
NOT DEFINED.
EPILOGUE; MAINSTREAMING AND SOCIAL CLASSIFICATION – DVORA YANOW
BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.

ERROR!

4

5

