Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.22

Pp. 319-332

The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill
Mohd Azmi Zakaria
Sekolah Berasrama Penuh Integrasi Selandar,
Melaka, Malaysia
Azlina Abdul Aziz
Faculty of Education,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia

Abstract
This paper presents a part of a study on the teaching of narrative writing by incorporating Digital
Storytelling. Writing skill is an essential component in mastering English because it incorporates
all elements in English. By integrating technology in the learning process, students would be able
to improve their writing skill. In Malaysia, students’ performance in examination has declined in
recent years since the marks are based mostly on students’ writing. This research aims to know the
impact of Digital Storytelling towards Malaysian secondary school students by investigating its
impact on content, grammar, vocabulary and overall performance. It also explores students'
perception of Digital Storytelling. This quasi-experimental study involved 52 Form four students
from a fully-residential school in Melaka who were chosen using convenient sampling as part of
the controlled and experimental groups. Data were collected from pre-tests, post-tests and a semistructured interview. The quantitative data were analyzed using mean analysis, Wilcoxon Signed
Tank Test and Independent t-Test while qualitative data were analyzed using thematic analysis.
Findings show that there is a significant difference in the score before and after the intervention
but there is no significant difference between the score of the experimental group and the
controlled group. Participants stated that DS motivates them to write and improves their writing.
It is hoped that this study would provide an alternative to teaching narrative writing and adds to
the current pool of literature. It is suggested for future researchers to conduct purposive sampling
which could yield different results.
Keywords: digital storytelling, education, ESL, narrative writing skills, technology
Cite as: Zakaria, M. A., & Abdul Aziz, A. A. (2019). The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL
Narrative Writing Skill. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5). 319332. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.22

319

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

Introduction
One of the key subjects under 21st Century Learning (21CL) is the English language. Students are
required to master all English language skills namely listening, speaking, reading and writing.
While all skills are important, writing is considered as the most crucial skill. As writing is
interrelated with other three skills i.e. listening, speaking and reading, indirectly it helps to improve
those skills (Saed & Al-Omari, 2014). Other than that, Maghsoudi and Haririan (2013), mention
that writing provokes thinking, makes students concentrate and manage ideas, and nurtures their
summarizing, analyzing and criticizing ability. One genre of writing is narrative writing. It serves
to inform function, report events that happened or tell stories (Abdel-Hack & Ahmed Helwa,
2014). Students encounter several challenges during the process of writing such as making
grammatical errors and producing better content (Teo, 2006). The question is, how to improve
narrative writing skill? Abdel-Hack and Ahmed Helwa (2014) suggested that teachers should
incorporate the use of Digital Storytelling (DS) in the learning and teaching process. With the
emergence of Web 2.0, there are numerous tools on the Internet such as DS that can enhance
students’ narrative writing skills. Reinders (2011) explains it as the use of text, audio, music,
videos and photos to form a digital story. Garrard (2011), as cited by Siti Mariam et al. (2016),
assert that there is absence of academic researches that prove DS can increase the standards of
literacy in writing.
Chung and Melor (2016) point out that the level of proficiency of Malaysian students is far
from satisfactory although they had learned English in school for 11 to 13 years. This can be proven
by students’ achievement in the Malaysian Certificate of Education (SPM) examination. In SPM
2017, the grade point average (GPA) for English was 5.84 with the percentage of failures was
20.1%. From the total number of candidates in 2017, which was 412,308 students, 82,874 of them
failed English subject. In the following year, the GPA was 5.98 (Lembaga Peperiksaan Malaysia,
2018) with the failure rate of 20.6%. The number of failures for English subject for SPM 2018 was
80,113 students from a total 388, 899 students. The high number of failures could be due to the
format of the English paper itself. SPM English paper is divided into two papers. The first one is
essay writing and in paper 2, there are questions on summary writing and answering the literature
question on the novel they have learnt before. Overall, the students need to answer written tasks
with a total mark of 115 out of 155 or 76% of the total mark. Hence, writing is a very important
skill for Malaysian English as a second language (ESL) secondary school students. If they could
not be proficient in that skill, it would lead to poor performance in their SPM results. From the
statistics mentioned earlier, it implies that ESL students are not competent enough in writing.
Previous researchers have stated that there are possible solutions to overcoming ESL
students’ weakness in writing skills. One of them is by using online educational tools such as DS
which was found to be able to improve writing skill in many aspects (Abdel-Hack & Ahmed
Helwa, 2014; Duman & Göcen, 2015; Leong & Jafre, 2018; Pardo, 2014; Rahimi & Yadollahi,
2017; Sepp & Bandi-Rao, 2015; Siti Mariam et al., 2016; Thonghattha et al., 2016; Tsigani &
Nikolakopoulou, 2018; Yee & Kee, 2017). Even though there have been many studies on writing
skill, but the study on ESL secondary fully-residential school students’ narrative writing to our
best knowledge is quite limited and the researcher feels that a study in this area needs to be carried
out as there is a need to know the impact of DS towards Malaysian secondary fully-residential
school students.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

320

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

This paper attempts to answer the following questions:
1.
2.

What is the impact of DS in improving ESL secondary school students’ narrative writing
essay in terms of vocabulary, grammar, content and overall performance?
What are students' perceptions of the use of DS in improving ESL secondary school
students’ narrative writing skill?

The following section in this article will discuss the literature review associated with the use of
DS in narrative writing. After that, the methodology of data collection is explained and followed
by the analysis of the data gathered. The final section is the discussion of the data analysed earlier.
Literature Review
This research is based on the constructivism theory which was pioneered by Jean Piaget and Lev
Vygotsky. Piaget’s theory of constructivism is based on cognitive development while Vygotsky’s
work is about social constructivism (Sanders, 2016). These two psychologists are two of the most
prominent figures in the field of constructivism. First of all, the theory of constructivism describes
how knowledge is constructed when the student is given the material. Two important branches of
constructivism are cognitive constructivism by Jean Piaget and social constructivism by Lev
Vygotsky. According to Piaget, students construct knowledge through their experience. Whenever
they experience something new, they would construct new schemata based on their previous
experience. Sanders (2016), who cited Piaget (1964) believes that students are individual
constructors of knowledge. They do not just sit and listen to the teacher. Instead, they take the
knowledge and interpret this new material according to their previous existing knowledge (Elliot
et al., 2000). When this process only happens within an individual, it is called individual or
psychological constructivism. On the other hand, social constructivism was pioneered by Lev
Vygotsky, a Russian psychologist. In the broad context of social constructivism, when students
collaborate to solve certain tasks, they are constructing knowledge during the process. This is
called Social Constructivism. Under this theory, through the concept of scaffolding, students
should interact with the teachers and their friends to construct knowledge (Masek & Yamin, 2010).
It is similar when students are influenced by their peers or by their family at home, they would go
through the process of constructing their meaning of the knowledge that they get (Elliot et al.,
2000). The theory of constructivism can best be seen in the writing task. When students learn to
write or try to complete a writing task, they are applying this theory.
Writing is a form of human communication. It is the visual form of the language
(Rahmawati, 2017). Byrne (1988) says that in writing, we write symbols to represent the sounds
that we make but they should be arranged according to the correct order to form words and words
should be arranged accordingly to form sentences. Furthermore, when we write several sentences
in an order and they are connected in a certain particular order, they form texts. Therefore, writing
requires a special skill so that those symbols and signs can be arranged in the right manner and the
reader can understand what is written by the writer. There is a need for writers to be competent in
making sentences and have a good range of vocabulary (Sulaiman, 2017). Anita (2016) highlights
that a person needs to be proficient with the elements of writing, namely vocabulary, grammar,
content, mechanics, organization and also style. This is echoed by Hapsari and Sukavatee (2018)
who stated that writing skill requires a few elements such as composition, vocabulary, grammar
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

321

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

and mechanics. Yee and Kee (2017) mention that a writer needs to develop and manage ideas
before transforming them into readable text and at the same time making sure the spelling,
punctuation, grammar and others are correct.
To make writing more meaningful, there are certain writing processes that writers go
through to complete a writing task. Primarily, there are two types of writing processes. The first
one is product-based approach and the other one is process-based approach. The product-based
approach is the traditional way of teaching writing whereby the emphasis is on the final product
by mimicking a model text (Yee & Kee, 2017). Meanwhile, the process-based approach
emphasises on the process of writing itself by which the various stages and activities that writers
have to go through will improve the development of the language used (Yee & Kee, 2017). A
writing process consists of planning, production, editing and revision as well as the integration of
content and the coordination of the whole writing (Kelly & Melor, 2016). The stages or process of
writing, as indicated by Tompkins (2008), is a process which the emphasis is more on what the
writers think and do when they write, rather than on the finished product. Tompkins (2008), had
divided the writing process into five stages namely prewriting, drafting, revising, editing and
publishing. The process of writing applies the theory of constructivism. It is especially more
relatable with this theory if the writing task is carried out in groups because the writers can
construct new knowledge when they interact with each other.
Writing can be divided into many genres. One of them is narrative writing. Narrative
writing is described as a series of events that are connected through time and causation (Trapsilo
2016). Sulaiman (2017) defines it as events in the form of a story. Adam (2015) explained it clearly
by defining narrative writing as writing stories or reporting about certain events, which can be
personal experiences or any real or fictitious events. It is usually written from the view-point of
the first person which includes feelings, sensory details and other attractive elements to the readers
(Hapsari & Sukavatee, 2018). There are five elements of narrative writing and they are plot,
setting, characters, theme, and point of view (Tompkins, 2008).
It is a general agreement that DS is telling a story in the form of electronic. The users can
combine text, audio, music, videos and pictures to create a digital story (Reinders, 2011). Later,
the product can be shared on a computer or published on the internet (Robin, 2008). He also stated
that there are two ways DS can be benefited in education. The first one is Teacher-created Digital
Stories. Teachers create DS as a tool to improve students’ understanding of certain topics or
content. Other than that, the greatest benefit of DS is when it is created by the students. Studentbased Digital Storytelling is the second way of using it the classroom. Teachers can assign students
to develop a DS which can be done individually or in a small group (Robin, 2008). This will
improve students’ knowledge and academic skills as they would do research on the topic given,
search for materials and create a Digital Story (Alismail, 2015). Aside from that, DS also promotes
21st Century skills such as digital literacy skills, global skills, technology literacy skills, visual
literacy skills and information literacy skills (Robin, 2008). Hence, acquiring narrative writing
skill with the help of DS shows that the learning theory of constructivism is the main underlying
theory.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

322

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

Previous studies have shown that DS is beneficial in improving students’ writing and/or
narrative writing skill. A research was administered by Abdel-Hack and Ahmed Helwa (2014) in
Egypt and the finding claims that the improvement on students' narrative writing skill is significant.
In America, Sepp and Bandi-Rao (2015) examined the use of DS in New York city, specifically at
a community college. They found that the participants, who were 19 ESL students, improved their
writing skills after they had used DS in their writing class. A more recent research was carried out
in Malaysia concentrating on students’ point of view towards DS, whereby Siti Mariam et al.
(2016) discovered that when working collaboratively, students managed to boost their narrative
writing skill. Furthermore, Rahimi and Yadollahi (2017) highlighted that DS has a positive impact
on students’ literacy skills which are reading and writing skills. Leong and Jafre (2018) conducted
a case study with six primary five pupils in Malaysia regarding the use of DS. The research posited
that there were improvements in their language skills and one of them was their writing skill.
Other than that, it is notable to mention that Duman and Göcen (2015) found that DS can
improve students' vocabulary when they used DS with pre-service teachers in Turkey. They found
that there was richness in the participants’ vocabulary compared to before the implementation of
DS. Another study carried out by Leong and Jafre (2018) with six primary five pupils in Malaysia
showed that the participants perceived that their vocabulary has improved after the implementation
of DS.
Pardo (2014) mentions that participants who used DS also have improved their level of
grammar proficiency. It was found that 21 undergraduates in Valencia had shown that there were
fewer grammatical errors after they had experienced DS. Duman and Göcen (2015) also mention
that the participants in their study had shown that there was more accurate use of grammar
compared to before. In Turkey, a case study was carried out with 63 5th grade English as a foreign
language (EFL) students and 3 teachers to identify the impact of DS among the participants. At
the end of the study, the researchers found out that the participants had a good command of
grammar rules and mechanics including spelling, capitalization, as well as punctuation (Dollar &
Tolu, 2015).
Other than improving vocabulary and grammar, DS can also improve students’ creativity
and contents of the writing. Researchers such as Pardo (2014) and Duman and Göcen (2015) have
all agreed that DS is useful to help students to develop original ideas. Meanwhile, in Malaysia,
Yee and Kee (2017) carried out qualitative research with eight student teachers and their finding
also showed that the writing quality of the participants had increased, specifically in the aspects of
organisation and content. This goes to show that after experiencing DS, participants can improve
their writing content.
Previous studies have shown that DS improves students writing skill in various aspects.
But, one crucial point to highlight is that DS also motivates students to write. This is once again
proven by Thonghattha et al. (2016) in their research whereby they stated that DS increases
motivation and intention towards the writing process. Likewise, Yee and Kee (2017) highlight that
motivation increased and students learnt writing in a fun way. Apart from that, Tsigani and
Nikolakopoulou (2018) also claimed that in a case study involving 11 6th grade pupils in Greece
showed high motivation and commitment towards their work.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

323

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

With all the studies mentioned, it prompts the researcher to further investigate the issue
regarding ESL secondary school students writing in a more specific focus. With regards to
improving students’ performance in English SPM examination, the researcher would venture into
narrative writing and how DS can assist students’ writing ability. Although there have been
numerous studies on ESL writing skill, but the study on Malaysian ESL secondary boarding school
students’ narrative writing is found rather limited and the researcher feels it is high time for a
study to be carried out as there is a need to know the impact of DS towards Malaysian secondary
boarding school students’ narrative writing skill.
Methodology
This research intends to investigate the impact of DS on ESL secondary school students' narrative
writing skill. To achieve that, a quasi-experimental study was carried out. The researcher
conducted a pre-and-post test to evaluate the performance of the students before and after the
implementation of DS. The intervention took 16 hours of lesson time. There were two groups of
participants involved: controlled group and experimental group. It is important to note that based
on the information from their English teachers, they had not learnt narrative essay writing prior to
the pre-test. After the intervention, both groups sat for a post-test to determine their level of
narrative writing ability. The researcher used the 2017 SPM English narrative essay question and
for both tests, the students would answer the same question. The validity and reliability of the
question were not tested since the question was taken from the real SPM question which was
constructed by experts and it is considered suitable for Form 4 students who would sit for SPM
the following year. In pursuance of collecting qualitative data, the researcher conducted an
interview session with the participants. The researcher chose to perform a semi-structured
interview. The questions were adapted from Zainudin's (2016) research interview questions. The
interview session was conducted after the post-test was carried out.
For this study, the participants were from a fully residential school in Selandar, Melaka.
The school is situated in a rural area in Melaka whereby the school itself is a co-educational school.
It was chosen because it is a fully residential school and has students from different backgrounds.
They are selected students from their Ujian Pencapaian Sekolah Rendah (UPSR) examination
results and most of them come from the southern part of Peninsular Malaysia. The background
diversity of the students is suitable to carry out this research as their background will not influence
the outcome of this study. Another reason for choosing this school is because of the accessibility
factor. The researcher was allowed to access the school and carry out the research. The participants
were selected from Form four students of the school through convenient sampling because the
school does not implement simultaneous English lesson and the researcher could not choose the
participants specifically for this research. Hence the reason why the researcher adopted
convenience sampling. There were two groups of participants i.e. a controlled group with 25
students and an experimental group with 27 students. The researcher chose Form four students
because they will sit for SPM examination the following year.
The scores were obtained from the pre and posttest which were assessed using a writing
assessment adapted from Wong (1989)’s Qualitative Writing Scale. After the scores were
gathered, the researcher analysed the data to look for data normality. After that, mean scores for
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

324

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Zakaria & Abdul

The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Aziz

both tests to determine which mean score was higher and if there was an improvement or not after
the intervention program. Apart from that, the researcher made a comparison between the means
of both groups to come up with a conclusion of which group performs better. The next analysis
was to figure out whether there was any significant difference after the intervention program. Not
only that, a test was also carried out to check if there was any significant difference between the
two groups. As for the data gathered from the interview session, the researcher conducted a
thematic analysis to get an insight of the participants’ perception towards DS.
Findings
This study was carried out to investigate the impact of DS on narrative writing skill of ESL
secondary school students, especially fully-residential school students. All data were analysed
using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 23.
Before further analysis was carried out, it is important to know the nature of data
distribution throughout the sample whether they are normally distributed or not. Since the number
of samples selected is less than 50, a Shapiro-Wilk test is suitable to be carried out (Razali & Yap,
2011). Table 1 shows the result from the Shapiro-Wilk test.
Table 1 Shapiro-Wilk normality test result
Groups
Tests
Content
Experimental
Pre-test
0.000
Group
Post-test
0.02
(n = 27)
Controlled
Pre-test
0.001
Group
Post-test
0.004
(n = 25)
p > 0.05

Language
0.000
0.001

Vocabulary
0.000
0.004

Overall
0.013
0.118

0.007
0.002

0.000
0.002

0.163
0.21

In summary, all data collected show that they are not normally distributed (p < 0.05) except for
overall post-test score for the experimental group, overall score for pre-test and post-test for the
controlled group (p > 0.05)
RQ1. What is the impact of DS in improving ESL secondary school students’ narrative
writing essay in terms of vocabulary, grammar, content and overall performance?
To answer this question, data were collected from the pre-test and post-test and were analysed to
look for the mean scores for both tests from both groups. Table 2 shows the result from the
analysis:
Table 2 Mean scores analysis
Groups
Test
Content
Experimental
Pre-test
2.6
Group
Post-test
3.3
(n = 27)
Controlled
Pre-test
3.0
Group
Post-test
3.2
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Language
5.2
6.5

Vocabulary
2.4
3.3

Overall
13.3
16.6

5.5
6.2

2.8
3.2

14.5
15.9
325

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

(n = 25)
From the analysis, it can be seen that all scores for post-tests are higher than the pre-tests in all
categories. In comparison between the experimental group and the controlled group, the result
shows that the mean score for the pre-test for the experimental group is lower than the controlled
group. However, after the intervention was carried out, the experimental group performed better
than the controlled group. This clearly shows that DS does bring a positive impact on students'
narrative writing skill.
To further analyse the data, an inferential analysis was carried out to check whether the
improvement is significant or not. To achieve that the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was the most
suitable test since the data are not normally distributed as shown in Table 1.
Table 3 Wilcoxon Signed Rank test result for the experimental group.
Sum of Ranks
Asymp. Sig. (2tailed)
Content
18.00
0.002
Language
13.00
0.003
Vocabulary
0.00
0.000
Overall
12.00
0.000
p < 0.05

Probability

Significant
difference

Table 3 shows the data analysis using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test for the experimental group.
The Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was conducted to check whether there is a significant difference
after the intervention program. Research shows that there is a significant difference between the
scores before and after the program with w (26) = 12.00, p < 0.05 for overall performance. This
proves that DS can improve students’ narrative writing skill.
Table 4 Wilcoxon Signed Rank test result for the controlled group.
Sum of
Asymp. Sig. (2Probability
Ranks
tailed)
Content
32.50
0.317
No significant difference
Language
12.00
0.020
Vocabulary
13.00
0.012
Significant different
Overall
25.00
0.003
p < 0.05
Table 4 shows the result of Wilcoxon Signed Rank test for the controlled group which was
carried out to see whether the scores of post-test have any significant difference compared to pretest after being taught without DS. Research shows that there is a significant difference between
the scores of the pre and post-test with w (24) = 25.00, p < 0.05 for overall performance. However,
there is no significant difference between the score of content for pre-test and post-test with w (24)
= 32.50, p > 0.05. This finding shows that the controlled group’s improvement after they had learnt
how to write narrative writing is significant but not significant for content.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

326

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Zakaria & Abdul

The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Table 5 Independent t-Test results for the post-test.
Mean
Std
Leven’s
Deviation
Test
Experimental
16.56
4.74
Controlled
15.92
4.05
0.606
p < 0.05

Sig. (2tailed)
0.607

Aziz

Probability
Not
significant

Since both data are normally distributed, an Independent t-Test was carried out to check
whether there is a significant difference in the improvement of the experimental and controlled
group after the intervention program. Research shows that there is no significant difference in the
improvement between the two groups with t (50) = 0.518, p > 0.05. Hence this shows that the
difference in the mean score is not significant.
RQ2. What are students' perceptions on the use of DS in improving ESL secondary school
students' narrative writing skill?
After the quantitative data are collected, a semi-structured interview was carried out to answer the
above question. Nine participants were involved in the interview session whereby they were
interviewed individually. During the interview, by participants eight and nine, the data gathered
was considered saturated. Each interview was transcribed and analysed thematically. As a result,
two categories were identified.
1. Digital Storytelling motivates students to write.
In the interview, all participants were asked about their opinion regarding DS. All participants
expressed their positive feeling towards DS. Six participants mentioned that they found DS as
interesting.
“I feel it’s interesting.”
“More interesting because it has … aaa … pictures …”
“ I feel interested.”
They found DS interesting because of various reasons such as the use of pictures and computers
during the writing process which help them a lot in narrative writing.
“ … we can insert pictures other than writing.”
“So, when I use the computer I doesn’t feel sleepy.”
“Because I like learn in computer.”
“I just need to type.”
Other than that, one participant highlighted that she felt excited about creating DS. She stated, "I
feel excited …". Another participant mentioned that he found it "a bit more easier … I can write
more easily because the picture." One participant, cheerfully answered “Happy, happy!” because
it was something new for her. Besides that, all participants were asked if they were willing to do
DS again and all of them answered similarly which is they would do it again.
2. Digital Storytelling helps them to write better.
It was found that some of the participants mentioned that DS helped them to generate ideas to write
a narrative essay because of the use of pictures in DS.
“... give me idea to write the story.”
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

“Because we can imagine how story and the character.”
“Yes, I can more imagine.”
“I can produce more ideas and make a interesting story.”
Interestingly, one participant expressed that the pictures made her difficult to write the story. When
asked further, she mentioned, "I need to think what I can do with this picture." She also clarified
that she had to adjust her story to match with the pictures and added: "after this I need to write a
story where I need to see the picture first.” Besides that, the process of creating Digital Stories
required the participant to publish their work. This stage has been beneficial to them because they
could garner more ideas by reading their friends’ Digital Stories.
“... because I see others people story so I feel inspired. So, I have more ideas.”
“... when I read my friends’ stories ... aaa ... it’s different than our group stories. So, I can
get more ideas.”
The participants also highlighted that their friends would show the grammatical errors during their
group work.
“...because we make Storybird by group, so when we write something, my friend will give
some advice.”
“When I write the story, my friend told me my wrong grammar ...”
“When we work in group, we ... we discuss our grammar.”
Furthermore, the participants managed to improve their vocabulary by searching for new words
from various websites.
“My sentence in the narrative writing become more longer.”
“Because I can use new word.”
“From internet dictionary I find the new words.”
These findings clearly show that participants think positively towards DS, which they perceive as
beneficial in improving their narrative writing skill.
Discussion
The present paper studied the impact of DS on ESL narrative writing skill. For this purpose, the
experimental group learnt narrative writing by creating digital stories while the controlled group
learnt narrative writing through the traditional method. Data collection was carried out through pre
and post-test and semi-structured interview.
The mean analyses of the data revealed that the post-test mean scores were higher than the
pretest mean scores. This proves that DS has a positive impact on narrative writing skill. This
finding echoes other previous researches' result which is DS improves narrative writing skill
(Abdel-Hack & Ahmed Helwa, 2014; Leong & Jafre, 2018; Saputro, 2013; Sepp & Bandi-Rao,
2015). To discuss further in detail, it was also found that the content, language and vocabulary
have also improved after the treatment with DS. The Wilcoxon Signed Rank test proved that there
is a significant difference after the treatment. Previous related studies have also demonstrated
similar results whereby the participants showed a significant improvement in the aspects of content
(Duman & Göcen, 2015; Pardo, 2014; Yee & Kee, 2017), grammar (Duman & Göcen, 2015;
Pardo, 2014; Ramirez, 2013) and vocabulary (Duman & Göcen, 2015; Leong & Jafre, 2018;
Ramirez, 2013). In light of this result, it can be argued that when the process of creating DS is
incorporated with the five stages of the writing process, it contributed to the development of the
experimental group's narrative writing skill. DS has certain features that improve narrative writing
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

328

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

skill. For example, the use of pictures helped the participants to generate more ideas. This is
because they can have a clear understanding of the events or scenarios in the story with the help
of pictures (Robin, 2008). On top of that, the process of creating DS also contributed to this positive
result. Participants were required to create Digital Story in groups. There would be discussions as
they worked and collaborated to create a Digital Story along the stages of process-writing. This
would lead to the construction and acquisition of knowledge. As the Theory of Constructivism
pointed out that when students interact with teachers and their friends, this would to construct
knowledge (Masek & Yamin, 2010). Hence, this shows that this process is fundamental in creating
a positive impact on narrative writing skill.
However, the independent t-test showed that the difference in the post-test mean score of
both groups are not significant (p > 0.05). Previous studies posited that although the mean score
shows improvement, it is not significant enough. This could be since the participants had not learnt
narrative writing prior to the pre-test. So, after both groups have learnt about narrative writing, it
would lead to an increase in their writing performance. Even though the controlled group learnt
narrative writing without the use of DS while the experimental group learnt narrative writing by
integrating DS in their lesson, both groups still showed improvement simply because they had
learnt something new to them. However, there was more value added to the experimental group
which was DS. Hence, the reason why the experimental group shows a higher post-test mean score
compared to the controlled. Regardless of the difference, it is still not significant. Possibly, if the
participants have already learnt narrative writing before, it is anticipated that the difference would
be significant because the experimental group experiences value-added intervention program only
throughout the experiment period. Whereby the controlled group would only repeat the previous
lesson on narrative writing.
From the interview, it can be concluded that DS motivates students to write (Thonghattha
et al., 2016; Tsigani & Nikolakopoulou, 2018; Yee & Kee, 2017). As mentioned by the
participants, they found DS interesting and felt excited about it. Yee and Kee (2017) also found
their participants experience the same thing. The reason is because pictures managed to attract
them to be involved in the writing process. It helped them to have a clear image of what they were
going to write about. On top of that, the use of computer was very appealing to them and made
them felt excited about DS. Nowadays, students are very much attracted to lessons that involve
technology. As a result of group work, participants felt that they were able to write better. This is
because they felt that they could generate ideas, improve their grammar and vocabulary (Duman
& Göcen, 2015) since they could discuss about it and help each other to improve their work. In
this situation, the Theory of Constructivism played an important role. While creating Digital
Stories, they explored the web to improve their writing in those key areas in narrative writing.
Besides, the ability explore the internet to comb for information and evaluate them to be used in
their writing is one of the 21st Century skills promoted by DS (Robin, 2008). More importantly,
they are willing to create Digital Stories again. This proves that DS motivates students to write as
they felt that it could improve their narrative writing skill.
Conclusion
This study aims to see the impact of DS on ESL narrative writing skill. Since technology plays an
important role in everyone's life, DS can capture students' interest in writing. The findings have
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

329

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

revealed the potential of DS in improving students' narrative writing. Nonetheless, it is essential
to understand that this study does not claim that DS is a definitive method that can guarantee an
improvement in narrative writing. Instead, it only suggests that DS is a tool to improve narrative
writing. It is hoped that it would create an awareness to the teachers of the alternative method of
teaching narrative writing i.e by integrating DS in the lesson. At the same time, this study will add
to the current pool of literature regarding DS except with a slight difference in the finding which
shows any result is possible given any situation. On top of that, it also can give an interesting
option for future researchers to continue and this study because of the different results.
Time was an important factor in this experimental study. The current study had limited
time to carry out this experiment because the DS tool used only allowed one month of free trial
period. So, the experiment could only be carried out for one month only. On top of that, the
participants were going to sit for their mid-year exam and the teacher-in-charge had a lot to catch
up in terms of the syllabus. Hence, a longer period was not a luxury for the researcher. For future
studies, the researcher suggests that a longer time to be allocated for the intervention program to
see whether it would yield a better result or not. Other than that, a different method of sampling
can be used such as purposive sampling. Furthermore, other researchers can focus on other
language skills which are listening, speaking and reading.
About the Authors:
Mohd Azmi Zakaria has been an English teacher since 2005 in a secondary school in Melaka,
Malaysia. He is currently pursuing a Master’s degree in Teaching English as a Second Language
(TESL) at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). His thesis is on the usage of Digital
Storytelling in narrative writing.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0251-4315
Azlina Abdul Aziz is a TESL lecturer at the Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia. She has an Ed.D in Teaching of English from Teachers College, Columbia University,
U.S.A. Her research interests are in the Teaching and Learning of Literature and Teacher
Education in TESL.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7800-3688
References
Abdel-Hack, E. M. & Ahmed Helwa, H. S. A. (2014). Using Digital Storytelling and Weblogs
Instruction to Enhance EFL Narrative Writing and Critical Thinking Skills Among EFL
Majors at Faculty of Education. International Research Journals, 5(1).
Adam, A. A. S. (2015). Developing EFL Learners’ Narrative Writing Through Using Short
Stories - The Case of Al-Baha University Students. European Journal of English Language
and Literature Studies, 3(4): 1–8.
Alismail, H. A. (2015). Integrate Digital Storytelling in Education. Journal of Education and
Practice, 6(9): 126–130.
Anita, R. (2016). Using “Storybird” for Teaching Narrative Writing. Proceeding of the Fourth
International Seminar on English Language and Teaching (ISELT-4), 230–239.
Byrne, D. (1988). Teaching Writing Skills. London:Longman.
Chung, J. & Melor, M. Y. (2016). Digital Storytelling Production as a Learning Tool in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

330

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

Improving ESL Learners’ Verbal. Asian EFL Journal Professional Teaching Articles,
3(90): 1–106.
Dollar, Y. K. & Tolu, A. T. (2015). My First Digital Story: A Case Study With 5th Grade
Turkish English Language Learners. ELT Research Journal, 4(3): 172–185.
Duman, B. & Göcen, G. (2015). The Effect of the Digital Storytelling Method on Pre-Service
Teachers’ Creative Writing Skills. Anthropologist, 20(1–2): 215–222.
Elliot, S. N., Kratochwill, T. R., Cook Littlefield, J. & Travers, J. F. (2000). Educational
Psychology: Effective Teaching, Effective Learning. Third Edit. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Garrard, D. (2011). A Case Study to Evaluate the Effectiveness of Digital Storytelling as a
Narrative Writing. Integration The Vlsi Journal.
Hapsari, E. W. & Sukavatee, P. (2018). Second Language Writing Instruction: A Recent
Practice in Indonesia. Journal of Linguistic and English Teaching, 3(1).
Kelly, J. D. & Melor, M. Y. (2016). The Effectiveness of Using Sentence Makers in Improving
Writing Performance among Pupils in Lubok Antu Rural Schools Proceeding of the
International Conference on Education in the 21th Century, 469–475.
Lembaga Peperiksaan Malaysia. (2018). Pengumuman Analisis Keputusan Sijil Pelajaran
Malaysia. Report No.
Leong, C. H. A. & Jafre, M. Z. A. (2018). Young ESL Learners’ Perception on the Effects of
Using Digital Storytelling Application in English Language Learning. Pertanika Journal
Social Science & Humanities, 26(December): 179–198.
Maghsoudi, M. & Haririan, J. (2013). The Impact of Brainstorming Strategies Iranian EFL
Learners’ Writing Skill Regarding their Social Class Status. International Journal of
Language and Linguistics, 1(1): 60.
Masek, A. & Yamin, S. (2010). Fostering Creativity from Constructivist Perspectives A
Literature Review. RCEE & RHEd (June): 1–10.
Pardo, B. S. (2014). Digital Storytelling: A Case Study of the Creation, and Narration of a Story
by EFL Learners El. Digital Education Review, (26): 74–84.
Piaget, J. (1964). Part I: Cognitive Development in Children: Piaget Development and Learning.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 2(3): 176–186.
Rahimi, M. & Yadollahi, S. (2017). Effects of offline vs. online digital storytelling on the
development of EFL learners’ literacy skills. Cogent Education, 4(1): 1–13.
Rahmawati, O. I. (2017). Think-Pair-Share: A Technique to Enhance Students’ Writing Skill.
Jurnal Pendidikan Edutama, 4(1): 49–58.
Ramirez, Y. E. H. (2013). Writing Skill Enhancement When Creating Narrative Texts Through
the Use of Collaborative Writing and the Storybird Web 2.0 Tool. Colombian Applied
Linguistics Journal, 15(2): 166.
Razali, N. M. & Yap, B. W. (2011). Power Comparisons of Shapiro-Wilk, KolmogorovSmirnov, Lilliefors and Power comparisons of Shapiro-Wilk, Kolmogorov-Smirnov,
Lilliefors and Anderson-Darling tests. Journal of Statistical Modelling and Analytics, 2(1):
21–33.
Reinders, H. (2011). Digital Storytelling in the Foreign Language Classroom.
Innovationinteaching.org 3(April): 1–9.
Robin, B. R. (2008). Digital storytelling: A powerful technology tool for the 21st century
classroom. Theory into Practice, 47(3): 220–228.
Saed, H. A. & Al-Omari, H. A. (2014). The Effectiveness of a Proposed Program Based on a
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

331

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Impact of Digital Storytelling on ESL Narrative Writing Skill

Zakaria & Abdul

Aziz

Mind Mapping Strategy in Developing the Writing Achievement of Eleventh Grade EFL
Students in Jordan and Their Attitudes Towards Writing Journal of Education and Practice,
5(18): 88–110.
Sanders, S. (2016). Critical and Creative Thinkers in Mathematics Classrooms. Journal of
Student Engagement: Education Matters, 6(1): 19–27.
Saputro, D. A. J. (2013). Digital Storytelling to Improve Students’ Mastery in Writing Narrative.
Journal of English Language Teaching, 2(1).
Sepp, M. & Bandi-Rao, S. (2015). Creating an Effective Model for Digital Storytelling in the
ESL Writing Class. CUNY Academic Works, 2(1): 76–88.
Siti Mariam, Z., Melor, M. Y., Nurhuda, M. N. & Parilah, M. S. (2016). Students’ Experience of
Using Storybird in Writing ESL Narrative Text. Creative Education, 07(15): 2107–2120.
Sulaiman. (2017). Improving Students’ Achievement in Writing Narrative Text Through
Modelling Technique in the Second Semester of the Eight-Year Students of Public Junior
High School 2 Blitar. International Research-Based Education Journal, 1(1).
Teo, A. K. (2006). Using a peer assisted writing activity to promote ESL/EFL students’
narrative writing skills. TESL Journal, 7(8): 12–25.
Thonghattha, M., Kittichartchaowalit, K. & Kittisunthonphisarn, N. (2016). Effects of Using
Storybird to Enhance Creative English Writing Ability of Mathayomsuksa III Students.
Proceeding of ISER 42nd International Conference, 41–44.
Tompkins, G. E. (2008). Teaching Writing: Balancing Process and Product. 5th Ed. New
Jersey: Pearson/Merrill Prentice Hall.
Trapsilo, P. (2016). A Think-Aloud Protocols as a Cognitive Strategy to Increase Students’
Writing Narrative Skill, Premise Journal, 5(1): 81–90.
Tsigani, C. & Nikolakopoulou, A. (2018). Digital Storytelling: A Creative Writing Study in the
Foreign Language Classroom. Educational Journal of the University of Patras UNESCO
Chair, 5(2): 68–80.
Wong, H. (1989). The Development of a Qualitative Writing Scale. Monograph. Pusat Bahasa.
Yee, B. C. & Kee, L. L. (2017). Digital Writing in English Language Writing Instruction.
International Research Journal of Language and Literature, 28: 1–16.
Zainudin, Z. (2016). Effect of Using Facebook in Collaborative Writing on ESL Students’
Writing Apprehension. National University of Malaysia.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

332

