Race, Writing, and Computation: Racial
Difference and the US Novel, 1880-2000
Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu
01.11.19
Peer-Reviewed By: Anon.
Clusters: Race
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.031
Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/6ANTB8
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu, “Race, Writing, and Computation: Racial Difference and the US Novel, 1880-2000,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. January 11, 2019.

Racial Critique and Data
This article seeks to bridge two scholarly fields often seen as incommensurable:
cultural analytics (also known as “computational criticism”) and critical race
studies.1 It does so by discovering generative points of contact between two sets
1 As with previous collaborations, this essay represents the combined efforts of all three authors.
While there was some division of labor in the research and drafting of the piece (Richard focused on
critical race scholarship and the Bible’s place in African-American literature; Hoyt on sociological
approaches to race, Megda, and black abstractionism; and Yuancheng on refining the statistical modeling), at every stage the labor was informed by collective conversations and experimentation that
blurred the presumed boundaries of our respective fields. This perpetual testing of boundaries and
knowledge domains represents for us both the excitement and ongoing challenge of this work. We
also want to thank our anonymous reviewer, Ronald Judy, Alison Langmead, and all the Novel TM
members for their feedback on the project as it evolved.

1

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

of methods that are also typically viewed as antithetical: data science and critique.
Cultural analytics is an emerging field wherein humanist scholars leverage the increasing availability of large digital corpora and the affordances of new computational tools. This allows them to study, for example, semantic and narratological
patterns in the English-language novel at the scale of centuries and across tens-ofthousands of texts. Cultural analytics is a fast-growing field, with scholars taking
on an expanding array of topics, including genre and cultural prestige. Yet there
is one topic that remains relatively understudied: race and racial difference.2 The
reasons for this elision are not hard to grasp. Computational methods demand
the quantification of one’s objects of study. It’s likely easier to accept measuring a
novel’s popularity by sales figures or classifying its genre by diction than labeling
it according to discrete racial identifiers. Such labeling is an affront to critical
race studies, which has taken as its very mission the deconstruction of racial categories.
Unsurprisingly, recent scholarship on the relationship between computation and
race has been critique-oriented. Scholars of science and technology, such as
Cathy O’Neil and Safiya A. Noble, have documented how computational algorithms used by banks and online search engines intensify racial stratification and
oppression by articulating racial minorities as fixed, quantified types that reinforce existing patterns of social inequality.3 Tara McPherson has shown that the
history of modern computation is deeply intertwined with the history of racial
formation in the US since the 1960s.4 Methods born of that earlier computational
moment are in part touched by ideologies of racial stratification. This association
goes back even further to the birth of social statistics in the nineteenth century,
a science whose history is simultaneously the history of efforts to classify people as racial types.5 One thinks of the intertwining of eugenicist thought with
foundational tools for statistical inference, or “general intelligence” tests, both of
which were used to assert the inferiority of black people and other racial minorities. Whether reflecting upon the birth of modern social statistics or the current
2 While the narrower field of cultural analytics has seen relatively little attention to the issues of
race and racial difference, our work follows in the path of scholars who have brought much needed
attention to these issues as they intersect with the digital humanities more broadly. This includes Elizabeth Dillon, Amy Earhart, Kim Gallon, Jessica Marie Johnson, Angel Nieves, and Roopika Risam,
among many others.
3 Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction (New York: Crown, 2016) and Safiya Noble, Algorithms of Oppression (New York: NYU Press, 2018).
4 Tara McPherson, “Why are the Digital Humanities so White?” in Debates in the Digital Humanities (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2016).
5 As Tukufu Zuberi notes in his own accounting of this history, “Evolutionary eugenics provided a
theoretical context for biological and social statisticians to employ enumerated data for society.” See
his Thicker than Blood: How Racial Statistics Lie (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press,
2001), 30.

2

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

flowering of machine learning, Albert Murray’s warning from 1973 appears as
sage advice: “There is little reason why Negroes should not regard contemporary
social science theory and technique with anything except the most unrelenting
suspicion.”6 Present suspicion bears a historical warrant.
Critical suspicion, of course, can also lead to critical adaptation. As Murray did
in his day, much like W.E.B Du Bois before him, and as scholars like Lauren
Klein are doing today, the association of quantitative method with structures of
racial oppression can be interrogated from the inside.7 For us, this means understanding the problematic assumptions about race that get encoded in algorithms
and computational models and adapting these models in ways that undermine
or enrich these assumptions. Inspired by the work of O’Neil, Noble, and social
scientists like Du Bois and Murray, we try to imagine what cultural analytics
might look like as a method for racial critique. With the increasing visibility of
cultural analytics as a field, a commonly heard complaint is: but what new things
does this actually teach us about culture and history? To which a scholar in critical race studies might add: what specifically do these methods tell us about the
constructed nature of racial difference and identity? This essay responds to these
questions dialectically, using a computational model to study race and literature
in order to grasp both the model’s affordances and its inadequacies. The former
provide insight into how race and writing intersect across more than a century of
US fiction. The latter are a way to critique and transform the model itself, setting
into motion a process of model instantiation and reconstruction that recursively
furthers the process of discovery.
This approach is in part inspired by an earlier scholarly attempt to bridge the gap
between two fields of humanistic inquiry seen (at the time) as deeply antithetical: critical theory and African-American literary studies. The title of our essay
is an homage to the now landmark 1985 special issue of Critical Inquiry, “Race,
Writing, and Difference,” guest edited by Henry Louis Gates Jr. and Kwame Anthony Appiah. In the collection’s introduction, Gates outlines the purpose of this
special issue as:
We must, I believe, analyze the ways in which writing relates to race,
how attitudes toward racial differences generate and structure literary texts by us and about us. We must determine how critical methods can effectively disclose the traces of ethnic differences in litera6 Albert Murray, “White Norms, Black Deviation,” The Death of White Sociology, ed. Joyce A.
Ladner (New York: Random House, 1973), 112.
7 See especially Klein’s “The Image of Absence: Archival Silence, Data Visualization, and James
Hemings,” which represents an excellent example of this emerging work. In American Literature 85,
no. 4 (December 2013): 661-688.

3

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

ture. But we must also understand how certain forms of difference
and the languages we employ to define those supposed differences
not only reinforce each other but tend to create and maintain each
other.8
As Gates writes, the main goal of the issue was to introduce “race” as a keyword
into literary studies. Its more specific gambit was to demonstrate the potential
utility of new paradigms in critical theory, such as psychoanalysis, for the study
of race and literature. “Difference” would be the mediating term. Gates sought
to leverage Derrida’s deconstruction of speech and writing to unravel otherwise
fixed categories of racial identification. However, what most stands out about the
issue is the special care that its contributors take to stage this encounter. Again
and again, they stress that “Third World critics” must critically adopt Western cultural theories, understanding the limits of such theories for non-Western texts,
and to use such incongruities to transform both text and theory. To do anything
less would be to “substitute one mode of neocolonialism for another.”9 Here we
find a useful precedent for our own project.
At the same time, we find in Gates’s useful formulation an elision. Of the many
new modes of interpretation invoked as the basis for a renewed analysis of race
and writing (“Marxist, feminist, post-structuralist”), he avoids mention of methods based in empirical evidence, such as statistics. Most likely, Gates imagined
such methods as the simple slotting of things into bins and categories, and thus,
diametrically opposed to the project of discerning the contingency of racial categories in order to unravel them. For Gates, quantification meant labeling things
(and people), and labeling things meant reifying them. Such a perspective, however, ignores methodological developments in the social sciences which have
found sophisticated ways to study race empirically that do not merely produce
crude reifications of identity, and which are often informed by the critical race
interventions of the 1980s. As humanist scholars interested in adapting quantitative methods to racial critique, we cannot ignore such developments.
Our overall aim in this article, then, is to implement a computational study of race
that is critical, reflexive, and interpretative, one that acknowledges the necessary
limits of quantitative method (in particular its categorical logic) while exploring
its affordances for thinking about racial difference at scale (its patterns and regularities). Indeed, we show how these limits and affordances can mutually inform
one another, producing a mode of racial analysis and critique commensurable
with foundational critical race studies but also with more recent work in the field
by scholars who have sought to destabilize even further the solidity of “blackness”
8 Henry
9 Gates,

Louis Gates, “Editor’s Introduction,” Critical Inquiry (Autumn 1985), 15.
“Editor’s Introduction,” 15.

4

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

as an interpretive category. In concrete terms, we develop a case study focused
on race, religion, and the US novel. We build a model to test if novelists marked
as “white” versus “black” produce different narratological effects with respect to
the interaction of race and religious authority, in particular the authority of the
Bible. We then identify a set of general patterns in these effects that we interpret
through our model’s reliance on reified categories of racial identity. Finally, we
propose a method for deforming this very categorical thinking. To wit, we reread the same large-scale patterns through outliers that trouble this thinking as
it exists in our model, but also as it is found lurking by black studies scholars in
their field’s own interpretive practices. Switching to the kind of relational thinking advocated by some of these scholars, we read categories into continuums,
and again into new categories that imagine race as a social assemblage, thereby
charting a computational path beyond critique.

Corpus and Model

Our research started with a broad and clear topic—race and the American
novel—and a specific question: can computational methods tell us anything
new and interesting about how racial difference is expressed in literature? Do
authors of different racial identifications (for example, “white” versus “black”)
consistently use different patterns of language, style, and narrative, and if so,
what are these patterns? Do they remain stable or change over time? To begin,
we were first drawn to the method known as “sequence alignment.” Sequence
alignment is usually associated with bioinformatics, where it has been used since
the 1980s to track sequences of DNA base pairs with the assistance of computers
(Figure 1).
5

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

Figure 1. Sequence alignment of avian influenza protein sequences. Algorithms
align sequences to identify similar regions that may indicate structural or evolutionary relationships between them. Image source: https://commons.wikimedia.
org/w/index.php?curid=965509
But it also has a long history in text search and retrieval, and has been adapted
more recently by digital humanists for literary and cultural analysis.10 Treating
objects like novels as long strands of DNA, and words as individual proteins,
one can track patterns of language within and across large corpora. One can, for
example, find which passages from Moby Dick are most cited by American novelists. But oftentimes we want to do more than track the circulation and re-use of a
10 See, for example, Mark Olsen, et al., “Something Borrowed: Sequence Alignment and the Identification of Similar Passages in Large Text Collections,” Digital Studies 2, no. 1 (2011); Ryan Cordell,
“Reprinting, Circulation, and the Network Author in Antebellum Newspapers,” American Literary
History 27, no. 3 (August, 2015); Kellen Funk and Lincoln Mullen, “A Servile Copy: Text Reuse and
Medium Data in American Civil Procedure,” in Legal History 24 (2016).

6

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

single work or author. We want to track the re-use of certain kinds of passages as
they are picked up (or not) by certain groups of writers. In our case, we sought to
apply the method to the following simplistic questions: do authors identified as
“white” versus “black” quote similar types of texts, or even each other? Do they
draw from a shared “canon” or radically different sources?
Reviewing the current state of black literary studies, these questions will seem
outdated or out-of-step with present scholarly concerns. Scholarship from the
mid to late 1980s—largely as an effect of that era’s “canon wars”—took an interest in cross-racial literary relations. Hortense Spillers and Robert Stepto wrote at
length on the felt literary “kinship” between Ralph Ellison and Ernest Hemingway, while Henry Louis Gates Jr., as part of his major work on black minority
discourse, explored the relationship between the Western canon and black literature.11 But since then, black literary studies have naturally moved on to a new set
of questions. Topics such as Afro-pessimism, sound-text dynamics within black
literature, black globality, and racial abstraction now command its attention. It’s
impossible to generalize about the field as a whole, but one might argue that scholars are today less interested in studying literary blackness’ relation to whiteness
and more focused on probing the autonomous properties of a black aesthetic.
We admit that, in broad strokes, the idea of a comparative “white-black” literary
analysis might be askance to what scholars in black literary studies now actually
care about.
Indeed, such an analysis seems to fall back onto a critical (and political) strategy
that underwrote the canon wars: identifying and counting authors as representatives of particular groups. As Gene Jarrett has noted, this strategy ”assumed an
authentic, if not also autobiographical, relationship between authors and their
texts…that what authors are predetermines what they will write.”12 We should
know better than to try to encode race, which is in reality a highly dynamic and
fluid social construction, as a fixed or objective marker ultimately derived from
physical and biological characteristics, and ultimately a legacy of the very statistical surveys and methods created to support eugenic thought and racial stratification in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. To attempt to count
by race presumes there is something there to be counted and is, as demographic
historians note, “as much a political act as it is an enumerative one,” naturalizing
11 See Robert Stepto, From Behind the Veil: A Study of Afro-American Narrative (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2001); Hortense Spillers, Black, White, and in Color: Essays on American
Literature and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003); and Henry Louis Gates, The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of African American Literary Criticism (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1988).
12 Gene Andrew Jarrett, “Addition by Subtraction: Toward a Literary History of Racial Representation,” Legacy 24, no. 2 (2007): 318.

7

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

biological or genetic difference as a fixed, neutral indicator of meaningful social
difference between two populations.13
Yet as much as this act of counting occludes an understanding of race as ongoing social process, there is some consensus among social scientists that racial
categories, empty as they may be, are also strategically useful. Useful because,
as participants in the canon wars knew, they represent socially institutionalized
essences through and against which social actors must define themselves for the
purposes of political mobilization and representation. Race still matters to the extent society remains racially stratified. But social scientists as far back as W.E.B.
Du Bois also recognized how useful racial categories are for making quantitative
arguments that can combat the effects of racial prejudice by uncovering systemic
patterns and trends. They must be critically interpreted, but ”to stop collecting
racial data prematurely in a racially stratified society would be like putting the cart
before the horse.”14 Social scientists who work on issues of race thus find themselves in the “treacherous bind” of needing to overturn entrenched racial categories that obscure the dynamics of racial differentiation as lived process while
provisionally relying on them as proxies for uncovering these dynamics at larger
scales.15
Our experiment and data collection all proceeded with these caveats in mind.
The novels that form the basis of our experiment are drawn from a larger corpus
that was constructed from a list of the most frequently held novels by American
authors published between 1880 and 2000 as catalogued by WorldCat. The corpus comprises nearly 10,000 volumes, with peak holdings around 1900 and the
1980s, and represents the work of about 6,000 authors. Given the source, the
corpus offers a vision of the literary field based on what librarians have valued,
which is in part a proxy for what academics and people who use libraries value. It
conveys, as Amy Earhart has argued, only a partial or conditional “truth” about
US literature because the “dataset is limited by its construction.”16 The data is biased, of course, and does not provide a neutral account of the American literary
field, but at the scale of 10,000 texts, it offers a non-trivial view of this field that
13 See Melissa Nobles, Shades of Citizenship:

Race and the Census in Modern Politics (Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2000), 1; and Angela James, “Making Sense of Race and Racial Classification,” in White Logic, White Methods (2008), 43.
14 Zuberi, 121.
15 Yasmin Gunaratnam describes this “treacherous bind” and possible responses to it in Researching
Race and Ethnicity: Methods, Knowledge, and Power (London: SAGE, 2003), 29-33. Also see Mustafa
Emirbayer and Matthew Desmond, The Racial Order (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015),
who call for a major rebalancing of the theory/method divide in studies of race because empirical
methods have long since outpaced theorizing.
16 Amy Earhart, Traces of the Old, Uses of the New (University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor: 2015),
Chapter four. E-edition.

8

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

likely captures its dominant trends.
Of the 6,000 authors represented in the corpus, we were able to identify the gender and race of approximately 4,000, which reduced the population of novels on
which we could draw since we were only interested in books by authors with
marked racial identities. We labeled an author by gender and/or race only if we
found that the author self-identified in one particular way and/or if we found
such an identification in the scholarly record. Such acts of identification are,
most would agree, complicated by the particular exigencies of shifting social and
historical circumstance and may bear no direct relation to the novels written under the sign of such identities. But to even begin to interrogate this complexity at
scale, it is helpful to start with this crude, provisional form of categorization. It
allows us to test whether or not writers were working under essentialized racial
categories with any consistency across our period of interest.
After performing this manual labeling, we selected all novels written by authors
identified as “black” or “African-American” (this includes biracial authors such
as Nella Larsen if we found that African Americanist scholars have identified the
author as both biracial and “African-American,” as in Larsen’s case), which totaled 137 novels for the period 1880-2000. Roughly half of these were published
before 1945, and half after 1945. The gender distribution is nearly even, with
slightly more male writers. Other categories for which we collected metadata—
education, religion, and geography—are randomly distributed. There do exist,
however, several biases in the corpus. First, the African-American novel as a
genre is known to be diverse in form, and often includes works not traditionally marked as “novelistic.” The Souls of Black Folkby W.E.B Du Bois is one such
example. Our corpus does not include such works because those responsible for
getting books into libraries, whose decisions are then reflected in WorldCat, tend
to be conservative in what they identify as a “novel.” Second, this corpus skews
highly canonical. Most of the novels are ones likely to be taught in university
classes or included in Norton anthologies. In any case, this corpus represents
what we call our “corpus of novels by black authors.”
To create a parallel corpus of “white” writers, which far outnumber black writers in the larger corpus, we were careful to select works that similarly skewed
canonical. We limited this corpus to canonical writers because otherwise our
comparison of “white” and “black” writers would be an anarchic comparison of
distinguished black writers against a sea of high and low white writers of all genres. To extract the “canonical” writers, we assembled a list of authors from the
Norton Anthology of American Literature (2003) and Harold Bloom’s The Western
Canon whom we could identify as “white.” About 95% of the authors in this list
were in our larger collection, and so their novels (~ 490) became our corpus of
9

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

novels by identified white authors. Like our corpus of novels by black authors,
the publication dates are split evenly from before and after 1945, but the gender skews more heavily male (about 80% to 20%). Other categories of authorial
identity do not skew in any particular direction. In sum, we call these texts our
“corpus of novels by white authors.” Last, we included the King James Bible (KJB)
in our corpus after early tests signaled its importance as a shared site of textual
quotation.
A final caveat about the data. The choice to preserve an imbalance in our primary
classes of interest—there are nearly four times more white authors than black authors—is intended to reflect actual underlying disparities in the history of the
modern American novel. Indeed, this 4-1 ratio is likely too conservative. For
example, the History of Black Writing project at the University of Kansas, which
is constituted by a group of librarians and scholars, has spent the past forty years
identifying every novel they could find written by a black person in America from
1880 to 2000. This includes quite obscure novels by authors, for example, who
self-published. To date, they have located a total of 1200 novels.17 By contrast,
using far less rigorous methods, we have found more than 6000 novels published
by white Americans in this same period—a figure that would no doubt exponentially increase if we had been as exhaustive in our search for white authors as
colleagues at Kansas were in their search. If we consider 1200 to be the upper
limit for identified black authors, a 4-1 ratio is well beyond conservative.
Next, we elaborate our method: sequence alignment. Genomic scientists use the
method to identify DNA patterns across millions of human samples. They might
extract, for example, all of the occurrences of the DNA “string” ABCABCABC in
a much longer DNA sequence. The same method can be applied to texts as well
if we think of sentences as strings of DNA and words or letters as individual nucleotides. Sequence alignment in this case might return every instance of “four
score and seven years ago” across millions of documents. Thus it is good at identifying the literal quotation or repetition of lines and phrases, which is an effective
way to assess a basic type of textual commonality between white and black writers. While it misses subtler forms of intertextuality like paraphrase and allusion,
literal repetition provides a baseline understanding of the degree to which writers of different racial identifications tended to quote the same texts. It identifies
a form of commonality based on the direct quotation of a single source.
Several approaches exist for doing sequence alignment, and many have become
reliable at detecting near, or “fuzzy,” matches. This is important in bioinformatics since genes mutate to produce almost, but not quite, identical sequences. One
17 Conveyed in private email correspondence with current director of the Project of the History of
black Writing, Dr. Maryemma Graham. Spring 2016.

10

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

may want a way to find not only complete matches, but something like ABCABD
when one was looking for ABCABC. Such “near matches” could represent important cases of genetic mutation. The same goes for texts, which mutate in their
own ways. If one is searching “four score and seven years ago” in documents with
poor OCR quality, one might also want to find every instance of “pour score and
saven years aqo.” For this we can use“local alignment” methods that search for
smaller matching sequences within much longer ones, often using fuzzy or “close
but not quite” matching techniques to do so.
Searching for all of these potential “local alignments” or matches in hundreds
of novels is computationally demanding. Fortunately, an efficient approach to
sequence alignment has been developed by the ARTFL project at the University
of Chicago. It treats documents as ordered sets of n-grams (“shingles”) by representing each successive, overlapping sequence of n words in a document. Trigram shingles are the most common choice, though one can tune this parameter.
These shingles are indexed by both document and their position within a document, and are then ordered according to their sequence of appearance. Rather
than a sequence of words, a document is represented as a sequence of overlapping trigrams. Importantly, prior to doing so, the program removes high frequency stopwords, short words, and numerals, and can also normalize accents
and spelling. This preprocessing eliminates minor textual variations or elisions
to allow for more matches.
Once this representation is produced for every document, the program identifies
all exact three-shingle matches and uses them as starting points for identifying
longer sets of overlapping shingles.18 Upon running sequence alignment on our
two sets of novels, the program returned, once duplicates were removed, over
1,200 unique alignments (the algorithm captures bi-directional alignments, thus
the need to remove duplicates).19 To better understand the type of language being shared, or its common source, we labeled all of these alignments and separated them into several categories, including “religious” (any biblical or religious
reference; 11%), “lyric” (poetry, religious spiritual, or popular song; 10%), and
“self-quotation” (a writer repeating language from an earlier work; 4%). In the
lyric category, for instance, an alignment was found between Ralph Ellison’s In18 For each pair, the algorithm looks at the next shingle in both sequences and checks if they are
the same. If they are, it looks at the next one, and so on. When it finds shingles that do not match,
it takes note and keeps going until it finds another match. The number of non-matching shingles it
looks at before giving up is set by the user and is called the gap parameter. The higher it is, the higher
the likelihood of capturing matches across longer sequences. If this gap parameter is exceeded and
the resulting alignment is longer than the minimum length requirement set by the user, it is recorded
as a local alignment between documents where the sequences occurred. Details on preprocessing
options can be found in “Something Borrowed.”
19 All of these are listed in the spreadsheet “ALL_ALIGNMENTS.csv.”

11

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

visible Man (1952), where he cites the lyric “John Brown’s body lies a-mold’ring
in the grave, John Brown’s body lies…,” and a 1931 novel by Booth Tarkington,
The Gentleman from Indiana, where he cites the very same song: “John Brown’s
body lies a-mouldering in the ground, John Brown’s body lies” (Table 1).
Category of Alignment

Proportion of Total

Example

Religious
Lyric
Self-Citation
Juridical
Quotation
Aphorism/Saying
Onomatopoeia

11%
10%
4%
4%
6%
2%
2%

Father Which art in Heaven hallowed be thy Name
Amazing Grace, how sweet the sound, That saved a wretch
asked: “Did I snore?” “Terribly,” he said, ”you sounded like a chain saw
find this defendant guilty of murder in the first degree
Patrick Henry said ‘Give me liberty or give me death’
to make a long story short
Kitty-kitty-kitty, here kitty-kitty-kitty

Table 1. Example alignments from the over 1,200 unique alignments found across
all novels in our corpus. These represent the most common categories of alignment after Bible alignments.
While these results exposed the wide variety of textual patterns shared between
novels by white and black authors, an overwhelming number of alignments (550)
were direct quotations from the King James Bible. If there was a shared language
animating literary commonality between white and black novelists in the long
twentieth century, it was the language of the Bible.

The Great Code?
To many this finding will not come as a great surprise. Generations of traditional
literary and religious studies scholars have painted a heroic picture of the Bible—
the King James Version of 1611, in particular—as providing the basis for the Western cultural imaginary. Robert Alter has argued that the “language of the Bible remains an ineluctable framework for verbal culture [in America].”20 Perhaps most
famously, the canonical literary scholar Northrop Frye, as part of his interest in
tracking universal literary archetypes, declares that the Old and New Testaments
enable “the Great Code of Art”—an expression he borrows from William Blake.
Our initial results, in their most naïve and transparent form, appear to confirm
what a growing number of traditional scholars of literature and the Bible have
argued for some time: that even as the world of the novel grows increasingly sec20 Robert Alter, Pen of Iron: American Prose and the King James Bible (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2010), 3.

12

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

ular, its commitment to religious ideas and language is never abandoned. It’s just
altered and transmuted.21
Our findings invoke two keywords/concepts—one old, and one new. The first is
“universality.” The trope of universalism is explicit in Frye’s conception of the
Great Code. The Bible has a distinct rhetoric, and this rhetoric possesses a “resonance” by which “a particular statement in a particular context acquires a universal significance.”22 Here, an entirely coarse and naïve reading of the results might
read as: novels by white and black authors have many obvious and not so obvious differences in matters of form and content, but underlying such differences
is a deep structure of universal commonality—the Bible. Both groups of writers
mutually quote the Bible. Such a reading invokes a second keyword, a modern inflection of the universalism trope: “virality.” Perhaps, one might argue, sequence
alignment reveals such strong confluences between different types of texts via the
Bible because the Bible has itself a viral quality to it. As Stephen Prickett notes,
“grounded in mythologies, belief and texts that have been acquired from elsewhere,” the Bible has always required readers and writers to find ways of making
these alien words their own.23 The language of the Bible is “contagious.” It has
become such a “universal” force in literature because writers find its language so
alluring. Both white and black writers find themselves equally stricken by it.
And yet surely there must be some differences in how these novelists quote the
Bible. Our early attempts to find them, however, came up empty. First, we assessed whether one group cited the Bible more than the other. We randomized
the race labels (e.g., white/black) in our dataset and pulled from them a null distribution of quotation counts. We found that the actual amount of Bible quotation by each group was not significantly different from this null distribution.
That is, had we assigned the race labels randomly, we could have expected the
same rates of quotation. The next dimension we looked at was time. Did white
and black writers cite the Bible at different rates over time? Looking at the rates
of Bible quotation normalized by the length of the novels, no trends stood out.
The data was too sparse for any given year to make any determination. Even
when we used a model to predict the amount of quotation given the year and race
21 Examples of this scholarship include Robert Detweiler, Breaking the Fall: Religious Readings of
Contemporary Fiction (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1989); Robert Alter, Canon and Creativity:
Modern Writing and the Authority of Scripture (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000); Andrew Tate, Contemporary Fiction and Christianity (London: Continuum, 2008); and Amy Hungerford, Postmodern Belief: American Literature and Religion since 1960 (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2010).
22 Northrop Frye, The Great Code: The Bible and Literature (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1982), 217-221.
23 Stephen Prickett, Origins of Narrative: The Romantic Appropriation of the Bible (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 35.

13

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

of the writer, the resulting curves were inconclusive and biased by a few novels
with large amounts of quotation. Within this particular corpus, black writers did
not explicitly cite the Bible more or less than white writers at any point in time.
Perhaps they were citing different parts of the Bible, which would be interesting
given the differences between the ideological orientation of the Old and New Testaments. Yet, when we analyzed whether chapters from either were being cited
at different rates, the results were inconclusive.
At this point we began to wonder if the differences did not lie in what they were
citing, but in how they were citing it. We turned our focus to the words surrounding the aligned Bible passages - what we refer to as the alignment “contexts.” Using a window of 300 characters on each side of an alignment, we tried to ascertain
if white and black writers talked about the Bible differently when they mentioned
it. Extracting the contexts for each of the biblical alignments(which gave us ~600
total data points), we treated these as simple word “vectors” and used cosine similarity to measure the lexical difference between every context. We found that
the texts did not cluster along racial dimensions, suggesting that white and black
writers, as a whole, did not use a different vocabulary when invoking the Bible.
Taking this line of investigation further, we fit an LDA topic model on these 600
contexts and represented them as topic distributions across 12 topics. The idea
here was that the variation in topics might explain a difference between white
and black writers. However, a principal components analysis of the topic distributions showed no distinctive grouping of white versus black authors in the first
two principal components.24 Thus there was no indication that these writers were
talking about different things when they cited the Bible. Again, nothing.25

24 The methods we employ here - topic modeling, Principal Components Analysis, and textual classification - are quite common in cultural analytics work. For a good account of topic modeling as used
by humanists, see Andrew Goldstone and Ted Underwood, “The Quiet Transformations of Literary
Studies: What Thirteen Thousand Scholars Could Tell Us,” New Literary History (Summer 2014); on
Principal Components Analysis, see Paul Vierthaler, “Fiction and History: Polarity and Stylistic Gradience in Late Imperial Chinese Literature,” Cultural Analytics (May 2016); and on text classification,
see Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So, “Literary Pattern Recognition: Modernism between Close Reading and Machine Learning,” Critical Inquiry (Winter 2016) and “Turbulent Flow: A Computational
Model of World Literature,” Modern Language Quarterly (September 2016).
25 We recognize that a more robust or sophisticated computational language model might be
able to detect other kinds of difference. We provide the full contexts in our Dataverse repository
(TAGGED_CONTEXTS.csv) and thus encourage others to pursue alternative methods.

14

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

Model Revision I: Against the Great Code
Our first set of results appear to support Frye’s “Great Code” thesis: that despite
the obvious differences between white and black authors, the Bible joins them to
a kind of “common culture.” It is a “universal” force of connection, transcending
what seem to be nominal differences of racial distinction. In a more contemporary, digitally inflected language, the Bible is a post-racial code, “viral” in its
reach. Indeed, the optimism of such a reading is implicitly supported by the felt
“universalism” of the computational method that supports such results. Much of
the authority and appeal of sequence alignment is that it derives from the methods used to pattern the human genome. As Dorothy Nelkin and Susan Lindeed
describe, the language of DNA “pervades our cultural imagination,” whereby hyperbolic phrases such as “the code of codes” has imbued the analysis of identity
through DNA sampling with profound power and “mystique.”26 Alondra Nelson argues that since the sequencing of the human genome, genetic analysis has
acquired a “perceived omnipotence” replete with “seemingly magic powers.”27
Indeed, the fact that a scientific methodology that espouses “human universalism” so neatly aligns with a fairly conservative argument from literary studies
that similarly envisions a sprawling “universalism” to all forms of human expression, should give us pause. Even a cursory reading of scholarship in black literary
studies and religion makes clear that black people, due to legacies of slavery and
social oppression, hold a complex and embattled relationship to the Bible and
Christianity. Theologians such as James Cone point to a central duality: white
Christians first introduced the Bible to black subjects in order to enforce docility
and acquiescence, an alibi for blacks to reject their concerns for freedom in the
human world. But later, black theologians would reinterpret the Bible as mapping a pathway for black liberation, asserting that racial equality represented the
will of God, and that its opposite signaled the will of the “anti-Christ.”28
In terms of literature, black studies scholars will not deny that black writers often cite the Bible or that the Bible occupies a central place in black communities.
However, they argue that when black writers invoke the Bible, they do so through
a process of “critical modification and revision.”29 This “critical modification”
26 Cited in Alondra Nelson, The Social Life of DNA: Race, Reparations and Reconciliation after the
Genome (Boston: Beacon Press, 2016), 4.
27 Nelson, The Social Life of DNA, 4.
28 James H. Cone, Black Theory and Black Power (Ossining, NY: Orbis Books, 2008), 120.
29 Tuire Valkeakari, Religious Idiom and the African American Novel, 1952-1998 (Gainsville, FL:
University of Florida Press, 2007), 29. See also James Coleman, Treatments of the Sacred, Spiritual, and
Supernatural in 20th -Century African American Fiction(Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University
Press, 2009), 81.

15

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

takes several forms: (1) irony: when the Bible is evoked, its meaning becomes
ironic because one sees that its normative meaning does not ideally suit the specific conditions of a black character or context. (2) Criticism: when the Bible is
cited or invoked, its meaning is explicitly criticized by a black character, revealing
some innate hypocrisy or contradiction in the text’s message when applied in an
African-American context. (3) Dialogism: when the Bible is cited or invoked, it
is not delivered as a monologic polemic or sermon, but rather, its invocation immediately incites debate or dialogue over its meaning by a cohort of characters,
including potentially the narrator him or herself. In sum, scholars argue that the
appearance of the Bible and its quotation in novels by black authors tend to be
very dialogic and interactive, whether that is the interaction between characters
in the story or the interaction between the reader and the story’s characters, all
in an effort to question the Bible’s normative or hegemonic “white” meaning.
Our attempts to identify differences in the language used around quotations of
the Bible had failed to find at least one important signal in the data. We decided
to revise our approach to capture this sense of dialogism or “sociality” in Biblical quotation—i.e. how the Bible is cited. Specifically, we used content analysis
to revisit the “contexts” we had extracted for each biblical alignment. In each
context, we looked for moments of sociality, here defined as the presence of two
or more characters engaged in dialogue or interaction. If we could find such an
instance, we coded the alignment as 1. If we could not find such an instance,
we coded the alignment 0, meaning that there was no indication of sociality. In
some cases, this meant a lone character delivering a monologue, while in others it was a character lost in thought. For each context, we now had a variable
called“social,” coded either 1 or 0. As short-hand, we refer to the Bible quotation
and its surrounding context as a “scene.” Our “social” variable captures whether
and how white versus black writers infuse that scene (the moment when the Bible
appears) with “sociality” (Table 2).
Bible Context

Label

Original Novel

Author

While Davis chanted a traditional prayer-poem with his
own variations, Joe mounted the box that had been placed
for the purpose and opened the brazen door of the lamp.
As the word Amen was said, he touched the lighted match
to the wick, and Mrs. Bogle’s alto burst out in:
We’ll ##walk in de light, de beautiful light Come
where the dew drops of mercy shine bright Shine all
around us by day and by night Jesus, the light of the
world##. They, all of them, all of the people took
it up and sung it over and over until it was wrung dry,
and no further innovations of tone and tempo were
conceivable. Then they hushed and ate barbecue.
When it was all over that night in bed Jody asked Janie,
”Well, honey, how yuh
it?” “No,” said Adam, “you’re making fun.” “I’m not,”
said Miranda, ”I’m trying to keep
from going to sleep. I’m afraid to go to sleep, I may
not wake up. Don’t let me go to sleep, Adam. Do you know
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John? Bless the bed I lie upon?”
”If I should ##die before I wake, I pray the Lord my

Social

Their Eyes were Watching God

Zora Neale Hurston

Social

Pale Horse, Pale Rider

Katherine Anne Porter

16

Cultural Analytics

Bible Context
soul to take##. Is that it?” asked Adam. ”It doesn’t
sound right, somehow.” ”Light me a cigarette, please,
and move over and sit near the window. We keep forgetting
about fresh air. You must have it.” He lighted the
cigarette and held it to her lips. She took it between
her fingers and dropped it under
of course. But in the end there returned the poignant
yearning from the Sunday world. As she went down in
the morning from Cossethay and saw Ilkeston smoking
blue and tender upon its hill, then her heart surged
with far-off words: ”Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem-how
##often would I have gathered thy children together
as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings##,
and ye would not-” The passion rose in her for Christ,
for the gathering under the wings of security and warmth.
But how did it apply to the weekday world? What could
it mean, but that Christ should clasp her to his breast,
as a mother clasps her child? And oh, for Christ, for him
safe, still free, still searching-when she awoke. Awoke
where she sat now. She ran her fingers through her hair,
then stretched and tried to remember why she was here.
Her Bible lay on the couch before her, and a ray of early
morning sun shone through the window onto the page.
”##Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me. In my Father’s house are many
mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you.
I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye
may be also. And whither## I go ye know,
and the way ye know.” Then her eyes moved down
the page: ”If you love me, keep my commandments.
And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever; even the Spirit of truth; whom the world
cannot receive, because

Race, Writing, and Computation

Label

Original Novel

Author

NonSocial

The Rainbow

D.H. Lawrence

NonSocial

Passing by Samaria

Sharon Ewell Foster

Table 2. Four example contexts where the Bible is cited (indicated by ##). Two
are coded as “social” to indicate a scene of dialogic interaction or the presence of
multiple characters. Two are coded as “non-social” to indicate a scene where the
Bible is being read by a single individual or cited as part of an interior monologue.
The next step was to build a statistical model to see if we could predict if a scene
was “social” or not based on several variables. For this task we used logistic regression, which is a standard statistical approach to analyzing the relationship
between variables. Such a model determines the likelihood that an object belongs to one category or another based on the predictor variables provided, and
in doing so finds which variables are significant or useful in making that prediction. Each object will receive a score between 0 and 1: if the score is above 0.5,
the object belongs to the first class, and vice versa. For example, one can use such
a model to predict whether a flower is of one type or another (0 or 1) based on a
few predictor variables, such as petal length and width.
For our model, we had three predictor variables: “gender” (the author’s gender);
“race” (the author’s race); and “Bible,” which indicates whether a scene has a quotation to the Bible or not. The “Bible” variable acts as a control. We wanted to be
sure that if we saw an effect around gender or race in passages citing the Bible that
this effect was tied to the fact that the Bible was being cited, and not that novels by
17

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

white or black authors are inherently more “social.” Thus, we randomly selected
400 passages from novels by each group of writers, each the same length as our
alignment contexts and split evenly between the two groups. We tagged them by
race, gender, and “social,” the same as we did with our 600 Bible quotation passages, giving a total of 1000 contexts. The “Bible” variable indicates whether the
Bible is cited or not. With this control added, if we found that the identified race
of an author helped predict if a Bible scene was “social” or not, we would know
it was because that scene had the Bible in it and not because novels by black writers simply have more “social” scenes. Last, we worried that single novels might
be contributing a disproportionate amount of Bible quotations, so we added a
random effects variable, insuring that no single novel became the source of any
specific effect.

Figure 2a. The logistic regression model we used to understand the relationship
of race, gender, and biblical citation to the “sociality” of contexts where the Bible
is quoted.

Figure 2b. Estimates produced from the above model.
Here is the specified model and the estimated coefficients for each term in the
model (Figure 2).30 In interpreting these results, we are interested in the interaction between the “Bible” and “race” variables. That is, we are interested in
whether the odds of a Bible context being “social” increases or decreases based
on the race variable: whether it is 1 or 0, or “white” or “black.” In plain language,
we want to know if the fact that a writer is identified as white or black, when that
writer cites the Bible, significantly changes the likelihood that the scene of citation is “social.” Or, in plainest language: do writers so identified contextualize the
Bible in different ways in the novel? Our results suggest they do. When a white
writer quotes the Bible, according to our results, it is less likely that she/he quotes
it in a social context. In fact, the odds of being “social” decreases by a factor of 3.8,
30 A fuller description of the model and our procedure for calculating the odds ratios can be found
in “Appendix1.pdf ” in our Dataverse repository.

18

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

compared to when she/he writes about non-Bible related topics. When a black
writer quotes the Bible, it is more likely that she/he quotes it in a social context.
The odds of being “social” increases by a factor of 1.5 compared to when she/he
writes about non-Bible related topics. In sum, white and black writers tend to
narrate the Bible differently when they cite it.
This new set of results usefully nuance our first findings. Our first set of results
make a valuable discovery: the Bible represents the major site of shared discourse
between white and black authors in the twentieth century. It is not, as previous scholars have argued, canonical authors like Shakespeare or popular music.31
Further, this form of discourse does not have clear forms of differentiation. For
example, white or black writers, at least those represented in our corpus, are not
more likely to cite the Old or New Testament, or any specific Biblical book. However, our second approach exposes a core oversight in the first, namely its inattention to the context of quotation. Taking a cue from existing scholarship, we
confirm with our second approach that the forms of sociality attached to each
quotation challenge Frye’s notion of “the Great Code.” There is a rupture in this
broader pattern - a pattern within the pattern - that marks a distinction in how
white and black writers narrate the Bible. If this pattern was already intuited by
black studies scholars, our results extend that intuition to the scale of hundreds of
novels written over a century and suggest it can be captured by a simple variable:
“sociality.”

Model Revision II: Against Reification
Thus far, our proposed computational approach to studying race and the US novel
has served to reveal a set of regularities at scale. This revelation, however, has
come at the expense of slotting novels into discrete categories: “novels by white
authors” and “novels by black authors.” For our model to work, writers must
be white or not white, black or not black. We then find that writers assigned to one
category share certain commonalities and differences with writers assigned to the
other. Lacking any deeper analysis or critique of these assigned categories, our
method could become circular if we presumed the reality of racial categories and
their correlation with particular literary effects, as if the categories themselves
were causing these effects.
31 See Gates and more recently, T. Austin Graham, The Great American Songbooks: Musical Texts,
Modernism, and the Value of Popular Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013).

19

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

As race scholars in the social sciences have pointed out, this has long been the
problem when racial categories are deployed in quantitative studies. The race
variable is interpreted in the absence of a nuanced underlying theory to explain
the mechanism by which race effects social outcomes.32 Filling in for this absence
is a generic notion of race rooted in assumptions about biological or genetic differences between populations. When these are treated, by default, as the causal
mechanism behind a set of relationships, the very dynamism of race as a social
construct is obscured.33 The result is a study that, for instance, finds an association between “black” populations and heart disease and interprets race as the
cause of the disease. In reality, what may be contributing to the association are
a host of other variables that interact with race in a particular context, including socioeconomic status, cultural factors, and levels of access and accessibility
to health care.34 To avoid reinforcing the notion of race as a fixed characteristic,
these same critics propose various ways to triangulate between quantitative and
qualitative methods, leveraging the temporary closure provided by racial categories precisely to open them up to more situated or elaborate accounts.35
32 Zuberi

writes that, “Statistical results, themselves, do not prove anything beyond the numerical
relationship between two or more lists of numbers or variables” and that how we understand “the
connection of these variables in the real world” always requires an underlying theory. Unfortunately,
that theory often goes unarticulated when interpreting race as a variable. See “Toward a Definition of
White Logic and White Methods,” 9. Angela James puts it most bluntly when she writes that race has
become a “black hole” of social scientific research and argues that “the use of race as a control variable
flattens out the meanings of racial differences and replaces it with a generic notion of difference.” See
“Making Sense of Race and Racial Classification,” 43.
33 As Zuberi puts it, “Race is not about an individual’s skin color. Race is about an individual’s
relationship to other people within society.” Zuberi, “Toward a Definition of White Logic and White
Methods,” 7.
34 Wilkinson and King, “Conceptual and Methodological Issues in the Use of Race as a Variable:
Policy Implications,” 60. On the problem of measuring human variation in a post-genome era, also
see Fatimah Jackson, “Anthropological Measurement: The Mismeasure of African Americans.” According to Zuberi, this does not mean race cannot be used as a variable, but that “statistical models
that present race as a cause are really statements of association between the racial classification and
a predictor or explanatory variable across individuals in a population.” Association is evidence of
causation only when “it is buttressed with other knowledge and supporting evidence” of the many
“contingencies or circumstances” which can influence social outcomes. Zuberi, Thicker than Blood,
129, 133. For Zuberi, the ability to interpret race as a causal mechanism requires that it be viewed as
a “treatment” (i.e., something that can be manipulated) which can be given or denied to the populations under study. But as Paul Holland observes elsewhere, “Properties or attributes of units are not
the types of variables that lend themselves to plausible statements of counterfactuality. For example,
because I am a White person, it would be close to ridiculous to ask what would have happened to me
had I been Black.” See “Causation and Race,” 100.
35 John Stanfield argues for a triangulation of quantitative and qualitative methods, as “the former
are important for trend analyses and for formulizing patterns and exceptions, particularly when using
large data sets; the latter are important for capturing deeply rooted immeasurable subjective experiences such as emotions and spirituality, so crucial for grasping racialized experiences.” See Rethinking
Race and Ethnicity in Research Methods (Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2011), 23. Similarly, Yas-

20

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

Something of this critical thrust is present in Alexander Weheliye’s revisionist
take on “black studies” conceived as a mode of knowledge production. In Habeas
Viscus, he asserts, “Continuing to identify blackness as one of black studies’s primary objects of knowledge with black people as real subjects… accepts too easily
that race is a given natural and/or cultural phenomenon.” We should approach
race instead as an assemblage of forces that “must continuously articulate nonwhite subjects as not-quite human.”36 From a social scientific perspective, one
way to think about such assemblages would be to develop more complex quantitative models. That is, we could replace race as a single variable with a host of
other variables that we believe might capture the interaction of racial experience
with religious practice and literary form. As literary critics, however, we recognize that this interaction is not like heart disease. It is not so easy to identify and
collect reliable data on the variables (e.g., religious affiliation, socioeconomic status, spiritual influences) that potentially inform an author’s Biblical disposition
and which are further mediated by the process of fictionalization itself.
How then to de-reify our interpretation of race while not wholly disregarding
what we learn from its temporary closure? Here we propose using information
contained in our model, reductive as it is, such that we can pivot from a “grammar of comparison,” to use Weheliye’s terms, to a grammar of relationality.37 We
leverage the numerical association between race and Biblical citation to relate
our texts in ways that complicate the grammar of categorical racial difference initially imposed on them. With this relational framework, we are able to read the
interaction of race and biblical citation across the color lines that, in both quantitative and qualitative approaches, have tended to segment and particularize the
ontological totality of human social relations.
The way we shift the grammar of analysis is through a measure latent in our statistical model. It is a coefficient derived from our regression formula that indicates
the relative “sociality” of a text. The measure captures how well an individual
text conforms to the associations between race, gender, and biblical citation that
min Gunaratnam insists that, ”while their must be temporary moments of closure in the defining of
racial and ethnic categories in order to do research, these points of closure must also…be opened up
in ways that enable us to look at and hear how ‘race’ and ethnicity are given situated meaning within
accounts.” Gunaratnam, 38. Zuberi integrates this process of opening up within the statistical model
itself, though to do so “requires an elaborate theory that states explicitly and in detail the variables in
the system, how these variables are causally interrelated, the functional form of their relationships,
and the statistical quality and traits of the error terms.” Zuberi, “Deracializing Social Statistics,” 131.
36 Alexander Weheliye, Habeas viscus: Racializing Assemblages, Biopolitics, and Black Feminist Theories of the Human (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2014), 18-19.
37 Weheliye, Habeas viscus, 13. Weheliye argues that to theorize racially motivated acts of political
violence through comparison, rather than in relational terms, reaffirms existing hierarchies rather
than realizing articulations of an ontological totality composed through social relations.

21

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

we discovered in the overall corpus. For instance, a text by a black writer that
frequently quotes the Bible and only in a “social” way will score high on this measure. Conversely, a text by a white writer who quotes the Bible frequently in a
non-social way will score very low. These scores allow us to pivot between individual works and the background trends evident in the data, but also to relate
them to each other in ways that loosen the link between text and race as a categorical label (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Plot showing the “social” score for all novels containing alignments with
the Bible. Lower scores indicate novels where the Bible is less frequently cited in
a “social” way, as we define the term. Scores closer to zero indicate novels where
the “social” and “non-social” contexts are split evenly, as in James Baldwin’s Go
Tell it to the Mountain.
According to these scores, one of the more “social” novels in our corpus is Sarah
Wright’s This Child’s Gonna Live, from 1969. Of the twelve biblical quotes in the
work, eleven are made in a “social” context. They form part of a longer conversation happening in the novel between its protagonist, Mariah Upshur, and the
church. A twenty-three year old black woman living a subsistence life in 1930s rural Maryland and pregnant with her fifth child, Mariah, as Trudier Harris writes,
“must reevaluate and ultimately reject Christianity” to challenge the social and
institutional forces that deny her individuality and autonomy.38 She does so by
imagining Jesus and God as characters in her mind with whom she can converse
and argue, closing the gap between herself and the divine. She reduces “Jesus and
38 Trudier Harris, “Three Black Women Writers and Humanism: A Folk Perspective,” in Black
American Literature and Humanism, ed. R. Baxter Miller (Lexington, KY: University Press of Lexington, 1981), 55.

22

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

God to the role of conversational buddies… Jesus becomes a familiar companion
who is addressed without reverence and who perhaps takes the place of Mariah’s
nonexistent friends.”39 At first glance, Wright’s novel validates the “critical modification” thesis and our statistical model. Yet it does so in a way that highlights
the intersectionality of race and gender as crucial to particularizing that thesis.40
Mariah’s socio-economic position hints at another intersection that is missing
from our model. Across the entire corpus, John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath
is the most “social” novel. Like Wright’s novel, it too centers on an impoverished
rural family, and yet it also stands as an outlier in being by a white identified author. The novel gets ranked as highly “social” because of a pivotal scene in which
Tom Joad, speaking with his mother, contrasts the “hell-fire Scripture” that tells
the poor to endure their fate on earth with snippets of verse given to him by Jim
Casy, a former preacher who has lost his faith. The snippets are reinterpreted by
Tom as incitement to work toward a better life and a newly autonomous community in the here and now.41 The scene embodies what Tamara Rombold identifies as a major structuring principle of the novel: “the rejection of the agency of
God and… of traditional Christianity” through its “repeated inversions of Biblical material and the theological implications of those inversions.”42 To the extent
we can align this structuring principle with the one that animates Wright’s novel,
we have here the seeds of an interpretive framework that reads “critical modification” of the Bible as motivated by intersecting forces of oppression along racial,
but also gender and class-based lines. Viewed in relation to one another, the political project of narrating resistance to the authority of God’s word is no longer
a strictly “white” or “black” one.
This breakdown in categorical thinking occurs again when we look at a novel that
is the inverse of Steinbeck’s: one of the least “social” novels by a black identified
writer. Megda (1891), by Emma Dunham Kelley, is a loosely autobiographical
narrative that tells the story of a young woman, the titular character, who is studying to be a teacher in Rhode Island. An outlier in our model, it is also an outlier in
literary history. As Holly Jackson has noted, Megda stands out from fin-de-siècle
39 Harris,

“Three Black Women Writers and Humanism,” 55.
importance of intersectionality for reading Wright’s novel is further attested to by what little critical attention has been given it. Jennifer Campbell celebrates the novel for its attempts to
bridge “the movements for black Power and for women’s rights.” As she puts it, the novel “offers
a woman-centered vision of an impoverished, besieged black community finally ‘closing rank’ in order to combat the systemic and individualized racism that seeks to destroy whatever community it
cannot control.” See “ ‘It’s a Time in the Land’: Gendering black Power and Sarah E. Wright’s Place in
the Tradition of black Women’s Writing,” African American Review 31, no. 2 (Summer, 1997), 212.
41 John Steinbeck, Grapes of Wrath (New York: Penguin, 2014), 440-41.
42 Tamara Rombold, “Biblical Inversion in ‘The Grapes of Wrath’,” College Literature 14, no. 2
(Spring, 1987), 147.
40 The

23

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

black novels in its seeming unconcern for African American life or politics. It
follows “a group of carefree adolescent female friends through Christian conversion to appropriate wifehood” and contains “no mention of the hardships facing
black people at this time.” Even more unusual is “the apparent whiteness of [Kelley’s] characters, most of whom have blue eyes and skin described repeatedly in
comparison to ‘pure’ or ‘driven’ snow.” And yet, Jackson adds, “Kelley has been
perennially cited and studied as an example of the diversity of strategies employed
by women of color in the 1890s.”43 These strategies are read through the apparent
fact of Kelley’s identified race, making them part of, as Phillip Brian Harper puts
it, “the peculiar effects of African American culture’s having been conceived as
a political project.” This concept, however, also harbors within it the possibility
that ”any given work—not to mention the artist who produced it—is always liable
to be deemed not properly black.”44
If we look at Kelley’s specific strategies for citing the Bible, we find she diverges
sharply not only from contemporary peers, but from black writers across the
twentieth century. Of the twelve Biblical citations found by our sequence alignment algorithm, we coded nine as “non-social.” Many of these appear in the
context of sermons delivered by Mr. Stanley, a preacher at the church attended
by Megda and her family and friends. Some come in the middle of a pages-long
monologue that lulls the reader into feeling as if they are but one of the congregation. Others come at the end of sermons and precede reactions by the congregation or by Megda herself. In the novel as a whole, her spiritual awakening
provides a narrative focal point and performative template for how to submit to
God’s will. In one pivotal scene, in which Megda watches a baptismal service for
her wealthier friend (and spiritual guide), Ethel, we see that the proper way to
receive his message ranges from passive acceptance to rapturous attention. During the service, Mr. Stanley’s “especially good” sermon leaves “not many dry eyes
among the congregation” (217) while “perfect stillness” settles over the congregation after a “short but impressive” prayer (223). Megda’s own affective response,
heightened by feelings of attraction to Mr. Stanley, further frame this collective
response. “A quiver passed over Meg’s face as she listened; her lips trembled and
her eyes filled with tears” (216). Moments later, “as she listened to the earnest
words that came from his lips, she felt her heart throb and beat with a feeling
she had never experienced before” (217). Even without Mr. Stanley’s “beautiful
face” to guide her, however, Megda was primed, with help from the narrator, to
receive God’s word. In the scene leading up to the baptism, Ethel admonishes
43 Holly Jackson, “Identifying Emma Dunham Kelley: Rethinking Race and Authorship,” PMLA
122, no. 3 (2007), 729.
44 Phillip Brian Harper, Abstractionist Aesthetics: Artistic Form and Social Critique in African American Culture (New York: New York University Press, 2015), 1.

24

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

Megda for her reluctance to commit herself to the authority of God by reciting a
few lines of scripture and leaving her to ponder them. Megda ”stood there alone
— speechless, remorseful, and dismayed, but, thank God! no longer blind to her
own folly and wickedness” (203-204).

These scenes of Biblical quotation convey the antithesis of critical modification,
lacking any sense of irony, critique, or dialogism. There appears to be a major category error in identifying Kelley as “black” in light of the associations between
race and critical modification uncovered by qualitative accounts and reinforced
by our computational model. Investigating the matter further, we found that
until 2007, little was actually known about Kelley’s biography. Megda was itself
mostly forgotten until 1955, when the bookseller Maxwell Whiteman listed it in
a landmark chronology, A Century of Fiction by American Negroes 1853-1952:
A Descriptive Bibliography. As Katherine Flynn notes, Whiteman assumed, like
many after him, Kelley-Hawkins’s African heritage from a frontispiece photograph in the novel (Figure 4).
25

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

Figure 4. The portrait of Emma Dunham-Kelley included in the frontispiece to
Megda (1891).
In 1976, Kelley’s status as a “Negro author” was solidified with Megda’s inclusion in the catalog of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. A
decade on, Gates included her in his Schomburg Collection of African American
Women Writers of the Nineteenth Century series, which he was inspired to compile after discovering a second novel by Kelley. “For a time,” Flynn writes, ”KelleyHawkins was understood to be the first published African American female novelist, prompting several studies of her work—the majority of which examined and
tried to rationalize the absence of African Americans and racial issues.”45 Critics
argued that Kelley’s original audience of black readers would have interpreted her
female characters as “white mulattas,” or construed the exclusively white world of
45 See Katherine Flynn, “Emma Dunham Kelley-Hawkins 1863-1938,” Legacy 24, no.

26

2 (2007), 283

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

her novels as “a kind of postracial utopia.”46 As Jennifer Harris writes, there has
been a “willingness to accept the irreconcilabilities, elisions, and oddities” that
come up when reading race in Kelley’s writing because of “the very way that we
read African American literature as always playing with… such matters.” Such
interpretive machinery has meant that Kelley is seen to be subverting “white literary codes” to covertly advance “black causes.”47
A major wrench was thrown into this machinery in 2007, however, when Flynn
and Jackson independently confirmed via historical records and census data that
Kelley did not identify as a person of color at any time in her life.48 Moreover,
“every one of the official records designates Kelley and every member of her family as racially white.”49 In the wake of this discovery, it became clear that Kelley’s
assumed racial identity had been a cipher through which critics were reading the
play of racial difference in her work. She was never passing as “white” because,
according to these records, she had no need to. Yet this cipher inadvertently
entered into our model owing to its social accretion through a series of editorial decisions by African-American literature scholars. Sticking to the grammar
of comparison, one response to this situation would be to change Kelley from
“black” to “white” in our metadata and declare our initial assignment as a failure
to acknowledge this recent discovery. Indeed, this is effectively what Gates did
when he learned of the discovery from Jackson, announcing that Kelley’s novels would be withdrawn from the Schomburg series.50 They were, in Harper’s
words, “not properly black.”51 Oddly, Gates himself, in the introduction to his
series, wrote that ”Literary works configure into a tradition not because of some
mystical collective unconscious determined by biology of race or gender, but because writers read other writers and ground their representations of experience in
models of language provided largely by other writers to whom they feel akin.”52
But in deciding to remove Kelley from the series, he implies that biology does
matter: as a white woman, Kelley could not possibly have felt kinship with the
black woman writers of her day. Biology begets social affinities begets patterns
of literary relation. Gates excludes her based on categorical thinking.
Rather than double down on this coupling of racial identity to aesthetics, we
46 Jackson,

729.
Harris, “Black Like?: The Strange Case of Emma Dunham Kelley-Hawkins,” African
American Review 40, no. 3 (Fall, 2006), 414.
48 See both Jackson and Harris.
49 Jackson, 730.
50 Jackson, 739.
51 Interestingly, Jackson herself absolved Kelley’s novels of having any political thrust in light of
their depiction of an extremely white world, but also presumably in light of what she had discovered
about her racial biography. See Jarrett, 318
52 Cited in Jackson, 738.
47 Jennifer

27

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

want to think about Megda’s outlier status through the grammar of relationality. This means thinking about it in relation to other texts through the “models
of language” they share - in this case, models for situating personal identity (as
a narrated process) within religious practices and institutions. While the language of critical modification appears absent in the novel, this is in part because
our computational procedure accentuates those moments where direct citation
of biblical verse leaves Megda and others speechless and awestruck. They are
given no choice but to submit to the authority of God’s word. Blind allegiance
to the power of an Other, however, is predicated on the repression and denial
of other sources of authority. Megda does not expel these sources outside the
text itself, but rather embeds them within the titular character’s own internal psychological struggle, one that animates the narrative leading up to the baptism
scene. As the narrator frames it, Megda’s struggle is one of a lost and confused
soul who awaits someone to lead her out of “the tangled path of doubt and dark
uncertainty in which she was walking and place her feet in the narrow, shining
way” (67). The familiar Christian tropes of darkness and light, enslavement and
freedom, operate throughout to remind us of where Megda walks and where she
must go, even marking her physically with “sparkling dark eyes” (36) in contrast
to Ethel’s “transparent,” “fair,” and “very white” skin (108). There is never any
doubt she will find her way. Narratorial interjection and the characterization of
everyone but Megda aim the text’s ideological crosshairs steadily on conversion.
But if the novel on the whole opposes critical modification of Biblical authority, it
still needs Megda to show what resistance (and inevitable submission) look like.
According to the narrator, the tyrant “pride” is Megda’s “besetting sin,” keeping
her from realizing she needs “a Saviour’s help” (102). But as narrated in her own
mind, her resistance stems from not wanting to be told what church to join (25);
not wanting to lower herself in her “own or anyone else’s estimation, by making
false professions of religion” (30); not wanting to “be governed entirely by one
superior mind” or to be one of those people who “never give an original expression to an original idea” (61). She feels this resistance no less outside the church
than within, and is first portrayed as someone who, unlike the rest of the congregation, cannot “keep her thoughts from dwelling, first upon one thing then upon
another, instead of keeping them strictly upon the sermon” (110). Indeed, “the
beautiful words from God’s own book, the grand thoughts [Mr. Stanley] gave
expression to… were all lost upon Meg; she gave no thought to them” (113). Perhaps her biggest hurdle to accepting God’s will is her love for theater, a passion
that plays out prior to her spiritual awakening in the form of a school recital, performed for the whole town and in which she takes center stage. It is hardly ironic
that her solo performance in the recital—a reading of a poem about a mother willing to have her arms and hands bound by “Russia’s heaviest iron bands” to save
28

Cultural Analytics

Race, Writing, and Computation

her son’s life—is met with a reaction identical to Mr. Stanley’s sermons: ”the audience showed their appreciation of her effort in that truest praise of all—complete,
breathless silence” (155).
Ultimately, it is Megda’s charisma that stands as her biggest threat to the novel’s
ideological orientation. And it is from this point on that the “workings of the
Spirit” begin to make her “a little more thoughtful, a little more subdued in her
manner” (177-78). When she hears Ethel’s voice in prayer she is now transfixed
(190); Mr. Stanley’s prayers compel her to give her “whole mind” to them (192).
At the pivotal moment following Ethel’s baptism where Megda finally, inevitably,
crosses into the light, the text reinforces how complete is her subjugation to the
authority of God and the sacrifice of her own freedom to resist. When Mr. Stanley
relays an anecdote about a desperate Siberian prisoner whose chains are miraculously unfastened by Jesus, representing the latter’s sacrifice for the spiritual freedom of all (227-230), Megda has her long awaited conversion. She “felt like falling
on her knees then and there, and bowing her head before the power of the Omnipotent” (230). The experience leaves her “inexpressibly happy,” and so too, we
can imagine, the intended reader, now that all possibility of critical modification
is suppressed. Even the narrator steps in to remind us that, “all this peace and
joy would have been hers months ago if she had only opened her heart to Him,
surrendered her will to His and believed on Him as her Saviour” (231).
At this final surrender, with Megda relinquishing one set of chains (of pride) for
another (to Jesus), the novel reconfirms its overall ideological stance. Moreover,
it firmly situates its rejection of critical modification as a movement toward whiteness, silent submission, and, by the end of the novel, safe middle-class domesticity. Megda, situated at the extreme end of the general narratological patterns revealed by our computational model, is thus right where it should be—its attitude
to the Bible is decidedly “non-social” and, moreover, conditioned on “whiteness”
being an amplifier of this orientation. We can almost read the text as a whole as
confirmation of the categorical thinking that allowed us to situate it within these
broader patterns in the first place. “White” writers tend to engage the Bible in
one way, “black” writers another. And yet we found that, according to this thinking, Megda was also not where it should be. We could have explained this away as
an effect of the author’s curious biography and the series of decisions that led her
to be improperly slotted into the category of “black” identified author. Instead,
we treated the novel as the very exception that proved the possibility of thinking
past whether Emma Dunham Kelley was writing while “white” or “black.” This
meant reading it against the same general patterns found by our model, but this
time through a relational perspective wherein social and non-social attitudes toward the Bible are seen as part of a continuum, neither divided along strict racial
29

Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu

Cultural Analytics

lines nor fully determined by them.
We were, in other words, able to read the novel doubly. For when recognized
as part of a broader formal tendency to appropriate the Bible in a non-critical
way, we can read it alongside novels that exhibit this tendency irrespective of the
racial identity of their authors. Conversely, we can read together novels showing
the opposite tendency, just as we began to do with This Child’s Gonna Live and
Grapes of Wrath. These new kinds of groupings allow us to read the interaction of
race, writing, and religion across a set of shared formal tendencies - shared “models of language” - and not across the categorical labels provisionally assigned to
authors. In the case of Megda, our relational approach further revealed how the
continuum between social and non-social attitudes - itself structured by specific
interactions of race and religion with other dimensions like gender and class could play out within the individual text or even within individual subjects. Race,
understood as an assemblage of social forces and institutions that exceed the ontological and categorical division of human experience, can be read everywhere
in the US novel, however particular its manifestation may be in any one text.
To conclude, and to return to our initial gambit of bringing together computation
and the critique of race: where does this leave us? Our approach allowed us to critique an obvious and easy target: Northrop Frye and his theory of the Bible and
literary universalism. Yet, it also enabled us to revisit an important controversy
within African-American literary scholarship, and to expose the limits of categorical thinking as it appears in quantitative methods, but also in one strain of
humanistic research. Counter intuitively, computation helps us think beyond a
politics of identification that, as in Gates’s editorial decision, can easily fall back
to a flat mapping of racialized bodies onto racial texts. The key is focusing on
both what the method reveals at scale as pattern, but also transforming our perspective on that pattern by questioning its underlying assumptions. For us, that
meant substituting the grammar of categories for the grammar of relationality
to read the general patterns doubly, and so too the individual texts, like Megda,
that constitute them. We still need categorical labels to limn the broad contours
against which to orient the interaction of race and religion across the twentiethcentury US novel. Abstract and reductive as they are, they point to a fundamental
dimension around which social and literary life is organized. But if this dimension provides an initial means of seeing difference in the data, it is one we can
look beyond. It was our double vision of Megda that allowed us to loosen the
categorical thinking behind our method, but also behind literary history itself,
which in this particular case, uncannily echoes the former.

30

