"x"
"1" "“HOPE WITHIN HOPELESSNESS”: THE LIVES OF FAMILIES WHOSE MEMBER IS ON DNR (do not resuscitate) STATUS”"
"2" "Rushel  E.  Berdeguel , RN,  FPSQua ;"
"3" "Rudolf  Cymorr  Kirby P. Martinez, Ph.D., RN FRIN"
"4" "ABSTRACT"
"5" "This study explores the experience of families whose member is on DNR (Do Not Resuscitate) status. Descriptive phenomenology was utilized as the philosophical underpinning of the study. After obtaining the appropriate ethics clearances, seven (7) participants were selected to be co-researchers of the study based on preset criteria. Multiple interviews were done, tape-recorded and transcribed verbatim to form the narratives of the study."
"6" "Further, the approach espoused by van  Manen  was employed as the process of reflective explication of the narratives of the co-researchers. From the process, three themes were revealed and are as follows: (1)   in a suspended reality, (2) bargaining with  time, and (3) restless  in a resting place. These themes are the overarching patterns of the lives of the co-researchers. Further reflection from these themes generated the essence of the co-researchers lives, encapsulated by the phrase “Hope within Hopelessness”."
"7" "Insights from the study suggest that the co-researchers continue to have a glimmer of hope even though the overall context of their experience is that of hopelessness since they seem to have attributed DNR with imminent death. The importance of proper and effective dialogical communication from the health care provider is further implied from the insights of this study."
"8" "Keywords: DNR Status, Phenomenology, Family Experience after DNR"
"9" "INTRODUCTION"
"10" "The lived experience of family members, surrogates of a person/patient under DNR (Do Not Resuscitate) status has been an interesting issue in the medical field. This entails the coping stages of the family on the outcome/consequence of their decision of not to administer resuscitation to the patient. Apparently, ethical issues seem to be of higher weight. The ethical issues and discussions revolve on the patient’s right to die. With this problem, the U.S. Congress passed the Federal Patient Self Determination Act (PSDA), a law that promotes patient’s participation and knowledge about the options available for the intervention. However, when the end of life decision making is to be discussed, the major decision is often postponed because of avoidance of patient’s family member as well as healthcare professionals. Cited reasons may include the fear of death, cultural and beliefs indifferences, and unwillingness to give up hope."
"11" "Modern medicine’s ability to save and sustain life has created a new imperative to balance technology with humanity. The question of what circumstances should medical intervention cease as well as whether a person is allowed to die are some of the worst controversial issues facing society today. Medical choices are moral choices and the need to balance fundamental and competing values in the delivery of care inevitably give rise to conflict and uncertainty both with the nurse, doctor and the person making the moral health care decision. This challenge is especially relevant to decisions about CPR (Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation). The emergence of do not resuscitate order reflects the growing consensus that the availability of technology does not create a medical or moral imperative for its use with and for all patients. The questions about when to withhold resuscitation, on what grounds, and by whose consent have surfaced as issues.  Withdrawing and withholding the medical treatment of a client is a big decision to make and is a sensitive issue that requires a consent signed by a sound mind individual. This is common in the ICU (Intensive care unit) setting wherein a client is on the DNR (Do Not Resuscitate) status. According to Kelly, as cited by  Delroughery  (1998), DNR order is a separate decision from the advance directives. It requires consent from the patient, families, surrogate, significant others provided after the physician explains its purpose and benefits."
"12" "DNR provides clear and specific actions on what medical treatment is to withdraw or withhold. Furthermore, there are key principles for a DNR order  proposed by Kelly, as cited by  Delroughery  ( 1998), and these are: statement of the policy of the institution that resuscitation will be initiated unless there is a specific order to withhold resuscitative order; statement from the client regarding specific desires; description of the client’s medical condition to justify a DNR order; statement about the role of family members or significant others; definition of the scope of DNR order; statement about the initiation of the DNR order; delineation of role of various caregivers.  In addition, the UK medical profession has guidelines for circumstances in which a DNR may be used: if a patient’s medical condition cannot be revived by resuscitation; mentally competent patient consistently stated or record his or her will that he or she doesn’t want to be resuscitated; if resuscitation will not bring the patient’s best interest but will lead the patient to poor quality of life."
"13" "This action has a big impact on every individual specifically to the family of a client who is on the DNR status. Nurses are always involved in any type of decision making whether for a non-invasive or invasive procedure and end of life decision. Being the patient’s advocate, it is the responsibility of the nurse to get involved in the discussion between the patient, family, and physician about the medical treatment thus protecting the patient from harm and providing the utmost nursing intervention by always observing and applying ethical principles."
"14" "There is a need to understand how family members appreciate their situation while their loved one is on DNR status. It covers different reactions from the members of the family. The information that will be provided from this study will help the healthcare provider’s forma deeper understanding of the experience and enable them to provide effective nursing intervention to help the family cope with the situation. This study will be focusing on the family’s’ experiences during the entire DNR status of their loved one."
"15" "METHODOLOGY"
"16" "The researcher used a descriptive phenomenology approach in the study to yield a description of the phenomenon of the experience of the family having their loved one on the DNR status. According to Creswell (1998), phenomenological data analysis proceeds through the methodology of reduction, the analysis of specific statement and themes, and a search for all possible meanings. This qualitative method helps the researcher unveil and  discover the meaning while emphasizing the richness, breadth, and depth of individual experiences. In order to discover meanings in the data, one needs an attitude open enough to let unexpected meanings emerge ( Giorgi , 20 09 ; Lopez & Willis, 2004). This method involves direct exploration, analysis, and description of particular phenomena, as free as possible from unexamined presuppositions, aiming at maximum intuitive presentation, which enables the researcher to stimulate the perception of lived experience while emphasizing the richness, breadth, and depth of those experiences."
"17" "The researcher utilized the purposive sampling technique to handpick the seven subjects who were screened to the ideal population based on their knowledge of a phenomenon for the purpose of sharing that knowledge.  Manen’s  process.   The study focused on the lived experience of families during the entire DNR status of their loved ones."
"18" "In this study, In-depth, open-ended interviews were utilized for exploration and gathering of narrative data that is the source of rich, deep understanding of a specific human phenomenon and can be used as a conversational way of gathering data ( Manen , 199 7 ). Each family member was asked to share their experience of having a loved one on the DNR status. Analysis of a phenomenon involves a reflection of the essential meanings of the experience ( Manen , 199 7 ). It, therefore, begins with the experience as related by the participant as a whole, started during the first phase of the interview. It continued throughout the study specifically during transcribing, listening to the taped interviews, reflecting on transcript, coding, and synthesizing.  It continued until the essences were identified and reduced from the context of the interviews, giving insight and meaning to the research question and the world it encompassed ( Manen , 199 7 ).  Conducting ongoing analysis allowed for elaboration and clarification of concepts within future interviews and permitted more observant and sensitive ways to approach the participants. Bracketing was observed by the researcher throughout the research process to have a clear interpretation of the interviews of the lived experiences of a family whose loved one is on the DNR status.  Attempts to bracket out personal beliefs were achieved in order to perceive the experiences as original and unbiased."
"19" "FINDINGS"
"20" "Essential Themes"
"21" "Thematic identification gives the order to the research, disclosing the evolving meanings and imagery of the lived experience.  Inquiring about the lived experiences of family who’s loved one is on the DNR status, the following three themes were found: In a Suspended Reality, Bargaining with Time, and Restless in a resting place. The three themes were derived from the meaningful event experience by the family"
"22" "In a Suspended Reality"
"23" "During the entire status of the patient, the co-researchers experience uncertainty in the pattern of their life. This uncertainty covers with three concepts: Timing of DNR updates, Vague and ambiguous updates from a health practitioner, and Overarching feeling of being left alone."
"24" "These concepts contribute to the life of co-researchers who are present during the entire status of their loved one. The timing of DNR added more stress and anxiety because as a protocol of the institution, it is being renewed every 24 hours after the DNR was signed and activated and every time co-researchers renewed the DNR status it added more guilt to the co-researchers. Vague and ambiguous updates from health practitioner also contribute to the co-researcher experience. Nurses and Attending physician must jive in giving information especially giving updates to the families to avoid miscommunication and giving false hope to the families. The fear of losing a soul mate, a partner in life, a loved one and the feeling of being left alone is the hardest thing to accept by co-researcher that makes their life a rollercoaster."
"25" "“ Unang    una   inexplain   nila   sa  akin financially  kasi   alam   nila   walang   wala   ako ,  tapos   sabi   nya   nandon   na   talaga   sa  stage  ang   Tatay   ko   na   kesa  pa  daw   gumastos   ng   gumastos   antayin   na   lang   na   mawala .  Tapos   tinanong   nya   sa  akin kung  kailangan  pa  kabitan   ng   tubo  kaya  sabi   ko   mano   mano   na   lang  kaya everyday  pinapipirma   ako   ng  DNR  na   hindi   na  eh CPR”  (At first they explain to me regarding the expenses because they know that I have no finances to sustain my father, and he explained to me that my father is at the end stage of life, instead of spending the money, we will just wait for her father until he will lose his life. Then he asks me if I want my father to be intubated and I told him there is no need to intubate my father that’s’ why every day I’m signing a DNR form for my father)"
"26" "Bargaining with Time"
"27" "With the short and precious time left for their loved one, families use the time wisely. This time triggers reconciliation with significant others, essential ritual for the dying, and amending loose ends."
"28" "Families hope that their loved one will be seen by relatives, friends and significant others before death comes. Families are busy calling or notifying religious groups and ask for prayers and rituals for their loved one based on their faith and belief. It happens that all the co-researcher were all Catholics. Co-researchers believe that there is a need for reconciliation, closure, and assurance from the people who will be left behind in order for the body and soul of their love to leave the earth peacefully."
"29" "Every minute, every second is very important for the family. The agony of waiting is the hardest part for a family is experiencing. Keeping the faith and waiting for a miracle to happen, waiting for the relatives to come before it’s too late, and waiting for the time the life would end. Even death is inevitable for their loved one, the family is still hoping from a vague chance to survive and if not the family is bargaining a longer period of time for them to see their loved one alive as Mr. R. A. expressed:"
"30" "“Sana  habaan   yong  time  ng  visiting hours  sa   ganong   sitwasyon   para   makasama   ng   pamilya   ng   matagal  at  makapagpaalam   sana   sa   mga   pasyenteng   pabigay   na ”  (We are hoping that visiting hours should be longer so that the family can stay with their loved one for a longer period of time and say goodbye especially for those patients at the End of life status)"
"31" "Restless in a Resting Place"
"32" "Such agonizing as a context characterized by emotional conflict, turmoil and ambivalence make the life of co-researchers more restless. Because of the agony of waiting, the uncertainty of what’s going to happen, and open empty space of the waiting area from one corner of ICU where the co-researchers can wait and rest added more restlessness to them."
"33" "The time has come for waiting when their loved ones’ heart stops beating and stops breathing is the saddest and hardest situation for the family members. The uncertainty of the time-frame of the death of their loved one, brought restlessness to the co-researchers. They always wanted to be updated by the healthcare providers how the patient is going. Frequent updates from  physicians and nurses are very important for the family in alleviating the stress. The nature of the waiting area of ICU for the families is at one corner of the institution near the ICU provided with a bench and an electric fan where the families can stay and rest. This bare environment contributes to the stress and upset of the family that instead of being comforted in the resting place they tend to be more restless because there is nothing to  deviate  their attention and feelings."
"34" "Medical ICU is one of the special areas of the hospital where critical patients are managed with intensive care and monitoring. Relatives and significant others are not allowed to stay inside the ICU at all times as the policy of the institution. Schedule of visiting hours are posted outside the ICU together with the guidelines that must be strictly followed by the visitors. Relatives and significant others stay at all times at the waiting area provided by the institution for the immediate family, significant others as a representative who can decide in behalf of the patient and other family members when the need arises."
"35" "“ Nong   nasa  DNR  na   sya   ayon   lumabas   na  kami  ng  ICU  tapos   doon   na  kami  sa  waiting area  nagiyakan   sa   labas   ng  ICU  nabigla  kami di  namin   matangap   pero   wala  eh  wala   na   kaming   magagawa   kundi   umiyak ”  (We got out from the ICU when our father was already in the DNR status, we've been crying at the waiting area we were saddened, we cannot accept the reality we are helpless, but we have no choice but to cry)"
"36" "Discovering the Essence"
"37" "Rigorous analysis of theme applying the Van  Manen's  (199 7 ) 4th step yielded “Hope within Hopelessness” as the essence of the phenomenon of their life experience."
"38" "The essence of this study proposes that even when death is imminent and DNR status is activated for their loved one, the family still never give up Hope and still believe that miracles could happen. Holding on to that hope even when hopelessness is very evident is what make their experience contextually unique.   Figure 1 shows the schematic mapping of the concepts related to the three (3) themes discussed above."
"39" "Figure1: Thematic Schema of the three (3) themes: In a Suspended Reality, Bargaining with Time, & Restless in a Resting Place, how the concepts were interrelated and  arriving  the Essence (Hope within Hopelessness)."
"40" "IMPLICATIONS"
"41" "This study has several implications for Nursing Education. First, this study yielded a need to develop students’ Competency: Empiric and Ethics of DNR, Psychosocial care, and Communication that could be integrated into the Nursing curriculum since OBE is being implemented. With the goal of OBE what is to be expected from the student, this would be of great help for the nursing students."
"42" "The clinical learning experience is the most effective approach to learning augmenting the inadequacy from classroom and textbook knowledge. Adequate exposure of student to the patient on DNR status as part of student learning is much required. Clinical learning in EOL, especially during the DNR status, must include a focus on acute settings and incorporating palliative care principles into this context. Students need to be taught the importance of effective and efficient nursing care in all settings. Psychosocial care would not be also set aside this aspect should, more importantly, be improved by nurses for them to be able to effectively care for the affected family members. Students should be exposed longer period of time at the bedside in providing care such as bathing patients and rendering oral care so that they can understand and put in their heart that the essence of nursing is caring and providing comfort to the patient and relatives. EOL care should also be highlighted in the Nursing curriculum to developed their skills, knowledge, and attitude the nurses should have before their exposure in their related learning experience. Nursing students should be assessed first, their outlook about the death and dying, end of life situation, and awareness of immense death. They should also be oriented on what to expect in that kind of situation, what they could see, and what they could hear in preparation for their area exposure. This skills will be enhanced and acquire by the nursing students when he/she is about to interact with the family and provide care to the patient facing EOL. Communication is very important in our profession because this study conveys the importance in the care of the entire family and not just the patient. Family members are just as vulnerable as their loved one who's dying. This skills should be developed from the Nursing students and this can be developed in the public speaking subject of the nursing students because if nurses are poor in communication and cannot express himself this may lead to dissatisfaction of the family member that may result to complaints and apprehension between nurses and family member."
"43" "Since Nurses are the patients’ advocate, family entrusted the life of their loved one to nurses. It is a big responsibility for nurses to overcome the family’s expectation from them. In this study, the family members were asked how he/she can be supported by Nurses while their loved one is on the DNR status. The family needs constant interaction with the Nurses and the desire to be with their loved one inside the ICU at all times is only what they need during those stressful times. Family members need guidance from Nurses on what is the next step to do to be able to help them away from confusions. Nurses are considered by the family members a friend sometimes calling the Nurses  Kuya   or Ate is one of the endearments of Filipinos that they considered you as a family member. The sensitivity of Nurses should always be on top. Observing the body language of the family members, the cues that family members need your attention because one of the family members does not go to Nurses to ask if she has concern instead she only waits for the Nurses to come for the update of his father. Nurses to be assigned in ICU should be in the proficient level because in this area a nurse must have a strong foundation towards the EOL care to address the needs of the family members. He/she is in the position to educate the family about the Death and Dying and facilitate good communication with the family members to promote comfortable, dignified and peaceful death for their loved one. This study implies that all healthcare provider especially Nurses must have proper training on Family support during DNR status/End of Life, Anger and stress management to prevent burnout, training on Proper Collaboration among healthcare practitioner, and constant training on good communication and decision making since family member look at Nurses as their partner in every decision made because most Nurses also stand as witness in every consent signed by the family member."
"44" "REFERENCES"
"45" "Creswell, J. W. (1998).  Qualitative research and research design: Choosing among five traditions . London: Thousand Oaks."
"46" "Deloughery , G. (1998).  Issues and trends in nursing (3 rd   ed . ). Minnesota: Mosby."
"47" "Giorgi , A. (2011). IPA and science: A response to Jonathan Smith.  Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 42 , 195-216."
"48" "Giorgi , A. (2009).  The descriptive phenomenological method in psychology: A modified  Husserlian  approach .  Duquesne University Press."
"49" "Lopez, K. A., & Willis, D. G. (2004).  Descriptive versus interpretive phenomenology: Their contributions to nursing knowledge.  Qualitative health research, 14 (5), 726-735"
"50" "Manen , M. V. (1997).  From meaning to method.   Qualitative health research, 7 (3), 345-369"
"51" "Manen , V. M. (1990).  Researching lived experiences . Albany: State University of New York Press."
"52" "Marshall, M.N. (1996).  Sampling for qualitative research.  Family Practice, 522-525 ."
"53" "Mason, J. (2002).  Qualitative researching (2 nd   ed . ).  Sage Publications."
"54" "Streubert , H. J. ,&  Carpenter, D. R. (1999). Qualitative research in nursing (2 nd  ed.) . Philippines: C & E Publishing, Inc."
