AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.4

Pp.51-67

Silence as a Tactic of Communication in Pragmatics, Novel, and Poetry

Enas Subhi Amer
Department of English, College of Education for Women
University of Baghdad, Iraq
Adhraa A. Naser
Department of English, College of Education for Women
University of Baghdad, Iraq
Rufaidah Kamal Abdulmajeed
Department of English, College of Education for Women
University of Baghdad, Iraq

Abstract
This study aims to discuss the meaning of the ‘silence’ notion pragmatically and literary; in novel
and poetry. As far as pragmatics is concerned, it means an important means of communication
within a context, and it is a culture dependent. As for silence in literature, it offers the example in
which silence is not only present and comprehended but also a substantial part of communication
that encapsulate a sender and a receiver. In novels, it is considered as a new humanistic tactic
through which a writer would force the reader to feel words rather than reading them plus more
intensity and strength. Novelists tend to use silence in writing their novels as it is an integral part
of voices and a revelation of so many hidden things, but it mistakenly might be understood as a
refusal for communication. Finally, the notion of ‘silence’ in poetry offers the readers many
examples where the poet invites the readers to hear "silence." In some cases, it is even personified
and is given a physical being.
Keywords: articulation, communication function, pauses, silence, unspeakable
Cites as: Amer, E. S., Andhra A. Naser, A. A. , & Abdulmajeed, R. K. (2019). Silence as a Tactic
of Communication in Pragmatics, Novel, and Poetry. Arab World English Journal for Translation
& Literary Studies, 3 (3) 51-67. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.4
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

51

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

1. Introduction
1- A Pragmatic Dimension of Silence
Silence is an actual, meaningful means of communication, and it has various functions in
a different context and different cultures. It may be defined as “meaningful absence, which leaves
its traces back in the signifying empty place in a text” (Moghaddam et al., 2014, p. 251).
It is notable from other concepts such as pause, stillness, and silencing as those are
comprehended as a sort of a means by which a non-communicative process is achieved. Breaks,
whether filled or unfilled, are the speakers’ choices inserted in their turns to breathe or to plan their
next utterance, whereas stillness, using Kurzon (1998)’s words, is a kind of non-communicative
absence of sound and it is not speech but noise (p. 15). As for silencing, it is the speaker’s choice
of “exercising power over another… it is an act depriving a person of expression” (Ephratt, 2008,
p. 1913).
Silence is currently receiving a wide range of attention in literary as well as in linguistic
studies as it has a function in the communication process and meaning depending on the context,
culture and the topic of the communication.
It, from a linguistic point of view, is a multifaceted concept and complex phenomenon.
According to AL-Harahsheh (2013), this complexity is due to the ambiguity that results from its
ill interpretation and, furthers because of its linguistic interpretation needs, first of all, a broad
knowledge of the socio-cultural background of the text under analysis and the context as well (p.
5).
Almost all the linguists have denied the functions of silence in language studies at the
beginning of the 1970s, but the notion of ‘silence’ creeps into linguistic studies almost in the
beginning 1970s. It was, at that time, “associated with negativity, passiveness, impotence, and
death. It was treated as absence: the absence of speech and absence of meaning and intention”
(Ephratt, 2008, p. 1910). The reason behind this attitude towards this notion is that because the
majority of those who tackled the concept of silence were mainly concerned with the grammar of
the language and ultimately devoted to studying lexicography (Saville-Troike, 1994, p. 15).
The next decade, up to the mid of the 1980s, has witnessed a remarkable development in
the interpretation of silence linguistically. Many projects and studies on eloquent silence were
carried out by many linguists. Among them was Pinker (1994), who suggests that “people hear
language but not sounds.” He primarily takes silence as “a metaphor of absence rather than a
phonetic, phonemic or even prosodic or semiotic entity” (p.158).

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

52

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

With the development of pragmatics in the 1990s, the studies conducted on silence
investigate the pragmatic dimension of silence and “undergo a slight shift from ground to figure”
(Ephratt, 2008, p. 1910). Poyatos (2002) writes that ‘‘Linguistics has wasted many research
opportunities offered by silence . . . rarely have linguists referred to silence as a component of
interaction’’ (p. 299).
1. B Function of Silence
The communicative silence serves multifunction, and it has a contextual and cultural
dependency. This kind of silence is called “eloquent silence” as it is an “active means chosen by
the speaker to convey his or her message” (Moghaddam et al. 2014, p. 251). These functions are:
1- Rhetoric Function:
In defining pragmatics, Yule (1996) says it is the study of the speaker’s intended meaning in
addition to the contextual factors (p. 3). In other words, it is the study of what and how more than
the words is communicated. Concerning this definition, Moghaddam et al. (2014) see silence as a
definite source of rhetoric in pragmatics (p. 252).
2- Expressing empty words:
Some consider silence as a non-verbal linguistic element and called it as “empty words” such as
“knocking on wood”. These words are culture-specific and draw their meanings depending on the
culture of the interlocutors (p.252).
3- Conveying emotions:
Smiling and making different facial and body gestures during conversation are also kinds of
silence. They are called emotive silence (p.252). It also might be used to show some other
emotional expressions such as surprise, anger, shame, embarrassment, hesitation, and courtesy
(AL-Harahsheh, 2013, p. 21).
4- Politeness: silence can be used to serve several politeness functions (p. 16). It is a way of using
a face-saving strategy. AL-Harahsheh (2013) argues that “The recipient tends to be silent before
saying something that could be embarrassing to the current speaker” (p.16). The speaker, in being
silent, chooses to be carefully selective in his words to avoid any inconvenience to his participation
in the conversation.
Human silence, using Johannesen (1974)’s words, "is pregnant with meaning because of
its assumption" (p. 29). It means that silence has never been out of context and never been a kind
of emptiness in the interpretation of the conversation, depending on the culture of a specific
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

53

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

language used. Silence "is rich in meanings, and without understanding these meanings during
communication, there is a possibility for ambiguity and misinterpretation" (p.29).
2. Silence in Novel
Language is an essential means of communication, telling facts, disseminating knowledge,
explaining figures, and expressing ideas, opinions, feelings, etc. Silence in a novel is a new
humanistic tactic through which a writer would force the reader to feel words rather than reading
them plus more intensity and strength. Mistakenly it might be understood as a refusal for
communication, yet this silence is a revelation of so many hidden things. Silence forms an integral
part of voices, as Jean-Michel Maulpoix suggests about poetry claiming that: “Silence is a moment,
a limit and a quality of speech.” (p.416)
To have a clear vision about silence, one should not consider language as spoken or written
words. Interaction is any means by which people of any culture communicates or understands each
other. Prof. Laurent Jenny (La vie esthétique. States et flux, Verdier, 2013) describes Arundhati
Roy’s use of silence as if she weaves voice and silence to induce a rhythmic presence stating that
“All speech is necessary woven with a silence in which it originates and that it extends at the same
time. All utterance is resonant with the dullness of something that remains unsaid and which is
also its rhythmical source” (Jenny, 2013, p.164).
Roy’s (1998) polyphonic and musical novel The Gods of Small Things exemplifies the
use of language in a post-colonial novel. It shows her excellent blend of two stylistic choices. She
decides to leave her language choice unexplained to give her reader space for digging deep into
the characters. It serves several functions and producing varied effects: they enable the text to
control its voice, get its breath back, and regulate its breathing. A reader might presume that each
capitalized, misspelled, or italicized word transports a cluster of significations. Although she does
not remark a specific linguistic selects, she does assert that there is a manner to her writing:
It was really like designing a building…the use of time, the repetition of words and ideas
and feelings. It was really a search for coherence—design coherence—in the way that
every last detail of a building—its doors and windows, its structural components—have,
or at least ought to have, an aesthetic, stylistic integrity, a clear indication that they belong
to each other, as must a book (as cited. in Abraham 1998, p.90).
Roy exposes her readers to new cultural practices. Her characters express themselves by their
actions more clearly than they do by their uttered words or visual communication. Esthappen is
the best embodiment for this unique point of view; he stayed without communication for nearly
half of the novel. His lack of communication or word shows the powerful effects of actions. He is
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
54
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

captivated in the prison of silence, which kept him listening to others and observing the world
around him well. It causes his withdrawing from contact, and also to be free from bringing death
again to anybody. Thus, silence is a decision for him.
Once the quietness arrived, it stayed and spread in Estha. It reached out of his head and
enfolded him in its swampy arms […]. It sent its stealthy, suckered tentacles inching along
the insides of his skull, hoovering the knolls and dells of his memory, dislodging old
sentences, whisking them off the tip of his tongue. It stripped his thoughts of the words that
described them and left them pared and naked. Unspeakable. Numb […] He grew
accustomed to the uneasy octopus that lived inside him and squirted its inky tranquilizer
on his past. Gradually the reason for his silence was hidden away, entombed somewhere
deep in the soothing folds of the fact of it (Roy, 1996, p. 13).
Silence signifies absence, Rahel sentences in the next paragraph shows that the blanks invade the
page, thus visually representing the void; each word is isolated by only one line:
“Nothing
[…]
Out
In
And lifted its legs
Up
Down”
(Roy, 1996, p. 293).
In The God of Small Things, the very visual and brutal image of the dead fish is to be repeated
again when Estha has to identify Velutha in cell and thus condemn him to death: “Dead fish floated
up in Estha […] Silence slid in like a bolt” (Roy, 1996, p. 320). Beaten to death in front of them:
“Screams died in them and floated belly up, like dead fish” (Roy, 1996, p. 308). For him, silence
is the loudest argument he makes with life. It is his language, “there wasn’t an ‘exactly when.’. It
had been a gradual winding down and closing shop. A barely noticeable quietening. As though he
had run out of the conversation and had nothing left to say” (p. 10).
Part of his usual way to explain this attachment is to consult Iser(2001) theory about
“Blanks” in a text. In reader-response theory, it is said that blanks “Leaves open the connection
between textual perspectives and so spur the reader into coordinating these perspectives and
patterns” (p. 1677).

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

55

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

In this way, Roy(1996) succeeds in connecting Estha to the reader and finds a way to let
it go naturally. By the use of these blanks, the reader starts to identify himself with the character
because of blanks “prompt acts of ideation on the reader’s part.” I bid blanks are the moments of
silence in the presence of Estha. A reader can understand silence as the means to connect himself
with Estha when he is in pain. Thus, it is expressive; a reader can shift from silence to words
quickly. Estha blends so well into the background that people around him do not even notice that
he never speaks “Estha’s silence was never awkward. Never intrusive. Never noisy. It wasn’t an
accusing, protesting silence as much as a sort of aestivation, dormancy” (p. 10).
Estha’s soundless actions are not less than actions with persuasive words. Tremendously,
this silent obsession with cleanliness and the need to be cleaned is telling his dis-agree to his filthy
abuse and incredible violence he undergoes as a child. His actions sound louder than words in this
respect. As words translate thoughts, Estha’s silence translates his ideas. The reader feels satisfied
with his silence. One can quickly get his point of view in a better way and gets comfortable as does
Estha. His silence is not awkward if one gets to understands him entirely “Yet Estha’s silence was
never awkward. Never intrusive. Never noisy” (Roy, 1996, p. 10). His silence is acceptable; no
one is wandering or questioning it.
“Around them the hosting-jostling crowd./ Scurrying hurrying buying selling luggage
trundling porter paying children shitting people spitting coming going begging bargaining
reservation-checking”(p. 300).
In these instances, the text itself becomes a voice, and more precisely a singing view. By providing
the reader with the essential events that led to Estha’s silence, Roy’s satisfied and fulfilled the
curiosity of any reader. She has armed her character and never left space for vagueness or
suspension. Estha wins the reader’s pity and compassion. Communication is clear this way, and
no gap in the text. The reader would always listen to eloquent silence.
“Communication in literature, then, is a process set in motion and regulated not by a given
code, but by a mutually restrictive and magnifying interaction between the explicit and
implicit, between revelation and concealment” (Iser, 2001, p. 1676).
With Estha, the reader shares his fear to talk. He has “left his voice behind” (Roy, 1996, p. 326)
and witnessed the traumatizing scene of (the murder of Velutha and the drowning of Sophie Mol
before the twins’ eyes) that will become unspeakable and will lead to his muteness. Again for this
would endanger the safety of another innocent person or it would threaten the life of a dear one.
After knowing Estha reason for silence, any reader won’t have to have the enthusiasm for him to
utter a word. One would prefer to share Estha’s peace of mind in silence rather than discussing his
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
56
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

still tried conscious brain. However, Rahel’s return plants the seeds of change in all the speeches
mentioned before:
It had been quiet in Estha’s head until Rahel came. But with her, she had brought the
sound of passing trains, and the light and shade and light that falls on you if you have the
window seat. The world, locked out for years, suddenly flooded in, and now Estha couldn’t
take the noise (Roy, 1996, p. 16).
The presence of Estha and Rahel in one place requires no words uttered. Unexplained comfort and
ease pervade the area in their company. The silent language that links between the two twins felt
rather than said. They established their way of communication. Both understand each other
thoroughly and naturally:
Silence filled the car like a saturated sponge” …that of Estha, safe in his autistic cell,
protected from the noisy world of the bazaar and the crowded tram-“A quiet bubble floating
on a sea of noise” …or the silence of the twins who are just about to seal a secret in the
factory deserted by the workers: “In the factory the silence swooped down once more and
tightened around the twins (Roy, 1996, p. 200).
The oceans of blurred voices, the muted rumblings, the hubbubs, but also the heavy oppressive
silences all taken on a concrete and palpable shape thanks to the telling similes and metaphors
chosen by the narrator to qualify them (cloak, umbrella, sponge, bubble, sea) and thanks to the
verbs which personify sounds and silences, and give them an autonomous existence (approached,
covered, grew, spread, floating, swooped down, tightened). Jean Goux claims that differently, “the
reader hears what he sees” (Roy, 1996, p. 182).
Even when they are a part of bodies, their communication will not stop. One completes the other
through their inner feelings and awareness about the other. Verbal language takes a unique shape
between those two twins:
What Larry McCaslin saw in Rahel’s eyes was not despair at all, but a sort of enforced
optimism. And a hollow where Estha’s words had been. He couldn’t be expected to
understand that. That the emptiness in one twin was only a version of the quietness in the
other (Roy, 1996, p. 21).
In The God of a Small Things, silence plays the role of a language. It requires the presence of both
twins. The nonoccurrence of one twin denotes the feeling of being lost. It is as strong as verbal
language. Rahel meeting Estha after twenty-three years has made her drop everything and returns
Ayemenem. Each one of the twins feels the presence of the other even if he cannot see him. Their
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
57
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

reunion played a significant part in their healing process “The silence sat between grand-niece and
baby grand aunt like a third person. A stranger. swollen. Noxious” (Roy, 1996, p. 21).
When Rahel attempts to speak, her voice jams and the words die in her throat: “Rahel tried to say
something. It came out jagged” (Roy, 1996, p. 29).
Their knowledge that they can begin together again strengthened and supported their broken soul.
Many times both were sharing the same thinking and experiencing the same feelings Rahel was
the only one who can delve deeply in Estha’s inner being. Both were connected mentally and
emotionally soon, after their reacquaints with each other, they recognized the emptiness of any
verbal process between them. They watch a Kathakali public presentation and walk home together,
wordlessly ignoring Comrade K.N.M. Pillai, who is entering the temple as the twins leave. Their
walks home were the source of change for the twins “The twins, not rude, not polite, said nothing.
They walked home together. He and She. We and Us”. (Roy, 1996, p. 225).
Words, according to Estha and Rahel, would not do justice to their feeling. Silence can do more
than word can do. In silence, the voice is better heard, and the reader should lend an ear to these
silences, decode them, “hear the inaudible” (17) to quote Marin, (1981) in La Voix excommuniee.
They spent the years of separation in need of one another. As they walk home, they silently go
over their family history, the events that took place when they were seven years old:
But what was there to say? Only that there were tears. Only that Quietness and Emptiness
fitted together like stacked spoons. Only that there was a snuffling in the hollows at the
base of a lovely throat. Only that a hard honey-colored shoulder had a semicircle of teeth
marks on it. Only that they held each other close, long after it was over. Only that what
they shared that night was not happiness, but hideous grief (Roy, 1996, p. 311).
In Roy’s novel, silence plays the role of redemption. The twin’s silent acceptance of each other
helps in breaking the “love laws” as Brinda Bose puts it:
The fact that the Rahel Estha incest is conducted in the (social) invisibility of a family
home, and indeed involves a partner who has ceased to speak and to be noticed in/by
society at large […] may evade the punishment it apparently would deserve (Bose, 1998,
p. 67).
Silence had succeeded in doing what words failed to do for a quarter-century ago. Silence is no
more captivating their emotions; it has finally released them to be set free. The potency and
strength of silence work effectively in connecting the family member.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
58
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

Velutha and Sophie Mol’s death changes the life of the children and Ammu. Silences spread and
circulate the life of each one “And for the little family curled up and asleep on a blue cross stitch
counterpane? What came for them? Not Death. Just the end of living” (1996, p. 304)
Unspoken grief will never leave anyone of that little family. Silent grief yet speaks volumes of the
changes that come over them and scream within them for the rest of their lives. Silence could make
sense between them because it combined with its other half. Rahel’s husband could see the
outcome of the silence in her eyes. Silence speaks her thoughts and articulated whatever she needs.
Roy’s use of silent language creates ongoing relationships between the characters and the outer
world; she digs deep inside the Small Things, which were the actual ingredient of the Big Things
in life:
Instinctively they stuck to the Small Things. The Big Things ever lurked inside. They knew
that there was nowhere for them to go. They had nothing. No future. So they stuck to the
Small Things (Roy, 1996, p. 320).
Thus, this was Roy’s stylistic choice to unfold the characters through an intention.
Roy succeeds the reader to listen to an unwritten text, her novel encourages the reconsideration of
silence as a form of language, and an integral part of voice Qui-gnard (1993-1994) argues that “To
write is to hear the lost voices.” In The God of Small Things, Roy attempts to regain lost voices.
She peers beneath the surface of what worlds and voices say to reveal a darker world of suffering
and oppression.
Capital letters in the middle of sentences that convey an oral emphasis on the word enable
Roy to give a voice to Small Thing and weight to ordinary words. In The God of Small Things,
Uncle Chacko who “said in his Reading Aloud voice, ‘Never. The. Less’ “(55) echoes Rodrigues,
the schoolteacher in Shame, who “had the ability to speak in capital letters […]. ‘To Succeed in
Life,’ he told the boy, ‘one must be Of the Essence’” (Roy, 1996, p. 49)
Breaking sentences up by punctuation or leaving them unfinished makes the silence more
evident in The God of Small Things. The new page number 34 arouses the feeling of emptiness
and evokes silence. Words dwindle into silence such as “nictitating” slowly dismantled by
repetition:
“Nictitating
ictitatingng
itating
tating
ating
ting
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
59
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

ing”
(Roy 1996:189).
Roy treated her written word as she treats any spoken ones, she inserts holes between words and
makes sentences break, so that the text indented like Rahel’s voice: “[she] tried to say something.
It came out jagged. Like a piece of tin (29), or:
“Nothing.
On Rahel’s heart, Pappachi’s moth snapped open its somber
wings.
Out
In
And lifted its legs
Up
Down”
(Roy, 1996, p. 293).
The blanks here stand symbolic reserve: something that remains untold, that is held back “When
the blank space comes, it marks the transitory limit of the said” (Roy, 1996, p. 309).
Roy successfully has prosecuted the reader with the textual matter as well as the characters. She
introduces the reader to new cultural patterns, unlike what they possess. Roy’s The God of Small
Things is a masterpiece which enfolds a blend of different types of language: verbal and silent, as
well as body language. In a way, her writing corresponds to what Barthes calls “writing aloud”:
[…] writing aloud is not phonological but phonetic; its aim is not the clarity of messages,
the theatre of emotions; what it searches for (in a perspective of bliss) are the pulsional
incidents, the language lined with flesh, a text where we can hear the grain of the throat,
the patina of consonants, the voluptuousness of vowels […] the articulation of the body, of
the tongue, not that of meaning, of language (Roy, 1996, p. 66-67).
3. Silence in Poetry
3.1 Stanley Moss: Subverting Silence.
"The Music is not in the notes, but in the silence between."
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
Poetry offers the readers many examples where the poet invites them to hear silence. In some
instances it is even personified and is given a tangible being such us Walter De La Mare's line "Ay,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
60
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

they heard his foot upon the stirrup, and the sound of Iron on stone, and how the silence surged
softly backward"("The Listeners": Lines 33-37). This section of the article intended to examine
the endeavors poets, such as poet Stanley Moss introduce to make silence heard in his poem
"Silences" published in October 2017 on the Website of the Poetry Foundation in addition to
Moss's autobiographical note entitled Satyr Song.
Rave (2016) points out in her article that:
Speaking of silence in literature –in arts in general-, over the years has become a familiar
territory. The cases of those authors are known, those who decide to suspend their creative
work by giving their words absolute silence. ..among which we can count Arthur
Rimbaud, JD Salinger, Racine Pepin Bello, Carmen Laforet, Juan Rulfo and Santiago
Davone, among others who are worthy presenters of the so-called syndrome of silence, of
the writing of the NO; as departures from the story of Melville, prefer not to do it, that is,
prefer not to continue writing (Rave, 2016).
As defined earlier in this article, silence in meaning is the absence of sound, movement, or action.
English language dictionaries, such as Cambridge English dictionary, define "silence" as a
"complete absence of sound" or a state that involves the action of not making or communicating a
sound, a state of not speaking or writing or making a noise. It is an alternative to void and emptiness
a concept that cannot tangibly be comprehended or interpreted. Moreover, literature offers an
example in which silence is not only present and comprehended but also a substantial part of
connection that enclose a sender and a receiver. Silence's position is marked, and its passivity
articulated as a verb and an action that marks a connection and an echo. The significant part of this
articulation is the other end that gives silence its significance; this other end is the language that is
the other end that breaks the silence and restores the identified method of communication.
Others see in silence a subject for their writing; they believe that by naming it, that by
writing the word silence and its variants, they conjure up the problem of contemporary art,
where the artist paradoxically, as Susan Sontag expresses it, lacks the words and has them
in excess, insofar as "the language is the most impure, the most polluted, the most
exhausted of all the materials that make up art (Rave, 2016).
There cannot be sound without silence, just like there cannot be white without black. It is the
contrast that creates the concept to our perception. However one side is meant to be the media for
the message, sounds came first "at the beginning it was the logos, a logos that is not only a measure
of reason but also the word, the word. Under this gaze, there is no place for silence: the word
covers everything. In this sense "Silence is a place of non-being.." as cited in Maftei 2008; it is a
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
61
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

being "from which all our yearning is to escape…" it is our suppressed voice and the state of
anticipation before being broken "silence is oppression …all silence is waiting to be broken"(a
quote that can't be changed) (Maftei, 2008: p.1). Silence, in this sense, is also something "real,
separate, actual thing, an ontological category of its own: not a lack of language but other than,
different from language; not an absence of sound but the presence of something which is not
sound" (Maftei, 2008: p.1).
Influences of silence "auditory hallucinations, intensification of physical sensations, and a
strong sense of connectedness to her surrounding environment." The difference between chosen
and enforced silence "lies not in the actual events arising, but in one's reactions to and perceptions
of the experience" (Maftei, 2008, p. 2), it is something meant to be broken.
Stanley Moss is an American Poet, born in New York City (1925) and finished his higher
education at Trinity College and Yale University. Moss published poetry collections throughout
the half century the first is The Wrong Angel published in 1966 and the latest Almost Complete
Poems winner of the 2016 National Jewish Book Award for Poetry. Moss's Book God Breaketh
Not All Men's Hearts Alike: New and Latest Collected Poems (2011) was described by the
publisher Seven Stories Press as "one that cements the author as among America's best living poets.
A work of intense illumination, these poems investigate meanings and subjects usually left in darkness."
Moss works as a private art dealer exposing his passion for Italian and Spanish old masters. Moss
is also the publisher and editor of the Sheep Meadow Press. He currently lives in Clintondale New
York.
His Poem "Silences" is published in the Poetry Foundation website October 2017 and the
Academy of American Poets website. This poet is not Moss's first contemplation of silence. The
subject and the title repeated in his poetry collections such us the poem "Silence" that is published
in his Almost Complete Poems (2016) depicting death as the ultimate silence. Moss quoted
Baudelaire as an epigraph in few of his poetry collection "God is the Sole Being who has no need
to exist in order to reign" (Baudelaire 2006: 31). Moss emphasized this significance of the
articulation of the presence and absence of concepts or actions and to what extent our experience
of this action is related the material or abstract form of these actions. Moss examined this through
many media specifically religion making sure that it is not the religion that is a cover of this
articulation but the spiritual contemplation religions offers "Although Many of Moss's Poems
invoke his Judaism, his scope is ecumenical, for Moss is just as likely to draw his images of the
divine from Christain, Islamic, Buddhist, Hindu, Chinese, and Classical Greek, Roman, and
Egyptian iconographies (sometimes in the same poem)" (Schoerke, 2007, p. 343).

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

62

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

Moss started the poem by marking voices as identities. "after the first word spoken, I'd
recognize who's there." Therefore silence to be understood by the reader as the lack of integrity
the ambiguous side of us the dark side that needs to be enlightened. Moss does this again in the
poem by linking sounds to light and silence to darkness contrasting between sound and silence
"The sun is noisy, gossips natural languages. Shhh. Trying to find the truth." However, the poem
opens like an invitation to speak, to communicate, and to find connections where people might
come close to each other. Moss uses the word silence in the second part. However, he does not
present it as an expression of the lack of sound, Moss, instead, identifies the different types of
silence he encounters in the city where the city gardens and the library has their silence, which is
an existence. Moreover, is visible where Moss depicts silence in the white color of 'Happiness'
"there is happiness written in white" and here where the poem declares the statement that silence
is not the absence of voice but "are the voice I no longer hear." It is a being that ceased to exist or
being present but not avoid or a complete absence.
Moss points out the significance of silence not within language itself but with the techniques
of art and artistic works "silent instructions without dialogue,", plays, sound picture films, music
and dances "later in Catalonia I danced the Sardana_ with its opening and closing circles" like in
harmony it is the silence, not the notes that give music its identity according to Mozart, same is
with dancing the intervals identify the movement and their artistic features. Moss declares that this
is not something new in his life or life in general. Opening this part with an invitation to go back
to the first silences "Further back again towards first Silences_ alone in the Charleville of my den,"
Moss continues his experience declaring that like the banderillas, silence is something to be broken
not to be kept going.
“I returned with Sancho to Granada,
My forefather's home, my forbearers' caves,
Banderillas in the bull's neck of my mind”.
Silence Moss points out belongs to the world of dreams where he could release all the feeling he
could not otherwise suppress; it lies in the still photos and the memories of the past:
“when I was young and difficult,
Lorca's photo near my bed,
I saw Twelfth Night, sang Mozart arias,
Read history textbooks my father wrote”.
Again he depicts silence as the dark side of the persona of identification. The sword is not visible
"in a cape of silence," which declares the comparison between visibility and sound and the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
63
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

invisibility of silence. It is related to our vision our recognition of the dark, comprehending the
invisible side through sensation, questioning it too "Is partial light the opposite of silence?".
Silence lies in the silence of the bull, which is not emphasized in the silence of the sword in its
cape. Hence, silence could break into something like murder, significantly marking a significant
change or significant pain; silence acts as the sound of pain. Moss interpreted this by separating
the parts of the poem with the words "Interval… Intermission…." Replacing the pause or silence,
no absence of words no void; only words separating other words. Moss is subverting silence by
breaking it by giving it a direct meaning that is not to be missed in the text of the poem words
"remain our master in all things/ some we have to make use of them to be quiet." Silence speaks
in the meaning it delivers. Silence Moss adds a reflection a method of self-reliant a spiritual
articulation a path to religious contemplation or revolt:
“Because it's common sense, I make noise for the Lord.
He wants our kind to read, sing, speak
To each other, to rejoice and play to beat the band,
Horns, drums, bawdy noisemakers”.
In these lines, what seems to start as a religious allusions soon takes a turn to be a musical
interpretation of sounds and pauses "unhearable" deafened with the echo of the "horns, drums,
bawdy noise makers." Silence is also the inability to communicate with others. The failure to make
connections and understanding. However the media is not humans where "the impulse to the
response remains" (Armantrout, 1985, p. 21), but "the language of trees which the birds can
understand in all its expressions:
“who out of gratitude and affection learn arboreal grammar,
Accents, pronunciation, whatever the weather,”
Moss later in the poem attempts to give silence dimensions. The silence he articulates is a shape
of the intensity of emotions "Affection" for my neighbor is easy; love is complicated. Silence can
be affection, silence a perfect herald.", and other forms such as "speechless love and "there is the
silence which is silenced by the presence of another" (Armantrout, 1985, p. 12).
These possibilities and more explains Moss and other poets' eagerness to use silence or use it
as a subject in their poetry and how according to Ray they manifest a "full awareness and writing
of silence" it could accordingly "mark the legitimate bound of certainty" it "breaks through the
words to illuminate them…The word is born of silence, because silence blows between white
spaces… the pause makes the poem, Hence the spaces allow words to slide towards the abyss of
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

64

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

meaning"(Armantrout, 1985, p. 22). Marianne Moore points out that this is because "the deepest
feeling always shows itself in silence."
4. Conclusion
Silence is an important means of communication; it has never been out of context and never been
a kind of emptiness in the interpretation of the conversation, depending on the culture of a specific
language used. It is pregnant in meanings during communication. It offers an example in which it
is not only present and comprehended but also a substantial part of conversation that encapsulates
a sender and a receiver. In literary works, it is considered as a new humanistic tactic through which
a writer would force the reader to feel words rather than reading them plus more intensity and
strength. It is used as an integral part of voices and a revelation of so many hidden things. It offers
the readers many examples wherein the writer invites the readers to hear "silence".
About the Authors:
Enas Subhi Amer B.A. Graduate of Baghdad University / College of Arts / Department of
English 1994 – 1998, then graduate of MA. degree in Baghdad University / College of Education
Women from 2007 – 2008. Specialized in English literature/Modern Novel. The Title of her
M.A. thesis is “The Concept of Evil In John Ronald Revel Tolkien's Lord of The Rings”.
Published more than fifteen researches and two books. Interested in Post colonialism, the issue
of identity and theme of Nature and Environment. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1806-1197
Dr. Adhraa A. Naser, Head of the department of English, College of Education for Women,
Lecture of 20th century poetry, Graduate of Plymouth University/ UK 2016. Has other published
research papers and participated in several conference in London, Newcastle, Baghdad, Istanbul
and Erbil. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6169-8172
Prof. Dr. Rufaidah Kamal Abdulmajeed, B.A. in English Language: College of
Arts/University of Baghdad, 1978. M.A. in English Linguistics/College of Education for
Women/University of Baghdad. 2005. Ph. D. in English Language and Linguistics: University of
Babylon/College of Education for Human Sciences/English Department. 2016
https//orcid.org/0000-0001-9615-3770

References
Abraham, T. (1998). An Interview with Arundhati Roy Ariel. 29.(1): 8892.
AL-Harahsheh, A. M. A. (2013). A Study of Pragmatic Functions of Silence in Colloquial
Jordanian Arabic. Indian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 39(1)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

65

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

Armantrout, R. (1985). Poetic silence. Ed. Bob Perelman. En: Writing/Talks. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press.
Barthes, Roland. (1975). Roland Barthes par Roland Barthes. Paris
Beckett, S.l (1958). The Unnamable. New York: Grove Press.
Bhabha, H. K, 2004. (1994). The Location of Culture. London: Routledge Classics.
Blanchot, M. (2007). A Voice from Elsewhere. New York: State University, New York, p. 9.
Bose, B. (1998). In Desire and in Death: Eroticism as Politics in Arundhati Roy’s ‘The God of
Small Things. Ariel. 29.(2): 5973.
Ephratt, M. (2008). The Functions of Silence. Journal of Pragmatics, 40, pp. 1909–1938.
Finney, B. (2005). The Sweet Smell of Excess. Will Self, Bataille, and Transgression. Retrieved
on 29 May 2017 at http://www.csulb.edu/~ bhfinney/WillSelf.html
Goux, J. (1999). La Fabrique du continu. Essai sur la prose. Seyssel: Champ Vallon.
Iser, W. (2001). Interaction Between Text and Reader. The Norton Anthology of Theory of
Criticism. Ed. Vincent B. Leitch New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 16731682.
Jean-M. M. (2000). Du Lyisme. José Corti ISBN: 2714307159, 9782714307156.
Johannesen, R. L. (1974). The function of silence: A plea for communication research. Western
Speech, 38, 25-35.
Kurzon, D. (1998). Discourse of Silence. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Laurent, J. (2013). La vie esthétique. Stases et flux, Verdier,
Louis, M. (1981) La Voix excommuniee. ISBN : 9782718602189.
Maftel, M. R. (2008). A Book of Silence By Sara Maitland. The Kelvingrove Review, London:
Granata. 4.
McLeod, J. (2000). Beginning Postcolonialism. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Moghaddam, A. S. & Golnaz, C. & Vahideh, A. Z. (2014). Eloquent Silence, a Pragmatic Concept
in Persian Language. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 136, pp 250 – 254.
Moss, S. (2016). Almost Complete Poems. New York: Seven Stories Press.
Moss, S. Official Website, http://www.stanleymoss.com.
Picard, M. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/silence
Picard, M. (1971). The World Of Silence: Essay [El mundo del silencio: ensayo. Trad. Norberto
Silvetti Paz.]. Caracas: Monte Ávila Editores.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York: William Morrow.
Poyatos, F. (2002). Nonverbal Communication Across Disciplines. Amsterdam and Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Rave, J. M. R. (2016). Towards A Rhetoric and Poetics of Silence. Colombia: Technological
University of Pereira, No. 20, pp 143-174.
Rée, J. (1999). I See a Voice. A Philosophical History of Language, Deafness and the Senses.
London: Flamingo.
Roy, A. (1998). The God of Small Things. New York: Harper Perennial.
Saville-Troike, M. (1994). ‘Silence’ In: Asher, R.E., Simpson, J.M.Y. (Eds.), The Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics. Oxford: Pergamon Press, pp. 3945–3947.
Schoerke, M. (2007). Everything preserved: Poems 1955-2005 by Landis Everson; New and
Selected Poems 2006 by Stanley Moss; A Trick of Sunlight by Dick Davis; Innocence by
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

66

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Silence as a Tactic of Communication

Amer, Naser & Abdulmajeed

Jean Nordhaus; For the Confederate Dead by Kevin Young. The Hudson Review 60(2), pp.
340-348, 350-351.
Sontag, S. (1985). La estética del silencio. En: Estilos radicales: ensayos. Trad. Eduardo
Goliogorsky. Barcelona: Muchnik Editores.
Sontag, S.https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poems/144366/silences59bc0221849e7
Sontag, S. https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/stanley-moss
Sontag, S. https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/stanley-moss
Spivak, G. C. (2006). Can the Subaltern Speak?. The Post-Colonial Studies Reader. Eds. Bill
Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. London and New York, Routledge
Steiner, G., (1977). Language and Silence. Essays on Language, Literature, and the Inhuman. New
York: Atheneum.
Thormann, J. (2003). The Ethical Subject of The God of Small Things. JPCS: Journal for the
Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society. 8: 299307.
Wolpe, S. (ed.) (2013). Breaking the Jaws of Silence: Sixty American Poets Speak to the World.
US: The University of Arkansas Press.
Yule, G. (1996) Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

67

