Author: Spencer Garrison (University of Michigan — Ann Arbor)
Unpublished Manuscript — Available on SocArXiv

Agree to Disagree, or Disagree to Agree? A Response to Vega, Holzman, Zhao, and Risman

Last summer, I published a research brief in Gender & Society (Garrison 2018) about the
narrative work that trans-identified teens and young adults take on in their efforts to account for
(and to legitimate) their claims to trans identity. In this article, I examine the identity narratives
produced by two cohorts of trans-identified respondents — respondents that identified within the
context of the existing gender binary, and respondents that did not — and assess the narrative
strategies that respondents within these two cohorts employed in order to establish themselves as
“authentically” trans. Since the release of this article, I’ve been fortunate enough to receive
commentary on it from peers all around the country — some celebratory, and some critical.
Most recently, this commentary has come in the form of a critique posted by a group of concerned colleagues to Psychology Today.1

I am always grateful to receive constructive feedback on my work, and this critique is no
exception: I appreciate that Dr. Risman and her colleagues have found the work's contribution
significant enough to merit such thoughtful and direct engagement, and I thank them for their
consideration and their time. Indeed, the substance of the critique suggests to me that there is a
great deal about which we agree here: while my critics allege that my approach to this research
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/gender-questions/201903/man-woman-and-in-between-orbeyond
1

1

“contradicts” their own, I suspect that the differences between our approaches are not nearly so
profound or so totalizing as my critics have proposed. That said, however, I fear that the core
principle anchoring this particular critique — namely, the claim that this research unjustly defines and asserts ALL non-binary persons as transgender — rests on a fundamental mischaracterization of the article’s argument and purpose. Below, I attend to the two most salient critiques
highlighted by Risman’s research team — the elision of critical distinctions between binary-identified trans people, non-binary trans people, and non-binary non-trans people, and the methodological concerns associated with the project’s small sample size. I then close with some final
thoughts, along with a suggestion or two on how we might fruitfully continue this (clearly muchneeded!) conversation.

Elision of the Distinction(s) between Binary Trans, Non-Binary Trans, and Non-Binary
Non-Trans Identities

The central argument presented in this critique — namely, that there exist many non-binary individuals that actively resist the label “trans,” and that these individuals’ experiences and
perspectives are worthy of study — is an important argument, and one with which I wholeheartedly accord! There is no question that non-binary people who do not identify as trans exist, and
to elide the distinction between trans-identifying and non-trans-identifying non-binary people
would be highly problematic, both methodologically and politically. Risman’s (2018) research
confirms this, as do my own interviews with non-binary teens and young adults that do not identify as trans (collected as part of a separate research project, the results of which are forthcom-

2

ing). Others working in the subject area have done much to clarify these myriad distinctions, too
(see, for example, Darwin 2017; Harrison-Quintana et al 2015; Factor and Rothblum 2008).

However, by framing this piece as a study (primarily) of how non-binary people compare
to binary-identified trans people, the authors misrepresent the study’s core objectives. This is,
first and foremost, a paper about self-selected trans people — it is not a paper about gender
non-conformity writ large. It is a study of how (and whether) the accounts of gender experience
produced by binary-identified trans respondents differ from the experiential narratives produced
by non-binary trans respondents. As stated in the text:

This work [examines] how trans-identified respondents approach the process of composing (and revising) accounts of their gender experience. I find that in order to claim public
identities as trans, non-binary respondents are often motivated to present accounts that
closely reflect prevailing understandings of trans experience…even when these accounts
fail to capture the nuance of their experiences. (Garrison 2018, p. 615; emphasis in original)

Non-binary people that did not also identify themselves as trans were excluded from this
study — and quite intentionally so, for this is a project about the social construction of trans
identity, and it does not seek to make claims about the behavior or the accounts of non-binary
people that do not identify as trans. In no way does this methodological decision serve to refute

3

or deny the existence of non-binary people that do not identify as trans; it simply acknowledges
that the experiences of such respondents fall beyond the scope of this inquiry.

Just as there are many non-binary individuals that do not identify as trans, there are many
binary-identified men and women who have pursued medical transition, but who nevertheless
reject self-definition as trans (for instance, some of the respondents featured in Rogers’ (2018)
recent article on drag-kinging). These respondents, too, would have been excluded by the recruitment criteria set for this project — and rightly so! As this paper is about the interactional
burden that those seeking to claim a trans identity label assume by disclosing their identities to
others, to recruit respondents that didn’t identify as trans would have made little methodological
sense (and certainly wouldn’t have made the most effective use of the limited research funding
accessible to me, as a then-first-year graduate student). Indeed, it would likely have proven more
presumptuous and damaging to open recruitment to non-binary and genderqueer people universally, only to inquire within the context of the interview about what their trans identity meant to
them!

I made a similarly intentional decision to recruit only respondents who had disclosed
their identities to at least one other person at the time of the interview, as those who have had to
“convince” others of the change in their gender status are held accountable to prevailing cultural
narratives about gender — both those about masculinity/femininity, and those about trans experience — in ways that those who have not disclosed their identities are not. Elsewhere in the
available literature, we find ample evidence that what people think they are doing to challenge or

4

resist norms may not actually bear out in social life. Indeed, this is an idea that many cultural
sociologists have empirically documented (e.g., Pugh 2013). This difference in alignment between what we think we are doing and what we actually do has offered tremendous insight elsewhere in sociological trans and queer scholarship, such as that found in Orne’s (2017) work on
how people re-create normativity within queer spaces (in spite of their best efforts to resist!) and
in Lamont’s (2017) work on the persistence of structural constraints that limit queer people’s
ability to “recreate” cultural scripts that eschew norms. I believe that the tension between the
strategies that trans-identified non-binary people use to actualize their commitment to gender deconstruction and the strategies that they employ to render themselves socially intelligible as
trans people is worthy of further study, and this tension could not have been empirically accessed
or analyzed without the use of these scope conditions.

Scope conditions are a fundamental necessity in research of this type: they keep our research tractable, focused on the questions that we’re attempting to answer. Without these conditions, we commit the same fundamental error that it has been suggested I’ve committed here: we
collapse identities, behavior, and beliefs into composite packages, obscuring the rich differences
between them. I do not believe that this elision has occurred in the article under critique, and I
believe that part of the reason why it hasn’t is because of the clarity of the scope conditions I’ve
enforced.

At the same time, I willingly recognize that the impact of my research (and not my intentions, necessarily, as the architect behind it) is what matters most centrally here. While I assured-

5

ly haven’t intended to conflate non-binary and trans identities in this piece, this feedback confirms that more explicit attention to the differences between these two cohorts may have been
necessary to clarify my interpretation of the findings. I’m deeply indebted, again, to my critics
for helping me to better understand where I may have fallen short in this regard. My forthcoming work on gender non-conforming teens and young adults — which attends more explicitly to
this question of the differences between respondents that identify as trans, and those that do not
— will incorporate a more intentional elaboration of these distinctions, and I am confident that
this added attention will do much to clarify my arguments and their purpose.

On the Issue of Sample Size

I also wish to attend briefly to the concern about sample size spotlighted in the first half
of the critique. Concerns regarding sample size are perennial in qualitative sociology, as many
who conduct research on “hidden” or marginalized populations are uncomfortably aware! While
the content and the quality of these critiques has varied, one of the most enduring arguments
concerns the (legitimate!) hazards inherent in constructing grandiose, generalizing claims about
samples that are unable to support this kind of generalization.

This is a worthy concern, and one that has been attended to at length by other scholars
(see, for example, Small 2009; Ambert et al 1995; Savolainen 1994). However, to suggest that
this study purports to speak for the experiences of all non-binary, genderqueer, or gender-fluid
people once again conveys a fundamental mischaracterization of the study’s aims and conclu-

6

sions. My purpose is not, and has never been, to argue that my findings can be generalized to
represent all non-binary people (or, for that matter, even to all non-binary persons that identify as
trans!). This kind of generalizability — what we might be inclined to think of as “statistical generalizability” (Small 2009) — is virtually unattainable in small-scale, interview-based research.
Although I do identify some notable differences between the two cohorts of respondents under
study (and suggest that these differences mark out generative avenues for future research), at no
point do I contend that the differences identified are universal, or that they can be generalized to
larger populations.

Moreover — and perhaps more importantly — to seek after this ephemeral generalizability is often to ask the wrong questions. To expect broad-scale applicability from small-n qualitative research, or to suggest that the absence of this generalizability undermines the potential utility and significance of the research findings, is also in error. As queer scholar D’Lane Compton
has recently noted, the critical question here is less often “How many cases do I need?” than
“What question is this paper working to address?” (Compton 2018). While small samples can’t
always make big claims, they can and often do generate important insights and highlight avenues
for future research.

Many of the most influential pieces of scholarship on trans and gender non-conforming
people to come out of Gender & Society in recent years have featured similarly modest sample
sizes: for example, Elizabeth Rahilly’s excellent piece on how parents frame and interpret children’s gender variance (2015), which speaks to the cases of 16 gender-variant children, or Cati

7

Connell’s germinal piece on the workplace experiences of trans people (2010), which features 19
cases. Casting a broader lens to encompass cases that make inter-group comparisons between
multiple populations of respondents, Baker Rogers’ exceptional recent piece on drag-kinging in
the American Southeast incorporates the experiences of 10 non-binary respondents (some of
whom identify as trans, and some of whom do not), fourteen respondents identifying as trans
men or transmasculine, and eight men that have pursued social or medical transition in order to
live as men, but for whom “trans” is no longer a relevant or personally fulfilling identity label.
While the claims made in each of these papers are unavoidably limited in scope by the size of
their samples, it would be just as egregious to trivialize the significance of their findings as it
would be to overstate them: each of these studies makes an important contribution to our understanding of trans and/or non-binary lives, and each helps to illuminate the agenda for future research.

Some Final Thoughts

As Kristen Schilt and Danya Lagos have noted in their excellent survey of the field, trans
studies — once relegated to the periphery of sociological research — have come to assume an
increasing centrality and significance in recent years. While inquiry into the lives and livelihoods of trans and otherwise gender non-conforming people was once considered to be the exclusive province of gender scholars, recent work in the field has done much to highlight the
salience of these questions for sociologists of health and health care (shuster 2016; Windsor
2017), social movements (Ghaziani et al 2016; Westbrook 2008), demography (Westbrook and

8

Saperstein 2015; Compton 2015; Tobin et al 2015), the family (Meadow 2011; Rahilly 2015; Pfeffer 2010; Hines 2006), work and organizations (Schilt 2010; Connell 2010); and the law
(Spade 2011; Westbrook and Schilt 2014; Meadow 2010). The pool of researchers working either directly or indirectly with trans and non-binary populations is growing exponentially, and
this tremendous theoretical and methodological diversity has the potential to serve as both a
blessing and a curse.

One thing I’m certain that my critics and I can agree upon is the incredible amount of
work that’s yet to be done in this space. The need for a large-scale disciplinary conversation
about the parameters of this evolving research agenda has never been more urgent, or more selfevident. If we are to do productive, generative work in this space, it is absolutely paramount that
we begin to work toward establishing a common language, a shared foundation for discourse:
there is little space in this rapidly-evolving movement for “talking past” one another, or for undermining and discrediting the work of those that share our views. This tension should enhance
and enrich our work: it is precisely these moments of disagreement that warrant consideration of
how unexpected finding might lead to new research avenues, and new theoretical insights. Engaging in careful dialogue around the similarities and distinctions within meaningful categories
of gender, linguistic practices, and methodological strategies will enable all of us to better make
sense of the various interactional and institutional constraints that trans, non-binary, and otherwise gender non-conforming people confront in social life. It is my hope that this exchange can
serve as a stepping stone into a more nuanced and dynamic conversation: one that can help us to
work towards the construction of a research agenda that center trans and gender non-conforming

9

people in the years to come, and to more effectively negotiate the form that this agenda should
take.
______________________________________________________________________________

References
Ambert, Anne Marie, Patricia A. Adler, Peter Adler, and Daniel F. Detzner. (1995) “Understanding and Evaluating Qualitative Research.” Journal of Marriage and Family 57(4): pp. 879-893.
Becker, Howard S. (2009) “How to Find Out How to Do Qualitative Research.” Accessed January 26, 2018 via http://home.earthlink.net/~hsbecker/articles/NSF.html.
Compton, D’Lane R. (2018) “How Many (Queer) Cases Do I Need? Thinking Through Research Design.” In Other, Please Specify: Queer Methods in Sociology (eds. D’Lane Compton,
Tey Meadows, and Kristen Schilt). Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Compton, D’Lane R. (2015) “LG(BT) Families and Counting.” Sociology Compass 9: pp.
597-608.
Connell, Catherine. (2010). “Doing, Undoing, or Redoing Gender? Learning from the Workplace Experiences of Transpeople.” Gender & Society 24(1): pp. 31-55.
Darwin, Helana. (2017) “Doing Gender Beyond the Binary: A Virtual Ethnography.” Symbolic
Interaction 40(3): pp. 317-334.
Factor, Rhonda and Esther Rothblum. (2008) “Exploring Gender Identity and Community
Among Three Groups of Transgender Individuals in the United States: MTFs, FTMs, and Genderqueers.” Health Sociology Review 17(3): pp. 235-253.
Garrison, Spencer. (2018) “On the Limits of ‘Trans Enough’: Authenticating Trans Identity
Narratives.” Gender & Society 31(5): pp. 613-637.
Ghaziani, Amin, Verta Taylor, and Amy Stone. (2016) “Cycles of Sameness and Difference in
LGBT Social Movements.” Annual Review of Sociology 42: pp. 165-183.
10

Harrison-Quintana, Jack, Jaime M. Grant, and Ignacio G. Rivera. (2015) “Boxes of our Own
Creation: A Trans Data Collection Wo/Manifesto.” TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly 2(1):
pp. 166-174.
Hines, S. (2006) “Intimate Transitions: Transgender Practices of Partnering and Parenting.”
Sociology 40: pp. 353-371.
Meadow, Tey. (2010) “A Rose is a Rose: On Producing Legal Gender Classifications.” Gender
& Society 24: pp. 814-837.
Meadow, Tey. (2011) “Deep Down Where the Music Plays: How Parents Account for Gender
Variance.” Sexualities 14: pp. 725-747.
Pfeffer, Carla A. (2010) “Women’s Work? Partners of Transgender Men Doing Housework and
Emotion Work.” Journal of Marriage and Family 72: pp. 165-183.
Rahilly, Elizabeth P. (2015). “The Gender Binary Meets the Gender-Variant Child: Parents’ Negotiations with Childhood Gender Variance.” Gender & Society 29(3): pp. 338-361.
Risman, Barbara J. (2018) Where the Millennials Will Take Us: A New Generation Wrestles
with the Gender Structure. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Rogers, Baker A. (2018). “Drag as a Resource: Trans* and Nonbinary Individuals in the Southeastern United States.” Gender & Society 32(6): pp. 889-910.
Savolainen, Jukka. (1994). “The Rationality of Drawing Big Conclusions Based on Small Samples: In Defense of Mill’s Methods.” Social Forces 72(4): pp. 1217-1224.
Schilt, Kristen and Danya Lagos. (2017) “The Development of Transgender Studies in Sociology.” Annual Review of Sociology 43: pp. 425-443.
Schilt, Kristen. (2010) Just One of the Guys? Transgender Men and the Persistence of Gender
Inequality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

11

shuster, stef. (2016) “Uncertain Expertise and the Limitations of Clinical Guidelines in Transgender Healthcare.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 57: pp. 319-332.
Spade, Dean. (2011) Normal Life: Administrative Violence, Critical Trans Politics, and the
Limits of the Law. Boston, MA: South End Press.
Small, Mario L. (2009) “‘How Many Cases Do I Need?’: On Science and the Logic of Case
Selection in Field-Based Research.” Ethnography 10(1): pp. 5-38.
Tobin, H.J., R. Freedman-Gurspan, and L. Mottet. (2015) “Counting Trans People in Federal
Surveys.” In A Blueprint for Equality: Federal Agenda for Transgender People. Washington,
DC: National Center for Transgender Equality.
Westbrook, Laurel and Aliya Saperstein. (2015) “New Categories are Not Enough: Rethinking
the Measurement of Sex and Gender in Social Surveys.” Gender & Society 29: pp. 534-560.
Westbrook, Laurel and Kristen Schilt. (2014) “Doing Gender, Determining Gender: Transgender People, Gender Panics, and the Maintenance of the Sex/Gender/Sexuality System.” Gender
& Society 28(1): pp. 32-57.

12

