"x"
"1" "Training and Development of Instructor-Leadership"
"2" "Paul Balwant"
"3" "Department of Management Studies,"
"4" "The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "Researchers have long recognized that instructors use leadership behaviours  in   higher education  teaching. This body of research, often called instructor-leadership, is gaining momentum with a shift from examining antecedents and consequences of instructor-leadership towards a deeper investigation of mediators and moderators. In spite of the field’s growth, the practical recommendations stemming from empirical investigations of instructor-leadership remain largely underdeveloped. Even the most popular practical implication – the training and development of instructor-leadership – is given fleeting attention, often skimmed over towards the end of a paper or study.  In light of this, the present paper aims to provide detailed guidelines on the training and development of instructor-leadership by drawing from both the instructor-leadership and training and development literatures.  In so doing, the paper highlights the main challenges of training and developing instructor-leadership ,  and draws reference to the instructional  systems design approach to provide guidelines according to assessment, design, implementation, and evaluation."
"7" "Introduction"
"8" "Instructor-leadership can be defined as “a process whereby instructors exert intentional influence over students to guide, structure, and facilitate activities and relationships”  (Balwant, 2016, p. 21) . Research on instructor-leadership has focused primarily on transformational leadership with an emerging body of research on destructive leadership   (Balwant, 2016, 2017) .  These studies have generally examined antecedents and consequences of instructor-leadership behaviours. Some studies even investigate mediators and moderators in the instructor-leadership causal chain, thus indicating that the field is beginning to mature  a bit   (Balwant, Birdi, Stephan, & Topakas, 2018) . However,  even with the  maturity in the instructor-leadership literature, little has been said about how to train and develop in structor-leadership behaviours. Specifically, studies of instructor-leadership often close with brief general guidelines for training or ‘un-training’ such leader behaviours.  In light of this superficial treatment of training and development  (T&D)  in the instructor-leadership literature, the aim of this paper is to connect the literature on training and development to that of the instructor-leadership literature in order to provide specific and clear guidelines for training and developing instructor-leadership.   For the  T&D  of instructor-leadership I first describe some of the potential challenges of such a programme. Then, I describe the training and development programme in four phases, including assessment, design, implementation, and evaluation."
"9" "Challenges  Facing Instructor-Leadership T&D"
"10" "There are three challenges that are likely to be faced in conducting human resource development efforts geared towards developing or improving instructor-leadership."
"11" "Challenge 1 :   It is unrealistic to expect that all instructors can adopt all of the transformational behavioural dimensions. A reality that has to be faced is that instructors  are limited in the breadth of their repertoire of teaching methods  (Bourner, 1997) . Therefore, the only option may be to broaden that repertoire to allow an instructor to develop the behaviours that are determined to be within their boundaries."
"12" "Challenge 2 :  Attempts to change behaviours, particularly at the senior level, may prove challenging because these instructors may accept traditional teaching norms. In general, instructors may view these change programs as a threat to their autonomy in discovering a teaching style that suits them  (Boice, 1996) ."
"13" "Challenge 3 :  Destructive instructor-leadership behaviours can go unnoticed  (Boice, 1996) ."
"14" "These challenges are taken into account in the development of the training and development programme. The training and development programme is based on the Training and Human Resource Development Process Model by Desimone and Werner  (2006) . The model is sometimes described as the instructional systems design  (ISD)  approach and is divided into four phases, including assessment, design, implementation, and evaluation."
"15" "Needs A ssessment"
"16" "Need “refers to a discrepancy or  gap  between what an organization expects to happen and what actually occurs”  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006, p. 130 original emphasis) . For instance, a discrepancy exists if an instructor is expected to give feedback on set work, but instead returns students’ assessments with a mark and nothing else. A discrepancy or performance deficiency forms the basis for a training or human resource development need. Needs can exist at three levels, including strategic/organization, task, and person."
"17" "Strategic/organization analysis"
"18" "An organization analysis is a “‘whole system’ view of the organization and what it is trying to accomplish”  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006, p. 132) . There are two factors of an organizational analysis that should be identified. First, an awareness of organizational resources that can be directed towards human resource development efforts is useful. Such resources include, money, materials, and facilities. Most HEIs (barring online only HEIs) have access to classroom facilities and training materials such as projectors or printing paper. Second, the organizational climate should be considered beforehand to determine potential issues that may arise in training. For instance, level of trust between the different ranks, including deans, heads of department, professors, lecturers, etc. The climate can affect whether instructors transfer training back to the classroom  (Tracey, Tannenbaum, & Kavanagh, 1995) ."
"19" "The methods of conducting an organization analysis depends on the organization and its availability of data sources. In the HEI context, one can consider the following data sources."
"20" "Organizational goals and objectives :  Link the human resource development program to the organization’s strategy and mission and ensure that this link is communicated to deans, heads of department, and lecturers. This link can make instructors aware of their connection to the organizational goals and, thus fostering support for human resource development efforts."
"21" "Human resource inventories:  If a HEI maintains human resource inventories, it can provide a demographic database for the scope of training required. This is especially useful given the second challenge in attempting to change behaviours at the senior level."
"22" "Student feedback surveys:   Many HEIs use some form of student feedback to gauge instructors’ effectiveness in the classroom. Instructor-leadership questions can be  incorporated into these feedback instruments to gauge instructors’ use of transformational instructor-leadership in the classroom. Also, the use of open-ended questions may identify students’ complaints that may be indicative of destructive instructor-leadership."
"23" "Task analysis"
"24" "Task analysis is a “systematic collection of data about a specific job or group of jobs … to determine what an employee should be taught to perform the job at the desired level”  (Moore & Dutton, 1978, p. 533) .  A  task analysis can be conducted in two steps. First, identify teaching tasks of instructors through a job description and/or other task identification methods such as time sampling, job inventory questionnaires, etc. Second, describe teaching standards based on the  items established in the instructor-leadership literature,  i.e ., four transformational leadership dimensions and three destructive leadership dimensions  (Balwant, 2013; Balwant, Birdi, & Stephan, 2019) ."
"25" "Person analysis"
"26" "Person analysis focuses on “the training needs of the individual employee”  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006, p. 146) . An instructor’s person analysis should consist of two components: a summary person analysis and a diagnostic person analysis. Summary person analysis entails an overall evaluation of the instructor’s teaching performance, and provides output regarding whether or not they are using transformational instructor-leadership or destructive instructor-leadership behaviours. Instructors who use transformational instructor-leadership behaviours can generally be regarded as successful performers, whereas those not using transformational instructor-leadership and/or using destructive instructor-leadership behaviours can be regarded as unsuccessful performers. Diagnostic person analysis determines  why  instructors’ behaviours occur. A primary source for both components of person analysis is performance appraisal."
"27" "Performance appraisal of instructor’s teaching is based on students’ perceptions of instructor’s teaching practices. As such, student feedback surveys can provide a useful benchmarking instrument from which to evaluate transformational instructor-leadership behaviours. The use of a benchmarking instrument results in a profile of the instructor’s strengths and weaknesses with regards to transformational instructor-leadership. As mentioned in the organization analysis, a subset of these surveys can be re-designed at the organizational level to incorporate the  question items from established instructor-leadership questionnaires ."
"28" "Destructive instructor-leadership behaviours may also be uncovered in these questionnaires, but can also be sourced from heads of department or other instructors who receive students’ complaints. Given that destructive instructor-leadership behaviours are likely to go unnoticed (third challenge), additional sources may need to be used to uncover such behaviours, e.g., use of trained observers. The use of trained observers is essential for external evaluation of instructors because these observers can note instructor behaviours in an unbiased manner  (Boice, 1996) . To supplement these sources of data, instructors with teaching deficiencies can be interviewed in order to obtain their perspective on what needs to be learned. This strategy can motivate instructors to direct efforts towards learning  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006) . Such interviews also provide valuable insight into reasons for instructors’ discrepancies in behaviours."
"29" "For any identified discrepancy in instructor-leader behaviours, information from organization, task, and person analysis should be integrated to determine why the discrepancy exists  (Herbert & Doverspike, 1990) . Discrepancies in behaviour may result from internal factors such as a motivational deficiency or a deficiency in knowledge, skills, and/or abilities or external factors such as lack of support, outdated or inadequate equipment, adverse conditions, or  obstructive work rules  (Herbert & Doverspike, 1990) . If deficiencies are due to internal factors, especially knowledge; skills; and/or ability deficiencies, then training and development should proceed to the other stages of the process."
"30" "Design and I mplementation"
"31" "The design and implementation of an effective training and development program should adhere to certain key activities including setting objectives, selecting the trainer or vendor, selecting training methods and media, and scheduling the training programme."
"32" "Setting objectives"
"33" "An objective is a collection of words intended to inform trainees what the trainer intends to achieve  (Mager, 1997) . Objectives should be outcome-based and depend on discovered deficiencies from the needs assessment phase. Instructors’ deficiency in their use of transformational instructor-leadership may range from one dimension to all four dimensions. However, in recognition of the first challenge, the four transformational instructor-leadership dimensions and three destructive instructor-leadership dimensions are split into separate modules. The use of separate modules allows for instructors to attend training where needed, rather than pushing their teaching repertoire beyond their natural limits by training or un-training a combination of dimensions simultaneously (Challenge 1). For each module, Mager’s suggestions for preparing instructional objectives are taken into account in designing  the  objectives as shown below  (Mager, 1997) ."
"34" "Idealized influence."
"35" "Use behaviours that can earn students’ respect (further research on specific actions needed)."
"36" "Use behaviours that make students proud to be associated with you (further research on specific actions needed)."
"37" "Show genuine concern for students’ progress."
"38" "Share enthusiasm about the subject with students."
"39" "Consideration."
"40" "Be able to show students how to think and arrive at conclusions in the subject."
"41" "Be patient in explaining module content that appear difficult for students to grasp."
"42" "Use verbal and nonverbal communication to indicate to students that their views are valued in the module."
"43" "Give students feedback on set work so that it clarifies things they may not fully understand."
"44" "Give students feedback on set work that can help to improve their ways of learning and/or studying."
"45" "Intellectual stimulation."
"46" "Teach in a manner that helps students to think about the evidence underpinning different views."
"47" "Encourage students to rethink their understanding of certain aspects of the subject for which they may have preconceived misconceptions."
"48" "Show students how to see a problem from different angles."
"49" "Direction and congruence."
"50" "Use teaching methods that are appropriate for the learning objectives."
"51" "Ensure that teaching content coincides with the module’s learning objectives."
"52" "Ensure that the module is presented and delivered in an organized fashion."
"53" "Make it clear to students what they are supposed to learn in the module."
"54" "Callous communication."
"55" "Refrain from using hostile, rude, aggressive, intimidating, arrogant, or harsh words or actions towards students in all settings, e.g., in the presence of other students, when students do not know the answer to a question, private meetings, etc."
"56" "In giving directions to students, avoid using too many words with negative connotations, e.g., threats, words like “don’t”, etc."
"57" "Refrain from using facial expressions that indicate disinterest in students."
"58" "Refrain from  giving students the silent treatment ."
"59" "Victimization."
"60" "Refrain from invading students’ privacy."
"61" "Do not blame students to save yourself embarrassment."
"62" "Do not express anger at students, especially when angry for another reason."
"63" "Avoid rude behaviour towards students."
"64" "Avoid making negative comments about students to others."
"65" "Irresponsibility."
"66" "Refrain from  using threats towards students ."
"67" "Do not mislead students."
"68" "Avoid unethical situations."
"69" "The un-training of destructive instructor-leadership behaviours should be accompanied by replacement behaviours where necessary. Hence, for destructive instructor-leadership training, components from transformational instructor-leadership training should be included.  For instance, in training instructors not to use too many negative words like “don’t”, the consideration dimension proposes the use of constructive feedback as an alternative."
"70" "S electing the trainer or vendor"
"71" "The development and delivery of the programme can be carried out using a combination of the HEI’s resources with external assistance. Universities are likely to have the knowledge, skills, and abilities required to implement the training, but may require external vendor assistance particularly during needs assessment. While assessment of transformational instructor-leadership needs can be a relatively straightforward process (use of the  instructor-leadership questionnaires  in subset of student feedback questionnaires), the assessment of destructive instructor-leadership may require resources for conducting interviews or hiring of externally trained observers. For the evaluation of instructor-leadership, considerable time and effort may also be required. Therefore, HR departments have to consider whether (a) they have the resources to dedicate towards these efforts, (b) evaluation should be outsourced, or (c) it is sensible to focus solely on transformational instructor-leadership given that destructive instructor-leadership did not appear to share any strong relationships with student engagement and burnout in this dissertation."
"72" "If a HEI decides to conduct the training program itself, the training staff should possess two specific competencies. First, the training staff must be competent at developing, implementing, and evaluating training programs. Second, trainers should be a subject matter expert with regards to pedagogy. To meet these requirements, a team comprising of training experts and pedagogy experts can be used."
"73" "Selec ting training methods and media"
"74" "The trainer/s should select the appropriate training methods. In leadership training, classroom training methods are widely used  (Yukl, 2006) . Two classroom type training methods that can be used are discussion and behaviour role modeling."
"75" "Discussion.  The discussion method is centered on active participation. Discussion involves “feedback, clarification, and sharing points of view”  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006) . This method may be useful in un-training destructive instructor-leadership because instructors are able to share their views on such behaviours and receive feedback on why such behaviours can be harmful to students’ success. The trainer can focus on asking direct questions related to the objectives of the programme. For instance, a discussion module on destructive instructor-leadership communication may ask trainees, “Why do instructors sometimes use hostile actions towards students?” This can then stimulate their thinking as to why they use such behaviours. Then, the trainer can explain why such behaviours are harmful and suggest alternative and more effective substitute behaviours. Training instructors to develop the substitute behaviours is likely to be more effective through the use of experiential methods such as behaviour role modeling."
"76" "Behaviour role modeling.  Behaviour role modeling is a very popular method for leadership training  (Yukl, 2006) . For training transformational instructor-leadership, “merely presenting and demonstrating behaviour guidelines is not sufficient to ensure people will learn and use behaviour”  (Yukl, 2006, p. 390) . Instead, behaviour role modeling entails active involvement and participation, and can be divided into five phases  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006) ."
"77" "Modeling: Trainees are shown a video clip in which an instructor models the target behaviour. The behaviour being shown should comprise of learning points that are based on the objectives of the training module."
"78" "Retention: Trainees are placed into small groups to discuss components of the modeled behaviour. Trainees should also be encouraged to identify the learning points and the rationale underlying the learning points."
"79" "Rehearsal: Trainees are asked to role-play the desired behaviour with another trainee, perhaps with someone from their group."
"80" "Feedback: Each trainee receives feedback on the behaviours used in the role-playing exercise and, if necessary, suggestions for improvement are given. Also, if resources permit, trainees can also be videotaped during role-play and then asked to evaluate themselves as well."
"81" "Transfer of training: Trainees are encouraged to practice the learned behaviours in the classroom or in their general interactions with students."
"82" "Behaviour modeling is considered highly effective for training new behaviours  (Burke & Day, 1986; Smith-Jentsch, Salas, & Baker, 1996) . In using behavioural modeling, trainees can be exposed to both positive and negative models reflective of transformational instructor-leadership and destructive instructor-leadership respectively  (Baldwin, 1992) . The use of destructive instructor-leadership models can help trainees “unlearn prior, ineffective behaviors”  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006, p. 547) . Behaviour modeling activities can take considerable time to execute, but the use of separate modules for each dimension/classification alleviates this time issue."
"83" "Scheduling the training programme"
"84" "Like other leadership training workshops, modules can be scheduled to take place over a period of two to three hours and the lesson plan can be prepared accordingly. Given the variation in schedules for instructors, flexible scheduling may be appropriate (e.g., the use of Doodle.com). Recall from the needs assessment phase that instructors should only be required to  attend modules for which a deficiency has been identified. Furthermore, regarding Bourner’s sentiment that the teaching repertoire of academic staff is limited to a few methods  (Bourner, 1997) , instructors may be required to attend only those modules for which their deficiency is strongest. The required modules to be attended and scheduling of such modules can be communicated through a HEI’s email/intranet. One the training programme has been designed and implemented, it should then be evaluated."
"85" "Evaluation"
"86" "Evaluation is “the systematic collection of descriptive and judgmental information necessary to make effective training decisions related to the selection, adoption, value, and modification of various instructional activities”  (Goldstein, 1980, p. 237) . Evaluation can assist in determining the extent to which a programme is meeting its objectives, the strengths and weaknesses of the programme, and the cost-benefit ratio of the programme  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006) . For evaluation of the training programme, I follow the most widely used approach by Donald Kirkpatrick because most evaluation frameworks are based on his approach  (DeSimone & Werner, 2006) . According to Kirkpatrick, training can be evaluated according to four criteria, including reaction, learning, behaviour, and results  (Kirkpatrick, 2004) ."
"87" "Reaction"
"88" "Measures of trainees’ reactions try to gauge their satisfaction with the programme. This is important because trainees are not likely to attend other training modules if they are dissatisfied. Trainees may also communicate dissatisfaction to their colleagues, thus discouraging others from attending. For measuring reaction, trainees can be given a brief questionnaire at the end of the programme; this instrument can be used to capture the extent to which they thought the program  was useful. The questionnaire can also measure whether they liked or enjoyed the programme  (for a sample reaction questionnaire see Weatherby & Gorosh, 1989, p. 76) ."
"89" "Learning"
"90" "Evaluation of learning involves collecting data about the extent to which trainees have learned the objectives set out at the beginning of the programme. Measuring learning does not necessarily have to be at the ‘end’ of the programme, especially when using the behaviour modeling technique. Using this technique, learning can be measured or evaluated during the programme by giving trainees feedback during their rehearsal."
"91" "Behaviour"
"92" "Behavioural evaluation measures the extent to which trainees transfer their learning from the training programme back to the classroom. Behavioural changes can be measured using the same approaches as during the assessment stage. That is, a subset of student feedback questionnaires that incorporate the  instructor-leadership question items , interviews with students, or direct observation of classroom practice. Using these measures, pre-training and post-training results can be compared to determine whether there are changes in behaviour as expected."
"93" "Results"
"94" "Results measure tangible outcomes from the training programme. Here, the aim is to justify the extent to which the HEI is better able to serve its students in terms of teaching quality, i.e., whether the improvements in instructor-leadership affects the ‘bottom line’. To measure results, a cost-benefit analysis can be used to compare the monetary costs of training, e.g., Robinson and Robinson’s model of training costs  (see Robinson & Robinson, 1989) , to the nonmonetary benefits, e.g., improvement in student satisfaction with teaching; improved student learning outcomes; better student academic performance; etc. Alternatively, the training  programme can be evaluated using a balanced scorecard approach in order to communicate the impact of the programme on an HEI’s strategy  (See Willyerd, 1997 for details on the development of a balanced scorecard for evaluating training programmes) ."
"95" "The  ISD  or ‘A DImE’ (assessment, design, implementation, and evaluation) is a holistic approach for training instructor-leadership. It ensures that (a) a HEI’s resources are channeled to where it is needed, i.e., addressing deficiencies in instructor-leadership; (b) training is designed and implemented according to programme objectives and the nature of the deficiency; and (c) evaluation is conducted according to meaningful criteria."
"96" "References"
"97" "Baldwin, T. T. (1992). Effects of alternative modeling strategies on outcomes of interpersonal-skills training.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  77 (2), 147–154. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.77.2.147"
"98" "Balwant, P. T. (2013). The Development of a Parsimonious Measure of Transformational Instructor Leadership.  Third Degree: The Working Papers of Doctoral Seminar Series ,  1 (1), 23–34."
"99" "Balwant, P. T. (2016). Transformational instructor-leadership in higher education teaching: A meta-analytic review and research agenda.  Journal of Leadership Studies ,  9 (4), 20–42. https://doi.org/10.1002/jls.21423"
"100" "Balwant, P. T. (2017). The dark side of teaching: destructive instructor leadership and its association with students’ affect, behaviour, and cognition.  International Journal of Leadership in Education ,  20 (5), 577–604. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2015.1112432"
"101" "Balwant, P. T., Birdi, K., & Stephan, U. (2019). The dimensionality and measurement of destructive instructor-leadership.  International Journal of Leadership in Education , 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603124.2018.1543803"
"102" "Balwant, P. T., Birdi, K., Stephan, U., & Topakas, A. (2018). Transformational instructor-leadership and academic performance: a moderated mediation model of student engagement and structural distance.  Journal of Further and Higher Education , 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X.2017.1420149"
"103" "Boice, B. (1996). Classroom incivilities.  Research in Higher Education ,  37 (4), 453–486. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01730110"
"104" "Bourner, T. (1997). Teaching methods for learning outcomes.  Education + Training ,  39 (9), 344–348. https://doi.org/10.1108/00400919710192377"
"105" "Burke, M. J., & Day, R. R. (1986). A cumulative study of the effectiveness of managerial training.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  71 (2), 232–245. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.71.2.232"
"106" "DeSimone, R. L., & Werner, J. M. (2006).  Human Resource Development  (4th edition). Ohio, U.S.: SouthWestern."
"107" "Goldstein, I. L. (1980). Training in work organizations.  Annual Review of Psychology ,  31 (1), 229–272."
"108" "Herbert, G. R., & Doverspike, D. (1990). Performance appraisal in the training needs analysis process: A review and critique.  Public Personnel Management ,  19 (3), 253."
"109" "Kirkpatrick, D. (2004). A T+D classic: How to start an objective evaluation of your training program.  T+D ,  58 (5), 1–3."
"110" "Mager, R. F. (1997).  Preparing instructional objectives: A critical tool in the development of effective instruction . Atlanta, GA: Center for Effective Performance."
"111" "Moore, M. L., & Dutton, P. (1978). Training needs analysis: Review and critique.  The Academy of Management Review ,  3 (3), 532–545. https://doi.org/10.2307/257543"
"112" "Robinson, D. G., & Robinson, J. (1989). Training for impact.  Training & Development Journal ,  43 (8), 34."
"113" "Smith-Jentsch, K. A., Salas, E., & Baker, D. P. (1996). Training team performance-related assertiveness.  Personnel Psychology ,  49 (4), 909–936. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1996.tb02454.x"
"114" "Tracey, J. B., Tannenbaum, S. I., & Kavanagh, M. J. (1995). Applying trained skills on the job: The importance of the work environment.  Journal of Applied Psychology April 1995 ,  80 (2), 239–252. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.80.2.239"
"115" "Weatherby, N. L., & Gorosh, M. E. (1989). Rapid response with spreadsheets.  Training & Development Journal ,  43 (9), 75."
"116" "Willyerd, K. A. (1997). Balancing your evaluation act.  Training ,  34 (3), 52–58."
"117" "Yukl, G. (2006).  Leadership in Organizations  (6th ed.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall."
