"x"
"1" "This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in  Contemporary Social Science: Journal of the Academy of Social Sciences  on  18 th April 2018,  available online:  http://www.tandfonline.com/ [https://doi.org/10.1080/21582041.2018.1459818]."
"2" "Using Reflexive Lifelines in Biographical Interviews to aid the Collection, Visualization and Analysis of Resilience"
"3" "Jane Gray and Jennifer Dagg"
"4" "Maynooth University Department of Sociology and Social Sciences Institute"
"5" "Published as:  Jane Gray & Jennifer Dagg .  (2018) Using reflexive lifelines in biographical interviews to aid the collection, visualisation and analysis of resilience, Contemporary Social Science, DOI:  10.1080/21582041.2018.1459818"
"6" "Abstract"
"7" "This article  demo n strates  the use of a reflexive lifeline instrument within  a study  oriented towards documenting and explaining resilience from a sociological perspective.  Informed by both life course and biographical   perspectives , o ur  research design   comprised two interview s  incorporating  recursive   co-constructio n of the participant’s lifeline .   We aimed to meet three objectives with this method : (1) to collect accurate retrospective data about the timing of lives; (2) to garner biographical data that allowed us to explore lives as wholes; and (3) to elicit  participant reflexivity  on turning points associated with resilience.   Our approach was distinctive  in its explicit use of  the lifeline  both as a means to  bring life stories into dialogue with life histories,  and  as a dynamic prompt to engage participants in the  reflexive  co-construction of turning points as  fateful  moments.   We illustrate our approach through a cas e presentation and analysis of the reflexive lifelines co-constructed with   two men  who participated in our study.   We also show how the reflexive lifeline interview generated opportunities for participant-led researcher reflexivity."
"8" "Key words"
"9" "Biographical method, reflexivity, resilience , qualitative longitudinal"
"10" "Funding details"
"11" "This project has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological development and demonstration under Grant Agreement 613245"
"12" "Introduction"
"13" "Lifelines , sometimes called   ‘ timelines ’  or ‘life maps’ (see Neale 2017) ,  are visual depictions of  lives , displaying events in chronological order and often indicating their meaning and importance ( Nelson, 2010 ).  Scholars have  incorporated them   as a method of graphic elicitation  within biographical interviews  across a range of theoretical and methodological perspectives  ( Adriensen 2012;  Gramling and Carr 2004;  de Vries 2013 ).   L ife lines  and"
"14" "related instruments  -  such as  life  history calendars ( Freedman et al. 1988 ) and lif e grids ( Berney  and Blane  2013;  Nico 2016 ;  Parry  et al.  1999; Wilson et al. 2007 )  -  improve the accuracy of participants’ recall of  the timing, chronology and detail  of  events ( Glasner and v an de r  Waart  2007 ; Hope et al. 2013 ) .   Scholars  also use  lifelines to  encourage participant  reflection  on   the course of  their lives  (Clausen ,  1998; Sheridan et al. ,  2011),   to identify   turning points and epiphanies ( Hanks  and Carr ,  2008 ; Nico and van der Waart, 2012 ) ) ,  and to  elicit  participant reflexivity within the context of collaborative  and participatory  research methodologies ( Bagnoli ,  2009;  Jackson,  2012;  Kolar et al. ,  2015 ; Pfister et al. ,  2014 )."
"15" "In  most published  findings , emphasis  is  placed either on the   utility  of lifelines  for aiding accurate recall of life events ,  or on their usefulness for enhancing collaboration and reflexivity within the research process.   However, Nico ( 2016 , p. 2117 ) recently argued in favour of a ‘mixed technique ’ to improve ‘ the quality of the objective information collected   (about the timing and order of events, i.e. the life lived) and  the subjective information (the  life told). ’   In this article ,  we ex te nd this  approach  by demonstrating a lifeline instrument  that was explicitly designed to aid  recall of key life events and  to  elicit participant  reflection and  reflexivity  within biographical interviews  oriented towards  understanding and explaining social resilience."
"16" "The interviews were  conducted  in 2014  as part of a  European project (RESCuE) on household resilience to the 2008 economic crisis (Promberger et al. ,  2014).   Following a shared  methodology   (see Promberger et al. ,  2014;  Dagg  and  Gray ,  2016),  t he research occurred  across two stages: an initial narrative interview  with twenty-four participants  and a follow-up  photo-elicitation  interview  with sixteen of the original twenty-four .      Study participants included people living in households  displaying varying levels of resilience to economic adversity  in an  Irish  urban centre and its rural hinterland .   All follow-up interviews  took place  within six months of the first phase."
"17" "During the  follow-up interviews , the Irish team  added  a reflexive dimension to the lifeline  we had  constructed in the course of and immediately following the previous narrative interview.    This allowed us  to  interrogate  the processes giving rise to resilience  by applying  concepts from the life course perspective within the ‘processual imaginary’ (Thomson and McLeod , 2015 ) of qualitative, biographical research, focusing in particular on ‘ turning points.’   We  wanted to learn about the historical and social timing of participants’  lives, to elicit  their  reflection s on  the meanings of key  life  transitions and stages,  and to engage  them  in reflexive co-construction of turning points as ‘critical moments.’"
"18" "Later in this article w e  illustrate our reflexive lifeline method  through a comparative discussion of its use with two male participants born in the mid-1950s, showing how it enabled us to understand resilience both  in the context of the social timing of their lives and through the identification o f turning points when their lives changed direction.    We also  describe how the reflexive lifeline interview created opportunities for ‘sticky moments’ (Riach  2009 ) that induced participant-led reflexivity on the part of the research team ."
"19" "The article begins with a brief introduction to the concept of  social  resilience and a discussion of how  it requires a  methodological and  analytical approach that can capture  process .  The second part  discusses the usefulness of the concepts of ‘turning points’ and ‘critical moments’ for  understanding resilience .    In  p art  t hree w e  describe our implementation of   a  ‘reflexive lifeline’  within the study.    Part f our  demonstrate s  the value of  our approach through a discussion and analysis of  Larry’s and  Seamus’ biograph ies . In the  conclusion ,  we  discuss  some   un expected  strengths   and challenges  of  our  approach ,  and suggest some considerations for future work."
"20" "Resilience as a social process"
"21" "Policy makers and social scientists  display  growing interest in the concept of resilience,  which   seeks to identify   how people in adverse circumstances adapt, mobilise and transform social resources in order to achieve desired outcomes that sustain and advance their future well-being   (Canvin et al., 2009) .   In opposition to a ‘heroic’ model focusing on the innate characteristics of individuals and families, critical sociological approaches to resilience emphasize  ‘the influence of structural conditions and path  dependency’  (Dagdeviren et al. , 2016, p.2 ) ."
"22" "Following,  Estêvão   et al.  ( 2017 , p.  17 ), we  define resilience as a dynamic process  through  which those experiencing  adversity  exercise reflexive agency in the context of rapidly changing social structural conditions following an external shock , such as the  recent  financial crisis .   People take action by mobilizing  natural , cultural, social and economic resources, and by shifting risks in time and space.   Resilience processes may or may not lead to resilient  outcomes ,  not just because of variation in individual attributes, or due to contingent events,  but because social structural conditions impinge, in cumulative and developmental ways on the  resources  that are available to people, and on their  capabilities   to convert those resources into effective agency (Hobson  2014, p. 12 ) .   Thus some of the resources available to people are given in their current social situation, but others are acquired in their family histories and biographies (Promberger 2017, p. 7)."
"23" "Scholarly and policy concerns about resilience thus resonate with the broader ‘temporal turn’ within the social sciences and more specifically, with the  emergence of a  longitudinal ‘sensibility’ within qualitative research (Thomson and McLeod , 2015 ).   In order to  explain it  through biographical analysis,  we  must  first  identify  how  people   move through time in interaction with personal communities and social institutions ,  and second,  how they accumulate  resources  and the capabilities to convert  them   into resilience at times of crisis .   We also need to  establish  how the experience of, and responses to, earlier difficulties and opportunities affect the stock of resources and capabilities that  affect  agency  in the present. Third, b ecause crises commonly have the effect of knocking people’s lives off track, creating the risk of  continuing  ‘downward’ trajector ies , we  need ways to  grasp the historically  and socially  situated processes through which lives are ‘turned around. ’   Furthermore, understanding peoples’ capabilities requires attention to how  they  reflect on  earlier life experiences   as they  redefine and transform their practices , identities  and life  plans .  In the next section we describe how  the concept s  of ‘ turning point ’   and ‘critical moment,’  applied within a qualitative, biographical research strategy, facilitate such an analysis."
"24" "Towards a  comparative  biographical understanding of resilience"
"25" "Within  the life c ourse perspective (see Alwin ,  2012; Elder ,  1994; Heinz ,  2016), the concept of ‘turning point’  refers to moments in individual lives when their trajectories change direction, for example, when a downward or negative pathway is turned around  (Laub and Sampson ,  1993).  The related concept  of ‘critical moment’  (Thomson et al. 2002),  originated  in late modern theories of the ‘reflexive project of the self’ (Giddens ,  1991), although it bears similarities to the conceptualization of turning points within the European biographical research tradition (Reimer ,  2014, pp. 5-7). Critical moments are  events within life narratives that have consequences both for the shape of individual lives and for their identities (Thomson et al. ,  2002, p. 339) ; they are moments that combine ‘an event and its recognizable effect’ (Nico and Van der Waart 2012, p. 144).    Such events  are ‘fateful’  when  individuals  recognize that they are at a crossroads in their lives (Giddens 1991, pp. 142-143) and  take action to shape their futures in ways that  often  entail a re-configuration of their identities (Holland and Thomson ,  2009, pp. 454-455)."
"26" "The identification of turning points  thus  involves bringing together life histories (‘lives as lived’) with life stories (‘lives as told’) (Nico and Van der Waart 2012, p. 146).   Identifying those turning points that are  ‘fateful’   is  particularly apposite for understanding resilience,  which centres on  people’s  agency  in reflexively  addressing critical moments   their lives .   People’s lives may take turns for better or worse due to chance or circumstance alone, but  the concept of resilience implies an active process of re- direction .  However,  in their discussion of the challenges associated with identifying fateful moments  within biographical interviews,  Holland and Thomson (2009)  cautioned against :"
"27" "[M] oving too quickly between evidence of the l ife as told and interpretations  of the life as lived. The critical m oment that is found in a single  biographical narrative represents a provis ional identity claim, which can  tell us a great deal about the individual and t heir circumstances. Yet if one- off life stories are our only form of data, we are limited in what we can see."
"28" "Qualitative longitudinal  (QL)   interviews   facilitate  the  reflexive elaboration of s uch provisional identity claims   through  ‘ recursive interviewing, ’  that is, by  ‘ revisiting, re- visioning and updating a life journey at each successive interview ’ (Neale 2017, p.18).    This process entails three intertwined ‘levels’ of reflexivity: ‘ that of the researcher, that of th e individuals being studied and  that specifically raised by the research context ’ (Caetano 2015, p. 231) .   W ithin the RESCuE project ,  w e did not have the benefit of  an extended   QL  research design .    However, the  reflexive  interview   allowed the Irish team to develop a fuller understanding of critical moments as fateful  by adding a  reflexive  dimension to the research , allowing us to explore   ‘ how the narrative of a life, the life as told, is continually r e-adjusted to the life as lived’ (Neale 2017, p. 19).    In the next section, we describe how we wove  the reflexive lifeline  into this  simple  QL  design."
"29" "Constructing reflexive lifelines"
"30" "Early in the project , two researchers were present  during the  biographical  interviews .   This allowed one researcher to  conduct  the interview while the second focused on  the timing of events described by the participant, constructing a draft lifeline .  We adopted this approach, in part because we were unsure how feasible it would be for a single interviewer to conduct an in-depth narrative interview while simultaneously drawing up the lifeline.   Lifelines,  or life grids ,   are  usually  constructed as  part of  the interview   ( see  Nico 2016 , p. 2116 ) ,  but  we wanted to facilitate  a  comparatively unstructured biographical  narrative  consistent with the shared methodology of the RESCuE project .  We  wished  to  avoid   burdening the  participants   by  extending the interview  to include a separate lifeline phase .   In a  multi-research er  project, we  also aimed  to establish  normative and practical  consistency  within the team  at the outset ."
"31" "With experience, it became possible for a single interviewer to   draft the lifeline while  simultaneously  conducting the narrative interview.  At the  conclusion,  we clarified  details of  the timing of events with  each   participant,   asking,  for example,   ‘ in what year did you move abroad ’ ?   Subsequently,  the researcher  c ro ss-referenced  the lifeline against  the  audio-recording of the narrative interview ,  in order to  further  clarify  key life transitions and events, and to  develop initial  ‘hunches’  about what appeared to be  ‘ turning points ’   within the  participant’s biography .   Figure 1 shows  the first ,  hand-drawn draft of  Larry’s  lifeline.  We have disguised some information to protect his confidentiality."
"32" "<Figure 1 about here>"
"33" "Before the follow-up interview, we created a formal representation of the lifeline using  a comput erised drawing tool .   Based on their narrative interviews, w e  included our initial  hunches  about  turning points   in the form of  question s  with asterisks .  We brought t wo   copies printed  on A3  sheets to the follow-up interview ."
"34" "The researcher began by introducing the  formal  lifeline ,  briefly describing what  we  understood  to be  turning points  and inviting the participant to reflect on whether or not they agreed with this interpretation .  Participants  often   suggested  additional  or alternative  examples of turning points  within their lives  and the interviewer marked up the lifeline accordingly .   This introduction was followed by  a set of questions  oriented towards  further  co- constructi on of   the reflexive lifeline :"
"35" "1.   I would like you to take a look at the lifeline and tell me if you think it is accurate?"
"36" "2.   Are there any other turning points?"
"37" "3.   On a scale of 0-10 (0 being the most unsatisfied/unhappy and 10 being most satisfied/happy) could   you put a number beside how that turning point made you feel?"
"38" "4.   Who was most important to you at this time in your life?"
"39" "5.   What number would you attach to your life at present?"
"40" "These questions  (inspired by the life review interview developed by Clausen ( 1998 ))  allowed  participants   to interact  visually  with   events in their lives. Frequently, the y  reached for a pen  -  which the researcher had left in easy reach  -  and  inserted  events or correct dates, adding words to describe their emotional state at particular turning points. Respondents also wrote numbers  corresponding  to events  other  than the  agreed  turning points. When this occurred the researcher prompted  them  to  ‘ join the dots, ’   encouraging  the m   to  draw  their reflex ive lifeline."
"41" "<Figure 2 about here>"
"42" "In cases where  participants  preferred not to do so ,  the rese archer  drew  their reflex ive lifeline according to  the scores they had provided,  and asked them, once constructed, if  this  was an accurate portrayal of how they felt their lives had gone. Crucially,  this  final question  allowed  the researcher to  gain an  understand ing  of how they view ed the current trajectory of  their lives.    See Figure s   3  and  4 ,   which show our  (anonymized)  graphical representation s  of  Seamus’ s  and Larry’s  lifeline s ."
"43" "<Figure  3  about here>"
"44" "<Figure  4  about here>"
"45" "Throughout this process of co-constructing their lifelines, participants reflected on their lives.  As we will describe in more detail below, the co-construction of turning points  also  elicited participant reflexivity, insofar as it challenged them to think in new ways about critical mo ments .  Frequently, this  engagement  also gave rise to ‘sticky moments’  (Riach 2009)  in which  participants challenged researcher interpretations of turning points, leading us to revise our understanding, not only of the trajectories of these participants’ lives, but also of resilience   as a social process."
"46" "In summary, c o-constructing reflexive lifelines in follow-up interviews aided our biographical   analysis of resilience in a number of important ways. First, it provided an  opportunity to check the chronological accuracy of our representation of events and transitions in participant narratives .   This enabled us  to  situate life  events with broader socio-historical context s   (Brannen ,  2013) .   In the course of reflecting on a graphical representation of their li fe stories,  participants often developed more time-structured narratives that linked events to one another in a chronological fashion  ( Nico 2016 ).  This was an essential aid to subsequent comparison of life trajectories, allowing us to trace the varying effects of shared  lives and times .    Second, the  reflexive lifeli ne  interview   allowed   us to garner additional information, including more detail about participants’ linked lives at significant events, transitions and turning points  and a clearer understanding of the  progression  of their lives .     Responses to the question about ‘who was important to you’ added information about the context of interaction within which choices and deliberations occurred (Caetano ,   2015,  pp. 228-229)."
"47" "Third , by encouraging participants to reflect on their lives,  inviting them to express how they felt at particular times,  the  reflexive lifeline  interview  also  elicited  participant  reflexivity  about the direction and course of their lives .   As we will show, this was  vita l for  navigating  the analytical space between ‘turning points,’ that may  take the form of adaptations to external circumstances  structured by  practical sense, and ‘critical moments’ that  are  founded on reflexivity giving rise to the restructuring of identities .    Building  on the  narrative  interview,  the reflexive lifeline interview  allowed us  to  maintain an analytical distinction between the ‘objective’ circumstances, timing and events that structured individual biographies and the  ‘subjective’ processes through which participants took action to re-direct, and give meaning to their lives in the face of adverse events. By inviting participants to co-construct the ‘turning points’ on their lifelines,  we  elicited  reflexiv e engagement  and  discourse on  ‘fateful moments.’    In this manner ,   we aimed to specify ‘the mediatory process  that links structural factors with individual agency and reflexivity’ (Peterson ,  2011, p. 275) within a comparative analysis of biographies that is sensitive to their  historical and individual timing .  In the next section, we provide a detailed illustration of our approach  through an  analytical discussion  of our interviews with Seamus  and Larry ."
"48" "Reconstructing l ives and times"
"49" "Seamus and Larry were born in the mid-1950s.  When we first interviewed them, both were  approaching their sixties,  living in rural areas and struggling to make repayments on  their mortgages.    They each  expressed disappointment about  the directions their liv es had taken.  For Seamus, this was ‘not what we had planned for.’  Larry ‘ couldn’t even tell you what my options are now. ’"
"50" "Their  lifelines  allowed  us to engage in a biographical matching exercise ( Crompton, 2001 ), comparing   their  li fe histories  in socio -historical context.  Figure  5  shows that there were considerable similarities  in the timing of key transitions, especially in early adulthood .   While average age at marriage reached a historic low in Ireland during the mid-1970s , both men  still  married  exceptionally young .   Their early adult transitions were therefore ‘ill-timed’ in ways that had the potential to impact on their future life paths ( Schoon, 2007, p. 97 ).   However , in the context of an expanding economy,  they  were able to support their young families  by working  in skilled manual occupations."
"51" "<Figure 5  about here>"
"52" "As their families continued to increase, they encountered the recession of the 1980s ,  with its  high rates of unemployment and emigration (Ó Riain,  2 014 ,  p .  32 ) .   In response to these challenges, Seamus initiated  a   lifetime  pattern of entrepreneurial adaptation through spells of migration to take advantage of opportunities in the construction industry, both within Ireland  and overseas, and by setting up small businesses  in partnership  with his wife .   Larry, by contrast, responded by entering the civil service  because he believed it would provide greater economic security for his family."
"53" "They each encountered personal, family problems in the 1990s.  In Seamus’s case, this led to estrangement from some of his extended family network.  In Larry’s case, it led to the breakdown of his first marriage.  These personal problems contributed to decisions that the men made just as the first phase of  the economic boom dubbed the ‘Celtic Tiger ’ began to take off in the mid-1990s  (Ó Riain ,   2014,  pp . 54-59 ) .  Seamus and his family returned to Ireland and began construction of their new home in a rural area.   Larry moved to a new home in a commuter town."
"54" "At  the peak of the property bubble that emerged during the second phase of  the Celtic Tiger  – between 200 3  and 2008  (Ó Riain  2014,  pp.  61-64 ),  both men made critical choices that subsequently increased their families’ exposure to the economic crisis .   Seamus decided to set up in construction on his own ,  partly  because he had  recently  been diagnosed with a chronic illness and wanted to  avoid the stress of   long distance commuting .  His adult children had moved out of the family home on which he still had a mortgage.   Larry took out a new mortgage to begin building  his ‘dream’   retirement  home in a rural area.   He did this in the context of a sense that he was ‘blocked’ from progressing further in his career.   Shortly afterwards he met his second wife and started a new family."
"55" "As the economic crisis developed, Seamus  quickly ran into trouble as clients failed to pay him for his work .  Very soon,  he   and his wife were  struggling  to pay their mortgage. Seamus became seriously depressed  and contemplated suicide  ‘ because I thought logically if I commit  suicide [my wife will] get the insurance and the house is paid .’   He  considered reverting to his previous pattern of short-term emigration for work, but felt that he was,  ‘too old and with depression…I’d have been no good.’     Around this time ,  a relative, visiting from  abroad,  offered financial  help . Soon afterwards, he  did secure temporary work overseas ,  with his son’s assistance."
"56" "Larry began to feel the impact of salary cutbacks imposed on public sector workers after 2010.  The cost of running a car added to the stress es  of  commuting   and coping with  the demands of a young family:  ‘I started getting debts, bills started building up and building up.’    In this context, Larry decided he would  take advantage  of the opportunity  to retire comparatively early , available to him in his civil service occupation .   Unfortunately, he soon discovered that he had underestimated the  value  of his pension, which left him with nothing after he had covered  his household expenses .  He tried to supplement his income by taking on ‘cash-in-hand’ jobs, but eventually reached  a crisis point , when he was  forced to seek help from a charity."
"57" "At the time of his  biographical  interview , Seamus had managed to pay off some of his mortgage and had re-negotiated payments on the remainder.  While this allowed him to keep his head above water, it meant that he would not own the property until he was seventy, which was  ‘not the plan, it was to own it this year or last year.’  He was working  in manual labour  on a state-sponsored  employment scheme .  Seamus felt that , in his new work,  he had gone  ‘from way up there to way down there .’    Larry, on the other hand, told us that he still did not know  ‘what to do.’   He was pleased that his family  had got through Christmas without charitable help and was contemplating taking on a seasonal manual job  offered through an  acquaintance .    He was concerned, however,  that it might not  be ‘worth it’ after tax and the costs of running a second car."
"58" "By   drawing up  their lifelines alongside their narrative biographical interviews, we were able  to reconstruct and compare the timing and sequencing of Seamus’s and Larry’s lives  in a manner that permitted ‘association of the ‘history of events’… with the history of decisions,   reflections and regrets ’ (Nico, 2016, p. 2118).   In  the context of their ‘historical times’ (Elder, 1994 ),   both men engaged in resilience practices that, cumulatively, affected the stock of resources and capabilities available to them as they  faced  the economic crisis  in their fifties .   In  a growing economy , both were able to overcome childhood difficulties and the challenge of early adult transitions.  By taking strategic decisions, they responded resiliently to the 1980s recession, but the costs exacted by this response left them less well able to cope with subsequent challenges in their personal lives ,  precipitat ing  them towards choices that  made   their families more vulnerable  to the financial crash.  At the end of  their biographical  interview s , both  appeared  uncertain  about  whether or not they would be able to adapt  resiliently .  In the next section, we show how the follow-up, reflexive  interview revealed new insights into the dynamic relationship between  Larry’s and Seamus’s   ‘ lives as lived ’  and  ‘lives  as told, ’  by  revisiting   their narratives  and by eliciting reflexivity on turning points."
"59" "Eliciting participant reflexivity"
"60" "Figure s  2  show s  that, in the co-construction exercise   during  his  reflexive  interview , Seamus d epicted  a lifeline that was  now  on  an upward  trajectory, following a steep downward trend that  began   when he set up his own business.  By contrast, Larry  (Figure 3)  depicted a continuing  negative  trend  beginning  shortly after he started construction on his new home.   In the course of adding scores to their turning points , both men  suddenly  disclosed new developments that had occurred since their  narrative  interviews.    Seamus told us that:"
"61" "I've always been a  ‘ half-full ’  guy, I've always been that way.  And it was only in this period here, the depression period, that I got down below into the minus. But I'm back up again to the  ‘ half-full ’  because I'm heading  [overseas] ,  […] , to take a foreman's job."
"62" "Larry  revealed :"
"63" "I've a sad story for you now… I'm selling the house, I have to sell it, banks are at me.  So that's where I'm at.  And I'd say the last while here, the last couple of weeks, probably since you're gone, I'm very down.  I'm stressed out, I'm all over the place, and I'm up one minute, down the next minute: all over the place.  And so it's taken me a while to accept that I have to sell it."
"64" "At first, therefore,  Seamus linked his  ‘resilient’  life line  to  a critical event that provided him with  an  opportunity for agency ,   which  would restore a former identity.  Larry , on the other hand, associated his  apparently ‘non-resilient’ trajectory with a critical event that he had yet to convert to a ‘fateful’ one ,  because he had not   accepted the change of direction it would bring to his life and self- identity.  However,  in the course of their reflexive interviews,  both men  challenged their own  initial  interpretations."
"65" "Seamus projected two selves to the interviewer, both his former identity as a strong ‘leader’  in his family  and his current sense of reliance on  a web of related  others , notably including his adult children .   He revealed that his wife did not want him to avail of the new employment opportunity .   At  the end of his  reflexive  interview ,  he  acknowledged that he  probably would  not   take   it  up.  Larry described how he and his wife  planned to move  into a new ho me   with  her parents.  He  returned continually to questions about  the feasibility of the new arrangement  and his sadness at the loss of  his dream  retirement home , revealing that he had yet to convert this critical moment into a fateful one .   Nevertheless, he  described having achieved a greater sense of self-awareness in the course of the interview:"
"66" "I can say I don't know what's around the bend now, where before my life was there like that, and then \"Oh\" it's stopped, do you understand? And that's what I would say to you, my life went \"Uh, boom!\", and you kind of said where's it going? ...   [B] ut now I'm kind of expressing myself a bit better aren't I in a sense …[Y]ou can see … coming in…  awareness is there ."
"67" "Thus the process of engaging with us through consideration of the graphical representation of their lifelines –  with  ‘ a voice that sits ‘on top’ of the original interview data ’ (Riach   2009 , p.  364 ) – elicited participant reflexivity on the direction of their lives.   In both cases, this  took the form of provisional identity claims  that involved   surrendering past dreams and coming to terms with  their reliance  on others.   For Larry this meant a process of ‘shifting risk’ by moving in with his in-laws, whereas for Seamus it took the form of drawing on the social and economic resources available to him, once he had accepted that he was no longer a ‘leader’ in his family.  Both  of these turning points towards resilience  exacted costs, but Seamus showed greater signs of converting this critical moment into a fateful one, coming to terms with  his  new identity, whereas Larry described himself as being unable to ‘see what is around the bend.’"
"68" "Participant induced  reflexivity"
"69" "In the section above, we showed how engaging in the co-construction of reflexive lifelines elicited participant reflection on their biographies.  In this section, we pr esent  two examples of how the discussion of turning points in the  reflexive   lifeline interviews  also  created opportunities for what Riach  (2009) described  as ‘sticky moments ,’  during which  participants  exercised  ‘symbolic mastery’ in ways that  facilitated   an open exchange of the different positions taken by researcher and researched."
"70" "During his  first,  narrative interview, Seamus  gave a striking account of how   an elderly  relative, visiting from overseas,  gifted his family  money to pay off some of their debt.  We  thought  that this intervention  might be  a significant ‘turning point,’ because it occurred when his financial circumstances were at their lowest, and seemed to mark a point at which they began to turn around.  Seamus noted that, after her intervention, he was beginning to ‘get stronger.’  However, during  his reflexive  interview,  in the course of ‘joining the dots , ’  Seamus challenged our interpretation :"
"71" "For me it was going out to  [overseas city] , I suppose, my son in  [overseas city] , and getting work again, and actually being wanted. And getting paid well for doing what I was doing. That was a big … [whi stles] … that made me feel really  good."
"72" "This occurred shortly  after  his relative’s intervention.   This ‘sticky moment’ caused us to reflect on  our assumption  that  material  adversity represented the most significant challenge to resilience and that the importance of social  capital  lay  solely  in its potential for con version into economic capital  (Bourdieu 1990) .   Re-reading the transcripts of his interviews   in light of this reflexive moment,  led us to a greater appreciation of  the symbolic importance of  how  Seamus  positioned himself  within  the ‘linked lives’ in his biography ,  and how  this was  critical to his capacity for resilience .  This aligns with Lamont et al.’s (2013, p. 135) argument that resilience is maintained by ‘repertoires that sustain recognition…of individual or collective selves.’"
"73" "In Larry’s case,  we initially viewed his  decision to retire  as  a  critical moment  that precipitated his personal financial crisis .   However, Larry rejected this understanding of his retirement as a turning point, emphasizing instead that  it  represented something positive in his life , associated with the construction of his dream home.  While not denying that he had miscalculated,  Larry depicted the timing of his retirement ,  not as a turning point, but  as part of a slow downward trend, linked to growing  financial difficulties  after 2008 :"
"74" "I'd planned on  [retiring] -  I had all the pape rwork done, I'd every kind of … in my head, I'd everything sorted.  I'd asked ,  \"Look where are we going?\"   And then from 2008 say to 2010 […]  we lost half our pay and we're doing three times the work now, you probably are the same.  And it just...  So why I retired was I couldn't get to work sometimes, I didn't have the fuel to get to work."
"75" "Larry’s  interpretation of his retirement experience led us to a greater appreciation of how his decision had been made in the context of a ‘moral rationality’ based on quality of life and his desire to spend more time with his young family , rather than an ‘economically rational’ cho ice  (Duncan and Edwards 1999) .     Furthermore, Larry’s  appeal  to us as fellow public servants, led us to reflect on own positionality in relation to the research topic ( Riach  2009, p. 364) , and how this might have   affected our  initial  interpretations.   Such  moments of  ‘participant-induced’ reflexivity contributed towards making our research  ‘ accountable  ‘ (Henwood 2008)."
"76" "Conclusion"
"77" "We have defined  resilien t biographies   as situated,  developmental processes  through which people acquire capabilities  to  mobilize resources in ways that  maintain  their well-being, or quality of life, under challenging and adverse conditions. Resilience to shocks such as the recent ‘great’ recession  may require people to turn their lives around in ways that entail a reconfiguration of their identities.  Social resilience is therefore a fundamentally reflexive process, situated within past and present  structural and institutional contexts ."
"78" "In this article ,  we described  how we  investigated  resilience using  a ‘reflexive lifeline’  method of graphic elicitation  within  recursive biographical interviews .   We illustrated our approach through a comparative analysis of the interviews and lifelines co-constructed with two men who participated in our study.   The reflexive lifelines   met  a number of objectives for a comparative biog raphical analysis  of resilience .  Using them, we collected   ‘objective’  retrospective data about the timing of lives  to facilitate comparison ,  garner ed  biographical data that allowed us to explore  subjective meanings,  and elicit ed  reflexive data on turning points as fateful moments.   The  lifeline  method  enabled us, as researchers, to  retain  an analytical distinction between  the ‘ life  as lived’  and  the ‘life as told , ’  while   collaboratively  reconstruct ing  participant s’  life experiences  and understandings  (Nico 2016 ) .   The  reflexive  lifeline interview allowed us to explore resilience as a  process through which participants ‘overwrote’ their pasts and re-imagined their futures (Neale, 2017, p. 18).   It al so provided unexpected opportunities for researcher reflexivity, challenging some of our ‘taken-for- granted’ ideas about resilience.   We believe that the reflexive lifeline method holds  potential for biographical research on a wide range of topics .  As a method that creates a ‘ feedback loop between participant narratives and research data ,’ it does require a high degree of ethical sensitivity  (Neale 2017 , p. 20)."
"79" "One of the challenges for biograph ical research in social science  is that it may appear to ‘individualize’  topics such as resilience, placing undue emphasis on contingent events, agency ,  and the unique characteristics of individuals, ignoring the determining effects of wider socio-historical contexts and structural constraints.  However, we believe that the reflexive lifeline approach  outlined here,  helps to capture what Abbott (2017 , p. 13 ) described as the ‘historicality of individuals,’ that is, the ‘encoded historical experience’ that at any given moment ‘constitutes a set of possibilities and constraints within which various actors must work in the present.’ It also allows us to  uncover and explore the ‘reflexive competences’ (Caetano ,  2015) through which people act to address critical life events. Both layers of interpretation and analysis are essential to a biographical understanding of resilience."
"80" "References"
"81" "Abbott, A. (20 17 ).  Processual Sociology .  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press."
"82" "Adriansen, H. K. (2012).  Timeline interviews: A tool for conducting life history research. Qualitative studies, 3(1), 40-55."
"83" "Alwin, D. F. (2012). Integrating varieties of life course concepts.  The Journals of  Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences ,  67B (2) , 206–220"
"84" "Bagnoli, A. (2009). Beyond the standard interview: the use of graphic elicitation and arts based methods.  Qualitative Research 9 (5), 545-570."
"85" "Berney, L. and Blane, D. (2003). The Lifegrid Method of Collecting Information From People at Older Ages.  Research in Policy and Planning, 21 (2), 13-22."
"86" "Brannen, J.  (2013). Life story t alk. Some  r eflections on  narrative in q ualitative  interiews.  Sociological Research Online, 18 (2),  URL:  http://www.socresonline.org.uk/18/2/15.html>  "
"87" "Caetano, A. (2015).  Personal reflexivit y and biography: methodological  challenges and strategies .  International Journal of Social Research Methodology ,  18 ( 2 ) , 227-242,"
"88" "Canvin, K., Marttila, A., Burstrom, B., & Whitehead, M. (2009). Tales of the unexpected?  Hidden resilience in poor households in Britain.  Social Science & Medicine ,  69 (2),  238-245 ."
"89" "Clausen, J. (1989). Life reviews and life stories. In J.Z. Giele and G. H. Elder, Jr. (eds).  Methods of Life Course Research: Qualitative and Quantitative Approach es (pp. 189-212). Thousand Oaks, California: Sage."
"90" "Crompton, R. (2001). Gender, Comparative Research and Biographical Matching.  European Societies 3 (2), 167-190."
"91" "Dagdeviren, H.,  Donoghue, M. and Promberger, M.  ( 2016 ) . Resilience, Hardship and Social Conditions.  Journal of Social Policy, 45 (1), 1-20."
"92" "Dagg, J. and Gray, J .  (2016)  RESCuE technical report on  fieldwork in Ireland . NIRSA Working Paper 83. Available at:   https://www.maynoothuniversity.ie/sites/default/files/assets/document/JDand%20JGNo83_0.pdf"
"93" "De Vries, B. (2013). Lifelines: A review of content and context.  International Journal of"
"94" "Reminiscence and Life Review, 1 ( 1 ) , 31-35."
"95" "Elder Jr, G. H. (1994). Time, human agency, and social change: Perspectives on the life  course.  Social  P sychology  Q uarterly ,  57 (1),  4-15."
"96" "Estêvão , P., Calado, A., & Capucha, L. (2017) Resilience:  Moving from a “heroic” notion to  a sociological concept .  Sociologia, Problemas e Práticas 85 , 9-25."
"97" "Freedman, D., Thornton, A., Camburn, D., Alwin, D., & Young-DeMarco, L. (1988). The Life History Calendar: A Technique for Collecting Retrospective Data.  Sociological Methodology,   18 , 37-68."
"98" "Giddens, A. (1991).   Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press."
"99" "Gramling, L.F. and Carr, R.L. (2004). Lifelines: A Life History Methodology.  Nursing Research 53 (3), 207-210."
"100" "Hanks, R. and Carr, N.T. (2008).  Lifelines of Women in Jail as Self-Constructed Visual Probes for Life History Research .  Marriage and Family Review 42 (4), 105-116."
"101" "Heinz, W. (2016).   “Conceptual foundations of qualitative life course research”, Soci ologia, Revista da Faculdade de  Letras da Universidade do Porto, Número Temático - Famílias e Curso de Vida. Pote ncialidades, limites e desafios  metodológicos, pp. 20 – 37"
"102" "Henwood, K. (2008).  Qualitative Resear ch, Reflexivity and Living with  Risk: Valuing and P racticing Epistemic Reflexivity  and Centering Marginality .  Qualitative Research in"
"103" "Psychology, 5 ( 1 ) , 45-55"
"104" "Hobson, B. (2014).  Worklife balance: the agency and capabilities gap . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"105" "Holland, J. and Thomson, R.  ( 2009 ) . Gaining perspective on choice and fate: revisiting critical moments.  European societies ,  11 (3), 451-469."
"106" "Hope, L, Mullis, R & Gabbert, F.  (2013).  Who? What? When? Using a timeline technique to  facilitate recall of a complex  event .   Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 2 (1), 20-24."
"107" "Jackson, K.F. (2012). Participatory diagramming in social work research: Utilizing visual timelines to interpret the complexities of the lived multi-racial experience.’  Qualitative Social Work, 12 (4), 414-432."
"108" "Kolar, K., Ahmad, F., Chan, L. & Erickson, P.G. (2015).  Timeline Mapping in Qualitative Interviews: A Study of Resilienc e With Marginalized  Groups .  International Journal of Qualitative Methods 14 (3), 13-32."
"109" "Laub, J. H., & Sampson, R. J. (1993). Turning Points in the Life Course: Why Change Matters to the Study of Crime.  Criminology ,  31 (3),  301."
"110" "Neale, B. (2017). Generating Data in  Qua litative Longitudinal Research:  A methodological review .   Timescapes Working Paper no. 8.  Available at:  www.timescapes.leeds.ac.uk/publications  and outputs"
"111" "Nelson, I.A. (2010). From Quantitative to Qualitative: Adapting the Life History Calendar  Method .  Field Methods ,  22 (4) ,  413-428 ."
"112" "Nico, M. L. (2016).  Bringing life “back into life course research”: using the life grid as a research instrument for qualitative data collection and analysis .  Quality and Quantity (50) 5,  2107–2120 ."
"113" "Nico, M. L and  Van der Vaart, W. (2012).  Between an ‘‘undoable science’’ and a ‘‘new kind of research’’: life cou rse  methods to study turning points and landmarks. In: Kunneman, H. (ed.)  Good work: the ethics of  craftsmanship.  Amsterdam:  Humanistics University Press,  170–182 ."
"114" "Ó Riain, Seán. 2014.  The Rise and Fall of Ireland’s Celtic Tiger: Liberalism, Boom and Bust.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"115" "Parry, O., Thomson, C. and Fowkes, G. (1999) ‘Life Course Data Collection: Qualitative"
"116" "Interviewing Using the Life Grid’,  Sociological Research Online 4 (2), URL: http://www socresonline.org.uk/4/2/parry.html"
"117" "Peterson, A. (2011). The ‘Long Winding Road to Adulthood: A Risk-filled Journey for Young People in Stockholm’s  Marginalized Periphery .  Young ,  19 (3) ,  271–289"
"118" "Pfister, A.E., Vindrola-Padros, C., & Johnson, G.A. (2014). Together we can show you: Using Participant-Generated  Visual Data in Collaborative Research .  Collaborative Anthropologies 7 (1), 26-49."
"119" "Promberger,  M., Huws, U., Dagdeviren, H., Meier, L. Sowa, F., Boost, M., Athanasiou, A., Arnal, M., Capucha, L., de Castro, C., Faliszek, K., Gray, J., Lecki, K., Mandrysz, W., Petraki, G., Revilla, J.C., Sengul, T., Slania, B., Tennberg, M., Vuojala-Magga, T., & Wodz, K.  (2014).  Patterns of Resilience during Socioeconomic"
"120" "Crises among Households in Europe (RESCuE) .   Concept, Objectives and Work Packages of an EU FP 7 Project .   IAB  Discussion Paper   5/2014 . Available at :  http://doku.iab.de/forschungsbericht/2014/fb0514.pdf"
"121" "Promberger, M. (2017 ). Resilience among vulnerable households in Europe:  Questions,"
"122" "concept, findings and implications . IAB Discussion Paper 12/2017. Available at:   http://www.iab.de/966/section.aspx/Publikation/k170412301"
"123" "Reimer, D.  ( 2014 ) . Subjective and Objective Dimensions of Turning Points.  Social   Work &"
"124" "Society ,  12 (1),  1-19."
"125" "Riach, K. (2009).  Exploring Partici pant-centred Reflexivity in the  Research Interview .  Sociology, 43 (2),  356–370"
"126" "R iessman , C. (2002) 'The analysis of personal narratives', in Gubrium, J. (Ed.),  Handbook of narrative research . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. pp. 695–710."
"127" "Schoon, I. (2007).  Adaptations to changing times: Agency in context .  International Journal of Psychology, 42 (2), 94–101"
"128" "Sheridan, J., Chamberlain, K. & Dupuis, A. (2011).  Timelining: Visualizing Experience. Qualitative Research, 11 (5), 552-569."
"129" "Thomson, R., Bell, R., Holland, J., Henderson, S., McGrellis, S. and Sharpe, S.,  ( 2002 ) . Critical moments: Choice, chance and opportunity in young people's narratives of transition.  Sociology ,  36 (2), 335-354."
"130" "Thomson, R. and McLeod, J.  (2015). New frontiers in qualitative longitudinal research: an agenda for research.  International Journal of Social Research Methodology ,  18 (3), 243-250."
"131" "Wilson, S, Cunningham-Burley, S., Bancroft, A., Backett-Milburn, K. and Masters, M. (2007).  Young people, biographical narratives and the life grid: young people’s accounts of parental substance use .  Qualitative Research, 7 (1), 131-151."
"132" "Figure 3. Seamus’s anonymised lifeline"
"133" "Figure 4. Larry’s anonymised lifeline"
"134" "Figure 5. Larry’s and Seamus’s lives and ties"
