Projecting Movement, Union, Synergy, Interplay & Cultural-collaboration
across the Silk Road (& beyond)
Chuah Aaron
global citizen

Aim
Interplay between culture and globalisation, and in particular the musical
connection between the two has been forwarded as an illustrative, hopeful, and
harmonious example of how humanity as a global race may enhance mutual
understanding and cross-cultural appreciation of its many diverse groups. In
particular, this study aims to investigate the global community-building behind the
relatively recent Silkroad initiative, and to what degree has its aims been achieved,
and how.
Introduction
The dawn of globalisation (though the term was only coined probably in the 1930s, 1
and popularised in the mid-1980s2), probably began at the confluence of the
traditional “East” and “West” thousands of years ago, along what is now popularly
known as the “Silk Road” or “Silk Route”, a slight misnomer for it was not a single
lengthy road but an ancient network of caravan and maritime routes stretching from
Japan and the Korean peninsula in far east Asia to the Mediterranean Sea in the near
west, through which it also linked the European and African continents. So named
because of its distinct trade of silk amongst other items, particularly horses and
spices, the Silk Road has been a channel of exchange between great civilizations
from antiquity including the Persians, Syrians, Arabs, Turks, Arabs, Indians and
Chinese.
The first documented Silk Road crossing3 was led by emissary Zhang Qian (Chang
Ch’ien / K’ien) in 139 BCE under the remit of Han Chinese emperor Wu-Di who
wished to explore the possibility of alliance with their Central-Asian enemies, which
led to deep interest in establishing and defending this trade route. Over a period of
twenty years including more than a decade in captivity by enemy forces, Zhang led
two expeditions from Chinese imperial capital Chang’an (modern-day Xi’an) to
Sogdia, an ancient Iranian civilisation that covered modern Samarkand and Bukhara,
from which he chronicled4 reports of the surrounding regions including
Mesopotamia by the “Western Sea” (the Mediterranean). 5

(Sadler, 1930)
(Levitt, 1960)
3 (Twitchett, Fairbank, & Loewe, 1978, pp. 163-165)
4 (Qian, 1993)
5 (Hays, 2017)
1
2

1

Movement of people, brought along with it language, culture, diversity, and since the
primary purpose of these routes was to facilitate trade (rather than territorial
conquest), along each step of the way, alongside the bartering of goods, came a
natural need and desire to exchange ideas, languages, cultures, and invariably,
musics.
This study aims to explore the musical and synergistic aspects of these cultural
collaborations, encapsulated in a modern case study of the appropriately-named Silk
Road Project and its eclectic innovative Ensemble.
The Silk Road Ensemble
Inspired by the rich breadth of tradition and culture along the Silk Road, renowned
cellist Yo-yo Ma founded the not-for-profit Silk Road Project, Inc. in 1998 as “an
initiative to promote multicultural artistic collaboration”6 and a “catalyst, promoting
innovation and learning through the arts.”
Yo-yo Ma was motivated by conductor Leonard Bernstein, who in 1973 gave a series
of lectures in Harvard University titled “The Unanswered Question” touching on the
universal linguistics of music. 7 Bernstein himself drew on philosopher-linguist
Noam Chomsky’s theory of a universal grammar: a set of rules and structured
constraints that all languages share,8 intricately tied in with the neuronal circuitry of
the human brain.9 Bernstein expounded on that to suggest that the harmonic series
is a universal truth, which is codified and structured within a universal musical
syntax. Yo-yo’s approach towards universality is less theoretical and more humancentric in its application, best summed-up in this quote regarding his goals for the
Silk Road Project, which perhaps also offers insight into his personal mission as a
musician:
"We live in a world of increasing awareness and interdependence, and I
believe that music can act as a magnet to draw people together. Music is an
expressive art that can reach to the very core of one's identity. By listening to
and learning from the voices of an authentic musical tradition, we become
increasingly able to advocate for the worlds they represent. Further, as we
interact with unfamiliar musical traditions we encounter voices that are not
exclusive to one community. We discover transnational voices that belong to
one world."10
As Ma sought to listen and learn from unfamiliar voices and traditions, after two
years of planning and fund-raising, he gathered together fifty-eight musicians and
(Hamilton, 2008)
(Bernstein et al., 2001)
8 (Chomsky, 1957)
9 (Dovey, 2015)
10 (Pincus, 2002, p. 6)
6
7

2

composers of diverse ethnicities and cultures along the historic Silk Road for an
experimental ten-day workshop at Tanglewood, in Massachusetts, USA where they
would listen, play, interplay and co-create something new together from their
distinct traditional musical styles.
The project was guardedly ambitious from its onset: 19 commissioned new works
by composers from Silk Road countries mixing instruments and styles, a two-year
series of concerts and broader cultural exchanges with a focus on education,
including school classroom programmes and neighbourhood concerts along the
route.
Prior to embarking on the Silk Road Project, there were a few key factors that led Ma
to this large undertaking. His own multi-cultural background must have been
instrumental. Decades earlier at a benefit concert in 1962, Bernstein had memorably
introduced the 7-year-old Yo-yo to US President John F. Kennedy and the world at
large as a “highly international type” and a cultural image to ponder: "a seven-yearold Chinese cellist playing old French music for his new American compatriots."
In an interview11 in 2000, Ma likened the encounters he hoped to create via the
project to the great Paris Exhibition of 1889, when a visiting Javanese gamelan
orchestra was heard by Debussy12 and Ravel, bringing long-term consequences to
direction and assimilated forms within French classical music. Consequently, in
similar fashion, the success and acclaim of the Silk Road Project has been farreaching, resulting in six albums including a 2016 Grammy-award winner, Sing Me
Home, and a Grammy-nominated feature-length documentary The Music of Strangers
directed by Morgan Neville, who had won an Oscar for previous work on Twenty
Feet From Stardom.
Another factor that spurred Ma was ethnomusicologist Theodore Levin’s book The
Hundred Thousand Fools of God: Musical Travels in Central Asia (and Queens, New
York)13 which related the struggles of musicians in former Soviet republics in
keeping their traditions alive against severe political pressure. Ma’s curiosity was
piqued by the music from distant parts of the world in Queens brought along by the
diaspora of diverse immigrants from the former Soviet Union (including Jewish
musicians from Burkhara, an major hub along the ancient Silk Road) and also from
other parts of east Asia. Ma pondered at what these waves of exodus would mean
for these musicians, their music, and their impact on Western music. As a cautionary
example against the globalisation of music, Argentinian composer Astor Piazzolla
who lived in New York and Paris on different occasions had his music reviled for its
foreign influences upon his return to Buenos Aires.14 Here, A.L. Pincus in his book
Musicians with a Mission: Keeping the Classical Tradition Alive, raises this poignant
(Deutsch, 2000)
(Johnson, 2002)
13 (Levin, 1996)
14 (Pincus, 2002, p. 35)
11
12

3

question: “Is it ever possible to cut yourself off from your origins?” This begs in turn
its natural converse: “Is it possible for your origins to cut itself off from you?”, a
question I reckon many migrants (impelled or otherwise) must have felt upon
revisiting their place of origin, which may have taken a different cultural path over
the years or sometimes mere months away.
Anthropologist Arjun Appadurai posited in 1996 that “the central problem of today’s
global interactions is the tension between cultural homogenization and cultural
heterogenization.”15 This tension has persisted globally in the past two decades,
driven in part by the proliferation of internet, smartphone and social-media usage
leading to a more homogenized globally-connected and mutually-influencing
culture, balanced against increasing cultural polarization and protectionism. Almost
counter-intuitively, the latter has been intensified by the heterogeneity and
accessibility of myriads of cultural platforms within which drastically dissimilar
cultural worlds “foster divergent sociopolitical values” and amplify the divide
between groups.16
A fascinating macro-evolutionary interdisciplinary study in cultural diversity
employing phylogenetic comparative methods found that the most inherited
cultural traits (at least within the studied Austronesian communities) were those
related to intergenerationally-acquired skills and equipment or goods required for a
specialized mode of subsistence (e.g. farming and fishing).17 However, unlike such
tribal or village communities which live and interact closely with each other and
mostly share the same values, skills, culture and world-views, modern groups of
people, especially in some urban contexts, live physically close to many others but
(mostly by choice) may not share nor seek to gain an understanding of the cultures
and values of, or even have a language in common with, their neighbours. This
divergence has been confirmed, at least in Appadurai’s technoscape in S.A. Matei’s
observations that the world’s telecommunicative flows have become increasingly
clustered along cultural and linguistic dimensions.18
I found this to be true in many pockets of New York City (particularly in Queens and
Lower Manhattan) where polarized enclaves of immigrant communities coexist side
by side, literally a street from each other, living and breathing the language, culture,
music and grocery supplies of their original homelands, but not assimiliating into
nor identifying with those of their adopted home, even after a few generations.
Thus it is against this flow of increasing social fragmentation into ethnographic,
ideological or personal “echo chambers”19 that Ma, working through the limitations
of this seed project ensemble, seeks to do his bit to unify humanity, at least in a
(Appadurai, 1996)
(Curtis, 2017)
17 (Mace & Jordan, 2011)
18 (Matei, 2006)
19 (Samuels, 2009, p. 20)
15
16

4

musical sense: to cross nationalistic, ethnographic or imaginary borders; to listen,
learn from each other, and play in harmony.
Structure
Whetted by Boston University historian Elizabeth ten Grotenhuis’ studies of the Silk
Road, and its relatively recent interdisciplinary angle, Ma convened a conference in
1998 to plan the Silk Road Project as a multidisciplinary study of the music spanning
the Silk route. Levin was hired as executive director, and in 1989 he travelled to
Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan and Mongolia to choose composers for commissioned pieces
which were planned to be recorded by the project’s main funder, Sony Classical.
Finally, 16 composers were selected by an advisory board, among 40 under
consideration including composers from China recommended by Bright Sheng, a
personal Chinese-American friend of Ma’s. These composers were to write pieces for
small ensembles, mixing Western and Eastern classical instruments and styles.
Three other American composers with looser ties to the Silk Road were tasked to
write works for the entire symphonic orchestra: Richard Danielpour of Iranian
heritage, Peter Lieberson whose works were inspired by Tibetan Buddhism, and
Chinese-American Tan Dun who regularly combines western and eastern elements
in wide-spanning musical realms from classical Chinese opera to film and
multimedia.
“World Peace”
One of the outright motivations of the Silk Road project was to foster harmony, and
over its 19 years, it has brought about some notable tangible exemplars. Barely a
year after their inaugural meeting and only three months after 9/11 (2001), at a
time where global political tensions were high, members of the ensemble went to
Aleppo, Syria to perform Islamic and western music to Muslim world leaders at their
newly-restored citadel. One of the violists, Nicholas Cords recalls:
“It was a time of incredible pain and hurt; nobody knew what the future
would hold… There was much sympathy for what America had just been
through. My sense of what music could accomplish was enlarged.”20
A few years later, in 2004, the ensemble hosted and rehearsed with six members of
the Iraqi Symphony Orchestra at a workshop in New York. There was a sense of
sympathy for the difficulties faced by the Iraqi musicians, as this collaborative effort
of being seen playing western music on western violins put their lives at great risk
with their own nation.21
Bridging Gaps
20
21

(Segran, 2013)
(Segran, 2013)
5

Bringing vastly-different musical backgrounds together in this ensemble can be seen
as a microcosm for global cooperation as a shared vocabulary has to be developed to
allow the musicians to communicate effectively, and compromises have to be found
for gaps that exist in each others’ backgrounds. For example, members of the group
have unique forms of musical notation, and some may not even have any notation at
all, such was the case for tabla (a pair of non-identical Hindustani drums) player
Sandeep Das, who when encouraged to compose a piece for the group, was asked to
“just bring his thoughts to the rehearsal”, which he did, wholly in his mind – and it
led to his first Silk Road composition.
Through their musical interactions, Silk Road musicians have found disparate
similarities and unexpected kinship between their respective cultures. Whilst
improvising with Iranian kamancheh (spike fiddle) player Kayhan Kalhor, Das
quipped that “playing with Kayhan for the first time felt like playing with a long-lost
cousin” despite the fact that he was playing a raga (lit. coloring, dyeing. An array of
motifs within melodic structures which is a central feature of north Indian classical
music with no direct parallels in European music) and Kalhor was playing in Persian
mode,22 a complex musical system of seven “royal modes” called Xosrovani, 30
modulation forms and 360 dastan melodies, corresponding to the days of weeks,
months and years. On his musical collaboration with Das and sitar player Ustad
Shujaat Husain Khan, another collaborator of the ensemble, Kalhor said:
“It’s not Persian music, it’s not Indian music. It’s something that didn’t exist
before. It has some musical values to offer to the listener, some meaningful
values.”
Musical Instrument Diffusion
The Silk Road Ensemble uses many instruments that have been commonly played
across the region where there has been distinct cultural diffusion over the millennia,
leading to these instruments being adapted and modified as their usage “travelled”
geographically. This is reflected too in the etymology of some of their names, which
hints at their origin.
For example, in Persia, the word for “string” is tar, which is also the name of a
fretted plucked instrument with six parallel strings arranged as three courses (close
identically-tuned pairs) and a “flying” bass string an octave lower than the middle
course. Precursors for this include the ektar (lit. one string), dutar (two strings) and
setar (three strings). The tar made its way to Spain where it was named the guittara,
which started out having four single strings, but eventually two more were added.
Meanwhile the setar made its way east to India where it featured prominently in
Hindustani music as the sitar, and took on a life of its own and now has six or seven
playable strings and up to 14 sympathetic strings which provide resonance.
22

(Farmer, 1926)
6

In parallel, the Persian tanbur a distinct long and narrow-necked string instrument
with a gourd-like body moved into Central Asia (retaining its name but having
slightly differing forms in Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan), Xinjiang
(tembor), Arabia (tunbur), Turkey (tambur, where its body became round), India
(tanpura), Pakistan (tanburag), Ukraine (bandura), Kazakhstan (dombra), Russia
(domra), Eastern Europe (tamburica), and Greece (tambouras).
A completely wooden-bodied, broader-necked version of this evolved into the
modern lute, which probably started in Mesopotamia (since the third millennium
BCE),23 Persia (barbad or barbud), Arabia (oud or ud, lit. wood), ancient Greece
(pandura or pandoura), China (pipa), and all the way to Japan (biwa).24 Far more
recently, the migration of instruments has also occurred from east to west, for
example, the Japanese Nagoya harp (taishogoto) invented in 1912 based on the key
mechanism of the typewriter, became localised in India (bulbul tarang or,
confusingly, “banjo”, which is also the English name of a completely different
plucked instrument played by 17th century West African slaves in the Caribbean),
Iran (benjo or binjo),25 East Africa (taishokoto) and Germany (akkordolia).
Now onto the woodwinds, the sorna (lit. strong flute, a double reeded horn) was an
ancient Persian26 instrument that migrated eastward to India (shahna), China
(suona), and westward to the Middle East (mizmar or zamour), Turkey (zurna),
Croatia (sopila), Iberia (shawm) and North Africa (rhaita or ghaita). The term gaita
is used in northern Iberia to exclusively refer to bagpipes, which are also reed
instruments, but enclosed, and played by squeezing a reservoir of air (the “bag”).
Featured Instruments and Musicians
For the scope of this project it would be difficult to give a detailed analysis of all
performing musicians of the rather fluid Silk Road Ensemble which number around
sixty, so I will only highlight a few key artists and their distinct instruments, a choice
aided in part by Morgan Neville’s selection in his documentary. The most striking
stories come from the ancient Near East (Western Asia, also what is affectionately
termed the “Cradle of Civilization”), where areas ranging from Iran to Syria have
been ravaged by war as they have been contested and overrun by various empires
for millennia. 27 In the midst of this, people and cultures have survived and even
thrived despite the adversity of being decimated by such conflicts.
Kinan Azmeh, a Silk Road composer and clarinettist from Damascus, weighed his
role and purpose as a musician after the 2011 Syrian revolution ravaged his people.
(McKinnon & Anderson)
(Nassehpour, 2017)
25 (Nassehpour, 2017)
26 (Nassehpour, 2017)
27 ("Imperial History of the Middle East," 2017)
23
24

7

Due to the external situation and internal conflict, he even stopped composing for a
year but came to this purposeful conclusion later on:
“For the past six years, I've realized the limitation of art. Sometimes I look at
my clarinet and I know that it can never stop a bullet, it cannot feed the
hungry, it cannot free a political prisoner and it cannot rebuild a destroyed
home. However, I think making music is an act of freedom and inspiration,
and it can affect people and motivate them to be proactive.” 28
Azmeh brought this hope of freedom into his stirring melodious, and at times
cacophonous, improv-friendly composition Wedding, drawn from his observations
of loud village weddings on a trip to the Syrian countryside (presumably after the
armed conflict had already begun). He quips:
“As I see it, I think it’s quite inspiring to see how there are Syrians who
manage to fall in love, under the falling bombs and all these bullets. Now we
are using the piece as a little hope at the end of the concert.”
Meanwhile, from the opposite end of the Middle East and bordering Central Asia,
Kurdish kamancheh virtuoso Kalhor Kayhan (introduced earlier) was impelled by
unfavourable the political situation to leave his home of Tehran, Iran after its Islamic
Revolution in 1979. He recalls to CNN in 1999:
"Well-known musicians who left Iran at the time couldn't actually train
young people any more, and they had to leave. The other very wonderful
aspect of this was that Persian music ... was introduced to other societies and
cultures. So that's actually the reason I'm sitting here now."
In a 2008 collaboration with four other founding Silk Road Ensemble musicians who
later became the Brooklyn Rider string quartet, Kayhan produced an album Silent
City with its titular centrepiece a stirring half-hour elegy to the 1988 massacre at the
Kurdish city of Halabja by Iraqi chemical bombs which killed up to 7,000 civilians
and brought about prolonged damage to the rest through increased rates of cancer,
miscarriages and congenital-defects years later.29
I’ve replayed the piece numerous times over the course of this project, and each
time it lends something different. It starts out quietly droning and dissonant as the
kamancheh, violins, viola and cello interplay to paint a haunting desolate landscape.
This, I learnt later, comes from the deliberate initial two group improvisation
sections where Kayhan explains in album’s liner notes, “the compositional style in
the first sections of the piece is unusual and based on signs. In this style, each
musician performs his own interpretation of the signs.” However, these improvised
moments are based on certain non-explicit rules based on the Iranian mode
28
29

("Interview with Kinan Azmeh," 2017)
(Muir, 2002)
8

dastgah-e shur, which Kayhan chose to enable flexible spontaneous modulation (due
to its similarity with A minor) and also give a sense of intercultural universality:
“This scale exists [in] China, [in] the Muslim-settled areas of China, which
have been under the influence of Iranian music, to North Africa. It exists
everywhere. … With a slight change in its second degree, it can sound like
Western music and if you move your finger forward [on kamancheh] and play
the second degree sharper, it becomes our own shur. If you play it even
sharper, it changes to one of the Kurdish maqams.”30
After a short (also improvised) kamancheh soliloquy section, the piece moves to a
hopeful, more harmonious finale with a joyful dance motif. This final nonimprovised segment, composed by Kalhor and fellow Silk Road Ensemble composer
Lev ‘Ljova’ Zhurbin, symbolises the resolution of conflict through its cheerful
transparent harmony.
I could (and probably should) have gone on highlighting other exciting members
and musical styles of the Ensemble: the bubbly Chinese pipa player Wu Man, who as
a child was coerced by her parents to study music (instead of dance, which she had
preferred) as a means of escaping the country during the Chinese Cultural
Revolution, choosing specifically for her the pipa because they thought “the shape of
the pipa [was] very elegant for a girl to hold”; charismatic Galician gaita (bagpipe)
player Cristina Pato, who along with Japanese shakuhachi (edge-blown flute) player
Kojiro Umezaki pieced together “Vojo”, an Esperanto-inspired composition that
connects the vastly-differing woodwind styles at the terminal ends of the Silk Road:
Galicia (Spain) and Okinawa (Japan). There are but a small handful of the many
stories that exist within the ensemble and those who work alongside it. As an
example, the Aga Khan Foundation, one of the project’s key sponsors, is a not-forprofit international development agency seeking to provide long term solutions for
poverty, hunger, illiteracy and health in the poorest regions of South/Central Asia,
Africa and the Middle East, and regularly engages the Silk Road team in educational
and cultural programmes in those regions.
Concluding Remarks
Certainly, there are key limitations to the scope of Ma’s aims and the execution of his
ideas: the omission of the various indigenous groups within the other continents (or
even other parts of Asia), for instance; the choice of his, often-already wellestablished composers and musicians; the link to the Sony label and large corporate
sponsorships to be more certain of commercial success.
Tamara Chin, a comparative literature professor and critic of idealized perceptions
of the Silk Road, pointed out that different civilizations regarded its history and
origin differently according to how it suited them. In contrast to China’s view of the
30

(Rostami, 2017)
9

road beginning with the journey of Zhang Qian in the second century BCE, she
pointed out how the very term was only “invented” in 1877 by German geographer
Baron Ferdinand von Richthofen, who then coined it “die Seidenstrasse” (lit. silk
road). Contrasting the sometimes historically-divergent perspectives (and even
maps!) of the road’s span and scope from von Richthofen, Ptolemy, geologists,
Europe, China and Central Asia, she lumps Yo-yo Ma’s efforts as simply being an
invented “model of idealized exchange”.31
Methaphorical or otherwise, Ma’s reinvoking of the world-bridging Silk Road struck
me deeply personally when I attended in late-July last year with a couple of friends,
the Canberra premiere of The Music of Strangers at Palace Electric cinemas, where
my spouse’s cello teacher was to perform with another local musician at the after
party. Being a fan of film and Ma’s classical cello renditions, I probably would’ve
seen the movie at some point anyway, but there, watching Morgan Neville bring to
life the inspiring back story and motivations behind Ma’s global efforts, seeing
afterwards the multi-ethnic attendees of all ages chatting voraciously at that
opening gala of the Stronger Than Fiction documentary festival against the backdrop
of live improvised cello and djembe – musical instruments and styles supposedly
from different worlds – I was awestruck, that for a few hours in chilly Canberra, the
warmth of humanity could travel across cultures, musical styles, and even celluloid –
to show that in our diversity (and increasing social fragmentation) there could yet
be communication, musical and cultural appreciation, and even harmony – not
simply as defined by Bach and western classical music, but a living dynamic
unscripted improvisation of microtones and microcultures.
Perhaps these efforts are simply transient notes in the clamorous bazaar of human
interaction. Pure, hopeful tones that overlay, interplay, give each other room, to
breathe, to be heard.
In the film’s official trailer Ma humbly and sincerely quips: “I’m always trying to
figure out where I fit in the world, which I think is something that I share with seven
billion other people.”
This Silk Road Project, which started as a personal creative experiment for Ma, has
gone on to affect others positively: from the initial 60 bleary-eyed musicians fresh
off the bus at Tanglewood, to the innumerable people (myself included) who have
heard the music and story of this nearly two-decade long project. This initiative has
kept reinventing itself (during the course of my writing over the past few weeks [in
Nov 2017] its name has gone from the Silk Road Project, Inc. to simply Silkroad) and
has gotten so big that, perhaps in preparation of their twentieth anniversary, Ma has
very recently handed over the reins of artistic direction of the Ensemble to not one
but three other members within the team.32
31
32

(Chin, 2013)
(Anderson, 2017)
10

In biology, the key measure of “fitness” (as referred to in the Darwinian concept
“survival of the fittest”) of a living species is not how well a single individual does
(however that’s measured), nor how long it lives, and not even how many offspring
(“copies” of itself) it leaves behind, but how many of its offspring’s offspring
(grandchildren) are viable. It is this continuity that determines the survival and
thriving of the species.
Ma’s revolutionary approach to cultural tradition is reflected in this quote: “the idea
of culture is not so much to preserve tradition, but to keep things alive and to evolve
things.” Thus, simply put, the coming together of ideas and traditions, ensure their
long-term survival through constant change and adaptation. By stepping down to let
his brain- (and probably, heart-) child evolve on its own, Ma is taking a brave new
step of trust that this cross-cultural musical revolution he has sparked will take on a
life, form and direction of its own. Of its fitness and impact on musical history, only
time will tell. But to those like me who’ve heard and been moved, it has been an
inspiration to step out of my self-imposed professional, cultural and ethnographic
boundaries, and do more.

11

Bibliography:
Anderson, A. (2017). Yo-Yo Ma hands over the reins of Silk Road Ensemble.
Retrieved from http://www.internationalartsmanager.com/news/music/yoyo-ma-hands-over-the-reins-of-silk-road-ensemble.html
Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity At Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization:
University of Minnesota Press.
Bernstein, L., Smith, D., Mozart, W. A., Beethoven, L. v., Berlioz, H., Wagner, R., . . .
Wiener Philharmoniker. (2001). The unanswered question six talks at
Harvard by Leonard Bernstein [6 videodiscs (793 min.)]. West Long Branch,
NJ: Kultur.
Chin, T. (2013). The Invention of the Silk Road, 1877. Critical Inquiry, 40(1), 194219. Retrieved from
http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/673232.
doi:10.1086/673232
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton & Company.
Curtis, J. (2017). A Fake America: Cultural Fragmentation and Polarization. Harvard
Political Review. Retrieved from http://harvardpolitics.com/online/fakeamerica-cultural-fragmentation-polarization/
Deutsch, R. W. (2000). Yo-Yo Ma Mines Global Musical Culture. Retrieved from
http://www.fastlanefilms.com/sonic/yo%20yo%20ma.html
Dovey, D. (2015). Noam Chomsky’s Theory Of Universal Grammar Is Right; It's
Hardwired Into Our Brains. Retrieved from
http://www.medicaldaily.com/noam-chomskys-theory-universal-grammarright-its-hardwired-our-brains-364236
Farmer, H. G. (1926). The Old Persian Musical Modes. Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society of Great Britain & Ireland, 58(1), 93-95. Retrieved from
https://www.cambridge.org/core/article/old-persian-musicalmodes/59735C5C8521B2C6377DD65373A99F4D.
doi:10.1017/S0035869X00055593
Hamilton, G. (2008). Follow the mellow Silk Road with Yo-Yo and his cello.
Independent. Retrieved from
https://www.independent.ie/entertainment/music/follow-the-mellow-silkroad-with-yoyo-and-his-cello-26471326.html
Hays, J. (2017). Silk Road During the Han Dynasty (206 B.C.- A.D. 220): Wu Di,
Romans, Sogdians and Parthians. Facts and Details. Retrieved from
http://factsanddetails.com/china/cat2/sub90/entry-5440.html#chapter-1
Imperial History of the Middle East. (2017, November 14). [Shockwave Flash]
Retrieved from http://www.mapsofwar.com/ind/imperial-history.html
Interview with Kinan Azmeh. (2017). [Interview]. Retrieved from
http://www.hamburg.com/elbphilharmonie/kinan-azmeh/
Johnson, H. (2002). Balinese music, tourism and globalisation: inventing traditions
within and across cultures. New Zealand Journal of Asian Studies, 4(2), 8-32.
Levin, T. C. (1996). The Hundred Thousand Fools of God: Musical Travels in Central
Asia (and Queens, New York): Indiana University Press.
Levitt, T. (1960). Marketing myopia. Harvard Business Review(July-August), p.45-56.
12

Mace, R., & Jordan, F. M. (2011). Macro-evolutionary studies of cultural diversity: a
review of empirical studies of cultural transmission and cultural adaptation.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 366,
402-411.
Matei, S. A. (2006). Globalization and heterogenization: Cultural and civilizational
clustering in telecommunicative space (1989–1999). Telematics and
Informatics, 23(4), 316-331. Retrieved from
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736585305000456.
McKinnon, J. W., & Anderson, R. Ancient lutes. Grove Music Online. Retrieved from
http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/subscriber/article/grove/music/4007
4pg2#S40074.2
Muir, J. (2002). Kurds look back with fear. BBC News: Middle East. Retrieved from
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/2138447.stm
Nassehpour, N. (2017). Impact of Iranian Music on Other Cultures and Vice Versa.
Iran Chamber Society: Music of Iran. Retrieved from
http://www.iranchamber.com/music/articles/iranian_music_other_culture.
php
Pincus, A. L. (2002). Musicians with a Mission: Keeping the Classical Tradition Alive:
Northeastern University Press.
Qian, S. (1993). Records of the grand historian : Han dynasty (B. Watson, Trans.).
Hong Kong ; New York: Renditions-Columbia University Press.
Rostami, M. (2017). Silent City: A Commemoration of Halabja’s Tragedy. Music and
Politics, 11(1). Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/mp.9460447.0011.105.
doi:10.3998/mp.9460447.0011.105
Sadler, M. (1930). Towards a New Education: A Record and Synthesis of the
Discussions on the New Psychology and the Curriculum at the Fifth World
Conference on the New Education Fellowship Held at Elsinore, Denmark, in
August 1929 (W. Boyd & M. M. Mackenzie Eds.). Helsingor, Denmark: A.A.
Knopf.
Samuels, R. (2009). New Media, Cultural Studies, and Critical Theory after
Postmodernism: Automodernity from Zizek to Laclau: Palgrave Macmillan US.
Segran, E. (2013). A Yo-Yo Ma Project Brings Together Musicians From Warring
Nations. The Atlantic. Retrieved from
http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2013/10/A-Yo-Yo-MaProject-Brings-Together-Musicians-From-Warring-Nations/280458/
Twitchett, D., Fairbank, J. K., & Loewe, M. (1978). The Cambridge History of China:
Volume 1, The Ch'in and Han Empires, 221 BC-AD 220 (Vol. 1): Cambridge
University Press.

13

