Poverty alleviation research in rural China:
Three decades and counting
X.J. Jay Luo†‡x
This draft: Sep 22, 2019

Abstract

Poverty alleviation is a hallmark of post-revolution Chinese policymaking. Since 1978,
the Communist Party of China (CPC) has implemented successive waves of poverty
alleviation policies whose effects have become the focus of an ever-increasing body of
academic literature. This paper reviews the diverse but limited literature that evaluates the
impact of the CPC’s rural poverty reduction programs through four major channels, namely
fiscal investment programs, social safety nets, rural governance on the village-, county- and
provincial level, and the relocation of rural populations from destitute regions. This paper
aims to synthesize results and evaluate whether and to what extent these poverty
alleviation programs have had distinct positive or negative impacts on regional development
outcomes. Furthermore, I highlight contradictions in empirical findings to motivate the
discussion about contextual importance when designing and implementing future rural
poverty alleviation programs. Finally, I suggest that an exhaustive and critical appraisal of
the empirical strategies used within the reviewed literature would further the development
and application of more accurate and informative methodologies.
Keywords: Poverty alleviation, poverty analysis, depressed areas, welfare, regional policy

†

University of British Columbia, 2329 West Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
St. George’s School, 4175 W 29th Ave, Vancouver, BC V6S 1V1, Canada
x
Corresponding author: jayluo215@gmail.com
∗
Declarations of interest: none
‡

1

1

Introduction
Since Deng Xiaoping’s monumental market reforms in 1978, 700 million Chinese people

have been lifted out of absolute poverty, accounting for 70% of poverty reduction worldwide
(Error! Bookmark not defined.). In 2013, General Secretary Xi Jinping set the ambitious
goal of lifting all 1.4 billion people out of destitution by the end of 2020, 10 years ahead of
the United Nation’s goal of eradicating poverty worldwide by 2030 (Wescott and Wang,
2019). By the end of 2018, the 832 poorest counties have already been reduced by at least
430, and at least 100,000 villages have exited extreme poverty (South China Morning Post,
2018). The 13th Five-Year Plan (2016-2020) has the stated mission to lift 30 million people
out of poverty through industrialization and investment, 10 million through employment
opportunities, 10 million through ex situ resettlement, and 20 million through social security
programs (Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, 2016; Zuo, 2019).
Despite the CPC’s remarkable progress in poverty alleviation, the nature of rural
poverty and the interplay of its causal factors have confounded scholars for decades. The
first attempt to empirically document rural poverty1 was undertaken by Travers and Ma
(1994), who investigated whether agricultural intensification and investment was effective in
raising peasant incomes. Since then, rural poverty measurement in the literature has
evolved from single-dimensional—that is, purely income-based—to multidimensional2, which
takes into account social deprivations, the lack of human capital, and vulnerability to enter
poverty. However, the integration of multiple poverty indicators is difficult, as empirically
measuring many of these holistic indicators, with any degree of precision or consistency,
remains challenging. While scholars have come to the consensus that a numeric cut-off line

1

There may have been earlier attempts to document poverty (especially in the Chinese literature),
but those articles were excluded from the review for reasons described in the methodology section.
2
Especially interesting is that the etymology of the Chinese word for poverty (pin kun 贫困) already
implies the multidimensionality of poverty in China. Poor (pin 贫) is defined as “little income,” while
predicament (kun 困) is defined as a being entangled in a painful state of social captivity or
environment. See Wang et al. (2016).

2

is an oversimplified model of defining absolute poverty3, approaches have generally differed
regarding poverty identification methods.
This paper is structured as follows: the first section gives a brief history of rural
Chinese poverty alleviation. The second section outlines the review methodology used
within this work. The third section discusses the evolution of research focus and
experimental design of the literature. The fourth section discusses the key findings of this
review. The fifth section concludes the paper.

1.1 A brief history of poverty alleviation in rural China
1949-1977 Economic development was stagnant in rural areas, whose populations

were in a state of constant poverty during this period. Poverty alleviation policies were
fruitless and misguided, focusing on the most basic physiological needs (food, clothing) of
rural populations (Liu et al., 2018). This passive blood-transfusion form of poverty
alleviation discouraged local economic growth, and transitions back into poverty were
pervasive.
1978-1985 Deng Xiaoping’s opening-up reforms led to gradual liberalizations in

agriculture and business development. The household responsibility system inspired farmers
to increase land output, which prompted a healthy increase in agricultural product prices.
The formation of township and village enterprises (TVEs) laid the framework for rural
economic structure. Poverty alleviation efforts became more comprehensive (e.g. fiscal
investment in disparate and contiguous rural areas). Absolute poverty dropped 17.86 million

3

The former official definition of poverty is based on the Chinese national poverty cut-off line of
RMB 2300 ($362.5) per capita annual income. Criticisms of the national poverty line—in addition to
its dismissal of other poverty causes—are centered around its inflexibility. For example, the living
standards of a person with a per capita annual income of RMB 2301 is virtually identical as one with
a per capita annual income of RMB 2299. The cut-off is also criticized for being set too low in
relation to the international standard. Using a 10-year panel data set from three provinces, Glauben
et al. (2011) demonstrated that while only 4% of the households in lived five or more years in
poverty according to the national poverty line, the portion increases to almost 40% when remeasured
using the international poverty line (Glauben et al., 2011).

3

people annually, and individuals unable to meet their basic needs dropped from 30% to 15%
of the rural population during this period (Hu et al., 2005).
1986-1993 The rural economy sustained its economic growth, but inequalities

emerged between eastern coastal cities and midwestern contiguous poverty areas. In 1986,
the CPC established the State Council Leading Group on Poverty Alleviation and
Development (LGOPAD 国务院扶贫开发领导小组). The establishment of this
administration marked the first state-led poverty alleviation program in China.
1994-2000 This phase of poverty alleviation is characterized by the National 8-7

Plan, which aimed to resolve food and clothing problems of 80 million poor in midwestern
mountainous regions. 82% of the 592 national poverty counties (an increase of 261 from the
previous period) was concentrated in midwestern areas. The targets of the 8-7 Plan was
achieved in 2000—one year ahead of its planned completion date—and led to a 48-million
decrease in rural poverty population in China. The 8-7 Plan marked a turning point in
Chinese poverty alleviation policy as it had clear objectives, solutions, and duration (Liu et
al., 2018).
2001-20134 Since the drafting of the “Outline for Development-Oriented Poverty

Reduction for China’s Rural Area” in 2001, rural China experienced over a decade of
village-centric poverty reduction (Yan, 2016; Liu et al., 2018). Whole-village advancement
measures such as rural infrastructure development and community-based development
paved the way for more region-specific poverty alleviation, a precursor to the era of targeted
poverty alleviation (2014-present). The tax-for-fee reforms (shuifei gaige 税费改革) in 2001
reduced agricultural tax burden for farmers; only five years later in 2006 did the CPC
eliminate the two-thousand-year-old agricultural surcharge. In 2003, the new-type rural
cooperative healthcare system (NRCHS) was designed to counteract poverty incidence
caused by illness. The healthcare relief policies in 2004 provided “destitute” households with

4

Other scholars categorize time periods differently. Liu et al. (2018) uses the period 2001-2012. Yan
(2016) uses the period 2001-2010. 2013 was chosen as the end date in this paper because of the
initiation to targeted poverty alleviation, which marked a turning point in the mechanism of the
poverty alleviation program.

4

“five welfare guarantees”, benefitting 3.04 million deprived population in rural villages. By
the end of 2010, China had lifted 58.26 million out of poverty and became the first nation to
achieve the UN Millennium Development target of halving the poverty population.
2014-2020 Since 2013, China has implemented the ‘targeted’ poverty alleviation

strategy (jingzhun fupin 精准扶贫). In 2013, the State Council released “Opinions on
Promoting Rural Poverty Alleviation through Innovation Mechanisms,” a programmatic
document that stresses the need for an appropriate identification process for poverty
alleviation. The document requires local governments to generate electronic reports for
individual households, detailing the causes and circumstances of their poverty. In June 2015,
Chairman Xi Jinping ratified the targeted poverty alleviation plan and positioned it at the
forefront of Chinese poverty alleviation policy.

2

Review Methodology

Here I provide a brief overview of the methodology used to review the empirical works
included in this review.

The quasi-systematic review of empirical methods and data. Original, peerreviewed research articles were selected from Elsevier, JSTOR, and SSRN. Publication dates
were divided into time periods (1990-2000, 2001-2010, and 2011-2019) as they correspond to
major poverty alleviation policies as well as shifts in the focus, methodology, and findings in
the literature. The literature reviewed in this work focuses on poverty alleviation programs
in rural5, rather than urban China because of its significantly higher poverty incidence,
persistence and severity, and the rural-centricity of government policies. I omit research

5

The characteristics that constitute an area as rural is poorly defined in China since 1) the CPC has
provided multiple definitions of a “rural population” (see Martin, M. F. (1992). Defining China’s
Rural Population. The China Quarterly, (130), 392–401. Retrieved from JSTOR.) and 2) urban areas
can grow by annexing parts of bordering rural areas (see Moreno, E. L. (2017, September 5).
Concepts, definitions and data sources for the study of urbanization: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Retrieved from
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/events/pdf/expert/27/papers/II/paperMoreno-final.pdf); however, that growth is unlikely to affect broad patterns of rural poverty.

5

articles analyzing poverty alleviation perspectives on ecology, biodiversity, energy use, and
tourism as environmental aspects of poverty bear little relevance to the canonical channels
of poverty alleviation. Each study in this review was evaluated based on the components of
its experimental design (geographical scope, time frame, sample source, sample size,
dependent variables).

Search methodology. I use Elsevier, JSTOR, and Google Scholar as primary search
engines. Restrictions were placed on the date of publication (1990-2000; 2001-2010; 20112019), the repository (restricted to Elsevier, JSTOR and SSRN), and topic (studies in other
developing nations were rejected). The authors must have used a clear empirical approach
to analyze the effects of poverty alleviation policy in rural China. The research articles were
catalogued according to the policies they analyze6.
Examples of search phrases:

-

China poverty alleviation "[insert methodology here]" -urban.

-

Rural microfinance China poverty Elsevier -Vietnam -Thailand

-

Poverty alleviation resettlement rural China JSTOR

There are important points to be discussed about this methodology. First, this work
should not be considered a meta-analysis, as a formal search algorithm was not used7, and
there has been no attempt to create standardized impact estimates. Secondly, I acknowledge
the exclusion of Chinese research, or other international research, that may not be included
in the repositories. I therefore acknowledge that there may exist publication and inclusion
bias resulting from the specific sources used for this review.

3

Experimental design in the literature
3.1 Research questions

6

In this review: fiscal investment, social support, resettlement, and governance mechanisms.
The relatively limited literature in poverty alleviation research in rural China and the dissimilarity
of geographic regions rendered an algorithm unnecessary. Alterations in word order in the searches
generally did not affect search results.
7

6

Scholars have posed research questions that have both evolved and remained the
same with the progression of poverty alleviation policy. While new research focuses have
emerged, core concerns such as the optimization of quantitative methods to more accurately
measure poverty have remained. Travers and Ma (1994) investigated the effects of
agricultural investment on rural poverty, consistent with the primary objective of the eight
Five-Year Plan (1991-1995) of direct irrigation investment. The first definitions of transient
and chronic poverty were provided by Jalan and Ravallion (1998), followed up by another
study that probed the causes of transient poverty, as well as the implications of the
interplay between transient and chronic poverty for measurements of overall poverty (Jalan
and Ravallion, 1999). These pioneer studies allowed for more specific analyses in the mutual
exclusivity of transient and chronic poverty (Jalan and Ravallion 2000, 2001; Mcculloch and
Calandrino, 2003; Duclos et al., 2010), and, on a broader level, introduced the inherent
complexity of rural poverty—perhaps foreshadowing the need for multidimensional
approaches, a topic explored by later works—and how effective policy should adapt to rural
poverty’s unpredictable fluctuations.
A fundamental understanding of rural poverty has enabled scholars to scrutinize
poverty alleviation policy in its distinct forms8. Hannum (2003) investigated how local
community resources influence educational inequality, providing a reference for a twodecade study that incorporated multidimensional poverty measurement metrics to evaluate
child poverty (Qi and Wu, 2015). Cheng (2006, 2007) examined the targeting efficacy of
rural microfinance policy, leading the way for further investigation in the welfare outcomes
of microfinance programs (Li et al., 2011; Turvey and Kong, 2010; You and Annim, 2014;
Ding et al., 2018). Carrin et al. (1999) provided the first temporal evaluation of the Rural
Cooperative Medical System in fourteen pilot counties, laying the framework for further
analysis of distributive properties of healthcare policy in poverty alleviation (Yang et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2018). It was not until 2017 that the innerworkings of social poverty
policy was elucidated, likely because of the difficulty of measuring social capital and the
8

It should be noted, however, that there were not particular focuses on specific poverty alleviation
programs until after 2010.

7

paucity of national or inter-regional data. The works of Ratigan (2017), Zhang et al. (2017),
Golan et al. (2017), and Kakwani et al. (2017) analyzed regional differences in social welfare
provision, the association between social relationships and the probability of living in
poverty, and the effectiveness of the dibao program. In light of recent poverty resettlement
efforts, Xue et al. (2013) inspected the mechanisms of voluntary9 poverty resettlement as Lo
and Wang (2018) gauged the distributive properties and potential biases of such programs.
The efforts in the literature to characterize rural poverty in China, described above,
points to the multifaceted nature of rural poverty. A breakthrough in poverty measurement
came in 2007 when developmental economists Sabina Alkire and James Foster published a
series of papers on multidimensional poverty that encapsulated—as the name suggests—the
multiple causal factors of poverty. Yu (2013), Qi and Wu (2015), Wang and Wang (2016),
Alkire and Wang (2018), and Shen et al. (2019) used this method to paint a more complete
picture of multidimensional rural poverty in China (see Appendix A). It is likely that these
multidimensional measurements will receive more attention in the future for their ability to
capture previously underappreciated contributors to rural poverty.

3.2 Sampling
The geographical scope and (quasi-)experimental design of the research articles have
generally remained comparable, which can be explained by the recurrence and persistence of
poverty in the mid-west and northwestern regions over the past three decades. The time
frames of the empirical literature are attuned to the dates of key policies such as the
National 8-7 Plan (1994-2000). Therefore, it is of interest and more feasible to investigate
clearly defined periods of poverty policy to gauge the effects thereof10.
9

The definition of “voluntary” versus that of “involuntary” poverty alleviation resettlement
programs was a debated topic, with Wilmsen and Wang (2015) proposing that a people-centered
approach, not volition is the driver of improved outcomes in PAR.
10
Another reason that scholars are not able to extend the temporal scope of empirical research is the
paucity of credible and accessible poverty statistics. These poverty data are rarely made public and
require personal relations with local officials, which is also a determining factor of the effectiveness of
qualitative research, explored more in the section on empirical methodologies.

8

The limited sampling capacity of empirical research during the first phase (19902000) of poverty alleviation research can largely be derived from geographical heterogeneity
and highly decentralized and county- and village-specific policy implementation. Policy
implementation bears little similarity across counties, sometimes even within villages (Park
and Wang, 2010). As a result, researchers often resorted to the analysis of two to three
provinces with adequately comparable geographic and demographic characteristics with
regards to poverty levels in these areas. The consequence of this compromise is a restricted
sample size, which is often limited to county- or village-level populations. In addition, the
data sources used during this period (1990-2000) were fairly homogenous among the studies,
with 3 of 5 studies using data from the Rural Household Survey11 (RHS), with the exception
of Chen and Ravallion (1996), who conducted face-to-face interviews with local officials.
Jalan and Ravallion (2001) even opted to re-use survey data from studies done several years
ago due to the scarcity of reliable data and of national-level surveys conducted by the
government. Overall, there was little attempt to empirically measure and interpret rural
poverty during this period.
With the maximum length of five years12, studies during the first phase were
relatively uninformative about whether and how the central government should optimize
policy options for distinct geographical regions. Observations from poverty measurement
studies had been derived from national household surveys (e.g. Rural Household Survey
(RHS)), which are cross-sectional, not longitudinal data. Cross-sectional data obtained at a
single point in time do not provide any indication of the a priori or post priori conditions of
poverty, thereby failing to capture fluctuations in poverty levels between the times of
measurement. It was not until 1998 when Jalan and Ravallion (1998) addressed this by

11

The RHS began in 1955, presumably the oldest survey accessible. The credibility of the surveys,
however, was questionable and access to the results were largely restricted until the early 1990s.
12
Jalan and Ravallion (1996, 1998, 2001) used the same dataset likely due to data unavailability
from other surveys.

9

constructing a new panel data set was from the RHS13 done by China’s State Statistical
Bureau (SSB).
A clear upward trend in sample size and data variety began in the late-2000s.
Montalvo and Ravallion (2009), using a sub-national panel dataset constructed by the
authors and China’s National and Provincial Bureaus of Statistics, evaluated rural China’s
economic growth from 1983 to 2001, re-defining the “longitudinal study” in rural Chinese
poverty alleviation research. Duclos et al. (2010) used survey data conducted annually by
China’s Research Center for Rural Economy (RCRE) to measure long-term changes in
transient and chronic poverty incidence from 1986 to 2002, followed by many others that
used the growing wealth of rural poverty data provided by all levels of Chinese
administration (Appendix A).

4

Findings and Discussion
Drawing on the diverse repertoire of literature in Chinese poverty alleviation, I argue

that there is no singular, primary cause for rural poverty14 and that whether the CPC’s
poverty alleviation programs are effective is not so clear-cut. All the evidence points to the
fact that Chinese rural poverty is a concoction of geographic location and natural
conditions, local governance, and the array of stochastic indicators of transient and chronic
poverty.

13

The authors note that the RHS has been a well-designed budget survey of a random sample of
households drawn from a sample frame spanning rural China (including small- medium towns), with
unusual effort made to reduce non-sampling errors. Sampled households fill in a diary on daily
expenditures and are visited on average every two weeks by an interviewer to check on the diaries
and collect other data. There is also an elaborate system of cross-checking at the local level. The
consumption data obtained from such an intensive survey process are almost certainly more reliable
than those obtained by the far more common cross-sectional surveys in which the consumption data
are based on recall at a single interview or possibly with one follow-up interview. For a six-year
period 1985–1990, the survey was also longitudinal, as it sampled the same households over time.
14
Though there certainly are primary causes of poverty for inhabitants in specific contexts (e.g. for
the poor people living in mountainous areas, natural factors and lack of infrastructure is the main
contributor of poverty).

10

Several generalizations can be made. Expectedly, investment in agriculture has
remained effective in reducing poverty (Travers and Ma, 1994; Montalvo and Ravallion,
2009; You, 2014; Imai and You, 2014), especially in the poorest areas where there are no
readily available external sources of employment. Investment in education has also been
shown to be successful in reducing poverty vulnerability (Hannum, 2003; Goh et al., 2009;
Glauben et al., 2011; Imai and You, 2014; Lü, 2015; Ratigan, 2017; Ren et al., 2017; Alkire
and Shen, 2018), although the study areas are generally limited to several provinces and
may reflect regional peculiarities15 rather than national-level trends. It seems that the
programs that are commonly associated with international poverty alleviation generally hold
true for rural China despite drastic demographic and spatial differences. That said,
inequalities remain and whether and how they will be addressed is a moot point.
Perhaps the most important finding of this review is that studies that analyze the same
policy can produce different, even opposite, findings. I argue that, ceteris paribus16, these
differences can primarily be attributed to spatial heterogeneity17 and that regional
differences in sampling in studies are not negligible. Whereas Ravallion and Chen (2005)
find that microfinance programs have little or no impact on permanent income, Li et al.
(2011), You and Annim (2014) and Ding et al. (2018) all find significant positive impacts
stemming from these programs. A comparison of geographic regions of the studies reveals
that the study done by Ravallion and Chen (2005) was conducted in southwestern
provinces, whereas the other three studies focus almost exclusively on central provinces.
Whereas Xue et al. (2013) find positive effects of poverty alleviation resettlement (PAR
programs) on economic opportunities and social welfare in Linfen Prefecture in Shanxi
Province, Lo and Wang (2018) find inconsistencies in implementation in Ji County18, a mere

15

Goh et al. (2009) is an exception (see Appendix A).
I acknowledge that there may be other variables driving these differences (e.g. differences in
methodology, time frame); however, only geographic heterogeneity has been concretely shown to be
involved in differences in poverty severity and type.
17
I refer to not only geographic and natural characteristics but also the variation in the attention
local governments pay to individual counties or villages (i.e. differences in local governance).
18
This finding is, however, consistent with the elite capture observed by Rogers (2014) in a
qualitative study done in four villages in Ji County.
16

11

100 kilometers from Linfen Prefecture19; Liu et al. (2018) emphasize distinct program
outcomes between different relocation regions in a study done in Ankang Prefecture. Yang
et al. (2016) finds coverage issues in the New Cooperative Medical Scheme (NCMS) in the
inland Shaanxi Province, whereas Chen et al. (2018) find improved service accessibility in
the eastern coastal Zhejiang Province. The pattern of provincial and regional exceptions
plays itself out in all channels of poverty alleviation—grave targeting errors or questionable
local accountability cannot and should not be generalized, and the failure of an investment
program on one region does not mean that it will have the same effect in another.
But what might be driving the regional differences? The villages investigated by
Ravallion and Chen (2005), while unnamed, show features characteristic of non-agricultural,
mountainous regions20 such as the lack of electricity, relatively long distances to the nearest
market, village county town, or township, and poor transport infrastructure. The Southwest
Poverty Reduction Project (SWPRP), which was the program analyzed in the study,
attempted to generate income through traditional poor-village investment initiatives that
primarily targets agriculture and rural infrastructure (43.05% and 17.24% of total
investment, respectively; Ravallion and Chen (2005)). In theory, these initiatives would
account for much of the poverty—they certainly are causal factors of rural poverty, after
all. In practice, however, this is not at all the case for these specific villages. It may well be
that what they need most is actually what the program emphasizes least: health, education,
and institution building (5.37%, 8.60%, and 1.69% of total investment, respectively;
Ravallion and Chen (2005)), all of which are essential for sustainable poverty reduction.
Given that there appears to be a positive association between variability in geographic
features and multidimensional poverty, it seems reasonable to compare the levels of
multidimensional poverty between the southwestern villages21 in Ravallion and Chen (2005)
with the provinces in the central regions of Li et al. (2011), You and Annim (2014) and
19

The reason for this difference is unclear. Studies have not yet examined regional differences in
program implementation at the prefecture scale.
20
These conclusions are validated by regression outputs in the paper.
21
To account for this uncertainty, I will use the MPIs from Yunnan and Sichuan, two southwestern
provinces associated with high rural poverty incidence and persistence, as placeholders.

12

Ding et al. (2018). A comparison using available data generated in Shen et al. (2019), which
extracted multidimensional poverty indices22 (MPIs) from the CFPS from 2010 through
2014, reveals that Sichuan and Yunnan province have higher (around three-fold) MPI
weightings than Jilin, Henan, and Hubei province. Among the individual dimensions
measured by the MPI, Sichuan and Shaanxi are significantly more deprived in child
education, nutrition, electric power, drinking water, and cooking fuel, causes and symptoms
of poverty that have troubled southwestern areas for decades. Given that these studies
evaluated the impacts of microfinance and investment programs, it is likely that these
programs were more effective in Jilin, Henan, and Hubei because there simply was less
“dimensions” of poverty (i.e. income deprivation as the primary causal factor) to account
for than in southwestern regions that are enriched in multidimensional poverty (i.e. income
deprivation as only one of the many causal factors, all of which have effects are relatively
less severe but together manifest an aggressive synergistic23 effect).
The fact that the literature can be identified with distinct aspects of rural poverty,
among them fiscal, social and health poverty, signifies that poverty alleviation programs are
not yet inclusive enough to confront all dimensions of poverty. That said, PAR programs do
hold some promise as they have been shown, at least regionally, to dramatically improve
living and economic conditions for those that chose to re-locate. It is expected that PAR
programs will do even more to reduce the financial burden on the relocated by providing
more affordable transportation services, carry out community-based programs to foster
social capital, assist the relocated in their search job searches by providing training in
specific skills, and, most importantly, ensuring that the non-movers do not continue to
suffer from endemic chronic poverty.

22

Defined as % incidence of deprivation.
I argue that the pernicious effects of each multidimensional indicator (e.g. education, nutrition,
electric power, drinking water, and cooking fuel) are synergistic, not additive, because each seems to
reinforce the others, eventually creating a vicious circle. This could also explain the daunting
difficulty of tackling multiple poverty indicators through implementing only one antipoverty
program.
23

13

The policy implications of these findings are far-reaching: the specificity to which
policies may be required to adapt will need to be on the village- or even on the householdlevel. Future attempts to create more targeted poverty alleviation programs should aim to
ensure that not one of the millions of people who exit poverty relapses for any reason, be it
a transient income shock, adverse natural conditions, or poor local governance. The
“eradication” of poverty should therefore be defined as the elimination of every possible root
cause of poverty through painstakingly specific programs and the ridding of the whack-amole approach to policy implementation that still plagues some of the poorest rural areas.
The sources of poverty that we know of24 may be incredibly difficult to control for given
that there are hundreds of counties and thousands of villages in poverty at any given time.
Because of the context-specific nature of rural poverty, a more holistic and multidimensional
approach should be used to evaluate poverty not only in rural China but also
internationally. Despite clear evidence that certain aspects of the CPC’s plan can and must
be improved, we must refrain from making brazen conclusions about the plan’s validity or
effectiveness.
It is important to be cognizant of the inherent noise involved in rural Chinese poverty
alleviation research. This paper assumes that the data sources are free of error and bias25
and that empirical strategies are optimal for the context of a specific province, county, or
village. We also lack a firm grip on the precise mechanisms by which poverty alleviation is
carried out in the poorest of the poor areas, and it is certainly possible that exogenous
influences such as ulterior political motives distort survey data. An in-depth survey of
empirical strategies and the relationship between the context of rural poverty and empirical
methods will be a crucial step in our quantitative understanding of poverty and
development in rural China. I have provided an overview of all the empirical methods

24

These conclusions are made on the assumption that scholars have already “decoded” all the
possible sources of poverty. It may well be that new or unknown sources of poverty will surface as
time progresses and as more novel poverty alleviation approaches such as e-commerce and tourism
become more widespread.
25
This is highly unlikely, especially when nationwide questionnaires are designed for millions of poor
people from geographically distinct regions.

14

researchers have used to date (Appendix B) and anticipate that these methods will continue
to be fine-tuned to match the dynamics of Chinese rural poverty.

5

Conclusion
To the author’s knowledge, this is the first quasi-systematic review of the rural Chinese

poverty alleviation literature. It is reasonable to conclude that Chinese poverty alleviation
policy is partitioned into periods of gradual and intense focus, as is the research that seeks
to better understand rural poverty dynamics. As poverty alleviation shifted from being more
material-centric to region- and household-specific, so did the literature.
As of April 2019, there are still approximately 373.1 million people living in extreme
poverty (World Bank, 2019)26 in China. Eradicating poverty by 2020 remains a daunting
task despite the extensive scale of poverty alleviation efforts. It is likely that rural poverty
and its intricacies will continue to pose challenges for the CPC even after supposed
‘eradication’.27 The CPC nevertheless appears to be willing to devote as much resource as
needed into this unprecedented effort for as long as rural poverty persists in China.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Professor Wei Cui and Avery Maloney for their valuable
comments and openness to discussion during the course of writing.

26

While the UN rightly defines ‘extreme’ as earning less than $5.50 a day, the literature has
recognized that poverty is not entirely income-dependent (although it plays a large role in poverty)
and there may be, especially in a country as large and complex as China, millions suffering from
poverty with other inadequacies, among them social poverty, education deprivation and the
inaccessibility of healthcare. This situation, again, stresses the need for more holistic measurements
of poverty that encompass multiple possible sources of rural poverty.
27
The reviewed literature has made a strong case for more optimized policy for different types of
poverty (e.g. transient or chronic) in different regions of China.

15

Appendix A: Study design
Authors of study Geographical scope

Travers and Ma 12 provinces28
(1994)

Chen and Guangxi, Yunnan,
Ravallion (1996) Guizhou, and
Guangdong

28
29

Time
frame

Data source

Research question(s)

1980-1987

China’s County
Level Rural
Economic Statistical
Abstract

Can agricultural
intensification and
investment raise peasant
incomes in poor areas?

1985199029

Rural Household
Survey (RHS); inperson interviews
with county officials

(1) How can we better
understand and validate
poverty rates from
existing data (i.e. how
can we improve datacollecting methods)? (2)
How can we corroborate
the concerns of
policymakers regarding
the effectiveness of the
policies in the 1980s?

Key findings
-

Increased use of machinery and
fertilizer offers some potential for
increasing peasant income in rural
areas.

-

Investment in irrigation in poor
regions would only increase net
peasant incomes if government
subsidies compensate for at least a
third of the costs of the projects.

-

Poor distributional effects of policies
led to preferential growth in rural
areas in coastal regions.

-

Inland provinces experienced slower
growth.

Heilongjiang, Neimenggu, Hebei, Henan and Shanxi are in North and North East China; Sichuan, Hubei, Jiangxi, and Jiangsu.
The authors note that 1984 data was unavailable because it was a trial period and the data produced were unreliable.

16

Jalan and Four contiguous
Ravallion (1998) provinces in southern
China, namely
Guangxi, Yunnan,
Guizhou and
Guangdong
Jalan and Guangxi, Yunnan,
Ravallion (1999) Guizhou and
Guangdong

1985-1990

Rural Household
Survey (RHS)

How can we better
understand and measure
the extent of poverty
through different time
scales30?

-

Consumption variability is responsible
for much of the observed poverty and
possibly poses a severe barrier on
efforts to combat chronic poverty.

1985-1990

RHS

To what extent are the
needs of households in
poor rural economies
similar or different, and
does the existing
consumption insurance
work better for some

-

There is ample evidence for the
existence of consumption insurance in
poor villages in southern China;
however, these programs work
noticeably less well for the poorest of
the poor.

-

There is evidence for inequitable
economic growth within poor rural
economies in Southern China.

-

Although all counties are rural, the
population structure by occupation

groups than others?

Carrin et al. (1999) 14 pilot counties (two
counties in each of
seven designated

1994

Same as Carrin et al.

(1) To what extent have

(1996)

counties and their
townships been able to

31

provinces)

reduce the burden of
healthcare costs on the
rural population?
(2) How effective are the
policies’ population
coverage and how

30

and income clearly varies.
-

The project has, however, adapted
itself to the variety in population
structure, and it has given sustained
support in implementation and in
monitoring the progress in the
different pilot counties.

The first definitions of transient and chronic poverty.
Tongxian and Pinggu (Beijing), Qidong and Xinghua (Jiangxu Province), Haining and Xiaoshan (Zhejiang Province), Xinmi and Wuzhi
(Henan Province), Wuxue and Changyang (Hubei Province), Yongning and Lingwu (Ningxia Province) and Yongxiu and Yihuang (Jiangxi
Province); early 1995, Tongxian County was replaced by Fangshan County of Beijing.
31

17

adequate is the
reimbursement
structure?

Jalan and Guangxi, Yunnan,
Ravallion (2000) Guizhou, and

1985-1990

Rural Household
Survey (RHS)

Is transient poverty is
determined by a process
that is similar to chronic
poverty?

Guangdong

-

The average population coverage in
most townships is adequate and that
full population coverage seems to be a
feasible goal. However, coverage
requires drastic Improvements in some
townships as well.

-

Reimbursement rates differ, often
significantly, from the scheduled rates.

-

The causes of poverty identified in
these provinces have weak
explanatory power for transient
poverty.

-

Some determinants of transient
poverty have no connection to chronic
poverty and sometimes even have the
opposite effect (i.e. mutually
exclusivity).

-

Effective measures to alleviate chronic
poverty may have no effect on
transient poverty.

Jalan and Guangdong, Guangxi,
Ravallion (2001) Guizhou, and Yunnan

1985-1990

Data from Jalan and

Ravallion (1998),
Jalan and Ravallion
(1999)32

32

How do characteristics of
household income
dynamics influence the
long-term effects of a
transient shock?

-

Two types of dynamics may result
from an income shock: 1) a temporary
drop in household income and 2) a
declining income path, possibly
leading to chronic poverty.

While the authors base their paper off of past results, they approach the data with improvements in quantitative methods, outlined in
the next section of this review.

18

Park et al. (2002) 592 national poverty
counties

Hannum (2003) Nationwide

Mcculloch and Sichuan Province
Calandrino (2003)

1981199533

1992

1991-1995

National panel data

How effective is regional
targeting in alleviating
rural poverty?

-

While the coverage of policies has
improved, political factors have
affected targeting and leakage has
increased.

-

The selection of ‘poor’ counties may
be politically biased.

Rural component of
the National Sample
Survey of the
Situation of Chinese
Children

(1) How do local
community resources
influence educational
inequality? (2) In what
ways do village
characteristics affect
children?

-

Village and household incomes and
village provision of junior high schools
impacted on children’s enrollment
probabilities.

-

Village income effects did not change
with family income. i.e. the effect of
village income was additive.

Household Survey
Division of the Rural
Survey Organization
in the National
Bureau Statistics
(NBS)

How chronic is poverty
in China?

-

57% of the households experience
transient poverty (one or more years
of poverty).

-

Geographic location has the most
significant impact on poverty
vulnerability34 as well as chronic
poverty.

Ravallion and 20 project counties,
Chen (2005) 200 villages in

33
34

1996-2000

Rural Household
Survey (RHS)

What is the savings
behavior of beneficiaries

The panel data is broken down into the time periods 1981–1985, 1985–1989, 1989–1992, and 1992–1995
The authors stress the need for a more location-dependent targeting mechanism.

19

-

Household size is significantly related
to chronic poverty.

-

A large share of the income gained
was saved by the participants in the
project over 5 years.

southwestern
provinces

Cheng (2007) Aohan, Nanzhao,

of a large poor-area
development project?

Mid-2005

RHS

(1) What factors affect
the household demand
for micro-loans in an
evolving economic
environment?
(2) How can we
understand the demand
of the poor for
microfinance from a
behavioral perspective?

Zhuoquan, Linxian
Counties of Chifeng
Prefecture

(3) How effective and
far-reaching are
microfinance institutions
in targeting the poor?

Montalvo and All 23 provinces + 3
Ravallion (2009) municipalities35

1983-2001

Sub-national panel
dataset constructed
by the authors and

35

What role does economic
growth—which has been
highly uneven across

-

Despite an overall gain income, little
to no impact on consumption was
found upon comparing the first and
final years of the project.

-

The project’s effects on permanent
income are unknown.

-

Microfinance projects in China failed
to target the poorest of the poor and
have not made a positive impact to
poverty reduction.

-

The demand for micro-loans is
positively correlated to household
income, opportunities for off-farm
investment and the educational level
of borrowers.

-

Wealthier (middle-income and above)
rural households are the key
beneficiaries of microfinance
institutions.

-

The institutions were effective in
reducing overall poverty despite the
targeting errors.

-

Agriculture has been the driving force
in poverty reduction, rather than

Beijing, Tianjin, and Shanghai. The authors also note that Chongquing, a newly created municipality at the time of writing, offered
limited amounts of data and was therefore not included in the empirical analysis.

20

China’s National and
Provincial Bureaus
of Statistics

Goh et al. (2009) Liaoning, Shandong,

1989-2004

CHNS

Jiangsu, Henan,
Hubei, Hunan,
Guangxi and
Guizhou Provinces36.

Turvey and Kong Gansu, Henan,
(2010) Qianyang, Shaanxi

October
2007, July
2008,
September
2008,

RHS

36

regions since 1980—play
in poverty reduction?

secondary (manufacturing) or tertiary
(services) sectors.
-

The unevenness of growth across
sectors greatly attenuated the overall
pace of poverty reduction.

-

China has had great success in
reducing poverty through economic
growth, but all this happened in the
context of an overall unevenness in its
sectoral pattern of growth.

What are the patterns of
income growth and
inequality nationwide
from 1989 to 2004?

-

Overall national income increased
despite inequality between coastal
central provinces.

-

Income growth can be derived from
increased investment in education and
the shift from agricultural
employment to manufacturing and
services sectors.

(1) What is the
connection between
informal and formal
lending in rural China?
(2) How might the

-

About two-thirds of farm households
with debt borrowed from friends or
relatives.

-

Informal borrowing may be preferred
to formal borrowing37.

The provinces were selected because they are regionally representative.
The authors point out that cultural factors and the role of trust is a key determinant of informal borrowing dynamics in rural China. To
demonstrate this point, they compare informal borrowing preferences outcomes from this study with a study in four Indian districts and
found that Chinese farmers, on average, is much more inclined to borrow from family and relatives compared to Indian farmers (see Kumar,
37

21

October
2008

Duclos et al. (2010) Anhui, Gansu,

1986-2002

Survey data
conducted annually
by China’s Research
Center for Rural
Economy (RCRE)

2001-2004

A subset of the
National Bureau of
Statistics (NBS)
annual RHS

Guangdong, Henan,
Hunan, Jiangsu, Jilin,
Shanxi, and Sichuan

Park and Wang Six unnamed
(2010) provinces

strength of informal
lending affect
microfinance?
How can better
statistical and empirical
methods be employed to
more accurately measure
transient and chronic
poverty?
How effective is
community-based
development (poor
village investment

-

Different poverty measurements yield
significantly different estimates of
chronic and transient poverty.

-

The program generally increased both
governmental and village investments.

-

While the program did not increase
the income or consumption of poorer
households, it did increase the income
and consumption of richer households.

-

There is evidence that governance
matters in the distribution of program

program)?

benefits. Relative gains were greater
for richer households in villages with
more educated leaders, and higher
quality village committees delivered
greater benefits to both richer and
poorer households.

C. (2009) “Credit Rationing and The Economics Of Informal Lending: Theoretical Results and Econometric Inferences Using the Household
Surveys From
China and India”. Unpublished PhD Dissertation. Cornell University August 2009.)

22

Glauben et al. Zhejiang, Hubei,
(2011) Yunnan Provinces

Li et al. (2011) Hubei Province

1995-2004

2008-2009

Survey data
conducted annually
by China’s Research
Center for Rural
Economy (RCRE)

Survey interview
using structured
questionnaire

What are the
determinants of longterm poverty and what is
the duration dependence
on the probability to
leave poverty?

What is the impact of
microfinance programs
on household welfare
outcomes such as income
and consumption in rural
China?

23

-

The majority of population seems to
be only temporary poor.

-

However, the probability to leave
poverty for those who were poor is
differently affected by poverty
duration across provinces, ranging
from no duration dependence in
Zhejiang to highly significant duration
dependence in Yunnan.

-

The number of nonworking family
members, education, and several
village characteristics seem to be the
most important covariates.

-

Despite the general conclusion that
poverty is a transitory phenomenon,
poor Chinese provinces show a higher
relevance of persistent poverty across
all poverty thresholds. Thus, different
policy measures are needed in order to
well address these issues.

-

Participating in microfinance
programs helps improve households’
welfare by raising household income
and consumption.

-

Total amounts of microfinance
obtained by the households have a
positive and significant impact on
welfare outcomes, suggesting a

positive relationship between
household involvement in
microfinance programs and benefit.

Xue et al. (2013) Linfen Prefecture,
Shanxi Province

JulyAugust
2010, July
2012

Meng (2013) National poor counties 1981-1995
of the 8-7 Plan

Local PAR officials,
in-person interviews

What are the
mechanisms by which the
voluntary relocation of
villagers is carried out?

Ministry of

What is the impact of

Agriculture (MOA)

the National 8-7 Plan on
rural income growth at
the county level over its
disbursement period?

Yu (2013) Heilongjiang,

2000-2009

CHNS

How can we estimate
multidimensional poverty
from a health and
nutrition perspective?

Liaoning, Shandong,
Jiangsu, Henan,
Hubei, Hunan,
Guangxi and Guizhou
Provinces

-

PAR generally does not jeopardize
livelihoods.

-

The displaced population experienced
an increase in income and was given
new economic opportunities and
access to better social services.

-

The displaced retained their
productive capacity and enjoyed
better housing quality.

-

the 8-7 Plan resulted in an
approximately 38-percent increase in
rural income for counties that were
treated between 1994 and 2000.

-

Initial endowments are important in
future economic development.

-

Rapid economic growth has resulted
not only in a reduction in income
poverty but also in a reduction in
multidimensional poverty in the last
decade.

-

24

However, there are disparities across
provinces and between urban and
rural areas (poverty is 1.5 times
higher in rural areas than in urban
ones in 2009)

Rogers (2014) Ji County, Shanxi

2012, 2013

Province

You (2014) Jiangsu, Shandong,
Henan, Hubei, Hunan,
Guangxi and Guizhou
Provinces

1989,
1991,
1993,
1997,
2000, 2004
and 2006

Survey interview
using structured
questionnaire

China Health and
Nutrition Survey
(CHNS)

What is the pattern of
resource allocation in
terms of poverty
alleviation and rural
development in one of
China's poverty
counties?

-

The county government is ‘betting on
the strong’: concentrating resources in
villages with better existing conditions
or potential for development.

-

Unfortunately, the poorer villages who
are in greater need, suffer from an
inequitable resource allocation.

How can we better
understand the persistent
hardship in some Chinese
rural households from
the perspective of assets,
stressing the long-run
implications of shocks
and risk on households'
agricultural asset

-

Overall, households' responses to
uninsured shocks and risk cause
inefficiencies and deficiencies of
investment in agricultural asset
accumulation.

-

Multiple equilibria in the dynamics of
household agricultural assets as well
as under-investment as a response to
risk make some households less able to
earn income above the poverty line
and keep them trapped in long-term
low-equilibrium asset poverty.

-

There is a significant positive impact
of microcredit on children’s schooling
years in 2000 only.

-

There appears to be no relationship
between academic performance and
microcredit programs in both 2000
and 2004.

holdings (i.e. why has
poverty persisted)?

You and Annim Gansu Province
(2014)

2000, 2004

Gansu Survey of
Children and
Families (GSCF)

What are the effects of
formal microcredit
programs on children’s
educational outcomes in
northwest rural China?

25

Imai and You Jiangsu and
(2014) Shandong, Henan,

1989-2009

CHNS

How can we measure
stochastic fluctuations in
poverty without
oversimplifying long-term
changes in poverty?

Hubei and Hunan,
Guizhou and Guangxi

Lü (2015) Nation-wide

1994-2000

Various38

How effective were the
intergovernmental
transfers of the National
8-7 Plan?

38

-

In the long term, microcredit has the
positive effects of both longer
schooling years.

-

Formal microcredit appears to
improve education in long term
compared to the short term.

-

Education can lower the probability of
households entering initial poverty
but not subsequent entrances into
poverty.

-

Agricultural assets reduce the
probability of entering initial poverty.

-

Land holdings and agriculture seem to
serve as valuable safety nets.

-

There is no evidence that
intergovernmental transfers enhanced
local education spending during the 87 Plan.

-

Intergovernmental transfers had
neither short- nor long-term impacts
on reducing illiteracy for the targeted
poverty counties.

China Education Finance Statistical Yearbooks, National Prefecture and County Finance Statistics Compendium, Compulsory Education
in National Poor Regions Project.

26

Ward (2015) Jiangsu, Shandong,

1991-2006

Henan, Hubei, Hunan,
Guangxi, and Guizhou

Qi and Wu (2015) Heilongjiang,
Liaoning, Shandong,
Jiangsu, Henan,

1989-2009

China Health and
Nutrition Survey
(CHNS39)

China Health and

(1) How can we more
robustly differentiate
between transient or
chronic poverty? (2) How
can we represent the
dichotomy using
probabilities instead of
using traditional poverty
indicators, which are
merely snapshot
summaries of poverty
dynamics?
(1) What is the

Nutrition survey
(CHNS)

multidimensional child
poverty status and its

Hubei, Hunan,
Guizhou and Guangxi

-

Most households shifted from chronic
to transient.

-

Vulnerability to poverty declined over
time, despite intermediate variability
in the declines.

-

By 2006, most of the poverty observed
is due to transitory income shocks and
not entrenchment in chronic
poverty40.

-

the overall rate of poverty declined
during this period, largely because of
the reduction of child poverty,
signifying an improvement in child
living conditions.

-

All poverty headcount ratios in

dynamic changes in
China from 1989 to
2009? (2) Do certain
geographic regions
receive more poverty
alleviation than others?

39

different provinces were reduced over
time, but provinces with middle
economic growth rates oversaw the

CHNS is an ongoing open cohort, international collaborative project between the Carolina Population Center at the University of North
Carolina and the National Institute for Nutrition and Health at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC). It is
designed to examine the effects of the health, nutrition, and family planning policies and programs implemented by national and local
governments and to see how the social and economic transformation of Chinese society is affecting the health and nutritional status of its
population.
40
Despite the positivity of the reduction of chronic poverty, the consistency of transitory income shocks from 1991 to 2006 raises the
concern that policies were not been able to prevent transitory entrance into poverty.

27

largest reduction in child
multidimensional poverty.

Wilmsen and Linfen Prefecture,
Wang (2015) Shanxi

2003-2012

Local PAR officials,
in-person interviews

Is there really a
dichotomy between
voluntary and
involuntary poverty
alleviation resettlement?

-

Multidimensional poverty rates
decreased in both urban and rural
areas, and the gap between the two
have been reduced.

-

A people-centered approach, not
volition is the driver of improved
outcomes in PAR.

-

While volition was not different
between the PAR and the Three
Gorges Project, the aims and
beneficiaries, the identification of
population and affected poverty sites,
integration into broader national
development plans, and accountability
and corruption differed significantly
between the two.

Wang et al. (2016) 12 counties in five
provinces/autonomous
regions41. 20
townships/towns were
selected from 12
counties, and 120

41

2010

China Child Welfare
Demonstration Area
Baseline Survey
(2010)

(1) How can we better
measure urban-rural
development (URD) in
China?
(2) What are the
spatiotemporal
characteristics and

Sichuan, Yunnan, Henan, Xinjiang Uygur autonomous region, and Shanxi.

28

-

The western and northeastern regions
of China have experienced slower
poverty reduction than other regions
from 1990 to 2010.

-

Southeastern China is enriched in
infrastructure and development; the
north provinces of Heilongjiang and

villages were further
selected.

Wang and Wang Hechi City, Guangxi
(2016) Zhuang Autonomous

2013

Region, China, and is
a part of Yunnan and
Guangxi and Guizhou
rocky desertification
areas.

Yang et al. (2016) Shaanxi Province

2013

2013 Census Data,
poverty alleviation
department of Hechi
City

internal relationships of
China's URD?
(3) What are the policy
implications for achieving
coordinated URD?
How can we measure
multidimensional poverty
in poverty-stricken
counties in rural China?

5th National Health
Service Survey of

What are the effects of
the New Cooperative

Shaanxi Province

Medical Scheme (NCMS)
on alleviating financial-

Xinjiang, and the lowest values are in
southwestern China.

-

The main factors contributing to
poverty are: unsafe housing, family
health and adult illiteracy.

-

Multidimensional poverty indexes
increased with an increasing degree of
desertification and rocky
desertification, corroborating previous
findings that multidimensional
poverty is strongly region-dependent.

-

While the NCMS can alleviate health
poverty, the coverage is lacking— the
benefits of the NCMS is greater for
hospital admission-insured than for
general-insured; serious diseases as
well as more common illnesses should
receive equal attention.

induced health rural
poverty?

Golan et al. (2017) Hebei, Jiangsu,

2007-2009

CHIP survey

What are the targeted
poverty reduction
implications of China’s
rural dibao program?

Zhejiang, Anhui,
Henan, Hubei,
Guangdong,
Chongqing, and
Sichuan

29

-

The rural dibao program provided
sufficient income to poor beneficiaries,
but the overall impact on poverty was
small.

-

Although total dibao expenditures are
fairly large relative to the poverty
gap, the program did not substantially

reduce poverty whether measured in
terms of the head- count or poverty
gap.

Ratigan (2017) Jiangsu, Hunan,

2009-2013

Gansu

Ren et al. (2017) 13 contiguous
poverty-stricken
counties designated in
201143

2013

The Finance
Yearbook of China

State council leading
group office of
poverty alleviation
and development
(CPAD)

42

-

Targeting analysis reveals large
inclusionary and exclusionary
targeting errors.

(1) Do Chinese provinces
differ in their social
welfare provision?
(2) How does provincial
social welfare policy
differ from one another?
(3) What factors
contribute to the
variation in provincial
social spending?

-

Economic development and social
instability are related to distinct
approaches to social welfare spending.

-

Developmental provinces identified in
the study tend to be wealthier and
more involved with the international
economy, and value education over
other social policies.

-

Social-autocratic provinces42 prioritize
poverty alleviation and are less
developed in social insurance,
pensions, and healthcare.

What are the
geographical patterns in
rural poverty at the
county level? How do we
estimate the effects of

-

Poverty incidence was negatively
associated with rural income,
urbanization and education44 in the 13
poverty-stricken counties.

The authors define ‘social-autocratic provinces’ as the ones that focus on poverty alleviation instead of a labor-intensive, export-led
economy like developmental provinces.
43
The authors note that the fourteenth contiguous poverty county, Tibet, was excluded due to unavailability of data.
44
Gross enrolment ratio of senior high school students

30

socioeconomic predictors
of poverty incidence?

Zhang et al. (2017) 11 western provinces

Late 2000s

(unnamed)

-

Urbanization policy did not
incorporate the development of
poverty-stricken rural areas.

-

Investment in senior high schools in
rural Yunnan Province could
significantly contribute to poverty
reduction.

-

Irrigation is negatively correlated with
poverty, although there is variability.

Data from a joint
research project
administered by the
Ministry of Science

What is the relationship
between social capital
and households’
probability of living

-

Social assets such as business ties,
political connections, and social
organizations can contribute
significantly to poverty reduction.

of Technology of
China and Norway

under poverty?

-

The uneven distribution of social
resources significantly impacts the
probability of living in poverty.

-

More upper-reaching social

Fafo Institute

connections can help rural households
overcome economic constraints.

Liu et al. (2017) 14 contiguous poverty
counties

197845,
2000-2015

2015 Yearbook of
China's Poverty
Alleviation and
Development,
Poverty Monitoring

45

What is the spatial
distribution of rural
poverty in China?

-

Poverty is manifested as spatially
“clustered” regions (agglomerations).

-

Poverty is concentrated in rocky
mountainous areas, consistent with
previous results. The majority of these

Data from 1978 and 2014 are derived from a previous study (for details see Li, Z., Wu, G., Wang, S., Sun, R., Hu, S., 2007. China's
poverty alleviation performance and its factors. In: Li, Z. (Ed.), Anti-poverty and Sustainable Development in China. Science Press,
Beijing, pp. 225e274)

31

Report of Rural
China, China Rural
Statistical Yearbook

Hua et al. (2017) Jinchuan county,
Tibetian Plateau
(upper reaches of the
Dadu river)

May-Aug
2011, Sep
2012

Responses from
semi-structured
interviews from 357
households

areas remain plagued with both
chronic and transient poverty.

How can we
quantitatively measure
the relationship between
livelihood assets and
livelihood strategies?

-

The “islanding effect”—that is, the
isolation of destitute areas that lack
public infrastructure and imprecise
poverty alleviation measures—may be
exacerbated in the future.

-

There are significant differences in the
livelihood assets owned by households with different livelihood
strategies. Human, natural, and
financial assets have significant
influences on livelihood strategies, and
the choice of livelihood strategy varies
by livelihood assets.

-

with improvements in household labor
capacity and cash income per capita,
the livelihood strategies of nonagricultural and non-farming
households may shift away from
agriculture, while an increase in
farmland cultivated per capita, cash
income per capita, and household
labor capacity may encourage
households to adopt agriculturedependent livelihood strategies

32

Alkire and Shen Liaoning, Shanghai,
(2018) Guangdong, Henan

2010-2014

China Family Panel
Studies (CFPS)

What are the national
levels of rural
multidimensional
poverty?

-

Dimensions such as nutrition,
education, safe drinking water and
cooking fuel aggravate overall nonfiscal poverty.

All 9
rounds of
the
CHNS46

China Health and
Nutrition Survey
(CHNS)

How can we paint a more
complete picture of
poverty in rural China
by combining traditional
income poverty measures
and new
multidimensional poverty
measures?

-

Both the income poverty and
multidimensional poverty decline
quickly as the time goes, and rural
multidimensional poverty is more
severe than urban areas, especially in
sanitation, drinking water and cooking
fuel, it mainly attributes to the
segregation produced by the China’s
registration system and its induced
formed rural living habits, lagged
infrastructure construction and high
transformation costs.

-

Rural education and rural

and Gansu Provinces

Alkire and Fang Liaoning,
(2018) Heilongjiang, Jiangsu,
Shandong, Henan,
Hubei, Hunan,
Guangxi, and Guizhou

malnutrition are still not very
optimistic.

Chen et al. (2018) Two counties of

2013

In-person interviews

Ningbo City,
Zhejiang.

46

1989, 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2009, and 2011

33

What are the equity
impacts of the NCMS in
rural China?

-

While NCMS has improved its
coverage and generally alleviated the
economic liability of illnesses, its
impact on mitigating the economic
vulnerability of illness and promoting
equity in health services is negligible.

Ding et al. (2018) Gansu, Jilin, Shaanxi,

1997, 2002

and Sichuan, Hebei
and Jiangsu

Zhang et al. (2018) 28 unnamed
provinces

48

2011,
2013, 2015

Chinese Agricultural
Policy Village
Survey 2003
(CAPVS 2003) 47

China Health and
Retirement
Longitudinal Survey
(CHARLS49)

What are the antipoverty effects before
and after the first
government-led
microfinance project in
rural China?

How can we estimate the
vulnerability to food
poverty for the rural
elderly?

-

Microfinance projects have a
statistically significant effect on
improving the net income of the
farmers and reducing rural poverty in
China, consistent with previous
findings.

-

The programs prompt an increased
access to non-farm activities instead of
the reliance on the growth of the farm
sector.

-

food poverty incidence and
vulnerability of the elderly with
chronic diseases in rural China is
41.9% and 35% respectively, which is
8% and 6% higher, respectively, than
the elderly that are in good health.

Tian et al. (2018) 14 contiguous poverty

1951-2012

50

Various

How can we

counties

quantitatively connect
poverty causes and

47

-

The main contributing factors to
poverty in the mountainous areas in
eastern part of China51 are the lack of

Admittedly, constrained by data availability, the assessment of the government-led microfinance project focuses on the average net
income growth of villages but not further using individual-level data. It prevents us from examining the heterogeneity among beneficiaries,
and, hence, this issue remains an interesting topic for future research.
48
the Tibet Autonomous Region was excluded
49
CHARLS was a nationwide survey aiming to collect personal and familial information regarding the elderly population. People of the age
45 and older were randomly selected to be interviewed in the survey.
50
GIS data, National Meteorological Administration of China Meteorological Administration, National Natural Atlas of the People’s
Republic of China, 2016 National Transport Digital Map of the Ministry of Communications, China County (City) Social and Economic
Statistical Yearbook, China City Statistical Yearbook, China’s Sixth Census Data, National Geographic Information Center.
51
Namely the Dabie mountain area, the Yanshan-Taihang mountain area and the southern Greater Khingan mountain area

34

geographical
characteristics?

Liu and Ma (2018) 592 national poverty

1993-2010

counties

China’s Ministry of
Agriculture, China
County Statistical
Yearbooks, various
Provincial Statistical

How effective is the
National Poor Counties
Program (NPC)?

Yearbooks

Lo and Wang Loess Plateau54
(2018)

MarchJune 2013

Fieldwork at 20
poverty alleviation
resettlement (PAR)
projects

52

How effective really is
China’s poverty
resettlement program?

human capital and information
technology.
-

The main factors behind regional
poverty in the central mountain
areas52 are poor transportation and
infrastructure, and other natural
factors.

-

Western mountain regions53 are
particularly susceptible to natural
factors; even then, each area has a
unique cause for poverty.

-

The NPC program failed to foster
local economic growth.

-

Local elite capture is partly
responsible for NPC’s ineffectiveness.

-

Placed-based poverty alleviation may
be influenced by limited local
accountability.

-

Inconclusive and conflicting findings.

-

On the one hand, the respondents
strongly expressed that they willingly
participated in resettlement. The
perception of willingness was

Namely the LuoXiao mountain area, the Lvliang mountain area and the Wuling mountain
Namely Tibet, Tibetan areas in four provinces, South Xinjiang’s three districts and the West Yunnan border area
54
Also known as the Huangtu Plateau. It spans Shanxi, Shaanxi, Ningxia, and Gansu Provinces and extends into some parts of Inner
Mongolia.
53

35

especially high among those who were
younger, wealthier, and had off-farm
employment. Furthermore, the
consent to relocate was mostly free
and driven by a desire to improve the
quality of life. On the other hand,
consent was not fully informed due to
inadequate consultation.

Naminse and Baise, Liuzhou and
Zhuang (2018) Guilin villages,
Guangxi Province

JulyAugust
2015

Semi-structured
interviews

How might farmer
entrepreneurship
alleviate poverty?

-

Socio-cultural capability55 has the
greatest influence on farmer
entrepreneurship growth.

-

The qualitative and socio-cultural
growth of farmer entrepreneurship
more significantly impacts rural
poverty than the attitude towards
farmer entrepreneurship growth.

-

Socio-cultural capabilities of farmers is
strongly associated with
entrepreneurship and therefore may
play a role in alleviating poverty.

Liu et al. (2018) Ankang prefecture,
Shaanxi province

55

2015

Local PAR officials;
657 questionnaires

Does the PAR achieve
poverty vulnerability
reduction, and do
different relocation
characteristics lead to
different livelihoods?

-

there is a difference in exposure,
sensitivity, and the adaptive capacity
of rural households with different
relocation characteristics, hence
generating different livelihood
vulnerabilities.

The authors define this as social interactions, networking capabilities, improved culture and available opportunities to farmers.

36

Liu et al. (2019) Hanbin, Ziyang,

2015

Shiquan, Pingli, and
Ningshan Counties of
Ankang prefecture

Lin et al. (2019) 15 poor counties from
58

Guangxi province

2014

Primary crosssectional survey
data56, semistructured interviews

Rural household
data from China’s

56

-

Project-induced relocation has a
significant positive effect on
vulnerability, but there is a significant
negative correlation between
livelihood vulnerability and relocation
region, relocation time, and relocation
subsidy.

(1) What is the role of
voluntary, chronic, and
transient poverty in the
surveyed counties? (2)
Does relocation time
influence resettlement
outcomes? (3) Does the
reason for PAR
matter?
(4) How do the types of
relocation57 play a role in
PAR projects?

-

Voluntary poverty, transient poverty,
and chronic poverty are distinguished
by combining income and
consumption criteria.

-

Relocated individuals and families
have diverse income and consumption

-

PAR has a negative correlation with
chronic poverty; however, the
relocated group does not have
significant differences in transient and
voluntary poverty compared to the
non-relocated.

How does participation
in discussion and voting
in rural poverty

-

The level of education and the
political standing of the household

levels and poverty type.

Collected by the Institute for Population and Development Studies of Xi’an Jiaotong University. The survey used a multi-stage stratified
sampling design and structured questionnaires.
57
Centralized, scattered, township/urban, or self-determined.
58
The authors conducted a pre-survey to adapt the questionnaires to be more targeted towards the regional circumstances of Xingye
county, one of the 64 poor counties in Guangxi province.

37

Whole Village
Poverty
Alleviation Program

Shen et al. (2019) 25 provinces,

head is a major factor in program
participation.
-

The poor receive less benefits than the
rich.

-

Increased villager participation in
discussion and voting can boost the
effectiveness of poverty alleviation
programs.

2010-2014

CFPS 2010, 2012
and 2014

What is the state of
multidimensional poverty
nationwide?

-

While nationwide levels of
multidimensional poverty decreased
over time, that decrease is
disproportional across regions.

2012-2014

CFPS 2012 and 2014

(1) How does the rural

-

Dibao participation generally boosts

municipalities and
autonomous regions59

Han and Gao 162 counties across 25
(2019) provinces

alleviation programs
affect household
incomes?

dibao program affect life
satisfaction of the

the rural poor’s life satisfaction.
-

recipients? (2) To what
extent does optimism or

Kakwani et al. Beijing, Liaoning,
(2019) Jiangsu, Shandong,
Guangdong, Shanxi,
Anhui, Henan, Hubei,
Hunan, Gansu,
59

2013

2013 Chinese
Household Income
Project (CHIP
2013), Subset of the
NBS annual RHS

pessimism, as well as
perceived social status,
play a role in the dibao’s
impacts?
To what extent does the
dibao program meets its
intended objective of
reducing rural poverty?

The increase in satisfaction can be
explained by the recipients’ higher
perceived social status and optimism,
in contrast to the recipients of urban

dibao from a separate study.

-

the rural dibao program suffers from
very low targeting accuracy, high
exclusion error, and inclusion error,
and yields a significant negative social
rate of return.

The authors exclude excluding Xinjiang, Qinghai, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, Tibet, Hainan, Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan.

38

Sichuan, Chongqing,
and Yunnan
Yang and Fu 21 provinces

2010-2016

CFPS

Does inclusive finance
programs play a role in
multidimensional
poverty?

(2019)

-

Labor capacity influences poverty
alleviation outcomes in financial
development

-

Financial institutions can achieve
both sustainable development and
poverty alleviation by targeting the
services more precisely to the workingage population in rural areas.

Appendix B: Empirical methods
Authors of Empirical method and usage
study
Travers and A variable elasticity model to gauge aggregate
Ma (1994) agricultural production and its impacts on
poverty.
Chen and Two poverty lines (on the basis of the standard
Ravallion poverty line made by the State Statistics
(1996) Bureau) to measure the extent to which rural
populations are considered poor.

Data source

Research question(s)

China’s County Level Rural
Economic Statistical
Abstract
Rural Household Survey
(RHS); in-person interviews
with county officials

Can the agricultural intensification and
investment raise peasant incomes in poor
areas?
(1) How can we better understand and validate
poverty rates from existing data (i.e. how can
we improve data-collecting methods)? (2) How
can we corroborate the concerns of
policymakers regarding the effectiveness of the
policies in the 1980s?

39

Jalan and
Ravallion
(1998)
Jalan and
Ravallion
(1999)

A poverty index to measure household-level
consumption over time.

RHS

Generalized Method of Moments to estimate risk
insurance.

Rural Household Survey
(RHS)

Carrin et al. Summary statistics of reimbursement structure
(1999) in the selected counties.

Jalan and
Ravallion
(2000)
Jalan and
Ravallion
(2001)
Park et al.
(2002)
Hannum
(2003)

Tobit and logit models to estimate transient and
chronic poverty.

A nonlinear dynamic model to take into account
long-term fluctuations in mean household
income.
Propensity-score matching method to measure
regional differences in targeting.
Binary logit models to test the impact of
community characteristics (topography,
demography) on the prediction of educational
provision.
Mcculloch and A vulnerability measure (based on the
Calandrino probability of being in poverty in any given
(2003) year) to measure the relationship between
chronic poverty and poverty vulnerability.

Data is based off of Carrin
et al. (1996)

Rural Household Survey
(RHS)
Data from Jalan and

Ravallion (1998), Jalan and
Ravallion (1999)
National panel data

Rural component of the
National Sample Survey of
the Situation of Chinese
Children
Household Survey Division
of the Rural Survey
Organization in the
National Bureau Statistics
(NBS)

40

How can we better understand and measure
the extent of poverty through different time
scales60?
To what extent are the needs of households in
poor rural economies similar or different, and
does the existing consumption insurance work
better for some groups than others?
(1) To what extent have counties and their
townships been able to reduce the burden of
healthcare costs on the rural population?
(2) How effective are the policies’ population
coverage and how adequate is the
reimbursement structure?
Is transient poverty is determined by a process
that is similar to chronic poverty?
How do characteristics of household income
dynamics influence the long-term effects of a
transient shock?
How effective is regional targeting in
alleviating rural poverty?
(1) How do local community resources
influence educational inequality? (2) In what
ways do village characteristics affect children?
How chronic is poverty in China?

Ravallion and Difference-in-difference (DID) to measure
Chen (2005) differences in outcomes between the treatment

and non-treatment group before and after
project implementation
Cheng (2007) Grameen methodology to test the sustainability
and effect of microfinance projects.

Montalvo and Regression models to determine whether the
Ravallion pattern of China’s growth played a significant
(2009) role in poverty reduction.
Goh et al. Growth incidence curve61 and the Poverty–
(2009) Growth–Inequality arithmetic62 to measure the
Turvey and
Kong (2010)
Duclos et al.
(2010)

extent of change in income growth over time.
Summary statistics on farm household attributes
and ran a Bonferroni test against the null
hypothesis of households being equal in
attributes.
A new index to measure transient and chronic
poverty that is based on the Jalan-Ravallion
method.

Park and Difference-in-Difference Propensity Score
Wang (2010) Matching.

(DID-PSM). The authors compare incomes and

61
62

Rural Household Survey
(RHS)

What is the savings behavior of beneficiaries of
a large poor-area development project?

RHS

(1) What factors affect the household demand
for micro-loans in an evolving economic
environment?
(2) How can we understand the demand of the
poor for microfinance from a behavioral
perspective?
What role does economic growth—which has
been highly uneven across regions since 1980—
play in poverty reduction?

Sub-national panel dataset
constructed by the authors
and China’s National and
Provincial Bureaus of
Statistics
CHNS

RHS

Survey data conducted
annually by China’s
Research Center for Rural
Economy (RCRE)
A subset of the National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS)
annual RHS

What are the patterns of income growth and
inequality nationwide from 1989 to 2004?
(1) What is the connection between informal
and formal lending in rural China? (2) How
might the strength of informal lending affect
microfinance?
How can better statistical and empirical
methods be employed to more accurately
measure transient and chronic poverty?
How effective is community-based development
(poor village investment program)?

Adapted from the nonlinear model of Ravallion and Chen (2001).
See Bourguignon, François (February 2004). "The Poverty-Growth-Inequality Triangle" (PDF). World Bank Website.

41

Glauben et al.
(2011)
Li et al. (2011)

Xue et al.
(2013)

public investment levels between (similar)
villages that took advantage of community-based
development programs, and those that did not.
A hazard model to take into account the fact
that the likelihood to leave poverty may be
associated with the amount of time spent in
poverty.
Adjusted Difference in Difference Approach. In
lieu of a matching method these authors perform
a DID estimation which includes household
characteristics as controls.
Descriptive surveys taken by local officials and
households.

Yu (2013) Alkire-Foster (A-F) method to measure income,

living standard, education, health and social
security.
Meng (2013) Regression Discontinuity (RD) and DID to
estimate the effectiveness of the agricultural
investment program on income growth.
Rogers (2014) Qualitative data recovered from field interviews
(71) with both village officials and households.
Prevalence of specific village-targeted programs
were also compared at the village level to
evaluate the distributions of these benefits.
You (2014) Fixed-effects model to estimate the changes in
consumption in response to income shocks.

Survey data conducted
annually by China’s
Research Center for Rural
Economy (RCRE)
Survey interview using
structured questionnaire

What are the determinants of long-term
poverty and what is the duration dependence
on the probability to leave poverty?

Local PAR officials, inperson interviews

What are the mechanisms by which the
voluntary relocation of villagers is carried out?

CHNS

How can we estimate multidimensional poverty
from a health and nutrition perspective?

Ministry of Agriculture
(MOA)

What is the impact of the National 8-7 Plan on
rural income growth at the county level over
its disbursement period?
What is the pattern of resource allocation in
terms of poverty alleviation and rural
development in one of China's poverty
counties?

Face to face interviews in Ji
County.

CHNS

42

What is the impact of microfinance programs
on household welfare outcomes such as income
and consumption in rural China?

How can we better understand the persistent
hardship in some Chinese rural households
from the perspective of assets, stressing the
long-run implications of shocks and risk on
households' agricultural asset holdings (i.e.
why has poverty persisted)?

You and Static and dynamic regression-discontinuity
Annim (2014) designs are used to measure microfinance

programs’ impact on education outcomes. The
models also control for unobservables between
borrowers and non-borrowers.
Imai and You Discrete hazard model to model poverty entry
(2014) and exit.

Lü (2015) Fuzzy-Regression Discontinuity (Fuzzy RD);

the author exploits the rolling-introduction of
intergovernmental transfers for public good
provision to test for signs of elite capture and
corruption in local Chinese governments.

Ward (2015) Income regression model to control for both

Gansu Survey of Children
and Families (GSCF)

What are the effects of formal microcredit
programs on children’s educational outcomes in
northwest rural China?

CHNS

How can we measure stochastic fluctuations in
poverty without oversimplifying long-term
changes in poverty?
How effective were the intergovernmental
transfers of the National 8-7 Plan?

China Education Finance
Statistical Yearbooks,
National Prefecture and
County Finance Statistics
Compendium, Compulsory
Education in National Poor
Regions Project
CHNS

household and time effects.

Qi and Wu A-F method to calculate dimension scores.
(2015)

Wilmsen and Presentation of descriptive accounts and survey
Wang (2015) results.

CHNS

Local PAR officials, inperson interviews

43

(1) How can we more robustly differentiate
between transient or chronic poverty? (2) How
can we represent the dichotomy using
probabilities instead of using traditional
poverty indicators, which are merely snapshot
summaries of poverty dynamics?
(1) What is the multidimensional child poverty
status and its dynamic changes in China from
1989 to 2009? (2) Do certain geographic
regions receive more poverty alleviation than
others?
Is there really a dichotomy between voluntary
and involuntary poverty alleviation
resettlement?

Wang et al. Entropy method to measure differences in urban
(2016) and rural development.

Wang and A-F method and GIS spatial analysis to measure
Wang (2016) multidimensional poverty.
Yang et al. In-person interviews
(2016)
Golan et al. Probit regression models (household is the unit
(2017) of analysis).
Ratigan (2017) Cluster Analysis, between-Effects estimation to

Ren et al.
(2017)
Zhang et al.
(2017)

test for evidence of statistically significant
divergence in public spending patterns for
provinces in China. Significant differences in
spending patterns were then used to create a
typology.
Multi-Level Mixed-Effect Model – The authors
test for regional heterogeneities in the response
of incidences of poverty to specific development
variables.
Multi-Level Mixed Effects Model with Matching
– The authors control for between-group
heterogeneities using a multi-level ME model,
and test whether social capital is effective in
reducing the probability that a household will
fall below (inter)national poverty lines.

China Child Welfare
Demonstration Area
Baseline Survey (2010)

2013 Census Data, poverty
alleviation department of
Hechi City
5th National Health
Services Survey (NHSS) of
Shaanxi Province
CHIP survey
The Finance Yearbook of
China

State council leading group
office of poverty alleviation
and development (CPAD)
Data from a joint research
project administered by the
Ministry of Science of
Technology of China and
Norway Fafo Institute

44

(1) How can we better measure urban-rural
development (URD) in China?
(2) What are the spatiotemporal characteristics
and internal relationships of China's URD?
(3) What are the policy implications for
achieving coordinated URD?
How can we measure multidimensional poverty
in poverty-stricken counties in rural China?
What are the effects of the New Cooperative
Medical Scheme (NCMS) on alleviating
financial-induced health rural poverty?
What are the targeted poverty reduction
implications of China’s rural dibao program?
(1) Do Chinese provinces differ in their social
welfare provision?
(2) How does provincial social welfare policy
differ from one another? (3) What factors
contribute to the variation in provincial social
spending?
What are the geographical patterns in rural
poverty at the county level? How do we
estimate the effects of socioeconomic predictors
of poverty incidence?
What is the relationship between social capital
and households’ probability of living under
poverty?

Liu et al. Spatial Autocorrelation; creation of a Moran
(2017) statistic, which indicates visually the
concentration of individuals living below the
national poverty line in 2015.

Hua et al. Two-step cluster analysis to quantify household
(2017) livelihood.
Alkire and A-F method to measure health and social
Shen (2018) characteristics
Alkire and A-F method to measure health indicators.
Fang (2018)
Chen et al. Multi-stage stratified cluster random sampling
(2018) method to draw the study sample.
Ding et al. Difference-in-Difference Propensity Score
(2018) Matching.

(DID-PSM) The authors use panel data on
villages between 1998 and 2003 to compare
incomes in villages that undertook microfinance
programs to those that did not.
Zhang et al. Three-Stage Feasible GLS - The authors create a
(2018) metric for food vulnerability, the probability a

2015 Yearbook of China's
Poverty Alleviation and
Development, Poverty
Monitoring Report of Rural
China, China Rural
Statistical Yearbook
Responses from semistructured interviews from
357 households
CFPS
CHNS

In-person interviews were
conducted using a
questionnaire
Chinese Agricultural Policy
Village Survey 2003
(CAPVS 2003) 63

China Health and
Retirement Longitudinal
Survey (CHARLS64)

63

What is the spatial distribution of rural
poverty in China?

How can we quantitatively measure the
relationship between livelihood assets and
livelihood strategies?
What are the national levels of rural
multidimensional poverty?
How can we paint a more complete picture of
poverty in rural China by combining
traditional income poverty measures and new
multidimensional poverty measures?
What are the equity impacts of the New
Cooperative Medical Scheme (NCMS) in rural
China?
What are the anti-poverty effects before and
after the first government-led microfinance
project in rural China?

How can we estimate the vulnerability to food
poverty for the rural elderly?

Constrained by data availability, the assessment of the microfinance program focuses on the average income growth of villages, not
households or individuals
64
CHARLS was a nationwide survey aiming to collect personal and familial information regarding the elderly population. People of the age
45 and older were randomly selected to be interviewed in the survey.

45

household will fall below a specific level of
caloric intake.
Tian et al. Creates a topography index to quantify destitute
(2018) areas then investigates the links between certain
geographic features and regional poverty.

Liu and Ma Regression Discontinuity (RD). The authors
(2018) exploit the discontinuous cut-off for the National
Poverty County (NPC) program to compare
development outcomes between participant and
non-participant villages.

Lo and Wang Household surveys and semi-structured
(2018) interviews to measure satisfaction with PAR
Naminse and
Zhuang (2018)
Liu et al.
(2018)
Liu et al.
(2019)

programs.
Structural Equation Modelling (SEM). The
authors use structural modelling to investigate
correlations between farmer entrepreneurship
and rural poverty rates
Creation of Livelihood Vulnerability Index (1-13)
Originating from cross-sectional survey of rural
living practices. Higher value = less vulnerable.
Multinomial logistic model to measure the
relationship between relocation,
settlement and type of poverty (voluntary,
transient, chronic).

Several topographic
databases (SPI, DEM
databases)
Income Survey Data
Chinese Ministry of
Agriculture (1992)
China County Statistical
Yearbooks (2010)
Provincial Statistical
Yearbooks (2010)
Fieldwork at 20 PAR
projects

Are there regionally-specific determinants of
poverty in China?

Survey Data in Guangxi
Province

How might farmer entrepreneurship alleviate
poverty?

Local PAR officials;
657 questionnaires

Does the PAR achieve poverty vulnerability
reduction, and do different relocation
characteristics lead to different livelihoods?
(1) What is the role of voluntary, chronic, and
transient poverty in the surveyed counties? (2)
Does relocation time
influence resettlement outcomes? (3) Does the
reason for PAR
matter?

Primary cross-sectional
survey data65, semistructured interviews

65

Have there been any short run (1994 – 2000) or
long run (1994-2010) impacts from the NPC
program?

How effective really is China’s poverty
resettlement program?

Collected by the Institute for Population and Development Studies of Xi’an Jiaotong University. The survey used a multi-stage stratified
sampling design and structured questionnaires.

46

Lin et al. Propensity score matching (PSM) to estimate
(2019) the impact of the program with restrictions on
the observed exogenous factors.

Shen et al.
(2019)
Han and Gao
(2019)

AF method, MPI global standards to measure
multiple dimensions of rural poverty across time.
PSM (to account for selection bias) and DID
(works synergistically with PSM to reduce timeinvariant unobservable heterogeneity) to
estimate program impact.

Yang and Fu Evolutionary game model to evaluate the
(2019) equilibrium strategies of financial institutions

and the poor in poverty reduction programs
Kakwani et al. Population Proportions and Population Averages
(2019) – The authors create population averages from
National-level survey data then test the changes
in the proportions as impacted by povertyalleviation programs.

Rural household data from
China’s Whole Village
Poverty
Alleviation Program
CFPS 2010, 2012 and 2014
CFPS 2012 and 2014

CFPS

2013 Chinese Household
Income Project (CHIP
2013), subset of the NBS
annual RHS

(4) How do the types of relocation66 play a role
in PAR projects?
How does participation in discussion and
voting in rural poverty alleviation programs
affect household incomes?
What is the state of multidimensional poverty
nationwide?
(1) How does the rural dibao program affect
life satisfaction of the recipients? (2) To what
extent does optimism or pessimism, as well as
perceived social status, play a role in the
dibao’s impacts?
Does inclusive finance programs play a role in
multidimensional poverty?
To what extent does the dibao program meets
its intended objective of reducing rural
poverty?

Appendix C: Explanatory variables
Authors of study Explanatory variables (indicators of poverty)

Travers and Ma Income, output, labor, land, mechanical power, irrigation area, fertilizer consumption.
(1994)
66

Centralized, scattered, township/urban, or self-determined.

47

Chen and Ravallion Head-count index (H), poverty gap index (PG), squared poverty gap index (SPG).
(1996)
Jalan and Ravallion
(1998)
Jalan and Ravallion
(1999)
Jalan and Ravallion
(2000)

Mean consumption, poverty line, household size, level of education of household head (hh), wealth of hh, standard
deviation (SD) of hh wealth, mean agricultural yield.
Richest decile, 70-90th percentile, 40-70th percentile, 40th percentile, poorest decile.

Household size, proportion of children (6-11 years, 12-14 years, 15-17 years), age of household head, proportion of adults,
illiterate proportion of adults (either primary school educated or secondary school educated), highest education of labor:
primary, middle, or secondary school (dummy), household member works in state sector (dummy), household member
works in TVE's (dummy), household member works out of town (dummy), mean and SD of grain yield, mean and SD of
wealth per capita, cultivated land per capita, geographical feature (plains, coast, or mountains), Border area (dummy),
Minority area (dummy), medical persons per 10,000 population in county.
Carrin et al. (1999) Average income, average health expenditure, population coverage, level of insurance.
Jalan and Ravallion Household income and consumption.

(2001)
Park et al. (2002) Average income in other counties in prefecture, percent of other counties in pref. designated poor (1986–1992), percent of
Hannum (2003)
Mcculloch (2003)

Ravallion and Chen
(2005)

other counties in pref. designated poor (1993–1995).
Village income, population, labor force, irrigated land, terrain, electrification, educational infrastructure.
Household size, dependency ratio, old revolutionary area, minority area, female-headed household, flat-land/adult (acres),
hilly land/adult (acres), lake area/adult (acres), value of assets, head with no or primary education, proportion of illiterate
males in hh, proportion of illiterate females in hh, located in hilly area, located in mountainous area.
Geographical feature (plains, hills, mountainous), net income per capita, whether village has electricity or telephones,
access to TV transmission, distance to nearest market, distance to nearest county town, distance from village to township
(5 km, 5–10 km or 10–20 km), main mode of transportation used by villagers (bicycle, bus or other ), nearest train and bus
station, whether village has a day-care center, nearest elementary school, nearest middle school, nearest medical clinic,
elevated and forest land (mu), cultivated land per capita (mu), grassland per capita (mu), whether village has TVE and %
of people work in TVE, output of grain per capita (kg/person), (End of year) # of pigs, cows, sheep, goat, poultry, and
honey bee per person, workforce per capita, average household size.

48

Cheng (2007) Loan demand, hh income67, head school, partner school, head skill, labour ratio, official status, wage ratio, off-farm ratio,
Montalvo and
Ravallion (2009)
Goh et al. (2009)

Turvey and Kong
(2010)
Duclos et al. (2010)
Park and Wang
(2010)
Glauben et al. (2011)
Li et al.
Xue et al.
Meng
Yu

(2011)
(2013)
(2013)
(2013)

Rogers (2014)
You (2014)

67
68
69
70

land area, Event 200468, RCC loan, informal loan.
Counterfactual vector of rates of poverty reduction, counterfactual change in the headcount index, counterfactual of the
average growth of each sector.
Age of household head, average age of other adults excluding household head, completed years of formal education of
household head, dummy of coastal provinces, occupation of household head, number of skilled workers in the household
excluding, type of firm of household head, number of household members with an occupation outside of agriculture,
household's farmed land per member, participation in off-farm activities.
Years of farming, farm size, total household income, % income from farming, number of people living in household,
outstanding debt, amount of debt, asset value, informal loan value, formal loan value, both informal and formal loan value,
debt to asset ratio.
Transient and chronic poverty69.
Net income, consumption expenditures, education of the household head, household size, number of laborers, number of
out-migrants, and cultivated land area.
Household size, age of head Dependents, elementary, secondary, and higher education, hukou, cadre, farm characteristics,
land size, asset value, cropping HHI70, village characteristics, unutilized labor force, migration, population density,
geographical features (plain, mountains), average village income.
Household annual income, household annual consumption.
Unspecified, presumably satisfaction levels of resettlement.
National poor counties, non-national poor counties.
Per capita income of household, access to clean water, access to improved sanitation facilities, access to electricity, access
to improved cooking fuel, body Mass Index (BMI), completion of primary school, medical insurance
Registered population (hukou), natural villages, poverty resettlement villages, approximate gross per capita income (RMB),
primary production, 2012 apple production (tonnes), land, farming area, converted sloping land, infrastructure, shops,
access to health clinic, cold storage, public transport.
hh per capita consumption, hh size, age of hh head, # years of education for hh head, % male members in hh, % off-farm
employment in hh, agricultural and business assets, consumer durables, housing, human capital, covariate income shock,

Separated into net family income per capita and net family income per capita squared.
Whether the family had large events in 2004, including wedding, funerals, and house-building.
The authors used the same money-metric indices as Jalan and Ravallion (1998).
Hirschman-Herfindal-Index of household income sources.

49

idiosyncratic income shock, # of ill members, # of deaths, wedding/dowry/funeral (binary), price shock of agricultural
input and output, % sown land affected by natural disasters, dependency ratio, out-migration networks, on-farm labor
ratio.
You and Annim Children’s educational outcomes, quantity and quality of education, schooling, academic performance.

(2014)
Imai and You (2014) hh per capita consumption, hh size, age of hh head, % primary, secondary, and tertiary education, index of agricultural

Lü (2015)
Ward (2015)

assets, small hh business, % local non-agricultural employment in hh, % village out-migration, % hh members having
health insurance, % hh members having commercial insurance, % hh members having free government insurance, % hh
members having cooperative insurance, extent of urbanization, economic activity, access to markets, social services,
purchasing price change of farm products, % cultivated land in natural disasters.
Log education spending per capita, log budgetary education spending per capita
Age of hh head, number of dependents, # of working age hh members, female-headed hh (=1), education of hh head, avg.
education of hh members, Land Area Cultivated, Agricultural capital index, business capital index, commuting near opentrade area (binary), % agricultural employment in community, % migrants in community.
Nutrition, water, sanitation facilities, shelter, education, health, information.
Satisfaction levels of resettlement, volition of resettlement, living conditions pre- and post-resettlement.

Qi and Wu (2015)
Wilmsen and Wang
(2015)
Wang et al. (2016) Economic development, urban-rural livelihood, urban share, employment structure, industrial structure, ratio of urban-

built land, urban-rural income gap, urban-rural consumption comparison, industrial labor, productivity disparity.
Unsafe housing, family health, adults’ illiteracy, fuel type, children enrollment rate, degree of rocky desertification and
topographic fragmentation.
Gender, age groups, marital status, education status, employment status, economic status.
Household size, average age of adult household members, household member with bad health or is disabled, household
member with migrant job, share of income from wages, share of income from non-agricultural business, access to
appliances, access to motorized transport, frequency of natural disaster, marriage in household, death in household, log
housing area, share of housing area that is multi-story, household cultivated land area (mu), water flush toilet, piped water,
revolutionary area, mountainous area, road covered by asphalt/cement, distance to township government.
Ratigan (2017) Human capital, exports and imports, political instability, public security spending, wealth, ln (GRP), needs, dependency
ratio, inequality (20:20 ratio), illiteracy (%), central transfers, fiscal transfers, key universities, social safety net transfers,
control variables, population, urban (% of population).
Ren et al. (2017) Poverty incidence (%), Rural income (Yuan/person), Urbanization (%), Senior high school (%), Village nursery (%), Road
density (kilometres/square kilometres) Grain production (kilogramme/person), Irrigated land ratio (%).

Wang and Wang
(2016)
Yang et al. (2016)
Golan et al. (2017)

50

Zhang et al. (2017)
Liu et al. (2017)
Hua et al. (2017)
Alkire and Shen
(2018)
Alkire and Fang
(2018)
Chen et al. (2018)
Ding et al. (2018)
Zhang et al.
Lo and Wang
Liu et al.
Liu et al.
Lin et al.

(2018)
(2018)
(2018)
(2019)
(2019)

Shen et al.
Han and Gao
Yang and Fu
Kakwani et al.

(2019)
(2019)
(2019)
(2019)

71

Household social capital, social networks.
Spatial distribution characteristics of poverty in rural China.
Non-farm activity, land transfer, livestock input, self-employment, non-farm income per capita, crop income.
Nutrition, education, safe drinking water, cooking fuel, gender of the household heads, age, education level, marital status,
household size, migration status, ethnicity, and religion.
Education, health, living standard.
Number of peasants, annual per capita income (RMB), consumption per capita (RMB), medicine expenditure per capita
(RMB), NCMS coverage rate (%), villager’s pay for NCMS (RMB), NCMS reimbursement rate (%).
Log of annual nonfarm income per capita, Log of annual farm income per capita, Share of households with family business,
share of households engaged in farm activities, number of villages.
Degree of voluntarism, Social connections, Incomes and expenses, Post-resettlement satisfaction
Relocated, relocation type, relocation region, relocation time, and relocation subsidy.
Per capita real disposable income, per capita real household consumption.
Voluntary, chronic, and transient poverty.
Age of household head, education of household head, family size Number of people living in the household, family labor,
land area (mu), party membership, village population.
Education, health, living standard.
Satisfaction with own life, satisfaction with household well-being, perceived social status, confidence about the future.
Permeability, usability, utility, quality, affordability71.
Disposable income consumption, total rural population and number of poor and nonpoor (million), Gini index, official
poverty line (Yuan per year), % of poor, poverty gap ratio %, severity of poverty %; welfare indicators: per capita
household welfare (Yuan per year), per capita household welfare of poor (Yuan per year), per capita household welfare of
non-poor (Yuan per year), per capita welfare of dibao beneficiaries (Yuan per year), beneficiary incidence (% of
beneficiaries), total number of beneficiaries (million), number of poor included in dibao (million), number of poor excluded
from dibao (million), Exclusion error (% of poor excluded), number of non-poor included in dibao (million), % of
beneficiaries among the poor , % of beneficiaries among non-poor (inclusion error), leakage (% of all beneficiaries from nonpoor), benefit incidence, average transfer in the population (Yuan per year), average transfer among the poor (Yuan per
year), average transfer among the non-poor, total transfers going to beneficiaries per year (billion), total transfers going to

The variables are part of the inclusive financial development index system.

51

poor beneficiaries (billion), total transfers going to non-poor beneficiaries (billion), average transfer per beneficiary (Yuan
per year).

52

References
1. Alkire, S., & Fang, Y. (2019). Dynamics of Multidimensional Poverty and Uni-dimensional
Income Poverty: An Evidence of Stability Analysis from China. Social Indicators Research,
142(1), 25–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-018-1895-2
2. Alkire, S., Shen, Y., Alkire, S., & Shen, Y. (2017). Exploring Multidimensional Poverty in
China: 2010 to 2014. In Research on Economic Inequality: Vol. 25. Research on Economic
Inequality (Vol. 25, pp. 161–228). https://doi.org/10.1108/S1049-258520170000025006
3. Cai, Y., & Xia, C. (2018). Interpretive Structural Analysis of Interrelationships among the
Elements of Characteristic Agriculture Development in Chinese Rural Poverty Alleviation.
Sustainability, 10(3), 786. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10030786
4. Carrin, G., Ron, A., Hui, Y., Hong, W., Tuohong, Z., Licheng, Z., … Xuesheng, L. (1999).
The reform of the rural cooperative medical system in the People’s Republic of China:
Interim experience in 14 pilot counties1The present article is largely based on findings and
data in Carrin et al. (1996).1. Social Science & Medicine, 48(7), 961–972.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-9536(98)00396-7
5. Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. (2016, December). The 13th FiveYear Plan for Economic and Social Development of the People’s Republic of China.
Retrieved September 3, 2019, from Green Growth Knowledge Platform website:
http://en.ndrc.gov.cn/newsrelease/201612/P020161207645765233498.pdf
6. Chen, J., Dong, H., Yu, H., Gu, Y., & Zhang, T. (2018). Impact of new rural cooperative
medical scheme on the equity of health services in rural China. BMC Health Services
Research, 18(1), 486. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-018-3288-2

53

7. Chen, S., & Ravallion, M. (1996). Data in transition: Assessing rural living standards in
Southern China. China Economic Review, 7(1), 23–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1043951X(96)90018-8
8. Cheng, E. (2007). THE DEMAND FOR MICROCREDIT AS A DETERMINANT FOR
MICROFINANCE OUTREACH - EVIDENCE FROM CHINA. Savings and Development,
31(3), 307–334. Retrieved from JSTOR.
9. Ding, H., Qin, C., & Shi, K. (2018). Who benefit from government-led microfinance
projects? Evidence from rural China. Journal of Comparative Economics, 46(4), 1253–1272.
10. Duclos, J.-Y., Araar, A., & Giles, J. (2010). Chronic and transient poverty: Measurement
and estimation, with evidence from China. Journal of Development Economics, 91(2), 266–
277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2009.09.002
11. Glauben, T., Herzfeld, T., Rozelle, S., & Wang, X. (2012). Persistent Poverty in Rural
China: Where, Why, and How to Escape? World Development, 40(4), 784–795.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2011.09.023
12. Goh, C., Luo, X., & Zhu, N. (2009). Income growth, inequality and poverty reduction: A
case study of eight provinces in China. China Economic Review, 20(3), 485–496.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2008.10.008
13. Golan, J., Sicular, T., & Umapathi, N. (2017). Unconditional Cash Transfers in China: Who
Benefits from the Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee (Dibao) Program? World
Development, 93, 316–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.12.011
14. Han, H., & Gao, Q. (2019). Does Welfare Participation Improve Life Satisfaction? Evidence
from Panel Data in Rural China. Journal of Happiness Studies.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-019-00157-z

54

15. Hannum, E. (2003). Poverty and Basic Education in Rural China: Villages, Households, and
Girls’ and Boys’ Enrollment. Comparative Education Review, 47(2), 141–159.
https://doi.org/10.1086/376542
16. Hu, A., Linlin, H., & Zhixiao, C. (2005). China’s Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction
(1978–2002). Retrieved September 15, 2019, from /paper/China%E2%80%99s-EconomicGrowth-and-Poverty-Reduction-Angang-Linlin/c883fc7496aa1b920b05dc2546b880f54b9c77a4
17. Hua, X., Yan, J., & Zhang, Y. (2017). Evaluating the role of livelihood assets in suitable
livelihood strategies: Protocol for anti-poverty policy in the Eastern Tibetan Plateau, China.
Ecological Indicators, 78, 62–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.03.009
18. Imai, K. S., & You, J. (2014). Poverty Dynamics of Households in Rural China (SSRN
Scholarly Paper No. ID 2515609). Retrieved from Social Science Research Network website:
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2515609
19. Jalan, J., & Ravallion, M. (1998). Transient Poverty in Postreform Rural China. Journal of
Comparative Economics, 26(2), 338–357. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcec.1998.1526
20. Jalan, J., & Ravallion, M. (1999). Are the poor less well insured? Evidence on vulnerability
to income risk in rural China. Journal of Development Economics, 58(1), 61–81.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3878(98)00103-5
21. Jalan, J., & Ravallion, M. (2000). Is transient poverty different? Evidence for rural China.
Journal of Development Studies, 36(6), 82–99.
22. Kakwani, N., Li, S., Wang, X., & Zhu, M. (2019). Evaluating the effectiveness of the rural
minimum living standard guarantee (Dibao) program in China. China Economic Review,
53(C), 1–14.

55

23. Li, X., Gan, C., & Hu, B. (2011). The welfare impact of microcredit on rural households in
China. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 40(4), 404–411.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socec.2011.04.012
24. Lin, J., Zhang, Z., & Lv, L. (2019). The Impact of Program Participation on Rural
Household Income: Evidence from China’s Whole Village Poverty Alleviation Program.
Sustainability, 11(6), 1–15.
25. Liu, C., & Ma, G. (2018). Are Place-Based Policies Always a Blessing? Evidence from
China’s National Poor County Programme. The Journal of Development Studies, 0(0), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220388.2018.1438598
26. Liu, W., Xu, J., Li, J., & Li, S. (2019). Rural Households’ Poverty and Relocation and
Settlement: Evidence from Western China. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health, 16(14). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16142609
27. Liu, Yanhua, & Xu, Y. (2016). A geographic identification of multidimensional poverty in
rural China under the framework of sustainable livelihoods analysis. Applied Geography, 73,
62–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2016.06.004
28. Liu, Yansui, Liu, J., & Zhou, Y. (2017). Spatio-temporal patterns of rural poverty in China
and targeted poverty alleviation strategies. Journal of Rural Studies, 52, 66–75.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2017.04.002
29. Liu, Yansui, Yuanzhi, G., & Zhou, Y. (2018). Poverty alleviation in rural China: Policy
changes, future challenges and policy implications. China Agricultural Economic Review, 10,
00–00. https://doi.org/10.1108/CAER-10-2017-0192
30. Lo, K., & Wang, M. (2018). How voluntary is poverty alleviation resettlement in China?
Habitat International, 73, 34–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2018.01.002

56

31. Lo, K., Xue, L., & Wang, M. (2016). Spatial restructuring through poverty alleviation
resettlement in rural China. Journal of Rural Studies, 47, 496–505.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.06.006
32. Lü, X. (2015). Intergovernmental transfers and local education provision—Evaluating
China’s 8-7 National Plan for Poverty Reduction. China Economic Review, 33, 200–211.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2015.02.001
33. Majendie, A. (2018, December 16). The Next Economic Superpower: China’s 40-Year Rise,
in Photos. Retrieved August 26, 2019, from Bloomberg website:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/photo-essays/2018-12-17/china-s-four-decade-opening-inpictures
34. Martin, M. F. (1992). Defining China’s Rural Population. The China Quarterly, (130), 392–
401. Retrieved from JSTOR.
35. McCulloch, N., & Calandrino, M. (2003). Vulnerability and Chronic Poverty in Rural
Sichuan. World Development, 31(3), 611–628. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305750X(02)00216-4
36. Meng, L. (2013). Evaluating China’s poverty alleviation program: A regression discontinuity
approach. Journal of Public Economics, 101, 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2013.02.004
37. Montalvo, J. G., & Ravallion, M. (2010). The pattern of growth and poverty reduction in
China. Journal of Comparative Economics, 38(1), 2–16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2009.10.005
38. Moreno, E. L. (2017, September 5). Concepts, definitions and data sources for the study of
urbanization: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Retrieved from

57

https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/events/pdf/expert/27/papers/II/pap
er-Moreno-final.pdf
39. Naminse, E. Y., & Zhuang, J. (2018). Does farmer entrepreneurship alleviate rural poverty
in China? Evidence from Guangxi Province. PLOS ONE, 13(3), e0194912.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194912
40. Park, A., & Wang, S. (2010). Community-based development and poverty alleviation: An
evaluation of China’s poor village investment program. Journal of Public Economics, 94(9),
790–799. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.06.005
41. Park, A., Wang, S., & Wu, G. (2002). Regional poverty targeting in China. Journal of
Public Economics, 86(1), 123–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(01)00108-6
42. Qi, D., & Wu, Y. (2015). A multidimensional child poverty index in China. Children and
Youth Services Review, 57, 159–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2015.08.011
43. Ratigan, K. (2017). Disaggregating the Developing Welfare State: Provincial Social Policy
Regimes in China. World Development, 98(C), 467–484.
44. Ravallion, M. (2009). Decentralizing Eligibility for a Federal Antipoverty Program. World
Bank Economic Review, 23(1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1093/wber/lhn023
45. Ravallion, M., & Chen, S. (2005). Hidden impact? Household saving in response to a poorarea development project. Journal of Public Economics, 89(11), 2183–2204.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2004.12.003
46. Ravallion, M., & Jalan, J. (2001). Household Income Dynamics in Rural China (SSRN
Scholarly Paper No. ID 632775). Retrieved from Social Science Research Network website:
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=632775

58

47. Ren, Z., Ge, Y., Wang, J., Mao, J., & Zhang, Q. (2017). Understanding the inconsistent
relationships between socioeconomic factors and poverty incidence across contiguous
poverty-stricken regions in China: Multilevel modelling. Spatial Statistics, 21, 406–420.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spasta.2017.02.009
48. Rogers, S. (2014). Betting on the strong: Local government resource allocation in China’s
poverty counties. Journal of Rural Studies, 36, 197–206.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2014.08.001
49. Rozelle, S., Park, A., Benziger, V., & Changqing, R. (1998). Targeted poverty investments
and economic growth in China. World Development, 26(12), 2137–2151.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-750X(98)00104-1
50. Seth, S. A. and S. (2016). On Relationship between Income Poverty and Multidimensional
Poverty in China (No. ophiwp101_1.pdf). Retrieved from Queen Elizabeth House, University
of Oxford website: https://ideas.repec.org/p/qeh/ophiwp/ophiwp101_1.pdf.html
51. Shen, Y., Alkire, S., & Peng, Z. (2019). Measurement and Decomposition of MultiDimensional Poverty in China. China Economist; Beijing, 14(3), 12–28.
http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.library.ubc.ca/10.19602/j.chinaeconomist.2019.5.02
52. South China Morning Post. (2018). Extreme poverty in China: Poorest village hopes for
change. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W11o_4keAwA
53. Tian, Y., Wang, Z., Zhao, J., Jiang, X., & Guo, R. (2018). A Geographical Analysis of the
Poverty Causes in China’s Contiguous Destitute Areas. Sustainability; Basel, 10(6), 1895.
http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.library.ubc.ca/10.3390/su10061895
54. Travers, L., & Ma, J. (1994). Agricultural productivity and rural poverty in China. China
Economic Review, 5(1), 141–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/1043-951X(94)90019-1

59

55. Turvey, C. G., & Kong, R. (2010). Informal lending amongst friends and relatives: Can
microcredit compete in rural China? China Economic Review, 21(4), 544–556.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2010.05.001
56. Wang, X., Zhou, L., & Shang, X. (2015). Child Poverty in Rural China: Multidimensional
Perspective. Asian Social Work and Policy Review, 9(2), 109–124.
https://doi.org/10.1111/aswp.12050
57. Wang, Yanfei, Liu, Y., Li, Y., & Li, T. (2016). The spatio-temporal patterns of urban–rural
development transformation in China since 1990. Habitat International, 53, 178–187.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.11.011
58. Wang, Yanhui, & Wang, B. (2016). Multidimensional poverty measure and analysis: A case
study from Hechi City, China. SpringerPlus, 5(1), 642. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40064-0162192-7
59. Ward, P. S. (2016). Transient Poverty, Poverty Dynamics, and Vulnerability to Poverty:
An Empirical Analysis Using a Balanced Panel from Rural China. World Development, 78,
541–553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.10.022
60. Wescott, B., & Wang, S. (2019, April 20). Xi Jinping is determined to end all poverty in
China by 2020. Can he do it? - CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2019, from CNN website:
https://www.cnn.com/2019/04/19/asia/poverty-alleviation-2020-xi-jinping-intl/index.html
61. Wilmsen, B., & Wang, M. (2015). Voluntary and involuntary resettlement in China: A false
dichotomy? Development in Practice, 25(5), 612–627.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2015.1051947
62. Xue, L., Wang, M. Y., & Xue, T. (2013). ‘Voluntary’ Poverty Alleviation Resettlement in
China. Development and Change, 44(5), 1159–1180. https://doi.org/10.1111/dech.12054

60

63. Yang, X., Gao, J., Zhou, Z., Yan, J., Lai, S., Xu, Y., & Chen, G. (2016). Assessing the
Effects of the New Cooperative Medical Scheme on Alleviating the Health Payment-Induced
Poverty in Shaanxi Province, China. PLOS ONE, 11(7), e0157918.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0157918
64. You, J. (2014). Risk, under-investment in agricultural assets and dynamic asset poverty in
rural China. China Economic Review, 29, 27–45.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2014.02.002
65. You, J., & Annim, S. K. (2013). The Impact of Microcredit on Child Education: QuasiExperimental Evidence from Rural China (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 2256569).
Retrieved from Social Science Research Network website:
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2256569
66. Yu, J. (2013). Multidimensional Poverty in China: Findings Based on the CHNS. Social
Indicators Research, 112(2), 315–336. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-013-0250-x
67. Zhang, Z., Luo, Y., & Robinson, D. (2018). Reducing Food Poverty and Vulnerability
among the Rural Elderly with Chronic Diseases: The Role of the New Rural Pension Scheme
in China. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(6).
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15061253
68. Zhu, M., Shuai, C., Wang, X., Leng, Z., & Zhang, F. (2018). Analysis of China’s policy
effect on poverty alleviation: Evidence from Chongqing in the Three Gorges Reservoir
Region. Quality & Quantity. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-018-0817-3
69. Zuo, C. (Ed.). (2019). The Evolution of China’s Poverty Alleviation and Development
Policy (2001-2015). Retrieved from https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9789811316890

61

