The Place where Huni probably Buried
Bohai,Xu
Address: Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, China
Abstract: From the paper , we can speculate that Huni is exactly 吴回
(wuhui). Besides, the pronunciation of Huni resembles 吴回(wuhui).
From the paper I speculate that the eagle in the statue unearthed in
Taibo's tomb and the eagle in a statue of a man, dating from the State of
Yue era, the eagles in the two statues resemble the God Horus in Egypt,
so I can also get a conclusion that Wuxi(无锡) and Zhejiang(浙江) was
once Egypt’s colony. I can also get a conclusion that Zhangshan Hill(嶂
山)means Egypt governor or pharaoh had come to Wuxi.
Besides, we can get a conclusion that Chanshan Hill(产山)is a
man-made pyramid, and Heliekou(河埒口)means enclosure around the
man-made pyramid- Chanshan Hill, this pyramid complex looks like
Djoser's Pyramid Complex which has enclosure around it. From the paper,
we can conclude that Huishan clay figurines（惠山泥人）are ushabtis with
Chinese characteristic, it indicates that Wuxi（无锡）was the colony of
ancient Egypt. So Wuxi（无锡）means binding spot, Mount Xi（锡山）
means a binding hill. And the ruins of Mount Xi(锡山) resemble "Pyramid
of Khufu" in Giza pyramid complex. So we can get a hypothesis that
Mount Xi(锡山) is a man-made pyramid.
Furthermore, Wuxi （无锡）is the cradle of Chinese Wu culture（吴

文化）, I think this is owing to Huni. So from the above, we can
speculate that Huni probably buried in Mount Xi , Wuxi(无锡锡山).

Huni (original reading unknown) was an ancient Egyptian king and the
last pharaoh of

the 3rd

dynasty during

the Old

Kingdom period.

Following the Turin king list,
list, he is commonly credited with a reign of 24
years, ending c. 2600 BC.

Pink granite head identified as Huni, Brooklyn Museum

Huni's chronological position as the last king of the third dynasty is
seen as fairly certain, but there is still some uncertainty on the
succession order of rulers at the end of the 3rd dynasty. It is also unclear
under which Hellenized name the ancient historian Manetho could have

listed him in his historical writing Aegyptiacae. Most possibly he is to be
identified with the Hellenized name Aches, as Winfried Barta proposes.
Many Egyptologists believe that Huni was the father and direct
predecessor of king Sneferu, but this is questioned by other scholars.
Huni is seen by scholars as a confusing figure in Egyptian history, because
he was long remembered in Egyptian traditions, but only very few
documents, objects or monuments have endured. ( Toby A. H.
Wilkinson: Early
Dynastic
Egypt.
1999, ISBN 0-415-18633-1, p. 85–89.)

Routledge,

London/

New

York

Huni is not a well attested pharaoh; most of the attestations only point
indirectly to him. There are only two contemporary objects with his
name.
The first one is a conical stele made of red granite, discovered in 1909
on the island of Elephantine. The object is 62.99 inches (160.0 cm) long,
27.16 inches (69.0 cm) thick and 19.69 inches (50.0 cm) broad. Its shape
resembles a typical Benben stele, as known from mastaba tombs of early
dynastic kings.

Granite cone uncovered on Elephantine and inscribed with Huni's cartouche

The second finding, discovered in 2007, is a polished stone bowl made
of magnesite,, found at South-Abusir in the mastaba tomb AS-54,
belonging to a high official, whose name is yet unknown to
archaeologists. The stone vessel inscription mentions Huni's name
without a cartouche, but with the Njswt-Bity title. The orthography of
the

hieroglyphs

that

form

Huni's

name

makes

a

reading

as Njswt-Hw or Hw-en
en-Niswt plausible.
Finally, Huni is attested in the papyrus Prisse, in the Instructions of
Kagemni,, probably dating to the 13th dynasty.. The papyrus gives an
important indication about Huni's succession in column II, line 7:
“But
But then the majesty of king Huni died and the majesty of king Snefru was now
raised up as beneficient king in this entire land. And Kagemni was raised as the ne
new
mayor of the royal capitol and became vizir of the king.”
king.

Most scholars today think that this extract may strengthen the theory
that Huni was the last king of the 3rd dynasty and immediate
predecessor of king Snefru (the first ruler of the 4th dynasty). The
Abydos kinglist, which also dates to the 19th dynasty, mysteriously omits
Huni's name and gives instead a Neferkara I who is unknown to
Egyptologists. And in my point of view, this extract indicated that Huni
was overthrown by king Snefru (the first ruler of the 4th dynasty).
The genealogical position of Huni in the family line of ruling kings,
during the time when the 3rd dynasty ended and the 4th started, is
highly disputed. Contemporary and later documents often mention Huni
and his follower Snefru in the same sentence, always in direct succession.
Therefore, Egyptologists and historians believe that Huni might have
even been related to Snefru. A key figure in this case is queen Meresankh
I, the royal mother of Snefru. She definitely bore the title of a queen, but
no contemporary source connects her name with the title of a daughter
or wife of Huni. This circumstance raises doubts in the family relationship
between Huni and Snefru. Today most scholars prefer to believe the
historian Manetho, who claims in his Aegyptiacae that with the
inthronisation of Snefru a different royal house gained power over Egypt
and a new dynasty had begun.( Silke Roth: Die Königsmütter des Alten Ägypten
von der Frühzeit bis zum Ende der 12. Dynastie. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden
2001, ISBN 3-447-04368-7, page 68–69 & 385). So I think this can also proved

Huni was overthrown by Snefru.

It seems though, that Huni undertook some building projects. The
Turin Canon, which is rather modest about additional informations
concerning the listed kings, credits Huni with the erection of a certain
building, for which Huni must have been honoured in later times.
After his death, Huni seemed to have enjoyed a long lasting mortuary
cult. The Palermo stone, which was made over a hundred years after
Huni's death, mentions donations made to a funerary complex temple of
Huni. Huni's name is also mentioned in the Prisse Papyrus, a further
evidence that Huni was remembered long after his death since the
papyrus was written during the 12th dynasty.
In the early 20th century, the Meidum pyramid was often credited to
Huni. One long-held theory posited that Huni had started a stepped
pyramid, similar to that of king Djoser, Sekhemkhet and Khaba, but
architecturally more advanced and with more and smaller steps.

The Meidum pyramid, initially believed to have been started by Huni, is now
thought to be exclusively the work of Snefru.

The structure of the Meidum pyramid

Closer examinations of the pyramid surroundings however revealed

several tomb inscriptions and pilgrim graffitos praising the "beauty of the
white pyramid of king Snefru". They further call for prayers to Snefru and
"his great wife Meresankh I". Additionally, the surrounding mastaba
tombs date to the reign of King Snefru. Huni's name has yet to be found
anywhere near the pyramid. These indices led Egyptologists to the
conclusion that the pyramid of Meidum was never Huni's, but rather an
achievement of Snefru, planned and constructed as a cenotaph.
Several small step pyramids along the Nile river are also credited to
Huni. Those small pyramids had a cultic function and marked important
royal estates. They contained no internal chambers and were not used
for burial purposes. One of them is located at the eastern end
of Elephantine island and a granite cone with Huni's name was
discovered nearby in 1909. Therefore, this little pyramid is the only one
that may be credited to Huni with some certainty.( Günter Dreyer, Werner
Kaiser: Zu den kleinen Stufenpyramiden Ober- und Mittelägyptens. In: Mitteilungen
des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts, Abteilung Kairo (MDAIK), vol. 36, 1980,
p. 57).

And the name of Huni has the following forms:

And
nd the Prenomen of Huni has four symbols: a

,a

,a

,a

.
First look at this wick symbol

. Westerners use alphabetic spelling to

think that this wick symbol is the letter h. There is also a symbol

for

the pronunciation of h,
h which is called the reed shelter
shelter. These two
symbols are equivalent.
equivalent
Hi
er
o
gl
y
p
h

G
a
r
di
n
e
r

O4

Unico
de

Tran
sliter
ation

U+13254 h

V28 U+1339B ḥḥ

And the symbol

Description

reed
shelter
(hieroglyph)
(in a plan
view)

'eternity'
a-long-timeperiod
wick-Ra-wick
God-Huh

Notes

1. first alphabetic h; 2. Egyptian
uniliteral signh
h; 3. see second
uniliteral h, the wick (hieroglyph),
Gardiner no. V28,

eternity, or "a long time per
period";
(variations of timeperiods, with
tweaks of the seated man
holding renpet-constructs)
constructs)

resembles the Chinese character 回..

The symbol of

(

) resembles Chinese character 回 in glyph and

pronunciation(h).
(h). And the meaning? In ancient Egyptian symbols, the

wick-Ra-wick symbol

means eternity. In fact, any symbol

placed between two wick symbols means cyclical . So the symbol
indeed has the meaning of Chinese character 回. The symbol
completely
ompletely

consistent

with

the

Chinese

character

glyph ,pronunciation(h)
(h) and meaning. So it is indeed 回！
Now let us look at the Chinese character 吴:

回

is
in

Actually the two symbols

and

, the prenomen of Huni exactly

constitute glyph of 吴 in bronze character. But why did the symbol

,

the prenomen of Huni disappear?
Now let us see what 吴 means. Its original meaning means that a
person
son screams while running, and turning back, implying the call of the
original hunter. So 吴 also has the meaning of 回, accurately from the
combination of the prenomen of Huni.
While in ancient Egyptian symbols, the symbol

means rush. It

writes su, maybe
aybe the original
original pronunciation is to read ““速”! And its
pronunciation is similar to “吴”. Therefore, this symbol means that the
original meaning of“吴
吴”has the meaning of "running".
su
rush

su
-(bil.
bil.)

rush
w/ 2-sets-of-leaves

At last, what is the meaning of

Egyptian biliteral sign su

? According to the Classic of

Mountains and Rivers,, Tianwu is the water god in the ancient Han myths
and legends. So you can see that the symbol of

in the character"

吴"" is gone, but still retains the legend of the water god Tianwu.

The water god Tianwu(天吴)

Besides,

Ḥeḥ (also Huh, Hah, Hauh, Huah,

personification

of infinity or eternity in

and Hehu))

was

the

the Ogdoad in Egyptian

mythology. His name originally meant "flood", referring to the watery
chaos that the Egyptians believed
belie
existed before the creation of the
world. （Allen,
Allen, James P. Genesis in Egypt: The Philosophy of Ancient Egyptian
Creation Accounts. Yale Egyptological Seminar, 1988 ）The Egyptians envisioned

this chaos as infinite, in contrast with the finite created world, so Heh

personified this aspect of the primordial waters. Heh's female
counterpart was known as Hauhet, which is simply the feminine form of
his name.（ Wilkinson, Richard H. (2003). The Complete Gods and Goddesses of
Ancient Egypt. Thames & Hudson. p. 109）

Like the other concepts in the Ogdoad, his male form was often
depicted as a frog, or a frog-headed human, and his female form as
a snake or snake-headed human. The frog head symbolised fertility,
creation, and regeneration, and was also possessed by the other Ogdoad
males Kek, Amun, and Nun.（Rush, John (2007). The Twelve Gates: A Spiritual
Passage Through the Egyptian Books of the Dead. Berkeley, CA: Frog. p. 281.）The

other common representation depicts him crouching, holding a palm
stem in each hand (or just one),（Owusu, Heike (2008). Egyptian Symbols. New
York, NY: Sterling. p. 73. ） sometimes with a palm stem in his hair,

as palm stems represented long life to the Egyptians, the years being
represented by notches on it. Depictions of this form also had a shen
ring at the base of each palm stem, which represented infinity.
Depictions of Heh were also used in hieroglyphs to represent one million,
which was essentially considered equivalent to infinity in Ancient
Egyptian mathematics. Thus this deity is also known as the "god of
millions of years".

The god Ḥeḥ was usually depicted anthropomorphically, as in the
hieroglyphic character, as a male figure with divine beard and lappet wig.
Normally kneeling (one knee raised), sometimes in a basket—
basket—the sign for
"all", the god typically holds in each hand a notched palm branch (palm
rib). Occasionally, an additional
additional palm branch is worn on the god's head.

An aspect of Heh, holding a pair of notched palm branches

So from the above, we can see that the water god Tianwu
Tianwu(天
吴)resembles the Egyptian god Ḥeḥ in pronunciation and meaning.
Now in sum, we can speculate that Huni is exactly 吴回
吴回(wuhui).
Besides, the pronunciation of Huni resembles 吴回(wuhui).

From the above, we can see that Huni is exactly 吴回
吴回(wuhui). But

where is he buried? Let us see the paper below.
The Egyptian

pyramids are

ancient pyramid-shaped

masonry

structures located in Egypt. As of November 2008, sources cite either
118 or 138 as the number of identified Egyptian pyramids. Most were
built as tombs for the country's pharaohs and their consorts during
the Old and Middle Kingdom periods.

The earliest known Egyptian pyramids are found at Saqqara,
northwest of Memphis. The earliest among these is the Pyramid of
Djoser, which was built c. 2630–2610 BC during the Third Dynasty.
（Gardner, Helen (1980) [1926]. De La Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G., eds. Art
through the Ages (7th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brave Jovanovitch.
p. 68. ISBN 0-15-503758-7.） This pyramid and its surrounding complex were

designed by the architect Imhotep, and are generally considered to be
the world's oldest monumental structures constructed of dressed
masonry.（Lehner, Mark (1997). The Complete Pyramids. New York: Thames and
Hudson. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-500-05084-2.）

The most famous Egyptian pyramids are those found at Giza, on the
outskirts of Cairo. Several of the Giza pyramids are counted among the
largest structures ever built. The Pyramid of Khufu at Giza is the largest

Egyptian pyramid. It is the only one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient
World still in existence.
By the time of the Early Dynastic Period, those with sufficient means
were buried in bench-like structures known as mastabas.

The Mastabat al-Fir’aun at Saqqara

The second historically-documented Egyptian pyramid is attributed to
the architect Imhotep, who planned what Egyptologists believe to be a
tomb for the pharaoh Djoser. Imhotep is credited with being the first to
conceive the notion of stacking mastabas on top of each other, creating
an edifice composed of a number of "steps" that decreased in size
towards its apex. The result was the Pyramid of Djoser, which was
designed to serve as a gigantic stairway by which the soul of the
deceased pharaoh could ascend to the heavens. Such was the
importance of Imhotep's achievement that he was deified by later

Egyptians.（Quirke, Stephen (2001). The Cult of Ra: Sun Worship in Ancient Egypt.
Thames & Hudson, pp. 118–120.）

The most prolific pyramid-building phase coincided with the greatest
degree of absolutist rule. It was during this time that the most famous
pyramids, the Giza pyramid complex, were built. Over time, as authority
became less centralized, the ability and willingness to harness the
resources required for construction on a massive scale decreased, and
later pyramids were smaller, less well-built and often hastily constructed.
The shape of Egyptian pyramids is thought to represent the primordial
mound from which the Egyptians believed the earth was created. The
shape of a pyramid is thought to be representative of the descending
rays of the sun, and most pyramids were faced with polished, highly
reflective white limestone, in order to give them a brilliant appearance
when viewed from a distance. Pyramids were often also named in ways
that referred to solar luminescence. For example, the formal name of
the Bent Pyramid at Dahshur was The Southern Shining Pyramid, and
that of Senwosret at el-Lahun was Senwosret is Shining.
The Egyptians believed the dark area of the night sky around which
the stars appear to revolve was the physical gateway into the heavens.
One of the narrow shafts that extend from the main burial chamber
through the entire body of the Great Pyramid points directly towards the
center of this part of the sky. This suggests the pyramid may have been
designed to serve as a means to magically launch the deceased

pharaoh's soul directly into the abode of the gods.
All Egyptian pyramids were built on the west bank of the Nile, which,
as the site of the setting sun, was associated with the realm of the dead
in Egyptian mythology.( "Discovery Channel Nederland". Discoverychannel.co.uk.
Archived from the original on 5 December 2004. Retrieved 16 November 2012.)

All of Egypt's pyramids, except the small Third Dynasty pyramid of
Zawyet el-Amwat (or Zawyet el-Mayitin), are sited on the west bank of
the Nile, and most are grouped together in a number of pyramid fields.
Some of the most important of these are listed geographically, from
north to south, below.
Giza is the location of the Pyramid of Khufu (also known as the "Great
Pyramid" and the "Pyramid of Cheops"); the somewhat smaller Pyramid
of Khafre (or Chephren); the relatively modest-sized Pyramid of
Menkaure (or Mykerinus), along with a number of smaller satellite
edifices known as "Queen's pyramids"; and the Great Sphinx of Giza.
Of the three, only Khafre's pyramid retains part of its original polished
limestone casing, near its apex. This pyramid appears larger than the
adjacent Khufu pyramid by virtue of its more elevated location, and the
steeper angle of inclination of its construction – it is, in fact, smaller in
both height and volume.

Diagram of the interior structures of the Great Pyramid. The inner line indicates the
pyramid's present profile, the outer line indicates the original profile.

A view of the pyramids at Giza from the plateau to the south of the complex. Fro
From
left to right, the three largest are: the Pyramid of Menkaure,, the Pyramid of
Khafre and the Great Pyramid of Khufu.
Khufu. The three smaller pyramids in the
foreground are subsidiary structures associated with Menkaure's pyramid.

Aerial view of the Giza pyramid complex

Map of Ancient Egypt

Map of Khufu cemetery

Satellite Map of Giza

The Great Pyramid of Giza

Map of the Giza pyramid complex

Zawyet el-Aryan, halfway between Giza and Abusir, is the location for
two unfinished Old Kingdom pyramids. The northern structure's owner is
believed to be pharaoh Nebka, while the southern structure, known as
the Layer Pyramid, may be attributable to the Third Dynasty
pharaoh Khaba, a close successor of Sekhemkhet. If this attribution is
correct, Khaba's short reign could explain the seemingly unfinished state
of this step pyramid. Today it stands around 17 m (56 ft) high; had it
been completed, it is likely to have exceeded 40 m (130 ft).
The Layer

Pyramid (known

locally

in Arabic as el

haram

el

midawwar, Arabic: ‫اﻟﻬﺮم اﻟﻤﺪور‬, meaning 'rubble-hill pyramid') is a ruined
step pyramid dating to the 3rd Dynasty of Egypt (2686 BC to 2613 BC)
and located in the necropolis of Zawyet El Aryan. Its ownership is
uncertain and may be attributable to pharaoh Khaba. The pyramid
architecture, however, is very similar to that of the Buried Pyramid of
king Sekhemkhet and for this reason is firmly datable to the 3rd Dynasty.

The ruins of the layer pyramid

The Layer Pyramid lies close to the necropolis of Zawyet El Aryan, 8 km
(5.0 mi) south-west of Giza and 7 km (4.3 mi) north of Saqqara. The main
structure is located on a rock ridge just above the floodplain.
The Layer Pyramid has a square base whose side is about 84 m (276 ft)
long, slightly smaller than the step pyramids of Djoser and Sekhemket.
Based

on

the

dimensions

of

the

pyramid

of

Djoser,

the

egyptologist Jean-Philippe Lauer estimated that the layer pyramid was
originally planned to comprise five steps and would have reached c.
42–45 m (138–148 ft) in height. ( Jean-Philippe Lauer: Histoire monumentale
des pyramides d'Égypte. Volume 1: Les pyramides à degrés (IIIe
Dynastie), Bibliothèque d'étude vol. 39. Institut français d'archéologie orientale Bibliothèque d'études, Paris 1962, p. 19-22.)Today, only two of these steps

remain, reaching a height of about 17 m (56 ft). The current ruined state
of the pyramid allows a view of its core, which is a 11 m2 (120 sq ft)

pyramidal mound made of poor quality rough stone blocks taken from
the local bedrock. This core is surrounded by a 2.6 m (8.5 ft) thick casing
of the same masonry. This is in turn surrounded by 14 layers of mud
bricks bonded with clay mortar and disposed almost vertically, with an
inward inclination angle of 68°. Just as the inner-most stone casing of the
pyramid core, each mud brick layer is 2.6 m (8.5 ft) thick.( Miroslav
Verner: Die Pyramiden. Rowohlt, Wiesbaden 1999, ISBN 3-499-60890-1, p. 174-177.)

Plan of the Layer Pyramid.

The disposition of the substructures of the layer pyramid is extremely
similar

to

that

found

in

the Buried

Pyramid of Sekhemket.

Consequently, Mark Lehner and others suggest that the two pyramids
must have been constructed very close in time.( Mark Lehner: The Complete
Pyramids, London: Thames & Hudson, 2008, ISBN 978-0-500-28547-3, p. 96.)

The entrance to the subterranean structures lies on the east, a

disposition which would be unparalleled until the construction of the
pyramid of Senusret II, almost 1000 years later.
The entrance immediately leads to a 36 m (118 ft) long steep stairway
and then down on to a corridor which heads west. The corridor ends in a
straight vertical shaft, at the top of which is the so-called upper corridor,
an unfinished passage which goes south toward the center of the
pyramid. At the bottom of the shaft is a T-shaped crossway. To the left,
this crossway leads south to the lower corridor, half-way of which is a
narrow stairway, so narrow that a sarcophagus could hardly have been
passed through it. The lower corridor then finishes in the king's burial
chamber. In this area of the stairway, Barsanti drew another gallery
leading above the burial chamber, but this gallery is absent in Reisner's
and Fisher's notes. To the right of the T-shaped crossway is a U-shaped
gallery system. The ground plan of the gallery system resembles that of a
comb, comprising rows of chambers, totalling 32, which were possibly
destined to be storage rooms for the gravegoods. ( Miroslav Verner: Die
Pyramiden. Rowohlt, Wiesbaden 1999, ISBN 3-499-60890-1, p. 174-177.) The

gallery proved to be "clean and empty, as if the workmen had only left".
(Mark Lehner: The Complete Pyramids,
2008, ISBN 978-0-500-28547-3, p. 96.)

London:

Thames

&

Hudson,

The king's burial chamber is located 26 m (85 ft) below ground, is
nearly square in shape, with a base of 3.63 m × 2.65 m (11.9 ft × 8.7 ft),
and a ceiling height of 3 m (9.8 ft). The burial chamber contained no

traces of a sarcophagus, which together with the absence of artefacts in
the gallery, hints to the premature death of the king.（Mark
Mark Lehner
Lehner: The
Complete Pyramids,, London: Thames & Hudson, 2008, ISBN 978-0-500
500-28547-3, p.
96.）

Section of the layer pyramid, showing the substructures

Major pyramids located in Saqqara include the Pyramid of Djoser –
generally identified as the world's oldest substantial monumental
structure to be built of dressed stone – the Pyramid of Userkaf
Userkaf,
the Pyramid of Teti and the Pyramid of Merikare,, dating to the First
Intermediate Period of Egypt.
Egypt Also at Saqqara is the Pyramid of Unas
Unas,
which retains a pyramid causeway that is one of the bestbest-preserved in
Egypt. Together with the pyramid of Userkaf, this pyramid was the
subject of one of the earliest known restoration attempts, conducted
Kitchen: Ramesside
by Khaemweset,, a son of Ramesses II. ( Kenneth Kitchen
Inscriptions,

Translated

&

Annotated,

Translations,

Volume

IIII,

Blackwell

Publishers, ISBN 0-631-18435
18435-X, 1996). Saqqara is also the location of the

incomplete step pyramid of Djoser's successor Sekhemkhet
Sekhemkhet, known as
the Buried Pyramid.. Archaeologists believe that had this pyramid been

completed, it would have been larger than Djoser's.

View of Saqqara necropolis, including Djoser's step pyramid (centre), the Pyramid of
Unas (left) and the Pyramid of Userkaf (right)

Saqqara: the funerary complex of Djoser: general view. In the background, the
pyramid of Userkaf. (Ancient Egypt website)

The Pyramid of Djoser

Funerary complex of Djoser

Djoser’s Step Pyramid complex, Saqqara.

Djoser’s Step Pyramid complex, Saqqara. Source: Mark Lehner, The Complete
Pyramids. London: Thames and Hudson, 1997, p. 85

Aerial photo of the Step Pyramid complex and three unfinished rectangular pyramid
complexes at Saqqara, from old RAF aerial photographs taken in 1947. Courtesy of

the Saqqara Geophysical Survey Project

South of the main pyramid field at Saqqara is a second collection of
later,

smaller

pyramids,

including

those

of Pepi

I, Djedkare

Isesi, Merenre, Pepi II and Ibi. Most of these are in a poor state of
preservation.
The Fourth Dynasty pharaoh Shepseskaf either did not share an
interest in, or have the capacity to undertake pyramid construction like
his predecessors. His tomb, which is also sited at south Saqqara, was
instead built as an unusually large mastaba and offering temple complex.
It is commonly known as the Mastabat al-Fir’aun. （ The Mastaba of
Shepseskaf）.

A previously unknown pyramid was discovered at north Saqqara in late
2008. Believed to be the tomb of Teti's mother, it currently stands
approximately 5 m (16 ft) high, although the original height was closer to
14 m (46 ft).

Saqqara: general plan of the northern group and the southern group. (Ancient Egypt
website)

Saqqara: general plan of the northern group with the necropolis of the Thinite and
Old Kingdom periods. (Ancient Egypt website)

Dahshur is arguably the most important pyramid field in Egypt
outside Giza and Saqqara, although it was relatively unknown outside
archaeological circles.
The southern Pyramid of Sneferu, commonly known as the Bent
Pyramid, is believed to be the first Egyptian pyramid intended by its
builders to be a "true" smooth-sided pyramid from the outset; the
earlier pyramid at Meidum had smooth sides in its finished state – but it
was conceived and built as a step pyramid, before having its steps filled
in and concealed beneath a smooth outer casing of dressed stone. As a
true smooth-sided structure, the Bent Pyramid was only a partial success
– albeit a unique, visually imposing one; it is also the only major Egyptian
pyramid to retain a significant proportion of its original smooth outer

limestone casing intact. As such it serves as the best contemporary
example of how the ancient Egyptians intended their pyramids to look.
Several kilometers to the north of the Bent Pyramid is the last – and
most successful – of the three pyramids constructed during the reign of
Sneferu; the Red Pyramid is the world's first successfully completed
smooth-sided pyramid. The structure is also the third largest pyramid in
Egypt – after the pyramids of Khufu and Khafra at Giza.
Also at Dahshur is one of two pyramids built by Amenemhat III, known
as the Black Pyramid, as well as a number of small, mostly ruined
subsidiary pyramids.

Sneferu's Bent Pyramid in Dahshur

Isometric, plan and elevation images of the Bent Pyramid Complex taken from a 3d
model

Sneferu's Red Pyramid

Isometric, plan and elevation images of the Red Pyramid Complex taken from a 3D
model

An overlook of Red Pyramid and Bent Pyramid of Dahshur, from Saqqara

General map of the site of Dahshur

Detailed map of the site of Dahshur

View of the great mastaba in the wady cemetery of Dahshur; view from the
southeast.

The following table lays out the chronology of the construction of
most of the major pyramids mentioned above. Each pyramid is identified
through the pharaoh who ordered it built, his approximate reign, and its
location.

Pyramid /
Pharaoh

Djoser

Reign

c. 2670 BC

Field

Saqqara

Sneferu

c. 2612–2589
Dashur
BC

Sneferu

c. 2612–2589
Meidum
BC

Height

62 meters (203 feet)

104 meters (341 feet)

65 meters (213 feet) (ruined)

Khufu
Djedefre

*Would have been 91.65 meters (301
feet) or 175 Egyptian Royal cubits.

c. 2589–2566
Giza
BC

146.7 meters (481
Egyptian Royal cubits

c. 2566–2558 Abu
BC
Rawash

60 meters (197 feet)

feet)

or

280

136.4 meters (448 feet)
Khafre

c. 2558–2532
Giza
BC

Menkaure

c. 2532–2504
Giza
BC

65 meters (213 feet) or 125 Egyptian
Royal cubits

Userkaf

c. 2494–2487
Saqqara
BC

48 meters (161 feet)

Sahure

c. 2487–2477
Abusir
BC

47 meters (155 feet)

Neferirkare
Kakai

c. 2477–2467
Abusir
BC

72.8 meters (239 feet)

Nyuserre Ini

c. 2416–2392
Abusir
BC

51.68 m (169.6 feet) or 99 Egyptian
Royal cubits

Amenemhat I

c. 1991–1962
Lisht
BC

55 meters (181 feet)

Senusret I

c. 1971–1926
Lisht
BC

61.25 meters (201 feet)

Senusret II

c. 1897–1878
el-Lahun
BC

48.65 m (159.6
Royal cubits) or

*Originally: 143.5 m or 471 feet or 274
Egyptian Royal cubits

ft;

93

Egyptian

47.6 m (156 ft; 91 Egyptian
Royal cubits)
Amenemhat III

c. 1860–1814
Hawara
BC

75 meters (246 feet)

Khendjer

c. 1764–1759
Saqqara
BC

37.35 m (122.5 feet), now 1 m (3.3
feet)
20 meters (66 feet) or

Piye

c. 721 BC

El-Kurru

Taharqa

c. 664 BC

Nuri

30 meters (99 feet)
40 meters (132 feet) or
50 meters (164 feet)

Hyperdiffusionism refers to hypotheses suggesting that certain
historical technologies or ideas originated with a single people
or civilization before their adoption by other cultures. Thus, all great
civilizations that share similar cultural practices, such as construction
of pyramids, derived them from a single common progenitor. According
to its proponents, examples of hyperdiffusion can be found in religious
practices, cultural technologies, megalithic monuments, and lost ancient
civilizations.
Heliolithic Culture, as Grafton Elliot Smith refers to it, consists of
cultural practices such as megaliths. Similar designs and methods of
construction of such pieces have what seem like a linear geographical
distribution. These heliolithic cultures can refer to religious customs that
share distinctive practices, such as the worship of a Solar Deity. As this
trope is seen in numerous belief systems, Smith believes it is diffused
from one ancient civilization (Smith 1929, p. 132).

Mummification, as believed by G. Elliot Smith, is a prime example of
how religious customs prove the diffusion of cultures (Smith 1929, 21).
He believes that only an advanced civilization, such as Egypt, could
create such a peculiar belief that then spread by way of ancient mariners
(Smith 1929, 133-134).

Grafton Elliot Smith: Map of Hyperdiffusionism from Egypt, 1929

And Haplogroup Q or Q-M242 is a Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup. It
has one primary subclade, Haplogroup Q1 (L232/S432), which includes
numerous subclades that have been sampled and identified in males
among modern populations. In my point of view, the speculation of
migration of Haplogroup Q is the following below:

The speculation of migration of Haplogroup Q

The subclades of Haplogroup Q with their defining mutation(s),
according to the 2011 ISOGG tree are provided below.



Q M242
Q1 P36.2, L232, L273, L274
 Q1a MEH2
 Q1a1 M120, M265/N14
 Q1a2 M25, M143
 Q1a3 L56, L57, M346, L528
 Q1a3a L53, L54, L55, L213, L331
 Q1a3a1 M3
 Q1a3a1a M19
 Q1a3a1b M194
 Q1a3a1c M199, P106, P292
 Q1a3a2 L191
 Q1a3a3 L330, L334
 Q1a3a3a L329, L332, L333
 Q1a3b M323
 Q1a3c L527, L529
 Q1b L275, L314
 Q1b1 M378/Page100, L214, L215/Page82
 Q1b1a L245
 Q1b1a1 L272.1

And that is the information of Egyptian Gene:

And that is the image of the world ancestry of the Egyptian Gene：

In the image above, green circle means strong match, brown means
weak match, red means no match, transparent means no match possible.
Notice that China also has a certain mark of this Egyptian Gene.(In the

area of ancient Liangzhu Culture(良渚文化)).
Culture
Listed below are the human Y-chromosome
chromosome DNA haplogroups found in
various ethnic groups and populations from Africa .

Feeling tired? Now let us back to China. According to a paper, the Y
chromosome
romosome haplogroup of DNA from ancient East Asians was ex
examined,
in order to genetically link them to modern populations.
ations. Fifty
Fifty-six human
remains were sampled from five
fi archaeological
ological sites, primarily along the
Yangtze River. The highly ethnic-related
ethnic
Y chromo-some
some diversity is one
of the best materials to describe the relationships (Su et al. 1999
1999; Shi et
al. 2005). The Y chromosome
chro
haplogroup patterns
tterns are quite di
different
among different
erent ethnic groups. In this paper, we present Y SNP data of 48
ancient samples
amples from China, mostly along Yangtze River,
iver, to provide a
survey on the genetic diversity of the prehistory populations in this
region.
The samples collected in this paper were from five
ve sites: Maqiao,
Xindili, Wucheng, Daxi, and Taosi. Most of the samples belonged to four
different cultures: Daxi C. was the earliest, followed by the Longshan C.

and Liangzhu C. around the same period, and finally, by Wucheng C., the
latest in the Shang Dynasty of the Bronze Age. These cultures were most
representative for the prehistory of China. Some samples from the same
necropolises that belonged to the historical time (later than 841 BC in
China) were also collected for comparison. Most of them belonged to
the Han Dynasty. The remains of the same culture were sampled from
different necropolises, avoiding the bias of relative samples.

Locations of the archaeological sites, cultures and the distributions of Y SNP
haplogroups

For some of the samples, not all of the five SNPs could be amplified,
thus haplogroups could not be determined if no mutated alleles were
found. However, most individuals were successfully amplified, and the
haplogroups were determined for half of them. Therefore, at least 62.5%
of the individual remains (30 out of 48) belong to O haplogroup, which is

still the major haplogroup of today’s East Asians. These ancient results,
consequently, did not differ from the modern populations. The resulting
DNA types thus made “phylogenetic sense” (the Y chromosome
haplogroup structure), helping to verify the authenticity of the ancient
DNA. The previously reported results of ancient Y chromosome were all
obtained from samples preserved in cold environments (Keyser-Tracqui
et al. 2003; Ricaut et al. 2005; Kuch et al. 2007; Bouakaze et al. 2007).
In two sites of Liangzhu Culture, only O1 haplogroup were found, and
the frequencies of O1 in two sites were almost the same. That indicated
the ancient people of these two sites belonged to the same population.
The historical samples from the same sites did not differ from the
prehistoric samples in the haplogroup patterns. Even modern
populations in this area around Shanghai contain a large proportion of
O1 haplogroup (Wen et al. 2004). The consistency of the Y haplogroup
pattern in this area, from the Neolithic Age to modern times, reveals that
the population might not have been replaced. O1 reaches the highest
frequencies in the Taiwan aborigines, and also in Daic speaking
populations in the southwest China (Li 2005). Therefore, it is also
possible that there are some close relationships among Taiwan
aborigines, Daic speakers and the ancient Liangzhu Culture populations.
A high frequency of O3d was only found in Daxi Culture. O3d is very
rare in modern populations; Hmong-Mien populations have been found

to contain a small proportion of O3d (Feng 2007). Since O3d occurs at
low frequency in the Hmong-Mien, the ancient people of Daxi Culture
might be the ancestors of the modern populations of Hmong-Mien. The
absence of O3d in the historical samples from the Daxi site (it might not
have been found because of the small sample size), and the migration of
modern Hmong-Mien populations to the southwest might indicate that
the prehistoric population in the Three Gorges area has been replaced.

Case counts of Y SNP haplogroups of the archaeological sites

Among three sites—Wucheng, Daxi and Taosi—O3* and O2a were
shared. And O3* is most common in modern East Asians, and O2a can
been found in different populations in southwestern China. Besides,
there were still some genetic differences between the populations in the
areas of Yangtze River and the Yellow River, as O2a was not found from

the Taosi site.
O1 was not found out of Liangzhu Culture, bringing a noticeable
genetic difference between coastal and inland populations, which can
still be observed in modern populations. O1 distributes along the coast
of East Asia, from Manchuria in the north to Malaysia and Indonesia in
the south (Su et al. 1999; Li 2005; Zhang et al. 2007). This distribution
may indicate that there were at least two different migration routes for
the early peopling of East Asia. Hardly any genetic flows could be
observed between the coastal route and the inland route in the
prehistoric peoples. So in my point of view, this may demonstrate that
hyperdiffusionism from Egypt by Grafton Elliot Smith.
Now why is human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups O be found in
Egypt, but no in the image above? I speculate that there must be a
“indigenous people” in the Liangzhu area to return to Egypt with the
fleet. This phenomenon was very common in the history of Egypt. The
ancient Egyptian fleet often brought back some animals and plant
species, including ethnic groups, back to Egypt from other places. During
the eighteenth dynasty of Egypt, when Thutmose III conquered a place in
the West Asia region, he took the nobles and princes of this place back
to Egypt and educated them in Egypt.
Now let us back to Wuxi, China(无锡). Taibo (泰伯 ) or Wu Taibo was
the eldest son of King Tai of Zhou and the legendary founder of the State

of Wu. According to Sima Qian, Taibo was the founder of the State of
Wu(吴国).
Born into the Jī clan (姬) of predynastic Zhou, Taibo was the eldest son
of King Tai of Zhou. He had two younger brothers, Zhongyong and Jili.
The King of Zhou wished to make his youngest son Jili to inherit the reins
of power, so Taibo and Zhongyong traveled southeast and settled in Meili
（梅里） in present-day Jiangsu province. There, Taibo and his followers
set up the State of Wu, and made Meili its capital. Taibo's grand
nephew, King Wu of Zhou overthrew the Shang Dynasty and started
the Zhou Dynasty.
During his reign, Taibo developed irrigation, encouraged agriculture,
and dug the Canal Du. When Taibo died, he had no heir and passed the
throne to his younger brother Zhongyong. Taibo's tomb was set up in
today's Hongshan Town, Wuxi(无锡鸿山).

Taibo's tomb

Taibo's tomb

And the statue below was unearthed in Taibo's tomb:

The statue unearthed in Taibo's tomb

The statue below was a man from "Baiyue" (百越). Also had a eagle in
the front:

An statue of a man, dating from State of Yue, located in the State Museum of
Zhejiang province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

And Horus is one of the most significant ancient Egyptian deities. He
was worshipped from at least the late prehistoric Egypt until
the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Roman Egypt. He was most often depicted as
a falcon, most likely a lanner falcon or peregrine falcon, or as a man with
a falcon head. Horus is recorded in Egyptian hieroglyphs as ḥr.w "Falcon";
the pronunciation has been reconstructed as ħaːruw. Addi onal
meanings are thought to have been "the distant one" or "one who is
above, over".

Horus may be shown as a falcon on the Narmer Palette, dating from
about the 31st century BC.
The image below is Horus, Louvre, Shen rings in his grasp:

Amulet representing a ram-headed falcon. Ancient Egypt, 1254 BC (26th year of the
reign of Ramses II, XIXth Egyptian dynasty), found on the mummy of an Apis bull in
the Serapaeum of Memphis at Saqqara. Gold, lapis, turquoise and cornelian.

The statue below is God Horus as a falcon:

God Horus as a falcon wearing the Double Crown of Egypt. 27th dynasty. State
Museum of Egyptian Art, Munich

So from the above, I speculate that the eagle in the statue unearthed
in Taibo's tomb and the eagle in a statue of a man, dating from the State
of Yue era, the eagles in the two statues resemble the God Horus in
Egypt. I can also get a conclusion that Wuxi(无锡) and Zhejiang(浙江)
was once Egypt’s colony.
Now let us back to Wuxi(无锡), China. In the south of Mount Hui(惠
山), there is a small hill called Zhangshan Hill(嶂山).Its former name
was 璋山. So what does 璋(Zhang)mean ? It means jade plaything or
jade ornament. In the images below, are opening of the mouth's ritual
sets, they resemble Chinese character 璋.

Opening of the Mouth kit ,Museum of Fine Arts, Boston

Opening of the Mouth Tools, metropolitan museum of art, New York

This is the photo of Zhangshan Hill (嶂山), from the front:

Zhangshan Hill (嶂山), from the front

This is the overlooking photo of Zhangshan Hill(嶂山), it looks like a
pyramid.

A overlooking photo of Zhangshan Hill(嶂山)

So from the above, I get a conclusion that Zhangshan Hill
Hill( 嶂
山)means
means Egypt governor or pharaoh had come to Wuxi.
Wuxi
In the south of Mount Hui,
Hui, and the east of Zhangshan Hill
Hill(嶂山),
there is a small hill called Chanshan Hill(产山).
Hill
. The image below is
Chinese character 产::

Chinese character 产

There is a folk proverb in Wuxi, which is called “Chanshan Hill(产
山 )emerged overnight”. Exaggerated as it is, but it indicates that
Chanshan Hill emerged rapidly. Since no big earthquakes happened in
Wuxi（无锡）, so I get a hypothesis that Chanshan Hill is a man -made hill.
In the south of Chanshan Hill( 产 山 ), there is a spot called
Heliekou(河埒口), and what does 埒（Lie）mean? It means enclosure,
dike, embankment. So Heliekou(河埒口)means enclosure near the
Liangxi River（梁溪河）.The image below is Chinese character 埒:

Chinese character 埒

The following image is Chanshan Hill(产山).

A overlooking photo of Chanshan Hill(产山)

The photo below is Chanshan Hill(产山)and Zhangshan Hill (嶂山),
the left is Chanshan Hill, and the right is Zhangshan Hill.

Chanshan Hill and Zhangshan Hill

So from the above, we can get a conclusion that Chanshan Hill(产

山)is a man-made pyramid, and Heliekou(河埒口)means enclosure
around the man-made pyramid- Chanshan Hill, this pyramid complex
looks like Djoser's Pyramid Complex which has enclosure around it.
Now let us back to Mount Xi , Wuxi(无锡锡山). As the city Wuxi(无
锡)is named for the hill, and local legend purports that Xishan （锡山）
was once visited by the emperor Shi Huangdi( 秦 始 皇 ) （ Leffman,
David. China, p. 435.）In the south of Mount Xi （锡山）, there are Liangzhu

(良渚)ruins. There are three sites that are divided into blocks by the
moat and joined together into a large block of about 20,000 square
meters. There are four large mounds, of which the east and west dug up
the Liangzhu tombs and their homes fifty years ago. It is not excluded
that there is a high altar and the presence of paddy fields. It has been
proved that the Majiabang-Songze-Liangzhu-Wuyue-Han-level cultural
accumulation. This should be a large settlement ruin that spans 5,000
years. The image below is the ruins of Mount Xi, the red circle means
Wuyue culture, the blue circle means Neolithic culture, the two together
means culture accumulation.

The ruins of Mount Xi(锡山)

Mount Xi is also known as Xishen Mountain（lit . “Western God
Mountain”） and Wushan Mountain（lit . “Wizard Mountain”）. The
ancient Baiyue (百越)people sacrificed ox to worship God, and Mount Xi
(锡山)was the sacred mountain of the wizard who buried there. In the
ancient times, it was a holy space of Baiyue people. This phenomenon
was similar to the adoration of the golden calf in Egypt. Besides, magic
was popular in ancient Egypt, it is similar to Baiyue (百越)people who
once lived in Mount Xi (锡山).And the following picture is Mount Xi (锡
山):

Mount Xi (锡山)

The photo below is Mount Xi (锡山)and Mount Hui(惠山). The small
is Mount Xi (锡山),the large is Mount Hui(惠山).From the photo below,
we can also see Mount Xi (锡山)looks like a pyramid.

Now let us see Wuxi Huishan clay figurines. Huishan clay figurines（惠
山泥人） are Wuxi（无锡）'s most famous folk craft. The techniques for
making and decorating the figurines developed among the ordinary
people of the area of many centuries, and these traditional styles and
techniques are still used today. The themes and decoration of the small
statues make them a charming example of traditional Chinese folk
culture. It is said that Huishan clay figurines have a history of over 1,000
years, originating in the Northern and Southern Dynasties Period
(386-581).
The main styles of traditional figurines are animals and chubby
babies. The most common figurines are of chubby babies, with outsized
heads and wide smiles, sitting crossed legged. The baby figurines were
always depicted rather pudgy, with rosy cheeks and bright eyes to show
their good health. The babies are always shown holding plants, animals,
or household objects with allegorical meanings promising health, wealth,
or happiness. And they are often based on nearly untranslatable Chinese
language puns and homophones. The classic chubby baby figure is the
Da Ah Fu（大阿福）, which has become something of a symbol for Wuxi
itself. The Da Ah Fu figurine is always shown with five allegorical symbols,
representing a range of wishes. In its hair it wears a peony flower, a
symbol of status and prosperity. Its clothes are decorated in five colors to
represent wealth, and hanging from its neck is a lock which represents

long life. The Da Ah Fu's toy green maned lion(I think the lion resembles
Egyptian goddness Tefnut in meaning and shape.) is a also charm to ward
off evil spirits. The symbolism extends to the tips of its toes - it wears
white soled shoes representing success in the imperial examinations.

Da Ah Fu（大阿福）figurine, Qing Style

Cats are perhaps the most classic type of animal figurines. Hardly cute
kittens, they are crafted to look almost fierce, traditionally with long
droopy whiskers made of silk. Their popularity and somewhat imposing
demeanor stem from the importance of silk in rural Jiangsu. The silk
worms are an easy snack for mice as they spin the cocoons that are later
used to make silk. Peasants traditional kept cats to scare away, or better
yet, eat the pesky mice. The cat figurines were both a good luck charm
against mice, and also a reminder of the prosperity that came from a

successful silk harvest. The two other traditional animals, the "spring ox"
and a large rooster, also reflect China's peasant traditions. So in my point
of view, I think the cat figurines resemble Egyptian goddess Bastet in
meaning and shape.

Cat of Huishan clay figurines

Bastet or Bast (Ancient Egyptian: bꜣstjt "She of the Ointment Jar") was a goddess of
ancient Egyptian religion, worshiped as early as the Second Dynasty (2890 BCE).

The Gayer-Anderson cat, believed to be a representation of Bastet

Now let us back to Egypt. The ushabti (also called shabti or shawabti,
with a number of variant spellings) was a funerary figurine used
in ancient Egyptian religion. Ushabtis were placed in tombs among
the grave goods and were intended to act as servants or minions for the
deceased, should they be called upon to do manual labor in the afterlife.
The practice of using ushabtis originated in the Old Kingdom of
Egypt (c. 2600 to 2100 BCE), with the use of life-sized reserve heads
made from limestone, which were buried with the mummy. Most
ushabtis were of minor size, and many produced in multiples – they
sometimes covered the floor around a sarcophagus. It was necessary for

the owner's name to be inscribed on an ushabti, along with a phrase
sending them to action, written in the hieratic script.（Taylor, Richard.
"SHABTI (USHABTI, SHAWABTI)." Death and the Afterlife: a cultural encyclopedia.
California: 2000.）

The term ushabti became prevalent after the 21st Dynasty and
remained in use until the Ptolemaic Kingdom.
Ushabtis were mostly mummiform, but during the Dynasty XVIII reign
of Thutmose IV, they began to be fashioned as servants with baskets,
sacks, and other agricultural tools. Some ushabtis were very beautiful in
form, and in colour, when of enamel. ( "Relics of Ancient Egypt". 1916. The
Lotus Magazine. 7 (5): 213-214.) They were made of clay, wood or stone;
( Brier, op. cit., p.186) early ones were sometimes made from wax also.

Memphis, 500 BC – Troop of funerary servant figures ushabtis in the name of
Neferibreheb, Louvre-Lens

Ushabti in the British Museum in London

As it talked above, we can conclude that Huishan clay figurines（惠山
泥人）are ushabtis with Chinese characteristic, it indicates that Wuxi（无
锡）was the colony of ancient Egypt. Furthermore, Despite varied tales,
many modern Chinese scholars favour the view that the word Wuxi
derived from the "old Yue language"（百越语） or, supposedly, the
old Kra–Dai languages. Wu means spot in "old Yue language". And what
does Xi mean? As it talked above, Wuxi was once the colony of Egypt. In

Egyptian hieroglyphs, the pronunciation of the hieroglyph

is spt

or sit , and Xi in Wuxi of Wuxi dialect is read si, similar, right? The

meaning of the hieroglyph

is binding. So Wuxi（无锡）means

binding
ng spot, Mount Xi（锡山）means
Xi
a binding hill.
Now let us back to Egypt. The Narmer Macehead forms part of
the Main Deposit found in 1899 at Hierakonpolis, and is now housed in
the Ashmolean Museum,Oxford.
Museum
Three bound captives
aptives seem to be
given to Narmer, labels around them saying 120,000 captives in
total(McDermott,
McDermott, B.(2004))
B.(2004) with 400,000 cattle and 1,422,000 sheep and
goats though this figure can in no way be credible.(Wilkinson,
Wilkinson, T, A, H.
(2001) )

Narmer Macehead Drawing

Here, we find the trampling of the "Nine Bows", as the Egyptian
referred to their enemies, as a vivid embodiment of the king's
supremacy over foreigners (and sometimes even other Egyptians). The
figure "nine" represented three times three, which was the "plural
"plurality of
Pluralities", thus designating the entirety of all enemies. And later, during
the New Kingdom,, the Sphinx Stele of Amenhotep II provides a striking
textual description of the Egyptian King smiting his enemies:
"He bound the heads of the Nine Bows... He has gathered them all into his fist, his
mace has crashed
rashed upon their heads..."

Bound captives in ancient Egypt

During the New Kingdom and Ptolemy period, a large number of
temples were built. The scenes of the pharaoh grabbing the foreign
captives' hair and beating them head-on and the foreign captives being
bound and killed repeatedly appeared.
As it talked above, Mount Xi（锡山）means a binding hill, and pharaohs
often bound captives since the first Dynasty. Besides, since Wuxi （无锡）
was the colony of ancient Egypt, and the ruins of Mount Xi(锡山)
resemble "Pyramid of Khufu" in Giza pyramid complex. So we can get a
hypothesis that Mount Xi(锡山) is a man-made pyramid. Besides, the
height of Mount Xi(锡山) is 66.8m, it is higher than the Pyramid of
Djoser and lower than the Red Pyramid built by the founding of the
Fourth Dynasty Pharaoh Sneferu. Mount Xi(锡山)is relatively high in
most of the major pyramids in Egypt. Furthermore, Wuxi （无锡）is the

cradle of Chinese Wu culture（吴文化）, I think this is owing to Huni. So
from the above, we can speculate that Huni probably buried in Mount Xi ,
Wuxi(无锡锡山).
Another example can also be

found

to prove this.

The Land

of

Punt (Egyptian: pwnt; alternate Egyptological readings Pwene(t)) was an
ancient kingdom. A trading partner of Egypt, it was known for producing
and exporting gold, aromatic resins, blackwood, ebony, ivory, and wild
animals. The region is known from ancient Egyptian records of trade
expeditions to it.（Shaw & Nicholson, p.231.）It is possible that it corresponds
to Opone as later known by the ancient Greeks, while some biblical
scholars have identified it with the biblical land of Put.
At times Punt is referred to as Ta netjer (tꜣ nṯr), the "Land of the God".
（ Breasted, John Henry (1906–1907), Ancient Records of Egypt ） The

exact location of Punt is still debated by historians. Most scholars today
believe Punt was situated to the southeast of Egypt, most likely in the
coastal region of modern Djibouti, Somalia, northeast Ethiopia, Eritrea,
and the Red Sea littoral of Sudan.（ Simson Najovits, Egypt, trunk of the tree,
Volume 2, (Algora Publishing: 2004), p.258.） It is also possible that the

territory covered both the Horn of Africa and Southern Arabia.（Dimitri
Meeks – Chapter 4 – "Locating Punt" from the book Mysterious Lands", by David B.
O'Connor and Stephen Quirke.）

Egyptian spelling "pwenet", the feminine "t" ending was not pronounced during the

New Kingdom. The
he last sign is the determinative for country, land

Men from Punt carrying Gifts, Tomb of Rekhmire

Location of the Land of Punt for most scholars.

Now let us connect
onnect Mount Xi( 锡 山 ), Chanshan Hill
Hill( 产 山 )and
Zhangshan Hill (嶂山
山)with a straight line(I think Mount Xi(
Xi(锡山),
Chanshan Hill(产山)and
and Zhangshan Hill (嶂山), the
he arrangement of the
three resemble the pyramids in northern group of Saqqara ) and extend
it, as the image below:

Then we will first meet a pyramid shaped mountain-Mount
mountain Mount Heng
Heng(横
山),, as the picture below:

Mount Heng(横山)

Mount Heng(横山)and
and Mount Hui(惠山),
Hui
the left is Mount Heng((横山)and the
right is Mount Hui(惠山)..

Next we will meet Helv City(阖闾城)
City
and Longshan Stone Tombs
Tombs(龙
山石室土墩墓):

Helv City(阖闾城
阖闾城) and Longshan Stone Tombs(龙山石室土墩墓
龙山石室土墩墓)

And the enlarged image of Helv City(阖闾城) and Longshan Stone
Tombs(龙山石室土墩墓
龙山石室土墩墓)is the following:

The enlarged image of Helv City(阖闾城)and
City
Longshan Stone Tombs((龙山石室土墩
墓)

Finally, we will meet the Land of Punt, about 11109 km away from
Mount Xi , Wuxi(无锡锡山
无锡锡山), as the picture below:

Punt

So in summary,, we can get a conclusion that Huni probably buried in
Mount Xi , Wuxi(无锡锡山
无锡锡山).

References:
1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huni
2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meidum

3. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0102vjqy.html（兵策儒剑
—确证古埃及第三王朝法老胡尼就是吴回）
4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Egyptian_hieroglyphs
5. https://baike.baidu.com/item/%E5%A4%A9%E5%90%B4/1094623
3?fr=aladdin（百度百科—天吴）
6. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heh_(god)
7. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_pyramids#cite_note-reuter
s1-3
8. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9wz0c837
9. http://www.globalcitymap.com/egypt/pyramid-map.php
10. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Layer_Pyramid
11. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saqqara
12.http://www.encyclopedie.bseditions.fr/article.php?pArticleId=59&
pChapitreId=21446&pArticleLib=Pr%E9ambule+%5BEgypte+%3A+L
a+n%E9cropole+de+Saqqara%5D
13.https://www.worldhistory.biz/ancient-history/65603-6-2-the-3rd-d
ynasty-djoser-s-step-pyramid-at-saqqara.html
14. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bent_Pyramid
15. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Pyramid
16. http://www.mafengwo.cn/photo/poi/6300627_33687509.html
17.https://www.researchgate.net/publication/277571532_Dahshur_E
xcavation_Report_2002

18. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperdiffusionism_in_archaeology
19. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haplogroup_Q-M242
20. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f01010qvr.html (兵策儒
剑—Y-Q 系全球迁徙路线推测图)
21. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0101c9zz.html（兵策儒
剑—古埃及人 2 个常染标记基因在全世界的分布）
22.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Y-DNA_haplogroups_in_populations
_of_North_Africa
23.https://www.researchgate.net/publication/6180520_Y_chromoso
mes_of_Prehistoric_People_along_the_Yangtze_River
24. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0102y0dj.html
25. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taibo
26. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_3fe8ebaa01017aef.html
（EpochOfYao—无锡名人墓 2—泰伯墓）
27. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yue_(state)
28. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horus
29. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6a4e1c6f0102xab0.html（兵策儒
剑—玉璋的古埃及起源）
30. http://chineseetymology.org
31. https://sns.91ddcc.com/t/17914 (惠山泥人_ 中国传统文化社区
_才府)
32. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xihui_Park

33. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_5d2f3e160100h2pk.html （ 马 崧
良子—吴论七八—良渚聚落特征）
34. http://www.sohu.com/a/232876698_467440 （纪念郑张尚芳先
生︱“今日何日兮，得与王子同舟”）
35. https://www.sohu.com/a/5925574_119016 （无锡锡惠公园，你
所没见过的夜景）
36. https://cn.hujiang.com/new/p575014/
37. http://cityguide.china.org.cn/shop/shop.php?shopid=3922
38. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huishan_clay_figurine
39. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bastet
40. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ushabti
41. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wuxi
42. How to Read Egyptian Hieroglyphs, by Mark Collier, Bill Manley,
2004 Version.
43. http://ancientegypt.wikia.com/wiki/Narmer_Macehead
44. http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/enemies.htm
45. http://www.sohu.com/a/127732576_523159 （王欢︱古代埃及
文献中的赫梯国王形象）
46. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_of_Punt

