"x"
"1" "Contingent Socialization  and the Process of Engagement"
"2" "Jaymes Pyne"
"3" "Stanford University"
"4" "Jaymes.Pyne@stanford.edu"
"5" "Abstract : Individuals can experience substantial upward and downward mobility despite persistent and widespread intergenerational transmissions. I lay the theoretical groundwork for the hypothesis of contingent socialization to help explain these empirical phenomena. In this framing, institutions of secondary socialization do not seek to socialize all candidates, nor do they seek to simply socialize viable candidates from various social backgrounds differently. Rather, powerful actors in these institutions determine the worthiness of candidates by evaluating whether those candidates engage in the work and social life of the institution. Those evaluations are shaped by race and social class distinctions, and perceptions of engagement are important for the candidate’s future successes. I present preliminary descriptive evidence in favor of this hypothesis and detail the many diverse future research directions necessary for confirming or disconfirming its viability as a useful social theory that can help address a range of empirical questions."
"6" "Acknowledgements : Thanks to Eric Grodsky, Adam Gamoran,  Sarah Bruch, Lynn Posey-Maddox, Jordan Conwell, Michael Halpin and Katherine Magnuson for their  helpful  comments and support while preparing this manuscript."
"7" "Theories of social reproduction  anticipate  that social origins and destinations should  closely  align due to intergenerational transmissions of advantage  and disadvantage . Yet empirical research has consistently shown substantial upward and downward  social  mobility alongside  historically   stable patterns of intergenerational status attainment   (Breen 2010, Shavit and Blossfeld 1993) .  In this paper,   I propose that  upward and downward mobility is possible because   institutions that socialize individuals into adult public life   do not  simply socialize those from  dissimilar  social backgrounds differently. Rather, socialization  is contingent on the degree to which  individuals are engaged – and  powerful actors  believe  individuals are engaged  –  in the work and social life of  those   institution s .  E ngagement  i s  thus  a necessary but not  sufficient  component   of   socialization  in these and similar institutions , shaped by social and cultural distinctions  and constraints ."
"8" "Drawing on theories in  the  stratification , deviance ,   and  social psychology   literatures, I extend an age-graded  life - course  perspective  of engagement  in which behaviors in childhood give rise to varying levels of emotional  and behavioral  engagement in adolescence through a complex set of  relationships   that play out in response to   individual  characteristics  and  social constraints.  I n addition to  – and at times in lieu of -  actual behaviors ,  perceptions of  individuals  influence  the development of engagement in these institutions ."
"9" "I  propose:"
"10" "Powerful actors  in  institutions of secondary socialization  will  work to socialize an   individual,  contingent  upon the   belief   that  the individual  first  engages ,  or has the potential to  engage ,   in the work and social life of the institution ."
"11" "I  build  this   hypothesis   through three arguments  supported in part by prior theoretical and empirical work . First,  e ngagement is not a quality of  individuals  alone . It is rather a   product  of   relational  agency   among  actors within institutions,  influenced by social origins and cultur al dispositions   to  co-create   secondary  socialization.  I  speculate   that  institutional agents  build a repertoire of characteristics  and actions  that  help them label   individuals  as “good”  and worthy of socialization or  “bad”   and  potentially  unfit for additional  attention ."
"12" "Second ,  institutions  of  secondary  socialization  influence  individuals ’  acceptance into a group or society  by co-creating engagement , bound by the rules of a  dominant   culture . A guiding principle of those rules is that a nyone  allowed to participate should be held to the same set of expectations for their engagement  ( although it is not always the case that  individuals  are held so ) .  F ailure (or perceived failure) to adhere to  the rules of an institutional culture   can  negatively  affect socially advantaged and disadvantaged  candidates  alike   --  although economic, cultural and social resources  may  buffer privileged individuals from the full consequences of failure to engage."
"13" "Third,  engagement is a process   and engagement path ways  can greatly influence individuals’ life chances .  W hile some are ready to engage from day one and do so throughout their time in  institutions of secondary socialization , others disengage over time. Others still are not ready to engage at entry and learn how to do so over time ,  or else are unengaged at entry and remain so throughout their time  in  the institution .  This  implies  that,  contrary to the expectations of social reproduct ion theories, life chance s are not necessarily determined by  one’s  social origins  or starting points . By  developing  engagement or disengagement,  individuals  (and those around them)  play an active role in determining the degree of socialization that will result from participation in an institution ."
"14" "To interrogate the three arguments above, I  describe  the process of engagement in  formal education  systems.  Formal education is a special case of secondary socialization because it  functions to socialize individuals at the societal level.  Schooling  is a universal experience for children in most complex societies  and doing well in school has a strong association with how well children will socialize and succeed in  adulthood   (Bowles and Gintis 1976, Bruch and Soss 2018, Dreeben 1968, Sewell, Haller and Portes 1969) . Schools typically adhere to sets of rules and expectations that are consistent across a wide range of  environmental  contexts;  although  specific  activities withi n schools are often  disconnected  from  both the structure of formal education and the effects of learning  (Weick 1976) ,  the rituals and classifications that give meaning to formal education --  what teachers  expect  students to do and how to behave in  school  –   are largely consistent  across educational contexts   (Meyer and Rowan 1978) ."
"15" "The study of schools  to interrogate the hypothesis of contingent socialization  has practical advantages . T eachers  typically  evaluate children regularly and share those evaluations with children and their families . A dministrators regularly document behavioral engagement metrics (such as attendance at school) and disciplinary involvement  between students and school authorities  (such as office  disciplinary referrals and exclusionary punishment  like  suspension and expulsion). Finally, there is a rich literature on engagement in schools, which will  serve as a point of entry  for an exploration of  the concept of engagement  as it relates to   institutions of  secondary socialization  more generally ."
"16" "I review literature on  school  engagement and connect the concept to  broader  theories of  agency  and   social reproduction.  I then  propose a  preliminary  test of the hypothesis of contingent socialization in schools, describing  the sample and methods I have used  for the test .  Results  suggest that trajectories of engagement matter, and starting points alone are not  necessarily  indicative of later school success.  Trajectories  of  behavioral  engagement reports  over time  in childhood strongly predict who is  emotionally and behaviorally  engaged in  school during  adolescence , and  those  pattern s  vary substantially by race and social class .  Children  who are consistently engaged over time do much better  later  in school than  their peers  by  nearly  every  adolescent  engagement metric I measure, while those never engaged do worse than all others.  Finally,  I find that early  teacher  perceptions  of  engagement  through out  childhood  explain  substantial portions of disparities by socioeconomic background  and race ; however,  some  social class  and racial  inequalities persist even after accounting fo r early  evaluations  of engagement.  Following a presentation of these findings,  I summarize and discuss the results from this  study . In doing so, I revisit  the hypothesis of contingent socialization given the evidence  I present ,  highlight ing  additional  implications  of the results  for social theory.  I close by offering future directions for the study of contingent socialization and processes of engagement in institutions of secondary socialization."
"17" "ENGAGEMENT IN  FORMAL EDUCATION SYSTEMS"
"18" "E ngagement  is a n individual’s  participation in and commitment  to the work and social life of  an  institution .  In schools, engagement generally means students are “ eager to learn, follow school rules, get along with others, show respect for others' rights and feelings, and persist when challen g ed by difficult tasks ” (Reschly and Christenson 2012:9).     Finn  (1989)  differentiate s   school  engagement into two components, with an eye towards explaining the long process leading to either high school completion or dropout. In his Participation-Identification Model, Finn proposes that participation in school (i.e., behavioral engagement)  engenders  educational successes, which lead to identification with school (i.e., emotional engagement) and, eventually,  high school  graduation . This model implies there are at least two components to engagement: behavior and emotion."
"19" "Behavioral engagement   in school  is comprised of observable  actions  teachers, administrators,  parents  and others  believe promote learning, serving as a  precursor  to   emotional  attachments  to school.   Some aspects of behavioral engagement show  one’s  active involvement in the  work  of school, while other aspects show a student’s active involvement in the  social   life  of school (Finn and Zimmer 2012). The  work  of school is an academic component of behavioral engagement , such as  the degree to which  someone  shows eagerness to learn new things.  Other  behaviors show a student’s active involvement in the  social life  of school,  such as  w hen a student forms and maintains friendships with classmates.  E motional engagement   in school  is the internalization   of  school  values . It includes students’ feelings of belonging in school, their trust in school authorit ies , and their identification with the work of school   (Finn 1989, Fredricks et al. 2011, Reschly and Christenson 2012) .  When  children   do not  identify with school or believe  they   do not  belong among teachers and peers, they  are  at risk of experiencing negative consequences such  as suspension, push-out or drop out  (Finn 1989, Mizel et al. 2016) ."
"20" "In the  subsections that follow , I  elaborate upon this definition of engagement  and its components  to position it more squarely into a general sociological framing .  I  explore the relational nature of engagement,  first  drawing on  the  sociological concept ion  of  agency . I then augment the   discussion of agency by discussing how culture and power shape it through one’s  habitus   and through  stigma . Finally, I elaborate on the process of engagement and formalize  the  definition  I use in this thesis ."
"21" "The Relational Nature of Engagement"
"22" "Engagement is driven in part by individual decisions.  Dreeben (1968) reports, “there are variations in people’s desire to conform; they calculate the likelihood and severity of punishment if they do not conform…” (p. 45).   However, ot her scholars frame agency as relational -  a  property of  interactions   in  the environment.  The symbolic interactionist tradition  posits  that actions  -  and  how others interpret and respond to  them  -  give  social action its meaning.   Becker  (1963:14)  states  that individuals’ conformity to social norms , “is not a quality that lies in behavior itself, but in the interaction between the person who commits an act and those who respond to it.”   Multiple social actors define situations in particular contexts in  “a stage of examination and deliberation”    which precedes  self-determined actions, one’s “life-policy” and personality itself  (Thomas 1923:42) ."
"23" "In  schools , agency  manifests through   compliance and  resistance  (e.g., Fordham and Ogbu 1986, Willis 1977)   and the degree to which students believe rules are legitimate and fair  (e.g., Arum 2003) .  From the relational view of agency,  children  do not generate engagement on their own, but instead co-create it through their actions in relation to the actions of others in  the institution .   Waller (1932)   claims   that  “the social life of the schools may be seen as a mass of situations to be defined by or for the persons involved in them” (Waller 1932: 297). This relational view of agency addresses both the abilities and constraints of  children  as they enter the context of school. According to Waller,  children  enter school with uncertainty about how to define the school situation, which has already been defined by other powerful actors in the school previously (see also Carter 2005). Once  children  have experienced school and understand what is expected of them, they can either acquiesce to or spurn those expectations. Because of these possibilities, it is important to consider how individuals define  institutional  situations, impose situations on others, and adapt to situations defined by others when considering the engagement levels of individual s ."
"24" "Engagement   as  Habitus"
"25" "Although  some institutions  help shape crucial skills for socialization, the degree to which  individuals  must  adapt  to the expectations of  those institutions  varies.  Habitus   refers to the  system of  dispositions  attributable to an individual that is typically unconscious, long-lasting and acquired early in life (Bourdieu 2005).  H abitus   connects   the concepts of  agency and structur e   i n a framework of culture and power , developing as s ocial relations structure — and are structured by —power  relations  based on attributes like   race and  social class   (Hiller and Rooksby 2005) .  Although members of all social  groups  have some form of  habitus,  formal institutions of secondary socialization  inherently  mirror the  habitus  of  dominant  groups or  classes   (Bourdieu and Passeron 1990)  that reflect  the  field  of the  socialization  enterprise   (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992) .  Although entrenched in individuals early in life, s uch dispositions are  also fluid   (Bourdieu 2007, Friedman 2016)  and  the acquisition of a new  habitus  can be a positive experience  with favorable outcomes   (Ingram and Abrahams 2015) .  Thus,  all  indi viduals who embody the dominant- cultur e  habitus  will have a greater  advantage than others when navigating and “fitting in” to institutions  meant to provide socialization ."
"26" "Often, referring to   habitus  implies that some sort of observable action is happening .  Yet an  often-overlooked  aspect of the concept is how affect and emotion shape and are shaped by prevailing cultural expectations. Bourdieu  (2007)   described   the process of developing a  cleft  habitus  as painful and distressing; these emotional , personal   responses to cultural disorientation (which   Bourdieu himself  claims to have   endured )  are integral to the ways  in which  individuals experience  habitus.  Affect – the unbridled and often unconscious visceral body response to social and natural stimuli – is  distinct  from rational thought and action but nevertheless shapes social action and interaction. At the same time, prevailing cultural norms shape the degree to which groups of individuals acknowledge ,  define  and regulate  affect – which can be thought of  as a prevailing  emotional habitus   (Gould 2009) .  Thus, behavioral engagement represents an observable, active  habitus  of the material world while emotional engagement incorporates an emotional  habitus   that defines  and  regulates the ways in which group members are expected to feel about actions and interactions."
"27" "From a socioeconomic perspective, p ublic K-12 schools  typically reflect  the cultural values of the middle  and upper  class es  (Carter 2005, Lareau 2003) .  Empirical evidence suggests behavioral and emotional  habitus   that is  consistent with school values and expectations are fluid and not fully dependent on social background  (Carter 2005, DiMaggio 1982, Grodsky and Riegle-Crumb 2010) .   Engagement  in school  exemplifies the fluidity of  habitus .  Schools tend to structure the rewards of education to mirror those of the workplace or adult civic life  (Bowles and Gintis 1976, Bruch and Soss 2018) .  Middle- and upper-class  families engender values and actions in their children that mirror the values of schooling (Calarco 2018; Lareau 2003). Consistent with those values, teachers assess engagement in school in part by observing the degree to which students put forth extra effort, concentrate on the lesson at hand, are inquisitive in their studies, and work independently while asking questions and contributing to discussions when appropriate  (Fredricks, Blumenfeld and Paris 2004) . As these metrics of  behavioral and emotional  engagement are reified and reinforced in schools, inequalities in the rewards of schoo ling can persist or grow ."
"28" "Race complicates discussions of  behavioral and emotional   habitus  because it is a social construct that both incorporates and transcends class and cultural boundaries  (Carter 2005, Rist 2000) . Beyond cultural  aspects  of race is the consideration that “whiteness” is itself its own form of capital that even socioeconomically advantaged racial and ethnic minorities and their families cannot possess  (Lareau and Horvat 1999) .  In societies like the United States, emotional  attachments  individuals make to  institutions of socialization can be highly racialized. These contexts can be perceived as “white spaces” where whites have an  emotional  habitus  to navigate and fit into the dominant group while historically  underserved  minorities feel as if they do not belong , have their emotions misinterpreted or maligned,  or are actively kept from the resources  otherwise  available to them  (Bonilla-Silva 2019) ."
"29" "Although it is  import  to  consider  ethno-racial  considerations of habitus   independent of  social class, it is a mistake to characterize those  with similar racial identities  as having similar experiences in institutions of secondary socialization.  Carter (2005) insists that  underserved  racial and ethnic minorit ies  “hold multiple intersecting identities shaped by varied forms of socialization and experience…” (p. vii). Thus, by treating race as monolithic – and treating members of racial groups as uniform actors in universal social processes – we disregard the wide range of social experiences of individuals within those groups  and how they may approach social institutions .  Rather, experiences across the life-course can variegate the degree to which individuals within racial groups experience engagement in a  particular institution  of secondary socialization."
"30" "Stigmatization of the Unengaged"
"31" "A failure  – or perceived failure -  to engage in  an institutional culture  can negatively impact  individuals’ socialization by excluding them from  its work and social life .  According to Link and Phelan   (2001) , stigma  arises  from a confluence of co-occurring elements , beginning  with those in power labeling individuals based on perceived behaviors or styles. The act of labeling  is rather benign if not directed in a negative fashion from a locus of power towards a relatively weaker subject (e.g., teacher to student ; priest to parishioner; police officer to civilian ).   When those in power label  individual differences with negative attributes based  on dominant  cultural beliefs, t his  is called  stereotyping .   Stereotypes  di fferentiate  those labeled  as  “outsider s ”  from those who are seen as part of the  dominant culture  (Becker 1963) . Once this differentiation occurs, those stigmatized suffer from status loss and discrimination  (Link and Phelan 2001) .  The status loss itself can serve as the basis for discrimination as potential companions and confidants in an environment devalue an individual as being unworthy of interaction.  As this  occurs, individuals are more likely to associate with other individuals who similarly function as “outsiders” of the dominant culture ( supportive deviant others ) , which increases the likelihood that the individual will continue similar behaviors  (Lemert 1951) ."
"32" "In schools, teachers and administrators   help determine whether   and how  students are negatively labeled . A  teacher might try several strategies to correct the student’s behavior, including consultation with other teachers, meetings with parents, direct remediation,  or  referral to a counselor or social worker .  If, despite the corrective actions of the teacher, the student does not improve,  teachers and administrators  may  resort less to the ameliorative options summarized above and more to the exclusionary ones  (Waller 1932) . As students are excluded more often and with increasing severity, they are more likely to internalize and accept the negative stereotypes attributed to them. Exclusion likely increases the chances the student’s engagement in school will recede   as they accept the  negative  label  (Pyne 2019) . In this way, students gradually adapt to their environment in a ‘vicious cycle’ of degrading school relationships  (Okonofua, Walton and Eberhardt 2016) ."
"33" "The Process of Engagement"
"34" "Patterns  of engagement help us better understand  processes of   secondary  socialization .  The age-graded theory of informal social control proposed by Sampson  and Laub (2005)  is instructive for understanding the process of engagement.  They suggest  life-course trajectories  develop through “the constant interaction between individuals and their environment, coupled with random developmental noise and a purposeful human agency….”  (Sampson and Laub 2005:12) . During critical junctures in individuals’ lives ,  there occur changes that delineate past and current circumstances, disrupt normal routines, and lead to identity transformation.  The relational aspects of  such   “ turning points ”  give them their power – the combination of environment, agency, and interaction at  that  critical juncture to  lead  individuals onto a new path in life.  Thus, while there may be long-lasting impacts of early life events, intervening forces can change the life-course of individuals, potentially by changing their engagement in an institution."
"35" "I propose  an individual’s  behavioral engagement follows the model:"
"36" "Equation 1"
"37" "in which the behavioral engagement  B  of  individual  i   at entry  into the institution  ( t   = 0)   is a function of:"
"38" "Institutional  values  v ;"
"39" "Powerful actors’  beliefs  J ;"
"40" "Peer behaviors  p ; and"
"41" "Γ v   =  A vector of family/community values and constraints"
"42" "I formalize the development of behavioral engagement trajectory  T  of  individual  i   at time  t :"
"43" "Equation 2"
"44" "This formula shows that m easuring engagement at two or more time points produces a trajectory  of development . A negative trajectory  T  of any  individual  i ,  in which the function of  all time   t   factors is smaller  than school-entry factors, can be considered  disengagement.  A positive trajectory could be considered  rising engagement . If the function of  all time   t   factors is  equivalent to initial ones, we can consider the student to have a consistent level of engagement over time."
"45" "Combining an engagement trajectory with an initial report of behavioral engagement   finalizes the formal description of the process through which engagement unfolds in  institutions of secondary socialization .  The process of engagement  E  for  individual  i   at time  t  is:"
"46" "Equation  3"
"47" "This formulation allows for further differentiation among those with consistent levels of engagement over time, based on whether those levels were always high or always low. Thus, we can  differentiate students into four distinct  ideal- types  of  engagement , comprised of : Consistent  E ngagers ,  R ising  E ngagers ,  D isengagers , and  Nonengagers  (Figure  1 ) ."
"48" "This four-category typology represents a confluence of ideal types of  individuals  borne from several theories in social science research .   Consistent  E ngagers  are  those candidates  with relatively high  behavioral engagement  from the beginning who remain engaged throughout their time in the system .  Such  individuals  may disproportionately benefit from  reserves of various forms of capital, a dominant-culture  habitus  and/or  early cultivation of  skills  relevant  to the institution they inhabit  (see Lareau 2003;  Bourdieu 1984 ).  Rising  E ngagers  are those who have relatively low  behavioral engagement  at entry but exhibit increasing engagement over time. Although  Rising Engagers  might not have conf ormed to  institutional  norms early on,   institutional  experiences  may  provide them with skills to effectively participate in the work and social life of  the institution translates to participation into their   adult life (see Dreeben 1968)."
"49" "By contrast,  D isengagers  are  those  who  start with an  acceptable level of  behavioral engagement  that recede s  over time. Such  individuals  might have been encouraged by early achievement and/or cultivation much like  Consistent Engagers . However, negative experiences,  a mismatch between environment and developmental stage, and/or  outside  influences eventually drive  Disengagers t o question the relevance and rewards of  an institution , leading to declining achievement and increasing behavioral problems  (see Eccles 2004) . The final category,  N onengagers , describes  those  who have relatively low  behavioral engagement   at entry  and whose engagement remains low  thereafter . Without properly cultivated skills early in life, and reinforced by subsequent negative experiences, these  individuals  might see  institutions of secondary socialization  as illegitimate  and  not relevant to their pathway to adulthood  (see Arum 2003, Willis 1977) ."
"50" "RESEARCH QUESTIONS"
"51" "I have thus far argued that t heories of social reproduction are quite helpful for understanding how social forces influence indiv iduals’ life-chances, y et they may portray social origins as overly deterministic.  By tracing behavioral engagement  in an institution  in childhood  though to   early adolescence , I seek to develop  the underpinnings  of how the experience  of  contingent  socialization   might  explain patterns of social mobility by shaping   individuals’   path ways  into adulthood  away from their social origins .  To begin,  I ask ,  how does behavioral engagement in elementary school relate to emotional engagement , behavioral engagement and disciplinary involvement  in middle school? Finn’s (1989) Participation-Identification model suggests  behavioral and emotional engagement  are acutely related.  Under contingent socialization,  t rajectories  of behavioral engagement, when considered alongside starting points of engagement, will strongly predict  who is more likely to emotionally and behaviorally engage in adolescence.  These trajectories should anticipate future emotional and  behavioral engagement  over and above the engagement of individuals as they enter an institution of secondary socialization."
"52" "Hypothesis  1 :  Starting points of engagement and subsequent trajectories  are better  indicators  of  later  success  in school   than starting points alone."
"53" "Next , I ask , how  do  race  and  socioeconomic background  relate  to membership in each elementary school behavioral engagement trajectory type ?   U nder the hypothesis of contingent socialization, these disparities  are plausibly  due to the lower likelihood of members of these groups having high behavioral engagement at any point in time  (Bourdieu and Passeron 1990, Bowles and Gintis 1976) . However,  the hypothesis allows for the possibility that  disparities signal   their higher likelihood of being judged  more  negatively by teachers   than others with similar behavior patterns  ( Rios 2011;  Rist  2000 ; Zimmerman 2018 )."
"54" "Hypothesis  2 :  Membership in  teacher-reported  en gagement trajectory groups  account for disparities based on socioeconomic background and racial identification."
"55" "Finally, I ask,  how  do  early behavioral engagement and demographic characteristics compound  later  engagement and discipline disparities ?  Under the hypothesis of contingent socialization, early behavioral engagement patterns will send a strong signal about  behavioral and emotional  engagement and discipline  disparities  later in adolescence, potentially more so than  disparities  based on race or family income.  Yet b lack-white and socioeconomic  discipline gaps can have many causes, some of which may come from systemic sources across society (i.e., that can result in gaps at school entry) or institutionally within schools (i.e., that can be conferred to African American and low-income students by  school  authority figures; see  Carter 2005, Fine 1991, and  Rios 2011). I do not intend to argue that the study or scrutiny of racial or income  engagement and  discipline gaps in the study of equity should be supplanted with gaps by early behavioral engagement type.  Under the contingent socialization hypothesis, behavioral engagement trajectories should explain most or  all of  later engagement gaps. Conversely, i f  contingent socialization is racialized or class-based,   some gaps could persist. This is particularly true of punishment gaps, since the appearance of engagement is  by definition codified  by race or class, resulting in different consequences for similar actions across groups."
"56" "Hypothesis  3 :  In contexts where racial and class tensions are  present ,  engagement gaps  by race and social class  will  disappear   while punishment gaps will persist or grow."
"57" "METHOD"
"58" "Data"
"59" "Data come from Madison Metropolitan School District  (MMSD)  administrative records.   Madison, Wisconsin is a mid-sized Midwestern city in the United States. The city is located eighty miles west of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and 150 miles northwest of Chicago, Illinois. The city of Madison is about 3/4 white, 7% Latin x , 7% African American, and 9% Asian. Whites tend to be most concentrated (85-90%) on the Isthmus (between lakes Monona and Mendota) and in the Near East – both home to historically African American neighborhoods just northeast of the capitol building – and farther west of the Capitol Square and University of Wisconsin – Madison campus. Latin x  and African American populations sprawl towards and concentrate within the neighborhoods south of the capitol and university and in the Far East neighborhoods beyond the Isthmus – two of the most socioeconomically disadvantaged sections of the city."
"60" "By comparison, the city’s  public school  district is quite diverse - although similarly racially, ethnically and socioeconomically segregated. Roughly two-fifths of the district’s students are white, a fifth are Latin x , a fifth are African American, roughly 10 percent are  Asian  and a small percentage of students are from another racial or ethnic group. About half of district  students participate in the free or reduced-price lunch program and one in ten is an English language learner. Although several private-school alternatives exist in the city, parents  across all socioeconomic and racial backgrounds   consistently  send their children to public school s . Nationally, r acial and socioeconomic disparities in school achievement and discipline are sources for some of the greatest equity concerns and attention about K-12 schools  (see Reardon, Kalogrides and Shores 2019, Sparks 2018) . The Madison Metropolitan School District is no different in this regard, as it has some of the largest racial and socioeconomic gaps in the country  despite having average test scores nationally .  This combination of qualities situates Madison, Wisconsin and its school district as an instructive context in which it is possible to observe racial diversity, residential segregation and a wide coverage of socioeconomic circumstances among students and their families, both between and within racial and ethnic subpopulations."
"61" "Madison Metropolitan School District  administrative data  include measures of students’ behavioral engagement in elementary school and fifth through seventh grade emotional engagement, absence from school and disciplinary involvement.  Historical  changes in the ways the district measures elementary school behaviors limits the number of cohorts available  for study . Using the available measures, I can track only those students who were in seventh grade in the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school years. I necessarily exclude students for which there are no elementary school teacher behavior reports from these two cohorts. This removes  2 % of students observed in  fifth, sixth, and  seventh grade administrative records, resulting in an analytic sample of 3,742 students with complete records of elementary school behavioral engagement, in addition to complete records of absences  and  office disciplinary referrals   in fifth through seventh grade.  Due to sample attrition based on student survey nonresponse, I also define a  second  analytic sample of 1,900 students containing elementary behavioral engagement trajectories and their emotional engagement in fifth through seventh grade. Attrition statistics suggest that  the  student survey sample is less likely to retain students of color and low-income students (Appendix  A , Table  A 1)."
"62" "Measures"
"63" "Elementary school behavioral engagement.  Behavioral engagement measures in early elementary school come from teacher assessments of students’ in-class behaviors, measured from kindergarten through third grade. There are 13 such items in MMSD administrative records that teachers complete twice a year. These items include prompts asking teachers to evaluate the degree to which students persist in tasks until completion, complete assignments on time, participate in classroom activities, and work independently. Exploratory factor analysis reveals that all items load onto a single factor, which I  call  “behavioral engagement.”"
"64" "Early adolescent emotional engagement.  I measure students’ emotional engagement in school through two groups of questions asked of students that I call  “ social belonging ”  and  “ affinity for learning ”  in school. The social belonging scale includes nine survey items asking students about their feelings toward peers and adults in school (alpha = 0.84). The affinity for learning scale includes eight items asking students to respond to prompts about the effort they put into school work and their desire to participate in educational activities (alpha = 0.82). Survey administrators asked each student to respond to these questions in February of each academic year from grades five through seven. All items use Likert scale response categories of Strongly disagree, Disagree, Not Sure, Agree, and Strongly agree. I derive a mean score for each  student based on all  nonmissing  responses to items. I report the exact wording of the survey items used to create these two scales in  Appendix B ."
"65" "Early adolescent  behavioral engagement  and disciplinary involvement.  I use district administrative records of students’ total absences, number of office disciplinary referrals in each year of fifth through seventh grades.  To the extent that multiple actors co-create an individual’s engagement in an institution, influencing behaviors either directly or indirectly to produce such data, either of these measures qualify as engagement.  An abundance of research uses school attendance as a proxy for behavioral engagement in adolescence  (see Fredricks et al. 2011) . Disciplinary involvement measures behavioral engagement as well,  if  records accurately reflect the proscribed actions of students.  But more precisely, disciplinary involvement records measure teachers’ perceptions of students’ behaviors and their responses to those perceived behaviors."
"66" "Student and family characteristics.   Other student and family characteristics I track include racial and ethnic background and family income.  Race and ethnicity come from district administrative records and categorize each student as either African American, Latinx, Asian, white, or from another racial or ethnic group.  I determine family income by tracking each student’s participation in the district’s free or  reduced price  lunch program. Following methods proposed by  Michelmore  and  Dynarski   (2017) , I define a child as persistently  economically  disadvantaged  if they participate in the district’s subsidized lunch program in each year from kindergarten through seventh grade  (Always FRL) . I define  children never participating in the program as advantaged by comparison  (Never FRL) ."
"67" "Strategy and Design"
"68" "I begin by placing each student into a category of behavioral engagement based on the ideal types  of engagement patterns  described  above . I do so by differentiating students’  behavioral engagement scores in kindergarten by drawing on the logic of Equations 1  through 3  above . Practically, I begin by creating a cutoff score that defines acceptable behavioral engagement in kindergarten, which I set at one half of a standard deviation below a perfect score. Nearly 55 percent of children have a perfect score in these early grades; my strategy for choosing a cutoff reflects the assumption that a perfect score is the minimum standard for defining behavioral engagement in school, and a half standard deviation window acknowledges there may be some acceptable deviation threshold in behavioral engagement from term to term among engaged students. I then determine each student’s behavioral engagement slope from kindergarten through third grade by subtracting beginning-of-year kindergarten behavioral engagement scores from end-of-year third-grade behavioral engagement scores. These two data points allow me to distribute students into four different categories: Consistent Engagers, Rising Engagers, Disengagers, and Nonengagers. I then report descriptive trends in elementary school behavioral engagement."
"69" "Next, I report descriptive statistics of all fifth through seventh grade emotional engagement,  absence , and disciplinary involvement reports of  children in school . I use the original metrics to determine average trends over time of emotional engagement, number of absences, and frequency of disciplinary involvement as students progress through each grade. I then use growth curve modeling with random slopes to regress each student’s emotional engagement, absence from school and disciplinary involvement trajectory on dummy variables representing the four categories of elementary school behavioral engagement (with Consistent Engagers as the reference category)."
"70" "Given the trends I observe based on categories  of engagement,  I conduct two additional tests to evaluate early behavioral engagement groups. Since  I find that  Disengagers and Rising  Engagers have quite similar seventh-grade outcomes despite having markedly different starting points, I evaluate behavioral engagement trajectory categories as predictors (Consistent Engagers, Rising Engagers, Disengagers, Nonengagers), compared to using high (average score=3) vs. low (average score<3) kindergarten and grade 3 behavioral engagement scores as predictors of seventh-grade emotional engagement, behavioral engagement and disciplinary involvement. To compare models, I calculate  model fit using  Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC) and Akaike Information Criteria (AIC). A lower BIC or AIC statistic suggests the model in question fits the data better than the model with the higher BIC statistic  (Burnham and Anderson 2002, Raftery 1995) . I then conduct  B linder- O axaca decompositions to understand overall and each trajectory group’s contribution to black-white and family income gaps in emotional engagement, absence from school, and disciplinary referrals."
"71" "Finally, I compare observed attendance and disciplinary gaps between Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers to commonly-used demographic indicators of educational inequality. These include gaps in black-white, Latin x -white and family income (based on FRL participation) achievement, attendance and school discipline, as measured by math/reading test scores, total absences and office disciplinary referrals in seventh grade, respectively. Finally, I explore the descriptive power of early behavioral engagement trajectories in identifying educational inequalities when combined with indicators of race and family income. I do so by comparing the academic, absence, and disciplinary seventh-grade outcomes of white and  African American , and FRL or non-FRL, Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers."
"72" "RESULTS"
"73" "Figure  1  shows the elementary school behavioral engagement trajectories of each group of students from the beginning of kindergarten through the end of third grade, derived by using  both the kindergarten entry cutoff score and each student’s slope as described in the methods section. These patterns are consistent with the  four ideal-type  engagement trajectories  described above . Consistent Engagers and Disengagers have identical behavioral engagement at school entry, but while those in the former group maintain their levels of behavioral engagement over time, those in the latter group see their behavioral engagement decline over time. Rising Engagers and Nonengagers have similar levels of behavioral engagement at school entry as well, but those in the latter group do not improve over time and those in the former group see their levels of behavioral engagement nearly reach the levels of Consistent Engagers by the end of third grade."
"74" "Table 1 presents summary descriptive statistics of the sample, both overall and by early patterns of engagement.  Among all students in the sample, 46% are white, 14%  African American , 21% Latin x  and 8% Asian. About half are female and 44% participate in the district’s free and reduced-price lunch program. Fifteen percent have a special education designation. About 36% of students in the sample are Consistent Engagers, 31% are Rising Engagers, 18% are Disengagers, and 15% are Nonengagers. Among Consistent Engagers, white students are highly overrepresented (59% vs. 46% of students overall) and  African American  students are greatly underrepresented (4% vs 14% overall). Girls are highly overrepresented as well (61% vs. 49% overall), while low-income and special education students are greatly underrepresented. Among Rising Engagers, low-income students are overrepresented, but students are evenly represented by race and gender. Among Disengagers, students are  quite  evenly represented based on all the demographic characteristics I examine. Among Nonengagers, white and Asian students are underrepresented while  African American  and low-income students are highly overrepresented."
"75" "Adolescent  Emotional Engagement"
"76" "S tudents’  typically experience  declines  in emotional engagement  from fifth to seventh grade  (Eccles 2004) . This is the case for the average student in all the four early behavioral engagement categories I constructed. Yet Figure  2  shows that in relative terms some  groups of  students still have lower social belonging in school than others by seventh grade, although differences among all groups are not statistically significant. In fifth grade, Consistent Engagers have the highest self-reported social belonging of all students, followed by Disengagers, Rising Engagers and Nonengagers. Consistent Engagers’ reports of social belonging are 30% of a standard deviation higher than Nonengagers and about 10% of a standard deviation higher than Disengagers and Nonengagers in fifth grade. Consistent Engagers’ reports of social belonging remain higher relative to their peers in each grade while Nonengagers’ feelings of belonging remain relatively low. Disengagers feelings of belonging in school  tend to decrease   through middle school while Rising Engagers’ feelings of belonging tend to increase . By seventh grade, Consistent and Rising Engagers’ feelings of belonging in school are alike, while Disengagers’ and Nonengagers’ feelings of belonging are similarly about 13% of a standard deviation lower than their peers. None of the levels of social belonging nor the differences in any of the four slopes is statistically significant, however (see Appendix  C  for full results)."
"77" "In fifth grade, Consistent Engagers reported the highest affinity for learning among all groups, followed by Disengagers and Rising Engagers and far behind all others, Nonengagers (Figure 3). In fifth grade, Rising Engagers and Disengagers’ affinity for learning is about 15% of a standard deviation lower and Nonengagers nearly a half a standard deviation lower than Consistent Engagers’ levels. These disparities narrow by seventh grade, largely due to declines in affinity for school among Consistent Engagers. Yet the levels of Consistent Engagers are still  a tenth of a standard deviation higher than those of Rising Engagers, whose seventh-grade levels are slightly higher than Disengagers by middle school, and about .30 SD higher than Nonengagers. None of the differences in any of the four slopes are statistically significant, though Consistent Engagers’ levels of affinity for learning are statistically different from all their peers (see Appendix  C  for full results)."
"78" "Adolescent  School   Attendance and Disciplin ary Involvement"
"79" "Trends in attendance and disciplinary involvement across early behavioral engagement groups are  similar to  academic trends. The number of days students miss also varies substantially based on early behavioral engagement type (Figure 4). When looking at total number of absences in each grade, Nonengagers miss about 12 days of school in fifth grade and 16  days  in seventh grade, on average. By comparison, typical Disengagers and Rising Engagers both miss an average of two  fewer  days less than typical Nonengagers in each grade. Consistent Engagers miss about seven days of school on average in grade five and nine days of school in grade seven. The difference in slopes from fifth to seventh grade for total absences between Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers is statistically significant (b=2.20, SE=0.86, p=0.01). No differences in slopes from fifth to seventh grade for total absences among Consistent Engagers, Rising Engagers or Disengagers are statistically significant."
"80" "Figure  5  shows the average number of office disciplinary referrals by behavioral engagement trajectory type. Consistent Engagers have virtually no office disciplinary referrals in fifth grade while Disengagers have one, Rising Engagers have two, and Nonengagers have four, on average. By seventh grade, Consistent Engagers’ count of office disciplinary referrals rises only slightly, while Disengagers have three, Rising Engagers have four and Nonengagers have six, on average. There is a statistically significant difference in slopes from fifth to seventh grade  between Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers (b=1.67, SE=0.65, p=0.01). There are no other statistically significant differences in slopes for office disciplinary referral trends."
"81" "Behavior Trajectories versus  Kindergarten and  Third Grade Behavior  Reports"
"82" "For theoretical reasons, similarities in seventh-grade outcomes between  Disengagers and Rising Engagers  are illuminating.  The  fact that students with such disparate starting points end up with such similar adolescent engagement outcomes has implications for theories  of socialization .  Theories aside ,   one   pragmatic  question that emerges from these results is whether  examining those developing upward or downward  early behavioral engagement trajectories  is  much more  predictive  than simply looking at point-in-time measures of behavioral engagement .  Data limitations constrain these comparisons in two ways. First, I do not observe teacher-reported behavioral engagement beyond third grade. Second, these measures of behavioral engagement are quite skewed towards the high end of teacher reports, creating ceiling effects in the measurement of the construct. In grade 3, about 45% of students average a perfect score on this metric across all 13 items. More variation in behavioral engagement measures would certainly make for a better test, but it is unclear whether increased variation from better measures absent of ceiling effects would benefit the predictive power of trajectories more or less than point-in-time measures."
"83" "With these limitations in mind, I  compare  models using early behavioral engagement trajectory categories as predictors (Consistent Engagers, Rising Engagers, Disengagers, Nonengagers), to  a model  using high (average score=3) vs. low (average score<3)  kindergarten and  grade 3 behavioral engagement as predictors of seventh-grade emotional engagement,  behavioral engagement and  disciplinary involvement.  Recall that  lower BIC or AIC statistic s   suggests the model in question fits the data better than the model with the higher BIC  or AIC  statistic  (Burnham and Anderson 2002, Raftery 1995) ."
"84" "I present results of these comparisons in Table  2 .  In terms of emotional engagement (i.e., social belonging and affinity for learning), b oth BIC and AIC statistics favor models  using  high/low third-grade measures of early behavioral engagement over early behavioral engagement trajectory models .  Results are mixed for attendance and disciplinary outcome models with categorical behavioral engagement  trajectory  predictors. BIC scores clearly favor third-grade high/low measures for total absences  and  office disciplinary referrals. AIC favors trajectory models over third-grade high/low behavioral engagement models for office disciplinary referrals."
"85" "Determining better relative fit using continuous measures of behavioral engagement is less ambiguous than in the categorical models. When it comes to emotional engagement in seventh-grade, third-grade behavioral engagement models win out in all cases but AIC for the affinity for learning model. For attendance and discipline models, behavioral engagement models that include interacted beginning of kindergarten and end of third grade levels win out on every metric except for BIC in the total absence model, which cannot adjudicate between the two models."
"86" "Variance Decomposition s"
"87" "I now turn to evaluating the contribution early behavioral engagement groups  make for  explaining seventh grade black-white and family income emotional engagement, behavioral engagement and discipline gaps.  Recall that based on the hypothesis above, absent racial or socioeconomic tensions ,  early   behavioral engagement patters should explain most or  all of  such gaps between groups of students.  Table  3  displays results from a series of  B linder- O axaca decompositions, which display the variance attributable to differences in black-white or  always/never FRL membership in each behavioral engagement trajectory group. The first column represents the actual gap either by standard deviation units for emotional engagement measures and by number of incidents for absences and discipline referrals. The second column is a percentage calculated by taking the decomposed overall “endowments” of demographic groups (i.e., their representation in each behavioral engagement category) divided  by the mean difference in outcomes between demographic groups. Essentially, these are estimates of the percentage of gap reduction in emotional engagement, behavioral engagement and discipline if African American students had the same behavioral engagement histories as white students and Always FRL students had the same characteristics as Never FRL students. The next four columns show each trajectory group’s contribution to the overall variance explained by trajectory groups."
"88" "Black-white emotional engagement gaps are quite modest in seventh grade. Typical  African American  students’ self-reports of social belonging in school are only six percent of a standard deviation  lower  than typical  white  students’ reports, and affinity for learning are a fifth of a standard deviation  lower  than their  white  peers’ reports.  Even so, i f African American students’ early behavioral engagement trajectories were  similar to  those  of  white students, we might expect those gaps to be 43% and 24% smaller, respectively.  Changes in membership among Consistent Engagers and Rising Engagers would contribute most to this portion of the explained gaps, while changes in membership among Disengagers would contribute almost nothing and changes in membership among Nonengagers would exacerbate these gaps. Average African American students have roughly five fewer absences and almost ten more office disciplinary referrals than their white counterparts. Given similar membership in each early behavioral engagement group, the absence gap would be  halved  and the discipline gap would be  42% smaller. Changes in membership among Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers would contribute the most to these reductions, while changes among Rising Engagers would contribute little and among Disengagers would contribute nothing."
"89" "Decompositions between  those who have always participated and never participated in the district’s free or reduced-price lunch program have similar results as black-white gaps. There is virtually no gap in these students’ self-reports of belonging in school. Typical Always FRL students have reports of affinity for learning that are a quarter of a standard deviation lower than their Never FRL peers. Differences in early behavioral engagement groups explain almost one fifth of that gap. Changes in membership among Consistent Engagers would contribute most to gap reductions, while Changes among Rising Engagers would contribute modestly and changes among Disengagers and Nonengagers would contribute nothing to gap reductions.  Average Always FRL students have six more absences and five and a half more office disciplinary referrals than their Never FRL peers. Early behavioral engagement trajectories explain about 30% and 25% of those gaps respectively, with differences in membership among Consistent Engagers contributing the most and differences among Rising Engagers contributing the least and among Disengagers contributing nothing."
"90" "Attendance and Discipline Gaps Comparisons"
"91" "Given  emotional engagement gaps are modest and   that the Consistent Engager and Nonengager trajectory groups explain  the  vast majority of  seventh-grade attendance and discipline gaps by race and income, the remaining analyses focus only on  behavioral engagement and discipline, differentiated by  Nonengagers and  Consistent Engagers .  Differences between  these two behavioral engagement trajectory groups  (hereafter, the  NE-CE  gap) are large for achievement, attendance and disciplinary outcomes. But how do they compare to other more  commonly-reported gaps? To answer this question, I now turn to comparing attendance and discipline gaps by behavioral engagement, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic background."
"92" "Figure  6   displays comparisons of attendance and discipline gaps based on measures of the frequency of student absences and office disciplinary referrals. Again, the  NE-CE  gap is larger than both the free  or  reduced - price lunch participation and  Latin x -white  gaps, with Nonengagers experiencing almost seven more absences from school and six more office disciplinary referrals than Consistent Engagers. The seventh-grade  black-white  discipline gap is larger than the  NE-CE  discipline gap, with  average  African American  students experiencing seven more office disciplinary referrals in seventh grade than their  white  peers. The  NE-CE  gap, however, is by far the largest gap for seventh grade absences of the metrics compared. Nonengagers miss almost seven days of school more than Consistent Engagers overage, while average black-white gaps stand at about five days and average  Always-Never FRL  gaps stand at about six days’ difference in absences."
"93" "Figure  7  differentiates absence and discipline gaps for  white  and African American Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers. White Consistent Engagers receive almost no ODRs in seventh grade while African American Consistent Engagers receive almost two on average. The average number of absences for  white  and African American Consistent Engagers are nearly identical, however. African American Nonengagers average nearly fifteen ODRs in seventh grade, eclipsing the number of ODRs conferred to either African American Consistent Engagers or even  white  Nonengagers ,  by an order of magnitude of about five and a half. Differences in early behavioral engagement trajectories among white and African American Nonengagers does not appear to explain this discipline gap.  Nonengaging white and African American students have slightly different levels of behavioral engagement at kindergarten entry, with teachers  rating white Nonengagers about 10% of a standard deviation higher than African American Nonengagers. Yet the downward patterns of white and African American Nonengagers is strikingly similar and parallel. By grade three teachers rate white Nonengagers about 13% of a standard deviation higher than African American Nonengagers  (see Appendix C for details) .  Absences for white and African American Nonengagers are strikingly similar, with the latter having only about one additional absence in seventh grade than the former. Distinguishing Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers by family income produces similar  discipline  results , but  there are large gaps in attendance between those never participating in free or reduced-price lunch and those who have always participated  ( Table 4) ."
"94" "DISCUSSION"
"95" "I  have   set out to  better understand   patterns of social mobility and reproduction by exploring a more general phenomenon:  the relational mechanisms through which institutions of secondary socialization prepare individuals for the expectations of  group membership .  I propose that socialization in such institutions is contingent on whether  individuals  engage  – and  powerful actors  within  those institutions   believe individuals  engage   –   according to  the values and expectations of the institution.   I  have  drawn on a range of  social theories to argue  that  (a)  e ngagement is not a quality of individuals alone,  (b)  institutions of secondary socialization influence  engagement -  bound by the rules of a prevailing institutional  culture , and  (c)  engagement is a process  that allows for  individual s  to  follow various  stable, positive and negative  pathways.   To investigate th ese  proposition s , I take the case of socialization through formal schooling and its relationship to engagement in school.   I use  evidence from a racially and socioeconomically diverse Midwest school district,  finding  that patterns of teacher reports of children’s behavioral engagement  are better indicators than starting points of  which students will  be emotionally and behaviorally engaged in early adolescence and the amount of disciplinary involvement  they   end up  experienc ing . Those patterns  help explain some variation  by race and socioeconomic background,  but  inequalities  within and between  these groups persist even after accounting for patterns of behavioral engagement."
"96" "Below, I discuss how the findings from this paper contribute to the hypothesis of contingent socialization. I  then  propose future directions for continuing to interrogate and expand  upon  the hypothesis of contingent socialization."
"97" "Implications for the Contingent Socialization Hypothesis"
"98" "The hypothesis of contingent socialization relies  on a primary   condition  to be true :   that socialization through an institution occurs  if and only if  individuals  first engage  in the work and social life of  the  institution , as defined by powerful institutional actors . To test this  condition ,  I have hypothesized that those  reported  by powerful others  as having  consistently high or increasing behavioral engagement in childhood will  themselves report having  higher emotional  engagement  and  will exhibit higher  behavioral  engagement in  adolescen ce compared to  those with consistently low or decreasing behavioral engagement  reports  in childhood. Differences in emotional and behavioral adolescent outcomes in this sample are most stark between  those who  teachers collectively rated as   Consistent Engagers and Nonengagers  in childhood . Those with  positively or negatively  developing trajectories of  childhood  engagement largely occupy a middle space between the two extremes of consistently high or low behavioral engagement, adding evidence that experiences in schools and sequences of teachers’ ratings of children over time  are associated with  the degree to which students  believe they are  emotionally and behaviorally engage d  later in life."
"99" "A  second  condition of contingent socialization is that dominant cultural values and expectations dictate the rules of being engaged  and who appears engaged at school entry.  I have hypothesized that racial and social class partially explain who is reportedly engaged and who is not.  I confirm this hypothesis, finding that children from lower income families and those who identify as African American or Latinx are disproportionately underrepresented among Consistent Engagers and overrepresented among Nonengagers.  In this sample,  i f African American students had behavioral engagement patterns consistent with white students, we could expect racial gaps in discipline to be  at most  3/5 the current size and attendance gaps to be  at most  about half the size. Differences by family income  c ould shrink similarly.  Some of the explanation here is likely cultural and some the result of power relations. Confirmation of this portion of the hypothesis does not necessarily imply that unengaged students resist or reject school culture, nor necessarily that teachers deliberately or falsely categorize children’s adherence to school values and expectations  based on assumed traits . Given the expectations of schooling inherently parallel dominant culture values (Bourdieu  and  Passeron  1992 ),  we  should expect children from non-dominant culture backgrounds  to be  less likely  than their privileged peers  to exhibit behaviors consistent with dominant culture  habitus , and for powerful actors in dominant culture institutions to make assumptions about such students’ abilities to conform to institutional values."
"100" "A nother condition of  contingent socialization is that racial and social class tensions will shape who appears to be engaged and who does not.  I have hypothesized that , absent group tensions,  early behavioral engagement trajectories should explain most or all group differences in later engagement. Yet where tensions exist, racial and socioeconomic gaps in engagement and discipline persist after accounting for patterns of behavioral engagement.  The context in which I  test this hypothesis  is a racially and socioeconomically diverse school district, situated within a predominantly white and racially and socioeconomically segregated midsized city.  In such a context, I expect racial and class tensions to be palpable.  Co nsistent with Carter (2005) and counter to  Ogbu (2003) and Willis (1979) , decomposition evidence suggests culture alone does not determine who is and is not engaged in school. Although the proportions of variance explained by early behavioral engagement patterns are large, sizeable portions of these gaps remain unexplained  even after accounting for the reported behaviors of students over time ."
"101" "Additionally, after accounting for students’ behavioral engagement histories, discipline gaps by race grow while attendance gaps  disappear .  Attendance at school, which researchers frequently use as a measure of adolescent behavioral engagement (see Fredricks et al. 2011), is arguably a  behavior  over which students have increasing control as they age . It is also   a  behavior  over which schools have relatively little control. On the other hand, disciplinary practices are quite reasonably , and  more squarely ,  under the control of school  authorities . Racial gaps in absences are consistent among those in the same behavioral engagement trajectory group. African American and white Consistent Engagers each average about eight absences in their seventh-grade year while African American and white Nonengagers each average about 16 absences in seventh grade. Conversely,  when conditioning on early behavioral engagement group,  discipline gaps by race or family income persist. These opposing trends cast doubt on resistance theories attempting to use disengagement from school as the chief explanation for the poor outcomes of African American or low-income students. They instead provide some evidence  to suggest  that stigmatization and exclusion by race and socioeconomic background are more likely explanations for large discipline gaps in schools than  students’  resistance to school  authorities ."
"102" "Future Directions"
"103" "I have intended for this paper to lay the theoretical groundwork  for  the hypothesis of contingent socialization and  to  present  some  preliminary   descriptive evidence in favor of its  presence in institutions of secondary socialization .  Much more can be done to describe how engagement  is connected to  secondary  socialization ; t here are at least  five  areas for improvement  or  expansion  that future research can address.  First, this hypothesis relies in part on  a condition   that those in powerful positions dictate the rules of the game and provide or deny resources based on their beliefs about an individual’s engagement. Powerful and privileged actors define what engagement looks like in institutions of secondary socialization like schools (Carter 2005). The standards and rituals that these actors employ to evaluate and classify children, and the very values by which they evaluate children, are tightly controlled, giving schooling a high degree of  social plausibility  (Meyer and Rowan 1978) . Thus, at different points in time  a  child  may  or may  not  appear to  be engaged  in school based on those definitions."
"104" "A lthough  teacher reports of students’ behavioral engagement in childhood  can help   us  trace  how the perceptions of powerful actors relate to  later engagement in adolescence, I do not provide direct evidence for  this  condition of the hypothesis of contingent socialization .   Instead,  I must still largely  rely on broader theories to  assume that the  beliefs  and actions  of powerful actors in institutions of secondary socialization   shape  engagement patterns and later success es . The  proposition   of contingent socialization thus  remains largely abstract and theoretical; with the data available, I do not know whether the typical inclination of  powerful actors in  institutions of secondary socialization   is  to withhold their crucial socialization  resources  from  those  who they believe are unengaged."
"105" "Prior literature suggests this condition  can exist  in schools  towards adolescents , to some degree . Fine  (1991)  quotes an administrator who likens his job to a pilot ejecting hijackers from an airplane, a reference to suspending or expelling students who will not do as they’re told in school. Rios  (2011)  describes the experience of Tyrell, whose teacher repeatedly uses his in-class negative behaviors as examples to the rest of the class for why they should respect teachers—subsequently kicking Tyrell out of class at every available occasion. Carter (2005) recounts numerous experiences of racial and ethnic minority students who claim their emotional engagement falters as “cultural gatekeepers” in schools (i.e., principals and teachers) reward and punish students based on pre-ordained dominant culture values and expectations. Each of these examples is a case in which  powerful institutional actors  decide certain  individuals  are not legitimate candidates for  secondary  socialization."
"106" "I necessarily rely on the  above  accounts and others like them to   propose the  complete  hypothesis of contingent socialization .  Yet  despite such evidence ,  I have no sense of whether this is a common understanding among teachers of their roles and responsibilities towards students, particularly in early grades. There are many remaining questions to answer. How prevalent is the contingent perspective among powerful institutional actors? Under what authority regimes, if any, does  exclusion  tend to thrive?  Are these valuations  of individuals more strongly , or at least different ly ,  related to later emotional and behavioral outcomes  in more homogenous populations of candidates for socialization?  If empirical evidence continues to support the hypothesis of contingent socialization, what, if anything, can be done about it to ensure  more  equitable  and inclusive  opportunities for all children?"
"107" "Different approaches in f uture studies can help support or confirm the hypothesis of contingent socialization I propose in this paper. In studies of education systems, qualitative  research can help determine whether school  authorities  dispense or withhold socialization  resources  by documenting common narratives teachers employ to explain or justify whom they will and will not devote their finite resources to help. Although such research is a good starting point, qualitative work is not well-suited to determine modal or typical attitudes and perceptions among  institutional authorities . Survey data employed widely would more appropriately  measure  typical trends and generalizability of attitudes  among institutional authorities , although  survey prompts  would need to be tailored in ways to avoid social desirability bias when attempting to  uncover  whether  powerful actors  cut “unengaged”  individuals  off from important aspects of secondary socialization."
"108" "Second , we need more work to help us understand the degree to which  institutional practices and  characteristics contribute to changes in behavioral and emotional engagement.  Recent  evidence  suggests  that school policies  of exclusion  can very likely contribute to emotional  disengagement  in early adolescence   (Pyne 2019) . That  evidence  is a useful data point for furthering  the  hypothesis of the contingent nature of the socialization function of schools. However, it is less helpful for those trying to identify promising practices for building environments conducive to engaging, or re-engaging, young people in  institutions of secondary socialization ."
"109" "I encourage more research to identify those practices that engender engagement, to the extent they exist. Prior  education research  suggests they do  exist in schools . Promising elements already found in the  education  literature include building relational trust in schools  (Bryk and Schneider 2004)  and fostering positive teacher-student relationships early in schooling  (Pianta and Steinberg 1992) . Gamoran and  Nystrand   (1992)  are particularly instructive in this regard. The authors argue that we would do well to focus on relational and discursive aspects of  instruction, insisting “questions that take students seriously promote engagement” (p. 41). I suggest researchers, policymakers and practitioners discover or revisit the above texts for answers to the question of school and educator contributions to student engagement, which are more promising avenues of study than much of what I have offered here."
"110" "Third, I do not trace the process of engagement past early adolescence. This shortcoming raises several questions for further study. How do earlier patterns of engagement impact  adolescents   as they near adulthood , and is some of what happens there a product of the trajectories  earlier in life ? For example, if one can observe students’ patterns of behavioral and emotional engagement from kindergarten through high school, would we see early Disengagers and Rising Engagers diverging from their near-identical academic, attendance and disciplinary levels in middle school, as Disengagers continue to do worse and Rising Engagers continue to improve? What happens to individuals with different early behavioral engagement patterns when we observe them in early adulthood, when they potentially enroll, attend and complete (or drop out of) college and make decision about voting, volunteering, and pursuing careers in public service? What happens in adult civic and political life  –   purportedly one of the most important  outcomes  socialization theories  allude to – and what is the  connection between engagement in school and engagement in society? What are the intervening disruptions, the  turning points,  that alter trajectories of individuals on these long paths into and through adulthood?"
"111" "Finally, the evidence I present is not necessarily generalizable to all institutions of secondary socialization. I encourage examination of the hypothesis of contingent socialization in other institutions outside of formal education systems. For example, how do powerful religious actors define engagement in churches, synagogues,  or  mosques, and do those definitions  – once embodied by or ascribed to  potential or current  members --  correspond to the likelihood of  acceptance into or  exclusion  from those religious institutions  and their activities ?  Do well-defined boundaries for engagement matter more in relatively closed institutions versus more open ones?    I  intend for  this  paper   to set  the stage for  this   and more  work, resulting in a clearer sociological framing and understanding of the role of engagement in the socialization of young people."
"112" "TABLES"
"113" "Table 1. MMSD Administrative Data Descriptive Statistics Overall and by Engagement Type"
"114" "N"
"115" "All (100%)"
"116" "N"
"117" "Consistent Engagers (36%)"
"118" "N"
"119" "Rising Engagers (31%)"
"120" "N"
"121" "Dis-engagers (18%)"
"122" "N"
"123" "Non-engagers (15%)"
"124" "Race/Ethnicity"
"125" "White"
"126" "1633"
"127" "0.46"
"128" "651"
"129" "0.59"
"130" "377"
"131" "0.40"
"132" "254"
"133" "0.46"
"134" "146"
"135" "0.31"
"136" "Black"
"137" "615"
"138" "0.14"
"139" "47"
"140" "0.04"
"141" "178"
"142" "0.19"
"143" "68"
"144" "0.12"
"145" "147"
"146" "0.31"
"147" "Latino"
"148" "779"
"149" "0.21"
"150" "198"
"151" "0.18"
"152" "223"
"153" "0.23"
"154" "132"
"155" "0.24"
"156" "88"
"157" "0.19"
"158" "Asian"
"159" "330"
"160" "0.08"
"161" "124"
"162" "0.11"
"163" "66"
"164" "0.07"
"165" "45"
"166" "0.08"
"167" "24"
"168" "0.05"
"169" "Other"
"170" "385"
"171" "0.10"
"172" "78"
"173" "0.07"
"174" "107"
"175" "0.11"
"176" "57"
"177" "0.10"
"178" "65"
"179" "0.14"
"180" "Female"
"181" "1827"
"182" "0.49"
"183" "668"
"184" "0.61"
"185" "419"
"186" "0.44"
"187" "270"
"188" "0.49"
"189" "149"
"190" "0.32"
"191" "FRL (Gr 5)"
"192" "1552"
"193" "0.44"
"194" "282"
"195" "0.28"
"196" "453"
"197" "0.52"
"198" "240"
"199" "0.48"
"200" "274"
"201" "0.64"
"202" "Table 2. Behavioral Engagement Model Comparisons for Early Adolescent Outcomes"
"203" "Categorical  B ehavioral Engagement  Models"
"204" "Seventh-Grade  Outcome"
"205" "Behavioral Engagement  Trajectory Categories (K-3)"
"206" "Kindergarten Levels"
"207" "(High/Low)"
"208" "Grade 3 Levels (High/Low)"
"209" "Social belonging"
"210" "BIC"
"211" "5040"
"212" "5033"
"213" "5022"
"214" "AIC"
"215" "5017"
"216" "5022"
"217" "5010"
"218" "Affinity for learning"
"219" "BIC"
"220" "4382"
"221" "4381"
"222" "4359"
"223" "AIC"
"224" "4359"
"225" "4370"
"226" "4348"
"227" "Total absences"
"228" "BIC"
"229" "19879"
"230" "19913"
"231" "19863"
"232" "AIC"
"233" "1985 3"
"234" "19901"
"235" "19852"
"236" "Office disciplin ary  referral"
"237" "BIC"
"238" "22590"
"239" "22651"
"240" "22602"
"241" "AIC"
"242" "22566"
"243" "22639"
"244" "22590"
"245" "Note:  N=2,192 for social belonging and affinity for learning models. N=3,075 for absence and discipline analyses.  Bolded values indicate the preferred model  and italicized values indicate the next best-fitting model following the bolded model .  B ehavioral engagement  categories are: Consistent engagers,  R ising  E ngagers,  D isengagers,  N onengagers. High  kindergarten and g rade 3 levels are students who have the highest score possible on all measures ( 55% and  45% of students , respectively ).  Outcomes are measured when the individual was in school in seventh-grade."
"246" "Table 3. Early Adolescence Race and Income  Gaps: Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition s"
"247" "Gap"
"248" "Percent Variance Explained"
"249" "Black-white gaps"
"250" "Differences in group  membership"
"251" "Consistent Engagers"
"252" "Rising Engagers"
"253" "Dis - engagers"
"254" "Non - engagers"
"255" "Social Belonging (SD)"
"256" "0.06"
"257" "43%"
"258" "42%"
"259" "14%"
"260" "3%"
"261" "-16%"
"262" "Affinity for Learning (SD)"
"263" "0.18"
"264" "24%"
"265" "36%"
"266" "9%"
"267" "5%"
"268" "-27%"
"269" "Absences"
"270" "5.1 7"
"271" "54%"
"272" "40%"
"273" "2%"
"274" "0%"
"275" "12%"
"276" "Discipline Referrals"
"277" "9.54"
"278" "42%"
"279" "26%"
"280" "3%"
"281" "0%"
"282" "1 4 %"
"283" "Always-Never FRL  gaps"
"284" "Social Belonging (SD)"
"285" "-0.01"
"286" "17%"
"287" "28%"
"288" "-16%"
"289" "28%"
"290" "-22%"
"291" "Affinity for Learning (SD)"
"292" "-0.24"
"293" "18%"
"294" "13%"
"295" "4%"
"296" "0%"
"297" "0%"
"298" "Absences"
"299" "6.00"
"300" "29%"
"301" "19%"
"302" "1%"
"303" "0%"
"304" "9 %"
"305" "Discipline Referrals"
"306" "5.46"
"307" "25 %"
"308" "17 %"
"309" "2%"
"310" "0%"
"311" "5 %"
"312" "N=2,192 for social belonging and affinity for learning models. N=3,075 for absence and discipline analyses.  Behavioral engagement categories  measured in kindergarten through grade 3 and  coded as normalized deviations from the grand mean, with Consistent Engagers as the base category.  Family income gaps measured by differentiating students who do and do not have p ersistent participation in free or reduced-price lunch program from kindergarten through seventh grade."
"313" "Table 4. Discipline, and Behavior Gaps by Engagement Type, Race and Family Income"
"314" "N"
"315" "ODR"
"316" "Absences"
"317" "Consistent Engager - White"
"318" "5 4 8"
"319" "0. 38"
"320" "8. 86"
"321" "Consistent Engager - Black"
"322" "4 2"
"323" "1. 64"
"324" "8. 29"
"325" "Nonengager - White"
"326" "1 18"
"327" "3.31"
"328" "15.09"
"329" "Nonengager - Black"
"330" "113"
"331" "14. 59"
"332" "1 7.09"
"333" "Consistent Engager – Never FRL"
"334" "594"
"335" "0.34"
"336" "8.33"
"337" "Consistent Engager  –   Always  FRL"
"338" "190"
"339" "1. 08"
"340" "10.14"
"341" "Nonengager -  Never  FRL"
"342" "1 09"
"343" "3.47"
"344" "10.54"
"345" "Nonengager  –   Always  FRL"
"346" "219"
"347" "10.41"
"348" "17. 80"
"349" "Note: FRL=Persistent participation in free or reduced-price lunch program from kindergarten through seventh grade."
"350" "FIGURES"
"351" "Figure 1. Average Behavioral Engagement Trajectories by Type (Grades K-3)"
"352" "Note: Behavioral engagement trajectories are derived from 13 teacher-reported items rating students’ in-class behaviors on a scale of 1 to 3. Intercepts at kindergarten entry differentiate students who are rated by teachers within a half a standard deviation from the highest possible mean score of three and those rated below one-half standard deviation from the highest possible mean score.  KG means “kindergarten.” G1, G2, and G3 mean grade levels 1, 2, and 3; t1 means “school term 1” and t2 means “school term 2”"
"353" "Figure 2. Self-Reported Social Belonging in Early Adolescence by Behavioral Engagement Type (Grades 5-7)"
"354" "Note: N=1900. Behavioral engagement trajectories are derived from 13 teacher-reported items rating students’ in-class behaviors on a scale of 1 to 3. Social belonging scores are derived from nine items of an annual climate survey (February administrations each year; alpha = .84)."
"355" "Figure 3. Self-Reported Affinity for Learning in Early Adolescence by Behavioral Engagement Type   (Grades 5-7)"
"356" "Note: N=1900. Behavioral engagement trajectories are derived from 13 teacher-reported items rating students’ in-class behaviors on a scale of 1 to 3. Social belonging scores are derived from eight items of an annual climate survey (February administrations each year; alpha = .82)."
"357" "Figure 4. Average Number of Absences in Each Grade by Behavioral Engagement Trajectory Group (Grades 5-7)"
"358" "Note: N=3,742. Average scores are derived from an unconditional growth curve model with random slopes that allow trends to vary between groups. Dots are mean number of absences within grade and bars are 95% confidence intervals. Behavioral engagement trajectories are derived from 13 teacher-reported items rating students’ in-class behaviors on a scale of 1 to 3."
"359" "Figure 5. Average Number of Office Disciplinary Referrals in Each Grade by Behavioral Engagement Trajectory Group   (Grades 5-7)"
"360" "Note: N=3,742. Average scores are derived from an unconditional growth curve model with random slopes that allow trends to vary between groups. Dots are mean number of office disciplinary referrals (ODRs) within grade and bars are 95% confidence intervals. Behavioral engagement trajectories are derived from 13 teacher-reported items rating students’ in-class behaviors on a scale of 1 to 3."
"361" "Figure 6. Seventh-Grade Attendance and Discipline Gaps"
"362" "Note: Behavior gaps are observed differences in the number of absences and discipline gaps are observed differences in the number of office disciplinary referrals (ODRs) between groups in seventh grade. Behavioral engagement trajectories are derived from 13 teacher-reported items rating students’ in-class behaviors on a scale of 1 to 3. FRL= free or reduced-price lunch program participation from kindergarten through seventh grade."
"363" "Figure 7. Median Absence and Discipline Gaps by Behavioral Engagement Type"
"364" "REFERENCES"
"365" "Arum, Richard. 2003.  Judging School Discipline: The Crisis of Moral Authority . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press."
"366" "Becker, Howard  1963.  Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance . New York: The Free Press."
"367" "Blumenfeld, Phyllis C., Toni M. Kempler and Joseph S. Krajcik. 2006. \"Motivation and Cognitive Engagement in Learning Environments.\" in  The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences , edited by R. K. Sawyer. New York: Cambridge University Press."
"368" "Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2019. \"Feeling Race: Theorizing the Racial Economy of Emotions.\"  American Sociological Review  84(1):1-25."
"369" "Bourdieu, Pierre and Jean-Claude Passeron. 1990.  Reproduction in Education, Society and Culture . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage."
"370" "Bourdieu, Pierre and Loïc Wacquant. 1992.  An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology . Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press."
"371" "Bourdieu, Pierre. 2007.  Sketch for a Self-Analysis . Translated by R. Nice. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"372" "Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 1976.  Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life . New York: Basic Books."
"373" "Breen, Richard. 2010. \"Educational Expansion and Social Mobility in the 20(Th) Century.\"  Social Forces  89(2):365-88."
"374" "Bruch, Sarah K. and Joe Soss. 2018. \"Schooling as a Formative Political Experience: Authority Relations and the Education of Citizens.\"  Perspectives on Politics  16(1):36-57."
"375" "Bryk, Anthony and Barbara Schneider. 2004.  Trust in Schools: A Core Resource for Improvement . New York: Russel Sage Foundation."
"376" "Burnham, Kenneth P. and David R. Anderson. 2002.  Model Selection and Multimodel Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach . New York: Springer."
"377" "Carter, Prudence L. 2005.  Keepin'it Real: School Success Beyond Black and White . New York: Oxford University Press."
"378" "DiMaggio, Paul. 1982. \"Cultural Capital and School Success: The Impact of Status Culture Participation on the Grades of U.S. High School Students.\"  American Sociological Review  47(2):189-201."
"379" "Dreeben, Robert. 1968.  On What Is Learned in School . Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley."
"380" "Eccles, Jacquelynne S. 2004. \"Schools, Academic Motivation, and Stage-Environment Fit.\" Pp. 125-53 in  Handbook of Adolescent Psychology , edited by R. M. Lerner and L. Steinberg. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons."
"381" "Fine, Michelle. 1991.  Framing Dropouts . Albany: State University of New York Press."
"382" "Finn, Jeremy D. 1989. \"Withdrawing from School.\"  Review of Educational Research  59(2):117-42."
"383" "Fordham, Signithia and John U. Ogbu. 1986. \"Black Students', School Success: Coping with the Burden of 'Acting White'.\"  Urban Review  18(3):176-206."
"384" "Fredricks, Jennifer, Wendy McColskey, Jane Meli, Joy Mordica, Bianca Montrosse and Kathleen Mooney. 2011. \"Measuring Student Engagement in Upper Elementary through High School: A Description of 21 Instruments. Issues & Answers. Rel 2011-No. 098.\"  Regional Educational Laboratory Southeast ."
"385" "Fredricks, Jennifer A, Phyllis C Blumenfeld and Alison H Paris. 2004. \"School Engagement: Potential of the Concept, State of the Evidence.\"  Review of Educational Research  74(1):59-109."
"386" "Friedman, Sam. 2016. \"Habitus Clivé and the Emotional Imprint of Social Mobility.\"  The Sociological Review  64(1):129-47."
"387" "Gamoran, Adam and Martin Nystrand. 1992. \"Taking Students Seriously.\" Pp. 40-61 in  Student Engagement and Achievement in American Secondary Schools , edited by F. Newmann. New York: Teachers College Press."
"388" "Gould, Deborah B. 2009.  Moving Politics: Emotion and Act Up's Fight against Aids . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"389" "Grodsky, Eric and Catherine Riegle-Crumb. 2010. \"Those Who Choose and Those Who Don't: Social Background and College Orientation.\"  ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science.  627(1):14-35. doi: 10.1177/0002716209348732."
"390" "Hiller, Jean and Emma Rooksby. 2005. \"Introduction to the First Edition.\" Pp. 19-49 in  Habitus: A Sense of Place , edited by J. Hiller and E. Rooksby. Burlington, VT: Ashgate."
"391" "Ingram, Nicola and Jessie Abrahams. 2015. \"Stepping Outside of Oneself: How a Cleft-Habitus Can Lead to Greater Reflexivity through Occupying “the Third Space”.\" in  Bourdieu: The Next Generation , edited by J. Thatcher, N. Ingram, C. Burke and J. Abrahams. New York, NY: Routledge."
"392" "Janosz, Michel, Isabelle Archambault, Julien Morizot and Linda S. Pagani. 2008. \"School Engagement Trajectories and Their Differential Predictive Relations to Dropout.\"  Journal of Social Issues  64(1):21-40."
"393" "Lareau, Annette and Erin McNamara Horvat. 1999. \"Moments of Social Inclusion and Exclusion: Race, Class, and Cultural Capital in Family-School Relationships.\"  Sociology of Education  72(1):37-53."
"394" "Lareau, Annette. 2003.  Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life . Berkeley: University of California Press."
"395" "Lemert, Edwin M. 1951.  Social Pathology; a Systematic Approach to the Theory of Sociopathic Behavior . New York: McGraw Hill."
"396" "Link, Bruce G. and Jo C. Phelan. 2001. \"Conceptualizing Stigma.\"  Annual Review of Sociology  27(1):363-85."
"397" "Luo, Wen, Jan N. Hughes, Jeffrey Liew and Oiman Kwok. 2009. \"Classifying Academically at-Risk First Graders into Engagement Types: Association with Long-Term Achievement Trajectories.\"  The Elementary School Journal  109(4):380-405."
"398" "Meyer, John W. and Brian Rowan. 1978. \"The Structure of Educational Organizations.\" Pp. 78-109 in  Environments and Organizations , edited by M. W. Meyer. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass."
"399" "Michelmore, Katherine and Susan Dynarski. 2017. \"The Gap within the Gap: Using Longitudinal Data to Understand Income Differences in Educational Outcomes.\"  AERA Open  3(1):1-18."
"400" "Mizel, Matthew L., Jeremy NV Miles, Eric R. Pedersen, Joan S. Tucker, Brett A. Ewing and Elizabeth J. D'Amico. 2016. \"To Educate or to Incarcerate: Factors in Disproportionality in School Discipline.\"  Children and Youth Services Review  70:102-11."
"401" "Okonofua, Jason A., Gregory M. Walton and Jennifer L. Eberhardt. 2016. \"A Vicious Cycle: A Social–Psychological Account of Extreme Racial Disparities in School Discipline.\"  Perspectives on Psychological Science  11(3):381-98."
"402" "Pianta, Robert C. and Michael Steinberg. 1992. \"Teacher‐Child Relationships and the Process of Adjusting to School.\"  New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development  1992(57):61-80."
"403" "Pyne, Jaymes. 2019. \"Suspended Attitudes: Exclusion and Emotional Disengagement from School.\"  Sociology of Education  92(1):59-82."
"404" "Raftery, Adrian E. 1995. \"Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research.\"  Sociological Methodology  25."
"405" "Reardon, Sean F., Demetra Kalogrides and Kenneth Shores. 2019. \"The Geography of Racial/Ethnic Test Score Gaps.\"  American Journal of Sociology  124(4):1164-221."
"406" "Reschly, Amy L. and Sandra L. Christenson. 2012. \"Jingle, Jangle, and Conceptual Haziness: Evolution and Future Directions of the Engagement Construct.\" Pp. 3-19 in  Handbook of Research on Student Engagement . New York: Springer."
"407" "Rios, Victor M. 2011.  Punished: Policing the Lives of Black and Latino Boys . New York: NYU Press."
"408" "Rist, Ray. 2000. \"Her Classic Reprint - Student Social Class and Teacher Expectations: The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy in Ghetto Education.\"  Harvard Educational Review  70(3):257-302."
"409" "Sampson, Robert J. and John H. Laub. 2005. \"A Life-Course View of the Development of Crime.\"  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science  602(1):12-45."
"410" "Samuelsen, Karen M. 2012. \"Part V Commentary: Possible New Directions in the Measurement of Student Engagement.\" Pp. 805-11 in  Handbook of Research on Student Engagement . New York: Springer."
"411" "Sewell, William H., Archibald O. Haller and Alejandro Portes. 1969. \"The Educational and Early Occupational Attainment Process.\"  American Sociological Review  34(1):83-92."
"412" "Shavit, Yossi and Hans-Peter Blossfeld. 1993.  Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational Attainment in Thirteen Countries . Boulder, CO: Westview Press, Inc."
"413" "Sparks, Sarah. 2018, \"Discipline Gaps - and Ways to Close Them - Get Researchers' Attention\": Education Week. Retrieved March 25, 2019 ( https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2018/04/25/discipline-gaps--and-ways-to-close-them--get-researchers.html )."
"414" "Thomas, William I. 1923.  The Unadjusted Girl . Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company."
"415" "Weick, Karl E. 1976. \"Educational Organizations as Loosely Coupled Systems.\"  Administrative Science Quarterly  21(1):1-19."
"416" "Willis, Paul. 1977.  Learning to Labor: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs . New York: Columbia University Press."
"417" "APPENDIX A. SAMPLE ATTRITION"
"418" "Table A1. Sample attrition"
"419" "Sample 1"
"420" "Sample 2"
"421" "Sample 3"
"422" "N=3,742"
"423" "N=2,759"
"424" "N=1,900"
"425" "Race/ethnicity"
"426" "White"
"427" "0.45"
"428" "0.45"
"429" "0.48"
"430" "African American"
"431" "0.15"
"432" "0.15"
"433" "0.13"
"434" "Latinx"
"435" "0.22"
"436" "0.22"
"437" "0.21"
"438" "Asian"
"439" "0.08"
"440" "0.08"
"441" "0.08"
"442" "Multiracial or Other"
"443" "0.10"
"444" "0.10"
"445" "0.10"
"446" "Female"
"447" "0.49"
"448" "0.49"
"449" "0.50"
"450" "FRL - grade 5"
"451" "0.47"
"452" "0.46"
"453" "0.42"
"454" "APPENDIX B. ENGAGEMENT ITEMS AND MEASUREMENT PROPERTIES"
"455" "Table B1. Behavioral and Emotional Engagement Items"
"456" "Behavioral  Engagement  Items (Grades K-3)"
"457" "Accepts responsibility for own behavior"
"458" "Completes assignments on time"
"459" "Demonstrates self-control"
"460" "Demonstrates listening skills"
"461" "Follows oral directions"
"462" "Organizes materials and time"
"463" "Participates in classroom activities"
"464" "Persists in tasks until completion"
"465" "Respects rights, diversity, and feelings of others"
"466" "Solves conflicts appropriately"
"467" "Takes positive risks in learning and social situations"
"468" "Works cooperatively with others"
"469" "Works independently"
"470" "Social Belonging Items (Grades 5-7)"
"471" "I feel I belong at this school"
"472" "I feel safe at my school"
"473" "I look forward to seeing the adults at my school"
"474" "In my school, students support each other"
"475" "My personal property is safe at this school"
"476" "Students in this school care about  each others'  feelings"
"477" "Students in this school care about one another's feelings"
"478" "Students in this school understand how they should and should not behave"
"479" "The consequences when students break rules are fair for everyone"
"480" "Affinity for Learning Items (Grades 5-7)"
"481" "I believe I can learn"
"482" "I get help from my teacher to improve my work"
"483" "I  make an effort  to learn, even when work feels hard"
"484" "I participate in classroom discussions"
"485" "My teachers care about how well I do in school"
"486" "My teachers expect me to do my best"
"487" "Teachers talk to me about my interests"
"488" "The adults in my school give me encouragement"
"489" "Table B2. Factor Analysis of MMSD Emotional Engagement Items"
"490" "Variable"
"491" "Social Belonging"
"492" "Affinity for Learning"
"493" "Uniqueness"
"494" "4. Believe I can learn"
"495" "0.23"
"496" "0.62"
"497" "0.56"
"498" "8. Get teacher help"
"499" "0.22"
"500" "0.62"
"501" "0.56"
"502" "10. I make effort"
"503" "0.13"
"504" "0.62"
"505" "0.60"
"506" "11. I participate"
"507" "0.09"
"508" "0.54"
"509" "0.70"
"510" "31. Teachers care"
"511" "0.34"
"512" "0.53"
"513" "0.61"
"514" "32. Teachers exp. Best"
"515" "0.21"
"516" "0.57"
"517" "0.63"
"518" "42. Teachers interested"
"519" "0.39"
"520" "0.41"
"521" "0.68"
"522" "44. Adults encourage"
"523" "0.38"
"524" "0.55"
"525" "0.55"
"526" "6. Feel belonging"
"527" "0.52"
"528" "0.39"
"529" "0.58"
"530" "7. Feel safe"
"531" "0.62"
"532" "0.30"
"533" "0.52"
"534" "9. Like adults at sch"
"535" "0.42"
"536" "0.47"
"537" "0.61"
"538" "13. Students support"
"539" "0.57"
"540" "0.32"
"541" "0.57"
"542" "26. Property safe"
"543" "0.57"
"544" "0.24"
"545" "0.62"
"546" "39. Students care"
"547" "0.70"
"548" "0.14"
"549" "0.49"
"550" "40. Stud resolve  confl ."
"551" "0.67"
"552" "0.11"
"553" "0.54"
"554" "41. Know behave"
"555" "0.56"
"556" "0.12"
"557" "0.67"
"558" "45. Consequences fair"
"559" "0.46"
"560" "0.23"
"561" "0.74"
"562" "12. Drugs & stuff"
"563" "0.30"
"564" "0.39"
"565" "0.76"
"566" "24. Parent asks HW"
"567" "0.08"
"568" "0.33"
"569" "0.88"
"570" "38. Stud. Involved"
"571" "0.40"
"572" "0.30"
"573" "0.75"
"574" "APPENDIX C. FULL MODEL AND SUPPLEMENTARY RESULTS"
"575" "Table C1. Emotional Engagement Full Models"
"576" "Social Belonging"
"577" "Affinity for Learning"
"578" "Estimate"
"579" "SE"
"580" "p"
"581" "Estimate"
"582" "SE"
"583" "p"
"584" "Engagement trajectory (reference = Consistent Engager)"
"585" "Rising Engager"
"586" "-0.082"
"587" "0.043"
"588" "0.06"
"589" "-0.119"
"590" "0.035"
"591" "<0.01"
"592" "Disengager"
"593" "-0.068"
"594" "0.050"
"595" "0.17"
"596" "-0.095"
"597" "0.041"
"598" "0.02"
"599" "Nonengager"
"600" "-0.192"
"601" "0.058"
"602" "<0.01"
"603" "-0.255"
"604" "0.047"
"605" "<0.01"
"606" "Early Mover"
"607" "-0.074"
"608" "0.055"
"609" "0.18"
"610" "-0.104"
"611" "0.045"
"612" "0.02"
"613" "Grade Level (reference = 5th grade)"
"614" "6th grade"
"615" "-0.088"
"616" "0.040"
"617" "0.03"
"618" "-0.018"
"619" "0.032"
"620" "0.59"
"621" "7th grade"
"622" "-0.390"
"623" "0.040"
"624" "<0.01"
"625" "-0.198"
"626" "0.032"
"627" "<0.01"
"628" "Engagement trajectory x Grade level"
"629" "Rising Engager x 6th grade"
"630" "-0.020"
"631" "0.061"
"632" "0.74"
"633" "-0.052"
"634" "0.050"
"635" "0.30"
"636" "Rising Engager x 7th grade"
"637" "0.062"
"638" "0.061"
"639" "0.31"
"640" "0.013"
"641" "0.050"
"642" "0.79"
"643" "Disengager x 6th grade"
"644" "-0.060"
"645" "0.070"
"646" "0.40"
"647" "-0.072"
"648" "0.057"
"649" "0.21"
"650" "Disengager x 7th grade"
"651" "-0.036"
"652" "0.070"
"653" "0.61"
"654" "-0.035"
"655" "0.057"
"656" "0.54"
"657" "Nonengager x 6th grade"
"658" "0.023"
"659" "0.082"
"660" "0.78"
"661" "0.053"
"662" "0.067"
"663" "0.43"
"664" "Nonengager x 7th grade"
"665" "0.079"
"666" "0.082"
"667" "0.33"
"668" "0.071"
"669" "0.067"
"670" "0.29"
"671" "Early Mover x 6th grade"
"672" "-0.068"
"673" "0.077"
"674" "0.38"
"675" "0.000"
"676" "0.063"
"677" "1.00"
"678" "Early Mover x 6th grade"
"679" "-0.022"
"680" "0.077"
"681" "0.78"
"682" "0.060"
"683" "0.063"
"684" "0.34"
"685" "Constant"
"686" "3.611"
"687" "0.028"
"688" "<0.01"
"689" "4.283"
"690" "0.023"
"691" "<0.01"
"692" "Observations"
"693" "5,700"
"694" "5,700"
"695" "Number of groups"
"696" "3"
"697" "3"
"698" "Random Effects Parameters"
"699" "Estimate"
"700" "SE"
"701" "Estimate"
"702" "SE"
"703" "Engagement trajectory"
"704" "0.000"
"705" "0.000"
"706" "0.000"
"707" "0.000"
"708" "Residual variance"
"709" "0.519"
"710" "0.010"
"711" "0.347"
"712" "0.006"
"713" "Table C2. Attendance Full Models"
"714" "Total Absences"
"715" "Unexcused Absences"
"716" "Estimate"
"717" "SE"
"718" "p"
"719" "Estimate"
"720" "SE"
"721" "p"
"722" "Engagement trajectory (reference = Consistent Engager)"
"723" "Rising Engager"
"724" "1.89"
"725" "0.47"
"726" "<0.01"
"727" "1.25"
"728" "0.28"
"729" "<0.01"
"730" "Disengager"
"731" "2.28"
"732" "0.56"
"733" "<0.01"
"734" "0.98"
"735" "0.34"
"736" "<0.01"
"737" "Nonengager"
"738" "4.64"
"739" "0.59"
"740" "<0.01"
"741" "2.78"
"742" "0.35"
"743" "<0.01"
"744" "Early Mover"
"745" "3.12"
"746" "0.56"
"747" "<0.01"
"748" "2.03"
"749" "0.34"
"750" "<0.01"
"751" "Grade Level (reference = 5th grade)"
"752" "6th grade"
"753" "0.05"
"754" "0.47"
"755" "0.92"
"756" "0.08"
"757" "0.28"
"758" "0.76"
"759" "7th grade"
"760" "1.76"
"761" "0.47"
"762" "<0.01"
"763" "0.27"
"764" "0.28"
"765" "0.34"
"766" "Engagement trajec t ory x Grade level"
"767" "Rising Engager x 6th grade"
"768" "0.75"
"769" "0.68"
"770" "0.27"
"771" "0.54"
"772" "0.41"
"773" "0.19"
"774" "Rising Engager x 7th grade"
"775" "0.77"
"776" "0.69"
"777" "0.27"
"778" "1.40"
"779" "0.41"
"780" "<0.01"
"781" "Disengager x 6th grade"
"782" "0.31"
"783" "0.81"
"784" "0.70"
"785" "0.50"
"786" "0.48"
"787" "0.30"
"788" "Disengager x 7th grade"
"789" "0.80"
"790" "0.81"
"791" "0.33"
"792" "1.06"
"793" "0.49"
"794" "0.03"
"795" "Nonengager x 6th grade"
"796" "1.85"
"797" "0.86"
"798" "0.03"
"799" "1.00"
"800" "0.51"
"801" "0.05"
"802" "Nonengager x 7th grade"
"803" "2.20"
"804" "0.86"
"805" "0.01"
"806" "1.72"
"807" "0.52"
"808" "<0.01"
"809" "Early Mover x 6th grade"
"810" "0.87"
"811" "0.82"
"812" "0.29"
"813" "0.62"
"814" "0.49"
"815" "0.20"
"816" "Early Mover x 6th grade"
"817" "2.27"
"818" "0.83"
"819" "0.01"
"820" "1.91"
"821" "0.50"
"822" "<0.01"
"823" "Constant"
"824" "6.95"
"825" "0.32"
"826" "<0.01"
"827" "0.62"
"828" "0.19"
"829" "<0.01"
"830" "Observations"
"831" "9,281"
"832" "9,281"
"833" "Number of groups"
"834" "3"
"835" "3"
"836" "Random Effects Parameters"
"837" "Estimate"
"838" "SE"
"839" "Estimate"
"840" "SE"
"841" "Engagement trajectory"
"842" "0.000"
"843" "0.000"
"844" "0.000"
"845" "0.000"
"846" "Residual variance"
"847" "105.200"
"848" "1.540"
"849" "37.6"
"850" "0.551"
"851" "Table C3. Discipline Full Models"
"852" "ODRs"
"853" "Any Suspension"
"854" "Estimate"
"855" "SE"
"856" "p"
"857" "Estimate"
"858" "SE"
"859" "p"
"860" "Engagement trajectory (reference = Consistent Engager)"
"861" "Rising Engager"
"862" "1.578"
"863" "0.368"
"864" "0.00"
"865" "0.043"
"866" "0.012"
"867" "0.00"
"868" "Disengager"
"869" "0.628"
"870" "0.432"
"871" "0.15"
"872" "0.017"
"873" "0.014"
"874" "0.23"
"875" "Nonengager"
"876" "4.287"
"877" "0.458"
"878" "0.00"
"879" "0.093"
"880" "0.015"
"881" "0.00"
"882" "Early Mover"
"883" "1.552"
"884" "0.408"
"885" "0.00"
"886" "0.045"
"887" "0.013"
"888" "0.00"
"889" "Grade Level (reference = 5th grade)"
"890" "6th grade"
"891" "0.303"
"892" "0.354"
"893" "0.39"
"894" "0.018"
"895" "0.012"
"896" "0.12"
"897" "7th grade"
"898" "0.454"
"899" "0.354"
"900" "0.20"
"901" "0.028"
"902" "0.012"
"903" "0.02"
"904" "Engagement trajectory x Grade level"
"905" "Rising Engager x 6th grade"
"906" "0.778"
"907" "0.520"
"908" "0.14"
"909" "0.061"
"910" "0.017"
"911" "0.00"
"912" "Rising Engager x 7th grade"
"913" "0.942"
"914" "0.520"
"915" "0.07"
"916" "0.061"
"917" "0.017"
"918" "0.00"
"919" "Disengager x 6th grade"
"920" "0.305"
"921" "0.611"
"922" "0.62"
"923" "0.041"
"924" "0.020"
"925" "0.04"
"926" "Disengager x 7th grade"
"927" "0.921"
"928" "0.611"
"929" "0.13"
"930" "0.065"
"931" "0.020"
"932" "0.00"
"933" "Nonengager x 6th grade"
"934" "1.575"
"935" "0.647"
"936" "0.02"
"937" "0.139"
"938" "0.021"
"939" "0.00"
"940" "Nonengager x 7th grade"
"941" "1.668"
"942" "0.647"
"943" "0.01"
"944" "0.136"
"945" "0.021"
"946" "0.00"
"947" "Early Mover x 6th grade"
"948" "0.718"
"949" "0.576"
"950" "0.21"
"951" "0.039"
"952" "0.019"
"953" "0.04"
"954" "Early Mover x 6th grade"
"955" "0.926"
"956" "0.576"
"957" "0.11"
"958" "0.056"
"959" "0.019"
"960" "0.00"
"961" "Constant"
"962" "0.081"
"963" "0.251"
"964" "0.75"
"965" "0.005"
"966" "0.008"
"967" "0.58"
"968" "Observations"
"969" "11,226"
"970" "11,226"
"971" "Number of groups"
"972" "3"
"973" "3"
"974" "Random Effects Parameters"
"975" "Estimate"
"976" "SE"
"977" "Estimate"
"978" "SE"
"979" "Engagement trajectory"
"980" "0.000"
"981" "0.000"
"982" "0.000"
"983" "0.000"
"984" "Residual variance"
"985" "68.900"
"986" "0.920"
"987" "0.074"
"988" "0.001"
"989" "Figure C1. White and African American Nonengagers’ Behavior Reports Over Time"
