"x"
"1" "A SECOND-GENERATION STRUCTURALIST TRANSFORMATION PROBLEM: THE RISE OF THE INERTIAL INFLATION HYPOTHESIS"
"2" "BY"
"3" "ANDRÉ RONCAGLIA DE CARVALHO *"
"4" "Abstract"
"5" "The paper analyzes the rise of the Latin American-based inertial inflation theory. Starting in the 1950s, various traditions in economics purported to explain the concept of “inflation inertia”. Contributions ranging from Celso Furtado and M.H. Simonsen to James Tobin anticipated key aspects of what later became the inertial inflation hypothesis, building it into either mathematical or conceptual frameworks compatible with the then contemporaneous macroeconomic theory. In doing so, they bridged the analytical gap with the North-American developments whilst maintaining the key features of the CEPAL approach, such as distributional conflicts and local institutional details. These contributions eventually influenced the second moment of the monetarist-structuralist controversy that unraveled in the 1980s. The paper also highlights how later works by structuralist economists gradually stripped the inertial inflation approach of its previous substance and form, thereby unearthing tensions among Latin-American structuralists that led to the eventual decline of this research program."
"6" "*Department of Economics, Univers idade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil. Email:  andreroncaglia@gmail.com ."
"7" "This “preprint” is the peer-reviewed and accepted typescript of an article that is forthcoming in revised form, after minor editorial changes, in the  Journal of the History of Economic Thought  (ISSN: 1053-8372), volume 41 (2019), March issue.  Copyright to the journal’s articles is held by the History of Economics Society (HES), whose exclusive licensee and publisher for the journal is Cambridge University Press ( https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-the-history-of-economic-thought  ).  This preprint may be used only for private research and study and is not to be distributed further."
"8" "The preprint may be cited as follows:"
"9" "Carvalho ,  André  R oncaglia de . “A Second-Generation Structuralist Transformation Problem: The Rise Of The Inertial Inflation Hypothesis”  Journal of the History of Economic Thought  4 1 (1)  (forthcoming). Preprint at  SocArXiv , osf.io/preprints/ socarxiv"
"10" "Introduction"
"11" "This paper provides a  historical  account o f  the process of theoretical development of th e  heterodox approach  to inflation stabilization theory  in Latin America. The purpose is to make sense of the  rise  of the “inertial inflation” research program that informed many stabilization attempts in the region in the 1980s.  It also aims at parsing out the main points of instability that beset this approach, which eventually led to its decline.  Central to this narrative is the unraveling  theoretical feud , from the early 1950s to the late 1980s,   on the causes of - and the adequate policies to curb - inflation  that opposed monetarists to structuralist economists . This is done  through the analysis of the changing economic landscape and the challenges posed by them to the contenders of both “schools of thought”.  This persisting opposition is a useful organizing device to make stabilization debates up to date."
"12" "It  begin s with a brief analysis of the debate between orthodoxy and heterodoxy in the 1950s, when the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA, henceforth CEPAL) began its  tour de force  against the theoretical and policymaking influence arriving from the Northern hemisphere. The then recently established Keynesian orthodoxy on macroeconomic matters faced the opposition of the so-called monetarist counter-revolution, beginning in the early 1960s and reaching its peak-influence along the 1970s with the overall diagnosis of “stagflation” in the aftermath of Richard Nixon’s devaluation of the dollar, the dissolution of the Bretton Woods policy apparatus and the 1973 oil shock. It follows through the intense reaction among the academic economists to the stabilization strategies proposed by the IMF to the debt-overburdened countries in Latin America  and in other parts of the world in the aftermath of the 1982 debt crisis triggered by the Mexican default on external debt service payments in August of that year. The ensuing economic landscape provided multifaceted challenges to policy   makers ,  which elicited an intellectual  ambience  highly fertile for theoretical innovation on matters of stabilization policy."
"13" "The Brazilian chapter of this broader debate  displayed  a high  level of theoretical sophistication and  is  thus  the focus of the  final  sections. However, it  is linked to  the international scope of such issues, for a complex set of interrelations explain s  the relative convergence of views on stabilization matters that encompassed the transition economies of the former Soviet Union and the emerging economies that faced severe economic instability for different reasons.  Following this introduction,  the  first section deals with the first round of monetarist-structuralist debate between the 1950s and late 1970s  and highlights  the contributions by  Celso Furtado and Julio  Olivera . Section 2  undescores  how  Mario Henrique  Simonsen ’s  and James Tobin ’s works connected the two moments of this theoretical debate . The  third  part  delves into the second round of the debate, while the fourth and fifth sections treat  the internal  puzzles that undermined the inertial inflation hypothesis .  The l ast section concludes  by weaving the threads of the narrative and pointing to the future research agenda ."
"14" "First round: inflation-induced vs. inflation-feeding bottlenecks"
"15" "Understanding policy requires assessing the theories that give it support.  This section outlines the long- lived debate over  inflation theory and  price stabilization  policy , the so-called “structuralist-monetarist stabilization debates” that took p lace in the 1950s and the 1960s   ( see Baer and  Kerstenetzky  1964,  Boianovsky   2012 and Bianchi 2016 )."
"16" "The historical context of this debate highlights a State-led industrialization process that was set in motion in the postwar period, having as the main features a persistently high inflation, resilient balance of payments deficits, secular structural public deficits and hard-to-overcome concentration of wealth  (see Simonsen 1995 for a brief historical overview of inflation in Brazil) . Among these traits, inflation has become a dominant aspect of the region´s economic history, a phenomenon deeply embedded in its institutional fabric and mindset. It grew to become the forefront enemy and triggered the innovative streak of analytical breakthroughs that undergird the successful stabilization plans i n the early 1990s  ( see Bastos 2002 ) ."
"17" "The monetarist-structuralist controversy was staged in the post-War period and can be simply defined as  “ market  competition  vs. planning ”  as best promoters of economic development. The controversy gained momentum due to theoretical and political opposition to the anti-inflationary programs in Latin America. These were sponsored by the Bretton Woods Institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (henceforth,  IMF ) and the Bank for International Development ( BID ), later renamed  as  World Bank (Hirschman 1962, p. 82).  Actively opposing these policies was the emerging Latin American lineage of economic thought, named  structuralists . They proposed that inflation was the result of underlying structural imbalances in the economy, not of excessive monetary emission (R angel  1963  and  1985)."
"18" "The structuralist school  advanced that the economy   was  irreparably inflexible  due to  the widespread existence of bottlenecks  and  obstacles that inhibit ed  changes.  The underdeveloped technological apparatus explained a chronically inelastic  supply . State action was needed ,   as  unassisted m arket processes would have limited power in promoting economic progress ( Little  1982,  p p. 20-21). Moreover, the price system  was not believed to be  an ideal resource-allocating  device.  The market power of oligopolistic corporations, the specific inelasticity of the supply of agricultural products and the secular effective demand problem due to highly concentrated income distribution profile that marked Latin American economies  explained  the dynamics of inflation. For  economists such as  Raúl   Prebisch , Celso Furtado, Juan Noyola  Vásquez  and Osvaldo  Sunkel ,   inflation  in underdeveloped countries  was  an  outcome of a deformed economic structure.  In order to adequately understand rising prices, the framework should take heed of the  interaction between ‘basic inflationary pressures’ – resulting of structural rigidities - and the ‘propagating mechanism’ of competing income claims accommodated by monetary expansion. Inflation was then sustained by excess competing claims of societal groups over the economy´s output, which  was  given by a rigid productive structure filled with bottlenecks and constraints.   The policy implications were that d ealing solely with inflation  only  attack ed  the symptom, not the cause ; tackling  the inadequacies of the productive structure  would render  inflation control more effective."
"19" "The term “monetarist” was coined to denote these specific set of policies, which usually included tighter credit constraints, cuts in public expenditures, partial wage freezes, devaluation and the repeal of various types of subsidies and direct controls ; i t was first used by Roberto Campos,  one of the  monetarist  contenders, alongside Eugenio  Gudin  ( Boianovsky  2012). In a nutshell, monetarists held that inflation  was always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon. ( Friedman  1963  and   Gudin  1962) and, therefore,   could  only temporarily promote development  (as economic growth was dubbed at the time) .  Lasting prosperity was however   claimed to be  incompatible with the  inflation  and  should, therefore,  be  curbed as  quickly  as possible , before it degenerated into unbearable tensions  (social and economic). T he only effective method , according to monetarists,  seemed to be the curbing of excess demand ,  through  a prudent combination of monetary and fiscal policies supplemented by international financial assistance.  As a response to structuralist claims, most of the alleged supply inelasticities and bottlenecks were not considered autonomous or structural, but rather  consequences of  price and exchange rate distortions generated during the course of the inflationary process itself; ( Campos  1962, p p . 69-70). In sum, based on Latin American experience, Campos alleges that bottlenecks were  originally inflation-induced , even though at a later stage they may become  inflation-feeding ."
"20" "Against this intellectual melting pot, a few seminal contributions  anticipated not only the inner workings of a persistently high inflationary process, but also the nearly insurmountable obstacles policymakers  in the region  would face attempting to control it  a few decades ahead .  Our focus here lie s  on  the “inertial inflation” hypothesis , which  finds its origins at this first moment of the controversy , although its heyday was yet to come.  We highlight the contributions made by Celso Furtado, Julio  Olivera  and Mario Henrique Simonsen."
"21" "In his  magnum opus , “ Formação   Econômica  do  Brasil ”, Furtado ([1959] 1967, chapter  35 ) tackles the “two sides of the inflationary process”, that is, “the reason why prices rise on a persistent  basis” and “the effects of such rise on the economic process” .  Inflation and distribution are thus two sides of a single process.  Furtado  starts  with a seemingly fictitious and extreme case (at least at that ti m e), that of a dynamic equilibrium concept of distributionally neutral inflation. Inflation can be “neutral” in its effects on the real economy when “ all prices rise simultaneously and at the same pace ”.  A neutral inflation implies that  rising price levels do not affect   the underlying  distributional profile.  Under this dynamic concept of neutrality  ( e.g. one-year-long circuit ) ,   s tabilization would  engender  the very outcome the system is defending itself from, that is, the redistribution of real income. At any point during this period, “ there is bound to be a group ahead of others in the struggle for the redistribution of income ”.  Such a  group would benefit enormously from the stabilization of the price level at that point (Furtado [1959]   1967, p. 239).  Dynamically speaking, e ven if one could find an “ average pattern of income distribution in a one-year stretch ” that stabilized  prices  around this pattern, through a series of price and wage adjustments, it  was unlikely  that every group would be entirely satisfied with  the outcome .  If  all groups are equipped to defend  themselves  (such as indexation of prices, wages and contracts)  and have a clear notion of the position they occupy in that moment,  the  “  elevation of the price level goes on displacing the system from one unstable equilibrium position to the other ” with no automatic countervailing process to restore the system to a stable equilibrium position (p. 239).  To this effect,  stabilization becomes quite  troublesome. due  to  this staggered structure of price and wage behavior."
"22" "Due to this process-based understanding of a chronic inflationary process, structuralist s  conten ded  that an orthodox monetary policy tackled only the propagation factors of inflation, leaving its underlying causes unharmed. These latter comprised both supply rigidities (which generate chronic inflationary pressures) ,  the monopoly pricing and social tensions that disseminate these specific upward price movements. Hence, a finite elasticity of supply and demand for goods implies that any change in relative prices will encounter a downward inflexibility of monetary prices  and wages . These non-monetary pressures then compel authorities into monetary accommodation. Expansion of the money supply becomes nearly inevitable, once the social costs entailed by recession-feeding monetary shortages are acknowledged."
"23" "Although notions of monetary endogeneity, lags and expectations had already been mentioned by  Sunkel  (1958), Julio  Olivera  (1960 and 1964)  slightly shares  the focus of inflation theory  on  the causes of such imbalances and maladjustments of prices along the chain of production  with  its propagating effects upon price behavior ; h ence the  notion that  structural inflation induced monetary accommodation.  If  money  is  a passively adjusting variable, rather than a fully controllable exogenous one ,  Olivera  argued, a  non-monetary theory of inflation  is  better suited to portray economies fraught with such institutional and structural rigi di ties, for it look s  “beneath the monetary surface, into the underlying region of physical flows, real prices and sectional disequilibria” ( Olivera  1964, p. 322)."
"24" "In an attempt to accommodate the structuralist inflation theory in the emerging procedure of mathematical modeling,  Olivera  (1967) formalize d  his argument in a two-sector model, in which differences in elasticity of demand and supply promote sustained structural pressures over prices, termed “structural inflation”. In one   equation  Olivera  decomposes inflation into  the “structural inflation multiplier” and “the structural inflation multiplicand” or the autonomous component of inflation. The multiplier depends  inversely  on the degree of flexibility of both markups and wages. The “multiplicand” is in turn determined by the relative elasticities of supply and demand that dictate how amplified are the pressure on prices arising from excess demand over the supply of the non-progressive sector.   Therefore, changes in relative prices prompt a rise of the price level. The magnified effects of both the multiplier and the multiplicand of structural inflation are, once again, due to the sluggish factor movements that render the structure of supply rigid."
"25" "To sum  up,  struc turalists  emphasized   that inflation result ed  from deep-seated  underlying  cause s  due to uneven structural changes along a historical process of development. Such imbalances were triggered either by the government-sponsored import-substituting industrialization policy or by the tendency of Latin American economies to undergo balance of payments crises. These maladjustments  then   boost  rising prices through   either  cost-push and /or  demand-pull  channels .  I nflation was  hence  a manifestation of a deformed economy ."
"26" "On a methodological note, one should be aware that the models of first-generation CEPAL were mostly formalized in discursive form, that is, in a sea of words. As the mathematical revolution slowly settled in economics,  Olivera’s  framework  synthesized  all the institutional bells and whistles so dear to structuralists in the value s  of  fixed  parameters,  thereby  assum ing  rather than explain ing these  features   .   This type of mechanical modeling was widely criticized by economists at CEPAL , for they  overlook ed  the historical and institutional particularities of countries (see Palma and Marcel 1989,  p p.  256-257 ),  thus  limit ing  the range of phenomena the theory encompasse d ."
"27" "A  second  point of relevance regards the  strict  dependence of the autoregressive component on the price of the wage goods , which singled out wage dynamics as  a  mechanical cause of inflation, overlooking, the role mark-up behavior  plays  in the process .  O nce the agricultural problem (that boosts food prices that feed into wages) is resolved,  the  inflation memory component  would vanish . Consequently, the price level would depend entirely on the relative price variation and supply-demand discrepancies.  H owever,  this mechanism cannot  explain   alone  the self-sustaining thrust of inflation on a systematic basis, unless it is simply assumed that both relative prices stability and demand and supply equality are seldom obtained."
"28" "Bacha (2 003, p. 145) would later state, without explaining,  that this understanding of structural inflation became, in the 1980s, the “inertial inflation hypothesis”. But such connection is not trivial and requires a careful account of the changes in methods and communication of ideas.  Olivera’s  contribution reveals a tension under the structuralist banner  that could have prompted such changes .  Th e methodological instability it created  helps  trac ing  the transition to the second  round of this debate  in the  late  1970s .   Crucial to this shift is  Mario Henrique  Simonsen’s   hard-to-frame intellectual track . Surrounded by a complex setting of intellectual and institutional influences,   Simonsen’s  work   provides  a connection between the 1960s development and stabilization debates and the later inflation stabilization controversy along the 1980s , followed  by  James Tobin´s  take on the subject .   Surprisingly ,  the relevance of  Tobin’s  input   has been greatly  downplayed  in the  historical accounts of  inertial inflation  hypothesis .   H e  one of  the first  writer s   to  use  the  expression  “inertial inflation”  and  his writings are filled with the conflict-based understanding of inflation .  Both dimensions are crucial to better comprehend the diversity of  inflation  models that arose in the early 1980s  and, amongst these, the emergence of the inertial inflation hypothesis ."
"29" "T he Simonsen  and Tobin  connection s"
"30" "Mário  Henrique Simonsen (1970) was the first to implement a form al feedback model of inflation  in Brazil .  As we have seen,  Olivera  (1967) had already delineated a simple inflation model with wage-indexation feeding into relative price changes that ultimately affected the rate of inflation.  It is worthy of note that the parlance on inflation-related issues is mostly dominated by developmental issues, such as relative price changes, social aspirations, competing claims by income groups and distributive aspects of economic growth."
"31" "In a regime of chronic inflation, Simonsen added, the real incomes undergo an oscillatory behavior that is virtually consistent at the aggregate level, for when some groups obtain their peak real income, others are at their “trough” real income, others are midway, given the unsynchronized structure of income adjustments, later known as the “ sawtooth  model” of nominal incomes under inflation (V era  2013). In aggregate terms, Simonsen argued, “ everything appears as if individuals, instead of living purchasing power cycles, remained in the comfortable stability of average income levels ”, a point Furtado had made about the dynamic neutrality concept a decade before (see section above). The very asynchrony among the various income peak levels may turn inflation  economically viable. Were all the peak levels to be simultaneously obtained, the result would be the acceleration of price rises. It is thus the “ effect of previous peak levels on the aspirations and expectations that explain the difficulties faced by monetary stabilization ”  Simonsen (1964, p. 20) hence ascribed the central cause of such difficulties to the socio-political background, namely, “the incapacity of economic policy to confront the political problem of distributional compatibility”."
"32" "Simonsen’s  writings   reflect the  standard of theoretical discourse at that period, although it absorbs by proximity the development-laden vocabulary of the Latin American economic debate. Simonsen synthesizes form and content in such a masterful way as to create an analytical framework for the subsequent exchanges among economists on inflation in Brazil.   Departing from  neoclassical  reasoning,   Simonsen  mov ed  in successive approximations  closer  to  Brazilian reality .   After a thorough analysis of the limitations faced by the quantity theory in explaining inflation in Brazil, in a later work ( Simonsen  1970b), he found it more us eful to illustrate his claim   by  means of a model of feedback inflation , as follows:"
"33" "where   denotes the autonomous component of inflation - or the “cost-push factor”, or even the “supply shock component” – which reflects institutional changes such as minimum wage  readjustments, tax increases or  public utilities prices, as well as accidental events, such as bad crops or energy price rises. The parameter    is  the feedback coefficient, that is, the pass-through inflation from the previous period to the present, and has values within the range 0  <   a   <  1, except for the hyperinflationary periods, when its value may exceed unit. At last,   represents the excess demand component; there is a growth rate of output that provokes no inflationary pressure, given by  , so that  ;  being y t  the effective rate of growth of output at a given period t.   By  assuming the absence of adaptive expectations or automatic price adjustments regulated by law (indexation)  according to past inflation ( ), the model illustrates  both  the demand-pull ( ) and the cost-push  and relative price changes  ( )."
"34" "T his  simple expression conveys two important aspects of chronic inflations: the idea that autonomous shocks have a permanent  – although gradually decreasing -  impact on the level of inflation rate, which depends on the  lagged inflation coefficient , given by the parameter  b .  E conomies facing chronic inflation develop mechanisms (such as formal indexation) to reduce its harmful effects it imposes on economic organization of households, firms, markets and government.  T herefore, a  more  disseminated practice of  indexation   (higher value of parameter  a )  leads to a  higher equilibrium rate of inflation."
"35" "Note that focus  lies   o n the self-feeding component that gradually takes  over the behavior of inflation , as the process of adjusting prices according to past inflation spreads throughout the economy.   This aspect is important in fleshing out  the differences in emphasis between his  inflation-feedback model and  Julio  Olivera’s  account.  The latter  underscores  (and analytically derives)  the  “ structural inflation multiplicand ” , which has to do with the changing structure of production under the import-substituting industrialization process of Latin American countries, whereas the self-feeding component receives less attention. In  Simonsen’s  account,  the structural inflation is dubbed  the  “autonomous   component” (the “ c t ” component), but  is  simply  assumed  -  as  a  constant  -   rather than  being  derived in analytical terms , whereas  th e propagating mechanism   ( self-feeding component )   assumes a pivotal role in his model ."
"36" "This apparently minor change in emphasis  from  Olivera  to Simonsen   reflects the very transition from the first to the second round of the monetarist-structuralist controversy, which is why   Simonsen’s  contribution became a cornerstone for subsequent analysis of inflation in Brazil , providing the  framework for those discussions  in the early 1970s , namely: his early distributional conflict perspective, the self-feeding inflation model, the relevance of unsynchronized price and wage adjustments, his “ sawtooth ” diagram illustrating the effects of inflation on nominal incomes, and the cautionary remarks concerning the difficulties involved in price freeze policies, also known as incomes policy, widely adopted along the 1980s in Argentina, Israel and Brazil.   Moreover, he  made constant   efforts  to merge the analysis of the Brazilian case with the overall developments in economy formal theory building, especially those of a North-American lineage."
"37" "Another contribution  helpedt  to connect the t wo rounds of the same decades-long controversy over the causes of inflation,   while  also  bridge d  the  gap  between the  North American  and the Latin-American structuralist lineages ,   In a  largely overlooked paper , James Tobin   (1981)     develop ed  a taxonomy for the diagnostics for inflation that may very well be the 1980s inflation-centered analogue of  Prebisch´s   ( 1949 )   Manifesto . The passive money hypothesis  wa s recast under new terminology and the monetarist plea is quickly dismissed on such terms.  Tobin is most direct and succinct in his classification of the three main types of causes to inflation, namely:  inertial inflation, specific price inflation and conflict inflation ."
"38" "By inertial inflation Tobin means “ the self-replicating pattern of wage and price inflation ”, which   “ once it is built into the system in a consistent manner it continues very much on its own ” (Tobin  1981, p. 23). In such an inertial setting, some prices feed into economy-wide price indexes, and then propagate onto other prices and wages, thereby eliciting the “ stubbornness of built-in patterns of wage and price inflation ” (p. 24) .  However, there exists  a viable equilibrium path of real outcomes,  on which  the rate of inflation offers no threat to economic and political equilibrium. As long as the economy has adapted its conventions, institutions – in which we may include monetary and fiscal accommodative policies - and expectations - especially in regard to relative prices -, inflation poses no distortion to the economic process."
"39" "Finally, Tobin  stresses  “ that inflation is the symptom of deep-rooted social an d  economic contradiction and conflict ” (p. 28).   I f players cannot agree to divide a growing pie, how will they concur with each other when dividing a smaller one?  Moreover, Tobin draw s attention to the  aspiration gap  that Rowthorn (1977)  had  explicitly modeled a few years before.  An  orthodox policy restricting demand would curb rates of growth of  potential output,  of  real wages and  of  real returns on capital investment , while  not necessarily  holding down  the “ standards of real income progress to which employed workers are accustomed or the profit rates that managers and shareowners expect ” (p. 28). In this sense,  an  economic downturn may , through  further  conflict ,  widen the aspiration gap,  boosting  inflation."
"40" "Tobin’s missing chapter is important for it reflects the  zeitgeist  at the onset of the troubled 1980s, a period in which the economics of the Keynesian Neoclassical Synthesis was fast-becoming a heterodoxy, as the perception of “disarray” overtook  the  economics profession by assault  ( Goodfriend   and  King 1997).  Moreover, it  unearth s  a relevant  network  of ideas   that provided  a North-American  precursor to a seemingly  Latin American issue."
"41" "The n ext  section looks into the second round of the controversy over price stabilization between the monetarist orthodoxy and the somewhat hard-to-define heterodoxy in Brazil (see Bacha 1982 and  Toye  1987).  Structural causes of price rises were sensitively downplayed, as the focus of theory shifted towards the propagation mechanisms of inflation, in contrast with the early debates on the relation between economic development and inflation. From the institutional standpoint, the “Brazilian indexing-style” ( Fishlow  1974) made up for the inflation-magnifying mechanism readily recognized as the chief distinction making up for the allegedly unique case of Brazilian experienc e with inflation - e.g.,  Arida  and   Resende  (1985) -, instead of structural and historical features emphasized by the structuralist models of the first generation, as we have seen in Section 2 above."
"42" "The Second Round of the Monetarist-Structuralist Controversy"
"43" "The world inflation of the 1970s  rekindled   debates  over inflationary processes ( Harberger  1978). The 1973 OPEC-driven oil price rise generated a worldwide inflationary bulge that set the grounds for an orthodox reaction against the Keynesian-inherited policies governments led all along the post-War period. The classic divergence reemerged with strength, eliciting a revival of academic and policy-oriented debates. As we have seen above, the long-lived inflations in Latin  America provided the pretext for a further deepening of analysis on such matters. Some ideas were fished out from a not-so-distant past and reshaped under the guises of formal mathematical models, whilst new ones sprung out of the pressing economic landscape."
"44" "The second-round of the monetarist-structuralist controversy was triggered by the mid-1970s. The intellectual battle between monetarist economists - such as  Pastore  (1969) Contador (1977),  Lemgruber  (1978), among others stationed at FGV-RJ – and structuralist-(neo)-Keynesian economists was thus fought, at first, on the empirical turf. The main issues regarded the endogeneity of money supply in Brazil ( Lemgruber  1977 and Cardoso 1979 ;  1918c), the effects of public deficits on the inflation via an accommodative monetary policy (e.g. Contador 1974 ;  1977 and Cardoso [1980] 1981a ;  1983) and the effects of restrictive demand-management policies upon inflation rates by means of estimations of  the Phillips curve for Brazil.  The dispute became more contentious in the early 19 80s , for intellectual and political reasons. Let us start with the latter aspect."
"45" "The 1980s were turbulent times and the thin line separating academia from policy-making in Brazil evaporated in the midst of a political struggle against the exiting twenty-year-old military regime. In this sense, the writings of such scholars reflect this political atmosphere filled with a drive for change, intellectually fueled by the challenges History posed to Latin American societies. As the political transition became increasingly more secure and the dormant inflationary “dragon” arose from its twenty-year “harmless” sleep, the politically militant arguments gave place to more technical proposals. An important part of such change has to do with their integration to public offices and their economic teams. Moreover, the economics profession began converging to a macroeconomic consensus at the international institutional level, where most of the scholars under our scrutiny held liaisons in the most prestigious academic and multilateral institutions."
"46" "The external debt crisis and the interest rates hikes that followed the oil shock in 1979 triggered a massive inflationary reaction in previously stable developed economies. But the tragedy that befell the Latin-American economies was many times more intense. The turmoil was rapidly associated with the immense resource constraint these economies suffered, eliciting a profusion of theoretical analyses of this rare phenomenon of rapidly increasing rates of inflation, historically attached to economies disorganized by wars and the ensuing occupation of the defeated countries. The classic cases of hyperinflation in the first half of the 20th century seemed however structurally different from the hardships  Latin America  endured ,  although the process had many similarities with those experiences, which required further investigation."
"47" "In  Brazil, the  first half of the 1980s witnessed large-scale social and political transformations, as the military regime raised growin g opposition in numerous fractions  of society. As it so happens, economists’ battling energy was harnessed towards actively trying to influence  policymaking.     A bundant historical material on  this period is prompt to show  the stream of short articles published in newspapers  engaged in a  sweeping controversy .   Contributions  suggested  ways   of  redirect ing  policy away from  full-fledged  orthodox measures  launched by the Minister of Finance Antonio  Delfim   Netto  in 1980 in President  Figueiredo’s  term, the last president of the military regime that rose to power in 1964.   These latter were perceived as a severe hindrance to economic growth at the very moment the country needed most a booming economy, that is, during a major political transition."
"48" "The neo-structuralist economists involved in the controversy found it quite striking that  macroeconomic  “fundamentals” (budget and current accounts  of the balance of payments ) were in place, but left inflation unscathed. This raised doubts concerning the relationship between budget deficits and inflation, as well as the level of proportionality - and the true direction of causality - between monetary aggregates a nd prices. For instance,  Arida  and   Resende  (1985) were adamant in claiming the Brazilian budget deficit was close to zero and the current accounts of the balance of  payments were on the positive side. And yet, inflation seemed to be stable at three-digit rates.  In this vein, it was argued that when contracts incorporate past inflation – by means of index-linkages or backward-looking behavior - conventional anti-inflationary measures of aggregate-demand restriction become ineffective and end up exciting social unrest, once it increases unemployment and aggravates recession."
"49" "Therefore, a mix of political discontent and theoretical rebellion fueled a yearning for institutional change and reform both in policy and in academia. As a result, it was po litics that eventually summoned  seemingly irreconcilable economic approaches under the banner of heterodoxy.  However ,  as we point out below, when this feeble  economic consensus  was challenged later on -  as the economist s behind it became policymakers -  compromise proved to be not only partial, but also too soft."
"50" "The literature alluding to this period in the intellectual history of Brazilian economics usually skips through the stage of the controversy, in which academic exchanges happen, and moves quickly to assess how these ideas have influenced policy design.   Alternatively, we  assess  the analytical developments set forth by these scholars ,     highlight ing  the tensions that emerged within the “inertial inflation paradigm” ( Arida  1992) from the late 1970s until the mid-1990s and quickly gained notoriety in the policy circles and academia."
"51" "The combination of  internal and external forces   unraveled  a second-generation structuralist transformation problem, in reference to Craven’s (1994) analysis of CEPAL’s self-contentious first moments. However, at some variance with the first-generation problem, we sustain that this change was not a complete rupture with their previous stance on inflation theories.  It was rather  a displacement of emphasis , allowing for a higher  level  of  consistency  with conventional readings of inflation. The  stripping  of  inflation theory of its  structural  and  institutional  aspects  smooth ed  the transition of the  concept  of inflation inertia  in the first round – meaning a self-replicating pattern of rising prices -  to ward  the meaning prescribe d by New Keynesian economics .  The following  sections narrate how the internal analytical puzzles within the structuralist camp of the second generation facilitated this move."
"52" "The second-generation structuralist transformation problem"
"53" "The self-entitled heterodox opposition to alleged monetarist  status quo  centered on the latter’s apparent oblivion to an “indubitable” fact (see Simonsen 1989, p.14), namely: that the widespread use of indexing schemes under persistently high rates of inflation had led to a substitution of domestic currency as unit of account of contracts for other referential assets, whose values are denoted in terms of the legal tender, which comes to define the terms at which contract obligations are met ( Carvalho  1994, p. 109). In a word, indexation tends to institutionalize the price-wage spiral (Simonsen 1995, p. 5) and imparts a mechanical drive to it (see  Heymann   and   Leijonhufvud  1995, p. 31)."
"54" "In the early 1980s,  heterodox economists   viewed  inflation in Brazil as  a fully- inertial phenomena ( Resende  and  Lopes 1982;  Arida  1983b and 1984;  Resende  1984; Lopes  1984a; Pereira and Nakano, 1984 ). However, consensus is a rare phenomenon and often conceals profound differences among its participants.  Despite  the agreement upon the inertial character of inflation, five different models of inflation  competed to explain  inflation dynamics in the Brazilian economy during the 1980s . T he rational expectations model   (Sargent and  Wallace, 1975 ; Sargent 1982 ) and  the  Friedman- and Phelps-type  adaptive expectations model s  (e.g.,  Cagan  1956)   rationalize  acute inflationary processes widely covered by the literature and shall not occupy us here.  Alternatively,  the institutional  interpretation    state d  that in a highly indexed economy, such as Brazil, a great portion of basic macroeconomic prices (exchange rate, interest rate, wage etc.) “ rise  by decree”, according to the previous period´s inflation rate.  Alternatively, we  focus on t wo   neo-structuralist  explanations  of a fully inertial inflation , namely:  the relative wages model and the distributional conflict model."
"55" "T he relative wages model  proposes that institutional, political and cultural factors affecting the labor market engender workers´ resistance to (downward) changes in relative wages. In an inflationary environment and unsynchronized structure of readjustments, workers seek to periodically restore their nominal wages according to the peak real wage, thereby stabilizing both the average real wage effective in the previous period and, in the absence of exogenous shocks, the wage structure as well.    It consists of  contributions by Silva (1981) and  Bresser  Pereira  and   Nakano (1984), as well as by economists at the PUC-RJ school, such as  Resende  (1979), Lopes (1979),  Resende   and  Lopes (1979)."
"56" "T he distributional conflict model  is  found mostly in   Arida  (1982, 1992),   Bresser  Pereira and Nakano (1983),  Modiano  (1985, 1988),  Arida  and   Resende  (1986),  Franco (1986),  and less prominently in  Modiano  (1987) and Lopes (1983  and 1989) . In this setting, inflation results from the social impasse derived from an unresolved distributional imbalance between profits and wages – rents, taxes and other forms of income - that may lead, given some specific hypotheses, to the inertial behavior of inflation. Entrepreneurs and workers have limited power in determining the others´ effective income. The problem relates to the dynamics of the “aspiration gap” ( Rowthorn  1977) that triggers the wage-price escalation up to levels that simply reproduce the imbalances previously observed.  Agents act to defend their peak real wage levels, and the relevant aspiration gap is thus given by the difference between peak and average real wage levels. This gap defines the degree of structural distributional incompatibility, which stems from a social impasse among the main income groups or classes, not from uncertainty or coordination failures in individual agents´ potentially consistent plans of action. This means that inflation inertia will result as long as the terms of conflict in distribution are stable. The level of inflation will be a function of the size of distributional imbalance and of the system of indexation, be it formal or informal."
"57" "Both approaches  are heterodox in their essence, for the strict refusal of aggregate demand restriction measures.   They also  share the concept of “inflationary equilibrium”, already present in Tobin’s (1980) assessment of stabilization policy, in which changes in the regime of nominal wages readjustments would only push prices upwards, leaving average real wages unaffected. However, the forces driving this equilibrium have slightly distinct properties.  The main difference between these two   inertialist  models refer s  to assumptions regarding  firms’ mark-up behavior and the ensuing matter of worker s’ rational decision-making. This  distinction reflects ,  above all ,  the more or less specified form assumed by “distributional conflict” in these models.  For  Bresser  Pereira and Nakano (FGV-SP)  inflation is but a symptom of the inherently conflictive character of the economic system, whereas in most of the PUC-RJ models , it is mostly due to the staggered structure of government-sponsored wage indexation scheme.  In other words, this  latter modeling strategy takes conflict as more of a placeholder – altogether with other types of exogenous shocks - than a substantial first-order determinant of inflation. It is really an assumption about labor market institutions, not of the economy-wide distributional dynamics. Workers´ aspirations are formally faced with an exogenous upper bound, to which they must rationally look up to, so as to at least maintain their relative position within the structure of claims on output. This institutional detail of indexation is a recurrent theme in the models crafted on these static properties of workers’ behavior."
"58" "At a more abstract level,  the  relative wages  models (un-)intentionally  approximate  structuralist s   to  New Keynesian approaches ; hence the relevance of Tobin’s input  (see  section 2  above) .  Through this point of contact, doubts were raised which concerned the rationality premises inserted in the model. The first involved explaining why workers bothered claiming for nominal wage increases, if their efforts are self-defeating in the inertial inflation case (  or  ). The second question involves providing analytical support to the notion that workers would choose to link wages to past inflation ( ) .  Finally, there was a decades-long puzzle regarding the policy implications of the inertial inflation dynamics, namely: is it possible to stabilize inflation without upsetting the distributional profile of the economy? In other words, is the distributional neutrality condition a binding constraint  of a stabilization procedure?   We  turn to these  aspects next."
"59" "The  puzzles within the  inertial inflation  hypothesis"
"60" "Two basic puzzles beset the inertial inflation “theory” as it was stated by Lopes (1980, 1984a),  Arida  (1982) and Lara  Resende  (1979), namely: why would workers persist in bidding up nominal wages if these latter would always result in the same real wages as before? And: why, in doing so, they would link wage increases to past rates of inflation? Serrano (2010,  p p. 407-409) has  found no “rational justification”, in their models, for workers to behave in such a fashion. In fact, Lopes (1984b) argues clearly that such  behavior  is independent of the existence of indexation rules or overall index-linkages of contracts, or even of adaptive expectations by economic agents; a straightforward defensive  behavior  or outright militancy by workers could guarantee successive rounds of wage negotiation aiming at restoring peak real wage levels."
"61" "Wage Setting and Mark-up Behaviors: a basic framework"
"62" "Following Bacha and  Lopes (1983, p. 3), we begin by defining the real average wage in an indexed economic setting, which can be formally stated as"
"63" "where    stands for the natural log of average real wage (and is assumed to be always greater than zero),   for the peak real wage,   for the inflation rate and   depicts the number of within-year revision of wages ( , for yearly revisions; and   for quarterly wage adjustments) . If we insert the above relationship into a simple functional distribution profile of the whole economy"
"64" "in  which   denotes the natural log of real income and m, real markup rate, and   for real wages .  If we assume  , we find that"
"65" "that  is, real  markup  decreases in response to increases in peak real wage, and responds positively and proportionally to price inflation, other variables held constant. In taking time-derivatives of the log values of the variables (and assuming  , given its exogenous definition by policy) we get growth rates of each one, denoted by the “hat” sign above them:"
"66" "or"
"67" "From the above relation, we can delineate three cases. First, a real  markup  rate ( ) growing at par with real output implies immediately that  . That is, changes in nominal wages have null effect on the distribution of income, and acceleration of inflation ( ) results entirely from  attempts to raise real wage peak levels ( ). Moreover, firms accrue every gain from economic growth. Second,   would require frequent adjustments on the part of firms to restore their desired real mark-up rate. This is the stand taken by Bresser Pereira and Nakano (1984) and the PUC-Rio structuralists at their first moments in the debate (see section 5.2 above). The chief point is that incomplete power of groups over the  behavior  of competing groups implies that adaptation is never complete: the permanent gap separating desired and average real incomes inherently entices new rounds of dispute. Above all, desired levels of income were in no way deemed constant and could be affected by the very process of economic development. The systematically alternated attempts to achieve desired real incomes by each fraction of income claimants infused an internal thrust into inflation, keeping its rates stable at a given level if peak levels remained constant. Nominal mark-ups could vary freely and faced no determinate upper bound; also, the non-labor costs of imported inputs are taken into consideration, together with interest as a cost-push factor (or the  Patman  effect) and the inflation-rising force of changing tax rates. Conflict-based inertial inflation is thus a potentially unstable phenomenon."
"68" "Alternatively, we can see the third possible case, whereby a constant real  markup  rate ( ) implies that"
"69" "This relationship means that the peak real wage varies with acceleration of price increases and real output growth.  Solving for a speeding-up inflation, we get"
"70" "which  clearly holds workers income claims accountable for the increase in inflation rates. Were peak wage growth to be paired up with output growth ( ), inflation would be held constant ( ). Thus conflict can be destabilizing solely because wages are pushing beyond the socially  agreed upon income share (which is frequently termed “underlying structure of income distribution”). Then, understanding and taming inflation requires reconciling wage demands with other groups’ claims. Wage indexation is thus of paramount importance in this approach. We find such an assumption in the main contributions from the PUC-Rio school."
"71" "Next we look into what this stand on wage setting  behavior  implies in terms of firm  behavior .  If firms seek to maintain a constant real mark-up over costs, they will adjust nominal mark-ups along the cycle of nominal wage claims. Firms are then logically understood as fully defensive decision-makers.  But, if firms simply react to a rise in wage bidding, what triggers workers demands? Conflict can arise for a myriad of reasons. In the structuralist tradition, discrepancy between real wage and workers’ targeted real wage stems from a sudden relative price change, such as a large-scale devaluation of the domestic currency or, in the case of Latin American  Structuralism, high food prices.  This aspect points to the question regarding the magnitude of the lagged-inflation pass-through coefficient."
"72" "To provide some support to their claims, economists at PUC-Rio  marshaled  empirical evidence on the assumptions of   and  ; that is, indexation was believed to impose, at that time, a full-memory to the price system, generating the fully inertial component in the absence of shocks. However, the conflict dynamics was formally deemphasized in their narrative, by recognizing that incomes policy pursued by the government was the chief cause of the systematic cost-of-living wage adjustments. From this viewpoint, we could then formalize the conflicting claims component as a function of the difference between average and effective real wages as follows:  . Conflict would thus raise the level ( ), but could not explain the inherent momentum, of inflation (given by the parameter  )."
"73" "In sum , the principal assumptions behind the differences between the  inertialist  groups regard firms’ mark-up  behavior  and workers’ aspirations. This distinction reflects above all the more or less specified form assumed by “distributional conflict” in these inflation models. As we have seen, both sides share the concept of “inflationary equilibrium”, in which changes in the regime of nominal wages readjustments would only stoke up prices, leaving average real wages unaffected. However, the forces driving this equilibrium have slightly distinct properties.   Antagonism between groups collapses into an assumption about labor market institutions, bypassing the complexities of economy-wide distributional dynamics.   Workers´ aspirations are formally given an exogenous upper bound, to which they must rationally look up to, so as to at least maintain their relative position within the structure of claims on output. No discussion is carried out as to why this peak real wage should remain constant. In its place, the institutional detail of  indexation is a recurrent theme in the models crafted on these static properties of workers’  behavior . It  fulfills  the blanks regarding workers’ rationality premises. The first involved explaining why workers bothered claiming for nominal wage increases, if their efforts are self-defeating in the inertial inflation case (  or  ). The second question implied providing analytical support to the notion that workers would choose to link wages to past inflation ( )."
"74" "It is rather telling that such features would pose any trouble to these scholars. If we recall the works by George Perry (1980), Charles  Schultze  (1981), Arthur  Okun  (1981) and James Tobin (1981) on the self-sustaining thrust of inflation, they relied on conventions, norms and general institutional details, which were deemed perfectly suitable factors accounting for such a  behavior . Given their academic background, it is yet more puzzling that the economists at PUC-Rio found it hard yielding to an argument based on such ad hoc assumptions points to the self-imposed requirement of conforming methodologically, in some degree, to the emergent phenomenon of the rational expectations canon. At some point, the argument goes, forward-looking indicators would have to override workers’  behavior ."
"75" "This requirement engendered enormous analytical trouble.  A  fisrt  solution  consisted in assuming several exogenous unanticipated shocks coming from government-endorsed policies such as monetary correction of public taxes and of public utilities fees, maxi-devaluations of the domestic currency, increased frequency of wage adjustments and so on. Under such circumstances, relative price changes would fool workers into “money illusion”, which would trigger wage bid-ups in the subsequent period. In the absence of such shocks, however, it became rather uncomfortable to couch the self-sustaining  behavior  of inflation on workers’ adaptive  behavior ."
"76" "The second solution was found in the relative wage dynamics, a shortcoming that  Arida  (1982) had previously underlined without raising any alarm. A copious literature of the 1960s and 1970s had shown that discrepancies among wages in different industries could give rise to catching-up  behavior  of labor compensations that would create sustained cost-push pressures on inflation, rendering price indices inflexible downwards (see  Laidler  & Parkin 1975). This inter-sector wage dispute solves the problem but leave s  open the question of how workers obtain the information concerning wage adjustments in other sectors.  Besides, why should workers disregard in today’s wage bid, as in backward induction, future wage adjustments claimed by workers in other sectors as a response to the disequilibrium generated by today’s claim? What would prevent the explosive  behavior  of wage claims? The answer lies in one expression: wage indexation.  Once propagation  mechanisms ha ve  taken over the determination of price setting  behavior , a s uccess ful  stabilization  hinges   necessarily on  dismantling the widely indexed price and wage structures."
"77" "However differently each camp saw it fit to classify the causes of inflation and its propagating mechanisms, the nature of policies required to deal with them were not in dispute; both sides of the structuralist camp disparaged any hope  leveled  at the efficacy of demand-management anti-inflationary measures. Alternatively, stabilization of prices should be achieved through an adequate management of wage policy coupled with a disciplining of mark-up rates. Conflict should be ameliorated somehow by way of a social pact.  Uncertainty  came down to one point: would society adhere to it in a voluntary or compulsory fashion? Next section  thus  addresses the policy implications of the PUC-Rio approach, that is, the requirement of distributional neutrality."
"78" "The binding neutrality condition"
"79" "A successful stabilization should see to three binding conditions. First, the structural distributional incompatibility had to be stabilized, which meant keeping steady the difference between negotiated and actual wages. Second, the wage indexation had to be suppressed and, third, the system’s  inflationary memory had to be wiped out. It should be sufficiently clear by now that these aspects are not independent from each other. For instance, transposing the distributional profile from a highly inflationary environment to one where prices rise only moderately amounts to reproducing the previous inflation-breeding distributive structure. Wiping out the inflationary memory would become, under such circumstances, almost impossible, and therefore, the same could be said of eliminating wage indexation schemes."
"80" "Following Tobin (1981), Bacha (1988), pointed out that inertia could be understood as a coordination problem inside a soccer stadium, where the crowd stands in order to watch the game, when it would better suit the spectators to sit down. However, that would only be obtained if everybody sat simultaneously. It would require the referee (meaning the government) to stop the game and threaten to proceed only after everyone has sat down. In economic terms, inflation is a result of unsynchronized  behavior  in price and wage adjustments. This diagnosis entailed a policy prescription that would bring all incomes to their average levels – and hence to mutual consistency -, therefore discouraging agents to try and run ahead of inflation - or, metaphorically, standing up again on the bunkers in order to get a privileged view of the game.  This is termed the “distributional neutrality” condition for a sustainable stabilization, and it had two facets.  The first  implied achieving the conditions for distributive neutrality at the analytical level. The second was sought after at the policy level, albeit conditioned by the former, to which we now turn in more detail."
"81" "Lopes (1986,  C hapter 6) provided a rather didactic exposition of the “inflationary process”, which is remarkably telling of the way economists at PUC-RJ pictured inflation. The starting point is the typical neo-structuralist national accounting identities, as in Taylor (1983). After constructing both the indexed wage equation and the inflation equation, closing the model allows us to attain the inflationary equilibrium:"
"82" "in  which   denotes the change in nominal mark-up rates and  ; as usual, “hats” over variables indicate proportional rates of change. In this simplified version, inflation drifts are caused by variations in mark-up rates. Should firms stick to the average profit rate of the economy, the inflationary equilibrium is guaranteed. But how do wages behave in this economy? Whenever inflation exceeds expectations, firms adjust their mark-ups to maintain real profit rates. By contrast, when inflation rises, real wages are eroded and income distribution is shifted in  favor  of firms. To see that more clearly, we can define   as the wage share, which can also be written in terms of real wage ( ) and labor productivity ( ):  . Taking logs and then time-derivatives gives us the rate of change in the wage share:  ; the author also defines a target inflation rate ( ) workers take into account during the bargaining process. Lopes reached the conclusion that altering the inflation target affects the distribution of income by the following relationship:"
"83" "This result unveils the daunting difficulties involved in any stabilization plan. Whatever outcome should hold which differs from workers fully achieving the targeted inflation rate implies a change in the distributional profile of the economy. If targets are underestimated, wage share is reduced from its inflationary equilibrium point. By contrast, if policy is more effective than predicted, distribution shifts in  favor  of wages. In the final analysis, inflation will be curbed by use of policy instruments to suppress claims from agents facing relative income losses. How should this be achieved?"
"84" "The analytical limits of the model were disquietingly narrow, leaving out the solution to distributional effects across firms and across labor groups, as well as functional distribution categories. This hurdle pointed to one additional problem: the inter-sector lack of synchronism of wage and price adjustments. Eduardo  Modiano  (1988) proposed one way around this obstacle, which consisted of gradually coordinating contract adjustments by means of a set of conversion rules that steered all contract values towards their average real values, measured in a stable unit of account in the post-disinflation period. Doing so required that no major redistributions of income and wealth were attempted. If these conditions were to hold, a disinflationary “neutral shock” could restore the patterns of income and wealth distribution prior to disinflation. Underlying this neutrality condition was the notion that a fully inertial inflation kept real incomes dynamically stable at their average levels; or, as Furtado (1954) claimed back in the 1950s, it was distributionally and dynamically neutral."
"85" "In the model sketch ed out above, as well as in   Arida’s  (1982) model, a monetary contraction or a policy of price controls would necessarily imply a downward adjustment of the mark-up rate. Therefore, an adequate policy of wage control should accompany such disinflation measures, in order to maintain intact the pre-stabilization distributional profile. Needless to say, achieving such a  result in the real world would prove much more complex than theory allowed one to grasp. Besides, a whole range of details were only seen within the scope of partial equilibrium analysis, such as exchange rate management, the conversion of tax collecting intervals and interest rates to the new state of low inflation, as well as the portfolio adjustments during the transition."
"86" "Concluding Remarks"
"87" "Th is  paper   aimed  to  highlight   the analytical  tensions within  t he inertial inflation framework, which help to understand why this theoretical endeavor  did not manage to muddle through the emergence of a new neoclassical synthesis.  B y  match ing   together  normally unrelated threa ds of historical developments, w e provide a  narrative in which the legacy  from the Latin American S tructuralist s  is gradually absorbed and processed into the newly emerging modeling mathematical formats of the new neoclassical synthesis, at least in its New Keynesian camp. We aimed at revealing the tensions and the selective process by which certain features are dropped in favor of more model-friendly assumptions.   The emphasis and connection among the contributions by  Furtado,  Olivera , Simonsen and Tobin constitute the main novelties of this paper. They have been duly noticed in early works in the history of economic ideas, but our narrative stands out in that we seek not to provide a rational reading of history, but rather an account of how difficult the construction of consensus can be within the community of economists, even on a n  abstract theoretical level."
"88" "Instability stemmed first and foremost from the choice of method. The mechanical models built by the neo-structuralists (unintendedly) de-emphasized institutions and structural features, which were denoted by specific “parameters” in a-historic deductive models. Consequently, the second-generation models of inflation of this lineage tended to assume – rather than explain - long-term processes of structural change and their distributional imbalances. T he contributions  made  by the group of economists from PUC-RJ,  as well as in the contributions by  Bresser  Pereira and  Nakano (1984), from FGV-SP school of economics,  under-rated basic causes of inflation in favor of  the importance   of  the p ropagation mechanisms embodied  in indexation practices."
"89" "Particularly regarding the PUC-RJ economists,   t he role played by distributional conflict rapidly turned into a “supporting character” in the plot, remembered only when it suited the argument  being made.  Once the notion of conflict was no longer useful, the inertial inflation story was stripped from its structuralist substance, and its scope was massively narrowed down to  the spontaneous non- synchronization of price and wage readjustments . As a result, the inertial inflation hypothesis became more congenial to the New Keynesian  f ormulations,  found in  Calvo  (1978 ), Gray (1976)  and  Fisch er (1977) ."
"90" "Of course t he  decline  of the inertial inflation hypothesis  does not  rest  solely  on these analytical problems and discourse format issues; yet, one cannot deny their relevance.  Despite differences   in working  the causes and propagating mechanisms  of inflation , the policies required to deal with them were not in dispute; both sides were highly skeptical of the efficacy of orthodox anti-inflationary measures. Stabilization of prices should be achieved, alternatively, through an adequate management of wage policy coupled with a disciplining of mark-up rates. Conflict should be ameliorated somehow by way of a social pact. The question was: would society adhere to it in a voluntary or compulsory fashion? This points our discussion to the policy implications of these theories.  An   inertial inflation   required the attainment  of distributional neutrality  at the policy level, which proved disquietingly hard to resolve in both the analytical and the policy dimensions .  The analytical requirements of distributive neutrality, as clearly outlined by Lopes (1986, p. 50-62), proved not only exceedingly unrealistic, but also entailed impractical – and, to some extent, untenable - policy requirements for achieving distributive neutrality in the real world. T he  diversity of approaches marching under the banner of the “inertial inflation hypothesis”  provided little help  in sorting  out  these policy puzzles .  The  theory failed to meet the required   external consistency, as  reality proved resistant to the policies derived from  it ,.  The  ensuing  evasion of the small group of  PUC-RJ economists from the  inertialist  camp concluded the destabilizing process of the theory it was supposed to deliver."
"91" "Future material will further  substantiate the  instability of the inertial inflation hypothesis by fleshing out tensions within the academic community of the economics profession in Brazil .  As we have hinted above, t he  works scholars at  PUC-RJ published along the 1980s gradually evolved from a seemingly distributional conflict approach - incarnated in a relative wages model of inflation - to a fiscally - dominated understanding of inflation .  Hence, t wo  further  sets of problems  must be tackled .  First,  the need to differentiate the academic group, situated in the economics department of PUC-RJ, from the other “heterodox” proposals in the aftermath of Cruzado Plan’s debacle. The development of the inflationary crisis provided further refinement in the understanding of the dynamics of inflation in Brazil, which may have defined the magnitude of political constraints faced by any stabilization policy in the context of an accelerating inflationary process. The  second  aspect of this change in both focus and emphasis concerns the fiscal element, which receives increasing importance towards the end of the 1980s and becomes central by 1994.  These two aspects can reveal how these scholars-turned-policymakers’ works smoothed the transition from this regional understanding of inflationary inertia to the  concept upheld by the  New Neoclassical Synthesis , thus accounting for the decline of the inertial inflation hypothesis in Latin America."
"92" "REFERENCES"
"93" "Arida , Pérsio.   1982 .   “ Austeridade, Autotelia e Autotomia ” .  Texto para Discussão   TD-36 ,   PUC-RJ. September."
"94" "Arida, Pérsio.   (org.). 1983a.   Dívida externa, recessão e ajuste estrutural: o Brasil diante da crise . 3ª. Ed. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra."
"95" "______.1983b .   “ Neutralizar a inflação: uma ideia promissora ” .  Economia e Perspectiva   (Boletim do Conselho Regional de Economia de São Paulo), jul. 1983."
"96" "______.  1984 .   “ A ORTN serve apenas para zerar a inflação inercial ”   Gazeta Mercantil , october."
"97" "______. 1992 .   Essays on Brazilian stabilization programs . PhD Thesis, MIT.  Mimeo."
"98" "______; Resende , André;  Rozenwurcel , Guillermo;  Bruno , Michael.  1986.   Inflação zero: Brasil, Argentina e Israel . Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra."
"99" "______; Resende , André.  1986 .   “ Inflação Inercial e reforma monetária ” . In:  Inflação Zero - Brasil, Argentina e Israel,  Pérsio Arida e A. Lara-Resende (org), Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra , pp. 9-36"
"100" "Arndt , Heinz Wolfgang .  1985.  “ The origins of structuralism ”,   World Development , 13 ( 2 ):  151-159."
"101" "Bacha , E.  1982a.  Introdução à macroeconomia: uma perspectiva brasileira . Rio de Janeiro, Campus, 1982. 204 p."
"102" "_____.   1983 .   “ Por uma política econômica positiva ”   In:  Arida, P.  Dívida Externa, recessão e Ajuste Estrutural: O Brasil diante da Crise . Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra,  p p.171-180."
"103" "_____. 1987 .   “ A estagnação econômica da América Latina ”,   Revista Brasileira de Econonomia , 42 ( 4 ): 395-409 ,  O ctober- D ecember ,  Rio de Janeiro,."
"104" "______.  1988 .   “ Moeda, inércia e conflito: reflexões sobre políticas de estabilização no Brasil ” ,   Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico .  18 ( 1 ):  1 - 16,  April ."
"105" "______. 1990.  “ A  three-gap model of foreign transfers and the GDP growth rate in developing countries ”,   Journal of Development Economics , 32 : 279-296 , North-Holland ."
"106" "______.  1994 .   “ O fisco e a inflação: uma interpretação do caso brasileiro ” .   Revista de Economia Política . 14 ( 1 ):  5 - 17, janeiro-março."
"107" "______. 2003 .   “ Reflexões Pós-Cepalinas sobre Inflação e Crise Externa ” .  Revista de Economia Política , 23 ( 3 ): 143-150 , julho-setembro."
"108" "Bacha   E.   and Lopes ,  F. L. 1983 .   “ Inflation, growth and wage policy: in search of a Brazilian paradigm ” .  Journal of Development Economics , 13 ( 1-2 ):  1-20."
"109" "Baer, W. And  Kerstenetzky , I.  1964 .   Inflation and Growth in Latin America.   Homewood, Ill.: Irwin."
"110" "Baer, Werner.  1967.  “ The Inflation Controversy in Latin America: A Survey. ”   Latin American Research Review , 2 ( 2 ): 3-25  ( Spring ) ."
"111" "Bastos, Carlos  Pinkusfeld  Monteiro .  2002 .   Price stabilization in Brazil: a classical interpretation for an indexed nominal interest rate economy . (PhD Thesis) -   New School of Social Research, NY, March."
"112" "______; Mello  Neto , Mario Rubens.   20 14 .   “ Moeda, Inércia, Conflito, o Fisco e a Inflação: Teoria e Retórica dos Economistas da PUC-RJ ” . Revista Econômica,    16(1): 1-31."
"113" "Bianchi, Ana Maria .  2016.   “ Albert O. Hirschman and the Structuralist–Monetarist Debate in Latin America ” .  Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology ,  34B :  101-122 . DOI: 10.1108/S0743-41542016000034B014"
"114" "Biderman , C.;  Cozac  ,  L.F.;  Rego , J. M.   1996 .   Conversas com economistas brasileiros . São Paulo: Editora 34."
"115" "Boianovsky , Mauro .  2012.   “ Celso Furtado and the Structuralist-Monetarist Debate on Economic Stabilization in Latin America ” .   History of Political Economy,  44 ( 2 ): 277-330 , Duke University Press."
"116" "Bresser Pereira, L.C. and  Nakano, Yoshiaki. 1984.   “ Fatores aceleradores, mantenedores e sancionadores da Inflação ” .  Revista de Economia Política   4(1) : 5-22 , janeiro-março."
"117" "______. 2010 .   A inflação inercial descoberta .  Revista de Economia Contemporânea , 14 (1) : 167-192 , janeiro . ."
"118" "Bronfenbrenner , Martin;  Holzman , Franklyn .  1963.  “ Survey of inflation theories ” .  The American Economic Review , 53 ( 4 ): 593-66  (September) ."
"119" "Calvo , Guillermo A. 1978.  “ On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy. ”   Econometrica.   46 ( 6 ): 1411-1428  (November)."
"120" "Camargo, José Márcio.  1983 .   “ Do milagre à crise: a economia brasileira nos anos oitenta. ”  In: Arida, P.  Dívida Externa, recessão e Ajuste Estrutural: O Brasil diante da Crise . Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra ,  p p. 181-188."
"121" "Carvalho,  Fernando J. Cardim.  1994.   “ Reforma monetária, indexação generalizada e o plano de estabilização ”,   Revista de Economia Política,  v. 14, n. 2(54) : 108-113 , abril-junho."
"122" "Contador , Cláudio R. 1977 .   “ O efeito realimentador da correção monetária ” .  Pesquisa e Planejamento econômico.  Rio de Janeiro, 7(3): 663-680, dezembro."
"123" "Felix , David.  1962 .   “ An alternative view of the  ‘ monetarist ’ - ‘ structuralist ’  controversy ”,   Latin American issues: essays and comments  (edited by Albert O. Hirschman). New York: The Twentieth Century Fund,  p p. 81-93."
"124" "Fischer , Stanley. 1977 .   “ Wage indexation and macroeconomic stability ”.  Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , Elsevier, vol. 5(1):107-147, January."
"125" "Franco ,  G ustavo  H.  B   .   1986 .   Aspects of the Economics of Hyperinflation: Theoretical Issues and Historical Studies of Four European Hyperinflations , Ph.D. diss ..   Harvard University."
"126" "______. 1995.  O Plano Real e outros ensaios , Editora Francisco Alves, Rio de Janeiro."
"127" "Friedman , Milton. 1963 .   Inflation: Causes and Consequences . New York: Asia Publishing House."
"128" "______.  1974 . “ Monetary correction ”  In:  Essays on inflation and indexation .  American Enterprise Institute. p. 25-61."
"129" "Gray , Jo Anna.  1976.  “ Wage indexation: a macroeconomic approach ”.   Journal of Monetary Economics  (2) :  221–235 ."
"130" "Gudin ,  Eugênio . 1962 .   “ Inflation in Latin America ”  In:  Inflation , edited by D. C. Hague,  London: Macmillan ,  pp. 342–358 ."
"131" "Harberger , Arnold C.   1978 .   “ A Primer on Inflation ” .  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,  10(4), pp. 505-21."
"132" "Harvey , David. 1989 .   The condition of postmodernity: an enquiry into the origins of cultural change . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell."
"133" "Hirschman , A lbert O .  1962 .   Latin American issues: essays and comments . New York: The Twentieth Century Fund."
"134" "Little , I an  M alcolm  D avid .   1982 .   Economic Development: Theory, Policy and international Relations .  New   York: Basic Books."
"135" "Lopes , Francisco Lafayete.   1979.  “ Teoria e política da inflação brasileira: uma revisão crítica da literatura ” . In: SAYAD, João (org.),  Resenhas de economia brasileira , São Paulo: Saraiva, 1979."
"136" "______.  1982 .   “ Inflação e nível de atividade no Brasil: um estudo econométrico ” .   Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico ,  12 ( 3 ):  639-670."
"137" "______.   1984 a.   “ Só um choque heterodoxo pode derrubar a inflação ” .  Economia em Perspectiva  (Boletim do Conselho Regional de Economia de São Paulo), August."
"138" "______.   1984b .   “ Inflação inercial, hiperinflação e desinflação. ”   Revista da Anpec , n. 7, december."
"139" "______.   1985 .   “ Inflação inercial, hiperinflação e desinflação: notas e conjecturas. ”   Revista de Economia Política , 5 ( 2 ): 135-151."
"140" "______.    1986 .  O Choque Heterodoxo . Rio de Janeiro: Campus."
"141" "______. 1989 .  O desafio da hiperinflação . Rio de Janeiro: Campus."
"142" "______. ;  John Williamson  1980. “A teoria da indexação consistente”.  Estudos Econômicos . Rio de Janeiro, setembro-dezembro, 10(3): 61-69."
"143" "Modiano , E duardo . 1983 a.  “ A dinâmica de salários e preços na economia brasileira: 1966-1981. ”   Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico , 15 ( 1 ):  39-68."
"144" "______. 1983b.  “ Choques esternos e preços internos: dificuldades da política de ajuste ”   : In: Arida, P.  Dívida Externa, recessão e Ajuste Estrutural: O Brasil diante da Crise.  Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra,  p p. 139-153."
"145" "______.   1985.  “ Salários, preços e  cambio : os multiplicadores dos choques numa economia indexada. ”   Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico,   15 ( 1 ): 1-32."
"146" "______.  1988.   Inflação: inércia e conflito . São Paulo: Campus . ."
"147" "Noyola , J uan; Vásquez . 1956.  “ El desarrollo economico y la inflacion en Mexico y otros paises Latinoamericanos ” .  Investigacion Economica . 16: 603-48."
"148" "Okun , Arthur M. 1981 .   Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis .  Washington,D .C.: The Brookings Institution."
"149" "Olivera , J ulio  H. 1960.  “ La teoria no monetaria de la inflación ” .   El Trimestre Económico ,  27: 616-28."
"150" "______. 1964.   “ On  structural inflation and Latin  American ‘structuralism ” .  Oxford Economic Papers  16: 321-32."
"151" "______. 1967.  “ Aspectos dinámicos de la inflación estrutural ” .  Desarrollo Económico . 7: 261-"
"152" "66."
"153" "Prebisch , Raúl. 1949 .   Desarollo económico de América Latina y sus principales problemas .  Santiago:  CEPAL , E/CN.12/0089, 87 pp. (Published in 1950 in Portuguese in  Revista   Brasileira  de  Economia , with summaries in English and French; published in English as “The Economic Development of Latin America and its Principal Problems’’ UN E CN.12/89/Rev.1, 1950)."
"154" "Ramalho , Valdir.  2000.  “ As raízes conceituais do inercialismo. ”   Análise Econômica , 18(33):101–119."
"155" "Rangel , I gnácio  M.   1963 .   A inflação brasileira . Rio de Janeiro: Tempo Brasileiro."
"156" "______.   1985 .   “ Recessão, inflação e dívida externa ” . Revista de Economia Política,  5 ( 3 ):  5-25."
"157" "Resende , A. 1979 .   Incompatibilidade distributiva e inflação estrutural . Texto para discussão n.1, Departamento de Economia, PUC, Rio de Janeiro  (published in  Estudos Econômicos ,  11  ( 3 ):  133-150, 1981) ."
"158" "______.   1984 .   “ A moeda indexada: uma proposta para eliminar a inflação inercial ” .   Gazeta Mercantil ,  p p. 26-28, september."
"159" "______.  1985 .   “ A moeda indexada: uma proposta para eliminar a inflação inercial. ”   Revista de Economia Política , 5 ( 2 ): 130-134."
"160" "______.;  Francisco Lafayette Lopes . 1979 .   Sobre as causas da recente aceleração inflacionária . Texto para discussão n. 6 , Departamento de Economia, PUC, Rio de Janeiro  (publi shed   in   Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico ,  12  ( 2 ): .607-614, 1982)"
"161" "______;  Persion   A rida . 198 5 .   “ Inertial inflation and monetary reform. ”  In:  John Williamson  (Org.).  Inflation and Indexation: Argentina, Brazil and Israel . Cambridge: MIT Press. Originally presented at a Conference held in Washington,  november ."
"162" "Ros , J. 1984. “Propiedades analíticas del modelo” in J. Ros (ed.),  MODEM: un modelo macroeconómico de la economía mexicana  .  CIDE; Mexico City."
"163" "R os , J. 1989 .   “ On inertia, social conflict and the structuralist analysis of inflation. ”   World Institute for Development Economics Research (WIDER) , Helsinki. Working Paper #128, August."
"164" "Rowthorn , Robert.   1977 .   “ Conflict, inflation and money. ”   Cambridge Journal of Economics,  1 ( 3 ):  215-239."
"165" "Sargent, T. J. and Wallace, N.  1975 .   “ Rational expectations, the optimal monetary instruments and optimal money supply role. ”   Journal of Political Economy , April ,  (83)2: 241-254."
"166" "Seers , Dudley.   1962 .   “ A Theory of Inflation and Growth in Under-Developed Economies Based on the Experience of Latin America. ”   Oxford Economic Papers , New Series,  June , 14 ( 2 ): 173-195."
"167" "Serrano , F ranklin . 1986 .   “ Inflação Inercial e Desindexação Neutra ”  In: J.M. Rego (ed.),  Inflação Inercial: Teorias sobre Inflação e o Plano Cruzad o, Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra."
"168" "______.   2010 .   “ O conflito distributivo e a teoria da inflação inercial ”   .   Revista de Economia Contemporânea , Rio de Janeiro,  may/aug., 14 ( 2 ):  395-421 ."
"169" "Silva , Adroaldo Moura .  1981 .   “ Inflação: reflex õ es à margem da experiência brasileira ” .  Revista de Economia Política , July/September, 1( 3 ): 57-81 ."
"170" "Simonsen,  M.H.   1964 .   A experiência inflacionária no Brasil . Estudo IPES/GB."
"171" "______.   1970a .   Novos aspectos da inflação brasileira . Estudo ANPES, n. 1 9 ."
"172" "______.   1970b.   Inflação: Gradualismo x Tratamento de Choque . Apec, Rio de Janeiro."
"173" "______.   1974 .   A nova economia brasileira . Rio de Janeiro: José Olympio."
"174" "______.  1980.  “ A teoria da inflação e a controvérsia sobre a indexação ”,   Estudos Econômicos.  Rio de Janeiro,  maio-agosto  10(2): 5-55."
"175" "______.  1983.  Dinâmica macroeconômica . São Paulo: McGraw Hill do Brasil."
"176" "______.   1995 .   30 anos de indexação . Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV."
"177" "______. ;  Roberto Oliveira Campos . 1975 .   Formas criativas de desenvolvimento . Rio de Janeiro: APEC Editora."
"178" "Sunkel , Osvaldo. 1958. “La inflación chilena: un enfoque hete rodoxo,”  El Trimestre Económico ,   Mexico, October-December,    25 (100(4)): 570-599.  Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/20855451"
"179" "Takami , Norikazu .  2015 .   “ The Baffling New Inflation: How Cost-Push Inflation Theories Influenced Policy Debate in the Late-1950s United States. ”   History of Political Economy  47(4): 605-629, DOI 10.1215/00182702-3321336."
"180" "Taylor , L ance . 1979.  Macro Models for Developing Countries . New York: McGraw-Hill."
"181" "______.  1983 .   Structuralist macroeconomics . New York: Basic Books."
"182" "______. 1989 .   Stabilization and growth in developing countries: a structuralist approach . (Fundamentals of pure and applied economics, volume 29)   Economic development studies section. Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Publishers."
"183" "______.  2004 .   Reconstructing macroeconomics: structuralist proposals and critiques of the mainstream .  Harvard University Press ."
"184" "Tobin , James .  1980.  “ Stabilization Policy Ten Years After. ”   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,  no. 1, pp. 19–71."
"185" "______ .   1981 .   “ Diagnosing inflation: a taxonomy. ”   Flanders, M. &  Razin ,  Assaf (orgs.).  Development in an Inflationary World . New York: Academic Press, pp. 19-30."
"186" "Toye , John .  1987.  Varieties of Stabilization Experience: A Comment , Brighton: Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex."
"187" "Vera , Leonardo. 2005 .   “ Can recession feed inflation?  a  conflicting claims framework. ”  Review of Political Economy , October , 17 ( 4 ):  1–19."
"188" "Vera , Leonardo. 2013 .   “ A note on the  Pazos -Simonsen mechanism and  Kaldor’s  early research on Latin American inflation. ”  Brazilian Journal of Political Economy , April-June , 33 ( 2 (131) ): 260-280."
