RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

1

Title: A more complete picture: Rural residents’ relative support for seven forms of natural
resource related economic development
Authors: J. Tom Muellera, Ann R. Tickamyer
aCorresponding

Author:
Department of Agricultural Economics, Education, and Sociology,
College of Agricultural Sciences,
The Pennsylvania State University
801 Ford Building, University Park, PA 16802
Phone: 913-302-6180 Email: TomMueller@psu.edu

Abstract: Understanding rural resident support for various forms of natural resource related
economic development has been a common research topic in rural sociology. However, the vast
majority of research has only evaluated support for one form of natural resource use at a time.
The little research that has explored support for a wide variety of uses has found that residents
are likely to support many of the suggested forms of development. We assessed rural resident
support for seven forms of natural resource development: commercial logging, natural gas,
mining, real estate, wind energy, tourism, and outdoor recreation. Using social exchange theory,
this study examines the influence of perceived impacts of development, industry trust, and
perceived industry power on general support for the seven forms of natural resource-related
economic development using a fixed effects generalized linear model among a sample of
residents of rural Pennsylvania communities. Additionally, we use mixed logit discreet choice
modeling to evaluate the drivers of relative support, meaning a stated preference for one form of
development over other possible options. The drivers of general support and relative support
were similar, with trust in industry and impacts to quality of life emerging as the primary drivers
of both.
Key words: Environment and Natural Resources; Recreation, Leisure, Tourism; Quantitative
Methods

Note: This is the pre-peer reviewed version of this article. The article, which received minor
revisions unrelated to the analysis, has been accepted for publication by Rural Sociology and is
available at https://doi.org/10.1111/ruso.12293. This article may be used for non-commercial
purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Use of Self-Archived Versions.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

2

Introduction
Economic development in rural communities is a contentious issue and on-going topic of
inquiry. Many rural economies have historically relied on the extraction of natural resources as
their dominant form of industry (Krannich, Gentry, Luloff, & Robertson, 2014). The volatility of
this industry in the U.S. has created a legacy of booms and busts, leaving a large portion of rural
America economically depressed (Krannich et al., 2014; Perdue & Pavela, 2012). When
attempting to address the lack of economic opportunity in rural areas, strategies for economic
development often include various forms of natural resource development. These strategies range
from extractive uses such as mining and logging, to non-extractive uses such as tourism and
outdoor recreation (Green, 2017). In this paper we investigate sources of support for multiple
forms of natural resource development in relation to one another. We term this relative support,
wherein support for one form of development is considered alongside other competing
development options, and a preference is stated. The ultimate purpose of this study was to use
social exchange theory to evaluate and compare the levels, and drivers, of both general and
relative support for seven of the most common forms of natural resource-related economic
development: commercial logging, natural gas, mining, real estate, wind energy, tourism, and
outdoor recreation.
In this paper we first review the empirical research and theoretical frameworks used to
assess support for natural resource development both generally and to the extent it exists, relative
to each other in rural communities. We then develop and test models of the drivers of both types
of support using a sample of rural Pennsylvanians. We conclude with implications for future
research on support for rural economic development options.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

3

Background Research
Prior research argues that when considering the various forms of natural resource-related
economic development policy makers could encourage in rural areas, it is important to consider
local community support and buy-in (Gordon & Barton, 2015; Park, Nunkoo, & Yoon, 2015;
Roseland, 2000). If local communities are resistant to strategies aimed at revitalizing their
economies, economic development efforts may prove contentious, or even impossible. When
officials make decisions based on assumptions about the public interest, it can negatively affect
public support and cooperation (Gordon & Barton, 2015). It has been noted, in the case of both
extractive and non-extractive forms of development, that understanding and assessing
community support and interest is essential for sustainable and successful development (Gordon
& Barton, 2015; Nunkoo, Smith, & Ramkissoon, 2013).
The importance of community support stands juxtaposed with traditional policy-making,
which seldom takes into account resident interests, often assuming resident desires based on
dominant political narratives. It is in the best interest of both policy makers and academics to be
aware of the broad landscape of resident perceptions if the desired outcome is successful
economic development. Because of this connection between resident support and successful
implementation, there is a rich body of literature on the topic of rural resident support for various
forms of natural resource-related economic development. Issues such as tourism, natural gas,
wind energy, and real estate development have all received significant attention. However, much
of the previous research has focused solely on one form of natural resource extraction at a time,
leaving researchers with only a partial picture of resident perceptions.
Research on support for multiple forms of natural resource related economic
development within the same sample remains scarce. Jacquet and Stedman (2013) explored

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

4

resident attitudes toward wind energy and natural gas and found that the type of perceived
impacts between the two were similar, but the magnitude of both the negative and positive
impacts was greater for natural gas. In a different context, Green, Marcouiller, Deller, Erkkila,
and Sumathi (1996) evaluated long-term and seasonal resident attitudes toward multiple forms of
development and found that seasonal and long-term residents differed in their assessment of the
various economic activities. Long-term residents were more supportive of growth activities, and
less supportive of land-use planning (Green et al., 1996).
Allen, Harry, Long, and Perdue (1993) evaluated rural Coloradan resident attitudes
toward outdoor recreation and tourism development. Results indicated that tourism attitudes
were influenced by the current level of tourism and the level of economic activity. Residents in
areas of high economic activity and high tourism development, or low economic activity and low
tourism development were more supportive of tourism. Additionally, attitudes toward outdoor
recreation were influenced by economic activity but not the level of tourism (Allen et al., 1993).
Notably, Stout-Weigand, Smith, and Jallow (1985) conducted one of the few published studies
examining attitudes toward a wide variety of development options. Their research examined
attitudes of men and women toward a multitude of natural resource uses and found that women
tended to be less supportive of every form of development. Further, their research indicated that,
in economically depressed areas, residents are likely to support most suggested forms of
economic development. This highlights the importance of considering the level of relative
support for natural resource-related development in comparison to other alternative forms, and
not simply the general level of support for the resource use in question.
To address this issue, this paper introduces the concept of relative support as a relational
construct rooted in stated preference. We view relative support as an individual’s stated

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

5

preference for one form of development over other possible options. Given that previous
research has shown perceived impacts to be key drivers of support in the case of both energy
development (Boudet, Bugden, Zanocco & Maibach, 2016; Jacquet & Stedman, 2013) and
tourism (Gursoy, Jurowski, & Uysal, 2002), we explore the relationship between perceived
impacts and relative support.

Theoretical Orientation
The theoretical basis for this paper is nested within both social exchange theory, as well as
previous research on perceived impacts of natural resource use. As this study assessed support
for seven different forms of natural resource related economic development, we draw on
literature from two deep pools, community support for tourism (Nunkoo et al., 2013), as well as
the energy impact and support literature.
Social exchange theory. Social exchange theory posits that exchange is a primary driver
of human behavior (Emerson, 1976). In the case of support for a given form of development, this
means that if an individual perceives the benefits of development to be greater than the costs,
they will support it (Nunkoo, 2016). In this case, one member of the exchange is either the
individual or their community, and the other member is the industry in question. It is important
to note that although much of the language surrounding social exchange theory is akin to that
used in economics, it differs in several important ways from traditional economic theory. Social
exchange theory, as applied here, does not assume any degree of rationality. Exchange in this
sense is not made based upon a calculated decision derived from weighing costs and benefits
beforehand, but is rather informed by “prior conditioning in longitudinal exchange relationships”
(Emerson, 1976, p. 341). Therefore, rationality is possible, but not an assumption, and

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

6

perceptions are shaped by prior exchange. In the present study, we are interested in the
relationship between perceptions and support, or willingness to enter into an exchange.
Importantly, we are not directly assessing what is driving resident perceptions. We adopt the
perspective that these perceptions have been shaped over time by this prior conditioning
described by Emerson (1976), and that this conditioning is likely due to many structural and
individual forces, as well as processes of socialization. However, this conditioning is not directly
being tested in this analysis.
According to Emerson (1976) the ideal unit of analysis is the social exchange relation,
not the individual. In this case it means that we are interested in the effect of perceived impacts
on support, but not whether or not an individual has weighed all the trade-offs and rationally
stated their position. Additionally, there is no assumption of perfect information in social
exchange theory, thus social exchanges involve uncertainty and are based on best-knowledge and
long-term fairness as opposed to perfect information and short-term returns (Konovsky & Pugh,
1994). Finally, unlike economic exchanges, social exchange theory directly integrates elements
of trust and power into the exchange process, both of which are assessed in this study (Nunkoo,
2016).
The study of resident support for various forms of development has often been
atheoretical, especially in the case of tourism (Nunkoo et al., 2013). Given this, scholars have
called for the application of social exchange theory to understand what drives resident support,
or opposition to development in the case of both tourism (Nunkoo et al., 2013) and wind energy
(Groth and Vogt, 2014). Social exchange theory has been utilized and evaluated in the case of
resident support for tourism many times (Nunkoo et al., 2013). Gursoy et al. (2002) modeled
support for tourism and found that host community support was influenced by ecocentric values,

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

7

perceived costs and benefits, the level of concern, and utilization of the tourism resource.
Similarly, Wang and Pfister (2008) tested a model of support using social exchange theory and
found that perceived personal benefit, meaning economic and social benefits, were the strongest
predictors of support. Further, Nunkoo and Ramkissoon (2012) modeled power and trust
alongside perceived impacts in the case of tourism support. Their results indicated that residents’
perceived power to influence tourism was positively related to trust in government actors and
tourism impact perceptions, and that trust in government actors and perceived benefits were
related to tourism support.
When considering the research related to other forms of development beyond tourism, we
believe the connection to social exchange theory has been pervasive, even if it has not been
explicitly invoked. Although other theories have been mentioned at times, multiple studies have
assessed the relationship between perceived impacts and general support for both wind
(Mulvaney, Woodson, & Prokopy, 2013; Olson-Hazboun, Krannich, & Robertson, 2016) and
natural gas (Evensen & Stedman, 2016; Jacquet & Stedman, 2013) which we would argue is
ultimately relying on an overarching theory of social exchange, even if implicitly. If researchers
expect perceived impacts to influence support, or opposition, then there is ultimately a
foundational belief in social exchange.
Perceived impacts. Of particular interest to this paper are the perceived impacts of
various forms of natural resource-related development, and their effects on support, specifically
the impacts identified by Jacquet & Stedman (2013). In their factor analysis, Jacquet and
Stedman (2013) identified four main dimensions of perceived impacts: environmental,
community, personal, and economic. They also identified an item that did not load on any factor,
quality of life. As this study assessed five more forms of development than Jacquet and Stedman

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

8

(2013), we could not directly use their 24 item impact scale. However, we modeled our
perceived impact items on their factors and assessed perceived community level impacts on
employment, the economy, the environment, and quality of life.
All perceived impacts assessed in this study were at the level of the community, not the
individual. This is in line with the work of Boudet et al. (2016) and Freudenburg and Davidson
(2007), which argued that, particularly in rural areas, the community level impacts of
development may be more relevant than individual level effects. In sum, this study integrates
previous research on the relationship between perceived impacts of natural resource related
economic development with social exchange theory to assess rural resident support for increased
levels of seven different forms of natural resource-related economic development. Additionally,
social exchange theory was used to assess resident stated preference for one form of
development over the other six options. It is important to note that while this study assesses the
potential for a number of exchanges and resident preferences for those to occur, we did not
present respondents with hypothetical information about each development type, or ask them to
choose between vignettes, as is often performed in discreet choice research (e.g. choice
experiments). Rather, respondents were asked to state their level of support for each form of
development, as well as their top preference for future development. Following this, we collected
information on their perceptions regarding the perceived impacts, trust in industry, and perceived
industry power for all types of development in question. We then used their responses to assess
their relative support based on their individual exchange relationship with each industry. By
doing this, we avoid many of the assumptions of rationality and choice inherent in many
exchange studies, while still grounding our research in a strong theoretical and analytical
framework.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

9

Trust and power. Previous researchers assessing support for natural resource related
development have rarely incorporated power and trust within their models, especially in the case
of tourism (Nunkoo, 2016). When considering trust and power as dimensions of social exchange,
they represent the internalization of societal power structures at the individual level. Both trust
and power are likely to influence support, as has been demonstrated within tourism literature
(Nunkoo & Ramkissoon, 2012) and energy development, in the case of the social license to
operate literature (Moffat, Lacey, Leipold, 2016). Although often unmeasured, power and trust
are likely to be key variables in understanding residents’ willingness to enter into an exchange
(Nunkoo & Gursoy, 2016). When considering social exchange, it is important to consider the
actors whose power and trust matters to the specific exchange in question. We view the
relationship between power and trust similarly to Ireland and Webb (2007), in that power and
trust are often opposing components leading to support for an exchange, but that they can also be
complementary. For example, when trust is not strong and the power differential is high between
participants in an exchange, a participant may still be willing to support the exchange if trust in
other, external entities (e.g. governments) is high. In this case, perceptions of power and trust
function as factors likely to have competing and interrelated impacts on support for development.
In the case of increased rural development, residents are likely to be at a power disadvantage
relative to industry (Nunkoo & Ramkissoon, 2012) and industry trust will be inextricably tied to
this position. Although previous research has positioned power as an antecedent of industry trust
(Nunkoo & Ramkissoon, 2012), we have positioned them alongside one another in our analysis
due to their theoretical complexity.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

10

Statement of Problem
Given the theoretical framework and context presented above, we evaluated both general and
relative support among rural residents for seven forms of natural resource-related economic
development: commercial logging, natural gas, mining, real estate, wind energy, tourism, and
outdoor recreation. These seven forms of development have all received varying amounts of
attention from researchers, with tourism, wind, and natural gas having significant bodies of
research, and real estate, commercial logging, mining, and outdoor recreation having a relatively
smaller body of work. We assessed general support and relative support for these forms of
development through three research questions.
1. What is the relationship between perceived impacts, trust in industry, perceived industry
power and general support for these seven forms of natural resource related economic
development?
2. What is the relationship between perceived impacts, trust in industry, perceived industry
power and relative support, modeled here as stated preference, for one of these seven
forms of development, over the other options?
3. How do the drivers of general support, vary from the drivers of relative support?

Methods
Data Collection
This study assessed relative support for natural resource related development in fourteen
Pennsylvania counties outside of core-base statistical areas as defined by the United States
Office of Management and Budget. These counties were chosen due to their status as the least
urbanized counties in Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania represents an appropriate case for this study

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

11

due to its rich history of multiple forms of natural resource-related development as well as large
swathes of rural areas throughout the state. Data were collected in February and March of 2018
using a stratified online sample purchased from an online survey sample provider, Qualtrics.
This method was chosen due to its relatively low cost and ability to capture the opinions and
attitudes of individuals in multiple locations.
The survey was distributed via a quota sampling approach. The desired sample was 800
Pennsylvanians from the selected counties, half male and half female, with non-binary
respondents filling either quota. Due to the low number of people living in the selected counties,
no further stratifications were made. While not a pure probability sample, this type of approach
has been shown to be effective in providing a broad cross-section of the population (Landers &
Behrend, 2015; Roulin, 2015). However, it should be noted that this sample may not be
completely representative of the population (Smith, Roster, Golden, Albaum, 2016). Although
there has been an increase in smartphone and internet access in rural areas, the fact that some
rural residents may not have internet access, does place a limitation on this sample’s
representativeness (FCC, 2018). As of 2018 the FCC concluded that only 82.74% of rural
Pennsylvanians have access to high speed internet and mobile LTE coverage. Therefore, this
sample should be considered as Pennsylvanians from the 14 selected counties with internet
access.

Variable Measurement
Independent Variables
Relative support. We operationalized relative support as stated preference for one form
of development in direct consideration of other possible options. Stated preference was assessed

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

12

by asking respondents to rank the seven forms of development from most desirable to least
desirable in their community. Respondents were presented with the following prompt,
‘Regardless of how realistic you think it may be, please drag and drop the following options into
your order of preference for these forms of development to increase in the area where you live.’
This language was crafted in order to increase the comparability of responses from different
communities. The response options were ordered randomly for each respondent. If an individual
did not drag at least one option, then they were not recorded and were treated as missing. For the
purposes of analysis, this variable was collapsed into a single ‘top preference’ variable.
General support. General support was assessed by asking respondents to rate their
degree of support for an increased level of each of the seven types of natural resource related
economic development. Each type of development was rated on a seven-point scale ranging from
one – extremely opposed – to seven – extremely supportive. Specifically, respondents were
asked, ‘Regardless of how realistic you think it may be, how supportive or opposed would you
be of the following activities occurring where you live?’
Perceived impacts. Perceived impacts of the seven different forms of natural resource
related economic development were measured in the form of a systematic battery of items related
to increased development. Each respondent was presented with a battery for each type of
development. All statements within the batteries were the same, except for the type of natural
resource use, which was changed for each battery. The batteries were designed using elements of
social exchange theory (Nunkoo, 2016), and were created in a manner to capture the dimensions
of perceived impacts outlined by Jacquet and Stedman (2013). The dimensions this battery was
meant to capture included environmental, community, and economic and quality of life impacts
as described by Jacquet and Stedman (2013). Specifically, the four items assessed perceived

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

13

impacts related to employment, the environment, the local economy, and life quality. Each item
was framed around the geographic scale of ‘my area’. This was done to allow for individual
interpretation of place while still constraining the questions to a localized scale, which is
important for both context and explaining overall support (Evensen & Stedman, 2016).
Respondents were asked to rate each statement from 1 – strongly disagree to 7 – strongly agree.
The battery contained four items:
•

Increased [type of resource use] would increase employment in my area.

•

Increased [type of resource use] in my area would lead to minimal negative
environmental impacts.

•

Increased [type of resource use] in my area would improve the local economy.

•

Increased [type of resource use] in my area would increase the quality of life in
my area.

Power and trust. As previously discussed, Nunkoo and Gursoy (2016) described two
key dimensions often absent from studies using social exchange theory to assess support for
tourism: power and trust. Therefore, this study also measured perceived power and trust as they
relate to natural resource related industries. In a similar manner to the perceived impacts, power
and trust were assessed using a systematic battery for each type of use. The statement remained
the same, with the exception of the industry in question being substituted for each of the seven
types of natural resource related development. There was one item for power and one for trust.
Respondents were asked to rate each statement from one – strongly disagree to seven – strongly
agree.
•

It does not matter how I feel, if the [type of resource use] industry wants to
increase development in my area, they will.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
•

14

I trust the [type of resource use] industry to do the right thing.

Development Type Specific Control Variables
Industry work history. Work history in natural resource related industries has been
shown to influence support and was included as a control (Boudet et al., 2016; Trent & StoutWiegand, 1985). In terms of social exchange theory, it is possible that work history would
influence the individual’s perceptions of the longitudinal exchange relationship, possibly making
it either more favorable, or less so. This was assessed at the family and personal level.
Respondents were asked if they either currently worked, or had ever worked, in the industry for
each of the development types in question. Similarly, they were asked if a member of their
family currently worked, or had ever worked, in the industry for each of the development types
in question. Two work history dummy variables were created, one for family and one for
personal, with (1) having a personal/family work history with the industry or (0) no
personal/family work history with the industry.
Property activity. Respondents were asked to report if any of the natural resource uses
in question occurred on their or their family’s property. Similar to work history, we felt it was
likely that property activity may color an individual’s perspective on an exchange with industry,
and is a necessary control. Therefore, this was included to control for the possible effect of direct
economic incentives on increased support.
Non-Development Type Specific Control Variables
We include a number of control variables that do not vary by development type. These
variables were drawn from prior literature (Jacquet & Stedman, 2013) and were included in our
mixed logit model of relative support, as that form of model does not control for the individual in
the same manner as our fixed effects model of general support.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

15

Gender. Gender was asked as male, female, or other. For this analysis the item was
recoded as either Female, or not-Female. Gender was included based upon previous research
showing it as an important factor in support for different forms of development (Stout-Weigand
et al., 1985), as well as a control in similar analyses (Jacquet & Stedman, 2013).
Educational attainment. Education was included due to its demonstrated effect on
various forms of support (McLeod, Woirhaye, & Menkhaus, 1999; Payne & Schaemlfeffel,
2008; Trent & Stout-Wiegand, 1985). Educational attainment was assessed by asking
respondents to report their highest level of formal education. Respondents were presented with
six options: Some high school, high school graduate or GED; Some college, business, or trade
school; college, business, or trade school; some graduate school, or master’s, doctoral, or
professional degree. Due reduce model complexity, this variable was dummy coded as either
have a bachelor’s degree or above (1) or not (0).
Length of residence and age. Similar to Jacquet and Stedman (2013) length of residence
and age were included as controls. Respondents were simply asked to report the years they had
lived in their area and the year they were born. The year a respondent was born was then turned
into an age variable by subtracting the answer from 2018, the year the data were collected.

Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using both SPSS 25.0 and Stata/MP 15. Given the small amount of overall
missing data (<1.5% of values), we elected to handle missing data using listwise deletion. First, a
fixed effects generalized linear model was performed using the xtreg function in Stata to assess
general support. The use of an individual level fixed effects model is ideal for understanding
general support, as it allows us to understand support for multiple forms of development at once
while controlling for individual-level characteristics. The dependent variable in this model was

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

16

general support for a given form of development. In terms of data structure, this means that each
individual was represented as seven rows in our dataset, one for each form of development (e.g.
longform). The use of individual level fixed effects allowed us to treat individuals as their own
control, thus looking exclusively at within-subject variation, and remove the necessity of
individual level controls that would not change by development type, such as education and
gender (McCaffrey, Lockwood, Mihaly, & Sass, 2012). Additionally, the standard errors in our
model were clustered around the individual, to ensure conservative tests of significance. We
included a fixed effect for the type of development in the model, in the form of dummy variables
with wind as the reference group. This inclusion essentially allowed each form of development
to have a unique intercept within the model. The independent variables in the model were the
perceived impacts, industry trust, and perceived industry power variables, as well as industry
work history, and development occurring on property. The use of a fixed effects model is ideal
for answering our research question because it allows us to evaluate the social exchange related
drivers of multiple types of development at once, while also controlling for individual level
characteristics. Although this model assesses support for multiple forms of development, we still
view this model as a model of general support because the dependent variable of support was
ranked while considering only one form of development at a time, not in relation to other
options.
To analyze our second research question, we estimated a discrete choice mixed logit
model using the mixlogit module for Stata (Hole, 2007). The dependent variable was a
respondent’s top preference of development type for their community. The independent variables
were perceived impacts, industry trust, perceived industry power, industry work history, and
development occurring on property. As the dependent variable was a stated choice in relation to

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

17

the other options, and not an independent level of support as in the case of the fixed effects
model, the use of dummy terms for development type similar to those used in our fixed effects
model would not be appropriate in this model. Given that this model does not control for the
individual in the same way as the fixed effects model used for general support, we introduce a
number of controls used in previous literature. Specifically, we include control variables drawn
from Jacquet and Stedman (2013). These include gender, education, length of residence, and age.
As variables with no within-subject variation are not allowed in mixed logit models, each control
variable was interacted with development type before inclusion in the model. This resulted in the
inclusion of 24 interaction terms as demographic controls.
The use of the mixed logit model allows for the estimation of random effects (Revelt &
Train, 1998). In this context, this means that the relationships between independent and
dependent variables are allowed to vary at the individual level. This relaxes two assumptions
present in traditional choice models unlikely to hold in actual decision making: the independence
from irrelevant alternatives assumption – the assumption that the probability of choosing an
alternative does not depend on the addition or removal of other, unselected options, and the
assumption that the influence of independent variables on choice is fixed across survey
respondents (e.g. preference homogeneity; Christiadi & Cushing, 2007; Dahlberg & Eklöf,
2003).
These assumptions are handled using residual correlations across alternatives and random
effects, respectively (Revelt & Train, 1998). The use of random effects allows for preference
heterogeneity, meaning that the model does not assume that the evaluation of options is the same
for each individual in the sample, thus allowing for preferences to have varying effects on choice
between individuals (Revelt & Train, 1998). This variation means that the random coefficients

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

18

presented using this type of model are the average coefficient, and its standard deviation, across
the sample (Hole, 2007). For our analysis we included all social exchange independent variables
as random effects. Although a number of these items later had coefficient standard deviations not
significantly different from zero, meaning one could argue they could have been moved to fixed
effects within the model, we elected to keep them as random effects due to our theoretical
orientation regarding preference heterogeneity as well is to avoid model over-modification. We
estimated the mixed logit model using robust standard errors and 500 Halton draws to ensure
conservative and precise estimates (Hole, 2007).

Results
Sample Characteristics
The sample contained a total of 810 responses. The overall sample demographics are presented
in Table 1. The sample was spread out among the 14 counties. The most represented county was
Jefferson County, with 224 (27.7%) respondents. The least represented county was Forest
County with only 4 (0.5%) respondents. Given that Forest County is the least populous county in
the state and dominated by the Allegheny National Forest, this is not surprising. The average age
of this sample was 44 and the median age was 43. A substantial portion of this sample was
retired, with 114 (14.6%) of this sample reporting retired as their current employment status. The
sample was dominated by White individuals with 686 (85.1%) respondents reporting themselves
as White. A total of 85 (10.5%) respondents reported their race as Black or African American,
which is only 0.5% less than Pennsylvania as a whole (U.S. Census, 2018) and is overrepresentative of Black populations within these counties. According to the American
Community Survey (ACS) 2012-2016 estimates, the population of the fourteen counties was
95.9% White (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018).

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

19

[Table 1 here]
Industry Affiliation
In terms of industry affiliation, respondents had the highest level of work affiliation with the
outdoor recreation industry (10.3%) and the lowest with wind energy (2.2%; Table 2). This
sample reported the highest level of family work affiliation with commercial logging (12.4%),
outdoor recreation (12.3%), and natural gas (11.6%). The development type occurring most often
on either respondents’, or respondents’ family’s, property was natural gas (12.2%), which was
followed by outdoor recreation (10.7%). The development type occurring the least often on
respondents’ properties was tourism (3.0%).
Stated Preference
A total of 789 of the respondents participated in ranking development types (Table 2). The most
frequent top choice for development was wind energy (33.0%), followed by outdoor recreation
(26.7%). The types of development chosen the least often were mining (4.4%), commercial
logging (5.7%), and real estate (8.4%). In terms of mean rank, the items with the most
preferential mean rank were wind energy (2.95), outdoor recreation (3.76), and tourism (3.76),
where 1 is the most preferred as 7 is the least
[Table 2 here]
General Support
General support for the seven forms of natural resource related economic development is
presented in Table 2. On the seven-point scale ranging from opposition to support, respondents
were, on average, the most supportive of increased outdoor recreation development (5.44) and
wind energy development (5.39). Respondents were the least supportive of increased commercial
logging (3.79) and mining (3.92), with both items averaging on the oppositional side of the scale.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

20

Perceived Impacts, Trust, and Power
Due to the volume of information collected, we describe the descriptive results for the perceived
impacts, trust, and power items in terms of extractive uses (commercial logging, natural gas, and
mining) and non-extractive uses (wind, tourism and outdoor recreation). Full descriptives,
including individual means for perceived impacts, power, and trust can be found in Table 3. In
general, respondents felt that non-extractive uses would lead to fewer negative environmental
impacts, greater economic impacts, and a higher quality of life than extractive uses, with real
estate development falling in between these two groups. The perceived employment impacts
were similar across the different types of uses, while industry trust appeared lower for extractive
uses versus non-extractive uses. On average, respondents appeared to perceive limited power for
every form of development.
[Table 3 here]
Fixed Effects Model of General Support
The overall fixed effects model was significant (F(69,802)= 160.72***) and explained 46% of
the variance in general support (Table 4). The type of development had a significant and negative
effect on support for all development types except for outdoor recreation, relative to wind. This
makes sense given wind’s level of general support presented in Table 2. When considering the
repeated battery of perceived impacts, trust, and power, all of the six items had a significant
effect on support at p<.05. The strongest predictor of general support was trust in the industry.
Due to the use of individual fixed effects, the model shows that as individuals agreed one-point
more strongly that they trust an industry to do the right thing, their general support for that form
of development increased by 0.215 on a seven-point scale, on average. The second strongest
predictor variable was perceived impacts to quality of life (B = 0.197), which was followed by

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

21

environmental (B = 0.143), employment (B = 0.083), local economic impacts (B = 0.091), and
perceived industry power (B = -.082), respectively. Personal history with the industry, family
history with the industry, and development on property were positively associated with support.
Of the personal history items, the most influential item was development on property. On
average, having a given form of development on either the respondent or respondent’s family’s
property increased their support by 0.183 on a seven-point scale.
[Table 4 here]
Mixed Logit Model of Relative Support
All of the repeated battery items had a significant effect on relative support, modeled as stated
preference for future development (Table 5). The three variables assessing existing industry
relationships did not have a significant impact on relative support and had high coefficient
standard deviations that were not significantly different from zero. This suggests that the
estimated coefficients for the three dummy coded variables may be unstable, likely due to the
relatively low number of respondents stating they had a history with the industries, or had
development occurring on their property. Although these variables did not have a significant
impact, the wide variation in impact may warrant further investigation.
In terms of items from the repeated battery, all perceived impacts, trust, and power had
significant effects on relative support for future development. The largest change in odds was
due to trust in industry (odds ratio = 1.49), followed by perceived impacts to quality of life (odds
ratio = 1.48), local economic impacts (odds ratio = 1.44), and environmental impacts (odds ratio
= 1.28). The only variable which significantly decreased the odds of choosing an option was
perceived industry power (odds ratio = 0.83). This means that as a respondent rated themselves
as feeling more powerless in relation to a given industry, they were significantly less likely to
choose the associated form of development as their top preference.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

22

Although all social exchange related independent variables were entered as random
coefficients, it should be noted that only three of the coefficients had standard deviations
significantly different form zero at p<.05. Trust in industry, economic impacts, and employment
impacts all had standard deviations that were significantly different from zero. This suggests that
the majority of the effects in the model are stable across people, with the exceptions of trust,
economic impacts, and employment impacts. The only control variables to demonstrate a
significant effect were those related to age. Age had a negative and significant effect on all forms
of development (Table 5). To preserve clarity, only significant controls are reported in Table 5,
the full model is reported in the Appendix.
[Table 5 here]
Comparison of the Drivers of General and Relative Support
While the coefficients of the mixed logit model and the fixed effects model are not directly
comparable, we can assess the significance and relative effect size of independent variables in
each model. The order of independent variable effect sizes showed little variation between the
two models. Industry trust, followed by impacts to quality of life, were the primary drivers of
both general and relative support, having both the largest model coefficients in both models.
Where the models varied was in the case of local economic impacts and personal history with the
industry. While perceived local economic impacts demonstrated the second smallest coefficient
in the general support model, local economic impacts were the third most impactful variable in
the case of relative support. Additionally, no personal history variables were significant in the
relative support model, contrasted with all having significant impacts in the general support
model. It appears that economic impacts have a slightly more important role in determining
relative support, while personal history plays a less impactful role.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

23

Discussion
This study analyzed the effect of perceived impacts of various forms of natural resource
related development, trust of natural resource related industries, and perceived power of those
industries on both general and relative support for increased development. The concept of
relative support was introduced, and a robust way of operationalizing and modeling the concept
was demonstrated. The findings of this analysis have implications for both researchers and policy
makers. Four primary implications will be discussed here.
First, similar to Stout-Wiegand et al. (1985), we found support for the majority of the
suggested forms of development. This sample was, on average, supportive of increased tourism,
outdoor recreation, wind energy development, natural gas development, and real estate
development. The only types of development this sample did not support on average were
mining and commercial logging, however, their averages were very close to the neutral point
between support and opposition. This finding adds further credibility to the notion that
researchers should avoid investigating support for only one form of development. Even if there is
only one proposal on the table, if researchers and policy makers have nothing to contrast resident
support against they will be missing important elements of the residents’ perspectives.
Second, while the goal of our analysis was to model relative support, we also feel that our
model of general support represents a significant increase in analytical rigor in the field of
resident support for natural-resource related economic development. By using a fixed effects
model, we were able to assess the drivers of general support while controlling for the individual
and considering seven different forms of development at the same time. If the interest of
researchers is to assess general support for multiple forms of development within a population,
we encourage future researchers to continue using similar techniques. It should be noted, that

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

24

while this form of modeling allows researchers to control for development type invariant
characteristics, if those characteristics are the object of the research question (e.g. race,
education), a fixed effects model such as this may be less appropriate.
Third, our analysis found that the perceived economic impact was only the third strongest
predictor of relative support, and the fifth strongest predictor of general support. This is
somewhat out of step with the findings reported by a number of studies concerning wind farms
(Olson-Hazboun et al., 2016; Mulvaney et al., 2013; Bidwell, 2013; Slattery et al., 2012) and
shale gas development (Jacquet & Stedman, 2013) which found economic impacts to be the most
important variable. When we consider the results of our models, we can see that this somewhat
consistent finding in the literature may be missing part of the story. When we considered
multiple forms of development at once, either generally or relatively, the primary drivers of
support are trust in the industry and quality of life impacts. As Nunkoo (2016) intimated, further
investigation into the dimensions of power and trust appears warranted. The importance of
industry trust, perceived impacts to quality of life, perceived environmental impacts, as opposed
to purely economic considerations, suggests rural residents in this sample do not view economic
and employment improvements as synonymous with quality of life improvements. Further
investigation to what quality of life means to rural residents will improve our understanding of
this dimension.
Our findings suggest that while perceived economic benefits may result in a higher
likelihood of general support for all forms of development, it may not be the primary driver in
relative support between different options. If policy makers or planners attempt to engender
support for a form of development based on the supposition that they should focus on
highlighting economic benefits, they may ultimately fail to raise support for that form of

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

25

development over other options. If the goal is to engender support relative to other possible
options, the elements of life quality and trust may be more effective in this case.
Slattery et al. (2012) found that the key drivers of support for wind energy in Iowa and
Texas were perceived employment and economic benefits. They went on to suggest that appeals
to the environment and carbon footprints would be less effective than simply advocating for its
employment and economic benefits. When looking across all forms of development, our research
supports their finding for relative support, but not general support. However, in both models trust
and life quality impacts were more important, suggesting that focusing exclusively on economic
and employment impacts may be less effective than previously argued. Wind farms in particular
have faced a gap between broad public support and significant siting difficulties due to localized
opposition (Larson & Krannich, 2016). Policy makers and planners may see greater success by
focusing on building trust and demonstrating the future quality of life impacts that may come
from future development, rather than simply focusing on economic, or environmental, outcomes.
The fourth main implication of this analysis concerns the primary drivers of relative
support, modeled here as stated preference. Notably, these entail perceptions of impacts on
quality of life and trust. When considering the theoretical orientation of our analysis, we feel that
the strong impact of quality of life perceptions highlights the importance of viewing rural
economic development as a social exchange, and not just an economic transaction. Given that
rural communities’ relationships with these forms of development are longitudinal exchange
relationships – informed by both personal and community knowledge and experience (Emerson,
1976) – it appears that quality of life is a key determinate in whether or not an individual will
support a form of development over other possible options.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

26

Additionally, previous research has demonstrated the importance of trust in perceived
natural gas impacts (Mayer, 2016), and Nunkoo (2016) called for its integration into
understanding resident support for tourism. It appears that relative trust is a dominant factor in
both general and relative support, as it was the strongest predictor in each model. The findings of
this analysis appear in line with our theoretical orientation. The importance of trust may indicate
the impact of “prior conditioning in longitudinal exchange relationships” (Emerson, 1976, p.
341). Industries commonly associated with the boom and bust cycles in rural America, such as
mining, natural gas, and commercial logging, were less trusted by this sample and it appears that
this difference in trust is one of the drivers of this sample’s preference for alternative forms of
development. When exploring the social exchange between natural resource related industries
and rural residents in this sample, the important trade-offs appear to center around trust, lifequality, and the environment.
It should be noted that our findings related to trust are supportive of the framework of
social license to operate (Moffat & Zhang, 2014). Social license to operate represents community
acceptance of an industry’s presence and operation (Moffat et al., 2016). In the framework of
social license to operate, trust in an industry has been placed as the key mediating variable in
determining industry acceptance. The framework of social exchange, as applied here,
incorporates the importance of trust demonstrated in the social license to operate literature, while
also incorporating the known importance of perceived impacts (Jacquet & Stedman, 2013). In
doing this we feel that we have produced a model of relative support which incorporates
elements of both research traditions under the umbrella of social exchange theory.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

27

Future Research and Conclusion
Results from this study suggest a number of avenues for future research. This study presented a
focused model of both general and relative support. Future constructs which have been explored
in other general support studies may play a significant role in determining relative support.
Concepts such as place attachment, place meanings, social identity, political ideology, and
environmental value orientations may be important for future investigation. Additionally, we
elected to model relative support as a respondent’s top preference for future development. This
choice was made to demonstrate and model the concept of relative support, while avoiding
undue model complexity. While this method was appropriate for our research questions, future
research should take full advantage of the ranked nature of this form of data. Future models
predicting the relative rank of a form of development compared to other forms, while
analytically complex, will continue to increase our understanding of relative support.
Future research should attempt this type of analysis using alternative methods of
sampling. Our sample was over representative of racial minorities and required internet access
for inclusion. Studies using more traditional sampling methods – or mixed sampling methods –
will be necessary for further developing our theoretical understanding of relative support.
Similarly, assessing relative support at a broader geographic scale and with attention to
characteristics of the communities such as poverty levels and economic base appears warranted.
Each rural area has unique relationships with industries; research assessing the dimensions of
relative support should expand to other regions. Additionally, comparative analyses may prove
helpful in understanding the political landscape of rural resident support.
This study attempted to assess the general and relative support through the social
exchange process. While we feel we appropriately demonstrated factors influencing respondent’s

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

28

willingness to enter into an exchange, we believe future research should attempt to evaluate the
longitudinal exchange relationships within communities more explicitly. Researchers should link
longitudinal exchange relationships to present day attitudes by using longitudinal secondary data
and cross-sectional primary data. This type of modeling will help researchers more fully
understand rural community social exchange with dominant industries and provide a broader
understanding of the focus of social exchange theory, the exchange itself (Emerson, 1976).
Regarding our measurement of power, while relative power perceptions had a significant
effect on relative support, the relationship was weaker than some other variables. We feel that
this may be due to respondents perceiving themselves as, on average, powerless against every
industry presented. Given this, our measurement of power may have been insufficient in
capturing small relative distinctions between industries. Future research should investigate this
dimension of powerlessness and how it impacts relative support.
In conclusion, this study has introduced and measured the concept of relative support
using the framework of social exchange. We believe that this concept will help researchers
understand the distinctions rural populations make between various forms of development. While
presented in the case of natural resource use, this concept has implications well beyond this
topic. For example, understanding rural residents’ relative support for natural resource related
development, as opposed to technology investment or small business development, may be an
important avenue for future research. Making policy decisions that are in line with the desires
and needs of residents is essential for sustainable and successful community development.
Moving our understanding beyond general support and toward relative support will be important
for the future of rural community development.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

29

References
Allen, L. R., Hafer, H. R., Long, P. T., & Perdue, R. R. (1993). Rural residents' attitudes toward
recreation and tourism development. Journal of travel research, 31(4), 27-33.
Bidwell, D. (2013). The role of values in public beliefs and attitudes towards commercial wind
energy. Energy Policy, 58, 189-199.
Boudet, H., Bugden, D., Zanocco, C., & Maibach, E. (2016). The effect of industry activities on
public support for ‘fracking’. Environmental Politics, 25(4), 593-612.
Cushing, C., & Cushing, B. (2007). Conditional logit, IIA, and alternatives for estimating models
of interstate migration. In annual meeting of the Southern Regional Science Association.
Charleston, SC (pp. 1-28).
Dahlberg, M., & Eklöf, M. (2003). Relaxing the IIA assumption in locational choice models: a
comparison between conditional logit, mixed logit, and multinomial probit models.
Nationalekonomiska institutionen.
Emerson, R. M. (1976). Social exchange theory. Annual review of sociology, 2(1), 335-362.
Evensen, D., & Stedman, R. (2016). Scale matters: variation in perceptions of shale gas
development across national, state, and local levels. Energy Research & Social
Science, 20, 14-21.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (2018). 2018 Broadband Deployment Report.
Retrieved from: https://www.fcc.gov/reports-research/reports/broadband-progressreports/2018-broadband-deployment-report
Freudenburg, W. R., & Davidson, D. J. (2007). Nuclear families and nuclear risks: The effects of
gender, geography, and progeny on attitudes toward a nuclear waste facility. Rural
Sociology, 72(2), 215-243.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

30

Gordon, J. S., & Barton, A. W. (2015). Stakeholder Attitudes Toward Reforestation and
Management of Bottomland Hardwood Forests in the Mississippi Delta. Journal of
Forestry, 113(3), 308-314.
Green, G. P. (2017). The opportunities and limits of economic growth. In A. R. Tickamyer, J.
Sherman, & J. Warlick (Eds.), Rural poverty in the United States (416-438). New York,
NY: Columbia University Press.
Green, G. P., Marcouiller, D., Deller, S., Erkkila, D., & Sumathi, N. R. (1996). Local
dependency, land use attitudes, and economic development: Comparisons between
seasonal and permanent residents. Rural Sociology, 61(3), 427-445.
Groth, T. M., & Vogt, C. A. (2014). Rural wind farm development: Social, environmental and
economic features important to local residents. Renewable Energy, 63, 1-8.
Gursoy, D., Jurowski, C., & Uysal, M. (2002). Resident attitudes: A structural modeling
approach. Annals of tourism research, 29(1), 79-105.
Hole, A. R. (2007). Estimating mixed logit models using maximum simulated likelihood. Stata
Journal, 7(3), 388-401.
Ireland, R. D., & Webb, J. W. (2007). A multi-theoretic perspective on trust and power in
strategic supply chains. Journal of Operations Management, 25(2), 482-497.
Jacquet, J. B., & Stedman, R. C. (2013). Perceived impacts from wind farm and natural gas
development in northern Pennsylvania. Rural Sociology, 78(4), 450-472.
Konovsky, M. A., & Pugh, S. D. (1994). Citizenship behavior and social exchange. Academy of
management journal, 37(3), 656-669.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

31

Krannich, R. S., Gentry, B., Luloff, A. E., & Robertson, P. G. (2014). Resource dependency in
rural America: Continuities and change. Rural America in a globalizing world: Problems
and prospects for the 2010s, 208-225.
Landers, R. N., & Behrend, T. S. (2015). An inconvenient truth: Arbitrary distinctions between
organizational, Mechanical Turk, and other convenience samples. Industrial and
Organizational Psychology, 8(2), 142-164.
Larson, E. C., & Krannich, R. S. (2016). “A Great Idea, Just Not Near Me!” Understanding
Public Attitudes About Renewable Energy Facilities. Society & Natural
Resources, 29(12), 1436-1451.
Mayer, A. (2016). Risk and benefits in a fracking boom: Evidence from Colorado. The
Extractive Industries and Society, 3(3), 744-753.
McCaffrey, D. F., Lockwood, J. R., Mihaly, K., & Sass, T. R. (2012). A review of Stata
commands for fixed-effects estimation in normal linear models. Stata Journal, 12(3),
406.
McLeod, D. M., Woirhaye, J., & Menkhaus, D. J. (1999). Factors influencing support for rural
land use control: A case study. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review, 28(1), 4456.
Moffat, K., Lacey, J., Zhang, A., & Leipold, S. (2016). The social licence to operate: a critical
review. Forestry: An International Journal of Forest Research, 89(5), 477-488.
Moffat, K., & Zhang, A. (2014). The paths to social licence to operate: An integrative model
explaining community acceptance of mining. Resources Policy, 39, 61-70.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

32

Mulvaney, K. K., Woodson, P., & Prokopy, L. S. (2013). Different shades of green: a case
study of support for wind farms in the rural midwest. Environmental management, 51(5),
1012-1024.
Nunkoo, R. (2016). Toward a more comprehensive use of social exchange theory to study
residents’ attitudes to tourism. Procedia Economics and Finance, 39, 588-596.
Nunkoo, R., & Gursoy, D. (2016). Rethinking the role of power and trust in tourism
planning. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management, 25(4), 512-522.
Nunkoo, R., & Ramkissoon, H. (2012). Power, trust, social exchange and community
support. Annals of Tourism Research, 39(2), 997-1023.
Nunkoo, R., Smith, S. L., & Ramkissoon, H. (2013). Residents’ attitudes to tourism: A
longitudinal study of 140 articles from 1984 to 2010. Journal of Sustainable
Tourism, 21(1), 5-25.
Olson-Hazboun, S. K., Krannich, R. S., & Robertson, P. G. (2016). Public views on renewable
energy in the Rocky Mountain region of the United States: Distinct attitudes, exposure,
and other key predictors of wind energy. Energy Research & Social Science, 21, 167179.
Payne, L. L., & Schaumleffel, N. A. (2008). Relationship Between Attitudes Toward Rural
Community Parks and Recreation and Rural Community Satisfaction. Journal of Park &
Recreation Administration, 26(3), 116-135.
Park, D. B., Nunkoo, R., & Yoon, Y. S. (2015). Rural residents’ attitudes to tourism and the
moderating effects of social capital. Tourism Geographies, 17(1), 112-133.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

33

Perdue, R. T., & Pavela, G. (2012). Addictive economies and coal dependency: methods of
extraction and socioeconomic outcomes in West Virginia, 1997-2009. Organization &
Environment, 25(4), 368-384.
Revelt, D., & Train, K. (1998). Mixed logit with repeated choices: households' choices of
appliance efficiency level. Review of economics and statistics, 80(4), 647-657.
Roseland, M. (2000). Sustainable community development: integrating environmental,
economic, and social objectives. Progress in planning, 54(2), 73-132.
Roulin, N. (2015). Don't throw the baby out with the bathwater: Comparing data quality of
crowdsourcing, online panels, and student samples. Industrial and Organizational
Psychology, 8(2), 190-196
Smith, S. M., Roster, C. A., Golden, L. L., & Albaum, G. S. (2016). A multi-group analysis of
online survey respondent data quality: Comparing a regular USA consumer panel to
MTurk samples. Journal of Business Research, 69(8), 3139-3148.
Slattery, M. C., Johnson, B. L., Swofford, J. A., & Pasqualetti, M. J. (2012). The predominance
of economic development in the support for large-scale wind farms in the US Great
Plains. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(6), 3690-3701.
Stout-Wiegand, N., Smith, D. K., & Jallow, S. (1985). Industrial Development in a Depressed
Area: Male-Female Differences in Attitudes. Northeastern Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics, 14(2), 154-160.
Trent, R. B., & Stout-Wiegand, N. (1985). Support for industrial development: the role of
anticipated benefits to the local area. Journal of Rural Studies, 1(4), 369-374.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
U.S. Census Bureau (2018). American Fact Finder. Pennsylvania and New York. 2012-2016
American Community Survey 5-year estimates. Retrieved from:
https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml
Wang, Y., & Pfister, R. E. (2008). Residents' attitudes toward tourism and perceived personal
benefits in a rural community. Journal of Travel Research, 47(1), 84-93.

34

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

35

Tables
Table 1. Demographics of Sample
Category
Gender
Male
Female
Other
Ethnicity
Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish Origin
Not of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish Origin
Race
White
Black or African American
Asian
American Indian or Alaska Native
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
Multiple Races/Ethnicities
Other
Education
Some high school/High school graduate or GED
Some college
College, business, or trade school degree
Some graduate school/Master’s, doctoral, or professional degree
Income
Under $25,000
$25,000 - $49,999
$50,000 - $74,999
$75,000 - $99,999
$100,000 - $149,999
Employment Status
Working – Full time
Working – Part time
Retired
Disabled
Not working
Student
Yes – Full time
Yes – Part time
No

N

%

401
405
4

49.5
50.0
0.5

38
764

4.7
95.3

686
85
4
11
1
12
4

85.1
10.5
0.5
1.4
0.1
1.5
0.9

293
208
213
88

36.5
25.9
26.6
11.0

195
242
172
90
60

25.7
31.9
22.7
11.1
7.4

334
122
114
79
131

42.8
15.6
14.6
10.1
16.8

60
39
706

7.5
4.8
87.7

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

36

Table 2. General support, ranked preference, work history, and development on property
General
Personal Work
Family Work
Development on
Mean Ranka
Top Choiceb
Supportc
Historyd
History
Propertye
Item
Mean
SD
%
Freq
Mean
SD
%
Freq
%
Freq
%
Freq
Wind energy
2.95
1.93
33.0
260
5.39
1.48
2.2
18
3.7
30
3.2
26
Outdoor
2.79
1.69
26.7
211
5.44
1.40
10.3
84
12.3
100
10.7
87
recreation
Tourism
3.76
1.87
10.1
80
4.83
1.52
6.7
54
6.0
49
3.0
24
Natural gas
4.01
1.87
11.7
92
4.40
1.65
4.8
39
11.6
94
12.2
83
Real estate
4.26
1.75
8.4
66
4.35
1.55
6.7
54
8.9
72
5.9
48
Commercial
4.98
1.73
5.7
45
3.79
1.62
6.4
52
12.4
101
9.8
79
logging
Mining
5.25
1.79
4.4
35
3.92
1.65
3.7
30
9.8
79
3.3
27
Items order from most preferable to least by mean rank
aItems ranked in order of preference in their community from 1 (Best) to 7 (Worst)
bPercent of sample who ranked the item as their top preference; N=789
cItems rated from 1 – ‘extremely opposed’ to 7 – ‘extremely supportive’
dCoded as any work history or none, those with history in multiple industries are represented more than once; N=810
eCoded as development on property or not, those with development; N=810

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

37

Table 3. Perceived impacts, trust and power means and standard deviations
Item

Commercial
Logging
Mean SD

Natural Gas
Mean SD

Real Estate
Wind
Mean
SD Mean SD

Tourism
Mean SD

Outdoor
Recreation
Mean SD

1.7

4.6

1.6

4.9

1.5

5.0

1.5

5.1

1.4

1.7

4.0

1.6

5.0

1.6

4.6

1.5

4.9

1.5

1.6

4.6

1.5

5.0

1.4

5.3

1.4

5.2

1.3

1.6

4.2

1.6

4.8

1.5

4.7

1.5

5.1

1.4

1.7

4.0

1.6

4.8

1.5

4.5

1.5

4.8

1.4

1.6

4.9

1.6

4.9

1.5

4.9

1.4

4.9

1.5

Mining
Mean SD

Increased [type of
resource use] would
4.4
1.6 4.8
1.5 4.6
increase employment in
my area
Increased [type of
resource use] in my area
would lead to minimal
3.6
1.7 3.9
1.6 3.5
negative environmental
impacts
Increased [type of
resource use] in my area
4.4
1.5 4.8
1.5 4.5
would improve the local
economy
Increased [type of
resource use] would
3.7
1.6 4.1
1.6 3.8
increase the quality of life
in my area
I trust the [type of
resource use] industry to
3.9
1.6 4.0
1.7 3.7
do the right thing
It does not matter how I
feel, if the [type of
resource use] industry
4.9
1.5 5.0
1.5 4.8
wants to increase
development in my area,
they will
Items rated from 1 – ‘strongly disagree’ to 7 – ‘strongly agree’

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Table 4. Fixed effects model of general support
Unstandardized
Independent Variable
Coefficient
Trust in industry
0.215
Quality of life impacts
0.197
Environmental impacts
0.143
Employment impacts
0.083
Local economic impacts
0.091
Perceived industry power
-0.082
Personal history with industry
0.165
Family history with industry
0.139
Development on property
0.183
Type of Development
Wind
Gas
-0.525
Mining
-0.780
Commercial logging
-0.929
Real estate
-0.556
Tourism
-0.440
Outdoor Recreation
-0.050
Constant
2.215
R2 (overall)
0.460
F(69,802)
160.72***
Number of observations
5,430
Number of groups (cases)
803
* p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001

38

Robust
Standard Error
0.024***
0.023***
0.021***
0.019***
0.022***
0.019***
0.083*
0.068*
0.070**

95% Conf. Int.
0.169 - 0.262
0.151 - 0.243
0.102 - 0.183
0.045 - 0.121
0.049 - 0.134
-0.120 - -0.044
0.003 - 0.328
0.006 - 0.273
0.045 - 0.321

0.054***
0.057***
0.059***
0.052***
0.054***
0.050
0.140***

[Reference]
-0.632 - -0.418
-0.892 - -0.667
-1.045 - -0.813
-0.658 - -0.454
-0.546 - -0.334
-0.148 - 0.048
1.940 - 2.490

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

39

Table 5. Mixed logit model of top preference for development

Variables
Random Effects
Trust in industry
Life quality impacts
Local economic impacts
Environmental impacts
Employment impacts
Industry power
Family history with industry
Personal history with industry
Development on property
Standard Deviation of Random Effectsb
Trust in industry
Life quality impacts
Economic impacts
Environmental impacts
Employment impacts
Industry power
Family history with industry
Personal history with industry
Development on property
Fixed Effectsc
Age by
Natural gas
Mining
Commercial logging
Real estate
Tourism
Outdoor Recreation
Number of observations
Likelihood ratio χ2
Log likelihood

Odds
Ratio

Log
Oddsa

Robust
Standard
Error

1.492
1.477
1.441
1.278
1.217
0.829
1.713
1.115
1.271

0.400
0.390
0.365
0.245
0.196
-0.187
0.538
0.109
0.240

0.109***
0.076***
0.089***
0.074**
0.087*
0.069**
0.333
0.406
0.367

0.187 - 0.613
0.242 - 0.539
0.190 - 0.541
0.099 - 0.390
0.025 - 0.367
-0.321 - -0.052
-0.114 - 1.191
-0.686 - 0.904
-0.480 - 0.959

0.440
-0.000
0.398
0.226
0.487
0.314
1.524
1.766
1.442

0.194*
0.033
0.141**
0.195
0.181**
0.182
1.035
1.084
0.994

0.059 - 0.820
-0.066 - 0.065
0.121 - 0.675
-0.157 - 0.609
0.132 - 0.841
-0.043 - 0.672
-0.504 - 3.552
-0.360 - 3.891
-0.506 - 3.390

0.985
0.969
0.981
0.984
0.973
0.987

[Wind is reference]
-0.015
0.006*
-0.031
0.009***
-0.019
0.009*
-0.016
0.007*
-0.027
0.007***
-0.013
0.005**

95%
Confidence
Interval

-0.027 - -0.003
-0.048 - -0.013
-0.036 - -0.001
-0.029 - -0.003
-0.040 - -0.014
-0.023 - -0.003

5,147
204.94*** (df = 33)
-1060.774

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001
aWhen coefficients are allowed to vary at the individual level for random effects, coefficients presented
for random effects are the average coefficients across the sample.
bOdds ratios for SD not presented
cTo

preserve space, only control variables significant at the p<.05 level are presented in this
table, but all controls remain in the model. The full table can be seen in the appendix.

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT

40

Appendix
Table 6. Mixed logit model of top preference for development - Full

Variables
Random Effects
Trust in industry
Life quality impacts
Local economic impacts
Environmental impacts
Employment impacts
Industry power
Family history with industry
Personal history with industry
Development on property
Standard Deviation of Random Effectsb
Trust in industry
Life quality impacts
Economic impacts
Environmental impacts
Employment impacts
Industry power
Family history with industry
Personal history with industry
Development on property
Fixed Effects
Age by
Natural gas
Mining
Commercial logging
Real estate
Tourism
Outdoor Recreation
Genderc by
Natural gas
Mining
Commercial logging
Real estate
Tourism
Outdoor recreation
Educationd
Natural gas
Mining
Commercial logging
Real estate

Odds
Ratio

Log
Oddsa

Robust
Standard
Error

95%
Confidence
Interval

1.492
1.477
1.441
1.278
1.217
0.829
1.713
1.115
1.271

0.400
0.390
0.365
0.245
0.196
-0.187
0.538
0.109
0.240

0.109***
0.076***
0.089***
0.074**
0.087*
0.069**
0.333
0.406
0.367

0.187 - 0.613
0.242 - 0.539
0.190 - 0.541
0.099 - 0.390
0.025 - 0.367
-0.321 - -0.052
-0.114 - 1.191
-0.686 - 0.904
-0.480 - 0.959

0.440
-0.000
0.398
0.226
0.487
0.314
1.524
1.766
1.442

0.194*
0.033
0.141**
0.195
0.181**
0.182
1.035
1.084
0.994

0.059 - 0.820
-0.066 - 0.065
0.121 - 0.675
-0.157 - 0.609
0.132 - 0.841
-0.043 - 0.672
-0.504 - 3.552
-0.360 - 3.891
-0.506 - 3.390

0.985
0.969
0.981
0.984
0.973
0.987
0.882
0.765
0.536
1.073
0.587
1.037
1.442
1.100
0.817
0.647

[Wind is reference]
-0.015
0.006*
-0.031
0.009***
-0.019
0.009*
-0.016
0.007*
-0.027
0.007***
-0.013
0.005**
[Wind is reference]
-0.125
0.284
-0.268
0.382
-0.623
0.406
0.070
0.327
-0.533
0.273
0.036
0.236
[Wind is reference]
0.366
0.321
0.095
0.473
-0.202
0.447
-0.435
0.390

-0.027 - -0.003
-0.048 - -0.013
-0.036 - -0.001
-0.029 - -0.003
-0.040 - -0.014
-0.023 - -0.003
-0.682 - 0.432
-1.016 - 0.481
-1.418 - 0.172
-0.572 - 0.711
-1.067 - 0.002
-0.426 - 0.498
-0.263 - 0.995
-0.832 - 1.022
-1.078 - 0.674
-1.199 - 0.330

RELATIVE SUPPORT AND NATURAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Tourism
Outdoor recreation
Length of residence by
Natural gas
Mining
Commercial logging
Real estate
Tourism
Outdoor Recreation

1.590
1.004

Number of observations
Likelihood ratio χ2
Log likelihood

5,147
204.94*** (df = 33)
-1060.773

0.998
0.990
0.992
0.987
1.013
1.011

0.464
0.290
0.004
0.259
[Wind is reference]
-0.002
0.010
-0.010
0.015
-0.008
0.015
-0.013
0.012
0.013
0.010
0.011
0.008

41
-0.105 - 1.033
-0.503 - 0.512
-0.023 - 0.018
-0.039 - 0.019
-0.037 - 0.021
-0.037 - 0.011
-0.008 - 0.033
-0.005 - 0.027

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001
aAs coefficients are allowed to vary at the individual level for random effects, coefficients presented for
random effects are the average coefficients across the sample.
bOdds ratios for SD not presented
cCoded as 1 = Female, 0 = All else
dCoded as 1 = Bachelor’s degree or above, 0 = All else

