Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Social Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/socnet

Who is fighting with whom? How ethnic origin shapes friendship, dislike,
and physical violence relations in German secondary schools☆
Mark Wittek , Clemens Kroneberg, Kathrin Lämmermann
⁎

Institute of Sociology and Social Psychology, University of Cologne, Germany

ABSTRACT

This study examines the role of ethnic background for friendship, dislike, and violence networks in secondary school. We analyze data on multiple networks from a
large-scale study of more than 2500 seventh-graders in Germany. In addition to ethnic homophily in friendship networks, our results reveal a tendency among
students to dislike ethnic outgroup members (ethnic heterophobia). However, students are more likely to engage in violence towards same-ethnic peers than
outgroup members. This is partly due to the greater prevalence of violence among students who are close in the friendship network and students who spend time
together outside of school. Moreover, schools marked by stronger ethnic homophily in friendships tend to display higher levels of ethnic heterophobia but exhibit
higher levels of intra-ethnic rather than inter-ethnic violence.
Keywords: Ethnic homophily; Violence; School networks; Multiplex networks; Exponential random graph models; Bullying

1. Introduction
During the last decades, Western Europe has experienced increasing
levels of ethnic diversity, which has become a contested issue in political and public discourse (Albahari, 2015; Carrera et al., 2015; Castles
et al., 2013). A key question for societies, policymakers, and scholars
alike is how to ensure that societies will not become disintegrated
through segregation along ethnic lines and inter-ethnic conflict. Against
this background, it is essential to gain a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms that underlie positive or negative relations within and
between ethnic groups. We contribute to this task by examining ethnic
segregation in social networks of friendship, dislike, and violence in the
school setting.
Schools are institutions with the potential to promote a societal
climate of mutual understanding, tolerance, and respect among ethnic
groups and foster the social integration of ethnic minorities (Aboud
et al., 2012). The literature on social networks in schools has long recognized the significance of ethnicity and race for tie formation. Analyzing complete networks among schoolchildren, studies have repeatedly found evidence for ethnic homophily – the tendency to form
ties with one’s co-ethnics rather than outgroup members, above and
beyond other known principles of tie formation (McPherson et al.,

2001; Moody, 2001; Wimmer and Lewis, 2010). These studies have
focused almost exclusively on friendships or other positive relations
(Moody, 2001; Baerveldt et al., 2004; Mouw and Entwisle, 2006;
Wimmer and Lewis, 2010; Smith et al., 2014, 2016; Kruse et al., 2016;
Munniksma et al., 2016).
In contrast, far less is known about ethnic segregation in negative
social ties among schoolchildren. The few studies that use data on
complete social networks have examined one particular negative tie
type in isolation, focusing on the role of ethnic background for bullying
(Kisfalusi et al., 2018; Tolsma et al., 2013), being mean to a classmate
(Wölfer et al., 2017) or a combined measure of dislike and hate (Boda
and Néray, 2015). Based on a sample of Hungarian secondary schools,
Boda and Néray (2015) reported a tendency toward ethnic heterophobia between Roma and non-Roma students in terms of dislike and
hate. Using data from the same study, a recent analysis of bullying
relations reported a more complex pattern: Not only non-Roma students
but also Roma students are more likely to report that they bully peers
they perceive as Roma compared to peers they perceive as non-Roma
(Kisfalusi et al., 2018). Similarly, Tolsma et al. (2013) observed no clear
tendency toward inter-ethnic bullying in a study of Dutch primary
schools: Contrary to their theoretical expectations, inter-ethnic bullying
was just as common as bullying within one’s own ethnic group.

☆
This work has been supported by funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 716461). We use data from the study ‘Friendship and Violence in Adolescence,’ funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG),
Grant KR 4040/2. We would like to thank Hanno Kruse, Mario Small, Tom Snijders, two anonymous reviewers, and the editors for valuable comments on this work.
Earlier versions were presented at the Social Science Research Colloquium, TU Kaiserslautern, in January 2018; at the XXXVIII Sunbelt Conference, Utrecht
University, in June 2018; at the Research Colloquium Analytical Sociology, LMU Munich, in July 2018, and at the Networks, Culture, and Action workshop at the
University of Cologne, in November 2018. We thank the various participants for their helpful feedback.
⁎
Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: wittek@wiso.uni-koeln.de (M. Wittek), c.kroneberg@uni-koeln.de (C. Kroneberg), laemmermann@wiso.uni-koeln.de (K. Lämmermann).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2019.04.004

0378-8733/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

Please cite this article as: Mark Wittek, Clemens Kroneberg and Kathrin Lämmermann, Social Networks,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2019.04.004

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

provide fertile grounds for inter-ethnic dislike and violence.

These mixed findings might originate in differences across types of
social ties (dislike vs. bullying), age groups, ethnic groups, countries, or
methods. To advance our understanding of negative ties and the role of
ethnic origin therein, it is therefore crucial to simultaneously investigate the co-occurrence of positive and negative ties among the
same set of actors (Harrigan and Yap, 2017; Huitsing et al., 2012; for socalled entrainment effects, see conceptually Lusher et al., 2013; Lusher
and Robins, 2013). In particular, the conditions for inter-ethnic hostility
– whether in terms of dislike or overt behavior such as bullying –
warrant further attention.
Against this background, our study extends the literature on ethnic
segregation in the social networks of schoolchildren in three important
ways. First, we develop a more comprehensive perspective on ethnic
segregation of peer relations in the school context. While previous research has mostly focused only on friendships or one particular type of
negative tie, we examine the co-occurrence of friendship ties with two
types of negative ties – dislike and physical violence – on the same set of
actors.
Second, we advance the theoretical understanding of negative ties
by directing attention to the differences between dislike as a relational
cognition and physical violence as a relational behavior. As the nature
and determinants of these two types of negative ties are fundamentally
different, they are also differentially associated with students’ ethnic
background and friendship relations.
Third, we derive implications of our arguments for contextual variation across schools. In particular, we examine how the strength of
ethnic homophily in friendships maps on to tendencies to form interethnic rather than intra-ethnic dislike and violence ties. Previous work
assumes a “dark side” of ethnic segregation in friendship networks as a
possible symptom or cause of threat perceptions and hostile inter-group
relations (Boda and Néray, 2015; Smith et al., 2016). Our study qualifies this conflict assumption: while dislike as a negative sentiment is
indeed more likely to occur across group boundaries, physical violence
as a negative behavior is more likely to be a within-group phenomenon,
especially in segregated environments.
Our analyses use new data on more than 2500 schoolchildren in 39
schools in Germany. The sample is ideally suited for our objectives due
to the large sample size and relatively large grade-level networks along
multiple dimensions. To study these multiple networks, we apply exponential random graph models (Lusher et al., 2013) in combination
with multivariate meta-analysis and meta-regression techniques (An,
2015). This allows us to answer the following research questions:

2.1. Dislike and violence: Different types of negative ties in the school setting
Dislike and violence are important types of negative ties that can
have serious consequences for rejected peers (Parkhurst and Asher,
1992), victims (Due et al., 2005; Hawker and Boulton, 2000), and offenders (Kaltiala-Heino et al., 2000) and may provide the building
blocks for social disintegration in schools. In this study, violence is
defined narrowly as a behavior that causes physical harm towards
others, such as hitting or kicking someone (Kaye and Erdley, 2011). In
comparison, dislike is a negative affective sentiment towards another
person. Following Borgatti et al. (2013: 13), we can classify dislike as a
relational cognition which expresses a negative affective evaluation,
while violence is a behavior – either a singular relational event or more
regular negative interactions between certain individuals that can even
give rise to relational roles (as in bully-victim relations, see Huitsing
et al., 2014; Olweus, 1996).
Causal feedback processes are likely to link both types of negative
ties: Victimization may lead to dislike between individuals, while dislike might at times provide the basis for acts of physical aggression. To
the extent that this reciprocal causation operates in the school context,
the following hypothesis should hold:
H1. Dislike and violence co-occur more frequently than would be
expected by chance.
However, it would be wrong to perceive of violence exclusively as a
manifestation or cause of strong feelings of dislike. Upon closer scrutiny, dislike and violence are markedly different. This becomes clear
once we take into account the causes and consequences of these types of
negative ties and their social embeddedness in friendship networks.
As a negative relational cognition, dislike should be rather opposed
to positive relationships such as friendship. Although peers can also
have ambivalent relationships marked by positive as well as negative
sentiments (see Methot et al., 2017), we expect friendship and dislike to
co-occur only rarely. This already follows conceptually from the understanding of friendships as positive social relationships based on reciprocal affection (Hays, 1988; see also Bukowski et al., 1998: 1). It is
also in line with balance theory (Heider, 1946), as individuals should
act to dissolve situations of cognitive dissonance in which they feel
dislike towards one of their friends. Within the literature on friendship
and dislike, several recent studies found friends to align in their feelings
or perceptions of dislike towards other students (Berger and Dijkstra,
2013; Fujimoto et al., 2017; Pál et al., 2016; Rambaran et al., 2015).
Moreover, dislike as a negative sentiment generally leads individuals to
avoid the disliked others (Harrigan and Yap, 2017). Taken together, the
reduction of cognitive dissonance and avoidance of disliked others
should make it unlikely that dislike occurs frequently in close friendship
circles. Indeed, dislike should become increasingly likely the more
distant schoolmates are in the friendship network. At the same time,
there is a countervailing effect, as dislike will be unlikely unless there is
a minimum amount of exposure and contact. These arguments lead to
the following hypothesis:

(1) For secondary school children, how are dislike and physical violence embedded in friendship networks?
(2) What is the role of ethnic origin for friendship, dislike and violence
relations?
(3) How does the strength of ethnic homophily in friendships relate to
intra- vs. inter-ethnic dislike and violence across schools?
Our findings reveal the distinct characters of dislike and violence as
negative ties and show that stronger ethnic homophily in friendship
networks tends to amplify the greater relative prevalence of inter-ethnic
dislike and intra-ethnic violence. The study demonstrates the potential
of a multi-dimensional view of ethnic segregation in the social networks
of schoolchildren and serves to qualify overly alarmist portrayals of
ethnic segregation of friendship networks as being indicative of overt
intergroup conflict.

H2. Dislike is rarely present among friends and becomes more likely the
more distant students are in the friendship network, until distance
makes contact unlikely.
In comparison, violence follows markedly different mechanisms. As
a behavior, violence tends to involve greater risks than disliking
someone (see Windzio and Bicer, 2013). Engaging in acts of violence
towards schoolmates means to break the official rules of schools, if not
the law (Wikström and Treiber, 2009). In addition, violence can lead to
retaliation or loss of status, but also to a gain in social standing in the
peer group – depending on the outcome of the physical confrontation
and its evaluation by friends and other peers (Faris and Felmlee, 2014;
Veenstra et al., 2010). Its greater potential costs should make violence

2. Theory and previous research
In this section, we first discuss dislike and violence as two different
types of negative ties and their relations with friendships in the school
setting. We then derive implications for the role of ethnic background
in networks of positive and negative ties and discuss the common view
that schools with ethnically segregated friendship networks might
2

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

much rarer than dislike. Even more importantly, the likelihood of interpersonal violence is strongly affected by frequency of contact and exposure to unsupervised settings.
Socially close children, such as friends or members of the same
friendship group, usually spend more time with each other (e.g., in
school breaks or in their leisure time) than with other students, and this
greater exposure comes with a greater probability of provocations and
other strain-inducing events or frictions. Moreover, as some of this
contact will take place outside of school, it might involve unstructured
and unsupervised time with peers that is known to be conducive to
violence and delinquency (Clarke and Felson, 1993; Osgood et al.,
1996). Hence, applying this insight from routine activity theory, we
expect opportunities and motivations for inter-personal violence to be
more frequent among friends and the risk of formal sanctions to be
lower, especially when they meet outside of school.
While it might seem paradoxical from a balance-theoretic perspective that friends fight with each other, motivation to do so may arise
from various sources. Previous studies have argued that adolescents’
goal to secure or improve social status often motivates them to target
socially close individuals (e.g., Felmlee and Faris, 2016; Gould, 2003;
Sijtsema et al., 2009; see also Gravel et al., 2018). Moreover, due to the
prior investments, positive feelings and rewards that bind friends together, these positive relationships tend to be retained even when
physical aggression erupts situationally. Hence, the avoidance mechanism that leads dislike and friendship to drift apart in schoolchildren’s social relations does not operate in the same way for
friendship and violence. On the contrary, the fact that violence is a
function of exposure, time spent in unsupervised settings, and adolescents’ competition for status means that violence should become increasingly unlikely the more distant schoolmates are in the friendship
network. Again, however, this effect will attenuate once social distance
becomes so large that students are not likely to interact at all:

(Leszczensky and Pink, 2015). Lacking a direct measure of same-ethnic
preferences, ethnic homophily is commonly defined as the degree of
ethnic segregation in networks that remains after controlling for the
opportunity structure and other important mechanisms such as reciprocity or triadic closure (Smith et al., 2016; Wimmer and Lewis,
2010). Most studies find at least some degree of ethnic homophily in
friendship networks (Baerveldt et al., 2004; Kruse et al., 2016;
Leszczensky and Pink, 2015; Moody, 2001; Mouw and Entwisle, 2006;
Smith et al., 2014, 2016).
In comparison, studies on the role of ethnic origin for negative ties
in the school setting are few and far between (Boda and Néray, 2015;
Kisfalusi et al., 2018; Tolsma et al., 2013; Wölfer et al., 2017). Theoretically, Boda and Néray (2015) use social identity theory to argue for
a greater prevalence of dislike relations across rather than within ethnic
groups. Social identity theory assumes humans to strive for a sense of
self-worth derived from group membership (Tajfel and Turner, 1979).
One strategy to establish positive self-esteem connected to an in-group
is to seek a clear distinction from and devaluation of the outgroup. This
mechanism should provoke not only negative feelings towards the
outgroup in general, but also make dislike ties to outgroup members
more likely than to members of the ingroup (Boda and Néray, 2015:
59). Similarly, conflict theory can be used to derive this tendency towards ethnic heterophobia (Blalock, 1967; Bobo and Hutchings, 1996;
Horowitz, 1985). This theory assumes members of different ethnic
groups to feel threatened by each other when the groups compete for
scarce resources, such as social status. Such threat perceptions have
been argued to make students prefer same-ethnic over cross-ethnic
friends (Smith et al., 2016: 1229–1235). In the same way, these threat
perceptions might lead to more dislike relations across group boundaries than within ethnic groups.
Support comes from the study by Boda and Néray (2015), who examined friendships and negative ties between Roma and non-Roma
students in Hungarian secondary schools. Their results showed that
majority students tend to dislike peers whom they perceive as minorities rather than perceived majority members. Moreover, the salience
of Roma ethnicity in these Hungarian schools allowed the authors to
measure and gain insights on the significance of self-declared and
perceived ethnicity: Minority students were likely to befriend perceived
minority classmates who also declared themselves as Roma but tended
to dislike them if they declared themselves as non-Roma.
While this study used a combined measure of negative ties based on
dislike and hate (Boda and Néray, 2015: 60-61), we will distinguish
between dislike as a relational cognition and violence as a relational
behavior. As the nature and determinants of these two types of negative
ties are fundamentally different, this should also affect their associations with ethnic background. Most importantly, our foregoing theoretical discussion cautions against the analytical short circuit from
inter-ethnic dislike to inter-group violence. Tellingly, the recent analysis of bullying relations by Kisfalusi et al. (2018) that used data from
the same study as Boda and Néray (2015) reports a more complex
pattern: Not only non-Roma students but also Roma students are more
likely to report that they bully peers they perceive as Roma compared to
peers they perceive as non-Roma. Similarly, in an analysis of Dutch
primary schools, Tolsma et al. (2013) found inter-ethnic bullying to be
just as common as bullying within one’s own ethnic group. As the authors conclude, these results do not support the theoretical arguments
that ethnic prejudice or ethnicity as a signal of someone’s otherness
translates into inter-ethnic bullying (Tolsma et al., 2013: 57).
Our foregoing discussion yields a markedly different theoretical
expectation as it implies a greater prevalence of violence within rather
than between ethnic groups. Negative sentiments usually lead to
avoidance rather than generating active hostility (Harrigan and Yap,
2017). Given the greater likelihood of violence within the social circles
constituted by positive ties and the common tendency towards ethnic
segregation of friendships, schoolchildren should be more likely to attack same-ethnic peers than outgroup members. To summarize, we

H3. Violence is more frequent among friends and less likely the more
distant students are in the friendship network, until distance makes
contact unlikely.
Hence, although dislike and violence as negative ties are sometimes
directed towards the same individuals, they relate very differently to
students’ friendship networks. This is also true with regard to spending
time outside of school: While students are unlikely to spend more time
than necessary with others they dislike, contact in settings with reduced
supervision makes violence more likely.
H4. Spending time together outside of school is associated with an
increased prevalence of violence but negatively associated with dislike.
Previous research already sheds some light on the conjecture that
the vast majority of everyday acts of aggression takes place within the
social circles constituted by positive ties. The most direct support comes
from a recent study that found cyber aggression among eighth- to
twelfth grade students to occur far more frequently between current or
former friends and dating partners (Felmlee and Felmlee, 2016).
Moreover, there have been studies of smaller scale that reported physical aggression to occur between young friends (Crick and Nelson,
2002; Mishna et al., 2008).
2.2. Ethnic segregation in positive and negative ties among schoolchildren
Our theoretical discussion carries important implications for the
role of ethnic origin for positive and negative ties in the school setting.
A large body of research has focused on friendship networks and suggests a lack of meeting opportunities and preferences for same-ethnic
others as two broad classes of causes that underlie ethnic segregation.
Meeting opportunities are largely a function of relative group sizes in
the school but also of residential ethnic segregation in the surrounding
communities (Kruse et al., 2016; Mouw and Entwisle, 2006; Schlueter,
2012) and the allocation of students to different classrooms or tracks
3

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

arrive at the following hypotheses on the relevance of ethnic background for friendship, dislike and violence:

with more inter-ethnic than intra-ethnic dislike.
H10. Stronger ethnic homophily in friendship networks is associated
with more intra-ethnic than inter-ethnic violence.

H5. Friendship networks tend to exhibit ethnic homophily.
H6. Dislike nominations tend towards ethnic heterophobia.

3. Data and measures

H7. Violence is more frequent between students of the same ethnic
origin than across ethnic groups.

3.1. Data

As this last hypothesis is based on the argument that everyday
violence takes place primarily within the social circles constituted by
positive ties, we can derive another testable implication:

We use data from a large-scale network study among 7th graders in
the Ruhr area in Germany. In winter 2013, all schools from five adjacent cities were asked to participate in the survey, with the exception
of special needs schools and upper secondary schools (German
“Gymnasium”). This metropolitan area and selection of schools yield a
sample of high ethnic diversity as well as a relatively high-risk sample
in terms of delinquency. The Ruhr area represents the largest urban
area in Germany, is characterized by the downfall of the coal mining
industry and relatively high levels of unemployment, and is home to a
large share of the population with a migration background.
A total of 39 out of 44 schools participated, 122 school classes were
surveyed, and the average number of students per grade was 66.62
(SD = 38.07). Students’ overall participation rate was 79%, which
yields a sample size of 2635 (for further details, see Beier et al., 2014).
After data cleaning, the analysis sample was reduced to 2598 cases.
Students were 13 years old on average (SD = 0.62); 53% of the students
were boys and 59% of the students had a migration background.
The survey was administered in the form of audio-enhanced, computer-assisted self-interviews, where students could additionally listen
to questions and answer categories using headphones in order to reduce
problems arising from language difficulties and illiteracy. The survey
was conducted in classrooms during two school lessons, where trained
interviewers instructed the students beforehand and supervised the
survey process. Participation was voluntary and required active parental consent.

H8. The greater prevalence of violence within ethnic groups as opposed
to across ethnic groups is due to the greater prevalence of violence
among students who are close in the friendship network and students
who spend time together outside of school.
2.3. School-level implications: how ethnic homophily in friendships relates
to intergroup dislike and violence
Even if a general tendency towards inter-ethnic violence seems
unlikely, ethnic origin might be a highly salient “conflictual” or “polarizing” attribute in certain contexts (Harrigan and Yap, 2017: 139). In
such situations, inter-ethnic dislike might become strong enough to
overcome the tendency towards avoidance and instead generate active
hostility. This idea is featured prominently in previous research on
schools. Although most social network studies have focused on friendships, a recurring motivating assumption has been that ethnic homophily in friendship networks is problematic, as it may be a symptom or a
cause of threat perceptions and hostile inter-group relations (Boda and
Néray, 2015; Smith et al., 2016). More explicitly, work on peer victimization has argued that particular ethnic compositions or ethnic segregation of friendships lead to higher peer victimization across ethnic
groups (Agirdag et al., 2011; Durkin et al., 2012; Kawabata and Crick,
2011; Thijs and Verkuyten, 2014; Walsh et al., 2016). For example,
Walsh and colleagues reason that “higher percentages of immigrants in
school are related to more within ethnic group friendships or ‘ethnic
homophily’ (Titzmann and Silbereisen, 2009), which might be associated with fighting and tension occurring on an intergroup basis.”
(Walsh et al., 2016: 11). Theoretically, the underlying argument is that
a preference for same-ethnic over cross-ethnic friends (i.e., ethnic
homophily) might be indicative of threat perceptions (see also Smith
et al., 2016: 1229–1235), ethnic prejudice, or outgroup denigration –
which might provide a fertile ground for inter-ethnic dislike and violence.
However, upon closer scrutiny, research on peer victimization has
not produced conclusive evidence on the hypothesized relationship
between ethnic homophily in friendships and inter-ethnic violence.
Most studies on peer victimization lack social network data that would
allow them to ascertain the identity and ethnic group membership of
the perpetrators (Agirdag et al., 2011; Durkin et al., 2012; Kawabata
and Crick, 2011; Thijs and Verkuyten, 2014; Walsh et al., 2016). Hence,
higher levels of victimization in ethnically segregated schools could
also be due to a greater prevalence of violence within ethnic groups.
Again, our theoretical arguments on the differences between dislike
and violence lead us to question the assumption that ethnic homophily
in friendship networks will yield a greater inclination to fight between,
rather than within ethnic groups. Schools where students have a pronounced preference for same-ethnic friends might indeed also exhibit
more inter-ethnic than intra-ethnic dislike ties. But to the extent that
such ethnic homophily leads to more exposure and contact among coethnics, everyday acts of physical violence should also be more frequent
within rather than between ethnic groups. We therefore arrive at the
following school-level hypotheses:

3.2. Measures
3.2.1. Ethnic background
We define ethnic origin based on parents’ and grandparents’ country
of birth. If only one parent was born abroad, her or his country of birth
was assigned. If both parents were born outside of Germany, the mother’s country of birth was assigned (following Dollmann et al., 2014).
If both parents were born in Germany but at least one grandparent was
born abroad, we used the country of birth of the grandparents to assign
ethnic background. Students with a migration background therefore
either immigrated themselves (1st generation) or are the children of
immigrants (2nd and 3rd generation). In order to avoid too sparsely
populated ethnic categories and to allow for reliable statistical analysis,
we distinguish between five large categories: German (40%), Turkish
(29%), East (Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union: 13%), other
European (North-, West-, South, and Southeast-Europe: 10%), and East
Africa (6%).
3.2.2. Sex, school class, and neighborhood similarity
We control for sex due to its well-known importance for tie formation in adolescence. To capture differential opportunities to form ties
to particular students, we include information on whether students
belong to the same school class. For the same reason, we use students’
self-reported information on the city and neighborhood they live in.
In the sociometric part of the survey, we asked students for information on different types of relationships they have with others in
their grade. Each student was given a list containing all members of the
school’s 7th grade, sorted by classroom and alphabetically by their first
name. On the list, each student’s name was assigned a unique identification number beforehand. Students were asked to use this list to
answer the network questions by indicating the respective student’s

H9. Stronger ethnic homophily in friendship networks is associated
4

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

assigned number. From this sociometric information, we constructed
uniplex, grade-level networks with directed ties for friendship, dislike,
violence, and spending spare time relations.

structure to form particular ties (e.g., due to relative group sizes).
ERGMs therefore allow us to evaluate the importance of ethnic group
membership for students’ social interactions, net of network-endogenous mechanisms and opportunity structure.

3.2.3. Friendship networks
Friendship relations were measured by asking students to indicate
their five best friends (“Who are your best friends in your grade?”).
Friendship nominations did not have to be mutual in order to count as a
friendship tie between two students in our analysis. This is in line with
previous research and helps to avoid underestimating existing friendship ties, since nominations were restricted to students’ five best friends
only (Boda and Néray, 2015; McFarland et al., 2014; Smith et al.,
2016).

4.2. Meta-analysis and meta-regression
We use meta-analytic techniques to combine parameter estimates
from these school-specific ERGMs. We conduct multivariate fixed-effects meta-analyses in order to assess general tendencies for inter- vs.
intra-ethnic ties in dislike, violence and friendship networks across our
sample of schools. Like the previously proposed univariate meta-analysis, it averages coefficients of network models weighted by their
standard errors (Snijders and Baerveldt, 2003). In addition, the multivariate meta-analysis accounts for the interdependence of estimated
parameters within each network based on their variance-covariance
matrix (An, 2015: 48–49).
Furthermore, we employ fixed-effects meta-regressions to examine
contextual predictors for the estimated ERGM parameters (similar to
McFarland et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2016). In the final step of our
analysis, we regress parameter estimates for the presence of inter- vs.
intra-ethnic ties in dislike and violence on ethnic homophily in
friendship networks. This allows us to consider co-variation of ERGM
parameters across schools while retaining the ability of multivariate
meta-analysis to account for within-network dependencies of parameters. Both multivariate fixed-effects meta-analyses and meta-regression are estimated by the generalized least square approach (see An,
2015).

3.2.4. Dislike networks
To measure dislike relations, students were asked, “Which of your
schoolmates do you not like at all?” They could nominate up to ten
fellow students from their grade.
3.2.5. Violence networks
We constructed violence networks by combining information on
victimization (“Which schoolmates sometimes hit or kick you?”) and
information on offending (“Which schoolmates do you sometimes hit or
kick?”). For both questions, students could indicate up to five schoolmates. A directed violence tie from actor i to actor j was considered
present, either when actor i indicated to have hit or kicked actor j, or
when actor j stated to have been hit or kicked by actor i. This measurement strategy follows the example of Felmlee and Faris (2016: 7)
and helps to account for underreporting due to social desirability,
which is a common issue in measuring negative ties (see Robins, 2015:
98-99).

4.3. Model specifications
Our ERGM specifications were guided by previously proposed specifications to model negative ties (Boda and Néray, 2015; Harrigan and
Yap, 2017; Huitsing et al., 2012, 2014). In an explorative modeling
strategy (see Wimmer and Lewis, 2010: 625), we estimated a range of
different specifications under various settings for the estimation process. In this iterative procedure, we aimed to achieve a balance between
the number of networks that converge under a certain specification and
the goodness of fit.

3.2.6. Spending spare time networks
In our analysis of violence relations, we also consider students’
nominations in response to the question, “Which of your schoolmates
do you also meet up with in your spare time?” They could nominate up
to ten fellow students from their grade.
Table A1 in the Appendix provides descriptive statistics on these
networks.

4.3.1. Structural effects
In order to control for the general tendency of adolescents to nominate schoolmates, we include the edges term in all network models. It
counts all ties present in a network and therefore represents the density
of the network. All models also include the mutual term that captures
students’ general tendency to reciprocate nominations of others. To
account for different activity and popularity levels between actors we
included geometrically weighted in- and out-degree effects for all tie
types (see, e.g., Kruse et al., 2016).
While these structural effects were entered into all models, we included additional terms to the model setup of particular network types
to account for their specific characteristics. In the models of friendship
relations, we added the “geometrically weighted edgewise shared
partner” (GWESP) term. The GWESP term captures transitivity, i.e., the
tendency of actors to become friends with friends (Hunter, 2007; for
applications see, e.g., Smith et al., 2016; Wimmer and Lewis, 2010).
The likelihood of having a tie increases with each additional edgewise
shared partner, but the magnitude of this increase declines with each
additional one. This decreasing return of additionally shared friends is
represented by the GWESP alpha term, which we fix to one.
Models of dislike as well as violence networks include non-sender
and non-receiver terms that count the number of students who were only
receiving or only sending negative ties. This takes into account the
sparseness of negative ties (for a similar modeling strategy, see Boda
and Néray, 2015: 62). Finally, the model fit in the ERGMs for dislike
relations improved by including a geometrically weighted version of

4. Methods and models
4.1. Exponential random graph models (ERGMs)
We model the grade-level networks of each school based on exponential random graph models (ERGMs).1 ERGMs take the global
structure of a given network as the dependent variable and model it on
the basis of local structural patterns (e.g., the number of reciprocated
ties present). In order to infer whether a specific local structure is an
important building block for the observed network’s overall structure,
ERGMs compare the frequency of that specific local structure in the
empirical network to its average prevalence in a distribution of simulated networks. The parameter estimates derived from this estimation
process thus reflect whether a specific tie-formation mechanism exists
more frequently in the observed network than expected at random,
given all other local structures specified in the model (see Lusher et al.,
2013; Robins, 2011).
In addition to network-endogenous mechanisms (e.g., reciprocity,
triadic closure), ERGMs can take into account structural patterns involving actor attributes (e.g., ethnic origin), as well as the opportunity
1
All analyses were carried out in R. We used the ergm package to conduct the
ERGM analysis (Hunter et al., 2008a, 2008b). The mvmeta package was used to
summarize the ERGM estimates and perform the meta-regressions (Gasparrini
et al., 2012; for an application of the package see An, 2015).

5

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

the incoming non-edgewise shared partner (GWNESP-ISP) and the
transitive non-edgewise shared partner (GWNESP-OTP) parameters.
The former term models the absence of a dislike relationship between
students who dislike the same students. The GWNESP-OTP term counts
triads in which i dislikes k and k dislikes j but there is no dislike relation
between i and j.

between social closeness and negative ties, as postulated in H2 and H3.
For example, if each additional path that separates students in the
friendship network makes dislike between them more likely, this effect
should “level off” after a certain path distance makes contact unlikely
(similar to the geometrical weighting of degree effects or transitive
structures).4

4.3.2. Effects of node-level characteristics
We model the tendency for ethnic homophily in friendship networks
and the corresponding tendency for intra- vs. inter-ethnic dislike and
violence ties. To this end, we include a term which is based on a statistic
that counts all same-ethnic ties. All cross-ethnic ties serve as the reference category. In addition, all ERGMs control for the preference to
interact with partners of the same sex and the greater tendency of two
students to interact if they are in the same class. Furthermore, we
consider neighborhood similarity as an additional source of exposure.

5. Results
5.1. Descriptive results
In Table 1, we report the average frequencies of and dyadic overlap
between different tie types. The right-hand column shows that violence
networks are relatively sparse, which resembles previous findings on
negative ties (Boda and Néray, 2015; Huitsing et al., 2012). The average
number of friendship dyads per school (∼165) is about three times
bigger than the average number of violence dyads (∼58). The frequency of spending spare time together (∼173) is similar to the one of
friendships, while dislike ties are even more frequent (∼210).
As a descriptive measure for the average pairwise co-occurrence of
tie types, we calculated the share of all dyads of tie type A that are also
linked via tie type B. In an average school, 8.6% of all dyads related by
dislike also entail a violence tie, and 27.5% of all violence dyads involve a dislike nomination. Furthermore, friendship and dislike nominations are almost mutually exclusive: On average only 0.5% of all
friendship dyads simultaneously display a dislike nomination and vice
versa. Spending spare time and dislike ties also co-occur rarely: On
average only 1.1% of all spending spare time dyads involve dislike
nominations, and only 0.8% of all dislike dyads involve reports of
spending spare time together outside of school. These findings are in
line with H1, H2 and H4: Whereas dislike and violence tend to co-occur
in dyads, dislike ties are rarely present between two students who are
connected by a friendship or spare time nomination.
To put the network correlates of violence ties into perspective, it has
to be noted that a substantial proportion of students is not involved in
violence at all: On average, 37% of the students in a school grade were
neither involved as victims nor as offenders (see Table A1 in the Appendix). This explains why the prevalence of violence in other tie types
is rather low: Only around 6% of all friendship and spending spare time
dyads are marked by incidences of violence and the prevalence of
violence is not much higher among students who dislike each other
(8.6%). Conversely, however, if violence occurs in a dyad, 20% of these
dyads share a friendship tie, 21% share a spending spare time tie and
27.5% of all violence dyads involve dislike. Hence, to a considerable
extent, violence is embedded in other types of peer relations. And while
the vast majority of friends do not sometimes hit or kick each other,
every fifth violence tie occurs between friends. The same holds for
spending spare time dyads. This descriptive result already points towards a substantial overlap between violence and friendship as well as
violence and spending time together outside of school (see H3 and H4).

4.3.3. Entrainment effects
In order to model interdependencies between different tie types,
entrainment effects can be included in ERGMs. Entrainment describes
the tendency for ties of one type to predict ties of another type
(Harrigan and Yap, 2017: 128; Robins and Pattison, 2006). To investigate the expected association between spending spare time together and violence, we include a spare time entrainment effect in our
model of violence networks. This tendency for the two tie types –
spending spare time ties and violence ties – to co-occur is measured by a
statistic which counts directed ties of one type that co-occur with nominations of another type between two actors.2
Moreover, all ERGMs for dislike include violence entrainment effects, and vice versa. These effects are not only necessary to test our first
hypothesis but also considerably improved model fit, allowing a greater
number of networks to enter the analysis sample. Robustness analyses
(available from the authors upon request) showed that the main findings are robust when excluding these entrainment effects (i.e., analyzing violence networks without controlling for dislike ties, and vice
versa).
4.3.4. Closeness in the friendship network
To test our theoretical expectations about the role of social closeness
for the occurrence of negative ties (H2, H3), we construct a matrix
entailing the shortest path between two students in the friendship
network. The matrix captures the notion of “close social circles” in the
friendship network as it is analogous to a distance matrix in physical
space (e.g., Luke, 2015: 176). For instance, a pair of students sharing a
friend but having no friendship themselves have a shortest path length
of two since they are only connected via their mutual friend.3
By including this shortest path matrix in our ERGMs of negative ties,
we estimate a parameter for the occurrence of a negative tie between a
pair of students separated by an additional path in the friendship network. In addition, we include a squared version of the shortest path
matrix, which entails the squared shortest paths between all students in
a grade. Similar to a quadratic term in the regression framework, this
squared shortest path matrix can account for a curved relationship

5.2. ERGM results: Meta-analyses of friendship, dislike and violence
networks
We now turn to the results of the exponential random graph models.
For each tie type, our initial analysis sample comprised all 39 gradelevel networks. None of the networks had to be excluded in advance
due to high data quality. Between 91 and 100% of all participating
students provided usable information in the network survey. Moreover,

2
We specified an entrainment effect in the ergm package (Hunter et al.,
2008a, 2008b) by adding an edgecov() term which entails the adjacency matrix
of the “entraining” network.
3
We use the Dijkstra algorithm to obtain the shortest path matrices for all
grades (see, e.g., West, 2001), which is implemented in the igraph package
(version 1.1.2; Csardi and Nepusz, 2006). The directionality of the friendship
network was not taken into account for the computation of shortest paths. To
avoid problems in the estimation process, students in different components of
the friendship networks were assigned a shortest path length of 10 to one another, since this path length was rarely observed empirically. The same cutoff
value was chosen for the shortest distance between isolates and non-isolates in
the friendship network.

4

Note that it was not possible to estimate a simple entrainment effect of
friendship on dislike since friendship almost always implies the absence of
dislike. Using shortest path matrices avoids this problem of perfect prediction.
Hence, this analytic strategy helps to examine the relationships between tie
types that are highly collinear on the dyad level.
6

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

Table 1
Co-occurrence of different combinations of tie types in dyads.

Tie type A

Friendship
Spare Time
Violence
Dislike

Friendship
0.639 (0.058)
0.202 (0.113)
0.005 (0.008)

Tie type B
Spare Time
0.624 (0.092)
0.207 (0.114)
0.008 (0.014)

Violence
0.058 (0.032)
0.063 (0.036)
0.086 (0.050)

Dislike
0.005 (0.009)
0.011 (0.025)
0.275 (0.121)

Dyads per tie type
165.49 (106.78)
173.43 (122.34)
57.59 (36.18)
210.10 (136.50)

Note: Numbers indicate the share of all type A dyads which are also type B dyads. We report the average of these pairwise overlaps across all 39 schools. The last
column reports the mean number of dyads per tie type across schools. Standard deviations are in parentheses for the mean number of dyads and for the share of tie
type co-occurrence.

grade-level networks varied from at least 15 to 156 students. The
median size was 59 students, with 75% of all networks including more
than 33 students and 25% including more than 98 students.
We only included the ERGM results in the meta-analyses that indicated a good model fit. If the t-ratio for convergence was greater than
0.1 for one of the model’s parameters, the model fit was considered
unsatisfactory (Robins et al., 2009), and all of the model’s estimates
were disregarded in the meta-analysis.5 Additionally, we excluded
models if one or more of their estimated parameters had a standard
error greater than 5 (Smith et al., 2016: 1259) or a magnitude outside a
[-10; 10] range (Kruse et al., 2016: 136). Based on these model fit
criteria, a varying number of networks enter the meta-analyses depending on the network type and model specification. Furthermore, we
assessed the goodness of fit (GOF) by simulating networks from the
obtained ERGM results and comparing their outdegree, edgewiseshared partner and geodesic distance statistics with the ones observed
in the respective network (Goodreau et al., 2008). All ERGM results
reported in the results section show a mean percentage of at least 90%
of GOF ratios below 2 across schools, which can be considered satisfactory (Robins and Lusher, 2012).

Table 2
Multivariate meta-analysis of friendship networks.
M1

Edges
Mutual
GWODEG
GWIDEG
GWESP
Same class
Same neighborhood
Activity female
Popularity female
Same sex
Same ethnic
AIC
N

beta

s.e.

−5.78***
2.37***
1.21***
0.47***
0.81***
1.15***
0.26***
0.03
−0.06
0.94***
0.30***
611.80
32

0.06
0.05
0.12
0.07
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.02

Note: beta denotes the averaged ERGM coefficient weighted by the variancecovariance matrix of all parameters estimated per model specification with a
multivariate fixed-effects meta-analysis (An, 2015); s.e. reports the standard
error associated with this averaged ERGM coefficient. †p < 0.10; * p < 0.05;
** p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 (two-sided).

5.2.1. Meta-analysis of friendship networks
Table 2 presents the results of the multivariate meta-analyses of
friendship networks. We observed a tendency for reciprocity as well as
a tendency for the occurrence of transitive ties, as indicated by the
significant GWESP parameter. The latter tendency decreases with each
additional k-shared partner of ego and alter. Friendship networks exhibited no sex differences in activity or popularity.
In line with previous research, several node-level characteristics
prove important for friendships: Students are more likely to be friends
when they share the same ethnic origin, the same sex, the same
neighborhood, or belong to the same class in the grade (see already
Kruse et al., 2016; Leszczensky and Pink, 2015; Moody, 2001; Mouw
and Entwisle, 2006; Smith et al., 2016). This can be interpreted as
evidence for sex homophily and ethnic homophily and for greater opportunities to form friendships that come with greater exposure in the
classroom and neighborhood.

Table 3
Multivariate meta-analysis of dislike networks.
M1

M2

beta
Edges
Non-receivers
Non-senders
Mutual
GWODEG
GWIDEG
GW incoming non-edgewise shared
partners
GW transitive non-edgewise shared
partners
Same class
Same neighborhood
Activity female
Popularity female
Same sex
Same ethnic
Violence entrainment
Shortest path
Shortest path squared
AIC
N

5.2.2. Meta-analyses of dislike and violence networks: Basic findings
Tables 3 and 4 show the results of the multivariate meta-analyses of
dislike and violence networks. For both negative tie types, we first report results from a specification without the shortest path effects that
capture closeness in the friendship network (M1). We then add the
shortest path effects to examine how the significance of other effects –
in particular the tendency towards intra- vs. inter-ethnic ties – changes
once we control for closeness in the friendship network (M2). The metaanalysis of violence networks simultaneously adds the entrainment

s.e.
*

beta

s.e.
***

−0.24
−0.76***
−1.07***
1.35***
−5.57***
−1.90***
−0.19***

0.11
0.12
0.18
0.05
0.23
0.10
0.01

−1.45
−0.73***
−1.10***
1.27***
−5.53***
−1.86***
−0.20***

0.14
0.12
0.18
0.05
0.23
0.10
0.01

−0.08***

0.004

−0.07***

0.005

1.54***
−0.12**
0.14***
−0.23***
0.03
−0.11***
1.00***

0.04
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.06

1.77***
−0.07
0.14***
−0.23***
0.19***
−0.10**
1.11***
0.38***
−0.03***
728.62
29

0.04
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.03
0.002

806.55
29

Note: beta denotes the averaged ERGM coefficient weighted by the variancecovariance matrix of all parameters estimated per model specification with a
multivariate fixed-effects meta-analysis (An, 2015); s.e. reports the standard
error associated with this averaged ERGM coefficient. †p < 0.10; *p < 0.05;
**
p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 (two-sided).

5

To ease convergence, we fixed the maximum outdegree to 5 for all tie types,
which proved to provide best convergence and GOF compared to other settings.
If the model showed degeneracy issues, we restarted the estimation process up
to 10 times. Moreover, we provided the estimation process with the logarithmic
tie vs. no-tie ratio as the initial value for the edges parameter.
7

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

Néray (2015) based on secondary schools in Hungary. In contrast,
however, violence networks are characterized by a significant tendency
for intra-ethnic ties compared to ties across group divides (Table 4,
M1). This is in line with H7.

Table 4
Multivariate meta-analysis of violence networks.
M1

M2

beta
Edges
Non-receivers
Non-senders
Mutual
GWODEG
GWIDEG
Same class
Same neighborhood
Activity female
Popularity female
Same sex
Same ethnic
Dislike entrainment
Shortest path
Shortest path squared
Spare time entrainment
AIC
N

s.e.
***

−2.54
0.27†
−0.19
2.41***
−2.05***
−1.84***
1.57***
−0.08
−0.41***
0.21**
0.07
0.16***
0.98***

1012.63
21

0.12
0.15
0.19
0.08
0.25
0.16
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.04
0.04
0.05

beta

s.e.
***

−1.03
0.25†
−0.12
2.32***
−1.89***
−1.84***
1.25***
−0.08
−0.41***
0.27***
−0.30***
0.08*
1.29***
−0.62***
0.05***
0.34***
845.99
21

5.2.3. Entrainment and shortest path effects
We now discuss the entrainment effects of other tie types as well as
effects capturing the shortest path distance in the friendship network on
negative ties. These effects allow a more rigorous multivariate evaluation of H1 to H4.
All model specifications for dislike include violence entrainment
effects and vice versa. Table 3 shows a significant positive entrainment
effect of violence on dislike in both model specifications. Table 4 includes the corresponding effects of dislike on violence. This provides
multivariate support for the hypothesis that dislike and violence cooccur more frequently than expected by chance (H1).
In Table 3 (Model 2), the shortest path effects reveal that dislike ties
are also significantly associated with closeness in the friendship network. In line with H2, the longer the shortest path separating two
students in the friendship network, the more likely a dislike nomination. This association is less pronounced for each additional shortest
path length. Finally, note that spending spare time together and dislike
relations were mutually exclusive to a degree that made it impossible to
estimate an entrainment effect of spare time ties on dislike ties due to
degeneracy issues. We regard this as further evidence for H4.
Model 2 in Table 4 reveals a significant association between violence ties and closeness in the friendship network. Contrary to dislike
relations, violence ties between students become increasingly unlikely
the longer the shortest path separating them in the friendship network
is. This is in line with our expectation that violence is more likely to
take place within close as opposed to distant social circles (H3). Again,
this effect is marginally decreasing (i.e., “levels off”) with each additional shortest path length. Moreover, the significant and positive entrainment effect for spending spare time nominations indicates that
students who spend time together outside of school are more likely to
sometimes hit or kick each other than students who only meet in school.

0.15
0.15
0.19
0.08
0.26
0.16
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.04
0.004
0.06

Note: beta denotes the averaged ERGM coefficient weighted by the variancecovariance matrix of all parameters estimated per model specification with a
multivariate fixed-effects meta-analysis (An, 2015); s.e. reports the standard
error associated with this averaged ERGM coefficient. †p < 0.10; *p < 0.05;
**
p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 (two-sided).

effect of spending time together outside of school.
We first describe effects that control for basic structural tendencies
and remain largely constant across these model specifications. As was
true for friendship networks, both dislike and violence networks exhibit
a significant tendency for reciprocity. The non-receiver and non-sender
terms that we included to take into account the sparseness of negative
ties are particularly relevant for dislike networks. In Table 3, these
parameters are negative and significant, which indicates that students
tend to receive and send dislike nominations at the same time rather
than only sending or only receiving nominations. For violence networks
(see Table 4), only the non-receivers effect is marginally significant
(p < .10). Its positive sign means that there tend to be more students
who only send but do not receive violence ties (i.e., offenders who are
not also victims) than would be expected by chance.
Turning to node-level characteristics, we observe a greater likelihood of dislike and violence between students who belong to the same
class (as was also true for friendships). Living in the same neighborhood
makes dislike less likely (Table 3, M1). This does not hold for the violence networks, where the same neighborhood parameter shows a negative sign but remains insignificant in all model specifications
(Table 4).
Sex is relevant for both negative tie types but exhibits remarkably
different patterns. Comparing the activity and popularity effects between Tables 3 and 4, we see that female students tend to send more
dislike ties but fewer violence ties than male students. In contrast, female students receive fewer dislike nominations but more violence
nominations than male students. In the model specification that does
not control for closeness in the friendship network (M1 in Tables 3 and
4), we observe no systematic tendency to nominate students of the same
sex or the opposite sex in negative ties.
Ethnic origin has significant but, again, contrasting effects. As evident in Table 3, the dislike networks display ethnic heterophobia. This
supports H6 and is congruent with the results reported by Boda and

5.2.4. Changes in same-sex and same-ethnic effects on negative ties when
controlling for closeness in friendships
Comparing Models 1 and 2 in Tables 3 and 4, we can examine how
other parameters in the models for negative ties change once we control
for the closeness of students in the friendship network. Recall that we
observed no systematic tendency toward more negative ties between
same-sex students or students of opposite sex in the basic model specifications (Model 1 in Tables 3 and 4). However, once we controlled
for closeness in the friendship network, we observed a significant tendency to send dislike nominations to same-sex peers rather than to
students of the opposite sex (Table 3, M2). Hence, taking into account
students’ greater likelihood to have same-sex friends, students of the
same sex are actually more likely to dislike each other. Again, results
are markedly different for violence. Here, we observe systematically
more violence ties between the sexes after including the shortest path
effects. Thus, taking into account the higher likelihood of violence in
close social circles reveals a tendency to hit and kick students of the
opposite sex.
Even more important for our analytic interests, there are also
changes in the same-ethnic parameter estimates for violence networks.
Once we control for the closeness in friendship networks and spending
spare time outside of school, the same-ethnic estimate for violence ties
drops substantially in size and significance from 0.16 (p < 0.001) to

8

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

Fig. 1. Covariation of ethnic homophily in friendships with intra- vs. inter-ethnic ties in dislike and violence.

0.08 (p < 0.05).6 These results provide some evidence for our hypothesis that the greater relative prevalence of violence within ethnic
groups can be partially explained by the greater prevalence of violence
among students who are close in the friendship network and among
students who spend time together outside of school (H8).

ethnic homophily in friendship networks (based on the specification in
Table 2, M1). On the y-axis, we report the degree of intra vs. interethnic nominations in negative ties (based on the specifications in
Table 3, M1, for dislike and Table 4, M1, for violence networks). Each
dot in the figure represents one particular school. The location of each
dot reflects the coefficients obtained from the school-specific ERGM.
The sizes of the dots correspond to the inverse squared standard error of
the same-ethnic coefficient in the dependent network (dislike, violence). Hence, bigger dots indicate more statistical precision of this
estimate, which corresponds to a greater weighting of the estimate in
the meta-regression (similar to Smith et al., 2016: 1246). The regression
lines added to both plots are based on multivariate meta-regressions,
which add ethnic homophily in friendship networks as a predictor to
the meta-analyses of dislike and violence networks reported in Tables 3
and 4.
The left-hand graph of Fig. 1 shows that schools with stronger ethnic
homophily in friendships tend to exhibit more inter-ethnic than intraethnic dislike. The slope of the regression line is -0.54 (s.e. = 0.16).
Hence, we find support for H9. The right-hand graph reveals that in
schools where ethnic homophily in friendship networks is strong, violence ties also tend to be more likely within than across ethnic groups
(slope = 0.62, s.e. = 0.22). This result supports H10 and contradicts
the view that ethnic segregation of friendship networks is associated
with fights occurring more often between than within ethnic groups.

5.3. Meta-regressions: Ethnic segregation in friendship and negative ties
across schools
The results discussed in the previous section are based on metaanalyses that average structural tendencies across all schools and may
hide important between-school differences. Tables A2, A3, and A4 in
the Appendix present measures for between-school differences in the
multivariate meta-analysis of friendship, dislike and violence networks.
Overall, there is clear indication of significant between-school variation. This is also true for the estimates of the same-ethnic terms which
vary significantly across schools for friendship and dislike networks and
marginally so for violence networks (p < .10).
In the final step of our analysis, we turn to this between-school
variability and examine how the strength of ethnic homophily in
friendships maps onto tendencies for inter- vs. intra-ethnic dislike and
violence ties. To this end, Fig. 1 visualizes the contextual co-variation of
ethnic homophily in friendships and the occurrence of intra- vs. interethnic ties in dislike and violence across schools. The x-axis denotes

6. Discussion und conclusion

6

Interpreting changes in the size of parameters across nested ERGM specifications is not unproblematic (see, e.g., Kruse et al., 2016: 136; Mood, 2010). It
is therefore important to note that the coefficients of all basic structural effects
remain practically constant and that also the p-value of the same-ethnic parameter drops considerably after including the shortest path terms and the spare
time entrainment effect on violence. In further robustness analyses, adding
these measures of social closeness even leaves the same-ethnic term significant
only at the 10% level. These analyses control for the size of schools in a metaregression in order to account for network size as a potential source of heterogeneity. These models produce very similar results (available from the authors upon request).

The aim of this study was to investigate the links between positive
and negative social ties in the school setting and specifically the role of
ethnic background in friendship, dislike, and violence networks. We
used data on more than 2500 schoolchildren in 39 schools from a regional study in Germany and applied exponential random graph models
and meta-analytic techniques to study the different tie types among
students on the grade level.

9

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

6.1. Friendship and different types of negative ties

networks: The overall tendency to hit or kick students from the same
ethnic group is amplified in schools with stronger ethnic homophily in
friendships. Our analysis therefore leads us to the conclusion that
stronger ethnic homophily in friendship networks tends to amplify the
greater relative prevalence of inter-ethnic dislike and intra-ethnic violence.
This result challenges work on peer victimization that has argued
for a link between ethnic segregation and higher victimization by
members of ethnic outgroups (Agirdag et al., 2011; Durkin et al., 2012;
Kawabata and Crick, 2011; Thijs and Verkuyten, 2014; Walsh et al.,
2016). Notably, most of these studies lack social network data that
would allow them to ascertain the ethnic group membership of the
perpetrators. Our results suggest that most of the greater peer victimization observed in ethnically segregated schools might actually take
place within ethnic groups.

To understand the links between friendship and negative ties more
broadly, we focused not only on the relational cognition of dislike but
also on physical violence as a behavior. Our analysis of violence relations – students hitting or kicking each other – showed that this type of
negative tie behaves very differently compared to dislike ties. In particular, we found opposite patterns in the embeddedness of dislike and
violence relations in friendships. The more distant two students are in
the friendship network, the more likely they are to dislike each other. In
contrast, inter-personal violence becomes more likely, the closer two
students are in the friendship network. The same pattern can be observed with respect to spending spare time with each other.
Theoretically, these findings suggest that violence as a behavior is
strongly shaped by exposure, which comes with a greater probability of
provocations and other strains as well as lower risk of formal sanctions,
especially during unstructured and unsupervised contact outside of
school (Clarke and Felson, 1993; Osgood et al., 1996). In comparison,
dislike is rare in closer friendship circles due to avoidance (Harrigan
and Yap, 2017) or a tendency to reduce cognitive dissonance in feelings
towards one’s persistent friends (Cartwright and Harary, 1956; Heider,
1946).

6.4. Limitations and future research
There are a number of limitations to our study that future research
might be able to overcome. First, our analysis of violence ties was based
on students’ reports on sometimes hitting and kicking other students or
sometimes being hit and kicked by other students. Although the sparseness of violence networks may limit the potential for more differentiated analyses, future research could try to distinguish between
different forms and degrees of seriousness of violent interactions. One
interesting question is whether our findings also apply to relational or
verbal aggression. As they carry lower risks of formal and social sanctions than physical violence, we expect these forms of aggression to
occupy a position in between dislike and physical violence.
A second limitation concerns the cross-sectional and correlational
nature of our analyses. Longitudinal analyses would not only provide a
stronger basis for causal inferences but also offer to examine important
additional questions. In particular, future research should examine the
co-evolution of friendship and violence ties and the role of students’
ethnicity for such dynamics. For example, violence could affect the
dissolution of friendship ties differently, depending on whether it involves students of the same or different ethnic origin. Furthermore,
longitudinal analyses of multiplex networks would allow one to go
beyond the rather basic entrainment and shortest path effects examined
in this study.7 As shown in recent studies, such analyses offer a detailed
understanding of the interplay of different types of social relations, as
they allow one to take into account various forms of structural interdependence (Berger and Dijkstra, 2013; Daniel et al., 2016; Fujimoto
et al., 2017; Huitsing et al., 2014; Rambaran et al., 2015). We believe
that much is to be gained by further integrating the study of structural
tendencies in multiplex networks with the literature on inter-group
relations and segregation in social networks.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that our findings pertain only
to the microcosms of schools in an ethnically diverse metropolitan area
of Germany during a period of stability and peace. With respect to such
contexts, our findings cast doubt on popular images of disintegrated
schools in which ethnically segregated friendship networks go hand in
hand with physical aggression across ethnic group divides. However,
we know from case studies of ethnic conflicts that ethnic segregation
makes local outbreaks of inter-ethnic violence more likely when ethnic
conflicts erupt in the wider society (e.g., Varshney, 2001). And even if
we restrict our attention to ethnically diverse schools under normal
circumstances, we cannot rule out the possibility that violence between

6.2. The role of ethnic origin for different tie types
Building on these general theoretical arguments, we developed a
more comprehensive perspective on ethnic homophily in the school
context. Most previous research in this area has been exclusively concerned with ethnic homophily in friendship networks (Baerveldt et al.,
2004; Kruse et al., 2016; Leszczensky and Pink, 2015; Moody, 2001;
Mouw and Entwisle, 2006; Smith et al., 2014, 2016). The prevailing
theories in this literature assume a “dark side” of ethnic segregation in
friendship networks: It may be a symptom (or a cause) of ethnic prejudice, threat perceptions, or outgroup denigration and might provide a
fertile ground for inter-ethnic violence. Based on a multi-dimensional
analysis of ethnic segregation in the social networks of schoolchildren,
we arrive at a more differentiated picture.
In addition to the well-known tendency for ethnic homophily in
friendship networks, our results reveal a tendency towards ethnic heterophobia, i.e., disliking outgroup members rather than ingroup
members. This is in line with the results obtained in Hungarian secondary schools by Boda and Néray (2015). This tendency, however,
does not extend to violence relations: We found students to be more
likely to engage in violence towards same-ethnic peers than towards
outgroup members. Our analysis suggests that this is partly due to the
greater prevalence of violence among students who are close in the
friendship network and students who spend time together outside of
school. Our theoretical arguments on the links between social closeness,
exposure, and violence might contribute to understanding the partly
unexpected results of previous studies. Rather than finding clear tendencies toward inter-ethnic bullying, the two existing social network
studies found bullying within one’s own ethnic group to be rather
common (Kisfalusi et al., 2018; Tolsma et al., 2013).
6.3. The relevance of ethnic origin across schools
A further contribution of our study is to add to a small but growing
literature which seeks to explain contextual variation in structural
tendencies related to race and ethnicity across networks (McFarland
et al., 2014; Moody, 2001; Smith et al., 2016). First of all, we can report
that the significance of ethnic origin varies across contexts for all investigated tie types. In line with the notion that ethnic homophily in
positive ties may be a symptom or a cause of negative inter-ethnic
sentiments, we found that ethnic heterophobia in dislike is more pronounced in schools that exhibit stronger ethnic homophily in friendship
networks. However, we found the opposite pattern for violence

7
To be sure, even our cross-sectional analyses could in principle be extended
by examining the overlap between more than two networks. For example, one
could analyze only spending spare time nominations which do not entail a
friendship nomination and investigate whether they play a different role for
negative ties compared to spending spare time nominations involving a
friendship tie.

10

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

students of different ethnicity may be qualitatively different from
within-group violence. In particular, the former might be coded as
“ethnic” by students, and consensus over such a meaning can in turn
have important social consequences, such as more intense antipathies,
retaliation, and ethnic closure in friendships (Brubaker, 2004: 93). To

investigate this possibility, future research could complement sociometric information on offender-victim ties with data on students’ perceptions about the prevalence of ethnic conflicts in their classrooms,
grades, or schools.

Appendix A

Table A1
Descriptive information on network characteristics.

Friendship
Dislike
Violence
Spare time

Density

Degrees per actor

Out-degrees per actor

Share reciprocity

Number isolates

Percentage isolates

0.073 (0.05)
0.08 (0.06)
0.026 (0.025)
0.067 (0.04)

6.67
6.83
2.10
7.43

3.33
3.41
1.05
3.87

0.59
0.22
0.28
0.58

0.82 (1.14)
2.77 (2.40)
25.9 (17.78)
2.31 (2.01)

0.02
0.04
0.37
0.05

(1.13)
(1.68)
(0.79)
(5.36)

(0.57)
(0.84)
(0.40)
(2.93)

(0.06)
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.10)

Note: We report the mean; standard errors in parentheses. NNetworks = 39 per tie type.

Table A2
Multivariate meta-analysis of friendship networks with measure for parameter heterogeneity.
M1
beta
Edges
Mutual
GWODEG
GWIDEG
GWESP
Same class
Same neighborhood
Activity female
Popularity female
Same sex
Same ethnic
AIC
N

***

−5.78
2.37***
1.21***
0.47***
0.81***
1.15***
0.26***
0.03
−0.06
0.94***
0.30***
611.80
32

s.e.

Q

0.06
0.05
0.12
0.07
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.02

151.69***
71.89***
55.34**
56.38**
87.78***
349.72***
38.513
56.38**
53.94**
58.83**
78.49***

Note: beta denotes the averaged ERGM coefficient weighted by the variance-covariance matrix of all parameters estimated
per model specification with a multivariate fixed-effects meta-analysis (An, 2015); s.e. reports the standard error associated with this averaged ERGM coefficient; Q reports the statistic of the Cochran Q-test, which tests whether the variance
of the true beta equals zero (see, e.g., Snijders and Baerveldt, 2003). † p < 0.10; * p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001
(two-sided).

11

(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.14)
(0.055)

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.

Table A3
Multivariate meta-analysis of dislike networks with measure for parameter heterogeneity.
M1

M2

beta
Edges
Non-receivers
Non-senders
Mutual
GWODEG
GWIDEG
GW incoming non-edgewise shared partners
GW transitive non-edgewise shared partners
Same class
Same neighborhood
Activity female
Popularity female
Same sex
Same ethnic
Violence entrainment
Shortest path
Shortest path squared
AIC
N

s.e.
*

−0.24
−0.76***
−1.07***
1.35***
−5.57***
−1.90***
−0.19***
−0.08***
1.54***
−0.12**
0.14***
−0.23***
0.03
−0.11***
1.00***

Q

beta
***

0.11
0.12
0.18
0.05
0.23
0.10
0.01
0.004
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.06

***

112.20
35.03
28.20
59.66***
57.49***
72.73***
84.95***
83.87***
195.78***
27.82
43.50*
35.15
63.96***
44.53*
47.71*

−1.45
−0.73***
−1.10***
1.27***
−5.53***
−1.86***
−0.20***
−0.07***
1.77***
−0.07
0.14***
−0.23***
0.19***
−0.10**
1.11***
0.38***
−0.03***
728.62
29

806.55
29

s.e.

Q

0.14
0.12
0.18
0.05
0.23
0.10
0.01
0.005
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.03
0.002

170.42***
33.44
28.26
69.70***
59.14***
63.07***
88.37***
77.12***
216.25***
25.75
38.99†
32.63
62.81***
44.26*
46.28*
138.50***
159.91***

Note: beta denotes the averaged ERGM coefficient weighted by the variance-covariance matrix of all parameters estimated per model specification with a multivariate
fixed-effects meta-analysis (An, 2015); s.e. reports the standard error associated with this averaged ERGM coefficient; Q reports the statistic of the Cochran Q-test,
which tests whether the variance of the true beta equals zero (see, e.g., Snijders and Baerveldt, 2003). †p < 0.10; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 (two-sided).
Table A4
Multivariate meta-analysis of violence networks with measure for parameter heterogeneity.
M1

Edges
Non-receivers
Non-senders
Mutual
GWODEG
GWIDEG
Same class
Same neighborhood
Activity female
Popularity female
Same sex
Same ethnic
Dislike entrainment
Shortest path
Shortest path
squared
Spare time
entrainment
AIC
N

M2

beta

s.e.

Q

beta

s.e.

Q

−2.54***
0.27†
−0.19
2.41***
−2.05***
−1.84***
1.57***
−0.08
−0.41***
0.21**
0.07
0.16***
0.98***

0.12
0.15
0.19
0.08
0.25
0.16
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.04
0.04
0.05

156.79***
17.44
25.13
53.90***
25.15
20.12
288.75***
40.42**
45.50***
33.97*
49.80***
30.80†
50.45***

−1.03***
0.25†
−0.12
2.32***
−1.89***
−1.84***
1.25***
−0.08
−0.41***
0.27***
−0.30***
0.08*
1.29***
−0.62***
0.05***

0.15
0.15
0.19
0.08
0.26
0.16
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.04
0.004

134.37***
17.43
26.61
55.81***
26.49
19.17
229.04***
38.92**
47.31***
35.18*
38.06**
29.78†
46.36***
51.02***
47.89***

0.06

47.36***

0.34***
1012.63
21

845.99
21

Note: beta denotes the averaged ERGM coefficient weighted by the variance-covariance matrix of all parameters estimated per model specification with a multivariate
fixed-effects meta-analysis (An, 2015); s.e. reports the standard error associated with this averaged ERGM coefficient; Q reports the statistic of the Cochran Q-test,
which tests whether the variance of the true beta equals zero (see, e.g., Snijders and Baerveldt, 2003). †p < 0.10; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 (two-sided).

Baerveldt, C., Van Duijn, M.A.J., Vermeij, L., Van Hemert, D.A., 2004. Ethnic boundaries
and personal choice. Assessing the influence of individual inclinations to choose
intra-ethnic relationships on pupils’ networks. Soc. Networks 26, 55–74. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.socnet.2004.01.003.
Beier, H., Schulz, S., Kroneberg, C., 2014. Freundschaft und Gewalt im Jugendalter:
Feldbericht der ersten Erhebungswelle (Technical Report). Working Paper 158,
Mannheim Centre for European Social Research (MZES), Mannheim.
Berger, C., Dijkstra, J.K., 2013. Competition, envy, or snobbism? How popularity and
friendships shape antipathy networks of adolescents. J. Res. Adolesc. 23, 586–595.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jora.12048.
Blalock, H.M., 1967. Toward a Theory of Minority-Group Relations. John Wiley & Sons,
New York.
Bobo, L., Hutchings, V.L., 1996. Perceptions of racial group competition: extending
Blumer’s theory of group position to a multiracial social context. Am. Sociol. Rev.
951–972.

References
Aboud, F.E., Tredoux, C., Tropp, L.R., Brown, C.S., Niens, U., Noor, N.M., et al., 2012.
Interventions to reduce prejudice and enhance inclusion and respect for ethnic differences in early childhood: a systematic review. Dev. Rev. 32, 307–336. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dr.2012.05.001.
Agirdag, O., Demanet, J., Van Houtte, M., Van Avermaet, P., 2011. Ethnic school composition and peer victimization: a focus on the interethnic school climate. Int. J.
Intercult. Relat. 35, 465–473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijintrel.2010.09.009.
Albahari, M., 2015. Europe’s refugee crisis. Anthropol. Today 31, 1–2. https://doi.org/10.
1111/1467-8322.12196.
An, W., 2015. Multilevel meta network analysis with application to studying network
dynamics of network interventions. Soc. Networks 43, 48–56. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.socnet.2015.03.006.

12

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.
Boda, Z., Néray, B., 2015. Inter-ethnic friendship and negative ties in secondary school.
Soc. Networks 43, 57–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2015.03.004.
Borgatti, S.P., Everett, M.G., Johnson, J.C., 2013. Analyzing Social Networks. Sage.
Brubaker, R., 2004. Ethnicity without Groups. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Bukowski, W.M., Newcomb, A.F., Hartup, W.W., 1998. The Company they Keep:
Friendships in Childhood and Adolescence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Carrera, S., Blockmans, S., Gros, D., Guild, E., 2015. The EU’s Response to the Refugee
Crisis: Taking Stock and Setting Policy Priorities. CEPS Essay 20.
Cartwright, D., Harary, F., 1956. Structural balance: a generalization of Heider’s theory.
Psychol. Rev. 63, 277.
Castles, S., De Haas, H., Miller, M.J., 2013. The Age of Migration: International
Population Movements in the Modern World. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Clarke, Richard V., Felson, Marcus (Eds.), 1993. Routine Activity and Rational Choice:
Advances in Criminological Theory, vol. 5 Transaction Books, New Brunswick, NJ.
Crick, N.R., Nelson, D.A., 2002. Relational and physical victimization within friendships:
nobody told me there’d Be friends like these. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 30, 599–607.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020811714064.
Csardi, G., Nepusz, T., 2006. The igraph software package for complex network research.
Int. J. Complex Syst. 1695.
Daniel, J.R., Santos, A.J., Antunes, M., Fernandes, M., Vaughn, B.E., 2016. Co-evolution
of friendships and antipathies: a longitudinal study of preschool peer groups. Front.
Psychol. 7, 1509. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01509.
Dollmann, J., Jacob, K., Kalter, F., 2014. Examining the Diversity of Youth in Europe: A
Classification of Generations and Ethnic Origins Using CILS4EU Data (Technical
Report). Arbeitspapiere Mannheimer Zentrum für Europäische Sozialforschung
Mannheim.
Due, P., Holstein, B.E., Lynch, J., Diderichsen, F., Gabhain, S.N., Scheidt, P.C., Currie, C.,
2005. Bullying and symptoms among school-aged children: international comparative cross sectional study in 28 countries. Eur. J. Public Health 15, 128–132. https://
doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/cki105.
Durkin, K., Hunter, S., Levin, K.A., Bergin, D., Heim, D., Howe, C., 2012. Discriminatory
peer aggression among children as a function of minority status and group proportion
in school context. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 42, 243–251. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.
870.
Faris, R., Felmlee, D., 2014. Casualties of social combat: school networks of peer victimization and their consequences. Am. Sociol. Rev. 79, 228–257. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0003122414524573.
Felmlee, D., Faris, R., 2016. Toxic ties: networks of friendship, dating, and cyber victimization. Soc. Psychol. Q. 79, 243–262. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0190272516656585.
Fujimoto, K., Snijders, T.A.B., Valente, T.W., 2017. Popularity breeds contempt: the
evolution of reputational dislike relations and friendships in high school. Soc.
Networks 48, 100–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2016.07.006.
Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B., Kenward, M.G., 2012. Multivariate meta-analysis for nonlinear and other multi-parameter associations. Stat. Med. 31, 3821–3839. https://doi.
org/10.1002/sim.5471.
Goodreau, S.M., Handcock, M.S., Hunter, D.R., Butts, C.T., Morris, M., 2008. A statnet
tutorial. J. Stat. Softw. 24, 1–26.
Gould, R.V., 2003. Collision of Wills: How Ambiguity About Social Rank Breeds Conflict.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gravel, J., Allison, B., West-Fagan, J., McBride, M., Tita, G.E., 2018. Birds of a feather
fight together: status-enhancing violence, social distance and the emergence of
homogenous gangs. J. Quant. Criminol. 34, 189–219. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10940-016-9331-8.
Harrigan, N., Yap, J., 2017. Avoidance in negative ties: inhibiting closure, reciprocity,
and homophily. Soc. Networks 48, 126–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2016.
07.003.
Hawker, D.S., Boulton, M.J., 2000. Twenty years’ research on peer victimization and
psychosocial maladjustment: a meta-analytic review of cross-sectional studies. J.
Child Psychol. Psychiatry 41, 441–455.
Hays, R.B., 1988. Friendship. In: Duck, S., Hay, D.F., Hobfoll, S.E., Ickes, W.,
Montgomery, B.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Personal Relationships: Theory, Research and
Interventions. John Wiley & Sons, Oxford, England, pp. 391–408.
Heider, F., 1946. Attitudes and cognitive organization. J. Psychol. 21, 107–112.
Horowitz, D.L., 1985. Ethnic Groups in Conflict. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Huitsing, G., van Duijn, M.A.J., Snijders, T.A.B., Wang, P., Sainio, M., Salmivalli, C.,
Veenstra, R., 2012. Univariate and multivariate models of positive and negative
networks: liking, disliking, and bully–victim relationships. Soc. Networks 34,
645–657. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2012.08.001.
Huitsing, G., Snijders, T.A.B., Van Duijn, M.A.J., Veenstra, R., 2014. Victims, bullies, and
their defenders: a longitudinal study of the coevolution of positive and negative
networks. Dev. Psychopathol. 26, 645–659. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0954579414000297.
Hunter, D.R., 2007. Curved Exponential Family Models for Social Networks. Soc.
Networks 29, 216–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2006.08.005.
Hunter, D.R., Goodreau, S.M., Handcock, M.S., 2008a. Goodness of fit of social network
models. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 103, 248–258. https://doi.org/10.1198/
016214507000000446.
Hunter, D.R., Handcock, M.S., Butts, C.T., Goodreau, S.M., Morris, M., 2008b. Ergm: a
package to fit, simulate and diagnose exponential-family models for networks. J. Stat.
Softw. 24.
Kaltiala-Heino, R., Rimpelä, M., Rantanen, P., Rimpelä, A., 2000. Bullying at school—an
Indicator of adolescents at risk for mental disorders. J. Adolesc. 23, 661–674. https://
doi.org/10.1006/jado.2000.0351.
Kawabata, Y., Crick, N.R., 2011. The significance of cross-racial/ethnic friendships:
Associations with peer victimization, peer support, sociometric status, and classroom

diversity. Dev. Psychol. 47, 1763–1775. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025399.
Kaye, A.J., Erdley, C.A., 2011. Physical aggression. In: Goldstein, S., Naglieri, J.A. (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of Child Behavior and Development. Springer, Boston, MA.
Kisfalusi, D., Pál, J., Boda, Z., 2018. Bullying and victimization among majority and
minority students: the role of peers’ ethnic perceptions. Soc. Networks. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.socnet.2018.08.006.
Kruse, H., Smith, S., van Tubergen, F., Maas, I., 2016. From neighbors to school friends?
How adolescents’ place of residence relates to same-ethnic school friendships. Soc.
Networks 44, 130–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2015.07.004.
Leszczensky, L., Pink, S., 2015. Ethnic segregation of friendship networks in school:
testing a rational-choice argument of differences in ethnic homophily between
classroom-and grade-level networks. Soc. Networks 42, 18–26. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.socnet.2015.02.002.
Luke, D., 2015. A User’s Guide to Network Analysis in R. London, England. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-23883-8.
Lusher, D., Robins, G., 2013. Example exponential random graph model analysis. In:
Lusher, D., Koskinen, J., Robins, G. (Eds.), Exponential Random Graph Models for
Social Networks: Theory, Methods, and Applications. Cambridge University Press,
New York, pp. 37–46.
Lusher, D., Koskinen, J., Robins, G., 2013. Exponential Random Graph Models for Social
Networks: Theory, Methods, and Applications, Structural Analysis in the Social
Sciences. Cambridge University Press, New York.
McFarland, D.A., Moody, J., Diehl, D., Smith, J.A., Thomas, R.J., 2014. Network ecology
and adolescent social structure. Am. Sociol. Rev. 79, 1088–1121. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0003122414554001.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., Cook, J.M., 2001. Birds of a feather: homophily in social
networks. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 27, 415–444. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.27.
1.415.
Methot, J.R., Melwani, S., Rothman, N.B., 2017. The space between us: a social-functional
emotions view of ambivalent and indifferent workplace relationships. J. Manage. 43,
1789–1819. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316685853.
Mishna, F., Wiener, J., Pepler, D., 2008. Some of my best friends - experiences of bullying
within friendships. Sch. Psychol. Int. 29, 549–573. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0143034308099201.
Mood, C., 2010. Logistic regression: why we cannot do what we think we can do, and
what we can do about it. Eur. Sociol. Rev. 26, 67–82. https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/
jcp006.
Moody, J., 2001. Race, school integration, and friendship segregation in america. Am. J.
Sociol. 107, 679–716. https://doi.org/10.1086/338954.
Mouw, T., Entwisle, B., 2006. Residential segregation and interracial friendship in
schools. Am. J. Sociol. 112, 394–441. https://doi.org/10.1086/506415.
Munniksma, A., Scheepers, P., Stark, T.H., Tolsma, J., 2016. The impact of adolescents’
classroom and neighborhood ethnic diversity on same-and cross-ethnic friendships
within classrooms. J. Res. Adolesc. 27, 20–33. https://doi.org/10.1111/jora.12248.
Olweus, D., 1996. The Revised Olweus bully/victim Questionnaire. Research Center for
Health Promotion. University of Bergen, Bergen.
Osgood, D.W., Wilson, J.K., O’Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.G., Johnston, L.D., 1996. Routine
activities and individual deviant behavior. Am. Sociol. Rev. 61, 635–655. https://doi.
org/10.2307/2096397.
Pál, J., Stadtfeld, C., Grow, A., Takács, K., 2016. Status perceptions matter: understanding
disliking among adolescents. J. Res. Adolesc. 26, 805–818. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jora.12231.
Parkhurst, J.T., Asher, S.R., 1992. Peer rejection in middle school: subgroup differences in
behavior, loneliness, and interpersonal concerns. Dev. Psychol. 28, 231–241.
Rambaran, J.A., Dijkstra, J.K., Munniksma, A., Cillessen, A.H.N., 2015. The development
of adolescents’ friendships and antipathies: a longitudinal multivariate network test
of balance theory. Soc. Networks 43, 162–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.
2015.05.003.
Robins, G., 2011. Exponential random graph models for social networks. In: Scott, J.C.,
Peter, J. (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Social Network Analysis. SAGE Publications
Ltd, Los Angeles, pp. 484–500.
Robins, G., 2015. Doing Social Network Research: Network-based Research Design for
Social Scientists. Sage, London.
Robins, G., Lusher, D., 2012. Illustrations: simulation, estimation and goodness of fit.In.
In: Lusher, D., Koskinen, J., Robins, G. (Eds.), Exponential Random Graph Modelsfor
Social Networks: Theory, Methods, and Applications. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 141–166.
Robins, G., Pattison, P., 2006. Multiple Networks in Organisations. MelNet, University of
Melbourne, Australia.
Robins, G., Pattison, P., Wang, P., 2009. Closure, connectivity and degree distributions:
exponential random graph (p*) models for directed social networks. Soc. Networks
31, 105–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2008.10.006.
Schlueter, E., 2012. The inter-ethnic friendships of immigrants with host-society members: revisiting the role of ethnic residential segregation. J. Ethn. Migr. Stud. 38,
77–91. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369183X.2012.640017.
Sijtsema, J.J., Veenstra, R., Lindenberg, S., Salmivalli, C., 2009. Empirical test of bullies’
status goals: assessing direct goals, aggression, and prestige. Aggress. Behav. 35,
57–67. https://doi.org/10.1002/ab.20282.
Smith, S., Maas, I., van Tubergen, F., 2014. Ethnic ingroup friendships in schools: testing
the by-product hypothesis in England, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden. Soc.
Networks 39, 33–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2014.04.003.
Smith, S., Van Tubergen, F., Maas, I., McFarland, D.A., 2016. Ethnic composition and
friendship segregation: differential effects for adolescent natives and immigrants. Am.
J. Sociol. 121, 1223–1272. https://doi.org/10.1086/684032.
Snijders, T.A.B., Baerveldt, C., 2003. A multilevel network study of the effects of delinquent behavior on friendship evolution. J. Math. Sociol. 27, 123–151. https://doi.

13

Social Networks xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

M. Wittek, et al.
org/10.1080/00222500305892.
Tajfel, H., Turner, J.C., 1979. An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. The social
psychology of intergroup relations, vol. 33. pp. 74.
Thijs, J., Verkuyten, M., 2014. School ethnic diversity and students’ interethnic relations.
Br. J. Educ. Psychol. 84, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12032.
Titzmann, P.F., Silbereisen, R.K., 2009. Friendship homophily among ethnic German
immigrants: a longitudinal comparison between recent and more experienced immigrant adolescents. J. Fam. Psychol. 23, 301–310. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0015493.
Tolsma, J., van Deurzen, I., Stark, T.H., Veenstra, R., 2013. Who is bullying whom in
ethnically diverse primary schools? Exploring links between bullying, ethnicity, and
ethnic diversity in Dutch primary schools. Soc. Networks 35, 51–61. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.socnet.2012.12.002.
Varshney, A., 2001. Ethnic conflict and civil society: india and beyond. World Polit. 53,
362–398. https://doi.org/10.1353/wp.2001.0012.
Veenstra, R., Lindenberg, S., Munniksma, A., Dijkstra, J.K., 2010. The complex relation
between bullying, victimization, acceptance, and rejection: giving special attention to
status, affection, and sex differences. Child Dev. 81, 480–486. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01411.x.

Walsh, S.D., De Clercq, B., Molcho, M., Harel-Fisch, Y., Davison, C.M., Madsen, K.R.,
Stevens, G.W.J.M., 2016. The relationship between immigrant school composition,
classmate support and involvement in physical fighting and bullying among adolescent immigrants and non-immigrants in 11 countries. J. Youth Adolesc. 45, 1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-015-0367-0.
West, D.B., 2001. ed. Introduction to Graph Theory Vol. 2 Prentice hall, Upper Saddle
River.
Wikström, P.-O.H., Treiber, K.H., 2009. Violence as situational action. Int. J. Conf.
Violence 3, 75–96. https://doi.org/10.4119/UNIBI/ijcv.49.
Wimmer, A., Lewis, K., 2010. Beyond and below racial homophily: ERG models of a
friendship network documented on Facebook. Am. J. Sociol. 116, 583–642. https://
doi.org/10.1086/653658.
Windzio, M., Bicer, E., 2013. Are we just friends? Immigrant integration into high- and
low-cost social networks. Ration. Soc. 25, 123–145. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1043463113481219.
Wölfer, R., Jaspers, E., Blaylock, D., Wigoder, C., Hughes, J., Hewstone, M., 2017.
Studying positive and negative direct and extended contact: complementing self-reports with social network analysis. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 43, 1566–1581. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0146167217719732.

14

