Between familial imprinting and institutional regulation:
Family related employment interruptions of women in Germany before and after
the German reunification 1
0F

Katrin Drasch 2
1F

Abstract
In this paper, I examine how family related employment interruptions for women in the
FRG (Federal Republic of Germany) and the GDR (German Democratic Republic)
looked like in the period prior to German reunification. Furthermore, I investigate how
career interruptions developed after the German reunification in the old and new states
and whether a convergence of re-entry behaviour can be observed. Following research
questions are addressed: Which factors are more important: attitudes towards the
employment of mothers, which were transferred through socialisation in childhood and
adolescence, or institutional arrangements shaped by parental leave regulations? Based
on data from the IAB ALWA study (‘Working and Learning in a Changing World’), the
results show that even twenty years after the German reunification, significant
differences between women in East and West Germany are found to exist with respect
to family related employment interruptions.
Keywords: maternal employment, parental leave legislation, discrete-time event
history analysis

1 A similar version of this paper appeared as chapter of my dissertation Drasch, K. (2013). The re-entry of
mothers in Germany into employment after family-related interruptions: empirical evidence and
methodological aspects from a life course perspective. Bielefeld: Bertelsmann. I gratefully acknowledge
permission of the Institute of Employment Research (IAB).
2 Dr. Katrin Drasch, Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Institute for Sociology, Chair for
Methods of Empirical Social Research, Kochstr. 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany; email:
katrin.drasch@fau.de

1

1

Introduction

The German reunification in 1990 united two states that had existed separately since
1949 but share a long common history. Within a few months, the reunification
dramatically changed the lives of more than 18 million East German citizens and had a
large influence on the West German population. Both populations consequently
experienced a number of disturbances and structural adaptations in different areas of
life. Two areas in which there were especially large differences between the FRG
(Federal Republic of Germany) and the GDR (German Democratic Republic) were the
employment behaviour of women with children and the opinion of the population towards
the employment of females. Therefore, after the German reunification, major changes in
female employment patterns were expected especially for women from the GDR.
In particular, the interaction between family and working lives for GDR citizens has
changed significantly through the reunification process. The socialist regime in the GDR
supported the gainful employment of mothers directly by means of an extensive
nationwide childcare system and indirectly through limited legal options for employment
interruptions following the birth of a child. In contrast, in the FRG, it was common for
women to assume caring obligations of their children at home for several years,
especially when their children were babies or toddlers. Subsequently, those women often
returned to the labour market to seek part-time work. This pattern is known as the
modified male breadwinner model. This model was additionally supported by a rather
generous parental leave system. Only in recent years has the pattern begun to gradually
change (Bothfeld et al. 2006).
In contrast, children and young people in the former GDR were raised in a social system
in which women and men were expected to participate in the labour market equally,
regardless of whether they had to raise children. Thus, children in the GDR were often
socialised in their families in a manner that was completely different than that of children
and adolescents in the FRG, who were often raised by non-working mothers. This
difference may explain why the empirically observed differences in the labour force
participation rates of women or mothers in the old and new federal states are more
pronounced even today. Growing up in different ‘life-course regimes’ (Diewald 2010)

2

could lead to persisting inequalities with respect to the labour force participation rate of
mothers or even women in general. The socialisation processes in childhood and
adolescence could have led to the development of inequalities in one of these processes,
namely, family related career interruptions in East and West Germany.
In particular, it is unclear how long women in the GDR, the FRG and today's West and
East Germany interrupted their employment after the birth of a child and what factors
crucially influenced the length of such interruptions. Likewise, it is uncertain how the
transition of the political system of the GDR influenced such employment interruptions.
Essentially, identical parental leave arrangements could have led to different results
depending on the cultural conditions in which they were embedded (Hummelsheim
2009). Also, Kreyenfeld and Geisler (2006) find substantive differences in the
employment rates of women in East and West Germany. In summary, the German
reunification and the influence of social norms for women's employment and institutional
arrangements for parental leave provisions is an interesting research field. This paper
addresses the following research questions: how were employment interruptions for
women in the FRG and GDR shaped before the German reunification? How did
employment interruptions change for women after the German reunification when the
different institutional arrangements are considered? Which factors are more important:
attitudes towards the employment of mothers, which were transferred through
socialisation in childhood and adolescence, or institutional arrangements shaped by
parental leave regulations?
The first step in answering these questions involves an explanation of the institutional
conditions in the FRG, the GDR and reunified Germany in the second section. The third
section describes general differences between the East and West Germany populations
with respect to attitudes towards the employment of women with children. The theoretical
perspective, which considers approaches on both the institutional and individual levels,
is explained in the fourth section. In the subsequent sections, the data are presented and
the research questions are examined with new life course data from the IAB study ALWA.
Finally, the results are summarized and discussed.

3

2

Institutional regulations in Germany and the GDR

2.1

Institutional regulations in the FRG and GDR before the German reunification

in 1990
A number of institutional conditions in Germany and the GDR prior to the German
reunification can be identified as affecting family related employment interruptions. First,
the direct influence of the maximum duration of statutory parental leave periods is
described. This leave period is connected to a guaranteed right to return to a preemployment interruption employer. In addition, the state financial compensation for the
foregone earnings of families who assume care obligations can affect family related
employment interruptions indirectly (Bird 2003). In Germany, maternity leave
(Mutterschutz) 3 was introduced in 1952. Maternity leave exempts employed women from
2F

work six weeks prior to the expected birth of a child and six weeks (from 1968 to the
present: 8 weeks) following birth and protects a women from being dismissed by her
employer for four months following the birth of her child. Maternal leave
(Mutterschaftsurlaub) was introduced in West Germany in 1979. In the following
decades, parental leave regulations changed frequently. Following the statutory period
of maternity leave (Mutterschutz) of 14 weeks, which is granted to every woman
regardless of her employment status prior to the birth of a child, the temporary exemption
from work was extended to four months. Parental leave (Erziehungsurlaub) was
extended to 10 months in 1986, to 12 months in 1988, to 15 months in 1988 and to 18
months

in

1990

(Bird

2004,

Kreyenfeld

2001,

Puhani/Sonderhof

2011,

Schönberg/Ludsteck 2007).
In the GDR, the situation was completely different. Although a maternal leave scheme
had existed since the 1950s, the Schwangerschafts- und Wochenurlaub, which provided
for 26 weeks of leave with payment of the net average earnings before birth, was not
introduced until 1976 (Winkler 1989). In addition, since 1972, single mothers have been
permitted to take a baby year if no institutional childcare could be made available by the
state. Although this baby year was introduced for mothers with two or more children in

3

The notations in italics correspond to the official names in German law terminology. These names are
added in parentheses.

4

the late 1970s and prolonged to 18 months for mothers with three children or more in
1984, this period was only established by law in 1986 for all mothers regardless of the
number of children they have (Kreyenfeld 2001).
These rules must be considered in conjunction with the prevalent social policy in the
GDR. Within this framework, gender equality policies had already been established in
the constitution as a central goal in the early years of the GDR. These policies included
the development of a public childcare system for children less than three years of age
and efforts to train women in the same manner as men are trained for the labour market
(Marold 2009, Winkler 1989). However, women were also responsible for household
duties, therefore, the traditional roles of men and women persisted, and women were
confronted with the double burden of employment and family responsibilities (Kreyenfeld
2001, Rosenfeld et al. 2004).

2.2

Institutional regulations in Germany after the reunification in 1990

Based on the Unification Treaty, the legal regulations of the FRG were enacted for the
citizens of the GDR. The first and most recent expansion of parental leave unified
Germany occurred in 1992 and increased the parental leave period from 18 to 36
months. However, the payment of parental allowance in the form of income-dependent
transfer payments to compensate for a loss of income became increasingly important. In
1993, the payment period was increased to 24 months. In 2001, parental leave was
reformed and the Elternzeit system (reformed parental leave) was introduced, but 36month protection of the employment relationship after birth was retained. The next major
reform in 2001 allowed parents to work 30 hours rather than 19 hours per week during
parental leave.
The introduction of the new parental allowance system on 1 January 2007 was the most
severe change in the law since its introduction. This new parental allowance system
changed the calculation of financial compensation but did not alter the maximum parental
leave period and the right to return to one’s previous employer. Parental allowance has
been calculated based on earnings since 2007. This regulation is expected to encourage
new parents, especially higher-income parents, to shorten their interruption periods

5

because the allowance is paid for only 12 to 14 months, depending on whether a father
also takes parental leave. An upper limit is established only for high earners with a net
income of 2700 € or greater.
The frequent changes in the institutional arrangements of parental leave schemes and,
in particular, the extension of the right to return to one’s previous employer must be
considered in the context of the conservatively oriented political coalition of the late
1980s. This coalition supported a traditional role model, which considered women to be
second earners. Moreover, the poor labour market conditions in Germany in the 1980s
and the beginning of the 1990s may have influenced these policies. In addition,
regulations, such as family load balancing (Familienlastenausgleich), and other social
conditions supported the non-employment of (married) women with children. For
example, the joint taxation of married couples leads to significant tax advantages if one
partner does not have (full-time) employment (Dingeldey 2002). Moreover, in West
Germany, the childcare system for children under three is still only poorly developed,
although there have been some efforts to improve the situation in the past. For children
in compulsory school, care is institutionally secured only in the morning, although some
schools have also begun to offer all-day schools. The childcare supply quotas are
historically much higher in East Germany than in West Germany (Federal Statistical
Office 2009). Table 1 gives an overview of regulations in the FRG, the GDR and unified
Germany.
<< Table 1 about here >>
3

Employment interruptions of women in Germany and the GDR

From a longitudinal perspective, family related employment interruptions in terms of
East-West differences have rarely been studied. However, several studies that focus
solely on West Germany are available (e.g., Aisenbrey et al. 2009, Grunow et al. 2006,
Weber 2004). East-West differences are the focus of the studies that were conducted by
Falk and Schaeper (2001, Schaeper/Falk 2003) and by Grunow and Müller (2012).
These authors found distinct differences between East and West German mothers: East
German mothers tend to have significantly shorter family related employment
interruptions than West German mothers. The authors also identify differences in

6

employment interruptions that occurred before and after the German reunification.
Before the fall of the Berlin Wall, the majority of women ended their employment
interruptions at the end of the baby year (i.e., after approximately one year). After the
reunification, interruptions were significantly longer. Return rates were particularly high
at the end of the statutory parental leave period. However, the database that was used
for the analyses was not representative and was based on a selective group of
apprentices from various graduating classes in East and West Germany. In addition, the
number of cases under study is rather low. Bredtmann et al. (2009) studied East-West
differences in women (birth cohorts from 1939 to 1945) who were returning to work with
complete pension biography data and found significantly higher return rates for women
in East Germany than for women in West Germany: within the first ten years after the
birth of a first child, only 45 percent of women in the West had returned to employment,
whereas in the East, this number amounted to 87 percent. The return rate for women in
the West decreased for each additional child born, whereas in the East, this rate
remained relatively constant across all subsequent births. Women in the East often
returned to work within the first 18 months of a child’s life, whereas women in the West
typically returned to work only after her (youngest) child began to attend kindergarten or
school. However, these results were obtained for a period in which there were virtually
no statutory regulations with regard to leave schemes in East and West Germany.

4
4.1

Theoretical background
Institutional regulations and cultural expectations

The relationship among welfare state arrangements, institutional regulations and reforms
at the macro level and the labour force participation of women with and without children
on the micro level has already been studied frequently (e.g., Lewis 1992, Geyer/Steiner
2007). These institutional arrangements include maternity leave, parental leave or
parental allowance as well as the promotion of childcare and the joint taxation of married
couples. The welfare state directly affects access to resources, creates infrastructure or
enforces social policies. However, in addition to a direct influence, there is an indirect
influence of normative and cultural expectations regarding ‘reasonable’ behaviour in a

7

society. This indirect influence has been given significantly less attention thus far (Lewis
1992). However, cultural expectations may modify the effects of welfare state policies on
the behaviour of individuals (Pfau-Effinger 2005). Thus, both institutions and the
prevailing gender culture in a state play important roles. In the corporatist-statist welfare
state type (Esping-Andersen 1990, 1999) to which (West) Germany belongs, one of the
prevailing norms is that women, especially those who have small children, assume
childcare and family obligations. In contrast, men fulfil their role as financial providers for
their families (Hummelsheim 2009, 2010). In the socialist welfare state of the GDR, the
role of women was defined differently. Women, including those with small children, were
expected to be active on the labour market. The state assumed control of childcare tasks
and ensured that childcare was available to all citizens. Thus, to some extent, the state
enabled the reconciliation of work and family.
Therefore, the following hypothesis can be presented. First, I assume that the average
durations of family related career interruptions differ for women who lived in the FRG and
GDR before the German reunification. In addition, after the German reunification, the
interruptions are assumed to differ for women from East and West Germany. In general,
interruptions in the GDR are expected to be significantly shorter than those in the FRG.
These differences can be ascribed to institutional regulations, the orientation of family
policies and the predominant gender culture.
The institutional approach to gender research (Krüger 2004) explains attitudes and
norms regarding the employment of women are important over a longer period. These
norms and attitudes are subject to constant societal change and are progressing towards
modern, equal gender roles for men and women. However, it appears to be problematic
that traditional gender roles are anchored in social structures and institutions that include
parental leave regulations, childcare and joint taxation of married couples. This anchor
in social structures and institutions indicates that preferences and the changes in
behaviour that result from such preferences occur only gradually over time. This gradual
change in behaviour suggests that the labour force participation of women in West and
East Germany is expected to change slowly over time. In the West, one can expect
slowly rising employment rates, in the East slowly falling employment rates.

8

4.2

Family, education and welfare state systems as socialisation agencies

The theoretical considerations of Ridgeway (1997) also provide a micro-level explanation
of why the labour force participation of women increases slowly despite changing
conditions over time. Individuals are constantly in contact with other individuals in their
society and are thus influenced by the behaviour of others. This influence implies that
women in both West and East Germany generally remain in one place because of their
unwillingness to move. Consequently, these women base their behaviour on the
behaviour of other women in their environment. Thus, a type of ‘invisible hand’
(Ridgeway 1997: 218) transfers preferences regarding the intra-family division of labour
and the labour force participation of women and mothers to a changing socio-economic
and institutional context.
The inclusion of the micro level also enables more precise assumptions regarding the
effect of cultural expectations and institutional regulations on individuals. Socialisation
theories (Hagemann-White 2004, Hurrelmann 1976, 2006, Hurrelmann et al. 2008)
explain the individual appearance and social reproduction of gender norms through
social learning in typical areas of experience in childhood and adolescence. Socialisation
means that an ‘external reality’ (e.g., family or educational institutions) influences the
development of a person (Hurrelmann 2006). However, ‘inner development’ (HagemannWhite 2004: 148), which refers to the basic structure of personality, is also important.
Preferences are transferred from parents to children in this phase of development,
especially within a family, as the primary socialisation agency, and social structures are
also internalised in this phase. This socialisation shapes the personality development of
an individual. Another secondary socialisation agency is the educational system in which
social knowledge is also transferred (Hurrelmann 2006). According to this approach,
socialisation, which occurs during childhood in families, schools and society, shapes the
future life course and individual preferences with regard to child-rearing responsibilities
and the employment of women with small children.
With respect to the labour market participation of women with children, one can derive
the following hypotheses. The socialisation theory predicts that the behaviour of women

9

is influenced by the experiences that they acquire in childhood and youth. Women who
were born in the West are expected to follow the principle that women should take care
of their children at home at least until their children are of school age (Pfau-Effinger
2005). Because these women have often been raised by non-working mothers, they are
socialised in accordance with this principle. Thus, the behaviour of these women
corresponds to the modified breadwinner model. Likewise, women who were born in the
East should tend to prefer that both women and men should be gainfully employed, and
such a preference would correspond to the dual breadwinner model (Lewis 1992). This
preference is consistent with socialisation theory and is supported both by the transfer
of values in the educational system of the GDR and by the employment of the majority
of mothers in the GDR, whose children were familiar with this situation.
One group of people who can provide insight regarding the importance of socialisation
theories are women who were born and raised in the GDR but decided to live in West
Germany after the German reunification and gave birth to their children in the West. It is
theoretically unclear whether these women are more likely to uphold and prefer the ideals
of their childhood or pragmatically adapt to the conditions in the West. This adaptation
could for example also be due to a non-availability of childcare facilities. Thus, women
who were born in the GDR and moved to one of the old federal states after the German
reunification constitute an interesting group to study. Ridgeway (1997) predicts that these
women would adopt their behaviour to their new surroundings in West Germany because
of their constant contact with other women in the West.
5

Data and methods

To investigate the research questions, I use data from the study ‘Working and Learning
in a Changing World’ (ALWA). The aim of this representative survey was to
retrospectively collect the life histories of approximately 10,000 adults who were born
between 1956 and 1985 (Antoni et al., 2010). In addition, family related employment
interruptions were explicitly addressed by asking the respondents to describe their
experiences with parental leaves in connection with the birth of a child. ALWA also
contains the complete employment, training and unemployment histories of all

10

respondents prior to the interview date and longitudinal information regarding the family
contexts, children and partners living in their households.
The event that is analysed with event history modelling is employment re-entry after a
family related employment interruption due to the birth of a child. The analysis is limited
to women, as family related employment interruptions occurred almost exclusively for
women during that period. A family related employment interruption is defined as follows:
an interruption begins with the birth of a child and ends with either (re-) entry into
employment of 15 hours or more or an unemployment phase, regardless of whether the
phase was reported to the employment agency by the target person. In addition, the
differing structural conditions and preferences in East and West Germany concerning
the behaviour of women in registering for unemployment and their self-reported
homemaker status are considered. Therefore, unemployment is considered to be a nonrealised employment re-entry.
The analysis includes women who worked before an interruption and a small number of
unemployed women or women who were still in training before giving birth (see also
Falk/Schaeper 2001, Schaeper/Falk 2003). Re-entries into full- and part-time
employment are not distinguished because it is unclear whether part-time work was
desired or determined by general conditions (such as limited childcare facilities). Reentries into training or education are excluded from the analyses, however, from an
empirical perspective, these re-entries occur only rarely.
All employment interruptions that occurred in or after January 1980 in both the FRG and
the GDR are taken into consideration. In sum, the data consist of 476 episodes in the
GDR and 1,270 episodes in the FRG that began prior to October 1990. After 1990, the
data contain 2,788 interruptions in the old federal states and 368 interruptions in the new
federal states. For the multivariate analyses, the employment interruptions in the FRG
and the GDR prior to reunification are first examined. Subsequent analyses concentrate
on employment interruptions that occurred after the German reunification from October
1990 to 2006. Due to a limited number of available cases and several of employment

11

interruptions that were not completed at the interview date, the period beginning in 2007
is excluded from the analysis. 4
3F

For both the descriptive and multivariate analyses, event history analyses are used (see
Blossfeld et al. 2007). Because the information in ALWA was collected on a monthly
basis, the process time is measured in discrete time units. The event data are converted
into a person-period file. The dependent variable measures for each month of the
interruption period whether a re-entry occurred. Thus, the data are analysed with event
models for discrete-time units (Singer/Willet 2003). Time dependence is modelled by
grouping into intervals of 6, 12, 15, 18, 24, and 36 months and the maximum observed
time. This grouping is based on the various statutory parental leave durations and an
exploratory analysis of re-entries. Separate models for the FRG and the GDR prior to
reunification are estimated. Subsequently, one common model for reunified Germany
and separate models for the old and new federal states following reunification are
calculated.
The model specification includes both time-constant and time-varying covariates at the
individual and institutional levels. A time-dependent variable is included in the models
and indicates whether the woman was entitled to statutory parental leave at the
respective time because she is not an employee, and e.g., self-employed or unemployed.
The models also contain a time-constant variable that indicates whether a woman lived
in the GDR or the FRG in June 1989. The variable provides information regarding the
type of political system that socialised each woman during childhood. Another variable
that relates to socialisation is whether the mother of a woman was employed when the
woman was 15 years old. In the descriptive analysis, different child birth cohorts (19801985, 1986-1990/1991, 1992-2000, 2001-2006) are distinguished which are based on
the major changes in parental leave legislation.
Based on previous research results, the models contain a number of other timedependent control variables. Because the economic situations of women is also relevant
to their re-entry decisions (e.g., Becker 1991, Bryant 1990) in addition to cultural norms

4

Of course, the group of women who interrupt their activity due to the birth of a child and the group of women
who reported having a child are selective. However, this selectivity is not the subject of analysis.

12

and institutional arrangements, the educational level of women and marital status are
included as controls. Moreover, the age of a woman in years and her number of children
are considered as categorical variables. The model contains information regarding a
woman’s work experience prior to her employment interruption. Furthermore, in the full
model following German reunification, regional female unemployment rates are included
separately as time-varying covariates for East and West Germany.
Unfortunately, the childcare coverage on a regional basis (e.g. administrative districts) is
only available from 1992 onwards. So, due to data unavailability, the childcare availability
cannot be controlled for. However, previous research including this rate show mixed
results: Kreyenfeld and Hank (2000) find no significant impact of childcare provision rate
on part-time and full-time employment. Frodermann (2011) also does not detect a
significant impact of child care provision when looking at re-entries of mother in full-time
employment or employment in general. However, for re-entry into part-time childcare
exhibits a positive influence. Grunow and Müller (2012) find a weakening influence of
being an East German mother when including child care provision.

6

Family related employment interruptions in East and West Germany and the

GDR
6.1

The duration of employment interruptions: West and East Germany in

comparison
The length of family related employment interruptions following the birth of children is
shown in Figure 1. Here, I examine births prior to the German reunification and
distinguish between two time periods. The first period includes employment interruptions
between 1980 and 1985. At that time, relatively short periods of parental leave were
guaranteed by law in the FRG. In the GDR, parental leave was guaranteed only for
mothers with two or more children. The second period includes the years from 1986 to
1991 for the FRG and the period from 1986 to May 1990 for the GDR. During this time,

13

the legal regulations in the FRG were gradually extended, and in the GDR, the baby year
was also granted for mothers with only one child. 5
4F

<< Figure 1 about here >>
Figure 1 shows that the employment interruptions of mothers in the FRG were longer
than those of mothers in the GDR. Striking differences are also apparent in the
cumulative return rates. These differences are significant at the 1 percent level as
indicated by log-rank tests (see Blossefeld et al. 2007). In the GDR, approximately 70
percent of mothers returned to the labour market 12 months following birth, and 82
percent of mothers returned after 24 months. Four years following birth, the return rate
reached almost 100 percent. This pattern corresponds to the political ideal of almost
uninterrupted careers of both men and women. The pattern also reflects the social
conditions of the GDR with full.-time employment as standard form of employment, e.g.,
marginal employment did not exist in the GDR. In addition, official unemployment
statistics are not available, and most companies were owned by the state. Furthermore,
the number of infants in full-time public childcare was high (Frerich/Frey 1993: 403).
The return rates in the FRG were considerably lower: prior to 1986, these rates reached
approximately 20 percent after 12 months and approximately 35 percent after 24 months.
For employment interruptions that began in or after 1986, these rates amounted to
approximately 40 to 50 percent. Four years after the birth of a child, only approximately
60 per cent of women returned to work. Within this period, both the parental leave system
and the recessive economic situation in West Germany (which was accompanied by high
unemployment) prompted extensive interruptions. In addition, a comprehensive system
of childcare for children under three did not exist at that time, and even for older children
of kindergarten age, mainly half-day childcare was available. Furthermore, the school
system was designed to be compatible with this half-day childcare system, and school
often ended in the early afternoon. Women in the GDR showed scarcely any differences
at the various time points. Most women in both cohorts returned to their jobs at the end
of the first year, which corresponds to the statutory maternity leave of the baby year. This

5

The transition period after the fall of the wall until the Unification Treaty on July 20, 1990, is not completely
excluded due to the generally low number of cases in the GDR.

14

consistent finding signifies the importance of institutional regulations for family related
employment interruptions in both states.

6.2

The duration of employment interruptions after the German reunification

The development of the duration of employment interruptions following reunification is
shown in Figure 2, which separates the old and new states for the period beginning in
1991. In addition, whether the women under study resided in the GDR or the FRG in
1989 is distinguished to address the political system under which these women were
socialised. Women who had lived in the old states in 1989 and re-entered in one of the
new states are not treated separately because of the small sample size for this group.
For parental leave periods that ended in the old federal states, a drastic increase in
cumulative return probability occurred after approximately three years, and this increase
corresponds to the expiration of statutory parental leave. Similar return patterns are
visible for women who lived in the West in 1989 and for women who lived in the East in
1989. Women from the East who moved to the old federal states appear to have adapted
their interruption behaviour to the behaviour of West German women. This adaptation
pattern suggests that institutional factors, such as the provision of public childcare, play
a more important role than socialisation in childhood. In the old states, approximately 60
percent of women returned to employment after four years. Thus, the cumulated return
probability was greater than the return rate prior to reunification.
<< Figure 2 about here >>
The results differ for women who had lived in the GDR in 1989 and chose to remain
there. Some women had already returned to the labour force at the end of a child's first
year. In this context, the baby year that was established in the GDR era continues to
have a clear effect. The return rate corresponded to approximately 20 percent after one
year and was almost twice as high as that in the old federal states. After the first year
and until approximately three years following birth, the return rate increased steadily.
After three years, the return rates increased at approximately the time of the expiration
of statutory parental leave, although this increase is less pronounced than that in the
West. In total, four years following birth, approximately 95 percent of women in the East

15

re-entered the workforce. The curves resemble those of the interruptions before the
German reunification in 1990. These curves also partially reflect the greater likelihood
that women in the East report being unemployed. The development of the interruptions
in the new and old federal states and whether they converge over time can be observed
in Figure 3.
<< Figure 3 about here >>
For women who lived in the GDR in 1989 for the two cohorts for 1992-2000 and 20012006, similar patterns emerge. After two years, approximately 50 percent of these
women returned to employment or were registered as unemployed, and after four years,
this rate approaches 90 percent. In addition, women who lived in the FRG in 1989
experienced few changes over time. In the 1992-2000 childbirth cohort, only
approximately 20 percent of all women had returned to the labour market after two years,
and 60 percent had returned after four years. After four years, this number reached
approximately 70 percent for the 2001-2006 cohort. In addition to institutional
arrangements, biographical factors, including aspects of socialisation, may crucially
influence return behaviour. However, differences in public childcare availability may also
be responsible for this unequal development. The differences between women who were
raised in the GDR and those who were raised in the FRG are striking and apply to
younger cohorts. A convergence of the re-entry pattern is visible only for the first year of
employment interruptions. Subsequently, this pattern is scarcely visible. Only the
cumulative re-entry rates for women from the GDR declined across cohorts, in contrast,
these rates increased for women in the FRG. Because of the small number of women
from the GDR, a multivariate analysis is not appropriate.

6.3

Factors that influence return after family related employment interruptions:
GDR and FRG in comparison

In addition to East-West differences in reunified Germany and differences between the
former GDR and the FRG, individual and institutional characteristics are expected to
influence return after family related employment interruptions. These factors are

16

examined in a multivariate framework (Table 2). First, I compare the FRG (model 1) and
the GDR (model 2) and the time span prior to German reunification. 6
5F

<< Table 2 about here >>
In sum, similar factors were operating in the two states. Institutional arrangements were
meaningful in both the FRG and the GDR. Within the statutory parental leave period and
for the individuals who were not entitled to benefits (e.g., women who were self-employed
or unemployed prior to the birth of a child), the return probability was lower than for those
women whose job guarantees has extinguished. The employment circumstance of the
mother of the woman during the adolescence of the woman has no significant effect.
This result suggests that socialisation played only a minor role – at least when
socialization and the decision to move are independent from each other. In both the FRG
and the GDR, education was found to have a weak effect: women who have completed
higher education returned to work more rapidly than women with lower levels of
education. This effect is consistent with general expectations of human capital theory. A
similar influence was also found for family status: in both countries, being married
reduced the rate of re-entry. No influence in the GDR and only a weak influence in the
FRG are found for the labour market experience of a woman.
In the models, the only difference in the influencing factors in East and West Germany
was found for the number of children living in a household. In the FRG, a higher number
of children decreased return probability, but this result was not found for the GDR. This
result may reflect the lack of availability of public childcare which cannot be controlled
for in the models. Women in the West with more children experience greater difficulties
in reconciling work and family. Conversely, a well-developed public childcare system was
available in the GDR, thus, women in the GDR with a higher number of children did not
necessarily report having childcare problems.

6

The factors that influence the dependent variable in the discrete-time event history models are
presented in hazard ratios. Hazard ratios of less than one indicate reduced re-entry probability,
and values greater than one indicate increased re-entry probability.
17

6.4

Factors that influence the duration of employment interruptions: GDR and

FRG in comparison after the German reunification
The research question regarding the type of factors that influence the duration of and
exit from a family related employment interruption following German reunification is first
examined in a joint model for the old and new federal states (Table 3). The results of the
complete model for the old and the new federal states (model 3) indicate that the
transition rate was considerably smaller within the statutory parental leave period than
after the expiration of statutory parental leave. Even women who did not have a statutory
right to parental leave had a lower rate of return to employment. In the overall model,
women who had lived in the GDR in 1989 were not more likely to re-enter the workforce
than women from the GDR. Furthermore, whether the mother of a woman was employed
was found to be unimportant. Again, this result preliminary indicates that socialisation
has minor relevance.
<< Table 3 about here >>
The number of children exerted a significant influence: women who had two or more
children had a significantly lower re-entry rate than women who were out of the labour
force as a result of their first parental leave period. Moreover, the level of educational
attainment influenced re-entry rates following reunification. Women who had medium or
low levels of education had a lower employment return rate compared with mothers with
higher levels of education. Married women who were partially covered by the incomes of
their husbands and did not financially rely on their own incomes also had lower transition
rates. Conversely, the labour force experience of a woman was found to have no
influence. 7
6F

When examining separate models for the old and new federal states, one observes
similarities between the results for the old states (model 4) and those of the full model
(model 3). This finding is not surprising because the results in the overall models are
driven by the higher number of cases in West Germany. However, even in this model,
no differences were observed in the re-entry behaviour of women who had lived in the

7

The regional unemployment rate at the time of interruptions was found to be not significant and is not
displayed in table 3.

18

GDR in 1989 compared with that of women who had lived in 1989 in the FRG. Therefore,
the behaviour of women who were socialised in the GDR but now live in the old federal
states did not differ from that of women who were socialised in the FRG. However, this
group could also be selective which could bias the results.
In the new federal states (model 5), the statutory parental leave regulations played a
similarly important role as in the old federal states. In contrast with the old federal states,
the employment of mothers in the new states had a positive effect on the probability of
return, thus, this result indicates the importance of socialisation aspects. The number of
children in a family was not important, this finding can again be attributed to the broad
availability of public childcare even after the German reunification. Moreover, the effects
of educational attainment are less clear than in the West. However, this could also be a
hidden effect of childcare unavailability because higher educated women in the West can
afford public or private childcare more easily. No effect in the new federal states was
found for the marital status of a woman. This result suggests that marital status was of
less importance in East Germany. In summary, institutional regulations and conditions
appear to be more important than socialisation aspects. The effects of the control
variables largely confirm the results of previous studies (e.g. Aisenbrey et al. 2009,
Grunow et al. 2006, Weber 2004).

7

The long road to uniform re-entry patterns

Together, the results show that significant differences between women in East and West
Germany in terms of the duration of family related employment interruptions persist even
twenty years after the German reunification. Although the trajectories of employment
interruptions for mothers in the East and West appear to converge, one cannot truly
speak of a convergence of patterns even today. As observed in past decades,
remarkable differences between the East and West German populations remain.
Nevertheless, interruption patterns for East German women following reunification more
closely resemble the patterns of women in the West than the patterns of mothers in the
GDR. Falk and Schaeper (2001) obtained similar results. Regardless of the length of
legally guaranteed parental leave with a right to return to their previous employers,
19

women tend to use this entire period. This pattern shows that family related employment
interruptions are generally subject to strong institutional control, as specifically shown by
the effect of the three-year job-protection period.
Women who were raised in East Germany and moved to the West after the reunification
had long employment interruptions that were similar to those of West German women.
This similarity suggests that institutional regulations were more relevant to re-entry
behaviour than socialisation. One must also consider that the group of women who
moved to West Germany could be a selective group. This selectiveness could have
biased the results. However, the most important reason for a relocation decision was
likely to be the tight labour market situation following reunification. In addition,
employment decisions, especially those of married women, are made in a partnership
context. Thus, when East German women had West German partners, such partnerships
could also affect participation decisions. Unfortunately, this possibility cannot be
investigated because of the lack of information pertaining to the residential history of
partners. Due to the unavailability of childcare coverage for the entire time span, the
results must be interpreted carefully although previous research did not show an
important role of childcare coverage on female employment.
Nonetheless, socialisation and familial imprinting cannot be neglected: for example,
when examining the relevance of marital status in West and East Germany, one can
conclude that marriage is more closely linked to the role that men assume as family
breadwinners in West Germany than in East Germany. Moreover, the tendency to marry
is more pronounced in the old federal states than in the new states. In addition, the
employment of the mother of a woman plays a role in the new states but is not relevant
in the old states. The descriptive results also indicate the importance of family
characteristics. Unfortunately, an unambiguous answer to the research question is
unattainable at this point because of the limited number of cases and the lack of
information regarding local childcare availability rates. With a higher number of cases it
would also be possible to examine West German women and their behaviour when
moving to the East.

20

Long-term employment interruptions in West Germany are particularly problematic from
the perspective of labour market and social policy because these interruptions can
reinforce social inequalities. This reinforcement can occur because knowledge and skills
that are useful in the labour market are not used during these periods and, thus,
depreciate over time. This view of the effect of interruptions on knowledge and skills is
often held by potential employers. The microeconomic theory (see Mincer/Ofek 1982)
also names this as human capital depreciation. Family related employment interruptions
also contribute to increasing gender wage differentials because no work experience is
acquired during interruptions (Beblo/Wolf 2003). Therefore, family related employment
interruptions contribute to gender inequality in life courses. From a social policy
perspective, women earn only small pensions during their inactivity, and these smaller
pensions may contribute to poverty in old age. In the long term, differences in family
related employment interruptions could lead to differences in the old-age incomes of
West and East German women and thus lead to new inequalities in Germany (Strauss
2010).
In 2007, a radical reform of parent leave schemes was introduced, and this reform may
lead to a permanent change in the interactions of institutional reforms and individual
characteristics. Therefore, the persisting differences between East and West Germany
can eventually be overcome as a consequence of this reform and other social changes,
such as the ongoing improvement of public childcare where still large differences
between East and West Germany exist. Furthermore, the generation of women who were
raised in unified Germany after 1989 will become mothers in the near future. The manner
in which their employment interruptions develop represents an interesting future
research area.

References
Aisenbrey, S., Evertsson, M. & Grunow, D. (2009). Is there a career penalty for mothers'
time out? A comparison of Germany, Sweden and the United States. Social Forces, 88,
2, 573–606.
Antoni, M., Drasch, K., Kleinert, C., Matthes, B., Ruland, M. & Trahms, A. (2010).
Working and learning in a changing world. Part I: Overview of the study - March 2011.
In: FDZ Methodenreport 05/2010.

21

Becker, G. S. (1991). A treatise on the family: Enlarged edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bender, S., Kohlmann, A. & Lang, S. (2003). Women, work, and motherhood: Changing
employment penalties for motherhood in West Germany after 1945. A comparative
analysis of cohorts born in 1934-1971. MPIDR Working Paper 2003-006.
Bird, K. (2004). Reconciling work and the family: The impact of parental leave policies
and occupation on the female life course. Frankfurt am Main: Lang.
Blossfeld, H.-P., Golsch, K. & Rohwer, G. (2007). Event history analysis with Stata.
Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bothfeld, S., Schmidt, T. & Tobsch, V. (Eds) (2006). Erosion des männlichen
Ernährermodells? Die Erwerbstätigkeit von Frauen mit Kindern unter drei Jahren, Hans
Böckler Stiftung im Auftrag des Bundesministerium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen und
Jugend.
Bredtmann, J., Kluve, J. & Schaffner, S. (2009). Women's fertility and employment
decisions under two political systems. Comparing East and West before reunification.
Ruhr Economic Papers 149.
Bryant, K. W. (1990). The economic organization of the household. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Destatis (Ed.) (2009). Kindertagesbetreuung regional 2008. Ein Vergleich aller 429
Kreise in Deutschland, Wiesbaden.
Diewald, M.(2010). Lebenslaufregime: Begriff, Funktion und Hypothesen zum Wandel.
In: A. Bolder, R. Epping, R. Klein, G. Reutter & A. Seiverth (Eds). Neue
Lebenslaufregimes: neue Konzepte der Bildung Erwachsener?, Wiesbaden: VS Verlag,
25-41.
Dingeldey, I. (2002). Das deutsche System der Ehegattenbesteuerung im Europäischen
Vergleich. WSI-Mitteilungen 3, 154-160.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). The social foundations of postindustrial economies. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Falk, S., Schaeper, H. (2001). Erwerbsverläufe von ost- und westdeutschen Müttern im
Vergleich: Ein Land - ein Muster. In: C. Born & H. Krüger (Eds). Individualisierung und
Verflechtung. Geschlecht und Generation im deutschen Lebensverlaufsregime,
Weinheim/München: Juventa, 181-210.
Frerich, J., Frey, M. (1993). Handbuch der Geschichte der Sozialpolitik in Deutschland.
Band 1: Sozialpolitik in der deutschen demokratischen Republik. München/Wien: R.
Oldenbourg Verlag.
Frodermann, C. (2011). Der Wiedereinstieg westdeutscher Mütter ins Erwerbsleben
nach der Geburt des ersten Kindes. Determinanten der Vollzeit- und Teilzeitrückkehr auf
den Arbeitsmarkt. Masterarbeit. Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg. Unpublished
manuscript.
Geyer, J., Steiner, V (2007). Short-run and long-term effects of childbirth on mothers’
employment and working hours across institutional regimes: An empirical analysis based
on the European Community Household Panel. IZA Discussion Paper No. 2693.
Gottschall, K, Bird, K (2003). Family leave policies and labor market segregation in
Germany: Reinvention or reform of the male dreadwinner? Review of Policy Research Special Issue on Gender and Work Place Policies 20, 1, 115-134.

22

Grunow, D., Hofmeister, H. & Buchholz, S. (2006). Late 20th-Century persistence and
decline of the female homemaker in Germany and the United States. International
Sociology, 21, 1, 101-131.
Grunow, D., Müller, D. (2012). Kulturelle und strukturelle Faktoren bei der Rückkehr in
den Beruf. Ostdeutsche, westdeutsche und ost-west-mobile Mütter im Vergleich. IAB
Discussion Paper 02/2012.
Gürtler, J., Ruppert, J., Vogler-Ludwig, K. (1990). Verdeckte Arbeitslosigkeit in der DDR.
München: IFO-Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung.
Hagemann-White, C. (2004). Sozialisation – ein veraltetes Konzept in der Geschlechterforschung? In: E. Glaser, D. Klika & A. Prengel (Eds). Handbuch Gender und
Erziehungswissenschaft, Bad Heilbrunn/Obb.: Verlag Julius Klinkhardt, 146-157.
Hummelsheim, D. (2009). Die Erwerbsbeteiligung von Müttern: Institutionelle Steuerung
oder kulturelle Prägung. Eine empirische Untersuchung am Beispiel von Belgien, Westund Ostdeutschland, Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.
Hummelsheim, D., Hirschle, J. (2010). Mother's employment: Cultural imprint or
institutional governance? European Societies 12, 3, 339-366.
Hurrelmann, K. (Ed.) (1976). Sozialisation und Lebenslauf. Reinbeck: Rowohlt.
Hurrelmann, K. (2008). Einführung in die Sozialisationstheorie. Weinheim/Basel: Beltz.
Hurrelmann, K., Grundmann, M. & Walper, S. (2008). Zum Stand der
Sozialisationsforschung. In: Hurrelmann, K., M. Grundmann & S. Walper (Eds).
Handbuch Sozialisationsforschung, 7. Edition, Weinheim/Basel: Beltz Verlag, 14-31.
Jenkins, S. P. (1995). Easy estimation methods for discrete-time duration models. Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 57, 1, 129-138.
Jenkins, S. P. (2005). Survival analysis. Mimeo. www.iser.essex.ac.uk/files/teaching
/stephenj/ec968/pdfs/ec968lnotesv6.pdf
Kreyenfeld, M., Hank, K. (2000). Childcare and fertility in (western) Germany. Population
Research and Policy Review, 19, 4, 317–337.
Kreyenfeld, M. (2001). Employment and fertility - East Germany in the 1990s. University
of Rostock Dissertation: Mimeo.
Kreyenfeld, M., Geisler, E. (2006). Müttererwerbstätigkeit in Ost- und Westdeutschland.
Zeitschrift für Familienforschung 18, 3, 333-360.
Krüger, H. (2004). Der Institutionenansatz in der Geschlechterforschung. In
Berufsbildung und Geschlechterverhältnis. In: A. Paul-Kohlhoff (Ed.). Band 12,
Dokumentation der 13. Hochschultage Berufliche Bildung 2004, Bielefeld: W.
Berteslmann, 17-33.
Kurz, K. (1998). Das Erwerbsverhalten von Frauen in der intensiven Familienphase: Ein
Vergleich zwischen Müttern in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland und den USA. Opladen:
Leske und Budrich.
Lauterbach, W. (1994). Berufsverläufe von Frauen: Erwerbstätigkeit, Unterbrechung und
Wiedereintritt. Lebensverläufe und gesellschaftlicher Wandel. Frankfurt am Main et al.:
Campus.
Lewis, J. (1992). Gender and the development of welfare regimes. Journal of European
Social Policy 2, 3, 159-173.
Marold, J. (2009). Mütter im Spannungsfeld zwischen Kind und Beruf. Der Weg vom
Ernährerzum
Zweiverdienermodell
im
Spiegel
familienpolitischer
und
geschlechterkultureller Entwicklungen in Deutschland, Dänemark und den
Niederlanden. Zeitschrift für Familienforschung 21, 1, 54-85.

23

Mincer, J., Haim, O. (1982). Interrupted work careers: Depreciation and restoration of
human capital. Journal of Human Resources, 17, 2, 3-24.
Obertreis, G. (1986). Familienpolitik in der DDR 1945 – 1980. Opladen: Leske und
Budrich.
Pfau-Effinger, B. (2005). Culture and welfare state policies: Reflections on a complex
interrelation. Journal of Social Policy, 34, 2, 3-20.
Puhani, P A., .Sonderhof, K. (2011). The effects of parental leave extension on training
for young women. Journal of Population Economics, 24, 2, 731-760.
Rabe-Hesketh, S., Skrondal, A. (2008). Multilevel and longitudinal modeling using Stata,
2nd Edition. College Station, Texas: Stata Press.
Ridgeway, C. L. (1997). Interaction and the conservation of gender inequality:
Considering employment. American Sociological Review, 62, 2, 218-235.
Rosenfeld, R. A., Trappe, H. & Gornick, J. C. (2004). Gender and work in Germany:
Before and after reunification. Annual Review of Sociology, 30, 103-124.
Schaeper, H., Falk, S. (2003). Employment trajectories of East and West German
mothers compared: One Nation - one pattern? In: W. R. Heinz & V. W. Marshall (Eds).
Social dynamics of the life course. Transitions, institutions, and interrelations, New York:
Aldine de Gruyter, 143-166.
Schönberg, U. (2008) Does the IABS reliably identify maternity leave taking. FDZ
Methodenreport 03/2008.
Schönberg, U., Ludsteck, J. (2007). Maternity leave legislation, female labor supply, and
the family wage gap. IZA Discussion Paper 2699.
Singer, J. D., Willet, J. B. (2003). Applied longitudinal data analysis: Modeling change
and event occurrence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Steele, F. (2009). Introduction to discrete-time models. Centre for Multilevel Modelling,
University of Bristol UK: Material distributed for the QMSS2 Summer School ‘Introduction
to event history analysis’, Paris.
Strauß, S. (2010). Familienunterbrechungen im Lebensverlauf als Ursache kumulativer
Geschlechterungleichheit. In: A. Bolder, R. Epping, R. Klein, G. Reutter & A. Seiverth
(Eds). Neue Lebenslaufregimes: neue Konzepte der Bildung Erwachsener? Wiesbaden:
VS Verlag, 89-104.
Trappe, H. (1995). Emanzipation oder Zwang? Frauen in der DDR zwischen Beruf,
Familie und Sozialpolitik. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Weber, A. M. (2004). Wann kehren junge Mütter auf den Arbeitsmarkt zurück? Eine
Verweildaueranalyse für Deutschland. ZEW Discussion Paper 04-08.
Winkler, G. (Ed.) (1989). Geschichte der Sozialpolitik der DDR 1945-1985. Berlin:
Akademie-Verlag.
Ziefle, A. (2004). Die individuellen Kosten des Erziehungsurlaubs: Eine empirische
Analyse der kurz- und längerfristigen Folgen für den Karriereverlauf von Frauen. Kölner
Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 56, 2, 213-231.

24

Appendix: Tables and Figures
Table 1: Overview of the legal regulation of parental leave in the GDR, the FRG and Germany
Date

Official Name (English
translation in parenthesis)

1952

Mutterschutz (Maternity leave)

2 (14 weeks)

2 (14 weeks)

1976

Schwangerschafts- und
Wochenurlaub (Maternity leave)*

6 (26 weeks)

6 (26 weeks)

1976

Babyjahr für Mütter mit zwei oder
mehr Kindern (Baby year for
mothers with two or more
children)*
Babyjahr für Mütter mit drei oder
mehr Kindern (Baby year for
mothers with three or more
children)*
Mutterschaftsurlaub (Maternal
leave)

12

12

18

18

6

6

1/1986-12/1990

Babyjahr (Baby year) *

12

12

1/1986-12/1991

Erziehungsurlaub – kurz (parental
leave)
Erziehungsurlaub – lang (parental
leave)

12 – 18

12 – 18

36

24/36, depending on
the federal state**

36

12/24 (choice)

36

12, earnings related

1984

7/1979-12/1985

1/1992-12/200
1/2001-12/2007
1/2007

Elternzeit (Reformed parental
leave)
Elterngeld (Parental allowance)

Duration of statutory
parental leave with
job guarantee (in
months)

Duration of (meanstested)
maternity/paternity
benefit (in months)

Source: Bird (2003, 311 ff.), Gottschall/Bird (2003), Kreyenfeld (2001: 18 f., 49 f.), Obertreis (1986, 287 ff.),
Trappe (1995, 39 ff.), Winkler (1989), own illustration
* regulation in the GDR
** The third year was paid in Baden-Wuerttemberg, Bavaria, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, RhinelandWestphalia and Thuringia by the state governments.

25

Figure 1: Durations of employment interruptions in the FRG and the GDR, child birth cohorts 19801985 and 1986-May 1990 (GDR) / 1991 (FRG) (Kaplan-Meier function)

0.00

cumulative probability
0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80

1.00

Kaplan-Meier function, FRG and GDR before reunification

0

12

24
duration in months

FRG, 1980-1985
GDR, 1980-1985

36

48

FRG, 1985-1991
GDR, 1986- May 1990

Source: IAB ALWA study, own calculations
Figure 2: Durations of employment interruptions for Western mothers in the West, Eastern mothers
in the West and Eastern mothers in the East (Kaplan-Meier function)

0.00

cumulative probability
0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80

1.00

Kaplan-Meier function, place of residence in 1989

0

12

24
duration in months

West, 1989 West
East, 1989 East
Source: IAB ALWA study, own calculations

26

36
West, 1989 East

48

Kaplan-Meier function, time dependency and place of residence, 1989

0.00

cumulative probability
0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80

1.00

Figure 3: Durations of employment interruptions for the new and old federal states between 1992
and 2000 and between 2001 and 2006 (Kaplan-Meier function)

0

12

24
duration in months

1992-2000, West
2001-2006, West
Source: IAB ALWA study, own calculations

27

36
1992-2000, East
2001-2006, East

48

Table 2: Influence factors on the return of mothers after family related employment interruptions
before the German reunification in the FRG and the GDR
(1)
(2)
FRG
GDR
Education (ref. high:
university degree or
similar)
Low: without training degree
0.630**
0.306**
(0.105)
(0.130)
Medium: training or
0.667***
0.700*
technical school degree
(0.056)
(0.127)
Parental leave (ref. right
expired)
Entitled to parental leave

0.233***
(0.029)
0.255***
(0.051)

0.472**
(0.123)
0.433*
(0.182)

0.668***
(0.050)
0.480***
(0.058)

1.082
(0.180)
0.894
(0.207)

Married

0.631***
(0.062)

0.725*
(0.113)

Woman’s age

0.941***
(0.009)

0.955*
(0.020)

Employment experience

1.005***
(0.000)

1.001
(0.002)

Not entitled to parental
leave
Number of children in
household (ref. one child)
Two children
Three children or more

Mother of woman employed

1.071
0.836
(0.085)
(0.168)
Number of observations
98996
10439
Number of events
1239
294
AIC
12596.1
2536.6
BIC
12757.6
2659.9
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, exponentiated coefficients (hazard ratios), standard errors in
parentheses, time dependency not displayed
Source: IAB ALWA study, own calculations

28

Table 3: Influence factors on the return of mothers after family related employment interruptions
after the German reunification in Germany in both the old and new federal states

Education (ref. high:
university degree or similar)
Low: without training degree
Medium: training or technical
school degree
Parental leave (ref. right
expired)
Entitled to parental leave
Not entitled to parental leave
Number of children in
household (ref. one child)
Two children
Three children or more
Married
Woman’s age
Employment experience
Mother of woman
employed
Lived in the East in 1989
Number of observations
Number of events
AIC
BIC

(3)
Germany#

(4)
Old federal
states

(5)
New federal
states

0.465*
(0.147)
0.457***
(0.078)

0.467*
(0.148)
0.459***
(0.078)

0.175**
(0.113)
0.763
(0.205)

0.066***
(0.008)
0.047***
(0.018)

0.065***
(0.008)
0.046***
(0.018)

0.266***
(0.080)
0.217*
(0.141)

0.730**
(0.076)
0.441***
(0.077)
0.435***
(0.081)
0.960**
(0.014)
1.001
(0.001)
1.245
(0.207)
0.771
(0.341)
101488
1534
11612.0
11802.6

0.725**
(0.075)
0.443***
(0.077)
0.436***
(0.081)
0.960**
(0.014)
1.001
(0.001)
1.245
(0.207)
0.766
(0.339)
101488
1271
11611.7
11792.8

1.001
(0.209)
0.730
(0.255)
0.928
(0.236)
0.963
(0.028)
1.000
(0.002)
2.599*
(1.078)
7947
262
2102.0
2227.6

* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, exponentiated coefficients (hazard ratios), standard errors in
parentheses, time dependency not displayed
# controlled for regional unemployment rate of women
Source: IAB ALWA study, own calculations

29

