Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.29

Pp. 413-428

Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Edhah Numan Khazaal
Department of International Economic Relations
College of Political Sciences,
University of Al-Nahrain, Baghdad, Iraq

Abstract
Writing is one of the essential poles of language learning, and should be one of the senior interest,
and concern to teachers, students, and researchers. The purpose of this study is to identify the effect
of using the summarizing strategy on postgraduates 'learners. To develop the summary writing skills,
two months implementation is applied to twenty Iraqi postgraduates 'learners, who are studying
English as a foreign language (EFL) .The participants were from two departments in the college of
political sciences at A-Nahrain University, Iraq, during the academic year 2018-2019. It was carried
out in a single-group pre-post-test model only. A pre-test on summary writing conducted to
participants a week before the summarizing strategy applied. The experimental process of the study
lasted eight weeks, where the participants received 16 treatment sessions. Five different passages
choose from their textbook (Headway for Academic Skills Level3), which was recommended by the
university. The selected written passage for post-test was "globalization." The participants asked to
summarize the passage within 45 minutes according to the new strategy. Data of the summary
written test collected, and scored according to the five criteria such as; (grammar, vocabulary,
organizing, content, and coherence). The findings of the study indicated that the summarizing
strategy has a significant effect on postgraduates' learners in academic writing skills, so it is
recommended that this strategy be applied in the curriculum of our schools and universities.
Keywords: Academic writing skills, EFL summarizing strategy, Iraqi postgraduates' students
Cite as: Khazaal, E. N. (2019). Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with
Summarizing Strategy. Arab World English Journal, 10 (3) 413-428.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.29

413

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

1. Introduction
English is the most-used language round the world. It is the center of our learning: without it, we
cannot make sense or communicate and understanding any subject via reading and writing. It's
known that text as English skill is necessary for our everyday life and writing enables us to express
our thoughts and idea. Writing is a skill which can be learned in the early stages of our study, starting
from the primary schools up to universities. In the early stages, students begin to learn how to write
letters, simple words, and their names in the English language, and then their writing ability
developed according to the level of their study. Writing is very critical for our human history. (Gilbert &
Graham, 2010).
Most of our students need writing skill in their fields of research, because writing is an
essential element during their academic years of study. Students, who have a good script with no
grammatical or spelling errors, will definitely can success in every written activity, such as; essays,
assignment, research paper and their exam.
"Writing is a crucial component of language performances. English writing in both educational and
professional settings is increasingly important in countries of non-native speakers of English". (Leki,
2001, p.199) .Writing is used to inform, to learn, to persuade, to entertain, and also to self-reflect. It
is essential in terms of skill that students' need to be successful in college (Graham, 2012). Writing
is not just the final, polished draft. Writing involves routines, skills, strategies, and practices, for
generating, revising, and editing different kinds of texts. ( Fink, 1998)
The writing process involves teaching students to write in a variety of genres, encouraging
creativity, and incorporating writing conventions. This process can be used in all areas of the
curriculum and provides an excellent way to connect instruction with state writing standards.
Writing in the disciplines varies widely in terms of content, and research methods and citation styles
(Friedrich, 2008).
Academic writing is critical to present students' arguments in a logical order and to arrive at
conclusions. In academic writing, writers always interact with each other's’ texts, and so there will
be frequent references to the ideas, thinking or research of other authors writing in this field. Hayland
(2002) asserted that "Academic writing is not just about conveying an ideational "content"; it is also
about the representation of self. Recent research has suggested that academic prose is not entirely
impersonal, but that writers gain credibility by projecting an identity invested with proper authority,
displaying confidence in their evaluations and commitment to their ideas'. (p. 1091)
Summarizing as a strategy encourage students to develop their steps in writing, starting with
traditional pen, and paper to writing a short story, an article and ending with the most updating social
media. It is the act of providing a clear statement of the essential points. When a student writes in
his ideas, and thoughts using certain words and phrases will encourage him to express his point of
view .and it helps him to demonstrate and understand the relevant information.
2. The Problem
English is a difficult and challenging task for many non-native English-speaking and writing
students. Academic writing appears to be one of the most important skills for university students to
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

414

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

learn. These challenges in English learning are found by Arab learners, because they tried to transfer
their mother tongue language to the foreign language. (Lakshmi, 2013)
Enhancing English language proficiency, especially, academic writing ability at postgraduate
level is the precondition to promote and extend research work in the Arab universities. It is observed
that traditional English language courses based on general English cannot serve the needs of
university students for research writing as plurality of postgraduates do not point out any
writing ability, especially, academic writing skills needed to promote research activity in
Pakistan. (Sajid & Siddiqui, 2015)
Generally, in Iraq, most of our undergraduates' and postgraduates 'ESL students have many
difficulties in academic English writing, they don’t have enough experiences in writing an
assignment, this is due to the different level of their linguistic and educational backgrounds.
Moreover, academic writing been ignored in our universities, and colleges for many years and this
is due to the traditional methods of teachings which neglected this kind of activity.( AlBadi,2015).Therefore the postgraduates' students in Iraqi universities faced a lot of problems when
they are instructed to write their academic assignments such as critical reviews, paraphrasing
exercises, summaries, term papers and theses in English during their course of study where a high
standard of academic writing competence is required (Rabab’ah, 2001). This statement is
compounded by the fact that the students have not been taught academic writing or attended such
workshops prior to joining in an English language master’s program me. Learning to write involves
the ability to reflect upon and talk about one’s writing. It is a highly sophisticated activity which
includes the “active control over cognitive processes engaged in learning” (Hattie, 2010, p.188).
Al-Badi, (2015) asserts that ESL learners suffer from the lack of knowledge of how
to organize their idea and information about the chosen academic subject and how to summarize the
written text. The lack of strategic skills is the cause of students’ difficulties in writing useful
summaries. Poor writing skills lead to inequality results. When students lack skills in these areas,
their writing may be unsatisfactory in multiple ways from poor grammar and syntax to the unclear
organization to weak reasoning and arguments. As a result, students have not had enough practice
to develop a set of advanced writing skills. Nunan(1989) pointed out that “writing is an extremely
complex, cognitive skill for everyone because, in this activity, the writer has to show control of some
variables simultaneously” ( p.36). It is a thinking tool." It is a tool for language development, for
critical thinking, and for learning in all disciplines." ( Bjork & Raisanen,1997, p.8).
Teaching students how to write summaries is a task that many teachers view with distaste, and
even trepidation. Some considered summarizing is boring to explain, and tedious to grade, so they
avoid both as far as possible. Stein, Dixon, & Isaacson (1994) suggest that "writing disabilities"
derive from too little time allocated to writing instruction or from instruction inadequately designed
for the learning needs of students. (p. 392).
3. The Significance
Written language skills are a vital part of many positions: it is the key to communication. Suitable
offers a message and a connection with others. Whether it's an assignment, letter writing, and reports
or any other way, to become a good writer needs a lot of practice.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

415

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

Graham & Harris (2016) noted that," Good writing is not a gift. It is forged by desire, practice,
and assistance from others. You can play a central role in this development by teaching writing
effectively." (p.359). It’s a fundamental skill that is practiced over and over again; because without
sufficient practice, students cannot develop their writing skill s to a higher level. Students use writing
skill to help them to think through, clarify, and develop their new ideas about how they might
respond to the title that been set. Writing is the painting of the voice. (Voltaire) It’s a powerful tool
if appropriately wielded properly (Creme & Lea, 1997, p. 115) asserts that ‘you may not know what
you think until you have written it down." Several studies in the development of thinking skills and
for language development have shown that it is necessary to develop writing skills through
summarizing strategy. (Graham & Herbert, 2011)
Academic writing is necessary for all students, academics, and researchers, and no one can
deny its importance, as writing academic assignments are common learning situation at university.
Writing needs to know about grammar, genre, and vocabulary. It is the ability to self-regulate one’s
learning (Graham & Harris, 2000; Zimmerman & Risemberg, 1997).
Students will, therefore, need to extract the relevant information from each paragraph when
making a summary. (Marse, 2008) asserts that an academic review is the ability to put the main
points of a source text in brief form. Teaching students how to summarize will improve their memory
for what is read. Summarization strategies can be used widely in every content area.
Summarizing is an essential skill in academic writing; it is useful in many types of writing, and at
different points in the writing process. Summarizing requires crucial reading, thinking and writing
skills which are fundamental to success at any course level.
Summary skills are crucial factors in an academic setting because students are frequently
required to produce summary assignments; however, summary writing is a complicated task to
accomplish during a school year. Proficient students may monitor their understanding of a text by
summarizing the passage as they read. They distinguishing the essential information, and re- stated
it into a few short cohesive sentences.
The advantage of summarizing lies in showing the "big picture," which allows the reader to
frame what you are saying, and for the writer to gain a better sense of where you are going with your
writing, which parts need refinement, and whether you have understood the information you have
gathered.
4. Aim of the Study
The study aimed to examine the effect of summarizing strategy on postgraduates 'learners in
improving their English academic writing skills.
5. Hypothesize of the Study
The present study is hypothesized the followings;
1. Summarizing strategy has a significant effect on postgraduates 'students in improving English
academic writing skills.
2. Summarizing strategy hasn't any significant impact on postgraduates' students in developing
English academic writing skills.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

416

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

6. Limits of the Study
This study is limited to:
1. Postgraduates from the College of political sciences at University at Al- Nahrain during the
academic year (2018-2019).
2. The prescribed textbook is" Headway Academic Skills: level 3 Student's Book".
2. Literature Review
2.1. What is summarizing?
Summarizing is defined as a short statement that explains the main idea or facts for something
written, such as a report, a story, or any written text. (Cambridge Dictionary, 2019) .It is about how
to put the main idea in the writer's own words, including the main points only. It is useful for
different types of writing. Summarizing is the ability to identify and select relevant information
about the main idea in the text is vital in producing a fruitful summary.
A summary is a shortened version of a text. It is the way of how to inform your reader of
what is the book about. It describes its main idea, and summarizes the supporting arguments that
develop that idea. A summary is a simple and easy way to understand and doesn’t contain any
idioms, metaphors, sayings, and complicated English style. The review is almost always in the
writer’s own words. However, keywords can be used directly from the passage.
It is the way of reducing and shorten the text to one-third or one-quarter its original size by getting
the main idea of the said article, stories, or essay. (Buckley, 2004)
Writing a summary of what you know about your topic before you start drafting your actual
paper can sometimes be helpful. Summarizing teaches students how to take a large selection of text
and reduce it to the main points for amore concise understanding. Upon reading a passage,
summarizing helps students learn to determine main ideas and integrate essential details that support
them. It is a technique that enables students to focus on key words and phrases of an assigned text
that are worth noting and remembering.

Figure 1 Shows Summarizing Text
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

417

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

2.1.1. Why is summarizing important?
Summarizing is one of the most useful strategies in teaching that we have today; it is the process to
select important information from the main text. It is one of those skills that may seem very easy to
a teacher but can be difficult for students who have not been adequate knowledge of how to
summarize. Many studies state that summarization is one of the effective strategies that should be
used in the classroom to develop students writing skill, it requires students to concentrate on the
main ideas of a text and then choose the vital information without deleting the key concepts. Spack
(1988) has mentioned that the most vital skill a student can engage in is "the complex activity to
write from other texts", which is "a major part of their academic experience."(p.42)
Summarizing helps English second language learners to develop their thinking skills because
they try to restate the information in the text. It also improves the ability to evaluate details by
choosing the important details when they summarize the text. (Freeman & Freeman, 2009; Zwiers,
2008; Frances, et al. 2006)
Summarizing requires readers to focus on the main elements of a text, and to decide what is
essential. Writing a summary is a fundamental skill for both writers and readers who read- along
with the passage. According to Havola (1986), good summarizers master reading techniques; they
first find meaning in the text and figure out how different parts of the text are connected (p.138). It
helps those readers to review what they had read and re-write it again depending on their experiences
and imagination.
2.1.2. The Benefits of Teaching Summarizing Strategies
Summarization, in general, provides many benefits for both teachers and students as well.
1-Summarizing builds comprehension by helping to reduce confusion.
2- Summarizing helps to find the main points and key details
3-Summarizing saves time during test review sessions
4-Students can construct personal meaning.
5-Students learn how to discern the essential ideas in a text,
6-Students can improve their memory for what been read.
7-Students and teachers find out what they know and what they still need to know.
8-Teachers discover what students understand and remember.
9-Teachers discover student held misconceptions and misunderstandings.
10-Teachers train students to process the information they read intending to break down content into
short pieces.
11- Teachers train students to process the information they learn with the goal of breaking down
content into succinct pieces.
12-This strategy be used with the whole class, small groups, or as an individual assignment. (Jones,
2007; Lorcher, 2018)
2.2. Academic writing
Academic writing is a formal language derived from Latin, and it refers to the language and
associated practices that people need to undertake study or work in English medium higher
education. (Gillett, 2011). It is an essential part of thinking and learning in school contexts,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

418

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

particularly in the light of 21st- century demands ( Johannessen, 2001), and writing tasks are
“critical tools for intellectual and social development” (Bruning & Horn, 2000, p.30).
Academic writing is characterized by evidence-based arguments, precise word choice, logical
organization, and an impersonal tone. It is stringy, which means it has one central point or theme
with every part participate in the mainline of argument, without digressions or repetitions. ( Valdes,
2019)
Academic writing is any formal written work produced in an academic setting. It requires a
formal tone and using correct punctuation, grammar, and spelling. Learners have tried to keep their
writing straightforward and clear, and don’t include any information that isn’t necessary to support
the text. In academic writing, writers always interact with each other's’ texts, and so there will be
frequent references to the ideas, thinking or research of other authors writing in this field. (Crème
&Lea, 2003 &Borg, 2008).
Academic writing refers to a style of expression that researchers use to define the intellectual
boundaries of their disciplines and their specific areas of expertise. Characteristics of academic
writing include a formal tone, use of the third-person rather than first-person perspective (usually),
a clear focus on the research problem under investigation, and precise word choice.
2.2.1. Features of Academic Writing
Academic writing has five main characteristics:
1. Evidence based - referencing and citing
2. Appropriately structured
3. Organized clearly
4. Demonstrates critical reading, writing and thinking
5. Written in an appropriate style
(Bourdieu & Passeron, 1994)
3. Methodology
3.1. Participants
The participants of this study were 50 postgraduates of four departments in the college of political
sciences at Al-Nahrain University in Baghdad. The survey conducted throughout the academic year
2018-2019.
3.2. The Sample
The sample of the study consists of 20 postgraduates chosen randomly from two departments in the
college. Their age ranged from 25 to 29. All participants were learning English as a foreign language
and receiving the regular eight weeks writing course within two hours weekly.
3.3. The Design
This research was conducted in an experimental design with one-group pretest-posttest design to
find out their performance in writing an academic essay through summarizing strategy.
3.4. Materials
The instrument used in the present study was a written test. The test aimed at measuring
postgraduates' ability in summarizing academic texts by using the summarizing strategy. The
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

419

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

participants were given a written passage to be read and summarized in the last phase of the explicit
summarizing instruction they were involved in.
3.5. The Instrument of the Study.
The researcher used the following instruments, to fulfill the aim of the study.
1-In this research, a pre- and post-tests in writing were administered. Five expository texts were
chosen from Headway Academic Skills Level 3 Student's book for reading and writing All the
passages were selected from the same book, which been suggested by the Iraqi Ministry of Higher
Education and Scientific Research. The reading comprehension passages were 400-600 words in
length. The topics of these passages were in different subjects.
2- Summarizing strategy was used in the instructional program.
3- Check-list of ten items was used to know the student’s idea about the new approach. (See
Appendix A).
3.6. The Validity and Reliability of the Test
The researchers gave the exam to university professors, supervisors, and teachers of the English
language. They were asked to see the validity of the study, whether it is related and appropriate or
not. All agreed that the study was suitable and can evaluate the students’ ability to write academic
writing. Cronbach Alpha was used, and it was (0.65), so, the researchers felt confident about the
validity and reliability of the exam.
3.7. Pilot Study
A pilot study was conducted before the experimental study to test and revise the material and the
methods (Mackey& Gass, 2005). The participants in the pilot research were not a part of the
experimental research, so the results were not included in the study. The researcher conducted the
pilot study on five students who are studying the English language in the same college.
3.8. Lesson Plans on Summary Writing
The research puts his plan and explains the study, and how to use the summarization strategy
to his participants. It is also essential that students practice the summarization strategy and get
feedback from the teacher about the quality of their summaries. When participants need help, the
teacher should encourage them to use modified or elaborated methods of summarization that best
fit the students and the situation.
3.8.1. Steps for Summarizing
The students were instructed to implement the summarizing strategy in writhing through the
following steps:
1. Read the whole text you are summarizing carefully and with full concentration at least twice to
make sure you understand it.
2. Highlight the main points and keywords and eliminate them.
3. List key-words in the order they appeared in the passage.
4. Identify the portions of the text that support the main idea; underline these sections
5. Delete the useless information such as illustrations, quotations, etc. from the original passage.
5. Paraphrase the key points and rewrite them again by using your own words.
6. Combine your sentences using transitional words or phrases.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

420

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

7. Summarize each part, paragraph, or segment in one to two sentences.
8. Your summary should be shorter than the original text for about one -third of its original size.
9. Do not add anything beyond the author’s ideas (do not include your opinion)
3.9. Procedure
At the beginning and before starting the treatment sessions, a pet-test was given to all the participants
to make sure that they had the same level in writing. The participants did not receive any instruction
about summarizing strategy. The chosen text was "The UK educational system," it consists of 315
words taken from their textbook, Headway for Academic Skills Level 3 page 6. To be tested as a
pre-test. The researcher asked the participants to read the written essay and re-write the passage once
again in their language within 45 minutes. Certain English experts evaluated the pre-test. (See
Appendix B)
The researcher informed his postgraduates that this strategy would help them to write a
summary, and it can help them to improve their academic writing skills. In the first week of the
treatment, the teacher explained the summarizing strategy and stating its goal and importance, then
he tries to write the primary sentence of the first paragraph in a text presented to students before
starting the session, and then asked students if the details shown in the following sentences give the
main idea, then the researcher asked his students to find the primary sentence of the next paragraph
in the passage and how to use keywords or phrases to identify the main points from the text and
deleting the unessential details in the passage.
The teacher encourages his participants to monitor their learning to evaluate, whether they
used topic sentence selection strategy appropriately. The teacher-guided participants with the steps
of summarizing and how to determine the statements that support the main idea by revealing
sentences, which are more central to the main idea. During the instruction, the learners learned
summary writing as a part of their regular class program. They were given five different texts to be
read in which each passage has 400 to 600 words in length, and with different subjects, such as:
1-Music used as a healing therapy
385 words
2- Lessons from Curitiba,
540 words
3- Anew capital,
339 words
4-World of water
380 words
5- Providing water for the world
436 words
After the instruction sessions finished a post-test was conducted at the last week of the
experiment. The post-test aimed to find if there are statistically significant differences between
participants before and after the treatment. The procedures in the post-test were the same as the pretest. Participants asked to write a summary of a passage chosen from the corresponding text-book
and under the same conditions as the pre-test. The selected passage was "Globalization: is it force
for good or for bad,' it consists of 495 words, page 37 (See appendix C).
For assessment, the researcher collected the papers for the writing test and read over them to make
sure they understand the summarization process.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

421

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

The results statistically analyzed by using analytical scoring for measuring specific written
criteria of writing such as; (grammar, vocabulary, organizing, content, and coherence) are scored
from 1 to 5. The subjects' scores were out of 100.
4. Results and Discussions
4.1. Data analysis
The research collected the testing result of the participants after the end of the test. The final results
analyzed according to the five writing criteria (grammar, vocabulary, organizing, content, and
coherence) to see if there are any changes in the participants' performance in academic writing
through summarizing strategy. The results are presented in Table 1.
Table 1
Descriptive statistics of different aspects of written performance in Pre – and Post Test
Writing Parts
Test
Mean
St. Deviation T-Value
Df
Sig.
Grammar
Pre
2.39
66
-14.119
55
0.000
Post
3.34
39
Vocabulary
Pre
2.02
47
-16.988
55
0.000
Post
3.31
29
Organizing
Pre
2.43
74
-8.948
55
0.000
Post
3.23
30
Content
Pre
2.36
64
-12.069
55
0.000
Post
3.25
46
Coherence
Pre
1.92
51
-28.213
55
0.000
Post
3.47
42
The above result shows that the mean score and standard deviation for the pre-test in grammar were
(M =2.39, SD =.66), while in the post-test was (M =3.34, SD =.39). The mean score and standard
deviation for the pre-test in vocabulary were (M =2.02 SD =.47), while in the post-test was (M
=3.31, SD =29). The mean score and standard deviation for the pre-test in organizing were (M =2.43,
SD =.74), while in the post-test was (M =3.23, SD =.30).The mean score and standard deviation for
the pre-test in content were (M =2.36., SD =.46), while in the post-test were (M =3.25, SD =.46),
and the mean score and standard deviation for the pre-test incoherence was (M =1.92, SD =.51),
while in the post-test was (M =3.47., SD =.42), at 0.05 significance level.
The result of analytical analysis shows that the score of the five criteria of writing such as; (grammar,
vocabulary, mechanics, organizing content, and coherence) indicate that there is a significant
difference before and after the treatment.
4.2. Discussion
According to the research questions if the summarizing strategy effects on postgraduates'
performance in writing an academic passage or there isn’t any effect. The results show that
summarization is successfully applied as a strategy to improve learners' performance in academic
writing, so the null hypothesis is rejected.
The writing scores for postgraduates' in the post-test showed a significant improvement,
which indicates that summarizing strategies had a significant effect on writing skill. The learners
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

422

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

aware to reframing the central passage in their way; they know how to organize the main idea and
the related details in their own words caring about all the language features.
The result of this study is similar to (Pakzadian, 2011); he tries to explore" The Effectiveness
of Using Summarization Strategies on EFL learners' level of Comprehending English Texts." The
researcher reached to the conclusion that summarizing strategy plays an active role to help teachers
and teacher trainers. This study is also similar to (Özdemir, 2018); he tries to examine the "Effect
of Summarization Strategies Usages and Narrative Text Summarization Success". The results
showed that there is an increase in the mean score of the post-test for the favor of the students who
used the summarizing strategy. This study is also compatible with (Mallia, 2017), "Strategies for
Developing English Academic Writing Skills.' The research discusses essential ‘pre-writing’ tasks,
and outlines some of the crucial elements of academic writing; these often focus on paragraph
structure, necessary components of an essay, and different functional types of essays. The researcher
uses many strategies for developing English academic writing skills.
5. Conclusions and Suggestions
5. 1. Conclusions
This study was designed to find out how if the summarizing strategy can improve Postgraduates’
academic writing skills in the college of political sciences. The pre - post results of the treatment
showed that the summarizing strategy has a positive influence on postgraduates' learners to
understand the passage and how to re-state it again in their words and phrases. The results showed
that there is a statistically significant difference in the postgraduates' performance before and after
the treatment. This treatment revealed that the summarization strategy could be successfully applied
to improve learners' ability in academic writing skills.
5.2. Recommendations
Due to the conclusion of the study, many recommendations could followed as;1-Further researches are recommended to reveal some techniques and strategies to increase students'
ability in academic writing.
2-More studies could conduct to find the effect of summarizing strategy on other activities, such as
reading and listening.
3- Summarization strategies should include in the curricula of education through teaching the
English language.
5.3. Suggestions
Based on the conclusion and recommendations of the students' performance in summarizing texts,
the following pedagogical implications are considered.
1-Teachers should improve students' writing skill by using summery strategy and evaluate the results
on using this strategy.
2- Encourage students for more practices in using such modern strategy in writing, like paraphrasing
and note -taking approaches that develop the student's thinking process.
About the Author:
Dr. Edhah Numan Khazaal, is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics at the Department of
International Economic Relations, College of Political Sciences, University of Al-Nahrain. Baghdad
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

423

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

–Iraqi. I received my Ph.D. in Applied Linguistics from the College of Education for Human
Sciences, Baghdad University. I have been teaching English as a foreign language and English for
Specific Purposes (ESP) since 2000 till current. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3707-5164
References
Al-Badi, I.A.H. (2015). Academic Writing Difficulties of ESL Learners. The 2015 International Academic
Conference Preceding. The West - East Institute Barcelona. Spain. 65 67.
Bjork, L., & Raisanen, C. (1997).Academic writing: A university writing course. Lund, Sweden: Student
literature.
Borg, E. (2008) .' Understanding the nature, possibilities, and challenges of academic writing'. In S.Moore
(ed) Supporting academic writing among students and academics. London: Staff and Educational
Development Association. (pp. 9-14).
Bourdieu, P. & Passeron, J.C. (1994). Introduction: Language and relationship to language in the teaching
situation. (R.Teese, trans). In Bourdieu, P., Passeron, J., C., and de Saint- Martin M.(eds)
Academic Discourse: Linguistic misunderstanding and professorial power. (pp.1-34). Cambridge:
Polity.
Bruning R, Horn C (2000). Developing Motivation to Write. Educ. Psychol. 35:25-37.
Buckley, J. (2004). Fit to Print: The Canadian Student’s Guide to Essay Writing. (6thed.) Toronto:
Nelson.
Cambridge Dictionary. (2019) .Definition of Summary. Cambridge University Press.
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/summary
Creme, P., & Lea M. R. (1997). Writing at University: A Guide for Students (Buckingham, UK. Open
University Press).
Crème, P. & M.R. Lea (2003). Writing at University: a guide for students (2ndedition). Maidenhead:
McGraw/Open University Press.
Francis, D., Rivera, M., Lesaux, N., Kieffer, M., & Rivera, H. (2006). Practical guidelines for the
education of English language learners: Research-based recommendations for instruction and
academic interventions. Portsmouth, NH: RMC Research Corporation, Center on Instruction.
Retrieved July 28, 2011, from http://www.centeroninstruction.org/files/ELL1-Interventions.pdf
Freeman, Y. & Freeman, D. (2009). Academic language for English language learners and struggling readers:
How to help students succeed across content areas. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
http://hdl.handle.net/11299/109931
Friedrich, P. (2008). (Ed.) Teaching Academic Writing. New York: Continuum International Publishing.
Gilbert, J., & Graham, S. (2010). Teaching writing to elementary students in grades 4-6: A national survey.
Elementary School Journal, 110(4), 494-518. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1086/651193
Gillett, A. J. (2011). What is EAP? Retrieved from http://www.uefap.com/bgnd/on May 2015.
Graham, S., & Harris, K. (2016). A Path to Better Writing: Evidence-Based Practices in the Classroom.
Reading Teacher, 69(4), 359-365. https://doi.org/10.1002/trtr.1432
Graham, Steve. Ed. D. (2012). Writing Is a Thinking Activity. Retrieved from
https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/PracticeGuide/wwc_writing_pg_graham.pdf
Graham, S., & Harris, K. (2000). The role of self-regulation and transcription skills in writing and writing
development. Educational Psychologist, 35(1), 3-12. DOI: 10.1207/S15326985EP3501_2
Graham, S., & Hebert, M. (2011). Writing to read: A meta-analysis of the impact of writing and writing
instruction on reading. Harvard Educational Review, 81(4), 710-744.
Graham, Steve. Ed. D. (2012). Writing Is a Thinking Activity. Retrieved from
https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/PracticeGuide/wwc_writing_pg_graham.pdf
Hattie, J. (2010). Visible Learning. A Synthesis of over 800 Meta-analyses Relating to Achievement.
London: Routledge.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

424

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

Havola, Liisa. (1986). Summarization Integrating Reading and Writing. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of
Education, Print.
Hayland, Ken. (2002). Authority and Invisibility, Authorial Identity in Academic Writing. Journal of
Pragmatics, 34(8), 1091-1112. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-2166(02)00035-8
JohannessenLR (2001). Teaching Thinking and Writing for a New Century. Engl. J. 90:38-46.
Jones, R. (2007).Strategies for Reading Comprehension: Summarizing.
Retrieved from
http://www.readingquest.org/strat/summarize.html.
Lakshmi.Bh.V.N.(2013). Challenges in Teaching Language and Literature: An EFL Perspective. IOSR
Journal of Humanities and Social Science (IOSR-JHSS) 15, (6)49-53. Retrieved from
www.Iosrjournals.Org
Leki, L. (2001). Material, Educational, and Ideological Challenges of Teaching EFL writing at the turn of
the century. International Journal of English Studies,1 (2), 197-209.
Lisa Fink. Link. (1998).Writing is a Tool for Thinking. National Council of Teachers of English. NCTE.
Lorcher, T. (2018). The Benefits of Teaching Summarizing Strategies. Bright Hub Education. Teaching
Summarizing and Summarizing Strategies Make Better Learners and Smarter Kids. Retrieved from
https://www.brighthubeducation.com/high-school-english-lessons/22665-summarizing-strategies
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. M. (2005). Second language research: Methodology and design. Mahwah, NJ,
US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Mallia, J. (2017). Strategies for Developing English Academic Writing Skills. Arab World English Journal
(AWEJ).8 (2) 3-15 DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol 8 no2.1
Marse, M. (2008).Writing an Academic Summary. Southeastern Writing Center. Celebrating the Writer’s
Voice. Retrieved from www.selu.edu/acad_research/programs/writing_center/
Nunan, D. (1989).Designing Tasks for the Communicative Classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Özdemir Serpil. (2018).The Effect of Summarization Strategies Teaching on Strategy Usage and Narrative
Text Summarization Success. Universal Journal of Educational Research 6(10): 2199-2209. DOI:
10.13189/ujer.2018.061018. Presented at 2nd International Symposium of Limitless Education and
Research )Bodrum-Muğla). Retrieved from http://www.hrpub.org
Pakzadian, M. (2012). The Effects of Using Summarization Strategies on Iranian EFL Learners' Reading
Comprehension., English Linguistics Research. Volume 1. Number. 1. Published by Sciedu Press.
DOI:10.5430/elr.v1n1p118.
Philpot, S. & Curnick, L. (2015).Headway Academic Skills. Level 3 Reading, Writing, and Study Skills
Student's Book. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rabab'ah, G. (2001). Communication Problems Facing Arab Learners of English. Journal of Language &
Learning, 3(1), 180-197.
Sajid, M & Siddiqui, j.A., (2015). Lack of Academic Writing Skills in the English Language at Higher
Education Level in Pakistan: Causes, Effects, and Remedies. International Journal of Language and
Linguistics. Vol. 2, No. 4; October. DOI: 10.30845/ijll
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL Students into the Academic Discourse Community: How Far Should We
Go? TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 29-51.
Stein, M., Dixon, R. C., & Isaacson, S. (1994). Effective Writing Instruction for Diverse Learners. School
Psychology Review, 23(3), 392–405.
Valdes, O. (2019). An Introduction to Academic Writing. Thought Co. Retrieved from
https://www.thoughtco.com/what-is-academic-writing-1689052
Zimmerman, B. J. & Risemberg, R. (1997). Becoming a self-regulated writer: A Social Cognitive
Perspective. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 22(1), 73-101.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1997.0919

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

425

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

Zwiers, J. (2008).Building academic language: Essential Practices for Content Classrooms, Grade5-12. San
Francisco: CA: Jossey-Bass.. Reviewed
by Ana Huerta-Macías .University of Texas.
http://hdl.handle.net/11299/109931

Appendices
Appendix (A)
Student's Summary Checklist
Dear student,
Use the following checklist to critique your summaries or those of your peers. Please. Answer (Yes,
Poor, and No.) in the right place.
Student Name------------------

Time: 20 minutes
Yes

Poor

No

1. Did the first sentences you mention give the author and the title of the article of the
original text?

2. Did you identify the main idea at the beginning of your summary?

3. Did you include all the essential points of the original text in summary?
4. Did you delete the unnecessary information found in the original text?
5. Did your summary read like a unified, clear, and accurate paragraph?
6. Did you keep the author’s meaning the same, not including any details, ideas, or
opinions that be eliminated without diminishing the reader’s understanding?

7. Did you use your own words, your opinions or analysis?
8. Did you use citation expressions to refer to the author’s ideas?
9. Did you T summary is balanced and objective.
10. Did your summary read like a unified paragraph, with no apparent errors in
grammar, spelling, and punctuation?

Thank you for your collaboration

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

426

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

Appendix (B)
Sample of one of the Postgraduate's pre-test in Academic Writing Skills
Without the Summarizing Strategy

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

427

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Improving Postgraduates’ Academic Writing Skills with Summarizing Strategy

Khazaal

Appendix (C)
Sample of one of the Postgraduate's post-test in Academic Writing Skills with the
Summarizing Strategy

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

428

