The value of communication:
Evidence from a field experiment with entrepreneurs in Togo
Stefan Dimitriadis
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
stefan.dimitriadis@rotman.utoronto.ca
Rembrand Koning
Harvard Business School
Harvard University
rem@hbs.edu
September 20, 2019
Why do some entrepreneurs benefit from their portfolio of peer advisers while others do not? In
this study, we argue that communication practices are an important but overlooked factor in the
formation of useful advice relationships between entrepreneurs, particularly in the context of
developing economies. We hypothesize that improving entrepreneurs’ communication practices
will affect the relationships they form and have implications for their business performance. To
test our theory, we conducted a field experiment in Togo with 301 entrepreneurs who were
randomized into a communication practices intervention that was embedded in a business training
program. We found that entrepreneurs who were exposed to better communication practices
perceived interactions more cooperatively and exchanged more information during those
interactions. Moreover, improving communication practices also led to a 50 percent increase in
the number of relationships entrepreneurs formed with peers. These relationships exhibited more
matching based on skill and were more ethnically diverse. Finally, communication practices
training also substantially increased entrepreneurs’ business performance. Our findings highlight
how communication practices play a central role in entrepreneurs’ ability to form portfolios of
relationships and perform in challenging business environments.
Keywords: communication practices, entrepreneurship, business relationships, developing country, field experiment

We thank Julie Battilana, Laura Doering, Soléne Délécourt, Anita McGahan; Sharique Hasan, Peter Marsden, MaryHunter McDonnell, Will Mitchell, Aruna Ranganathan, Metin Sengul, and Ned Smith for helpful feedback and
suggestions. We also thank Alaye Abalo, Essenam Agblevo, Ayite Eklu, Matt Thibek, and Nyaku Yao for excellent
research assistance. This project has received funding from Harvard Business School, the Kauffman Foundation
Dissertation Fellowship, and the Strategic Research Foundation’s Dissertation Fellowship Program.

INTRODUCTION
Entrepreneurs depend on access to information to seize opportunities, find employees, and
develop new products. This information is all the more crucial in developing countries, where
formal institutions that encourage information flows are often weak. Therefore, a key challenge
for entrepreneurs in developing countries is how to access new, accurate, and timely information.
Prior research has highlighted that advice from peers can help entrepreneurs resolve this problem
of information access (Zuckerman and Sgourev, 2006; Kacperczyk, 2013; Abraham, 2019).
Relationships with peers can serve as important sources of information about how to manage a
business, identify market opportunities, and learn new practices (Sorenson, Rivkin, and Fleming,
2006; Stuart and Ding, 2006; Chatterji et al., 2018). However, research also suggests that
entrepreneurs’ portfolios of peer relationships are frequently far from optimal in terms of
providing access to information. Rather, entrepreneurs’ peer relationships tend to be made up of
people who are similar to them (Ingram and Morris, 2007; Vissa, 2011), in physical proximity
(Aldrich and Kim, 2007), or family members (Peng, 2004). These types of peers, by virtue of
their similarity to the focal entrepreneur, are less likely to provide access to new or timely
information (Granovetter, 1973; Reagans and Zuckerman, 2008). Given the value of peer advice,
how can entrepreneurs improve the size and composition of their portfolios of advisers?
We argue that communication practices can help entrepreneurs identify more and better advisers,
build relationships with them, and so improve business performance. By making it easier to
engage with and share information with strangers, communication practices enable entrepreneurs
to form relationships on the basis of useful information instead of relying on signals like
homophily or proximity. Similar to how organizations adopt practices to improve internal
communication flows (Allen, 1966; Goffman, 1967; Tushman, 1978; Collins, 2004), we argue
that entrepreneurs can also improve their communication practices. We build on theories of
organizational communication, as well as practitioner insights, to identify three practices that
enable entrepreneurs to connect with and learn from peers: (1) asking questions and giving
advice; (2) reflecting on others; and (3) following up.

2

We use a field experiment in Togo to test if improving communication practices leads
entrepreneurs to better exchange information and build more useful peer relationships. Togo is a
suitable setting to test this theory because local conditions make communication between
entrepreneurs especially difficult. Based on 47 semistructured interviews with entrepreneurs in
Togo, we found evidence that while entrepreneurs were aware of the benefits of peer advice,
most struggled to initiate and sustain communication with their peers. To test if better
communication practices would help overcome these difficulties, we worked with a business
training program to develop a two-hour communication practices intervention. Crucially, we
randomized which cohorts received this additional training. The experimental design allows us to
separate the impact of communication practices from observed and unobserved differences in an
entrepreneurs’ network composition and business ability. In total, 301 entrepreneurs enrolled in
the program, roughly half of whom received the intervention. Entrepreneurs were surveyed at the
start of the training program, at the end of the program, six weeks after the program, and six
months after the program.
Results from our analyses show that, even when limited to a brief introduction, teaching
communication practices leads to a cascade of changes in entrepreneurs’ patterns of interaction
and relationships. First, we argue that training in communication practices make prospective
interactions with other entrepreneurs more appealing because they increase entrepreneurs’
expectations of gaining new information. As a result, entrepreneurs’ perceptions of interactions
and their level of engagement in them should improve. Indeed, we find that entrepreneurs in the
treatment condition of the field experiment were significantly more likely to perceive
interactions as cooperative and also engaged in significantly more information exchange during
those interactions.
This effect on interactions should in turn change the patterns of relationship formation. With
more information and a stronger sense of how to engage with others, entrepreneurs with better
communication practices are more likely to identify more individuals who they want to learn
from, who have complementary skills, and who they want to sustain relationships with.
Consistent with this logic, our analyses show that entrepreneurs who received the treatment
formed approximately 50 percent more new relationships and that they formed advice
3

relationships based on business needs rather than similarity on ascriptive characteristics.
Specifically, we find that entrepreneurs in the treatment condition formed more relationships
with peers possessing skills they wanted to learn and also ended up with more ethnically diverse
ties.
Finally, through a combination of the information gained and the new relationships formed, we
expect entrepreneurs to seize more market opportunities and improve their business practices.
This, in turn, should drive improvements in business performance. Accordingly, we found that
six months after the training program entrepreneurs in the treatment group increased their
performance by approximately 50 percent compared with the control group.
This study makes three main contributions. First, it contributes to existing research on interorganizational communication. Although this area of research has deep roots in sociology and
organization theory (Goffman, 1967; Tushman, 1978; Allen, 1984; Collins, 2004), recent
research on organizations and entrepreneurship has generally abstracted from individual
interactions and the process of communication (McFarland, Jurafsky, and Rawlings, 2013).
Bringing communication into focus is a salient contribution, particularly as organization theory
begins to consider environments where communication about business is difficult, such as in
developing countries. Our theory of communication practices provides a new lens for thinking
about the impact of relationships both between and within organizations.
Second, this study contributes to the literature on business relationship formation in
entrepreneurship. There is a plethora of research on the ways in which dyad-level characteristics
affect the process of relationship formation (Hallen, 2008; Vissa, 2012; Kleinbaum, Stuart, and
Tushman, 2013) and their consequences for entrepreneurial performance (Stuart and Sorenson,
2007). This study considers a new factor that affects patterns of relationship formation—
communication practices—and provides causal evidence of their benefits for entrepreneurs’
business relationships.
Finally, this study also contributes to research on entrepreneurship in developing countries.
There is a growing body of research that aims to understand how entrepreneurs operating in
4

resource-scarce and institutionally challenging settings can build business relationships and
increase their performance (Dutt et al., 2016; Assenova and Sorenson, 2017; Pierce and Snyder,
2017). Our findings suggest that communication practices may be particularly valuable in these
environments, as they help entrepreneurs overcome challenges created by weak formal
institutions and increase their business performance (Khanna and Palepu, 2010; Gao et al.,
2017).

ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND COMMUNICATION PRACTICES
Entrepreneurs tend to rely on peer advice relationships to access important information about
markets (e.g., new opportunities), learn about business practices, find clients, and hire employees
(Saxenian, 1990; Zuckerman and Sgourev, 2006; Cai and Szeidl, 2017). This is especially the
case in developing countries, where formal market institutions that act as alternative sources of
such information may be lacking (Nanda and Khanna, 2010; Acquaah, 2012; Armanios et al.,
2017). Yet many entrepreneurs in developing economies have portfolios of peer relationships
that do not maximize access to information. Rather, they are heavily homophilous, often
segregated by ethnic group and reliant on family members, neighbors, or others who work
nearby (Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter, 2003; George et al., 2016b). While high in trust, the drawback
of these closed relationships is that they provide less access to new information about markets
(Renzulli, Aldrich, and Moody, 2000). Individuals who are similar and come from the same
environment are likely to know more or less the same things or find out about them at the same
time as the focal entrepreneur (Granovetter, 1973; Burt, 1992; Golub and Jackson, 2012).
This homophilous composition of peer relationship portfolios is driven at least in part by the fact
that communication with similar others is often easier (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook,
2001). Individuals with similar experiences and who occupy similar social spheres perceive the
world in similar ways, which makes communication between them less complicated (Zenger and
Lawrence, 1989; Kleinbaum, Stuart, and Tushman, 2013). By contrast, communication with
dissimilar alters is a more complex because there is less of a shared vocabulary or repository of
common experiences. As a result, part of an entrepreneurs’ challenge with forming larger and
5

more diverse relationships relates to their ability to communicate effectively about business
issues with others. Put simply, communication between entrepreneurs without a shared
background is difficult.
Research on organizations has long recognized that this is also the case with communication
within organizations (Katz and Kahn, 1978; Allen, 1984). In the case of intra-organizational
communication, prior work has identified many of the challenges involved in exchanging
information. Employees from different demographic and functional backgrounds often lack
shared codes or a common language, and fail to ask of and listen to one another (Edmondson,
Bohmer, and Pisano, 2001; Weber and Camerer, 2003; Huang et al., 2017). Yet communication
need not break down. Work building on these insights argues that planned, structured, and
formalized patterns of communication within organizations enable interactions between
individuals and facilitate the transfer of information, thereby improving business performance
(Allen and Cohen, 1969; Tushman, 1979). For example, Lee et al. (2019) find that teams within
a consulting firm relied on the communication practice of using interaction scripts to facilitate
communication during interactions. Similarly, Kellogg et al.’s (2006) study of a marketing
agency revealed that cross-boundary communication practices were needed for employees to
communicate and coordinate effectively.
We argue that, similar to organizations, there exists a bundle of practices that can improve the
quality and quantity of entrepreneurial communication. For entrepreneurs, these practices are
centered on three mechanisms in the communication process that tend to break down: sharing
information, identifying complementary others, and sustaining communication once started.
Below we describe how each of these three mechanisms makes communication difficult and then
link each to practices that scholars and practitioners have argued might overcome these
challenges.
Information sharing. When attempting to communicate, entrepreneurs commonly fail because
they don’t talk about businesses in the same way. As a result, they have difficulty conveying
what their business does, the issues they face, and their visions for the future. This failure relates
to foundational insights about communication and the need for both parties to have shared codes
6

and collections of terms, symbols, anecdotes, and statements (Allen and Cohen, 1969; Tushman
and Katz, 1980). Individual entrepreneurs carry their own sets of codes, which may diverge
significantly between otherwise similar peers (Weber and Camerer, 2003).
Developing a shared understanding about others’ businesses requires a process of asking
questions and offering advice. Asking questions is something that individuals frequently fail at,
particularly when it comes to questions that sustain a conversation and probe into others’
businesses (Huang et al., 2017; Brooks and John, 2018). But question asking is critical because it
allows entrepreneurs to understand the way others’ businesses operate, the problems they face,
and the language they use to describe it (Hasan and Koning, 2019a). As Simon (1991:131)
stressed, “Each [actor] must have a sufficient knowledge and understanding of the others’
problems to be able to communicate effectively.”
These theoretical insights are closely paralleled by practitioner recommendations that advise
entrepreneurs to ask questions and give advice as part of the communication process. Expressing
genuine curiosity through questions can begin a process of learning about others’ businesses
(Argyris, 1991). Giving advice also helps entrepreneurs learn how to talk about their business
and how to effectively use those terms themselves (Rollag, 2015; Casciaro, Gino, and Kouchaki,
2016). Sharing advice not only encourages asking more questions, it also pushes entrepreneurs to
translate their own information into others’ terms (Uzzi and Dunlap, 2005; Ibarra and Hunter,
2007).
Identifying complementary others. Even when entrepreneurs are able to share information, it
may be of little use if they cannot identify those who have new or relevant information. This can
frequently be an issue, as network theory suggests people tend to gravitate toward others who are
similar to them in terms of ascriptive characteristics such as age, gender, or ethnicity
(McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook, 2001; Ingram and Morris, 2007). The danger with
associating based on ascriptive similarity is that the exchange partner may have access only to
relatively similar information as the focal entrepreneur and, as result, may not have new and
complementary information to share.

7

According to research, going beyond homophily or proximity requires that entrepreneurs identify
alters with new, non-redundant information. Burt and Ronchi (2007) suggest that teaching
network concepts like brokerage and warning against stereotyping can lead to such
improvements. Reagans et al. (2004) argue that merely seeking out others with different
demographic characteristics may suffice for increasing individuals’ network range and access to
new information. In either case, there is a requirement that entrepreneurs shift toward reflecting
on what their opportunity set of interactions is and which of those interactions may have the
highest potential to help them achieve their goals.
The practitioner literature echoes these insights by emphasizing that entrepreneurs should look
beyond their regular exchange partners and that they can do this by reflecting on others. This
means taking the time to observe others in a given social setting, and to reflect on what they do
and how that relates to their goals as entrepreneurs (Edmondson, 2012). The process of reflection
helps identify others who potentially have useful information (Cross and Thomas, 2011). Taking
the time to reflect on these issues can help reduce entrepreneurs’ reliance on superficial
similarities, proximity, or convenience when choosing whom to connect with (Krackhardt and
Hanson, 1993; Cross et al., 2001). Thus, the practice of reflecting on others should help
entrepreneurs identify more opportunities for communication.
Sustaining communication. Finally, communication may fail because it is fleeting. For
communication to lead to the transfer of new and complex information, there must be sufficient
interaction. Yet there is significant evidence that individuals tend to reach out to familiar alters—
people they already know well—rather than talk to people they’ve only recently met, because the
latter requires more effort (Ingram and Morris, 2007; Hasan and Koning, 2019b). Failure to
sustain communication, therefore, is a potential pitfall.
Research suggests that entrepreneurs can address this issue by communicating in a manner that
creates opportunities for future interactions (Dahlander and McFarland, 2013). Repeated
communication is at the foundation of cooperation (Baldassarri, 2015) because it enables the
development of positive affect and trust (Homans, 1961; Feld, 1981). Integrating this into
communication practices involves making communication a cyclical and endogenous process,
8

with a propensity to repeat itself. The practitioner literature on communication places a lot of
emphasis on opportunities for following up, particularly before the focal entrepreneur is in need
of an alter’s help (Casciaro and Lobo, 2005). It also involves searching for and emphasizing
commonalities between the actors, which are likely to give rise to future opportunities for
interaction (Uzzi and Dunlap, 2005). These recommendations suggest ending communications
by explicitly setting up an opportunity to follow up in the future (Eisenhardt and Galunic, 2000).
To summarize, theory about inter-organizational communication, relationship formation, and
entrepreneurship suggests that communication between entrepreneurs is a difficult task and is
likely to fail at three different points: attempting to share information, identifying
complementary alters, and sustaining communication. Practitioner insights suggest that there are
communication practices that can help address these common failures for entrepreneurs. These
are: asking questions and giving advice, reflecting on others, and following up. In the following
section, we outline the ways in which teaching these communication practices affects measurable
entrepreneurial outcomes.

THE EFFECTS OF GOOD COMMUNICATION PRACTICES FOR ENTREPRENEURS
Improving communication practices can have a series of cascading effects for entrepreneurs,
beginning with their perceptions of and engagement in interactions, then affecting their
formation of new relationships, and finally influencing their business performance.
Cooperation and information transfer. Communication practices are likely to be especially
important in driving cooperative perceptions of interactions with other entrepreneurs. This is
important because, compared with coworkers, entrepreneurs are more likely to be in direct
product-market competition with one another. Moreover, in developing-country contexts, weaker
formal market institutions and protections may increase uncertainty and entrepreneurs’
perceptions of others as threats (Neace, 1999; Kim and Li, 2014).

9

Communication practices can affect the extent to which entrepreneurs perceive interactions as
cooperative in at least two ways. First, by structuring and adding formalization to the process of
interaction between entrepreneurs, there is less ambiguity and room for error in the process. This
reduces entrepreneurs’ uncertainty and fear of engaging with others. Second, part of good
communication is asking questions and giving advice, which are collaborative activities. These
activities are known to inspire positive affect and a stronger sense of closeness between
individuals (Small, 2009). For these reasons, entrepreneurs with better communication practices
are more likely to perceive interactions with others as cooperative. We therefore hypothesize
that:
Hypothesis 1a: Improving communication practices will lead entrepreneurs to perceive
interactions as more cooperative than competitive.
Entrepreneurs’ shift in their perception of interactions is paralleled by a shift in the way they
share information in interactions. Better communication practices should enable entrepreneurs to
exchange more information related to their businesses during interactions. First, the shift to more
cooperative perceptions leads to a greater willingness to share knowledge, ask for advice, and
give feedback. Second, communication practices emphasize asking questions and reflecting on
which others have useful information. These practices direct entrepreneurs to focus on the
reciprocal exchange of help and advice, which should increase the quantity of information about
business that is exchanged. Finally, communication practices highlight how to more effectively
sustain a conversation once started. With more back-and-forth, the interaction should help
entrepreneurs better understand one another and so exchange more information. We therefore
hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 1b: Improving communication practices will lead entrepreneurs to exchange more
information during interactions.
Relationship formation. Interactions that are more cooperative and lead to greater information
exchange should in turn increase the probability of forming a longer-term relationship. Increased
cooperation and information exchange increase the perceived value of staying in touch with a
10

peer. Moreover, a key component of better communication practices is the focus on sustaining
communication over repeated interactions. Not only are entrepreneurs with better practices more
likely to meet and interact with more people, they should also be better equipped to generate
follow-up interactions with those people with whom they want to stay in touch. Thus,
communication practices should result in richer interactions and the formation of more
relationships. We therefore hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 2a: Improving communication practices will lead entrepreneurs to form more new
relationships.
Skill complementarity. An important concern with any intervention that increases
entrepreneurs’ business relationships is that the intervention might lead to redundant business
ties and unhelpful connections. We argue that, unlike mixers or other structural interventions
(Ingram and Morris, 2007; Carrell, Sacerdote, and West, 2013), improving communication
practices will result in the formation of fewer redundant business relationships, even though such
practices push entrepreneurs to form more connections. Entrepreneurs with better
communication practices form fewer redundant business relationships because they base their
decision on more information about their peers. Better communication practices lead to more
information transfer in any given interaction, and with more information, entrepreneurs can
better evaluate the potential value of connecting with a peer (Hansen, Podolny, and Pfeffer,
2001; Kuwabara, Hildebrand, and Zou, 2018). Conversely, entrepreneurs can also better
recognize when they have useful knowledge to share with their partner.
These arguments suggest that improved communication practices should not just increase the
number of relationships, but also the quality of the match between any given pair. A first-order
concern for entrepreneurs, especially in developing countries, is the acquisition of better
management skills and practices (McKenzie and Woodruff, 2018). If communication improves
matching, then we expect that entrepreneurs who communicate better will be more likely to
connect with peers who have complementary skills they want to learn and, conversely, they
possess a skill the peer would like to learn. Building on Vissa’s (2011) concept of task
complementarity, we define skill-complementary business relationships as those that connect an
11

entrepreneur with another entrepreneur who possesses a management skill that the focal
entrepreneur has expressed a desire to learn. This leads us to predict:
Hypothesis 2b: Improving communication practices will lead entrepreneurs to form more skillcomplementary relationships.
Ethnic diversity of relationships. If entrepreneurs are forming connections on the basis of skill
complementarity, then what dimensions are they no longer building relationships on? As
described earlier, an important pattern in relationship formation is homophily (McPherson,
Smith-Lovin, and Cook, 2001). People who are similar in terms of ascriptive characteristics,
such as ethnicity, are likely to communicate more easily, which makes the formation of a
relationship between them likelier. Ethnicity is a particularly salient dimension of homophily in
many African countries, which are often ethnically diverse (Easterly and Levine, 1997; Luke and
Munshi, 2006; Yenkey, 2015; Pierce and Snyder, 2017). We argue that improved communication
practices should diminish the role of ethnic homophily in the formation of relationships.
Entrepreneurs who have been taught better communication practices might be less reliant on
demographic similarity and other forms of non-deliberative matching, which occurs when actors
match on a small, limited number of attributes (Azoulay, Liu, and Stuart, 2017). As a result,
entrepreneurs will form more new relationships based on skill complementarity and access to
new information rather than demographic similarity, which should lead to entrepreneurs forming
more ethnically diverse relationships. This leads us to predict:
Hypothesis 2c: Improving communication practices will lead entrepreneurs to form relationships
that are less concentrated in one ethnic group.
Entrepreneurial performance outcomes. Existing research suggests that entrepreneurs with
larger and more diverse sets of business relationships are likely to perform better in terms of their
survival, financing, and profitability (Shane and Cable, 2002; Chatterji et al., 2018). This
happens because diverse business relationships provide access to information about market
opportunities, increase the chance that an entrepreneur will come across a valuable new practice,
and provide better access to resources such as funding and investments (Hochberg, Ljungqvist,
12

and Lu, 2007). Given that entrepreneurs with better communication practices are likely to share
more information and form more new relationships that are skill-complementary, we would
expect that this leads to improvements in their business performance. We therefore predict that:
Hypothesis 3: Improving communication practices will improve entrepreneurs’ business
performance.
We expect performance to improve precisely because improved communication practices shift so
many key mechanisms simultaneously. While this improves our confidence in Hypothesis 3, it
does make it difficult to say precisely whether one single mechanism accounts for the change.
For example, changes in communication practices will affect the information gained during oneoff interactions. They also change the number and diversity of relationships. Such changes might
lead an entrepreneur to learn a new practice or to the referral of a new customer, and could lift
benchmarks and expectations about appropriate levels of performance. It is likely that some
combination of all of these effects works to benefit entrepreneurs and translates into higher
performance. As a result, although we are able to hypothesize that exposure to good
communication practices is likely to increase performance, we defer on identifying which of the
mechanisms outlined in Hypotheses 1 and 2 are most responsible for shifts in performance. In
the next section, we turn to where effective communication practices are likely already in use
and where there might be room for improvement.

Persistent Barriers to Adopting Better Communication Practices: The Case of
Entrepreneurship in Togo
Despite the apparent simplicity of communication practices, some environments may present
persistent barriers to their use. While these practices may already be widely diffused and have
become the norm in places like Silicon Valley or Route 128 (Hallen and Eisenhardt, 2012), there
is reason to believe that this may not be the case in developing economies. Research on
management practices has found that there are significant barriers to entrepreneurs using
managerial best practices in developing countries (McKenzie and Woodruff, 2013). This work
13

argues that many entrepreneurs are either unaware of the practices or lack motivation to
implement them even if they are profitable (Gibbons et al., 2010; Bloom et al., 2013). In the case
of communication practices, there may be similar reasons why entrepreneurs fail to implement
them.
Given our focus on testing the effects of improving communication practices, we sought an
empirical setting where barriers to communication would be prevalent. In the end, we selected
Togo as a promising field site. Togo is a small, francophone country in West Africa and
representative of countries designated by the World Bank as low-income. According to the
“Doing Business Index” created by the World Bank to measure the difficulty involved in starting
and operating a business, Togo scored 54.9 out of 100, which is close to the regional subSaharan average of 52.6 (World Bank, 2018). Although agriculture is the largest sector of
economic activity, entrepreneurship rates have been rapidly increasing, particularly in urban
areas, where the government has been promoting entrepreneurship as a solution to
unemployment (Acs, Desai, and Hessels, 2008).
To better understand how our theory of communication practices maps onto the context of Togo,
one of the authors conducted extensive fieldwork between 2015 and 2017. During three separate
visits, this author conducted 47 semistructured interviews with entrepreneurs of varying levels of
experience and in a variety of sectors of activity. Additional details about these interviews can be
found in Appendix A. We used these interviews to understand how entrepreneurs perceived and
engaged in communication. Our examination of the qualitative data showed that they were often
aware of the value of peers and faced challenges in interacting, but they were often unaware of
communication practices that could help overcome those challenges. This was expressed,
unprompted, during several interviews as frustration with attempts at initiating and sustaining
communication with other entrepreneurs. Several entrepreneurs admitted that although they were
motivated to reach out to others, they simply felt that they couldn’t initiate communication with
them. For example, one entrepreneur said:

14

I find that the way we are educated here is that entrepreneurs have good ideas but
they cannot implement them because they cannot approach other people to
discuss them. (YE 13)
Another entrepreneur expressed similar challenges related to reaching out to peers for the first
time, when such attempts were hampered by the peers not having any “contact information” or
not responding at all:
I find that to get help in Togo is complicated because there’s no contact
information, really. There are no real contacts, because you reach out to people
through their emails and their websites, but you never get a response. Similarly,
you deposit letters to request a meeting and it’s as if you never did anything. It’s
frustrating. (YE 12)
When trying to understand why these difficulties in communication exist, entrepreneurs often
turned to cultural narratives related to a lack of training in communication: They couldn’t
communicate effectively because local circumstances didn’t train them to engage with other
entrepreneurs. One expressed it like this:
I think you have to train yourself in order to form new relationships. There may
be a cultural side that plays a role. For example, culturally, we go to the market,
and the process of entrepreneurship that we have always known is seeing our
mothers at the market. It’s essentially that—it’s customers coming to them and
them never really having worked on a business strategy to attract customers. But
it is also perhaps a lack of training on this [building relationships]! Existing
entrepreneurial training focuses on the business plan and the sources of financing
that may exist—loans or something like that—but not enough on the relational
side. (YE 6)
Another entrepreneur expressed the same narrative from a different perspective, as related to
mentors:
15

[…] entrepreneurs here are not able to reach out to people. Even mentors tell you
not to talk to others about your business. All this slows down the evolution of
your business. (YE 4)
A seasoned entrepreneur, who had mentored younger entrepreneurs in Togo, lamented about
how difficult it was to get entrepreneurs to talk to each other:
It's very difficult ! Entrepreneurs prefer to work alone, unfortunately. But our
job is that too: to be able to sensitize them, train them, explain to them the
merits of living together and working together. (AY 3)
The interviews revealed that Togo is a context where entrepreneurs are motivated to connect
with peers, but also a place where they struggle to do so. Given the baseline difficulties in
communication, changes in the exposure to communication practices should have measurable
impacts.

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Research Setting: “Marketing in Action” Business Training Program
To study the impact of communication practices, we worked with a business training program
for entrepreneurs in Togo’s capital, Lomé. The context of the program allowed us to shift
communication practices by exposing participants to a bundle of communication practices. The
business training program was organized by the Association of Young Entrepreneurs of Togo
(Association des Jeunes Entrepreneurs Togolais) in collaboration with the Energy Generation
Academy. Both organizations are leading not-for-profit organizations in Togo whose social
mission is the promotion of entrepreneurship. Both have extensive experience hosting business
plan competitions and training events for entrepreneurs. In the spring of 2017, they invited
entrepreneurs to participate in a training program called “Marketing in Action.” In collaboration
16

with the organizers, we created an experimental intervention to expose entrepreneurs to basic
communication practices. We randomly selected half of the participating cohorts of
entrepreneurs into this “communication practices” condition.1
Participating Entrepreneurs and Randomization
The Marketing in Action program solicited participants from throughout Lomé. The program
was advertised to the local business community through social media and a network of local notfor-profit organizations. In addition to advertising, a team of three canvassers visited businesses
door-to-door in all major commercial districts to invite the owners to participate. The
requirements for participation were that the entrepreneurs had been in operation for at least one
year and that they be based in the city of Lomé. In addition, participants were asked to pay a
small participation fee (approximately 5 USD), which was reimbursed to them upon successful
completion of the training. All of the entrepreneurs who participated in the training were both
owners and founders of their businesses.
The recruitment process yielded 326 participants, whom we split into 14 groups, each with 20–
25 entrepreneurs.2 Program dates were filled one after the other on a sequential basis as
individuals registered. Once all the groups had been filled, 7 of the 14 groups were randomly
selected into the communication practices condition using a random number generator in Excel.
The timeline and implementation of the field experiment are detailed in Appendix A.
It is worth noting that the sample of entrepreneurs who participated in the field experiment is
made up of those who decided to attend the training program on marketing practices. As a result,
the sample is not completely representative of all enterprises in Togo. Due to this self-selection
into the training program, the treatment effect of the field experiment applies to entrepreneurs
who are motivated enough to participate in business training programs. Although this is a
1

The surveys, intervention, and randomization were approved by the authors’ Institutional Review Board (IRB)
(Protocol # IRB17-0319).
2
Ex-post power calculations based on our study’s sample of 301 observations and the cluster randomized trial
design with 14 clusters have 91% power to detect an effect of the size we observe using a 5% significance level.
This level of power is standard in research on entrepreneurship in strategy; see, for example, Chatterji et al. (2018),
who use a field experimental design with entrepreneurs and have a similar sample size.

17

boundary condition for this study, motivated entrepreneurs are also theoretically important
because they are likelier to be key players in their market segments.
Business Training Content and Instructors
The training program curriculum was adapted from programs carried out by the International
Labor Organization (ILO) in developing countries (for a review, see McKenzie and Woodruff
(2013)). Typically, these programs bring together business owners for short courses on basic
management practices. The Marketing in Action program used the ILO training course on
marketing for small business owners, called the “Start and Improve Your Business Programme”
(ILO 2018). The content covered seven basic marketing practices: doing market research, choice
of location, setting a price, negotiating with suppliers, using advertising, evaluating advertising,
and creating a brand. The training lasted for two full workdays, from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. each day,
for an approximate total of 20 hours per cohort.
The training program was taught by two instructors, who were local consultants. Two new
groups of entrepreneurs started each week, one on Monday and one on Wednesday. The
instructors taught the classes together, following a strict schedule. There were catered coffee and
lunch breaks each day. The program also included a networking event at the end of the two days.
During this networking event, after all the teaching material had been covered, participants were
randomly assigned three discussion partners from within the same class. Participants were then
given space for private one-on-one conversations with each of their discussion partners. These
conversations lasted approximately 30–45 minutes each. During the conversations, participants
were given writing materials to take notes on their conversations.
Experimental Treatment
To test whether improving communication practices shapes entrepreneurs’ interactions, business
relationships, and profitability, we randomly assigned cohorts of entrepreneurs in the Marketing
in Action program into two conditions, a “communication practices” condition and a control
condition. Participants in the treatment condition began the two-day training program with a two18

hour training session on communication practices. Prior field experimental research has used
such training sessions and lectures as effective interventions for changing practices and shared
understandings in organizational settings (e.g., Cable et al. (2013) and Paluck (2011)). After the
communication practices session, the treatment groups followed a series of interactive lectures
during the remaining two days that covered the marketing practices. The control group followed
the exact same training program, except that they were not given the two-hour lecture on
communication practices. Instead, the lectures on marketing practices were covered at a slightly
slower pace to make up for the two hours that the treatment group spent on communication
practices.3 As a result, both control and treatment groups spent exactly the same number of hours
together.
Our treatment, the two-hour training session, introduced entrepreneurs to the three
communication practices outlined in the theory section: asking questions and giving advice,
reflecting on others, and following up. Table 1 provides an overview of the structure of the
session. During the first hour, the first 20 minutes were spent teaching how advice-giving
involves a process of learning about others by asking them questions about their businesses and
translating one’s own experiences into advice that others can understand (Argyris, 1991).
Entrepreneurs were also taught that giving advice also created the possibility of receiving useful
information from others in return. Then, after the discussion on the practice of asking questions
and giving advice, another 20 minutes were spent on the practice of reflecting on others. This
component focused on how a social setting can be an opportunity to meet and learn from
someone new, which involves noticing who else is in a given social setting and whether they
might contribute to achieving one’s own goals (Cross and Thomas, 2011; Edmondson, 2012) .
Finally, in the next 20 minutes, entrepreneurs were walked through how to follow up after initial
interactions. This involved simple steps like making sure to ask for contact information, sending
thank-you notes, and talking about business issues that could be followed up on in the future. To

3

In order to introduce the two-hour training session into the program, we chose to condense the amount of time
spent on marketing practices rather than add an additional two hours for the treatment condition because this would
have represented an approximate increase of 10% in the total time that entrepreneurs in that condition spent
together. We chose to avoid this increase in total time spent together because it could have confounded the effects of
the communication intervention on our outcomes of interest related to communication and relationship formation.
Notably, test scores for comprehension of the marketing practices showed no difference between the control and
communication practices conditions.

19

reinforce the entrepreneurs’ understanding of the three communication practices, the final hour
of the training session was spent working through a brief case study about communication, using
a fictional example of a Togolese entrepreneur. This was followed by time for questions and
answers.
*** Insert Table 1 about here ***
The instructors who led the session on communication practices also taught the other materials in
the two-day training program, which helped with the integration of the session into the rest of the
program. The two instructors co-taught all materials; as a result, they were both present in all
classes. As well as being consultants, the instructors were graduates of the local university who
each had several years of experience teaching courses to entrepreneurs. One of the authors
trained the two instructors on communication practices and walked them through the content of
the lecture. Before the start of the training programs, the instructors practiced and refined giving
the presentation. Although the instructors were trained in communication practices, they were
blind to the design of the field experiment and the authors’ outcomes of interest. The PowerPoint
slides developed with the instructors for this session can be found in Appendix I.
Data
The data for this study come from five sources: (1) pre-treatment survey; (2) digitized participant
notes; (3) training program exit survey; (4) six-weeks post-treatment survey; and (5) six-months
post-treatment survey. The pre-treatment survey and the two post-treatment surveys (sources 1,
4, and 5) collected information from all participant entrepreneurs about their management
practices, networking practices, expenditures, revenues, employees, and other demographic
information. The two follow-up surveys conducted after the training program (sources 4 and 5)
contained additional questions on participants’ contact with other participants from their class in
the training program; these were used to measure relationship formation. The digitized
participant notes (source 2) are handwritten notes that participants took of their discussions with
other participants during a structured networking event, which were electronically scanned. The
exit survey (source 3), asked all participants questions about their interactions during the two
days of the program and their perceptions of other participants, as well as their comprehension of
20

the material taught. The survey questions used to construct the variables for our analyses can be
found in Appendix J.
All surveys were administered by the same two instructors who taught the training program.
During registration for the program, the instructors explained to the entrepreneurs about the
follow-up survey process and that they themselves would be visiting the participants later to
survey them. This helped build a sense of commitment and trust between the instructors and the
participants.
Although 326 entrepreneurs signed up to participate in the training program, 10 did not finish
their training. Five entrepreneurs were unable to attend the second day of the training due to
unforeseen circumstances, such as a health condition or business emergency. During the followup surveys, 15 more entrepreneurs fell out of the sample, leaving a total of 301 participants.
Most of the entrepreneurs who dropped out at this stage were either away from Lomé for
prolonged periods of time for travel or had had to stay away from their work due to health issues,
such as malaria.4
Dependent Variables
Cooperative perception of interactions. Our first hypothesis (H1a) is that entrepreneurs will
perceive interactions during the training program as more cooperative than competitive after they
have been exposed to communication practices. To measure entrepreneurs’ perception of
interactions, we asked them to think about the interactions they had had during the two days of
the training program. We then provided them with a sheet of paper with a grid of 24 words, of
which half represented concepts related to collaboration (such as help, trust) and the other half
represented concepts related to competition (such as grow, dominate), and asked them to circle
five words that they believed best represented these interactions.5 Using this information, we
4

To further check that attrition did not bias the randomization of the treatment, we ran an OLS regression for
receiving treatment (1 if in the treatment group, 0 otherwise) as a function of attrition (a binary indicator for not
having completed the training program or the two follow-up surveys). In this regression, the coefficient of attrition
was insignificant (Coef 0.148; St. Err. 0.126), indicating that attrition did not impact treatment.
5
Other cooperative words included friendship, sharing, and alliance, while other competitive words included
adversarial, beat, and dominate. For the full list of words, see Appendix J.

21

created a measure of cooperative perception of interactions for each entrepreneur, which was a
count variable equal to the total number of cooperative words selected from the grid of 24 words.
Information exchange. The second hypothesis (H1b) states that entrepreneurs will exchange
more information after they’ve been exposed to communication practices. To measure
information exchange between entrepreneurs, we created a structured networking event at the
end of the training program, during which each entrepreneur was successively paired with three
randomly selected discussion partners. All participants were given pen and paper, and at the end
of the event, their written notes from their discussions were scanned. The total number of words
that each participant wrote during their three discussions was used as a measure of information
exchange (Aral and Van Alstyne, 2011).
Relationship formation. The third outcome of interest is how many relationships an
entrepreneur formed with other participants in the training class (H2a). To measure relationship
formation, we used data from the follow-up survey conducted six weeks after the training
program. During the follow-up survey, all participants were asked whether they had spoken over
the phone or met in person with any other participants from the same training group after the
program had ended, and they were asked to name those individuals. This post-training contact
was taken as an indication of a relationship having been formed between two participants. Using
these data, we calculated the number of relationships formed for individual participants as the
number of people they had kept in touch with (Vissa, 2011; Piezunka and Dahlander, 2019).
Skill complementarity. Hypothesis H2b relates to the proportion of relationships formed with
entrepreneurs who possess complementary business skills. The measure for skill
complementarity is adapted from the dyad-level measure used by Vissa (2011) for task
complementarity and captures whether the focal entrepreneur formed a relationship with another
training-class participant who has a skill that the focal entrepreneur has expressed a desire to
learn.
To construct this measure, we use survey responses in which participants were asked to describe
one issue in their business that they felt was the most pressing and that they wished to address.
22

They were asked to select which category this specific issue fell into: (1) firm financing; (2)
marketing; (3) stock and inventory management; (4) accounting and record keeping; (5) planning
for the future. We used the list of business best practices (which cover all five areas of expertise)
developed by the World Bank (McKenzie and Woodruff, 2018). In parallel, based on their
responses to the pre-treatment survey, we coded each participant according to whether they used
best practices in those five categories.
Using these two data points (i.e., the skill that each participant most desired to learn and each
participant’s portfolio of skills), we created an indicator of skill complementarity between each
pair of participants i and j which was equal to 1 if participant j showed evidence of expertise in
best practices in the domain in which participant i indicated a wish to improve. Then, to bring
this measure from the dyadic level to the individual level, we calculated the proportion of
relationships with skill complementarity by taking the ratio of relationships characterized by skill
complementarity to the total number of relationships formed after the training program. This
measure ranged from 0 to 1, where 0 means that none of the connections formed exhibit skill
complementarity and 1 means that all connections formed exhibit skill complementarity.
Ethnic concentration. Hypothesis H2c states that better communication practices will lead to
the formation of more diverse relationships. Ethnic concentration of relationships represents the
level of concentration of the newly formed relationships across ethnic groups. Using the pretreatment data regarding each entrepreneur’s ethnicity, we calculated the ethnic concentration of
the relationships formed using Herfindahl indexes, a common approach for measuring diversity
in egocentric portfolios of relationships (Uzzi, 1996). The index ranges between a minimum of
1/N, where N is the number of possible categories represented in the sample, and 1. The
minimum value indicates that all relationships were equally distributed among the ethnicities,
and the maximum value (“1”) indicates that all relationships formed were concentrated in one
ethnicity or one neighborhood. In the case of ethnicities, there are five possible cases, making the
minimum value of the index 0.20.
Performance. Finally, Hypothesis 3 is about the performance of entrepreneurs’ businesses. The
measure for business performance comes from three surveys: a pre-treatment survey at the
23

beginning of the training and two post-treatment surveys at six weeks and six months after the
training. In each survey, we asked participants about their businesses’ profits in the month
previous to the interview. Self-reported monthly profits is a standard measure of performance for
small businesses in developing economies, which is highly correlated with other measures of
performance based on accounting books (De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff, 2009; Atkin,
Khandelwal, and Osman, 2017).
Independent Variable
Treatment group. The main independent variable in the analyses is whether the individual
participated in a group that received the communication practices treatment. Accordingly, we
created a dummy variable equal to 1 for having received the treatment, and 0 for being in the
control group.
Control Variables
Although the research design randomizes the exposure to communication practices, we also
accounted for variation in the characteristics of entrepreneurs and their businesses in the
regression models. Specifically, we included as control variables several conventional factors
that may be related to perceptions of interactions, information exchange, relationships formed,
and performance.
First, we controlled for Ewe ethnicity, coded as 1 if the participant was Ewe (the majority ethnic
group in Lomé) and 0 otherwise. This was measured in the first post-treatment survey by asking
participants what language they spoke at home, which is a common indicator of individuals’
ethnic group (Yenkey, 2015). Being a member of the majority group could increase the number
of potential interaction partners during the training program, thereby making it easier to form
more relationships. In addition to ethnicity, we controlled for entrepreneurs’ gender by including
an indicator for female entrepreneurs. Cultural beliefs about gender and entrepreneurship can
make it more difficult for women entrepreneurs to form new relationships (Field, Jayachandran,
and Pande, 2010); therefore, we controlled for this factor. We also controlled for whether
participants had completed primary school, which was coded as 1 if the participant had
completed at least primary school and 0 otherwise. Completion of primary school is a way of
24

gauging whether the participant was functionally literate. Entrepreneurs with less than a primary
school education are unlikely to have facility with reading and writing, which is also an indicator
of lower socioeconomic status in Togolese society.
Furthermore, three control variables were included to capture various aspects of participants’
businesses. First, we controlled for the size and age of the participant’s business using the
number of employees, measured by the log of total number of full-time employees working in the
business, and firm age, measured by the number of years since the business started producing
and selling goods or services. These factors may affect relationship formation because
entrepreneurs with larger and more established businesses tend to be higher-status and therefore
perceive fewer participants as attractive interaction partners (Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter, 2003).
We also controlled for the extent to which each participant used established best practices for
management in their businesses. Using the management practices score for small businesses in
developing economies created by McKenzie and Woodruff (2018), we collected data in the pretreatment survey through a series of “yes or no” questions about whether participants used each
of the best practices in a list of 27 practices.6 The management practices score of a participant’s
business is the proportion of the 27 questions to which the entrepreneur answered “yes.” We
controlled for this because participants with higher scores may be less motivated to interact,
communicate, or create new relationships.
Furthermore, a series of 10 dummy variables was created to capture entrepreneurs’ sector of
economic activity. The 10 sectors were tailoring and shoemaking, sale of food or drink, jewelrymaking and sales, information technology sales and services, cosmetic and health services,
construction, food processing and production, carpentry and metal works, rug manufacturing and
weaving, and multimedia services.
Finally, we controlled for the training class size, which is equal to the number of entrepreneurs in
each training program class. This was included to control for the number of prospective

6

These best practices include, for example, recording every purchase and sale, using advertising, and having a
monthly budget of expenses. See McKenzie and Woodruff (2018) for a complete list and details.

25

connections each actor had available, which could have a positive effect on the total number of
relationships formed, but a negative effect on the level of familiarity with those individuals.
We report the summary statistics and bivariate correlations in Table 2. The majority of
participants (78 percent) were members of the Ewe ethnic group and had completed primary
school (75 percent). Approximately 66 percent of entrepreneurs were male. Entrepreneurs’
businesses had on average one or two employees and had been in existence for 11 years. In
general, larger businesses tended to be more profitable. Finally, in terms of best practices,
entrepreneurs’ businesses on average used about 60 percent of the practices defined by the World
Bank for small businesses. The higher use of best practices was positively associated with firm
size and age. In Appendix B, we report balance tests, which explore whether baseline
characteristics predict being in the treatment group. We find no statistically significant evidence
that any baseline characteristics of the entrepreneurs or their businesses predicts receiving the
treatment.
** Table 2 about here **

Estimation
Our estimation strategy builds on a pre-registration plan,7 but better takes into account the kinds
of outcome variables and their longitudinal structure. Among the dependent variables, there are
three kinds: count, fractions, and normally distributed. All dependent variables are crosssectional, except for the performance dependent variable, logged profits last month, which is a
panel time series with three periods.

7

We pre-registered our field experimental design and our expected outcomes with the Open Science Foundation
(OSF) at https://osf.io/qpydj/. Our pre-registration document refers to communication practices as “cultural frames
of cooperation and helping” and explicitly outlines our first three hypotheses. The OSF included one prediction—
that the treatment should increase “relational knowledge”—for which we did not end up collecting data to test. We
did not register our final two hypotheses. We did not initially think we could measure firm performance but ended
up having funds for surveys after the program. For ethnic diversity, we did not realize that the prediction followed
from our model until discussing our findings with colleagues. Our pre-registered analyses use OLS and hold as
shown in Appendix E.

26

The first group of dependent variables comprises cooperative perception of interaction (H1a),
information exchange (H1b), and relationships formed (H2a), which are count variables. To test
hypotheses H1a, H1b, and H2a, we used a negative binomial model, which is appropriate for
models where the dependent variable is a count with nonnegative values (Cameron and Trivedi,
2009).
The dependent variables skill complementarity (H2b) and ethnic concentration (H2c) are ratios,
which range from at most 0 to 1. To test hypotheses H2b and H2c, we used fractional logit
regressions, which is appropriate for models where the dependent variable is a fraction (Papke
and Wooldridge, 2008). Finally, the dependent variable for performance (H3) is logged monthly
profit. We log the variable because profits, as is regularly the case, is highly skewed. We use
ordinary least squares (OLS). We included sector dummies to account for unobserved
heterogeneity across sectors of activity and clustered standard errors by training groups (i.e., we
let observations be independent across groups but not necessarily across the participants of the
same group) in all models.

RESULTS
Cooperative Perception of Interactions and Information Exchange
Hypothesis 1a posits that entrepreneurs who have been exposed to communication practices will
perceive interactions with other entrepreneurs as more cooperative. Table 3 presents regression
results that test this hypothesis. All regressions in Table 3 are estimated using a negative
binomial model because the outcomes are count variables, with standard errors that are clustered
at the classroom level. In addition to the controls shown, each model also contains fixed effects
for entrepreneurs’ sector of activity and a constant, which are not shown in the table. In Models 1
and 2, the dependent variable is the number of cooperative words that entrepreneurs selected to
describe their interactions during the training program. Model 1 presents the set of control
variables, of which only the class size has a statistically significant effect on number of
cooperative words selected, though the magnitude is small. Model 2 introduces the variable for
the treatment, communication practices. The coefficient for this variable is positive and
27

statistically significant at the 5-percent level. Using predictive margins and keeping all other
variables at their means, being in the treatment group leads to selecting 0.25 more cooperative
words, an increase equivalent to roughly one-quarter of a standard deviation. These results
provide empirical support for Hypothesis 1a that entrepreneurs who were exposed to
communication practices did perceive interactions as more cooperative.
Hypothesis 1b states that entrepreneurs exposed to communication practices will exchange more
information during interactions with other entrepreneurs. To measure information exchange
during interactions, we counted the number of words written during three discussions that each
entrepreneurs participated in during the structured networking event at the end of the second day
of the training program. Figure 1 shows the plots of the kernel density function for the number of
words written during the three discussions by participants in the treatment and control groups.
The red dashed line is the distribution for participants in the treatment condition, while the solid
blue line represents those in the control group. Figure 1 shows that the distribution for the
treatment group is shifted significantly to the right of the distribution of the control group.
Models 3 and 4 of Table 3 test this hypothesis using regressions and controlling for entrepreneur
and business characteristics. Model 3 presents only control variables. Model 4 introduces the
treatment variable, which is positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The
predictive margins show that being in the treatment group increases the average number of words
written by 27, which represents a doubling of the number of words written. These results lend
support to Hypothesis 1b that entrepreneurs who were exposed to communication practices
exchanged more information during interactions.
*** Insert Figure 1 about here ***
*** Insert Table 3 about here ***
Relationship Formation
Hypothesis 2a states that exposure to communication practices will lead to the formation of more
new relationships between entrepreneurs. Figure 2 shows the plots of the kernel density functions
for the number of new relationships formed, as measured six weeks after the end of the training
28

program, for the treatment and control groups. The figure shows that the distribution for the
treatment group is shifted to the right of the distribution for the control group, indicating that
there is a higher frequency of larger numbers of relationships formed. The regressions in Table 4
confirm this difference between the two groups. Specifically, Models 1 and 2 of Table 4 estimate
the effect of communication practices on the number of new relationships formed after the
training program. Model 1 of Table 4 presents the control variables, of which only being a
member of the Ewe ethnicity is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Given that this is
the majority ethnic group, being a member of it increases the ease of forming new relationships
for entrepreneurs. Model 2 introduces the treatment variable, which is positive and statistically
significant. In order to assess the substantive significance of the results, we calculated the
predicted count of ties for participants in the control and treatment groups, while keeping the
other covariates at their means. The predicted count of ties for participants in the control group is
1.5, compared with 2.25 in the treatment group. Given that the median participant in the control
group formed approximately two ties, the addition of (about) one more tie through the treatment
represents a large increase in the outcomes from the treatment. Therefore, the results provide
strong support to the prediction that entrepreneurs that have been exposed to communication
practices will form more relationships with other entrepreneurs.
*** Insert Figure 2 about here ***
Skill Complementarity
We further hypothesized that entrepreneurs exposed to communication skills would form a
greater proportion of relationships that exhibit skill complementarity (Hypothesis 2b). In line
with this hypothesis, the proportion of relationships that exhibit skill complementarity (i.e., those
in which the target possesses a skill that the focal entrepreneur has expressed the wish to improve
upon) were on average higher for individuals in the treatment group than those in the control
group. The regression analyses support Hypothesis 2b as well: the coefficient for exposure to
communication skills is positive and statistically significant at the 5 percent level on the
proportion of ties exhibiting skill complementarity in Model 4 of Table 4. Based on the
predictive margins for this model, receiving the treatment increases the proportion of the
entrepreneur’s network that is task complementary by about 15 percent, when keeping other
29

covariates constant at their means. Taken together, these results provide support for Hypothesis
2b.
Ethnic Diversity
Hypothesis 2c stated that communication practices will lead to the formation of more ethnically
diverse relationships. This is tested using a measure of the concentration of new relationships
formed within ethnic groups. Because this measure ranges from 0 to 1, Models 5 and 6 in Table
4 use a fractional logit model. In Model 5, the only statistically significant control variables are
having completed primary school, which lowers the ethnic concentration of new ties, and the
number of employees, which increases the concentration. Model 6 introduces the variable for the
treatment, whose coefficient is negative and statistically significant at the 1 percent level,
indicating that being in the treatment group decreases the ethnic concentration of new
relationships formed. The effect is meaningful, with the marginal effect being –0.11, which is
nearly half of a standard deviation. This result provides support for Hypothesis 2c.8
*** Insert Table 4 about here ***
Business Performance
The final hypothesis posited that communication practices will lead to better performance for
entrepreneurs. In particular, it was theorized that exposure to communication practices will lead
to an increase in monthly profits, measured six months after the training program. Figure 3 plots
the kernel density function of the logged profits for the treatment and control groups. The red
dashed line represents the treatment group, and it is shifted to the right of the blue solid line that
represents the control group. This indicates that at every level of the distribution of business
performance, entrepreneurs experienced increases. As shown in Appendix C, the visual shift in
distributions is comparable to past work testing the effects of peer groups on firm performance
(Cai and Szeidl, 2017).

8

In addition to ethnic diversity, gender diversity is also an important dimension of entrepreneurs’ portfolios of
relationships. However, after conducting exploratory analyses, we find no effects of the treatment on the gender
composition of entrepreneurs’ peer relationships. For these analyses, see Appendix H.

30

To test the significance and magnitude of this effect, we use a difference-in-differences type
approach. Table 5 shows the results for OLS regressions for logged monthly profit before, six
weeks after, and six months after the program. Model 1 shows the results without entrepreneur
fixed effects, while Model 2 includes entrepreneur fixed effects. The effect of communication
practices is significant at the 5 percent level in both models. The coefficient estimates indicate
that communication practices in the post-treatment period were associated with an approximately
50 percent increase in monthly profits, roughly one-quarter of a standard deviation.
Why do we observe such a large percentage change? In our data, the baseline monthly profits
and sales are quite low. For example, the median firm in our sample has revenues of 768 USD
per month and a profit of 168 USD per month. As a result, small improvements, such as gaining
a new client, selling several more units, or finding a better supplier, can lead to very large
percentage increases in profits. It is not uncommon for interventions with small-scale
entrepreneurs in developing economies to have the effect of increasing profits by 100 percent
(e.g., see McKenzie and Sakho 2010). One recent field experiment testing the effect of a training
program on entrepreneurs in Tanzania found that their intervention led to increases in profits of
about 50 percent (Berge, Bjorvatn, and Tungodden, 2014), which is a similar effect size to ours
in Table 5. Furthermore, consistent with prior work, in Model 1 of Table 5, we find a strong
association between management practices and number of employees and the firm’s profitability.
This increases our confidence that our measure of profits is not merely noise.
The results of these analyses are consistent with the theory and confirm Hypothesis 3. Additional
details on the interpretation of the kernel density functions for performance and a comparison of
the magnitude of the treatment effect with those in other studies can be found in Appendix C.
*** Insert Figure 3 about here ***
*** Insert Table 5 about here ***

ROBUSTNESS CHECKS
31

We also conducted a series of robustness checks to validate these results. First, to confirm that
the measure of new business relationship formation accurately captures the effect of
communication practices on the number of new relationships formed, we estimated the models
using an alternative outcome variable. Specifically, we adapted a measure from Vissa (2011),
who uses the receipt of a business card to measure intention to form a relationship. To create this
measure, we provided all entrepreneurs with personalized business cards with their name and
phone number printed on them, and we told them they could use them as they wished. At the end
of the two days, we asked the participants to show us the cards they had received from others and
we took note of each card received. Following the same model specification as in Table 3, but
changing the outcome variable to be the number of cards received, we replicated the result for
number of relationships formed from Table 3. This helps verify that our outcome measure was
accurately capturing the dynamics that better communication practices lead to more new
relationships. For details on these results see Appendix G.
An additional concern may relate to the skill complementarity results. Perhaps entrepreneurs
were not seeking out others with the skills they needed, but rather by simply making more
relationships, they accidentally ended up with more good matches. In other words, perhaps the
increased skill complementarity is an accidental by-product of building more relationships. To
confirm that the observed differences in skill complementarity were not simply the result of
network growth, we ran a series of simulations where the number of new relationships that each
entrepreneur formed was held at the observed value, but the targets of those relationships were
randomly selected. Then the proportion of skill-complementary relationships was calculated for
the treatment and control. This was repeated for 2,000 simulations. In Appendix D, we plot the
simulated differences. The actual difference between skill complementarity in the treatment and
control groups is extremely unlikely to happen by chance (less than one-tenth of a percent).
Forming more ties does not necessarily result in more useful connections.
Furthermore, an additional potential concern may relate to the model dependence of our results.
The regressions in Tables 3 and 4 estimate non-linear models. As a precaution, we estimated all
regressions in these tables using OLS. This has the added benefit of making the interpretation of
the results simpler as well. All of our results held unchanged using this regression approach, as
32

did the interpretation of the magnitudes of the effects. For details on these robustness checks, see
Appendix E.
Finally, we re-estimate all models including additional controls for gender, being formally
registered, having received a loan, and networking practices, inserting them one by one and in
combinations. The inclusion of these variables, none of which were significant, did not change
the results.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Existing research has long argued that having a large and diverse portfolio of peer advice
relationships has significant benefits for entrepreneurs’ survival, growth, and business
performance (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986; Stuart and Sorenson, 2007). Peers can supply
information about market opportunities and advice about business practices (Renzulli, Aldrich,
and Moody, 2000; Kuhn and Galloway, 2015). This study explores the role of communication
practices in interactions with peers, the formation of new relationships, and business
performance. Using a field experiment in Togo, this study provides causal evidence that simple
communication practices enable entrepreneurs to make more out of social opportunities to
interact by making interactions more cooperative, increasing information exchange, and leading
to the formation of new relationships. The peer relationships formed due to such communication
practices are not only more useful in terms of access to complementary skills, but also more
ethnically diverse. Beyond affecting the formation of new business relationships, communication
skills are also associated with improvements in business performance.
Contributions
First, our study contributes to the foundational literature on inter- and intra-organizational
communication. Classical organization theory has long studied the various formalized structures
and practices, including scripts, codes, and shared cultures, that are necessary to facilitate
effective communication and information flows within organizations (Tushman, 1978; Kogut
and Zander, 1996; Weber and Camerer, 2003; Srivastava et al., 2017; Choudhury et al., 2019).
Research has also examined the factors that enable inter-organizational communication as it
33

relates to learning and knowledge transfer, emphasizing factors such as absorptive capacity and
“knowledge gatekeepers” (Tushman and Katz, 1980; Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). While these
studies have considerably enriched our understanding of communication within and between
organizations, they remain silent about the role of communication practices, especially in
entrepreneurial settings. We address this gap by identifying three simple communication
practices for entrepreneurs and providing experimental evidence of their effects. The results are
compelling in that they affect not only entrepreneurs’ ability to exchange information, they also
change the composition of their peer relationships and improve their performance. These results
also highlight that communication can be theorized as a bundle of practices, which may have
significant implications for how organizations pursue the development of better communication
flows (O'Reilly III and Roberts, 1974).
In addition to this, our study also contributes to the literature on entrepreneurship and the
formation of peer business relationships. Existing research has focused primarily on the
structural characteristics of dyads to explain the formation of business relationships (Rivera,
Soderstrom, and Uzzi, 2010). This work has identified factors such as homophily (Abraham,
2019), proximity (Hallen, 2008; Dahlander and McFarland, 2013; Hasan and Bagde, 2015),
mutual ties (McFarland et al., 2014), and common organizational membership (Feld, 1981) as
significant predictors for the formation of peer business relationships. We build on this literature
by examining a non-structural factor related to relationship formation: communication. This
study shows that entrepreneurs’ exposure to communication practices affects the way they
perceive interactions and the information that is exchanged during those interactions, thereby
increasing and diversifying the number of relationships they form. Given that prior work has
found that structural factors, such as homophily, that lead to relationship formation often
reproduce existing social relationships and divisions (Ingram and Morris, 2007), we think that
the results of this study are especially crucial, as they offer evidence of an intervention that
promotes the formation of new and diverse ties, thereby potentially changing social hierarchies.
Finally, this study contributes to the study of entrepreneurship in developing countries. Existing
research on entrepreneurs in developing markets has emphasized the importance of management
practices (Bloom et al., 2013; McKenzie and Woodruff, 2018). Some researchers have also
34

begun to note the importance of relationships for entrepreneurs in developing markets (Acquaah,
2012; George et al., 2016a; Armanios et al., 2017). However, these studies are limited in their
ability to shed light on the dynamics involved in the formation of relationships in these contexts.
In particular, these studies do not provide any guidance as to how entrepreneurs can overcome
obstacles to forming relationships with other entrepreneurs. This study helps fill that gap by
showing that communication practices can help entrepreneurs form relationships within specific
settings, thus overcoming many barriers to relationship formation that are endemic to developing
markets.
Beyond its contributions to various theoretical literatures, this study also makes a methodological
contribution to the study of entrepreneurship and organizations. In this study, we leveraged field
experimental methods, which are still nascent in the field of organization theory research
(notable exceptions include Bernstein (2012) and Ranganathan (2018)). One benefit of this
approach is that it allows us to make causal evaluations of the relationship between
communication practices, information exchange, and relationship formation. To achieve this, we
designed an experimental setup with well-defined treatment and control groups. A second benefit
of this methodological approach is that it enabled us to measure elements of information
exchange and patterns of interactions at a more fine-grained level than most other studies of
business relationship formation have so far been able to. Our hope is that future studies will
continue to build and add to the repertoire of this methodology.
Boundary Conditions and Future Research Directions
An important aspect of this study is that it was conducted in Togo, which was a compelling
setting for testing our theory, but it also represents a boundary condition. Togo offered a context
in which many entrepreneurs were active but also faced difficulties in communication with peers.
As a result, this setting enabled us to observe and measure the effect of communication practices.
Yet Togo is also a low-income country with weak formal market institutions, where
entrepreneurs face high levels of uncertainty and risk in markets (Marquis and Raynard, 2015).
As a result, it is possible that in settings where communication is easier due to prevailing norms,
institutions, and the social infrastructure, an intervention that involves exposing entrepreneurs to
communication practices may not have as large or as measurable effects. If this is true,
35

discussing communication practices with entrepreneurs may be less important in highly
developed institutional environments. Nevertheless, uncertainty is at the basis of much
entrepreneurial activity (Alvarez and Barney, 2005), and therefore there is a good chance that in
many environments improving communication practices will have an effect.
Second, in the design for this study, the exposure to communication practices was brief and the
opportunities for interactions were constrained to the two days that the training program lasted.
Although the treatment was limited, results did show statistically significant changes in patterns
of interaction and performance. Nevertheless, it is unclear whether a longer and more thorough
exposure to the communication practices would alter the results. It is possible that actors would
create more ties and that these ties would be more durable over time. This, in turn, could increase
their performance even more. Furthermore, there is also a possibility that creating more
connections could lead to negative social capital, whereby successful entrepreneurs are burdened
by the connections and the favors that are asked of them. Future studies should explore these
dynamics with more comprehensive treatment designs.
Third, the exposure to communication practices took place within the context of a business
training program, and the treatment was administered to entire groups at the same time. It is
unclear how the results of this intervention would have changed if the exposure to
communication practices had happened to randomly selected individuals before they joined the
training program. It is possible that the size of the effect may be diminished when training
groups contain a mix of entrepreneurs who have been shown communication practices and
entrepreneurs who have not. We are unable to determine the extent to which the treatment relies
on the presence of a group norm, in addition to entrepreneurs being familiar with the practices.
We believe that this represents an opportunity for future research on how communication
practices depend on the structure and the norms of the spaces within which they are deployed.
Finally, this study examined the specific case of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs have a strong
incentive to create new ties and search for new information. As a result, it is possible that the
treatment was very appropriate for entrepreneurs, but might be less so for other types of actors.
For example, would communication practices resonate with corporate executives? In theory, in
36

any setting in which actors have the potential to mutually help each other, communication should
lead to the formation of new relationships that increase performance. Moreover, scholars have
emphasized the need for effective communication in large organizations and teams (Edmondson
and Lei, 2014). However, due to the emphasis of this study on entrepreneurs, it remains to be
tested whether this dynamic replicates for other types of market actors and whether there are
differences in the effects.
Conclusion
Entrepreneurs depend on peer relationships for access to information, especially in the context of
developing countries. Forming business relationships with individuals who provide access to
useful information is difficult. Although there is considerable research on the macro structures
that can play a role in the formation of these types of ties, this study introduces an additional
mechanism of communication. We argue that when exposed to communication practices,
entrepreneurs perceive interactions more cooperatively and exchange more information during
those interactions. In turn, this enables entrepreneurs to form more business relationships, of
which a larger proportion exhibit skill complementarity and are more ethnically diverse. Finally,
communication practices are also associated with better performance subsequently. Analyses of
data from a field experiment in Togo provide supportive evidence for these claims.
Communication practices appear to be a promising tool to catalyze the formation of relationships
between entrepreneurs even within some of the most challenging environments.

37

REFERENCES
Abraham, M.
2019 "Gender-role Incongruity and Audience-based Gender Bias: An Examination of
Networking among Entrepreneurs." Administrative Science Quarterly.
Acquaah, M.
2012 "Social networking relationships, firm‐specific managerial experience and firm
performance in a transition economy: A comparative analysis of family owned and
nonfamily firms." Strategic Management Journal, 33: 1215-1228.
Acs, Z. J., S. Desai, and J. Hessels
2008 "Entrepreneurship, economic development and institutions." Small Business
Economics, 31: 219-234.
Aldrich, H. E. and P. H. Kim
2007 "Small worlds, infinite possibilities? How social networks affect entrepreneurial
team formation and search." Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1: 147-165.
Aldrich, H. E. and C. Zimmer
1986 "Entrepreneurship through social networks." In D. Sexton and R. Smilor (eds.), The
art and science of entrepreneurship: 3-23. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Allen, T. J.
1966 "Performance of information channels in the transfer of technology." Industrial
Management Review, 8: 87.
Allen, T. J.
1984 Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology Transfer and the Dissemination of
Technological Information within the R&D Organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Allen, T. J. and S. I. Cohen
1969 "Information flow in two R&D laboratories." Administrative Science Quarterly, 14:
12-19.
Alvarez, S. A. and J. B. Barney
2005 "How do entrepreneurs organize firms under conditions of uncertainty?" Journal of
Management, 31: 776-793.
Aral, S. and M. Van Alstyne
2011 "The diversity-bandwidth trade-off." American Journal of Sociology, 117: 90-171.
Argyris, C.
1991 "Teaching smart people how to learn." Harvard Business Review, 69: 99-109.
Armanios, D. E., C. E. Eesley, J. Li, and K. M. Eisenhardt
2017 "How entrepreneurs leverage institutional intermediaries in emerging economies to
acquire public resources." Strategic Management Journal, 38: 1373-1390.
Assenova, V. A. and O. Sorenson
2017 "Legitimacy and the benefits of firm formalization." Organization Science, 28: 804818.
Atkin, D., A. K. Khandelwal, and A. Osman
2017 "Exporting and firm performance: Evidence from a randomized experiment."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132: 551-615.
Azoulay, P., C. C. Liu, and T. E. Stuart
2017 "Social influence given (partially) deliberate matching: Career imprints in the
creation of academic entrepreneurs." American Journal of Sociology, 122: 1223-1271.
38

Baldassarri, D.
2015 "Cooperative networks: Altruism, group solidarity, reciprocity, and sanctioning in
Ugandan producer organizations." American Journal of Sociology, 121: 355-395.
Berge, L. I. O., K. Bjorvatn, and B. Tungodden
2014 "Human and financial capital for microenterprise development: Evidence from a
field and lab experiment." Management Science, 61: 707-722.
Bernstein, E. S.
2012 "The transparency paradox: A role for privacy in organizational learning and
operational control." Administrative Science Quarterly, 57: 181-216.
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts
2013 "Does management matter? Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
128: 1-51.
Brooks, A. W. and L. K. John
2018 "The surprising power of questions." Harvard Business Review, 96: 60-67.
Burt, R. S.
1992 Structural Holes: The social Structure of Competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Burt, R. S. and D. Ronchi
2007 "Teaching executives to see social capital: Results from a field experiment." Social
Science Research, 36: 1156-1183.
Cable, D. M., F. Gino, and B. R. Staats
2013 "Breaking them in or eliciting their best? Reframing socialization around
newcomers’ authentic self-expression." Administrative Science Quarterly, 58: 1-36.
Cai, J. and A. Szeidl
2017 "Interfirm relationships and business performance." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 133: 1229-1282.
Cameron, A. C. and P. K. Trivedi
2009 "Microeconometrics with STATA." College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.
Carrell, S. E., B. I. Sacerdote, and J. E. West
2013 "From natural variation to optimal policy? The importance of endogenous peer
group formation." Econometrica, 81: 855-882.
Casciaro, T., F. Gino, and M. Kouchaki
2016 "Learn to love networking." Harvard Business Review, 94: 104-107.
Casciaro, T. and M. S. Lobo
2005 "Competent jerks, lovable fools, and the formation of social networks." Harvard
Business Review, 83: 92-99.
Chatterji, A., S. Delecourt, S. Hasan, and R. M. Koning
2018 "When Does Advice Impact Startup Performance?" Strategic Management Journal,
40: 331-356.
Choudhury, P., D. Wang, N. A. Carlson, and T. Khanna
2019 "Machine learning approaches to facial and text analysis: Discovering CEO oral
communication styles." Strategic Management Journal.
Cohen, W. M. and D. A. Levinthal
1990 "Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation."
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 128-152.
Collins, R.
39

2004 Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cross, R., A. Parker, L. Prusak, and S. P. Borgatti
2001 "Knowing what we know: Supporting knowledge creation and sharing in social
networks." Organizational Dynamics, 30: 100-120.
Cross, R. and R. Thomas
2011 "A smarter way to network." Harvard Business Review, 89: 149-153.
Dahlander, L. and D. A. McFarland
2013 "Ties that last: Tie formation and persistence in research collaborations over time."
Administrative Science Quarterly, 58: 69-110.
De Mel, S., D. J. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff
2009 "Measuring microenterprise profits: Must we ask how the sausage is made?"
Journal of Development Economics, 88: 19-31.
Dutt, N., O. Hawn, E. Vidal, A. Chatterji, A. McGahan, and W. Mitchell
2016 "How open system intermediaries address institutional failures: The case of
business incubators in emerging-market countries." Academy of Management Journal,
59: 818-840.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine
1997 "Africa's growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112: 1203-1250.
Edmondson, A. C.
2012 "Teamwork on the fly." Harvard Business Review, 90: 72-80.
Edmondson, A. C., R. M. Bohmer, and G. P. Pisano
2001 "Disrupted routines: Team learning and new technology implementation in
hospitals." Administrative Science Quarterly, 46: 685-716.
Edmondson, A. C. and Z. Lei
2014 "Psychological safety: The history, renaissance, and future of an interpersonal
construct." Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior,
1: 23-43.
Eisenhardt, K. M. and D. C. Galunic
2000 "Coevolving at last, a way to make synergies work." Harvard Business Review, 78:
91-91.
Feld, S. L.
1981 "The focused organization of social ties." American Journal of Sociology, 86: 10151035.
Field, E., S. Jayachandran, and R. Pande
2010 "Do traditional institutions constrain female entrepreneurship? A field experiment
on business training in India." American Economic Review, 100: 125-129.
Gao, C., T. Zuzul, G. Jones, and T. Khanna
2017 "Overcoming Institutional Voids: A Reputation‐Based View of Long‐Run
Survival." Strategic Management Journal, 38: 2147-2167.
George, G., C. Corbishley, J. N. Khayesi, M. R. Haas, and L. Tihanyi
2016a "Bringing Africa in: Promising directions for management research." Academy of
Management Journal, 59: 377-393.
George, G., R. Kotha, P. Parikh, T. Alnuaimi, and A. S. Bahaj
2016b "Social structure, reasonable gain, and entrepreneurship in Africa." Strategic
Management Journal, 37: 1118-1131.
40

Gibbons, R., R. Henderson, N. Repenning, and J. Sterman
2010 "What do managers do? Suggestive evidence and potential theories about building
relationships." Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Goffman, E.
1967 Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-to-Face Interaction. Chicago, IL: Aldine
Publishing Co.
Golub, B. and M. O. Jackson
2012 "How homophily affects the speed of learning and best-response dynamics."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127: 1287-1338.
Granovetter, M. S.
1973 "The Strength of Weak Ties." American Journal of Sociology, 78: 1360-1380.
Hallen, B. L.
2008 "The causes and consequences of the initial network positions of new organizations:
From whom do entrepreneurs receive investments?" Administrative Science Quarterly,
53: 685-718.
Hallen, B. L. and K. M. Eisenhardt
2012 "Catalyzing strategies and efficient tie formation: how entrepreneurial firms obtain
investment ties." Academy of Management Journal, 55: 35-70.
Hansen, M. T., J. M. Podolny, and J. Pfeffer
2001 "So many ties, so little time: A task contingency perspective on corporate social
capital in organizations." In S. M. Gabbay and R. Leenders (eds.), Social capital of
organizations, 18: 21-57: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Hasan, S. and S. Bagde
2015 "Peers and network growth: Evidence from a natural experiment." Management
Science, 61: 2536-2547.
Hasan, S. and R. Koning
2019a "Conversations and idea generation: Evidence from a field experiment." Research
Policy, 48: 103811.
Hasan, S. and R. Koning
2019b "Prior ties and the limits of peer effects on startup team performance." Strategic
Management Journal, 40: 1394–1416.
Hochberg, Y. V., A. Ljungqvist, and Y. Lu
2007 "Whom you know matters: Venture capital networks and investment performance."
Journal of Finance, 62: 251-301.
Homans, G. C.
1961 "Human Behavior: Its Elementary Forms." New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,
Inc.
Huang, K., M. Yeomans, A. W. Brooks, J. Minson, and F. Gino
2017 "It doesn’t hurt to ask: Question-asking increases liking." Journal of personality and
social psychology, 113: 430.
Ibarra, H. and M. Hunter
2007 "How leaders create and use networks." Harvard Business Review, 35: 101.
Ingram, P. and M. W. Morris
2007 "Do people mix at mixers? Structure, homophily, and the “life of the party”."
Administrative Science Quarterly, 52: 558-585.
41

Kacperczyk, A. J.
2013 "Social influence and entrepreneurship: The effect of university peers on
entrepreneurial entry." Organization Science, 24: 664-683.
Katz, D. and R. L. Kahn
1978 The Social Psychology of Organizations. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Kellogg, K. C., W. J. Orlikowski, and J. Yates
2006 "Life in the trading zone: Structuring coordination across boundaries in
postbureaucratic organizations." Organization Science, 17: 22-44.
Khanna, T. and K. G. Palepu
2010 Winning in Emerging Markets: A Road Map for Strategy and Execution.
Cambridge: MA: Harvard Business Press.
Kim, P. H. and M. Li
2014 "Seeking assurances when taking action: Legal systems, social trust, and starting
businesses in emerging economies." Organization Studies, 35: 359-391.
Kleinbaum, A. M., T. E. Stuart, and M. L. Tushman
2013 "Discretion within constraint: Homophily and structure in a formal organization."
Organization Science, 24: 1316-1336.
Kogut, B. and U. Zander
1996 "What firms do? Coordination, identity, and learning." Organization Science, 7:
502-518.
Krackhardt, D. and J. R. Hanson
1993 "Informal networks." Harvard Business Review, 71: 104-111.
Kuhn, K. M. and T. L. Galloway
2015 "With a little help from my competitors: Peer networking among artisan
entrepreneurs." Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 39: 571-600.
Kuwabara, K., C. A. Hildebrand, and X. Zou
2018 "Lay Theories of Networking: How Laypeople’s Beliefs About Networks Affect
Their Attitudes Toward and Engagement in Instrumental Networking." Academy of
Management Review, 43: 50-64.
Lee, M. Y., M. A. Mazmanian, and L. Perlow
2019 "Fostering Positive Relational Dynamics in Teams: The power of spaces and
interaction scripts." Academy of Management Journal.
Luke, N. and K. Munshi
2006 "New roles for marriage in urban Africa: Kinship networks and the labor market in
Kenya." Review of Economics and Statistics, 88: 264-282.
Marquis, C. and M. Raynard
2015 "Institutional strategies in emerging markets." Academy of Management Annals, 9:
291-335.
McFarland, D. A., D. Jurafsky, and C. Rawlings
2013 "Making the connection: Social bonding in courtship situations." American Journal
of Sociology, 118: 1596-1649.
McFarland, D. A., J. Moody, D. Diehl, J. A. Smith, and R. J. Thomas
2014 "Network ecology and adolescent social structure." American Sociological Review,
79: 1088-1121.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff

42

2013 "What are we learning from business training and entrepreneurship evaluations
around the developing world?" World Bank Research Observer, 29: 48-82.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff
2018 "Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing Countries." Management
Science, 63: 2967-2981.
McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook
2001 "Birds of a feather: Homophily in social networks." Annual Review of Sociology,
27: 415-444.
Nanda, R. and T. Khanna
2010 "Diasporas and domestic entrepreneurs: Evidence from the Indian software
industry." Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 19: 991-1012.
Neace, M. B.
1999 "Entrepreneurs in emerging economies: Creating trust, social capital, and civil
society." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 565: 148-161.
O'Reilly III, C. A. and K. H. Roberts
1974 "Information filtration in organizations: Three experiments." Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 11: 253-265.
Paluck, E. L.
2011 "Peer pressure against prejudice: A high school field experiment examining social
network change." Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47: 350-358.
Papke, L. E. and J. M. Wooldridge
2008 "Panel data methods for fractional response variables with an application to test
pass rates." Journal of Econometrics, 145: 121-133.
Peng, Y.
2004 "Kinship networks and entrepreneurs in China’s transitional economy." American
Journal of Sociology, 109: 1045-1074.
Pierce, L. and J. A. Snyder
2017 "The historical slave trade and firm access to finance in Africa." Review of
Financial Studies, 31: 142-174.
Piezunka, H. and L. Dahlander
2019 "Idea rejected, tie formed: organizations’ feedback on crowdsourced ideas."
Academy of Management Journal, 62: 503-530.
Ranganathan, A.
2018 "The artisan and his audience: Identification with work and price setting in a
handicraft cluster in Southern India." Administrative Science Quarterly, 63: 637-667.
Reagans, R., E. Zuckerman, and B. McEvily
2004 "How to make the team: Social networks vs. demography as criteria for designing
effective teams." Administrative Science Quarterly, 49: 101-133.
Reagans, R. E. and E. W. Zuckerman
2008 "Why knowledge does not equal power: The network redundancy trade-off."
Industrial and Corporate Change, 17: 903-944.
Renzulli, L. A., H. Aldrich, and J. Moody
2000 "Family matters: Gender, networks, and entrepreneurial outcomes." Social Forces,
79: 523-546.
Rivera, M. T., S. B. Soderstrom, and B. Uzzi

43

2010 "Dynamics of dyads in social networks: Assortative, relational, and proximity
mechanisms." Annual Review of Sociology, 36: 91-115.
Rollag, K.
2015 "Managing Yourself Succeed in New Situations." Harvard Business Review, 93:
112–115.
Ruef, M., H. E. Aldrich, and N. M. Carter
2003 "The structure of founding teams: Homophily, strong ties, and isolation among US
entrepreneurs." American Sociological Review: 195-222.
Saxenian, A.
1990 "Regional networks and the resurgence of Silicon Valley." California Management
Review, 33: 89-112.
Shane, S. and D. Cable
2002 "Network ties, reputation, and the financing of new ventures." Management
Science, 48: 364-381.
Simon, H. A.
1991 "Bounded rationality and organizational learning." Organization Science, 2: 125134.
Small, M. L.
2009 Unanticipated Gains: Origins of Network Inequality in Everyday Life. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Sorenson, O., J. W. Rivkin, and L. Fleming
2006 "Complexity, networks and knowledge flow." Research Policy, 35: 994-1017.
Srivastava, S. B., A. Goldberg, V. G. Manian, and C. Potts
2017 "Enculturation trajectories: Language, cultural adaptation, and individual outcomes
in organizations." Management Science, 64: 1348-1364.
Stuart, T. E. and W. W. Ding
2006 "When do scientists become entrepreneurs? The social structural antecedents of
commercial activity in the academic life sciences." American Journal of Sociology, 112:
97-144.
Stuart, T. E. and O. Sorenson
2007 "Strategic networks and entrepreneurial ventures." Strategic Entrepreneurship
Journal, 1: 211-227.
Tushman, M. L.
1978 "Technical communication in R & D laboratories: The impact of project work
characteristics." Academy of Management Journal, 21: 624-645.
Tushman, M. L.
1979 "Managing communication networks in R&D laboratories." Sloan Management
Review, 20: 37.
Tushman, M. L. and R. Katz
1980 "External communication and project performance: An investigation into the role of
gatekeepers." Management Science, 26: 1071-1085.
Uzzi, B.
1996 "The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance of
organizations: The network effect." American Sociological Review: 674-698.
Uzzi, B. and S. Dunlap
2005 "How to build your network." Harvard Business Review, 83: 53.
44

Vissa, B.
2011 "A matching theory of entrepreneurs' tie formation intentions and initiation of
economic exchange." Academy of Management Journal, 54: 137-158.
Vissa, B.
2012 "Agency in action: Entrepreneurs' networking style and initiation of economic
exchange." Organization Science, 23: 492-510.
Weber, R. A. and C. F. Camerer
2003 "Cultural conflict and merger failure: An experimental approach." Management
Science, 49: 400-415.
World Bank
2018 Doing Business: Togo. Washington, D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Yenkey, C. B.
2015 "Mobilizing a market: Ethnic segmentation and investor recruitment into the
Nairobi Securities Exchange." Administrative Science Quarterly, 60: 561-595.
Zenger, T. R. and B. S. Lawrence
1989 "Organizational demography: The differential effects of age and tenure distributions
on technical communication." Academy of Management Journal, 32: 353-376.
Zuckerman, E. W. and S. V. Sgourev
2006 "Peer capitalism: Parallel relationships in the US economy." American Journal of
Sociology, 111: 1327-1366.

45

FIGURES AND TABLES

Figure 1. Communication Practices Increase Information Exchange

The kernel density plots above compare the number of words written by
entrepreneurs in the control and treatment groups. For entrepreneurs in the control
group (blue solid line), the density is much higher at lower numbers of words,
indicating that most entrepreneurs wrote fewer than 20 words when describing their
exchanges with peers. By comparison, the density plot for entrepreneurs in the
treatment group (red dashed line) is shifted to the right, with a median near 50
words, indicating that in general these entrepreneurs had more to describe after an
interactions with peers.

46

Figure 2. Communication Practices Increase Relationship Formation

The kernel density plots above compare the number of relationships formed by
entrepreneurs in the control group and in the communication practices treatment
group. Relationships are measured six weeks after the completion of the training
program. The density plot for entrepreneurs in the control group (blue solid line) is
skewed to the left and peaks at about one relationship formed, while the plot for
those in the treatment group (red dashed line) is shifted to the right of control group
and peaks at about two relationships formed, indicating that entrepreneurs in the
treatment formed more new relationships.

47

Figure 3. Communication Practices Increased Profitability

The kernel density plots above compare the logged profits in the last month earned by
entrepreneurs in the control group and the treatment group, measured six months after the
training program finished. The distribution of the profits for entrepreneurs in the treatment
group (red dashed line) is shifted to the right of the distribution of profits for entrepreneurs in
the control group (blue solid line).

48

Table 1. Structure of Two-hour Presentation
Step Duration
1
20 minutes

Content
Information sharing: Taught how to ask questions and give advice. Learning
to communicate with others by asking about others’ business activities,
struggles, challenges; offering advice based on own experience; sharing
common experiences; sharing insight and lessons.

2

20 minutes

Identifying complementary others: Taught about reflecting on others. Involved
identifying whom to connect with; emphasizing alters that the actor doesn’t
frequently have occasion to meet; initiating contact.

3

20 minutes

Sustaining communication: Taught how to follow up after initial interactions.
The focus was on creating opportunities to reconnect, exchanging contact
information; following up with contacts; the benefits of repeated contact.

4

1 hour

Case study and questions: Examples of asking questions and giving advice,
identifying alters with complementary information, and following up. Case
discussion and commentary. Description of practical steps: how to talk to new
people, reaching out, following up. Questions and answers.

49

Table 2. Summary Statistics and Bivariate Correlations
Mean

S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

1

Cooperative
perception of
interactions

2.691

0.928

2

Information
exchange

30.872

23.929

0.004

3

Num. of
relationships
formed

1.983

1.704

0.062

0.134

4

Skill
complementarity

0.155

0.300

0.048

0.126

0.122

5

Ethnic
concentration

0.833

0.256

-0.037

-0.134

-0.382

-0.070

6

Profits at baseline
(log)

10.695

1.958

0.007

-0.111

-0.133

0.099

0.077

7

Communication
practices

0.518

0.500

0.131

0.571

0.229

0.134

-0.170

-0.135

8

Ewe ethnicity

0.781

0.414

-0.008

0.099

0.188

0.039

0.031

0.042

0.015

9

Female

0.355

0.479

0.057

0.021

0.042

-0.089

-0.005

-0.134

0.059

-0.083

10

Completed
primary school

0.748

0.435

-0.076

-0.022

-0.001

-0.085

-0.108

-0.069

-0.107

-0.112

0.006

11

Employees (log)

1.701

3.361

-0.054

-0.052

-0.105

-0.084

0.105

0.276

-0.023

-0.049

-0.060

-0.047

12

Firm age

10.590

7.649

0.002

0.070

0.095

0.108

0.096

0.085

0.113

0.234

0.019

-0.410

0.090

13

Management
practices score

0.577

0.266

0.004

0.040

0.065

0.189

0.023

0.275

0.033

0.077

0.017

-0.126

0.298

0.261

14

Class size

23.465

2.777

0.084

0.297

0.123

-0.092

-0.035

-0.178

0.397

0.057

0.076

-0.013

-0.152

-0.001

13

-0.114

* N = 301 except for profits at baseline, which has an N of 273. This is because 28 participants had not tallied revenue and costs before the
baseline survey.

50

Table 3. Negative Binomial Regressions Show Communication Practices Increase
Entrepreneurs’ Cooperative Perceptions and the Amount of Information Exchanged
Cooperative perception
(1)
(2)
Communication practices
Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size
Sector fixed effects
Likelihood ratio χ²
N

Information exchange
(3)
(4)

0.098*
(0.044)

1.012**
(0.260)

-0.016
(0.055)
0.072
(0.041)
-0.061
(0.046)
-0.003
(0.007)
0.000
(0.003)
0.057
(0.079)
0.013*
(0.007)

-0.012
(0.053)
0.072
(0.040)
-0.049
(0.044)
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.048
(0.071)
0.006
(0.007)

0.069
(0.114)
-0.013
(0.089)
0.022
(0.112)
-0.002
(0.017)
0.003
(0.007)
0.124
(0.182)
0.118
(0.061)

0.081
(0.095)
-0.074
(0.115)
0.121
(0.081)
0.004
(0.014)
-0.008
(0.009)
-0.037
(0.219)
0.051
(0.043)

Yes
39.580**

Yes
152.570**

Yes
24.950**

Yes
77.510**

301

301

303

303

All models estimated using negative binomial regression. The outcome variable in Models 1 and 2 is the
number of cooperative words selected by each participant to describe interactions. The outcome variable in
Models 3 and 4 is the number of words written by individual participants during the networking session,
during which they spoke to three randomly selected peer entrepreneurs. Constant estimated in each model
but not shown. Robust standard errors clustered at the training-class level in parentheses. ** p<0.01, *
p<0.05

51

Table 4. Regressions Show Communication Practices Increase the Number of Relationships
Formed, Increase the Proportion of Relationships Formed that are Skill-Complementary, and
Reduce the Level of Ethnic Concentration in Relationships Formed
Relationships
formed
(1)
(2)

Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size

Sector fixed effects
Wald χ²
N

(3)

0.360*
(0.155)

Communication practices

Ewe ethnicity

Skill complementarity
(4)

Ethnic concentration
(5)

1.036*
(0.417)

(6)
-0.870**
(0.178)

0.373**
(0.116)
-0.044
(0.158)
0.043
(0.142)
-0.020
(0.020)
0.005
(0.004)
0.228
(0.252)
0.027
(0.022)

0.372**
(0.116)
-0.010
(0.155)
0.074
(0.138)
-0.022
(0.020)
0.003
(0.004)
0.214
(0.253)
-0.002
(0.026)

0.206
(0.321)
-1.633
(1.122)
-0.138
(0.368)
-0.172**
(0.051)
0.017*
(0.008)
1.642**
(0.525)
-0.092
(0.048)

0.220
(0.340)
-1.495
(0.973)
-0.031
(0.377)
-0.187**
(0.051)
0.012
(0.011)
1.596**
(0.521)
-0.177**
(0.045)

-0.038
(0.247)
-0.336
(0.482)
-0.536**
(0.193)
0.093*
(0.038)
0.000
(0.011)
-0.214
(0.465)
-0.009
(0.050)

-0.053
(0.258)
-0.407
(0.390)
-0.656**
(0.219)
0.102*
(0.042)
0.006
(0.010)
-0.212
(0.445)
0.060
(0.042)

Yes
42.14**

Yes
56.45**

Yes
190.06**

Yes
200.40**

Yes
515.39**

Yes
432.68**

301

301

301

301

301

301

Models 1 and 2 are estimated using negative binomial regressions. The outcome variable in these models is the
number of peer business relationships to other participants from the same class that each entrepreneur formed six
weeks after the training program. The remaining models in the table were estimated using fractional logit
regressions. The outcome variable in Models 3 and 4 is the proportion of all relationships formed that exhibit
skill complementarity. The outcome variable in Models 5 and 6 is the Herfindahl index of concentration among
ethnic groups of the relationships formed. Constant is estimated in all models but not reported. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the training-class level, are in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

52

Table 5. Fixed Effects Regressions Show Communication Practices Increase
Entrepreneurs’ Profits in the Last Month
(1)
(2)
Communication practices X Post-treatment period
Post-treatment period
Communication practices
Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size
Entrepreneur fixed effects
Sector fixed effects
Survey wave fixed effects
F-statistic
N

0.553*
(0.265)
-0.143
(0.199)
-0.467
(0.273)

0.671*
(0.281)
-0.078
(0.214)

0.295
(0.211)
-0.223
(0.184)
-0.047
(0.180)
0.089*
(0.039)
0.007
(0.011)
0.945**
(0.276)
-0.053
(0.030)
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

4.930**

3.690*

812

812

The outcome variable in both models is entrepreneurs’ logged profits during the last month.
The post-treatment period is an indicator variable for the survey waves after the treatment
was administered. Three survey waves are included in these analyses, the baseline, first
follow-up six weeks after the training, and second follow-up six months after the training.
Robust standard errors clustered at the training-class level are in parentheses. ** p<0.01, *
p<0.05

53

Appendix
The value of communication:
Evidence from a field experiment with entrepreneurs in Togo

54

APPENDIX A: Togo, qualitative data, and field experimental procedures
Togo
Togo is a small country in West Africa, with a population of approximately seven million
people, about two million of whom reside in the capital Lomé. It is bordered on the west by
Ghana, on the east by Benin, and on the north by Burkina Faso, to the south it rests on the Gulf
of Guinea. As a former French colony, the main language for business is French. Togo became
an independent country in 1960, but since then it has been largely isolated from the international
community due to the dictatorial political regime and the human rights abuses the regime has
committed. This has changed since 2005, when a new president was elected, which has in turn
led to a decade of slow but steady economic growth. Despite this progress, Togo remains an
income poor country. In terms of per capita income at purchasing power parity it ranks 207th of
216 countries (World Bank, 2018). Similarly, the UN’s Human Development Index (2017) ranks
Togo 166th of 188 countries. Over 54 percent of the population lives under the poverty line of
$1.90 per day and the mean years of schooling for inhabitants is 4.7 years (United Nations
Development Programme, 2017).
Togo is made up of multiple ethnic groups. The majority ethnic group in the south of the country
is the Ewe group, whereas in the north it is the Kabiye group. Beyond these two main groups
there are also significant populations of the Ana, Yoruba, and Kotokoli ethnic groups.
Qualitative data on entrepreneurs in Togo
During three trips to Lomé between 2015 and 2017 one of the authors conducted 47 semistructured interviews with local entrepreneurs, each of which lasted between 30 and 90 minutes.
Interviews included entrepreneurs at every stage of growth, from recently launched to several
decades in business. The distribution of interviews was 17 micro businesses, 18 small businesses,
and 12 medium businesses. The sample of entrepreneurs also covered a diverse array of sectors,
including food processing, construction, clothing manufacturing, and electronics.
To build the sample the author used a staggered referral approach (Small, 2009). The starting
point were several local nonprofit associations whose social mission was the promotion of
entrepreneurship. From there, he increased the sample by asking interviewees for suggestions of
other entrepreneurs to approach. This approach was appropriate in this context because there
were no public listings of businesses in Lomé and experienced entrepreneurs rarely trusted
strangers enough to grant interviews without an introduction from someone they know. As a
result, this approach was successful in completing a substantial number of interviews.
The author used a grounded theory approach in their interviews (Charmaz, 2014). They began
with general questions about what entrepreneurs felt were significant challenges in doing
business in Togo and what they feel were important ways of overcoming those challenges. At the
outset we were agnostic as to the specific challenges that entrepreneurs faced and the ways in
which they might approach overcoming them. However, after the first few interviews a pattern
quickly emerged around the formation of new business relationships. Specifically, it emerged
that forming relationships was a complex process for entrepreneurs. Many complained about
feeling isolated and having to manage the difficulties of doing business in Togo alone. Probing
55

further on this theme revealed that entrepreneurs were largely aware of the value of peer
relationships to other entrepreneurs, but they often struggled with connecting with new
acquaintances. As a result, their portfolios of relationships were highly concentrated among
family, neighbors, and childhood friends. Talking to entrepreneurs revealed that the process of
connecting was often sidetracked because they were unable to get to the point where they could
talk about their businesses or develop a foundation of mutual respect and trust. This revealed to
us that there were significant communication problems between entrepreneurs who previously
did not know each other. There was a need to structure the communication process in a way that
would enable entrepreneurs to get to talking about their businesses, their opportunities, and their
challenges. This formed a significant insight into thinking about this field experiment and
designing the intervention.
Field experimental procedures
The setting for the field experiment was the business training program “Marketing in Action.”
The offices of the business training program were based in the suburb of Kegue, in Lomé. At
these offices, we registered all participants between the first and thirty-first of March 2017. The
first group of participants began their training on April 3rd 2017 and the last group finished their
training on May 18th. After the end of the training program the offices remained open for several
months in case any of the participants had questions or comments.
One author was present during the entirety of the training program in order to ensure that the
registration of participants, the randomization into the treatment, the teaching of the program,
and the discussion of communication practices were done correctly. In addition to the author,
there were three full-time employees: one administrative assistant and two instructors. The
administrative assistant helped manage the registration process and organize the teaching space
during the training. The two instructors were consultants from Lomé, who had previously taught
similar training programs to Togolese entrepreneurs at the local university and in programs
organized by the World Bank. The instructors were intimately familiar with the teaching material
and how to convey them appropriately to local entrepreneurs. Finally, to help with the
recruitment of participants, three local university students were hired to walk through the main
business districts of Lomé and advertise the training program to business owners. In addition to
this canvassing, we also advertised the training program to local entrepreneurs through a number
of local nonprofits, incubators, business associations, facebook pages, and WhatsApp groups.
The canvassing and advertising produced 326 registrants into the training program.
Data collection was built around four different time points in the field experiment. A pretreatment survey was administered as individuals arrived to the first day of the training
programs. At the end of the second day of the training program, participants were given a
training program exit survey, which included questions related to their experience during the
training program, their interactions with others, and a word-map for the word selection exercise.
The third data collection point occurred six weeks after the training program, between May and
June 2017. Instructors followed-up in person with the participants to survey them at the location
of their business. It was important for the instructors to survey them and not a third party because
there was an important bond of trust between the instructors and participants, which makes the
answers to the survey more accurate and reliable. Instructors were able to follow-up with 303
participants of the 316 who completed the training. Finally, the last point of data collection was
56

the second follow-up survey, which took place six months after the training program, from
November to December, 2017. Instructors were able to survey 301 of 303 participants in the
second follow-up survey. Figure A1, below, shows the geographic distribution of the 301
entrepreneur participants across the city of Lomé that completed the training program and the
follow-up surveys. It is worth noting that the broad canvassing and online advertising produced a
geographically diverse set of participants.
Figure A1: Approximate geographic location of study participants

57

APPENDIX B: Balance Test
To test the balance of our randomization we ran a series of logit regressions, which are presented
in Table B1. In each model the treatment, a binary variable indicating whether an entrepreneur
was exposed to the communication practices treatment, is regressed on variables that capture
entrepreneur and business characteristics. Models 1 to 7 test each characteristic on its own, while
Model 8 tests all variables simultaneously. None of the coefficients in any of the models are
statistically significant at conventional levels. This indicates that none of the entrepreneurs’ or
their businesses’ characteristics are associated with receiving the treatment and that therefore the
randomization of the treatment was successful, producing balanced control and treatment groups.
Table B1: Balance tests checking if pre-treatment entrepreneur characteristics predict whether
the entrepreneurs ends up in the communication practices treatment arm.
(1)
Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size

0.136
(0.402)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.204
(0.415)
0.320
0.098
(0.237)
(0.165)
-0.628
-0.444
(0.432)
(0.447)
-0.027
-0.030
(0.073)
(0.053)
0.043
0.038
(0.037)
(0.031)
0.504
0.650
(1.035)
(0.716)
0.368
0.380
(0.257) (0.263)

N
301
301
301
301
301
301
301
301
All models are estimated using logit regressions. The outcome variable in all models is a binary indicator
of whether the entrepreneur received the treatment of communication practices. A constant is estimated in
each model but not shown. Robust standard errors clustered at the training class level are in parentheses.
** p<0.01, * p<0.05

58

APPENDIX C: Interpreting performance effects
The graphical interpretation of performance effects can be difficult. In our study we plotted the
difference in business performance between the control group and the treatment group using a
kernel density plot in Figure 3. What is noteworthy about the plot is that the entire distribution of
profits is shifted to the right, which means that entrepreneurs at every earnings level increased
their performance. This represents a large substantive shift in performance, which, however,
translates into only slight graphical changes. To help interpret our Figure 3, it helps to refer to
the equivalent plot published in Cai and Szeidl (2017), reproduced here below in Figure C1. This
plot contrasts the performance of their control and treatment groups at the end of their field
experiment, where the treatment increased businesses’ performance by 8.1 percent. As can be
seen in Figure C1, the visual difference in the distribution of profits for treatment and control is
relatively small, yet, as in our case, the substantive effect was large.
Figure C1: Kernel density of log sales (Cai and Szeidl 2017, 1246)

59

APPENDIX D: Validating skill complementarity using simulations
A potential concern with our results is that the treatment led to more skill complementary simply
a byproduct of entrepreneurs forming more relationships. To show that the observed increases in
skill complementarity in entrepreneurs’ relationships in the treatment group are driven by the
communication practices and not by the fact that they form more new relationships we ran a
series of simulations. The simulation is meant to show what entrepreneurs’ levels of skill
complementarity would be if they were randomly forming relationships with others in their
training class but still forming the same number of relationships. This allows us to rule out the
possibility that our treatment did not change the types of people sought out as advice partners.
Our simulation begins with the real data we gathered on participating entrepreneurs. For each
entrepreneur we know the number of business relationships they formed and the co-participants
they formed them with. For the simulation, we take each entrepreneur and the number of
relationships they formed and we direct these to a new set of randomly selected co-participants
from within their training class. For each such simulation, we estimate the difference between the
treated entrepreneurs and the control group entrepreneurs. We repeat this simulation process
2,000 times and this produces a distribution of values for the difference between the simulated
control and treatment groups. In the actual data, the difference between the treatment group and
the control group for skill complementarity was positive. If this was driven by non-random
matching, we should not observe the same magnitude of difference between the control and
treatment group in levels of skill complementarity.
Figure D1 plots the distribution of the simulated values of the difference between control and
treatment groups in the skill complementarity of entrepreneurs’ relationships. The vertical
dashed line shows the observed difference in task complementarity between the treatment and
control groups. As the figure shows, all the simulated values are substantially below the observed
value and near zero. The mean value of the difference in skill complementarity for the simulated
data are not statistically different from zero.

60

Figure D1: Simulated and observed difference between control and treatment group in
proportion of skill complementary relationships

Observed difference

61

APPENDIX E: Estimating models using linear regression
In Tables E1 and E2 we replicate our results from Tables 3 and 4 in the paper using ordinary
least squares (OLS) regressions in place of the negative binomial and fractional logit regressions.
Replicating the results using OLS helps show that the key results of the paper are not model
dependent and therefore more robust.
The coefficients in Tables E1 and E2 replicate closely the results in Tables 3 and 4 respectively.
The coefficient signs and levels of statistical significance are comparable, as are the
interpretations of their magnitudes.

Table E1: OLS regressions explaining the number of cooperative words chosen and the amount
of information exchanged
Cooperative perceptions
Information exchange
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Communication practices
Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size
Sector fixed effects
F-statistic
N

0.265*
(0.125)

26.849**
(3.912)

-0.044
(0.157)
0.198
(0.115)
-0.173
(0.135)
-0.010
(0.021)
0.000
(0.010)
0.159
(0.223)
0.036
(0.019)

-0.035
(0.150)
0.196
(0.113)
-0.140
(0.129)
-0.008
(0.020)
-0.002
(0.010)
0.136
(0.200)
0.017
(0.018)

1.136
(3.284)
-0.811
(2.805)
-0.628
(3.754)
-0.268
(0.492)
0.170
(0.166)
4.966
(5.050)
2.589
(1.305)

2.035
(2.614)
-0.956
(2.215)
2.686
(2.563)
-0.120
(0.453)
-0.047
(0.135)
2.649
(4.606)
0.669
(0.646)

Yes
0.84*

Yes
1.07**

Yes
2.67**

Yes
10.05**

301

301

301

301

All models estimated using OLS. The outcome variable in Models 1 and 2 is the number of cooperative
words selected by each participant to describe interactions. The outcome variable in Models 3 and 4 is
the number of words written by each participant during the networking session, during which they
spoke to three randomly selected peer entrepreneurs. Constant estimated in each model but not shown.
Robust standard errors clustered at the training class level in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

62

Table E2: OLS regressions estimating the number of relationships formed, proportion of
relationships formed that are skill complementary, and ethnic concentration of relationships
formed
Relationships
Skill
Ethnic
formed
complementarity
concentration
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Communication practices
Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size
Sector fixed effects
F-statistic
N

0.678**
(0.196)

0.109*
(0.048)

-0.108**
(0.028)

0.599**
(0.220)
-0.109
(0.509)
0.081
(0.244)
-0.036
(0.042)
0.012
(0.014)
0.435
(0.393)
0.053
(0.032)

0.609**
0.026
0.028
-0.004
-0.006
(0.218) (0.033)
(0.034) (0.034) (0.034)
-0.044
-0.098
-0.088
-0.045
-0.055
(0.521) (0.059)
(0.046) (0.068) (0.054)
0.152
-0.022
-0.010 -0.060* -0.071**
(0.243) (0.051)
(0.049) (0.022) (0.024)
-0.041 -0.021** -0.022** 0.012*
0.013*
(0.042) (0.007)
(0.007) (0.005) (0.005)
0.008
0.003*
0.002
0.000
0.001
(0.014) (0.001)
(0.001) (0.002) (0.001)
0.431
0.201*
0.201*
-0.021
-0.020
(0.385) (0.077)
(0.072) (0.067) (0.063)
0.004
-0.012 -0.020** -0.001
0.007
(0.033) (0.006)
(0.004) (0.006) (0.005)

Yes
2.670**

Yes
3.330**

Yes
2.440**

Yes
2.860**

Yes
1.740**

Yes
2.440**

301

301

301

301

301

301

All models are estimated using OLS. The outcome variable in Models 1 and 2 is the number of peer
business relationships to other participants from the same class that each entrepreneur formed six weeks
after the training program. The outcome variable in Models 3 and 4 is the proportion of all relationships
formed that exhibit skill complementarity. The outcome variable in Models 5 and 6 is the Herfindahl index
of concentration among ethnic groups of the relationships formed. Constant is estimated in all models but
not reported. Robust standard errors, clustered at the training class level are in parentheses. ** p<0.01, *
p<0.05

63

APPENDIX F: Estimating models without control variables
Given that the empirical strategy for this paper relies on a randomization of the treatment and
that this randomization was successful according to Table B1, the models estimated in Tables 3,
4, and 5 do not need the inclusion of any control variables. Moreover, the inclusion of control
variables can run the risk of overfitting the regression models. We estimated all the regression
models without the inclusion of any additional control variables, to make sure the results were
not driven by the inclusion of control variables. Tables F1, F2, and F3 replicate Tables 3, 4, and
5 from the paper, respectively. These tables show that the statistical significance and the
substantive importance of the effects do not change with the exclusion of control variables.

Table F1: Regressions explaining the number of cooperative words chosen
and information exchanged without control variables
Cooperative perception Information exchange
(1)
(2)
Communication practices
N

0.108**
(0.040)

1.000**
(0.213)

301

301

Models estimated with negative binomial regressions. The outcome in Model 1 is
the number of cooperative words chosen, while the outcome variable in Model 2 is
the number of words written during the networking session. Robust standard errors
clustered at the training class level in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

Table F2: Regressions estimating the number of relationships formed, proportion
of relationships formed that are skill complementary, and ethnic concentration of
relationships formed without control variables
Relationships
Skill
Ethnic
formed
complementarity concentration
(1)
(2)
(3)
Communication practices

N

0.755*
(0.278)

0.667*
(0.276)

-0.089*
(0.042)

301

301

301

Model 1 is estimated using a negative binomial regression because the outcome variable
is the number of relationships formed. Models 2 and 3 are fractional logit regressions. The
outcome variable in Model 2 is the proportion of relationships formed that are skill
complementary and in Model 3 it is the Herfindahl index of concentration of ethnicities
in new relationships. Robust standard errors clustered at the training class level in
parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

64

Table F3: Difference-in-differences models estimating entrepreneur
profits last month, without control variables
(1)
Communication practices X Post-treatment period
Communication practices
Post-treatment periods
N

0.584*
(0.265)
-0.610**
(0.212)
-0.078
(0.190)
812

The outcome variable is logged profits last month and the regression model
is OLS. Standard errors clustered at the training class level are in
parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

65

APPENDIX G: Alternative measure of tie formation
In Table G1 we replicate the result that exposure to communication practices leads to increases
in the number of peer business relationships formed using an alternative measure of relationship
formation. In Models 1 and 2 of Table 4 of the paper we used the number of co-participant
entrepreneurs that each entrepreneur met up with or spoke to on the phone as an indication of a
relationship. In Table G1 we use the number of business cards that each entrepreneur received by
the end of the training program. Business cards have been used to measure relationship
formation in other studies of entrepreneurs (e.g. see Vissa 2011) and it helps to provide
additional validation of a key outcome in this study. As Table G1 shows, Models 1 and 3 include
the treatment variable, which is positive and statistically significant. It is worth noting that the
sample size is slightly smaller because during the field experiment the handing out of
personalized business cards to participants failed in the first class that was taught, as a result we
lost those observations.

Table G1: Regressions estimating the number of business cards received
(1)
(2)
(3)
Communication practices

0.732**
(0.203)

Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size
N

271

0.624**
(0.163)
0.050
(0.068)
0.067
(0.065)
-0.022
(0.087)
0.019
(0.013)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.188
(0.194)
0.097**
(0.029)

0.044
(0.054)
0.047
(0.069)
0.030
(0.069)
0.019*
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.007)
0.151
(0.165)
0.060*
(0.027)

271

271

The outcome in all models is the number of business cards received from other
participants in the same business training class. The models were estimated using
negative binomial regressions. Robust standard errors clustered at the training
class are in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

66

APPENDIX H: Testing for effects on gender diversity
Research on gender and entrepreneurship has stressed the differences in women entrepreneurs’
ability to form new and diverse business relationships. Given this, a theoretically relevant
dimension of diversity for entrepreneurs’ portfolios of relationships is gender. Since our
experimental treatment is theorized to affect the ethnic diversity of relationships, it is worth
exploring whether it also affects the gender diversity of entrepreneurs’ relationships. Table H1
tests this by estimating the effect of communication practices on the concentration of
entrepreneurs’ new relationships by gender. The effect of the treatment is negative, which aligns
with out theoretical prediction that the treatment should make relationships more diverse.
However, it is not statistically significant. This could be because there were not enough women
entrepreneurs participanting or that gendered cultural beliefs about entrepreneurship are so
deeply entrenched that the treatment was not strong enough to have an effect. In either case, this
is an important question for future research to pursue further.
Table H1: Regressions estimating the effect of
communication practices on the gender diversity of
relationships formed
(1)
Communication practices
Ewe ethnicity
Female
Completed primary school
Employees (log)
Firm age
Management practices score
Class size
N

(2)
-0.217
(0.563)

-0.406
(0.396)
-0.915*
(0.432)
-1.147*
(0.516)
0.046
(0.081)
-0.015
(0.015)
-0.254
(0.448)
-0.182
(0.101)

-0.400
(0.416)
-0.963*
(0.481)
-1.173*
(0.556)
0.047
(0.082)
-0.014
(0.014)
-0.288
(0.427)
-0.166
(0.097)

301

301

All models estimated using fractional logit regressions. The
outcome variable is the gender concentration of the relationships
formed. Constant included but not shown in models. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the training class level.
** p<0.01, * p<0.05

67

APPENDIX I: Presentation slides for the treatment
Below we share the slides that were developed by the instructors and the authors to lead the
discussion on communication practices. We preserve the original French used in the teaching to
avoid potentially ambiguous translations.

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

APPENDIX J: Survey questions
The variables used in our analyses relied on survey questions that were administered to
entrepreneurs participating in the field experiment, as described in Appendix A. Below are the
survey questions that correspond to data used in the construction of variables used in the
analyses for Tables 3, 4, and 5.

1. Entrepreneur gender (“female”)
Q13 Sexe:
m Masculin
m Féminin

2. Ethnic group (“Ewe ethnicity”)
Q14 Quelle langue parlez-vous à la maison?
m Ewe
m Français
m Kabye
m Kotokole
m Autre: |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|

3. Entrepreneur education (“Completed primary school”)
Q16 Quel est votre niveau scolaire?
m Aucune scolarité complète
m École primaire complète (CEPD)
m Collège complet (BEPC)
m Lycée complet (BAC)
m Brevet de technicien supérieur (BTS)
m Licence universitaire
m Master ou Doctorat

4. Year the business was started (“Firm age”)
Q33 En quelle année avez-vous commencé votre entreprise? |__|__|__|__|

5. Employees in entrepreneurs’ business (“Employees (log)”)
Q44 Maintenant, je vais vous poser quelques questions concernant le nombre d'employés travaillant
dans votre entreprise actuellement. (Par emploi à temps plein je veux dire qu'on travaille 8 heures par
jour ou plus.)
Nombre total
Combien d’employés à temps plein avezvous?

|__|__|

Combien d’employés à temps partiel avezvous?

|__|__|

Combien de stagiaire ou apprenti avez-vous
employé?

|__|__|

75

6.

Management practices score items

Q148 Dans les derniers 6 mois avez-vous:
Q50 Visité un de vos concurrents pour voir quel prix ils demandent?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q51 Visité un de vos concurrents pour voir quels produits ils vendent ?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q52 Demandé à vos clients existants s'il y a d'autres produits qu'ils aimeraient que vous vendiez ou
produisiez?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q53 Parlé avec au moins un ancien client pour savoir pourquoi ils ont cessé d'acheter de votre
entreprise?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q54 Demandé à un fournisseur quel produits se vendent bien dans votre secteur?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q57 Au cours des trois derniers mois, avez-vous utilisé une offre spéciale pour attirer des clients?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q56 Au cours des trois derniers mois, avez-vous utilisé une forme de publicité?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q59 Avez-vous fait quelque chose pour mesurer l'efficacité de la publicité?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q58 Au cours des trois derniers mois, avez-vous tenté de négocier avec un fournisseur pour un meilleur
prix sur vos matières premières?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)

76

Q69 Au cours des trois derniers mois, avez-vous comparé le prix ou la qualité offerte par d'autres
fournisseurs à celle de votre fournisseur actuel ?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q66 Est-ce que il y a eu un moment où l'entreprise n'a pas eu assez de stock ou de matières premières
pendant les 3 derniers mois?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q62 Gardez-vous des documents commerciaux écrits?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q61 Enregistrez-vous chaque achat et vente faite par l'entreprise?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q76 Pouvez-vous utiliser vos documents pour voir facilement combien d'argent est disponible à votre
entreprise à tout moment?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q75 Utilisez-vous régulièrement vos documents pour savoir si les ventes d'un produit particulier
augmentent ou diminuent d'un mois à l'autre?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q74 Avez-vous calculé le coût de production de chacun de vos produits principaux?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q73 Savez-vous lesquels de vos produits vous apportent le plus profit par unité?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q72 Avez-vous un budget écrit, qui vous indique combien vous devez payer chaque mois pour le loyer,
l'électricité, l'entretien de l'équipement, le transport, la publicité, et d'autres dépenses de l'entreprise?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q80 Si vous vouliez demander un prêt bancaire, et vous étiez demandé de fournir des documents pour
montrer que vous avez assez d'argent chaque mois pour rembourser un prêt, est-ce que vos documents
vous permettraient de le démontrer à la banque?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)

77

Q79 Examinez-vous la performance financière de votre entreprise et analysez-vous les points à
améliorer chaque mois?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q78 Avez-vous un objectif pour les ventes au cours de la prochaine année?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q77 Est-ce que vous comparez votre performance à cette cible au moins une fois par mois?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q82 Avez-vous fait un budget des coûts auxquels votre entreprise fera face l'an prochain?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q83 Avez-vous fait un compte de résultats?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q131 Avez-vous fait un tableau de flux de trésorerie au cours de l'an passé?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q132 Avez-vous fait un bilan annuel pour l'an passé?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)
Q133 Avez-vous fait l'état de vos résultats / dépenses annuelles?
m Oui (1)
m Non (2)

7. Entrepreneurs’ business performance (“Profits last month, log”)
Q110 Quelle était la valeur de vos bénéfices en FCFA au cours de
La semaine dernière (1)

Le mois dernier (2)

Valeur estimée (1)

78

8. Interactions with co-participants (“Relationship formation”)
Q0.2 Depuis la formation, est-ce que vous avez rencontré des personnes qui ont fait la formation avec vous ?
m Oui
m Non
Q0.3 Si oui, s’il vous plait nommez-les :
Personne 1 |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|
Personne 2 |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|
Personne 3 |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|
Personne 4 |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|
Personne 5 |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|
Personne 6 |__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|__|

9. Cooperative words
S’il vous plaît, encerclez les 5 mots qui décrivent le mieux la formation que nous avons fait :
Concurrence

Rivalité

Connecter

Discuter

Echanges

Abattre

Amitié

Partenariat

Compétition

Rapporter

Collaboration

Bénéfices

Association

Pouvoir

Adversaire

Maximiser

Aider

Eloigner

Communication

Partage

Gagner

Dominer

Alliance

Confiance

79

10. Skill entrepreneur wants to learn (“Skill complementarity”)
Dans l'espace ci-dessous, veuillez décrire une chose que vous aimeriez améliorer dans votre entreprise
au cours des deux prochains mois:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Veuillez choisir s'il s'agit d'un changement dans:
-

Marketing
Comptabilité
Financement
Tenue des dossiers
Recherche de fournisseurs
Achat de stock
Employés et embauche
Planification pour l'avenir

80

REFERENCES
Charmaz, K.
2014 Constructing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Small, M. L.
2009 "How many cases do I need?' On science and the logic of case selection in fieldbased research." Ethnography, 10: 5-38.
United Nations Development Programme
2017 Human Development Indicators: Togo. New York, NY: Human Development
Reports.
World Bank
2018 World Development Indicators. Washington, DC.

81

