"x"
"1" "South  African Marriage in Policy and Practice: A Dynamic Story"
"2" "This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in  South African Review of Sociology  on January 8, 2016, available  online:  http://www.tandfonline.com/ 10.1080/21528586.2015.1100095 ."
"3" "MICHAEL W. YARBROUGH"
"4" "Assistant Professor of Law & Society"
"5" "Department of Po litical Science"
"6" "John Jay College of Criminal Justice, City University of New York"
"7" "524 West 59th Street"
"8" "New York, NY  10019"
"9" "myarbrough@jjay.cuny.edu"
"10" "Research Associate"
"11" "Department of Sociology, Faculty of Humanities"
"12" "University of Johannesburg"
"13" "ABSTRACT"
"14" "Law forms one of the major structural contexts within which family lives play out, yet the precise dynamics connecting these two foundational institutions are still poorly understood. This article  attempts   to  help  bridge this gap by applying  sociolegal  concepts to empirical findings about state law’s role in family, and especially in marriage, drawn from across several decades and disciplines of South Africanist scholarly research. I sketch the broad outlines of a  nuanced  theoretical  approach   for analyzing the law-family relationship, which insists that the relationship entails a contingent and dynamic interplay between relatively powerful regulating institutions  and relatively powerless regulated populations. Accordingly, while my argument broadly distinguishes the more repressive regimes of colonialism and apartheid from the more expansive post-apartheid legal regime, it also partially undoes that  periodisation  by highlighting limits and evasions of repressive law and obstacles impeding access to post-apartheid law’s expansive promises."
"15" "KEYWORDS"
"16" "apartheid ; colonialism;  law and society; marriage;  post-apartheid ;   sociolegal  studies"
"17" "Law and family are among society’s most important institutions, yet the relationship between them is poorly understood. Law’s impact on families can be foundational or negligible, planned or unintended, and any of these can trigger responses that go on to shape the future direction of law. Empirical findings about law and family’s entanglement in South Africa are scattered across the already scattered South Africanist family literature, small asides in arguments focused elsewhere. Yet there are clearly important stories to explore. For example, colonial and apartheid regulation deeply transformed central features of African customary marriage, but never truly won full authority to define its boundaries. Family-related anxieties shaped colonial and apartheid policies far beyond the boundaries of family law, especially around migration and  residence, that  created wrenching hardship for  African,  coloured , and Indian  families—but that were also unevenly implemented and frequently evaded. Post-apartheid law, for its part, boasts one of the globe’s most expansive marriage-recognition regimes—alongside record low marriage rates, marriage now far less common than single motherhood in wide swathes of the country. Law clearly matters—but sometimes, under some conditions, for some people, in varying ways that trigger varying responses."
"18" "The extremes of South Africa’s history make it urgent to understand this relationship.   They also make it potentially illuminating. So self-consciously have family issues animated lawmaking across multiple eras of South African history, and so substantial are the changes wrought under colonial, apartheid, and post-apartheid rule, that South Africa could hold vivid lessons for a broader sociology of the law-family relationship.  Amid the  many social science studies of family that mention law , surprisingly  few   explicitly  theorise   how the two are related .  Most family scholarship  draws on theories  that locate  the prime drive r  of family change in broad macro-historical trends  such as  industrialis ation  or  moderni s ation  (e.g.,  Adams 2010;  Goode  1982) , implying that these trends more or less simultaneously shape both  official  law and everyday family practice .  For example, the essays in Adams and  Trost’s  (2005) comprehensive handbook on family scholarship around the world rarely consider  how law and family relate ; the only chapter to do so at length is  Ziehl’s  (2005) on South Africa.  The more interesting  threads  of  this  scholarship  do  acknowledge law, but  tend   implictly  to  frame  it as the outcome rather than  the cause of everyday practice  (e.g.,  Powell  et al. 201 0 ).  Most sociologists of law, however,  would  suggest  this assumption is insufficient even within liberal democracies where (some) regulated people enjoy at least some formal access to the levers of lawmaking, let alone in colonial or other relatively closed political systems.  Displacing this  simplistic assumption  requires a more robust  cross-subfield  conversation than currently exists between the social science of family and of law ."
"19" "This article attempts to  help  bridge that gap  by gathering together empirical observations and arguments about law’s role in family, especially in marriage, from decades of South Africanist scholarship , and interpreting them through the lens of core  sociolegal  concepts . A comprehensive review would be impossible, but in what follows I gather some suggestive nuggets from the historical, sociological, and anthropological literature in order to sketch a broad  set of baseline theoretical assumptions upon which  empirical questions about the law-family relationship   could  be more productively built. A long the way  I  suggest a few such  empirical  questions  specific to South Africa  that emerge from the literature I consider."
"20" "The baseline assumptions I advocate   conceptualis e  the relationship between law and family  neither   as a monolithic, top-down imposition  of state law onto family practice   nor as a simple filtering up of practice into law,  but instead as a contingent and dynamic interplay between the practices of relatively powerful regulating institutions and relatively powerless  regulated people.  Methodologically, I argue  that the relationship between law and family is best examined from the “ground up,” starting from people’s actual practices rather than from law.  As some  sociolegal  scholars have argued, i f one begins by asking what a law’s impact has been, one risks over-interpreting the evidence of its alleged traces  ( Sarat   1985 ) . Starting from actual practices, by contrast, allows one to focus on people’s experiences of marriage and family in their actual lived contexts, tracing law’s role in helping produce those experiences. This methodological ordering is essential for grasping the full, dynamic interplay between legal regulation and grassroots action. In the South African context, this involves a number of intersecting systems, including not only state law but also customary law—both as administered by the state and  as  actually  practi s ed  on the ground—as well as religious laws. The import of this “legal pluralism,” as  sociolegal  scholars call it, is best captured when avoiding state-centric assumptions  (Griffiths 1986) ."
"21" "Applying this  approach   to South Africa, I advance a series of interrelated arguments. First, I argue that marriage and other family laws have never perfectly achieved their aims, whether the laws in question have taken more restrictive or more expansive approaches. Implementation has often been uneven, relying on a range of actors whose interests and ideologies often conflicted ,  and  repeatedly  producing what  sociolegal  scholars call a “gap” between “the law on the books” and “the law in action”   (Sarat 1985) . Second, law’s uneven consequences have also reflected the range of innovative responses developed by those targeted for regulation, such as the widespread phenomenon among black South Africans of “dual marriages” whose wedding ceremoni es and day-to-day lives frequently combine  African and Western traditions   (Rudwick and Posel 2014; Mbatha 1997) . Finally, I argue that the most consequential laws for the lived reality of marriage have often been not marriage laws  themselves but instead laws governing a wide range of matters including  labo u r , migration, housing, and social grants  (Sachs 1990) . In the sections that follow, these broad argument s unfold across a rough  periodis ation  distinguishing the more repressive regimes of the colonial and apartheid states from the more expansive regime of the post-apartheid period.  T hey  also  partially undo that  periodis ation ,  however,  highlighting  limits and  evasions of colonial and apartheid regulation and the many obstacles  impeding  access to post-apartheid law’s more expansive promises."
"22" "COLONIAL ERA:  CONSTITUTING  STATE AUTHORITY"
"23" "My  analysis begins with the colonial period, which unleashed wrenching upheaval into the family structures of indigenous societies often already reeling from their own political and military struggles. Across regional and ethnic differences, southern African marriages were classically understood as binding to each other not two individua ls but two extended families through  a gradual process completed over time primarily through the payment of lobola and similar practices   (Evans-Pritchard 1931; Dlamini 1984; Gluckman 1950; Kuper 1982) .   In  many s cholarly accounts, marriage was the very  cent r e  of  pre-colonial  African societies, critical to constituting a wide web of key social relations   (Bryant 1949; Guy 1990) . Wage  labour   and Christian missions introduced more individualist trends that transformed marriage’s meanings and began to erode its frequency and stability   (Hunter 2005) . The possibility—eventually, the necessity—of working for wages pulled young African men into a new economic circuit that enabled them to pay their own lobola , an increasing necessity as rural decline undermined their fathers’ cattle-raising capacities   (Hunter 2010; Welsh 1971) . This helped shift power over  marriage from elder to younger generations, and together with missionary ideologies increasingly imbued marriage with connotations of romantic love between two individuals  (Erlank 2000; Hunter 2004, 2005; Meintjes 1990) . In certain respects these trends expanded young  men’s  and women’s autonomy, but they also helped make marriage more difficult. The increasing proportion of lobola paid in cash helped facilitate its inflation   (Welsh 1971) , while those who did marry  increasingly  found their rural homesteads stressed by land  shortages  and the extended absences of migrant  labo u r   (Walker 1990a) ."
"24" "Many of these changes reflected explicit colonist attempts to transform African marriage, whether for moral reasons or to facilitate the availability of young African male  labour   (Essop Sheik 2014; Welsh 1971) . Colonies most directly regulated African family life through their various approaches to what came to be called “customary law,” i.e., governance and dispute resolution practices (claiming to be) based on indigenous traditions   (Bennett 2004; Chanock 1989, 1991; Myers 2008) .  Theophilus  Shepstone famously devised  the Natal C olony’s especially influential intervention, which consigned “natives” to territorial reserves governed by traditional leaders, some newly installed by the Natal government, and  subjected them to  the legal jurisdiction  of customary law  in most matters  (Guy 2013; McClendon 2010; Welsh 1971) . Although Shepstone long argued  that  codifying the substantive content  of customary law would  fossilis e  the previously flexible practices of African societies, he eventually acquiesced, beginning with a  m arriage  law  enacted in 1869. This written  statute  required African wedding ceremonies to include the bride’s public consent and  to  be registered in writing by a colonial or customary official, and it limited to ten the number of cattle transferable for a commoner bride’s lobola (plus one beast for her mother).   State - recognis ed  divorce required a hearing by a native  affairs magistrate. Separate regulations taxed every hut on a homestead  in order to discourage polygyny ,  each wife in a  polygynous  household typically living with her uterine children in her own structure."
"25" "The Shepstone system left clear marks on African marriage in Natal that can be discerned even today. As colonial elites wanted, young men did assume greater control over marriage and, at least at first, begin marrying  more frequently —although this latter trend began to reverse ,  and  marriage  has  generally   declined since   (Hunter 2007; Mhongo and Budlender 2013; Posel, Rudwick and Casale 2011; Posel and Casale 2013) . Ten cows also seems to have quickly become the standard expected lobola amount in many Natal communities, and today many isiZulu-speaking people understand this number as a cultural rather than colonial prescription  (Rudwick and Posel 2014;  Yarbrough n.d. ) . It is not universal, however, and finer-grained research on the timing and reach of its spread could helpfully illuminate the dynamics of the Shepstone system’s instantiation. For example, research on segregation-era Zululand, to which the Natal Native Code  had been  extended  after Natal conquered the Zulu kingdom , documents that some manipulated their commoner/noble status to evade the lobola cap   (MacKinnon 1999) , and similar evasions may have occurred in colonial Natal. At stake here is both a specific historical question about Natal marital regimes and a broader theoretical question about  the relationship between   state law’s enforcement practices and ideological capacities."
"26" "In other respects the Shepstone system’s effects were more complicated. Chief among these  were   gender relations and women’s autonomy. Senior men frequently complained that women and girls were challenging their authority, and  indeed records document many cases  brought by women in  magistrates’ courts. At the same time, h owever, interactions between dif ferent portions of the Shepstone code intensified women’s status as legal minors, for example by placing them under the continued guardianship of their ex-husbands  (Essop Sheik 2014) . There is still much work to do to precisely trace the contours of African women’s autonomy during this time  (Walker 1990b) ."
"27" "The  Cape Colony used a very different approach,  not codifying customary law but granting   magistrates discretion to apply  it . An 1883 Cape Commission  ‘ refused t o ban polygyny and accepted lobol a as a contractual accessory to marriage ’  (Bennett 2004: 189) .  The Transvaal, meanwhile, established a system of magistrates’ courts allowed to apply customary law in civil disputes among A fricans, but refused to  recognis e  customary marriages or lobola ag reements  on grounds that they were   repugnant to  civilis ation  (39). The Orange Free State never adopted comprehensive customary law policies, and customary law’s treatment of marriage varied widely by location (40). This makes research into state law’s impact on family there that much more difficult, but also potentially that much more illuminating if ways can be found to compare similar people’s practices under different legal regimes."
"28" "It  was not just family law that reshaped African marriage, but also a range of laws addressed to other matters. The wage-paying jobs, for example, that enabled young men to pay their own lobola rested upon bodies of  labo u r , property, and tax law at the core of the colonial project  (Marks and Rathbone 1983b: 12) . Or consider Jo  Beall’s   (1990)  work on Indian indentured  labo u rers  in colonial Natal. Indian law required that for every 100 men leaving for a colon y, 40 women must accompany them . Although married women were entitled to accommodation and rations without working,  ‘ marriage by Indian religious rites was n ot  recognised  in colonial Natal’  (152). These intersections of immigration,  labo u r , and  marriage law made Indian women ‘ultra-exploitable’  (146) by employers and husbands alike."
"29" "Many  of these examples highlight the full question at stake for the colonial period: not only how colonial state law transformed marriage but also how those transformations helped instantiate state law’s authority as a defining feature of the social landscape   (Merry 2000) . New arrivals on the scene, colonial states and their legal systems could increase compliance using violent enforcement, but that alone would not entrench  authority in the eyes of  colonis ed  African peoples. Indeed, the co lonies’ various ways of  recognis ing  customary law were all attempts to extend colonial authority by co-opting existing indigenous systems into the colonial apparatus   (Erlank 2003; McClendon 2002; Welsh 1971; see also Berry 1992) . The project effectively attempted to borrow the authority enjoyed by a few persistent  customary practices to  legitimis e  an overall system whose content departed in many respects from pre - colonial realities.  Some, especially those disadvantaged in existing customary power relations, turned to colonial courts as a resource in disputes.  While they often lost their cases, each observed verdict  built colonial authority  out  across the landscape  bit by bit . In short, colonial law did not only transform African marriage. African marriage also helped transform and consolidate colonial law."
"30" "That  growing authority is reflected in the fact that much of the work cited above relies primarily on records of colonial bureaucracies and courts. A key difficulty for scholarship on this period is that little written evidence exists, and colonial records are among the few sources able to fill this gap. This is especially true for family matters, which composed a large disproportion of customary law’s jurisdiction.  Historians have used court records   to  help illuminate the  perspectives of those  marginalis ed  by race, gender, and class, court testimony representing some of the few written traces we have of such perspectives   (McClendon 1995) . And of course such  records are especially important as documents of the actual operation of colonial state power. Yet they also have profound limitations. Of particular importance to this article: Court disputes represent only a tiny fraction of social life. Most disputes d o not make it to official forums  (McClendon 2002: 28) , and the great bulk of social action involves more ( superficial , at least) consensus than dispute. An important strand of  sociolegal  scholarship focuses on the ways law and society “mutually constitute” each other, helping to form the unstated assumptions undergirding social action in a particular  historical moment  (Ewick and Silbey 1998; Sarat and Kearns 2009) . Court records  open  at best a partial window into such questions,  tending to  emphasis e  that which is  contested  more  than assumed. A full appreciation of colonial law’s  reconstitution of  African marriage thus requires new data and methodologies extending beyond court records."
"31" "SEGREGATION  AND APARTHEID  ERA S : URBANISATION AND  ‘BREAKDOWN’"
"32" "Military and economic struggles produced political unification in 1910, within a broader   context of  industriali s ation  and  urbani s ation . South Africans of all races streamed to cities seeking work, and family instability continued to rise. This provoked widespread concern and some strategic political alliances between, most  importantly,  white state bureaucrats and black traditional leaders ,  w ho both saw strengthening Africa n patriarchal authority as the necessary solution. The Union government  implemented   a range of policies designed to control black movement between urban areas and rural reserves, vesting day-to-day governance over the latter in chiefs and Native Commissioner courts in a new, nationwide customary law system based largely on the Shepstone model. Neither influx control nor customary law managed to stem the  growing numbers of Africans in town, but both left major marks on the family and marriage practices of black South Africans."
"33" "Segregation -era lawmakers saw themselves as confronting a core dilemma: how to make  male  black  labour   available in rapidly  industriali s ing  cities without altering the fundamentally white character of those cities   (Marks and Rathbone 1983a) . Their thinking eventually converged on a segregation strategy constructed primarily through residential and migration law in order to support the emerging institution of migrant  labo u r . A key early legislative component was the 1913 Natives Land Act, which prohibited Africans from owning or renting land outside the reserves and areas earmarked for future reserve expansion   (McClendon 2002) . Reserve land was minimal,  low-quality , and overcrowded, increasingly unable to sustain the agricultural base of African homestead economies even as white industrial employers expected it to perform that function. In town, the presence of black men was regulated by the 1911 Native  Labour  Regulation Act and the 1923 Native (Urban Areas) Act, which elaborated early versions of the infamous “pass system” that would become an apartheid cornerstone and  that  established nationwide frameworks within which municipalities could develop residential segregation policies   (Walker 1990a) . These statutes did not  at that time  apply to women, but many smaller regulations attempted to con trol women’s presence in town,  including municipal policies limiting township housing to single men and married couples   (Posel 1995, 2006) . Out of these laws and a consolidating set of employer practices emerged the migrant  labour   system that would dominate the South African economy for much of the twentieth century."
"34" "This system had complex, wrenching effects for marriage and family. Perhaps the most widespread effect was to remove many husbands and fathers from their families for much of the year, leaving wives as de facto rural household heads but also rendering them vulnerable to  dispossession, especially if widowed or abandoned  (Walker 1990a) . Many fathers remained in rural homes as tenants on white farms, but the progressive implementation of the  Natives  Land Act made rent tenancy illegal and strengthened white farmers’ negotiating power, increasingly pushing such families toward  labour   tenancy  (McClendon 2002) . This system required fathers to  commit  their children, especially sons,  to  farm  labo u r , but their ability to do so eroded as the higher wages of industrial work drew sons to town seeking cash for taxes, lobola payments, and discretionary consumption.  This was  one iteration  of a broader  trend, in which children found opportunities in town to pursue lives and initiate romances outside the strictures of rural kinship."
"35" "Elites, both white and black, grew anxious  about   these changes. Many thought the necessary response was to shore up African patriarchal authority, and opinion eventually coalesced around a  Shepstonian  system of customary law as the tool for doing that  (Bennett 2004; McClendon 1995, 2002; Posel 1995) . The 1927 Native Administration Act (NAA) formally codified a body of customary law applicable to disputes among Africans, and it vested authority for adjudicating those disputes in traditional leaders, now incorporated into and sometimes created by the state,  alongside a nationwide system of Native Commissioner (NC) courts staf fed by white officials.  Authoris ed  to hear appeals from traditional courts as well as original cases, NC courts had more power  than traditional courts  to direct customary law’s actual application, and scholars agree that beginning in the 1930s they tended toward rigid and conservative interpretations  (Bennett 2004; McClendon 2002) . We know less about traditional courts, which did not begin keeping records until the 1950s   (McClendon 2002) ."
"36" "While the NAA extended the core structure of the Shepstone system nationwide, th e provisions aimed at  rationalis ing  customary marriage were never so extended. The NAA di d  authoris e  provinces to create formal registers for customary marriages, but only Natal did so  (Posel 1995) . Customary marriages’ legal fragility was further underlined by their recognition in law as “unions”—pointedly, not “marriages”—and the scattershot selection of purposes for which they were legally enforceable  (Albertyn and Mbatha 2004; Mbatha 2005; Nhlapo 1994) . Most strikingly, a civil marriage, even to a new spouse, completely nullified the legal validity of any existing customary union. The Act specifically allowed the practice of lobola but made no provisions for regulating it or adjudicating lobola disputes. Perhaps its most concrete provision regarding customary marriage was one intended to confirm its patriarchal character: Customarily married wives were deemed minors, unable to represent themselves legally."
"37" "While  this system strengthened the legal basis for African patriarchies, it did little to stem the flow of urban migration. This migration was overwhelmingly male, helping produce  new  practices such as “mine marriages” between older men and younger male “wives” who provided their husbands with household  labour   and sexual companionship until they aged into husband status themselves and took their own wives   ( Achmat 1993;  Epprecht 2004; Moodie 1988) .  Yet women’s urban migration grew at a faster clip than men’s over this period, composed especially of women escaping their disadvantaged rural kinship positions—unmarried, unhappily married, or widowed   (Walker 1990a) . Probably the most widespread consequence of customary marriage’s partial recognition was to dispossess many rural women at the hands of newer “paper wives” married in town under civil law or in-laws able to manipulate marital proof after a husband’s death   (South African Law Commission 1997) . Yet it also provided some unexpected  openings, as women and men sometimes declared themselves customarily married in order to gain access to urban housing. Impossible to prove or disprove, their declarations were usually accepted  (Posel 1995) , and some municipal housing bureaucracies even developed mechanisms for facilitating sudden marriages for this purpose   (Posel 2006) . More broadly, attempts to extend pass laws to women clashed with African men’s desire to control  ‘ their ’  women, a site of tension between the customary law and migration control sides of the segregation regime."
"38" "As  elsewhere in the world, this period also saw major growth in empirical social science research. Anthropologists and sociologists conducted a range of studies on  everyday  South African s,  within which marriage and family  questions  often featured prominently. Responding to the concerns of the day, much of this research was framed around the  ‘ breakdown ’  of family and other social ties. These concerns extended beyond African s , such as in the  Carnegie study of  poor whites   (Willoughby-Herard 2010) . Much of the work on Africans pegged colonialism as the source of such breakdown, but rarely with an explicit focus on law. The driving force was  instead  frequently framed as  ‘ contact ’  with white  cultures  ( e.g.,  Hunter 1933; Wilson 1964)   or  the political economic conditions created by colonial settlement   (Krige 1936) . Moreover, scholars of the time tended towar d uncritical understandings of ‘tradition,’  frequently presenting the norms they identified as pre - colonial in origin without acknowledging the decades of colonial entanglement preceding the research   (e.g., Bryant 1949; Krige 1957) . Using these sources thus requires care, as with the colonial legal documents discussed above. An advantage for this era is that some of its children are still living, and some recent scholars have used oral hi story interviews to  contextualis e  and triangulate colonial documentary evidence   (e.g., Carton 2000; McClendon 2002) . Such multi-methodological approaches are especially invaluable for  understanding the social operation of law, and more such work is urgently needed while it remains possible."
"39" "Many  trends begun under segregation continued into the apartheid era, growing in scale and intensity and producing qualitatively new consequences.  For example, rapid black  urbanis ation  produced a new segment of the population born and raised in town with fewer ties to rural social structures and norms   (Mayer and Mayer 1971) . Massive informal settlements enacted new forms of sociality, physically reproducing both racial domination and a relative freedom from rigid rural kinship relations   (Hickel 2014; Hunter 2010) . African marriage rates continued to decline and the single-mother household became more common   (Posel and Devey 2006) . Rural households, meanwhile, continued to suffer increasing pressures as rural areas transitioned from  labour   reserves into even more peripheral reservoirs of the unemployed. Yet even amid all these transform ations some practices persisted .  These included lobola, by now clearly beginning to take on new meanings yet as fiercely valued as ever  (Haas 1987; Rudwick and Posel 2014; Walker 1992) .  One could see lobola’s persistence as the cornerstone of a broader practice of dual weddings combining an African with a Christian white wedding, by this period the emerging cultural norm among wide swathes of the country’s urban and even rural African populations  (Erlank 2014; Mbatha 1997) ."
"40" "There were few such  hybridities  in law,  which quickly translated apartheid ideology  in to  a series of sexual regulations  beginning with  the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act  of 1949  and the  Immorality  A mendment A ct  of 1950 , which  extended segregation-era prohibitions against interracial sex  (Hoad, Martin and Reid 2005) .  A further amendment to the Immorality Act increased prohibitions against  same-sex  sex   (Cameron 1994) ,  reflecting  the conservative Christian foundations of apartheid ideology   (Retief 1994) . Interestingly, the text of the Marriage  Act of 1961 somewhat  countered  this trend,  authoris ing  marriages under “Mohammedan” and Indian religions. Court decisions invalidated these clauses, however, due to Muslim and Hindu marriages’ potential for polygyny. More work is needed to understand the Marriage Act  in its historical context ,  for ,  together with the just-mentioned court decisions ,   it  formed the constitutive foundations of marriage law throughout most of the apartheid era."
"41" "It  also may be worth exploring possible links between these sexual regulations and a shift in urban residential and planning policy  begun in the segregation era that reached its fullest expression under apartheid . The  colonial   era’s focus on pushing Africans back to reserves was  reluctantly  replaced  in the  segregation  era  with a  slow   acquiescence to  their presence in town,  epitomis ed  by planned township communities  of single-family homes designed  to, among other things, produce nuclear households in the Western model   (Hickel 2014) .   The first such communities emerged in the early 20 th  century,  with the largest established after the National Party took power in 1948. Driven by concerns that informal urban settlements had dangerously upended traditional  kinship  structures, these communities were violently created through forced removals that themselves tore  holes in kinship networks."
"42" "POST-APARTHEID ERA: EXPANSIVE RIGHTS, CONSTRICTING ECONOMIES"
"43" "The instability and diversification of family formations of previous eras has continued in the post-apartheid era, in a context simultaneously defined by expansive liberal rights and acute economic struggle.   Marriage continues to become increasingly rare, and cohabitation more common   (Posel and Rudwick 2014) . Although hard data do not exist, one can safely say  that increasing numbers of South Africans identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, and/or transgender (LGBT) ,  forming  same-sex romances and households   (de Vos 2001 ; Matebeni 2011; Smuts  2011 ) . Female- cent red  households  now  dominate the broader familial landscape, and researchers increasingly speak of “fluid” household structures   (Seekings 2003, 2008; Spiegel 1996) . This diversification reflects  both economic pressures that have made kinship relations difficult for most to maintain and, to varying degrees, a measure of agency to construct those caring relationships one most trusts to help weather those pressures."
"44" "In  law, South Africa’s reckoning with the narrow confines of apartheid marriage law has produced perhaps the globe’s most expansive marital recognition regime. The Recognition of Customary Marriages Act (RCMA) of 1998 extended full state recognition to customary marriages, including  polygynous  marriages   (Albertyn and Mbatha 2004) .  Eight   years the later the Civil Unions Act (CUA) offered state recognition to couples regardless of gender, allowing them to choose either the term “marriage” or “civil partnership”   (Judge, Manion and De Waal 2008) . This statute rests on the constitution’s Equality Clause, the world’s first to prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation   (Berger 2008; Cameron 1993; de Vos 2008; Reddy 2006) ,  and  it  is also the first statute under which clerics of all religions may potentially register to be marriage officers   (Bilchitz and Judge , 2009) . A long-debated Muslim Marriages Bill has yet to be enacted  (Amien 2014) , but dozens of Mu slim imams were recently  deputis ed  as marriage officers under the Marriage Act, for the first time in South African history. Attempts to expand recognition to unmarried partnerships have faltered, however   (Goldblatt 2001) ."
"45" "So far these recognition expansions have generally taken a modular approach, with separate statutes and administrative structures extended to supposedly distinct communities. I have argued that this approach encodes a regime of “gendered multiculturalism” in South African marriage law, officially defining “cultures” in terms of their supposedly characteristic gender relations   ( Yarbrough 2015 )  in a manner that echoes  apartheid ideologies . Yet, while such  ideas are widespread on the ground in South Africa, there is little evidence that the marriage laws  themselves  have helped entrench them. Indeed, each of the statutes appears to have had very different effects. It seems clear that knowledge about the RCMA is rare  (Mamashela 2004; Mbatha 2005;  Yarbrough n.d. ) , while  awareness of the CUA is likely  high—due in part, ironically,  to the c ontroversy around its enactment . Implementation of both has been uneven  (de Souza 2013; Judge, Manion and De Waal 2008) ."
"46" "As  striking as the recognition expansions have been, probably the most consequential domain of post-apartheid family policy has been social grants.  Tens of millions of  South Africans are currently receiving some form of social grant from the government, falling into one or more of three broad categor ies: the elderly, the disabled , and caregivers for minor children. Grandparents and young mothers make up a large proportion of grant recipients, with profound and complicated consequences for family relations. While their access to cash can help bolster their power in households, it can also produce tension   (Dubbeld 2013 ; Mosoetsa 2011 ) .  Many on the ground believe the child grant has discouraged women from marrying   (Naidoo and Misra 2008) . Although there are  many  other social forces  contributing to  that shift,  the belief  has powerful  ideological  consequences  for the social position of young women ."
"47" "One  major excitement of the post-apartheid period is an explosion of research on various dimensions of marriage and family, coming from a range of disciplines and practitioners  and relying on new data sources, including more large-scale survey research . This work often includes observations about law, but as with the family literature more generally there remains a need for greater synthesis of these findings. The legal academy has been an especially important font of social science research on marriage and famil y as they relate to law.  Organis ations  such  as the Centre for Law & Society at the University of Cape Town and the Centre for  Applied   Legal Studies (CALS) at the University of  Witswatersrand  have supported qualitative and sometimes quantitative research into marriage and family practices under systems of customary law   (see, e.g., Claassens 2013; Claassens and Smythe 2013; Goldblatt 2001; Mbatha 1997; Mnisi Weeks 2013) . Ultimately aimed at law ref orm, these studies have  emphasis ed  questions about laws’ impacts and efficacy."
"48" "CONCLUSION"
"49" "That  state law has shaped marriage and family in South Africa cannot be doubted. Law has been both a conduit for broader economic and political forces and exerted its own, relatively autonomous pressures, the latter often in contexts of intra-state contestation  that  muddl e  the coherence of its ideologies and the evenness of its implementation. Another critical factor has been the response of regulated populatio ns, in the forms both of  organis ed  political action and of everyday practice. South Africans have, variously, run to town to flee rural hardship, paid lobola in cash to break parental control over marriage, sued each other for divorce in a range of different  fora , developed a new custom of dual marriage to secure all necessary forms of secular and sacred marital recognition, and litigated a series of cases culminating in a constitutional right to same-sex marriage. Often these responses drew on, or were shaped by, legally pluralist non-state regulatory systems situated in cultural and religious institutions that themselves have been treated very differently in different eras of state law. So ,   although  one cannot deny law’s impact on family,  neither  can one simply assert it as self-evident."
"50" "The contours of the law-family relationship are complex and varied, requiring careful and highly  contextu alis ed  examination.  Such close attention to historical context tends to frustrate  broader arguments about historical continuities and ruptures, yet some key domains for such analysis do emerge even from  this article’s  cursory review. One such domain comprises str uggles over patriarchy and gender relations . From the earliest moments of colonial encounter until today, women have struggled for greater autonomy over their marriage and family relations.  In very broad terms the legal context for these struggles has become more favorable to women  from the onset of colonial rule until today , from colonial Natal regulations that  generally  minimize d  women’s scope of action, through unintended openings created by segregation-era officials’ inability to settle on coherent  urban residence  policies, to the post-apartheid  entrenchment  of constitutional rights to gender equality and social grants programs.  One should not  overinterpret  this general trend, however, as individual women’s positions have radically depended on the conjuncture of highly localized factors. Put more simply: While post-apartheid law is clearly more favorable to women than colonial law, true gender equality remains a frustratingly elusive goal."
"51" "This complexity is related to another, perhaps surprising,  continuity :  t he enduring centrality of “cultural” distinctions in family-related political debates and policy frameworks.  Apartheid governance’s strategic reliance on supposed cultural distinctions between racial and ethnic groups had rendered such notions highly suspect among many in the anti-apartheid struggle, yet such distinctions lived on in various ways in post-apartheid law. These include the continued inclusion of traditional authorities in post-apartheid legal frameworks, an inclusion that has generally expanded over time. As I write this, the  Zuma  administration is prepa ring to once again introduce a Traditional Courts B ill consigning most disputes in customarily governed communities to the jurisdiction of traditional courts. This persistence also manifests in the post-apartheid elaboration of multiple and distinct marriage laws for customary marriages and gender- neutral marriages, with a potential Muslim marriage bill still on the horizon .  The gendered multiculturalist architecture of these expansions  reflects not only the traditionalist political impulses that also drive the strengthening of traditional leaders, but also the  belief   of  many feminists that expanding women’s autonomy requires attention to the specific contexts in which they live—contexts that, for better or worse, are defined in part by the very cultural distinctions colonial and apartheid policy helped to cultivate."
"52" "In other words, the shape of post-apartheid marriage law  itself  reflects the dynamic interplay between state policy and everyday practice. The dynamic and interactional framework I have advocated in this article is  thus  important not only for the sociological understanding of family practice in its legal context, but also for a sociological understanding of that legal context itself. To be sure,  my theoretical intervention here remains limited, and much work remains to elaborate its details. Similarly, t he  empirical  nuggets I have shared here from existing literature are but a few from among many dispersed across  several  decades and disciplines of social science research. It is worth gathering more, precisely because South Africa’s extreme history has produced such a dynamic, uneven set of outcomes. In many ways, a more systematic sociology of the law-family relationship would measure the state’s reach into the most intimate scale of  life, where so much of  socialis ation  and social action happens. To study marriage and family in this way is  thus  to study governance itself."
"53" "REFERENCES"
"54" "Adams, B.N. 2010. Themes and threads of family theories: A brief history.  Journal of Comparative Family Studies  41(4): 499-505."
"55" "Adams, B.N. and  Trost , J. ( eds ). 2004.  Handbook of world families , Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications."
"56" "Albertyn , C. and  Mbatha , L.  2004.  Customary  l aw  r eform in the  new South Africa.  I n  Gender,  c itizenship and  g overnance: A  g lobal  s ourcebook , Oxford: Oxfam Publishing."
"57" "Amien , W.  2014 .   The  r ecognition of  r eligious and  c ustomary  m arriages and  n on- m arital  d omestic  partnerships in South Africa.  I n  Routledge   h andbook of  f amily  l aw and  p olicy , New York:  Routledge ."
"58" "Beall , J.  1990.  Women under indentured  labour  in colonial Natal, 186 0-1911.  I n C. Walker (ed . ) .   Women and  g ender in  s outhern  A frica to 1945 .  London: James  Currey ."
"59" "Bennett, T.W.  2004 .   Customary  l aw in South Africa .  Lansdowne, South Africa:  Juta ."
"60" "Berger, J.  2008.  Getting to the Constitutional Court on  t ime: A  l itigation  h istory of  s ame- s ex  m arriage .   I n M. Judge, A.  Manion , and S. de Waal (eds . ) .   To  h ave and to  h old: The  m aking of  s ame- s ex  m arriage in South Africa , Auckland Park, South Africa:  Fanele ."
"61" "Berry, S.  1992 .  Hegemony on a  s hoestring: Indirect  r ule and  a ccess to  a gricultural  land.   Africa: Journal of the International African Institute  62(3):  327–55."
"62" "Bilchitz , D. and Judge, M.  2007.  For whom does the bell toll?  The challenges and p ossibilit ies of the Civil Union Act for family law in South Africa.   South Africa Journal of Human Rights  23: 467– 99."
"63" "Bilchitz , D. and Judge, M.  2009 The Civil Union Act: Messy compromise or giant leap forward?   I n M. Judge, A.  Manion , and S. de Waal (eds . ) .   To have and to hold: The making of same-sex m arriage in South Africa .   Auckland Park, South Africa:  Fanele  Press ."
"64" "Bryant, A.T.  1949 .   The Zulu people as they were before the white man c ame .  Pietermaritzburg , South Africa :  Shuter  and Shooter."
"65" "Cameron, E.  1993 .  Sexual orientation and the constitution: A test case for human rights.   South African Law Journal  110:  450–72."
"66" "Cameron, E.  1995 [1994].  ‘ Unapprehended  felons’ : Gays and lesbi ans and the law in South Africa. I n M.  Gevisser  and E. Cameron (eds .).  Defiant Desire : Gay and Lesbian Lives in South Africa .  New York:  Routledge ."
"67" "Carton, B.  2000 .   Blood from your children: The colonial origins of generational c onflict in South Africa .  Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press."
"68" "Chanock , M.  1991 .  A peculiar sharpness: An essay on property in the history of customary law in colonial Africa.   The Journal of African History  32(1):  65–88."
"69" "Chanock , M.  1989.  Neither c ustoma ry nor legal: African customary law in an era of family law reform.   International Journal of Law and Policy of the Family  3(1):  72–88."
"70" "Claassens , A.  2013 .   Recent changes in women’s land rights and contested customary law in South Africa.   Journal of Agrarian Change  13(1):  71–92."
"71" "Claassens , A. and  Smythe , D.  2013. Marriage, land, and custom: What’s law got to do with it.   Acta   Juridica   2013 :  1–27."
"72" "Dlamini , C.R.M.  1984 .   The significance of ilobolo in Zulu l aw .   KwaDlangezwa : University of Zululand."
"73" "Dubbeld , B.  2013 .  How social security becomes social insecurity: Unsettled households, crisis talk and the value of grants in a KwaZulu-Natal village.   Acta   Juridica  2013:  197–217."
"74" "Epprecht , M.  2004 .   Hun gochani : The history of a dissident sexuality in s outhern Africa .  Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press."
"75" "Erlank , N.  2000.   Gendered reactions to social dislocation and missionary  zctivity  in  Xhosaland  1836–1847.   African Studies  59(2): 205– 27."
"76" "Erlank , N.  2003 .  Gendering commonality: African m en and the 1883 Comm ission on Native Law and Custom.   Journal of Southern African Studies  29(4): 937– 53."
"77" "Erlank , N.  2014.  The white wedding: Affect and economy in South Africa in the early twentieth century.   African Studies Review  57(2):  29–50."
"78" "Essop  Sheik, N.  2014 . African marriage regulation and the remaking of gendered authority in colonial Natal, 1843–1875.   African Studies Review  57(2):  73–92."
"79" "Evans-Pritchard, E.E.  1931.   An Alternative Term for  ‘Bride-Price’.   Man  31:  36–39."
"80" "Ewick , P. and  Silbey , S.S.  1998 .   The common place of law: Stories from everyday l ife .  Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"81" "Gluckman , M.  1950 .   Kinship and marriage among the  Lozi  of n orthern  Rhodesia and the Zulu of Natal.   I n A. R. Radcliffe-Brown and D. Forde (eds . ) .   African Systems of Kinship and Marriage .  London: Oxford University Press."
"82" "Goldblatt , B. , C.  Yose  and S. Mills.   2001  Cohabitation and  g ender in the South African  c ontext — Implications for  l aw  r eform .   Unpublished report, Gender Research Project of the Centre for Applied Legal Studies , University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa."
"83" "Goode , W.J. 1982.  The family . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall."
"84" "Griffiths, J.  1986 .  What  i s  l egal  p luralism .   Journal of Legal Pluralism and Unofficial Law  24: p.1–55."
"85" "Guy, J.  1990 .  Gender oppression in southern Africa’s  precapitalist  societies.   I n C. Walker (ed . ) .   Women and  g ender in  s outhern Africa to 1945 .  London: James  Currey ."
"86" "Guy, J.  2013 .   Theophilus  Shepstone and the forging of Natal: African autonomy and settler colonialism in the making of traditional a uthority . Scottsville, South Africa:  University of KwaZulu-Natal Press."
"87" "de  Haas, M .  1987 .  Is th ere anything more to say about  lobolo ?   African Studies  46(1):  33–55."
"88" "Hickel , J.  2014 .  Engineering the township home: Domestic transformations and ur ban revolutionary consciousness. I n M. Healy-Clancy and J.  Hickel  (eds . ) .   Ekhaya : The Politics of Home in KwaZulu-Natal .  Pietermaritzburg, South Africa: University of KwaZulu-Natal Press."
"89" "Hoad , N., Martin, K. and Reid, G.  (eds . ) .   2005  Sex and p olitics in South Africa .   Cape Town: Double  Storey ."
"90" "Hunter, M ark .  2005 . Courting desire ?:  Love and intimacy in late 19th and early 20th century Kwazulu-Natal.   passages  2. Retrieved from  http://quod.lib.umich.edu/p/passages/4761530.00 10.016?rgn=main ;view =fulltext (a ccessed  21  December  2011)."
"91" "Hunter, Mark.  2007. The changing political economy of sex in South Africa: The significance of unemployment and inequalities to the scale of the AIDS pandemic.  Social Science & Medicine  64(3): 689–700."
"92" "Hunter, M ark .  2010 .   Love in the time of AIDS: Inequality, gender, and r ights in South Africa .  Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press."
"93" "Hunter, M onica .  1933 . The effects of c ontact with Europea ns on the status of  Pondo  w omen .  Africa: Journal of the International African Institute  6(3): 259– 76."
"94" "Judge, M.,  Manion , A. and De Waal, S.  (eds . ) .  2008  To have and to h old: The  m aking of  s ame- s ex  m arriage in South Africa .  Auckland Park, South Africa:  Fanele ."
"95" "Khunou , G. 2012.   Money and gender relations in the South African maintenance system.   South African Review of Sociology  43(1) :4 -22."
"96" "Krige , E.J.  1936. Changing conditions in marital relations and parental duties among urbanized natives.   Africa: Journal of the International African Institute  9(1):  1–23."
"97" "Krige , E.J.  1957  The  social s ystem of the Zulus ,   third edition.  Pietermaritzburg:  Shuter  and Shooter."
"98" "Kuper , A.  1982 .   Wives for  c attle .  London:  Routledge  &  Kegan  Paul."
"99" "MacKinnon, A.S.  1999 .  The  p ersistence of the  c attle  e conomy in  Zululand, South Africa, 1900-50.   Canadian Journal of African Studies / Revue  Canadienne  des  Études   Africaines  33(1):  98–135."
"100" "Mamashela , M.  2004.   New  f amilies,  n ew  p roperty,  n ew   l aws: The  p ractical  e ffects of the Recognition of Cu stomary Marriages Act.  South African Journal on Human Rights  20:  616–41."
"101" "Marks, S. and Rathbone, R.  1983a .   Industrialization and  s ocial  c hange in South Africa: African  c lass,  c ulture and  c onsciousness, 1870-1930 .   Longman Group United Kingdom."
"102" "Marks, S. and Rathbone, R.  1983b .  ‘Introduction’ in  Industrialization and social change in South Africa: African class, culture and consciousness, 1870-1930 .   Longman Group United Kingdom."
"103" "Matebeni ,  Zethu . 2011. Exploring black lesbian sexualities and identities in Johannesburg.  PhD dissertation, University of the Witwatersrand."
"104" "Mayer, P. and Mayer, I.  1971 .   Townsmen or  t ribesmen: Conservatism and the  p rocess of  u rbanization in  a  South African  c ity , second edition.  Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"105" "Mbatha , L.  1997 .   How bl ack South Africans  m arry .  Unpublished report, Gender Research Project of the Centre for Applied Legal Studies, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa."
"106" "Mbatha , L.  2005 .  Reflection on the  r ights  c reated by the Recognit ion of Customary Marriages Act.   Agenda  2005:  42–47."
"107" "McClendon, T.V.  1995. Tradition and domestic struggle in the courtroom: Customary law and the control of women in segregation-era Natal.  The International Journal of African Historical Studies  28(3): 527–61."
"108" "McClendon, T.V.  2002 .   Genders and  g enerations  a part: Labor  t enants and  c ustomary  l aw in  s egregation- e ra South Africa, 1920s to 1940s .  Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann."
"109" "McClendon, T.V.  2010 .   White  c hief,  b lack  l ords :  Shepstone and the  c olonial  s tate in Natal, South Africa, 1845-1878 .  Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press."
"110" "Meintjes , S.  1990 .  F amily and  g ender in the Christian  c ommunity at  Edendale , Natal, in  c olonial  times.   I n C. Walker (ed . ) .   Women and  g ender in  s outhern Africa to 1945 .  London: James  Currey ."
"111" "Merry, S.E.  2000 .   Colonizing  Hawaiʻi : The  c ultural  p ower of  l aw . Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press."
"112" "Mhongo , C. and  Budlender , D.  2013 .  Declining  r ates of  m arriage in South Africa: What do the  n umbers and  a nalysts  say?   Acta   Juridica  2013:  181–96."
"113" "Mnisi  Weeks, S.  2013 .  Women’s  e viction in  Msinga : The  u ncertainties of  s eeking  justice.   Acta   Juridica   2013 :  118–42."
"114" "Moodie , T.D.  1988 .  Migrancy  and  m ale  s exuality on the South African  g old  mines.   Journal of Southern African Studies  14(2): 228– 56."
"115" "Mosoetsa , S. 2011.  Eating from one pot: The dynamics of survival in poor South African households . Johannesburg: Wits University Press."
"116" "Myers, J.C.  2008 .   Indirect  r ule in South Africa: Tradition,  m odernity, and the  c ostuming of  p olitical  p ower . Rochester, NY:  University of Rochester Press."
"117" "Naidoo , K. and  Misra , K.  2008 .  Poverty  and intimacy: R eflections on sexual exchange, reproductive dyn amics and AIDS in South Africa.   South African Review of Sociology  39(1):  1–17."
"118" "Nhlapo , T.  1994.   Indigenous  l aw and  g ender in South Africa: Taking  h uman  r ights and  c ultural  d iversity  s eriously .   Third World Legal Studies  1994-1995:  49–71."
"119" "Posel , Deborah.  1995 State, power and gender: Conflict over the registration of African customary marriage in South Africa c. 1910-1970’,  Journal of Historical Sociology  8(3): 223–56."
"120" "Posel , D eborah .  2006.  Marriage at the  d rop of a  h at: Housing and  p artnership in South Africa’s  u rban African  townships, 1920s-1960s.   History Workshop Journal  61:  57–76."
"121" "Posel ,  Dorrit  and  Casale , D.  2013.  The relationship between sex ratios and  marriage rates in South Africa.   Applied Economics  45(5): 663– 76."
"122" "Posel ,  Dorrit  and  Devey , R.  2006 . T he demographics of fathers in South Africa:  A n ana lysis of survey data, 1993-2002. I n L. M. Richter and R. Morrell (eds . ) .   Baba: Men and  f atherhood  in South Africa .  Cape Town: HSRC Press."
"123" "Posel ,  Dorrit  and  Rudwick , S.  2014 .  Ukukipita  (cohabiting): Socio-cultural constraints in urban Zulu society.   Journal of Asian and African Studies  49(3): 282– 97."
"124" "Posel ,  Dorrit ,  Rudwick , S. and  Casale , D.  2011 Is marriage a dying i nstitut ion in South Africa?  Exploring c ha nges in marriage in the context of ilobolo payments.   Agenda  25(1): 102– 11."
"125" "Powell, B.,  Bolzendahl , C., Geist, C.,  Steelman , L.C. 2010.  Counted out: Same-sex relations and Americans’ definitions of family , New York: Russell Sage Foundation."
"126" "Reddy, V.  2006 .   Decriminalisation  of homosexuality in post-apartheid South Africa: A brief legal case history  review from sodomy to marriage.  Agenda  20(67): 146– 57."
"127" "Retief, G.  1995.   Keeping Sodom out of the laager: State repression of homosexu ality in apartheid South Africa.  I n M.  Gevisser  and E. Cameron ( eds )  Defiant Desire : Gay and Lesbian Lives in South Africa .   New York:  Routledge ."
"128" "Rudwick , S. and  Posel , D.  2014 .  Contemporary  f unctions of  i lobolo ( b ridewealth) in  u rban South African Zulu  society.   Journal of Contemporary African Studies  32(1): 118– 36."
"129" "Sachs, A. 1990.  The family in a democratic South Africa: Its constitutional position.  Agenda  8: 40-54."
"130" "Sarat , A.  1985 .   Legal  e ffectiveness and  s ocial studies of law: On the u nfortunate  p ersistence  of a  r esearch  t rad ition.   Legal Studies Forum  9:  23–31."
"131" "Sarat , A. and Kearns, T.R.  2009 .   Law in Everyday Life , Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press."
"132" "Seekings , J.  2008 .   Beyond ‘ f luidity’: Kinship and  h ouseholds as  s ocial  p rojects .  Cape Town: Centre for Social Science Research.  Retrieved from  http://www.cssr.uct.ac.za/publi cations/working-paper/2008/237 (a ccessed  29 November 2009) ."
"133" "Seekings , J.  2003. H ouseholds and  f amilies in  s outhern Africa: Introduction to the  s pecial  issue.   Social Dynamics: A  J ournal of African  S tudies  29(2):  1 -4 ."
"134" "Smuts, Letitia. 2011. Coming out as a lesbian in Johannesburg, South Africa: Considering intersecting identities and social spaces.  South African Review of Sociology  42(3): 23-40."
"135" "South African Law Commission .  1997 .   Project 90: The  Harmonisation  of the Common Law and Indigenous Law.  Discussion Paper 74.   Customary Marriages .  Pretoria, S outh African Law Commission."
"136" "d e  Souza, M.  2013  When  n on- r egistration  b ecomes  n on- r ecognition: Examining the  l aw and  p ractice of  c ustomary  m arriage  registration in South Africa.   Acta   Juridica   2013 :  239–72."
"137" "Spiegel, A.  1996 .   Introduction: Do mestic fluidity in South Africa.   Social Dynamics: A  Journal of African S tudies  22(1):  5 -6 ."
"138" "de   Vos , P.  2001. The constitution made us queer: The sexual orientation clause in the South African constitution and the emergence of gay and lesbian identity.  In C. F.  Stychin  and D. Herman (eds.).   Law and Sexuality the Global Arena . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press."
"139" "d e   Vos , P.  2008.  A  j udicial  r evolution?   The  c ourt- l ed  a chievement of  s ame- s ex  marriage in South Africa.   Utrecht Law Review  4(2):  161–74."
"140" "Walker, C.  1990a.   Gender and the  d evelopment of the  m igrant  l abour   s ystem c. 1850-1930: An  overview.  I n C. Walker (ed . ) .   Women and  g ender in Southern Africa to 1945 .  London: James  Currey ."
"141" "Walker, C.  1990b .   Women and  gender in s outhern Africa to 1945: An  overview.  I n C. Walker (ed . ) .   Women and gender in Southern Africa to 1945 .  London: James  Currey ."
"142" "Walker, C.  1992.   Attitudes to lobola.   Agenda  8(13): 57–58."
"143" "Welsh, D.J.  1971 .   The  r oots of  s egregation: Native  p olicy in  c olonial Natal, 1845-1910 .  Cape Town: Oxford University Press."
"144" "Willoughby- Herard , T.  2010.  ‘I’ ll  g ive  y ou  s omething  to  c ry  a bout’ : The  i ntraracial   v iolence  of  u plift  f eminism  in the Carnegie Poor White Study Volume, the Mother a nd Daughter of the Poor Family.   South African Review of Sociology  41(1):  78–104."
"145" "Wilson, M.H.  1964 .   Reaction to  c onquest : Effects of  c ontact  with Europeans on the  Pondo  of South Africa , third  ed ition ,  London : Oxford University Press."
"146" "Yarbrough, M.W. 2015. Toward a political sociology of conjugal-recognition regimes: Gendered multiculturalism in South African marriage law.  Social politics: International studies in gender, state, and society . Published online with print publication forthcoming.  doi:10.1093 / sp /jxv016"
"147" "Yarbrough, M.W  n.d.   “Very long engagements: Legal pluralism and the persistence of bridewealth in a South African community.” Unpublished manuscript on file with author."
"148" "Ziehl , S.C. 2005.  Families in South Africa.  In B.N. Adams and J.  Trost  (eds.)  Handbook of World Families , Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications."
