Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.8

Pp. 113- 132

An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing Teacher Cognition and
Pedagogical Practices in the Palestinian University Context
Eman I. Alzaanin
Faculty of Languages and Translation
King Khalid University
Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Abstract
This multiple case study explores some intricate connections between the cognition and the
pedagogical practices of eight English as a foreign language (EFL) writing instructors over one
academic year in two Palestinian universities. The study also examines how their cognition and
pedagogical practices interplayed with the ecological contexts in the setting in which they taught.
Integral to the study was the use of semi-structured interviews, classroom observations, stimulatedrecall interviews, and course document review. Constructivist grounded theory informed the data
analysis. Results revealed that the instructors’ cognition about second language (L2) writing, about
teaching and learning L2 writing, and about their professional roles influences their teaching
approach, curriculum design, and classroom assessment methods. The findings also stressed the
role of the ecological contexts as a mediating force influencing the interaction between cognition
and practices. The classroom context was identified as the most significant barrier to teaching
writing; however, gaining access to L2 writing scholarship was viewed as the most significant
facilitator for implementing effective practices in the L2 writing classroom. The findings showed
that the instructors’ cognition about themselves as professionals could mitigate the impact of the
ecological constraints hindering L2 writing instruction. This finding of the role of cognition may
explain why teachers working in the same context under the same conditions teach differently. The
implications of these findings include the importance of encouraging EFL writing instructors to
reflect upon their cognition, pedagogical practices, and working contexts and the need for
introducing recommended models of L2 writing instruction in tertiary institutions.
Keywords: Grounded theory, contextual factors, L2 writing, teacher cognition
Cite as: Alzaanin, E. I. (2019). An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing
Teacher Cognition and Pedagogical Practices in the Palestinian University Context. Arab World
English Journal, 10 (3)113- 132. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.8

113

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

Introduction
Second language (L2) writing research has shown that teachers cognition has a significant impact
on the way they teach in the classroom (Burns, 1992; Lee, 2018; Shi & Cumming, 1995). Borg
(2006) defines teacher cognition as “teachers’ beliefs, knowledge, theories, attitudes, images,
assumptions, metaphors, conceptions, perspectives about teaching, teachers, learning, students,
subject matter, curricula, materials, instructional activities, and self, colleagues, assessments, and
context” (p. 283). Studies of teacher cognition have helped capture the complexities of who
teachers are, what they know and believe, how they learn to teach, and how they teach in diverse
contexts (Johnson, 2006). However, the existing research on L2 writing teachers’ cognition has
been limited. One limitation is the context of research. Much of the research has been carried out
in developed countries with native English teachers teaching small groups of motivated adult
students (Borg, 2006). Studies investigating the cognition and pedagogical practices of teachers
working in foreign language university settings have also been limited (Borg, 2009). Leki,
Cumming, and Silva (2008) call for more research to investigate the pedagogical practices of
teaching L2 writing and the development of teachers’ knowledge in underrepresented and
unrepresented contexts.
No research has been published internationally on L2 writing teacher cognition and
classroom practices in Palestinian universities. In the research context, non-native Englishspeaking teachers teach large classes in an exam-oriented educational system. This study employed
interview data supplemented by classroom observation and course documents analysis to
investigate the relationship between the cognition and the pedagogical practices of eight EFL
writing instructors in two large Palestinian universities. It also sought to explore how their
cognition and practices interplay with their working context. This study was designed to answer
the following research questions: 1) What are the instructors’ cognition about teaching and learning
EFL writing? 2) What are the instructors’ actual pedagogical practices of teaching writing? 3) To
what extent does the instructors’ cognition correspond to their L2 writing pedagogical practices?
And 4) What ecological factors shape and inform these instructors’ cognition and practices? The
structure of the article is as follows. Firstly, pertinent literature on teacher cognition and L2 writing
instruction is reviewed. Secondly, the methodology of the study is outlined; namely, a qualitative,
collective case study drawing on constructivist grounded theory for data analysis. Thirdly, the
findings are presented with a comparison and contrast of the participants’ cognition, pedagogical
practices, and perceptions of their working contexts. Finally, the results are examined, and
theoretical and professional contributions are discussed.
Literature Review
Keeping in line with the aims of the present study, this section mentions studies on themes
related to teacher cognition and L2 writing instruction. These studies suggest that L2 writing
teacher cognition impact pedagogical practices. Also, the review shows the relative lack of focus
on research in the area of L2 writing teachers’ cognition in developing countries context and
highlights the methodological limitation in data collection methods. Researchers have examined
writing teachers’ self-reported beliefs and practices about teaching and learning writing in Hong
Kong (Lee, 1998), writing teachers’ conceptualizations, planning and delivery of writing courses
in Canada (Cumming, 2003), teachers’ use of written language in English as a second language
(ESL) classrooms in Australia (Burns, 1992), and L2 writing teachers’ beliefs about and practices
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

114

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

of error feedback in the United States (Junqueira & Payant, 2015). Other studies investigated L2
writing teacher cognition about assessment in Iran (Nemati, Alavi, Mohebbi, & Panahi Masjedlou,
2017).
Another line of research explored writing teachers’ perspectives about their own
development as teachers of writing in Hong Kong (Lee, 2010, 2011) and students’ perceptions of
their teachers’ pedagogical practices in the Netherlands (Van der Schaaf, Stokking, & Verloop,
2008). Furthermore, other studies investigated the impact of teacher education programmes on
shaping teacher cognition and practices in the United States (Gebhard, Chen, Graham, & Gunawan
2013) and the influence of previous learning experiences upon pre-service teachers’ knowledge
about teaching L2 writing in Vietnam (Nguyen & Hudson, 2010)
These studies are limited in terms of the educational context and the methods they included.
Most of these studies were conducted in an ESL setting where the teachers are native speakers of
English, and the conventional methods of data collection are questionnaires and interviews. Very
few studies included classroom observations (Burns, 1992) to gain a more in-depth insight into
teachers’ practices. Instead, authors conducted interviews (Cumming, 2003; Lee, 2008),
administered surveys (Lee, 2011), or combined surveys and interviews to elicit teachers’ thinking
and practices (Lee, 1998). Borg (2006) points out that it is crucial to include observations in
language teacher cognition studies to be able to refer to what happens in classrooms accurately.
To bridge these gaps, this study aims to capture the richness and diversity of eight Palestinian EFL
writing teachers’ cognition and their interplay with their classroom practices and ecological
contexts. The study, therefore, intends to make L2 writing teachers working in similar EFL
contexts reflect upon their cognition and classroom approaches. It is also hoped that this research
can inform teacher educators and policymakers when making decisions to improve the teaching of
EFL writing at universities. Furthermore, the qualitative approach adopted for this study makes a
methodological contribution to language education research in the context of Palestine. In
Palestine, educational research is in its infancy, and uses mostly questionnaire-based studies,
analyzed statistically.
Methods
Setting
This study examines the cognition and classroom practices of eight EFL writing instructors
working at two English language teacher education programs in two large universities in Palestine.
For confidentiality purposes, the first research site is referred to as University A and the second
research site is referred to as University B. The typical Bachelor of English Language in the
research sites involves 140 credits of coursework. EFL student teachers study 34 credits worth of
cultural preparation courses delivered in Arabic, 34 credits worth of educational preparation
courses also delivered in Arabic, and 72 credits worth of courses in English language skills,
linguistics, translation, and English literature. Student teachers are expected to complete three
courses on Academic Writing in English. Writing I, offered in the second semester of the first year,
focuses on sentence and paragraph writing. Writing II, taught in the first semester of the second
year, is concerned with writing different patterns of traditional essays. Writing III, offered in the
first semester of the third year, focuses on writing a short research paper. Instructors have the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

115

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

freedom to design their academic writing courses, as there are no prescribed course descriptions.
EFL writing instructors prepare the syllabus, choose the textbook, and create the assessment.
Participants
A purposive sampling strategy was necessary to identify instructors to participate in the
present study. Creswell (2009) emphasizes that the sampling should be underpinned by explicit
criteria. The sampling in this study was based on three criteria: EFL Palestinian writing instructors
who have been teaching for at least one year in the research sites; who are employed full time; and
who obtained their postgraduate degrees from an English-speaking country. Participants with these
characteristics had the potential to provide rich data. The researcher had worked in the first
research site for six years and had a friend who had taught in the second research site for four
years. Therefore, gaining access was not difficult. The researcher explained the aim and processes
to be used in the study to the Heads of the English Departments in both universities. Permission
to carry out the research onsite was granted. Each Head of Department provided a list of the writing
instructors who met the selection criteria along with their contact details. Emails were sent to the
identified instructors, which explained the focus, objectives, procedures, benefits, and significance
of the research. The researcher sought their voluntary participation through email response,
followed by a face-to-face meeting to discuss the study in more depth and to arrange times for
interviews and classroom observation sessions. Eight instructors participated in the study. Table 1
summarizes the participants’ qualifications and professional backgrounds and provides
information about the lessons they were observed teaching during this study.
Table 1. Participants’ professional profiles
Partici
pants

Qualifica
tions

Y
ears

of

Work

Topic of
1st

place

Teaching

class

observation

Topic of
2nd

class

observation

Experience
P1

MA

in

7

TEFL

Unive
rsity A

Writing

Writing

topic sentences

supportin
g sentences

P2

MA
Linguistics

in

16

Unive
rsity B

Introduct
ory paragraphs for

Error
analysis

essays

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

116

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing
Partici
pants

Qualifica
tions

Y
ears

of

Alzaanin
Work

Topic of
1st

place

Teaching

class

observation

Topic of
2nd

class

observation

Experience
P3

MA in

5

Discours

Unive
rsity B

Writing
topic

Simple &
compound

e Analysis

sentences
sentences

P4

MA in

8

Applied

Unive
rsity A

Types of
sentences

Exercises
on

Linguisti

sentence

cs

P5

problems

MA in

7

English

Unive
rsity A

Literatur

Writing

Exercises

concluding

on

sentences

structure

paragraph

e
P6

MA

4

TESOL

Unive
rsity B

Argumen
tative text

Argumen
tative

text

continued
P7

PhD

in

9

Teacher

Unive
rsity A

Descripti
ve writing

Describin
g places

Education
P8

MA
TEFL

in

10

Unive
rsity B

Comparis
on &

Comparis
on &

contrast
texts

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

contrast
texts

117

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

Study design and data collection
This study adopted a qualitative multi-case study approach to address the four research
questions. Merriam (1998) notes, “A case study design is employed to gain an in-depth
understanding of the situation and meaning for those involved” (p.19). Investigating multiple case
studies enabled me to compare the cognition and pedagogical practices of the participants and to
group them into clusters to facilitate my analysis and interpretation of the data.
Data collection occurred over one academic year. The researcher interviewed and observed
five instructors during the first semester and three during the second semester. Data were collected
through a one-hour semi-structured interview with each instructor, two non-participatory
observations of the instructors' classes followed by two stimulated-recall interviews, and reviews
of course documents. Interviews are the best means to access the minds of research subjects so
that their knowledge, information, values, preferences, attitudes, and beliefs are accurately
reflected (Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2007). Charmaz (2006) comments that “the in-depth
nature of an intensive interview fosters eliciting each participant’s interpretation of his or her
experience” (p.25). I audio-recorded and transcribed each interview.
The purpose of observation in the context of the present study was not to evaluate the
teaching. Instead, observing the instructors in action allowed an assessment of the extent to which
the instructors’ cognition and reported practices corresponded to what transpired in the classroom.
Researchers often use observations together with interviews to cross-check issues under study as
well as to capture data that may be difficult to collect through interviews (Creswell, 2009). Cohen
et al., (2007) noted that observational data are attractive as they allow the researcher to gather live
data from live situations.
The main aim of stimulated recall interviews was to help the participants recall their
thought strategies and reflect on what was happening during their teaching (Borg, 2006).
Following each session observing classes, I spoke to the participants in person so that they could
attempt to recall their thought processes during teaching and the cognition behind their practices.
The notes I took during the observation were used as the stimulus for the stimulated recall
interview.
Document analysis was another tool used to provide a rich source of information to
complement the data collected through interviews, stimulated recalls, and observations. Yin (2011)
states that documents can “yield invaluable data about things not directly observable” (p.147). In
the present study, the researcher collected and analyzed a writing course description and a sample
writing test from each participant for any evidence of instructor’s cognition and actual practices in
the writing classroom. The researchers sought to triangulate findings from analyzed documents
with those resulting from the interviews and the observations. In the present study, all data were
stored and coded in NVivo 9.
Data analysis
Charmaz’s (2006) constructivist grounded theory guided the data analysis process through
initial, focused, and theoretical coding, constant comparison method, category extraction, memo
writing, diagramming, and memo sorting. The analysis process helped generate a framework that
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

118

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

depicts and explains the interplay between L2 writing instructors’ cognition, pedagogical practices,
and ecological contexts in the research sites. Data analysis took place both during and after data
collection, and information from all data sources was compared. The first stage involved the
independent, in-depth analysis of each case. After I analyzed each case, I grouped individual cases
into two clusters based on the focus of their L2 writing instruction. Cluster A, which consisted of
five participants (P1 to P5), focused on teaching grammatical forms and writing mechanics. Cluster
B, which included three participants (P6, P7, P8), focused on teaching writing as a communicative
act. I cross-analyzed and interpreted the clustered cases in the third stage. I synthesized the main
categories evolving from the cross-cluster analysis in an emerging model which depicts L2 writing
instruction in two Palestinian universities.
Findings and Discussion
Variations in pedagogical practices
The first research question was posed to gather information on the pedagogical practices
of L2 writing instructors in the research sites. Analysis of data from Cluster A and Cluster B
displayed evident variations in the instructors’ teaching and assessment practices. As shown in
Table 1, the ten classes that I observed for Cluster A focused on sentence-level writing, grammar,
punctuation, and structural elements of paragraphs and essays. Below is a brief description of P1’s
class procedures:
P1 explained on the board how to write topic sentences for paragraphs…. P1 then
asked his students to write topic sentences for the following topics: “Watching
television; doing exercise; college; and my first class.” The students were not easily
able to generate specific ideas for these topics. (My field notes from P1’s class)
P2 focused on correcting students’ grammatical mistakes:
After lecturing students on how to write introductory paragraphs for essays, P2
wrote three topics to write an introduction for: “stress, writing, and tourism.” After
fifteen minutes, P2 asked two of the students to write their introductions on the
board to get feedback from the teacher and classmates. The teacher commented
mainly on the grammar mistakes in students ‘texts. (My field notes from P2’s class)
Cluster A’s assessment tools were consistent with their approach to teaching writing. For
example, P3’s and P4’s tests were forms-oriented. One question asked students to correct the
mistakes in discrete sentences, and another question asked students to combine simple sentences
into compound and complex ones. Below are excerpts from their tests:
Correct the mistakes in the following sentences:
• He is so selfishness, and everybody dislikes him.
• Ali lives in Gaza since 1990. Before one year, he got his high school certificate.
(P3’s writing test).
Combine each of the following pairs of sentences to make compound or complex sentences:
• The cost of education has been rising. Many students are having financial problems.
• He did not study hard. He did not obey his father. (P4’s writing test)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

119

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

In Cluster A’s classes, textbooks worked as a quasi-syllabus. During my observation of their
classes, practicing writing meant completing form-based exercises from the textbook. Below is a
brief description of P3’s class.
P3 explained the purpose of FANBOYS coordinators to his students. Students were
asked to complete exercises from the textbook. (My field notes from P3’s class).
Cluster A’s teaching approach is similar to the teaching approach described in research
studies of EFL writing teachers at university settings in China (You, 2004) and the Arab
world (Ezza, 2010). The focus of instruction is the written product, with students usually
writing only one draft on a particular topic. In many Arab universities, writing instruction
assumes a bottom-up approach, emphasizing the sentence and its constituents at the
expense of the skills needed to write coherent paragraphs (Ezza, 2010).
In Cluster A’s classes, textbooks acted as semi-syllabus because they provided content and
teaching-learning activities, which shaped much of what happened in the classroom (CelceMurcia, 2001). The features of most of Cluster A’s textbooks are similar to the textbooks used in
other Arab universities as examined by Ezza (2010). Ezza applied content analysis to existing
writing courses in three Arab universities. The examination of these courses has revealed that
English departments adopted approaches and materials characteristic of the 1940s and 1950s. Ezza
believed that unless new developments into the linguistic and writing theories and approaches are
incorporated into the writing syllabus, Arab EFL learners will continue to experience writing
problems. This finding is consistent with the findings of Akbulut’s (2007) study. Akbulut (2007)
found out that the teaching practices of the thirteen Turkish novice EFL teachers who participated
in his study were almost always textbook-based. The participants did not feel confident to move
beyond the textbook and to try out innovative techniques and methods.
In contrast, one key characteristic of Cluster B’s classes was the use and analysis of written
models to illustrate the features of different genres. In later stages, students and teachers
collaborated to create texts similar to the model, and then students were encouraged to follow the
process and convention of writing to produce their texts. Also, within this pattern of instruction,
the teachers provided their students with collective oral feedback inside the class and individual
written feedback after collection of assignments. Below is a brief description of P6’s class:
P6 began her class by writing the following statement on the board: “Should
university students be allowed to use their laptops inside the class?” She asked her
students to discuss their opinions on the topic in groups of four…. P6 then asked
her students to read a sample argumentative text about banning cell phone use while
driving. P6 listed the following questions on the board: “What is the purpose of this
text? Who is the target audience? Has the writer been successful in persuading his
audience?” (My field notes of P6)
When asked to recall the objective of her lesson, P6 stated:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

120

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

I wanted my students to understand the purpose and structure of argumentative
texts. (P 6, Interview2)
Similarly, P8’s writing classes focused on practicing writing, giving feedback,
brainstorming ideas collaboratively, and writing many drafts. Furthermore, P8 stressed the
importance of peer feedback in supporting learners’ writing skills.
She asked her students to work in pairs to come up with arguments for, and
arguments against, whether to study abroad or to study in one’s home country.
Students were required to revise their paragraphs first and then to have it checked
by a peer reviewer. (My field notes of P8)
Besides, many of Cluster B’s test questions assessed students’ ability to produce genrebased texts. For example, P6’s questions asked students to write a cover letter to be attached to a
language teacher job application.
Use the following information to write a cover letter for a language teacher vacancy
in the Future Private School. Clare Genner aims at being a language instructor at
this school in Gaza City. She has a BA in Language and Linguistics from
Southampton University. She graduated with distinction and has two years of
teaching experience at Melton College- Southampton (2009-2011). She took two
courses in language programming and using virtual learning environments. (P6’s
Test)
Cluster B’s pedagogical practices were eclectic; they incorporated many principles and
features of the product, process, and genre approaches. Combining the process and genre
approaches provides opportunities for learners to develop their creativity and helps them to fully
understand the features of target genres (Kim & Kim, 2005). The priority of the process-genre
approaches over the product approach was highlighted in Hashemnezhad and Hashemnezhad’s
(2012) study. Cluster B’s practice of employing peer feedback in their classes is recommended in
ESL writing classes for its valuable social, cognitive, affective, and meta-linguistic benefits
(Lundstorm & Baker, 2009). Supporting the value of peer feedback, the results of Ting and Qian’s
(2010) study showed that students considered most of their peers’ feedback when revising their
drafts.
Cognition about L2 writing instruction shapes pedagogical practices
There were apparent variations in Cluster A and Cluster B participants’ cognition about the
nature of L2 writing, about teaching and learning L2 writing, and about their professional roles.
Cluster A perceived writing as being primarily concerned with linguistic knowledge, focusing
mainly on the correctness of lexical and grammatical structures. P1 and P3 thought of writing as a
measure of a person’s linguistic competence:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

121

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

Writing is the process in which you use your talents to manipulate to correct
yourself, okay. Writing is a real reflection of your linguistic competence. (P1,
Interview 1)
Writing is a combination of words, clauses, and sentences, structured according to
the linguistic rules in English. Writing can help us improve our language by
applying grammatical rules. (P3, Interview 1)
Cluster A’s conceptualization of writing as structures shaped their cognition about the
importance of teaching grammatical and textual forms. P2 stressed the importance of teaching
sentence types in English.
I think you have to focus on teaching them grammar…. I teach sentence types; then,
I concentrate on the complex sentence. (P2, Interview 1)
P5 was also keen to stress the importance of a correct grammatical start, which would
prepare students for writing tasks.
After I teach my students grammar and improve them, I will be able to make them
understand what the paragraph is, what the topic sentence is. (P5, Interview 1)
Cluster A’s conceptualization detaches writing from its contexts and seems to overlook the
complexities of the process of writing and its nature as a social practice (Street, 2003). This finding
of how Cluster A’s conceptualization of writing shaped their cognition is in line with Cumming
and Shi’s (1995) findings. Their study showed each instructor's conceptions of writing to be highly
consistent with their individual, expressed views about their teaching. Cluster A’s cognition about
L2 writing echoed the form-based beliefs about writing instruction articulated by the Iranian EFL
instructors in Khanalizadeh and Allami’s (2012) study.
On the contrary, Cluster B believed that teaching writing should focus first on the process
and convention of writing. In later stages, mechanics of writing, such as grammatical forms,
punctuation, and transitional signals can be taught to enable students to polish their texts. P6
expressed:
I want them first to brainstorm ideas…. I do not expect my students to write well
without searching for information, brainstorming ideas, …. Then, I teach them the
style of the different types of English text. (P6, Interview1)
Cluster B believed that L2 writing instructors’ orientation influences students’ learning. If
instructors focus mainly on grammar and punctuation, the students’ main concern would be on
writing error-free sentences.
If teacher’s main focus is on grammar, you will notice that students begin writing
their first sentence with focus on grammar which may constrain developing a good
text. (P7, Interview 1)
Arab World English Journal
122
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

Similarly, P8 commented:
If the teacher has taught students to focus on the flow of ideas…. you will find these
students brainstorm and write their drafts. (P8, Interview 1).
Furthermore, Cluster B believed in the importance of integrating reading with writing since
reading is a vital source of providing linguistic input and ideas that students need when composing
English text. These instructors also talked about reading and analyzing model texts which
exemplify the types of texts which the students are supposed to produce:
I believe when they read, they can see how other people write and how they use a
particular style of language. Writing and reading are related. I urge my students to
read if they want to have strong ideas and arguments. (P 8, Interview 1)
Cluster B believed in the invaluable role of practice and feedback in improving students’
L2 writing. Students who write a lot learn more about the difficulties and strategies of writing
because they have had more experience completing different writing tasks.
Learners will not be able to make progress if they are not given opportunities to
practice writing (P7, Interview 2).
The results of my study revealed a significant relationship between instructors’ cognition
about L2 writing teaching and their real practices in classrooms. Our classroom decisions are
always informed by our theories and beliefs about what writing is and how people learn to write
(Hyland, , p.1). This finding about the consistency between teachers’ reported cognitions and
actual classroom practices is similar to Burns’ findings (1992) who found a very complex and
interconnected network of underlying beliefs which seemed to influence the pedagogical practices
and approaches adopted by the six ESL teachers.
Variations in participants’ cognition about professional roles
Cluster A and Cluster B held different perceptions about their roles as writing teachers and
about the sources of their pedagogical cognition. Cluster A observed the importance of their
professional roles as lecturers, error-hunters, and error correctors. Cluster A’s perception of their
roles was in line with the perceptions of the Turkish teachers in Saban, Kocbeker and Saban’s
(2007) study where they saw their roles as knowledge provider. P1 stated:
I explain for everyone. Most time of the class I am the one who is talking and giving
information. (P1, Interview 3)
My students need to know exactly the errors they make …. I need to tell them to
avoid this and avoid that. (P5, Interview 2)
In contrast, Cluster B articulated a range of professional roles, such as coaches, modelers,
collaborators, feedback givers, need analysts, and motivators. P8 prepared activities to enhance
her students’ learning and to build good rapport with them.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

123

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

I can think of myself as a coach…. an assessor ... Collaborator....Yes, students have
negative attitudes, but we can turn their negative attitudes into positive ones. (P8,
Interview 3)
Cluster B’s perceptions of their roles were similar to those reported in Cowie’s (2011) study
where EFL teachers working in a Tokyo university described their roles as carers and moral guides.
P3 and P5 mentioned that they copied their former writing instructors. P3 said “I stole" my
teaching approach from my writing teachers. The practice of editing texts and picking up
grammatical mistakes had been a common exercise in P5’s writing class when he was a student.
I copy my previous writing teachers. They corrected our grammar and spelling
mistakes. (P5, Interview 3)
Teachers’ prior learning experience emerged in this study as a main contributor to their
cognition and instructional practices. This finding is supported with Lortie’s (2002) comment that
the main sources of knowledge for teaching writing are teachers’ experiences when they were
students in writing classrooms or through apprenticeship of observation. Their prior learning
experiences as language students are likely to inform their cognition and act as a filter to their
subsequent practices as teachers (Ariogul, 2007). It was noted in the present study that the
instructors’ early learning experiences shape beliefs and attitudes toward writing and often
determine the pedagogical choices made in their classes (Hall & Grisham-Brown, 2011; Street,
2003).
Ecological factors shape teachers’ cognition and pedagogical practices
The findings from Cluster A and Cluster B data showed that several ecological factors
influenced their cognition and pedagogical practices. The physical reality of the classroom with its
limited resources, large numbers of students, and space and seating inflexibility acted as a
hindrance for many desired classroom practices. P1 commented on how the shortage of
technological resources forced him to limit himself to copying sentences on the blackboard, which
he viewed as a waste of time.
There is lack of technological facilities. lack of computers, photocopying machines,
and projectors. If I have a projector, I will not waste my class time copying texts. I
will teach better. (P1, Interview 3).
P4 felt that considerable time was required for more learner-based approaches to teaching writing:
Writing is a time-consuming activity, so you do not have time to read, criticize,
analyze, and write. The class duration is one hour, and the number of students is
very huge. Teaching writing is a process of pain. (P4, Interview 1)
The way seats were organized in the classroom made it difficult for P5 to organize his
students to work in groups and to manage overcrowded classes:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

124

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

The huge number of students in the class is a big challenge. You cannot control
students’ behaviors. (P5, Interview 1)
P3 mentioned that giving feedback to students is hindered by the big number of students.
Giving feedback and interacting with students could be done with only 15 to 20
students maximum. Do not give me 60 or 70 students in one class and ask me to
give them feedback. (P3, Interview 1)
Likewise, P7 stated that his ideal way to teach writing is sometimes constrained by the physical
factors.
The large numbers of students, not having a photocopier that is always available to
share students’ writing to receive feedback from their classmates.... I am still bound
by finishing a certain amount of the curriculum. (P7, Interview 1)
Having big number of students in the writing classroom hindered P8’s ability to give her students
the chance to write on topics of their choice because she would not be able to read and comment
on hundreds of different topics. To overcome the negative impact of large classes, P8 employed a
great deal of peer feedback in her writing classes.
Casanave’s (2009) study referred to these barriers as diverse realities. Contextual factors –
such as insufficient weekly class times, big classes, students with multiple levels of motivation and
English competence, teachers' workload, and teachers’ motivation – may act as barriers that
prevent teachers from enacting their cognition. The realities of the institutional context were also
perceived as a constraint. The lack of placement tests before admitting high school graduates into
the EFL programme meant that students who did not seem to possess the necessary aptitude and
attitude to succeed in learning English were able to join the programme. The main criterion for
admission is students’ average in the Third Secondary Certificate Exam.
Academic affairs accept according to the Third Secondary Certificate Exam. They
do not care about students’ English entry level. (P3, Interview 3)
P7 also expressed his concern about the English programme study plan. Freshman students
must study their first writing course right from their first semester. P7 believed that students need
a foundation course to improve their grammar and reading skills. Once students improve their
grammar and reading, they can use the skills and the knowledge in their composition classes.
It does not make sense to teach the most difficult language skill before the easy
ones. Do you think students will find [it] easy to write texts when they do not have
good command of vocabulary or they make many grammatical mistakes? (P7,
Interview 1)

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

125

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

P8 also thought that the lack of coordination among writing instructors constitute a barrier
facing their endeavors to improve their students’ writing skills.
The lack of coordination among writing teachers is partly responsible for students’
writing problems. (P8, Interview 1)
It was therefore prevalent in this study that the institutional context acted as a barrier that
constrained the practices of the writing teachers. The impact of the institutional context cannot be
minimized. It is, therefore, important to examine this cognition within their particular “ecologies”
(Zhao & Frank, 2003) and to recognize the relationship between teacher cognition and institutional
culture.
Cluster A and Cluster B made many references to constraints that result from the broader
educational context. P5 believed that the schools did not prepare students well to facilitate their
EFL writing learning at university.
I need to know how schools destroyed students’ minds and fossilized their brains.
They teach them, you know, capsules: do this when you see this. (P5, Interview 1)
P8 thought that her students’ learning experiences in high schools caused discrepancy
between her expectations of the students and her students’ expectations from the writing courses.
Most of her students were used to teacher-fronted classes throughout their school years. P7 blamed
the testing culture that controls the performance of language teachers and schools.
In schools, teachers focus on teaching students to memorize information to pass
tests… teachers give students formulas to memorize. They are mostly concerned
with their students’ success rate. (P7, Interview 1)
P4 used the word “poison” to refer to the negative impact of school teachers upon the way
students learn writing.
We try to, what to say, clear their minds from the poison they have put in their
minds during their school life. (P4, Interview 1).
Thus, teachers’ perceptions of their students’ attitudes and linguistic level influenced their
pedagogical practices. This finding is in line with the findings of Cumming’s (2003) study where
teachers reported that they conceptualized writing instruction according to their perceptions of
students’ characteristics. Cluster A descriptions of their students’ characteristics mirror the
description of Arab students’ low aptitude, motivation, and low proficiency (Fareh, 2010).
Another issue that emerged from the broader educational context is the lack of
opportunities for students to use English language outside the classroom. It was noted that even if
some students wish to practice their English with their friends, others make fun of them. In the
Arab world, language education focuses on memorization and rote learning (Fareh, 2010).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

126

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

We have to be realistic; our students are oppressed, they do not have chances to
talk, or to learn from native speakers or to travel. This makes learning English more
difficult and students unmotivated. (P3, Interview 2)
The final important ecological factor identified in this study as a contributor to the
development of Cluster B’s pedagogical cognition and classroom practices was their exposition to
the global community discourse and L2 writing research scholarships during postgraduate training.
P6 and P8 talked about their own learning experience in the MA TESOL programme where they
were introduced to the teaching of writing and how that course influenced their approach to
teaching L2 writing. P8’s postgraduate experience helped her to learn about different aspects of
academic writing, such as genre approach, new literacies, purpose, audience, academic honesty,
and intertextuality.
I got my master’s degree from the U.S where great importance is placed on
academic writing… Also, I studied a “Teaching of Writing” course. I learnt about
the importance of giving feedback and how to give feedback, about new rhetoric,
the process approach and the genre one.... (P8, Interview 2)
Teachers’ cognition can undergo significant changes as a result of professional training
(Borg, 2006; Mattheoudakis, 2007). In this study, Cluster B who took professional courses on the
methodology of teaching EFL writing and who read research literature on teaching writing
appeared to be more equipped with skills and knowledge that facilitated their teaching of writing.
Cluster B reported that such courses assisted them in adapting and compromising the deterministic
context and ultimately improving the teaching of writing in their respective universities. This study
may have the potential to confirm Casanave’s (2009) speculation that teachers who took
professional courses on teaching writing were more likely to adopt a social orientation to teaching
writing while teachers who did not are more likely to hold form-oriented beliefs. Teachers with
little preparation in teaching L2writing may minimize FL writing instruction or focus primarily on
grammatical form (Casanave, 2009). This is the case with the majority of Cluster A. Lee (2010)
commented that “writing teacher education can broaden teachers' perspectives on teaching writing
and help them construct a new identity as writing teachers” (p.1).
Teachers’ cognition mediate reactions to perceived ecological challenges
Although all ecological factors except the global discourse community are perceived by
participants as barriers to L2 writing instruction, teachers reacted differently to these constraints.
Differences in how teachers respond to ecological constraints may be due to the variation in
teachers’ cognition about their professional roles and their sense of teaching self-efficacy. Cluster
C teachers employed a number of strategies in their teaching of writing to adjust their beliefs and
instruction according to the perceived affordances and limitations of their teaching environment.
For example, because of their inability to give feedback on every piece of writing for students,
they employed peer review where students could read each other’s writing and give feedback.
They stressed their role in motivating their students. Their reactions to the ecological barriers are
similar to those reported in Farrell’s (2006) study. The teacher did not give up his beliefs which
were not applicable in his teaching context and tried to search out a balance between his beliefs
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

127

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

and the institution’s policies and expectations. Teacher self-efficacy has a strong influence on
language teachers’ pedagogical practices, especially those of foreign language teachers (Chaco’n,
2005). Instructors’ cognition, especially their perceptions of self-efficacy which emerge largely
from adequate professional training, can explain why teachers working in the same context teach
differently. This study therefore concludes that teachers’ cognition can determine the weight
assigned to ecological constraints and thus the level of the impact of the contextual constraints
upon classroom practices.
Findings Synthesis & Conclusion
My study found variation in L2 writing instructors’ pedagogical practices, cognition, and
their reactions to their working environment. The interplay among these variations can be
synthesized in an emerging cognitive-ecological model (CEM) of teaching EFL writing as shown
in Figure 1. The term cognitive is used to signify the influence of teachers’ cognition on their
teaching practices. The term ecological is used to denote the nested contexts that shape teachers’
cognition and influence their teaching practices. The model explicitly describes how teaching
practices are shaped by their cognition and their surrounding ecological contexts. This model may
provide an insight into the realities of EFL writing teaching and the structures within which the
teachers in Palestine and similar EFL contexts operate.

Figure 1: A cognitive-ecological model (CEM) of teaching EFL writing
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

128

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

The pictorial representation of the CEM is a comprehensive rainbow-like figure of seven
bands. It is holistic because it extends beyond the classroom into the context where the teaching is
occurring. At the core of the model are the teachers’ instructional practices in the writing
classroom. The other six bands can be thought of as filters to classroom practices which operate at
different levels with a degree of overlap. The term filter is used to reflect the subtle impact of these
factors upon practice. The first filter is teachers’ cognition, and it operates at the intrapersonal
micro level of individual teachers. The intrapersonal level refers to the micro personal factors that
influence the teachers’ practices. Examples of these personal factors are teachers’ attitudes,
pedagogical beliefs, conceptualizations, and their perceptions of their professional roles. The
classroom social environment, the second filter, involves teacher-student interpersonal
relationships and teachers’ perceptions of their students’ characteristics. This filter impacts on how
teachers act on the classroom and orient their focus. The third filter to practice is the physical
classroom environment. The teachers’ perception of the physical classroom environment operates
as a hindrance to the implementation of desired classroom practices. The classroom-related
barriers were class size, space availability, environmental conditions, teaching materials, and
classroom resources. The last three filters are the macro contextual factor: Institutional context,
national educational context, and global community discourse. Global community discourse
ecology enhances its members’ knowledge and skills and promotes their teaching self-efficacy.
The mediating positioning of the teacher cognition band between practices and the different
contextual contexts may show that cognition determines the weight that teachers assign to various
environmental constraints. This may explain why teachers working under the same conditions may
exhibit different teaching practices.
To conclude, as the ﬁrst in-depth study to directly explore L2 teachers’ cognitions with
respect to L2 writing teaching in the Palestinian university context, this study provides a thick
description of the cognition and practices of eight experienced university EFLteachers when
teaching L2 writing. The combined results from the interviews, classroom observations, and
documents analysis provide empirical evidence that it is necessary to uncover teachers’ cognition
underlying their instructional practices in order to understand how teachers teach in the classroom
and why they teach the way they do (Borg, 2009). Examining teachers’ cognition and practices is
the first step to gain insights into their teaching. If teachers do not have the opportunities to
articulate their cognition in a manner open for a challenge, those cognitions will automatically be
routinized into taken-for-granted instructional behaviors and personal theories for practice.
Therefore, this study may act as a catalyst to enable other L2 writing teachers to reflect upon and
examine their cognition about their teaching of writing in other academic contexts against those
reported by the participants and the literature referenced in this study.
About the Author:
Eman Alzaanin is an assistant professor of applied linguistics at the English Language
Department, Faculty of Languages and Translation, King Khalid University. Her areas of
interests include teacher emotions and cognition, L2 writing pedagogy, teacher education,
curriculum design, and program evaluation. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9332-233X

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

129

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

References
Akbulut, Y. (2007). Exploration of the beliefs of novice language teachers at the first year of their
teaching endeavours. Selçuk University Journal of Social Sciences Institute, 17, 1-14.
Ariogul, S. (2007). Understanding foreign language teachers' practical knowledge: what is the
role of prior language learning experience? Journal of Language and Linguistic Studies,
3(1), 168 – 181.
Borg, S. (2006). Teacher cognition and language education: Research and practice. London:
Continuum.
Borg, S. (2009). Language teacher cognition. In A. Burns & J. C. Richards (Eds.), The
Cambridge guide to second language teacher education (pp. 163-171). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Burns, A. (1992). Teacher beliefs and their influence on classroom practice. Prospect, 7(3), 56-66.
Casanave, C. P. (2009). Training for writing or training for reality? challenges facing writing
teachers and students in language teacher education programs. In R. Manchón (Ed.). Writing
in foreign language contexts: Learning, teaching, and research (pp. 256-277). Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters.
Celce-Murcia, M. (2001). Teaching English as a second or foreign language. Boston: Heinle &
Heinle.
Chacón, C. T. (2005). Teachers’ perceived efficacy among English as a foreign language teacher
in middle schools in Venezuela. Teaching and Teacher Education, 21(3), 257-272. DOI:
10.1016/j.tate.2005.01.001
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory. A practical guide through qualitative
analysis. London: Sage.
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research methods in education (5th ed.). New York:
Routledge Falmer.
Cowie, N. (2011). Emotions that experienced English as a foreignl (EFL) teachers feel
about their students, their colleagues and their work. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27
(1), 235-242.
Creswell,J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods approaches
(3rd ed.). California: Sage.
Cumming, A. (2003). Experienced ESL/EFL writing instructors’ conceptualization of them
teaching: curriculum options and implications. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the dynamics
of second language writing (pp. 71-92). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ezza, S. (2010). Arab EFL learners’ writing dilemma at tertiary level. English Language Teaching,
3(4), 33-39.
Fareh, S. (2010). Challenges of teaching english in the arab world: Why can’t EFL programs
deliver as expected? Prodeia Social and Behavioural Science, 2, 3600-3604.
Farrell, T. S. (2006). The first year of language teaching: Imposing order. System, 34(2), 211-221.
DOI: 10.1016/j.system.2005.12.001
Gebhard, M., Chen, I. A., Graham, H., & Gunawan, W. (2013). Teaching to mean, writing to
mean: SFL, L2 literacy, and teacher education. Journal of Second Language Writing,
22(2), 107-124. DOI: 10.1016/j.jslw.2013.03.005
Hall, A. H., & Grisham-Brown, J. (2011). Writing development over time: Examining preservice
teachers’ attitudes and beliefs about writing. Journal of Early Childhood Teacher Education,
32, 148-158. DOI: 10.1080/10901027.2011.572230
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

130

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

Hashemnezhad, H., & Hashemnezhad, N. (2012). A comparative study of product, process, and
post-process approaches in Iranian EFL students’ writing skill. Journal of Language Teaching
and Research, 3 (4), 722-729. Doi:10.4304/jltr.3.4.
Hyland, K. (2003). Second language writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, K. E. (2006). The sociocultural turn and its challenges for second language teacher
education. TESOL Quarterly, 40 (1), 235-257. DOI: 10.2307/40264518
Junqueira, L., & Payant, C. (2015). “I just want to do it right, but it's so hard”: A novice teacher's
written feedback beliefs and practices. Journal of Second Language Writing, 27, 19-36. DOI:
10.1016/j.jslw.2014.11.001
Khanalizadeh, B. & Allami, H. (2012). The impact of teachers’ beliefs on EFL writing instruction.
Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 2 (2) 334-342. DOI:10.4304/tpls.2.2.334342
Kim, Y., & Kim, J. (2005). Teaching Korean university writing class: Balancing the process
and the genre approach. Asian EFL Journal, 7(2), 1-15.
Lee, I. (1998). Writing in the Hong Kong secondary classroom: Teachers’ beliefs and practices.
Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, 3 (1), 61–76.
Lee, I. (2010). Writing teacher education and teacher learning: Testimonies of four EFL
teachers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 19(3), 143-157. DOI:
10.1016/j.jslw.2010.05.001
Lee, I. (2011). Feedback revolution: What gets in the way? ELT Journal, 65(1), 1-12. DOI:
10.1093/elt/ccp028
Lee, I. (2018). Future directions for writing teacher cognition. In J. Liontas (Ed.), The TESOL
encyclopedia of English language teaching (pp. 2351-2357). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons.
Leki, I., Cumming, A. & Silva, T. (2008). A synthesis of research on second language writing in
English. Routledge: USA.
Lortie, D. (2002). Schoolteacher: A sociological study (2nd ed). Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Lundstrom, K., & Baker, W. (2009). To give is better than to receive: The benefits of peer review to
the reviewer’s own writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18 (1), 30-43. DOI:
10.1016/j.jslw.2008.06.002
Mattheoudakis, M. (2007). Tracking changes in preservice EFL teacher beliefs in Greece: A
longitudinal study. Teaching and Teacher Education, 23(8), 1272-1288.
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case study application in education. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nemati, M., Alavi, M., Mohebbi, H. & Panahi Masjedlou, A. (2017). Teachers’ writing proficiency
and assessment ability: The missing link in teachers’ written corrective feedback practice in
an Iranian EFL context. Language Testing in Asia. 7 (21), DOI: 10.1186/s40468-017-00530.
Nguyen, T. M. H. & Hudson, P. B. (2010. Preservice EFL teachers’ beliefs about teaching writing
and learning to teach writing before their practicum: A case study in Vietnam. Asian EFL
Journal, 12, 43-67.
Reichelt, M. (2009). A critical evaluation of writing teaching programmes in different foreign
language settings. In R. M. Manchón (Ed.), Writing in foreign language contexts (pp.
183–208). Buffalo, NY: Multilingual Matters.
Saban, A., Kocbeker, B. N., & Saban, A. (2007). Prospective teachers’ conceptions of teaching
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

131

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
An Exploratory Study of the Interplay between EFL Writing

Alzaanin

and learning revealed through metaphor analysis. Learning and Instruction, 17(2), 123-139.
DOI: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2007.01.003
Shi, L., & Cumming, A. (1995). Teachers’ conceptions of second language writing: Five case
studies. Journal of Second Language Writing, 4, 87–111.
DOI: 10.1016/10603743(95)90002-0
Street, C. (2003). Preservice teachers’ attitudes about writing and learning to teach writing:
implications for teacher educators. Teacher Education Quarterly, 30 (3), 33-50.
Ting, M., & Qian, Y. (2010). A case study of peer feedback in a Chinese ESL writing classroom.
Chinese Journal of Applied Linguistics, 33 (4), 87-98.
Van der Schaaf, M.F., Stokking, K.M. & Verloop, N. (2008). Teacher beliefs and teacher behavior
in portfolio assessment. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24 (7), 16911704.
Yin, R. (2011). Qualitative research: From start to finish. New York: Guilford Press.
You, X. (2004). The choice made from no choice: English writing instruction in a Chinese university.
Journal of Second Language Writing, 13 (2), 97–110. DOI: 10.1016/j.jslw.2003.11.001
Zhao, Y., & Frank, K. A. (2003). Factors affecting technology uses in schools: An ecological
perspective. American Educational Research Journal, 40 (4), 807-840.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

132

