Exploring the Demographic History of Populations with Enhanced Lexis
Surfaces
Jorge Cimentada, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research
Sebastian Klüsener, Federal Institute for Population Research, Max Planck Institute for
Demographic Research, Vytautas Magnus University
Tim Riffe, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research
Abstract
Background
Lexis surfaces are widely used to analyze demographic trends across periods, ages, and birth
cohorts. When used to visualize rates or similar, these plots usually do not convey
information about population size. The failure to communicate population size in Lexis
surfaces can lead to misinterpretations of the mortality conditions populations face because,
for example, high mortality rates at very high ages have historically been experienced by only
a small proportion of a population or cohort.
Objective
We propose enhanced Lexis surfaces that include a visual representation of population size.
The examples we present demonstrate how such plots can give readers a more intuitive
understanding of the demographic development of a population over time.
Methods
Visualizations are implemented using an R-Shiny application, building upon perception
theories.
Results

We present example plots for enhanced Lexis surfaces that show trends in cohort mortality
and first-order differences in cohort mortality developments. These plots illustrate how
adding the cohort size dimension allows us to extend the analytical potential of standard
Lexis surfaces.

Contribution
Our enhanced Lexis surfaces improve conventional depictions of period, age, and cohort
trends in demographic developments of populations and cohorts. An online interactive
visualization tool based on Human Mortality Database data allows users to generate and
export enhanced Lexis surfaces for their research. The R code to generate the application (and
a

link

to

the

deployed

https://github.com/cimentadaj/lexis_plot​.

application)

can

be

accessed

at

1 Motivation
Lexis surfaces are widely used to visualize life table and other kinds of demographic data in
order to detect and analyze regularities and anomalies in demographic patterns across periods,
ages, and birth cohorts (Vaupel et al. 1987, Schöley 2016, Schöley and Willekens 2017, Rau
et al. 2018). These surfaces are built upon the Lexis diagram representation that was
developed by Wilhelm Lexis (1875) based on earlier work by Gustav Zeuner, Otto Brasche,
and Karl Becker, among others (Vandeschrick 2001). The Lexis diagram can be represented
in several different ways (Keiding 2011); we follow the most common contemporary
orientation where age is displayed on the ordinate and period on the abscissa (also referred to
as AP). Lexis surfaces usually focus on a single aspect of population development, such as
mortality rates. However, single layer representations have limitations. If, for example, a
color scheme for mortality rates is chosen in which higher mortality is indicated by a more
saturated or more prominent color (such as dark red), the upper part of a Lexis surface
becomes visually very dominant, as mortality is particularly high at the highest ages.
Moreover, because the area representing high mortality rates usually extends over several
ages, this spatial cluster in the upper part of the Lexis diagram forms a strong perceptual
group (see Duncan 1984, Merikle 1980). However, it is often the case that at very high ages
only a few members of a population remain alive. Thus, this visually dominant part of the
Lexis surface is of limited relevance to the survival experiences of a population or cohort.
The enhanced Lexis surfaces we propose are an attempt to overcome this limitation
by integrating into a single plot at least two dimensions of demographic development:
Mortality rates are the first dimension and population size is the second dimension. Enhanced
Lexis plots could also include dimensions related to fertility, migration, or other phenomena
that vary over age and time. In constructing such figures, one of our objectives is to avoid

moving to a 3D representation, as 2D representations continue to be easier for readers to
grasp and more convenient to include in scientific manuscripts. Our enhanced Lexis surfaces
take a cohort perspective, with birth cohorts plotted as diagonal lines so that readers can
follow cohorts as they age. These lines are formed by a succession of age-cohort Lexis
parallelograms, which we call ​AC cells​. In our plots, the width of the lines varies depending
on the size of the cohort over time. Each age-cohort combination is represented by an AC cell
where we expand or shrink the width of these lines to represent standardized values of the
population, with color used to inform the reader about the value of the indicator (e.g. the
mortality rate) in each cell. AC cells are placed in succession to form a variable-width
diagonal line for each cohort. ​Fig. 1 shows a simple example of the differences between the
classical Lexis surface and our enhanced Lexis surface.
Figure 1: Conventional Lexis Surface and Enhanced Lexis Surface
a) Conventional Lexis Surface

b) Enhanced Lexis Surface

A conventional Lexis surface graph is depicted in Fig. 1a, where each combination of age,
and cohort is represented by a Lexis parallelogram. The color varies by an indicator of
interest, in this case cohort mortality rates. The area covered by each AC cell is in this
conventional Lexis surface set to be the same across all cells, both within a given cohort but

also between cohorts. Our enhanced Lexis surface on Fig. 1b adapts the width of each AC
cell. In this example this is done proportional to the mean population size of that specific
cohort in a certain year standardized by the biggest size ever recorded for that cohort (see
below for more details and options). Such enhanced Lexis surfaces allow (1) to visualize how
the size of a cohort is subject to variation as it ages and/or (2) to show how different cohorts
vary in size. We believe that such plots provide users with a more intuitive understanding of
the ages at which mortality levels are or respectively were particularly relevant for cohorts or
populations living at specific time periods. In addition, enhanced Lexis surfaces allow to
visually explore data to investigate whether cohort size differences relate to variation in
mortality or other demographic phenomena across cohorts. For example, these surfaces
enable users to trace how disparities change depending on cohort size (also called Easterlin
effects, Easterlin 1987), or to grasp the degree to which a cohort was subject to potentially
selective in- and out-migration. An accompanying online visualization tool allows scientific
users and the interested public to explore these new analytical potentials independently.

2 Data and Implementation
Data for the visualization tool come from the Human Mortality Database (HMD 2019), which
provides high-quality cross-country comparative life table mortality data for about 40
countries. We use cohort death rates and exposure to risk, extracted from the HMD files
(​cMx_1x1 and ​cExposures_1x1​, respectively). The visualization tool is implemented
using an R-Shiny application. The main advantage of relying on the R-Shiny app rather than
other visualization programs is that it allows us to access existing R-libraries that support the
analysis of HMD data in Lexis surfaces. For example, we use the HMDHFDplus package
(Riffe 2015) to scrape the HMD data directly from the HMD web page (HMD 2019), thereby

gaining instant access to new data when the HMD is updated. Our visualizations are created
using functions from R base graphics (R Core Team 2018).

Standardization of cohort line width
A key challenge in creating enhanced Lexis plots is to ensure that valid and consistent
procedures are used to scale line widths to the cohort size at each point in time. The HMD
contains data for populations that vary greatly in size. For example, the US has a population
of more than 300 million, while Iceland’s population is almost 1000 times smaller. For some
populations the data spans more than two centuries, including periods of substantial growth.
We give users four way to standardize line widths. The first option (#1) is the conventional
Lexis surface, in which the AC cells that form the cohort lines are plotted next to each other,
with no space left between them (see, e.g., Fig. 2 or Fig. 4). The other three options shrink the
cells so that cohort lines vary by the mean size of a cohort at a specific age. The second
option (#2) enables users to standardize by a reference cohort of their choice (see e.g. Fig. 5b,
where we use the cohort born in 1960 as a reference cohort), while the third option (#3)
allows users to standardize by a reference year. The fourth option (#4) enables users to
standardize each cohort relative to its own maximum size (see e.g. Fig. 3).
In the second option, the application detects the biggest size recorded for the reference
cohort at any age, whereas in the third option the application detects the biggest cohort of any
age in the reference year. This reference number is then used to standardize the size of the
1

cohort line segments by age for the whole plot. A limitation of this approach is that it could

In this standardization, we divide all of the recorded cohort sizes by the derived reference
number and multiply these numbers by 0.9. As a result, the line for the cohort/year combination that is
used as a reference is plotted at a width of 0.9 (a width of 1 would imply that we are plotting a whole
surface).
1

end up generating overlapping lines if the cohort/year chosen as the reference has much lower
population numbers than the biggest sizes ever recorded for the studied population. In the
fourth approach the application treats each cohort separately. For each cohort we detect the
biggest cohort size ever recorded at any age, and use this as the base for the standardization
of the AC cell widths of that cohort. For this operation we only consider cohorts that can be
followed from birth onward. Otherwise, the standardization might result in misleading
patterns, particularly for those cohorts that can only be tracked for a short period at high ages
with high mortality levels. Thus, in this fourth option, we lose the upper-left corner of the
Lexis surface in which the cohorts who cannot be followed from birth onward are displayed.
Unlike the second and third approaches, the fourth approach does not display differences in
cohort sizes. Instead, it allows the reader to explore the data to determine at which age
cohorts reported their highest population numbers, and to detect differences in cohort attrition
at higher ages. The size of a cohort over time is, of course, affected not only by mortality
events, but also by migration. However, given that international migration is usually
undertaken between the ages of 20 and 40, the interpretation of variation in the development
of the line widths at higher ages is mostly driven by mortality events. This fourth option thus
allows the reader to explore the data to find out what proportions of cohorts over a wide time
horizon reached high ages.

Dimensions to be visualized
The application currently provides data on three indicators: (1) cohort mortality rates, (2)
gender differences in cohort mortality rates, and (3) first-order differences in cohort mortality

rates. As previously stated, the indicators are not necessarily limited to mortality indicators,
as we could potentially plot fertility (e.g., from the Human Fertility Database) and migration
indicators (e.g., implied migration balances).
The application provides users with the choice to visualize raw rates or smoothed
rates. Smoothed rates aim to make broad patterns clearer, where random variation may
otherwise mask the pattern. Such random variation is more likely to occur in smaller
populations, and might especially play a role at 1) young ages at around 10, where death rates
are very low, and 2) in older ages where death rates are high, but where few survivors remain
to be exposed to risk. Smoothing may also have the undesirable effect of eliminating real
ruptures, and for this reason it is advised to compare smoothed and raw rate surfaces. Our
application uses one dimensional (1d) P-splines, implemented in the MortalitySmooth R
package (Camarda 2012). This method assumes that death (or birth) counts are Poisson
distributed. We opted to 1d smooth over age within calendar years in order to preserve period
mortality shocks, which appear frequently in these historical data.
All three currently implemented indicators are available for men and women. A
specificity of the second indicator on gender differences in mortality is that users can either
standardize these mortality differences for women in reference to men (with the cohort line
size depicting women), or for men in reference to women (with the cohort line size depicting
men). In addition, users ​must select the country for which they would like the data to be
displayed. Finally, the background color can be selected as be black, gray, or white. The
white background is useful if the graph is intended to be used in a manuscript, while the gray
and black background might be the preferred choice for computer screen presentations also in
order to avoid glaring effects.

Color categorization
Currently, the color schemes are chosen automatically based on the choices made by the
users. For the cohort mortality rates, the colors are derived from the magma palette of the
viridis library (Garnier 2018). This palette is designed to ensure that most color-impaired
readers can detect the color variation. In order to maximize the contrast, we use a gamma
distribution to cut out colors from the given range of colors in the palette. For the other plots
displaying gender mortality differences and first-order differences in mortality over time, we
use a purple-green diverging palette (PRGn) from the RColorBrewer library (Neuwirth
2015). This palette is as well distinguishable for most color-impaired readers. In all derived
plots a legend provides the range of colors and a density curve of the displayed data. For the
density curve we treat each plotted AC cell as a unit of observation.
For cohort mortality rates the legend refers to deaths per 1000 persons, while for the gender
mortality differences it depicts the ratio of male deaths per 1000 males over female deaths per
1000 females multiplied by 100 (default option, but this can be reversed to females over
males in the Shiny application). For the first order differences the legend displays the change
in death rates over time within each age. This last indicator is calculated as the natural log of
the difference between a given year and the preceding year and it can be interpreted as the
growth rate change in percentage between years.

3 Visualization Examples
In our visualization examples we focus on graphs displaying cohort mortality rates and those
showing first-order differences in cohort mortality rates. We first turn to Sweden, the country

with the longest available time series, to plot male cohort mortality rates (​cmx​). To
demonstrate how enhanced Lexis surfaces can improve our understanding of mortality
conditions, we plot a conventional Lexis surface plot in Fig. 2, and then present the same data
with an enhanced Lexis surface in Fig. 3.

Figure 2: Conventional Lexis Surface of Cohort Mortality Trends among Males in Sweden

Source: HMD, own calculations

If readers are just interested in age-period-cohort variation of mortality, the
conventional Lexis surface is likely the preferred choice. An advantage of the conventional
Lexis surface is that period fluctuations in cohort mortality rates come out very clearly.
Mortality crises such as the famine of 1772/73, the Dano-Swedish war of 1808/09 and the
Spanish Flu of 1918 clearly stand out. In addition, smaller mortality crises are detectable.
However, the conventional Lexis surface is not able to provide an intuitive understanding of
which ages were particularly important for the mortality experience of cohorts and population

over time. In the 18​th century, a large fraction of births did not survive beyond age five.
However, in the left part of the graph the high mortality rates at age 80 are much more
dominant, even though they were of little relevance for these cohorts. To gain a deeper
understanding what this variation implies for the studied population at risk, the enhanced
Lexis surface as depicted in Fig. 3 offers additional insights. In this example surface the
cohort line width has been standardized by the biggest size ever recorded for each cohort
(standardization #4). In comparison to Fig. 2, the areas displaying mortality at ages above 80
years are less dominant particularly in the upper left part of Fig. 3. As a result, the high infant
mortality in the 18​th and 19​th century becomes more prominent. ​Consequently, readers are
better able to grasp the high relevance of infant mortality for the mortality experience of
cohorts born in this period. We can also observe that the proportion of a cohort that reached
ages above 80 years increased among the cohorts born in the early 19​th century, while this
tendency stalled among the cohorts born between 1850 and 1880. However, this trend seems
to be driven by migration as these cohorts already thin out at ages with high migration
intensities (20-30 years). This is particularly visible in the period 1871-1900. While survival
improvements at young ages continued through the first half of the 20​th century, massive
increases in the share of cohorts reaching age 80 are only detectable after 1960 and
particularly with the onset of the decrease in cardiovascular-related deaths in the 1970s
(​Mensah et al. 2017)​. I​ n addition, our enhanced Lexis surface demonstrates that in recent
years high mortality rates at older ages have become increasingly relevant for men in
Sweden, as higher shares of Swedish male cohorts are able to reach these ages.

Figure 3: Enhanced Lexis Surface of Cohort Mortality Trends among Males in Sweden

Source: HMD, own calculations

In addition to providing a general perspective, the enhanced Lexis surface invites
readers to zoom in to study other details. In particular, the Shiny application provides high
resolution images (Scalable Vector Graphics) with a bigger plot size that still retains its
original resolution regardless of the size of the image. This property combined with the
interactivity of the application and the option to download the high resolution images
provides much more analytical potential compared to having just access to static plots in a
manuscript. For example, in the case of Sweden the option to zoom in allows to explore
patterns in the late 19​th century when the country experienced a large emigration wave.
According to the healthy migrant hypothesis (e.g., Razum et al. 2000), healthier people were
more likely to leave the country. Readers can identify the cohorts who were most affected by
emigration by zooming in to study the plot. They can then investigate the question of whether
cohorts that were thinning out in their very early adult years due to emigration (e.g., the

cohorts born 1850-1880) had different mortality experiences in their later years than those
cohorts with lower emigration levels. Clear indications of such a pattern are not visible in the
graph.

Figure 4: Conventional Lexis Surface of Cohort Mortality Trends among Males in France

Source: HMD, own calculations

In a second example we show cohort mortality data for males in France. In the
conventional Lexis surface plot (Fig. 4), similar to the Swedish example, mortality crises in
France such as World War I and World War II are clearly visible, while the area of the plot
displaying mortality rates above age 80 is again perceptually dominant. ​The enhanced Lexis
surface plot (Fig. 5a), in which each cohort has been standardized by the biggest size ever
recorded for that cohort (standardization #4), demonstrates the shifting relevance of mortality
by age and ​also offers a better understanding of the tremendous effects World War I had on

the size of cohorts of prime drafting ages. As with the case of Sweden, the high importance of
mortality early in life for the mortality experience of populations during the 19​th century is
more apparent in the enhanced Lexis surface. For the interpretation of the effects of World
War I it is important to note that France experienced territorial changes that had an impact on
the total population size (Glei et al. 2017). Alsace-Lorraine was, for example, excluded from
the French dataset from 1871 to 1919 due to its temporary secession to the German Empire.
The distorting effects of these territorial changes are most visible in the trends during World
War I, as the data for France during this period exclude the data for Alsace-Lorraine as well
as for the territories most affected by war activities (departments of Aisne, Ardennes, Marne,
Meurthe-et-Moselle, Meuse, Nord, Oise, Pas-de-Calais, Somme, and Vosges). The existence
of distortions due to territorial changes is a limitation when constructing enhanced Lexis
surfaces. However, unlike in conventional depictions, drastic changes in the covered
population are immediately visible in such diagrams​.
An even different perspective is offered by an alternative enhanced Lexis surface (Fig.
5b) in which we standardize the line widths by the biggest cohort size ever recorded for the
cohort born in 1960 (standardization #2). For this particular example (Fig. 5b), the highest
cohort size for the cohort born in 1960 was recorded at an age of 11 years. With this
alternative standardization we are able to see links between World War I and World War II.
As a result of World War I, the French cohorts born between 1914 and 1919 were particularly
small. At the beginning of World War II these small cohorts were of prime drafting age,
which put France demographically in a weak position. On the other hand, the German
Empire, despite a drastic fertility bust during World War I, was in a better demographic
position as the overall fertility level had been higher than that in France in the beginning of
the 20​th​ century (see Vandenbroucke 2014).

Figure 5: Enhanced Lexis Surfaces of Cohort Mortality Trends among Males in France
a) Cohort line width standardized by the biggest size ever recorded for each cohort

b) Cohort width standardized by biggest size recorded for cohort born in 1960

Notes: Line widths are set relative to the biggest size recorded for the cohort born in 1960. In this example, the
biggest size was recorded at the age of 11 years. See standardization #2 in methods section.
Source: HMD, own calculations

Finally, in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 we provide an example of first-order differences in mortality
where we focus on the baby boomers in the United States. Fig. 6 shows the conventional
Lexis surface, while in the enhanced Lexis surface in Fig. 7 we standardize the line widths
relative to the cohort born in 1960 (standardization #2). The biggest size of this cohort was
recorded at age 1. Green denotes a mortality rate reduction in mortality rates and purple a
mortality rate increase relative to the preceding year. Turning first to the conventional Lexis
surface in Fig. 6, we can detect in the period between 1975 and 2000 at ages up to 50 years
green and purple clusters of improvement and deterioration. These appear in a period fashion
and seem to follow a diagonal cohort pattern. However, only when we turn to our enhanced
Lexis surface in Fig. 7 it becomes visible that this cohort pattern is centered on the large baby

boom cohorts. This finding is suggestive of period events having particularly an impact on
the mortality of the large baby boomer cohorts. Such visual explorations with enhanced Lexis
surfaces could then be further explored with more detailed data and analyses.

Figure 6: Conventional Lexis Surface of Changes in Cohort Mortality Rates among Males in the
US (log-scaled difference compared to preceding year)

Source: HMD, own calculations

Figure 7: Enhanced Lexis Surface of Changes in Cohort Mortality Rates among Males in the
US (log-scaled difference compared to preceding year)

Notes: Line widths are set relative to the biggest size recorded for the cohort born in 1960 (standardization #2). In
this example, the biggest size was recorded in 1961 when this cohort turned 11.
Source: HMD, own calculations

4 Discussion and conclusion
Our aim in this paper was to motivate and present enhanced Lexis surfaces, and to
demonstrate how they allow to overcome limitations in the interpretation of conventional
Lexis surfaces. Adjusting the Lexis parallelograms according to cohort size information at a
specific age can provide the reader with a better understanding of which parts of a population
or a cohort were experiencing specific mortality levels at certain ages. The use of this
approach gives the reader a more intuitive understanding of why high mortality levels in the
first years of life have historically been much more relevant to the overall mortality
experience of a population than high mortality levels at higher ages. In addition, we
demonstrated that adding the cohort size dimension to the plot helps the reader better
understand how differences in cohort sizes can affect the mortality experiences of cohorts

(e.g., Easterlin effects). Our visualization tool with enhanced Lexis surfaces will allow
researchers to explore these dimensions in a more intuitive way than is possible using tools
based on conventional Lexis surfaces. In the future, we intend to expand the available
indicators to cover fertility and migration data as well.

5 References
Camarda, C.G. (2012). MortalitySmooth: An R Package for smoothing Poisson counts with
p-splines. ​Journal of Statistical Software​ 50(1): 1–24.
Duncan, J. (1984). Selective attention and the organization of visual information. ​Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General​ 113(4): 501–517.
Easterlin, R.A. (1987). Birth and fortune: The impact of numbers on personal welfare.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Garnier, S. (2018). Viridis package. ​https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/viridis/viridis.pdf
Glei, D., Meslé, F., Vallin, J., Wilmoth, J., and Barbieri, M. (2017). About mortality data for
France, total population.
http://www.mortality.org/hmd/FRATNP/InputDB/FRATNPcom.pdf
Human Mortality Database (2019). University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max
Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Germany). Available at:
www.mortality.org​ or ​www.humanmortality.de​ (data downloaded on 16.06.2018).
Keiding, N. (2011). Age–period–cohort analysis in the 1870s: Diagrams, stereograms, and
the basic differential equation. ​Canadian Journal of Statistics​ 39(3): 405​–​420.
Merikle, P.M. (1980). Selection from visual persistence by perceptual groups and category
membership. ​Journal of Experimental Psychology: General​ 109(3): 279–295.

Mensah, G. A., Wei, G. S., Sorlie, P. D., Fine, L. J., Rosenberg, Y., Kaufmann, P. G., ... &
Gordon, D. (2017). Decline in cardiovascular mortality: possible causes and
implications. ​Circulation research,​ ​120(​ 2), 366-380.
Neuwirth, E. (2015). RColorBrewer package.
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RColorBrewer/RColorBrewer.pdf
Rau, R., Bohk-Ewald, C., Muszyńska, M.M., and J.W. Vaupel (2017). Visualizing mortality
dynamics in the Lexis diagram. Dordrecht: Springer. The Springer Series on
Demographic Methods and Population Analysis 44.
Razum, O., Zeeb, H., & Rohrmann, S. (2000). The ‘healthy migrant effect’–not merely a
fallacy of inaccurate denominator figures. ​International Journal of Epidemiology
29(1): 191–192.
R Core Team (2018). R: A Language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Riffe, T. (2015). Reading Human Fertility Database and Human Mortality Database data into
R. MPIDR, TR-2015-004.
Schöley, J. (2016). ​The Human Mortality Explorer: An interactive online visualization of the
Human Mortality Database​. Paper presented at the Population Association of
America 2016 Annual Meeting, Washington DC, USA, March 30-April 2, 2016.
Schöley, J., & Willekens, F. (2017). Visualizing compositional data on the Lexis surface.
Demographic Research​ 36: 627​–​658.
Vandenbroucke, G. (2014). Fertility and wars: The case of World War I in France. ​American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics​ ​6​(2): 108–136.
Vandeschrick, C. (2001). The Lexis diagram, a misnomer. ​Demographic Research​ 4: 97–124.
Vaupel, J.W​.​, Gambill .B.A., and Yashin A.I​.​ (1987). Thousands of data at a glance: Shaded

contour maps of demographic surfaces. IIASA Research Report. IIASA, Laxenburg,
Austria: RR-87-016.

