PRELIMINARY DRAFT

October 2019

Global inequalities in taxing rights:
An early evaluation of the OECD tax reform proposals
Alex Cobham (Tax Justice Network)1
Tommaso Faccio (University of Nottingham)
Valpy FitzGerald (University of Oxford)
Abstract. The current OECD process to reform the international rules governing
corporate tax, aimed to achieve a consensus solution by 2020, has finally
recognised the need to introduce elements of formulary apportionment to allocate
the profits of multinationals and is framed explicitly in terms of redistributing
taxing rights between countries. In this paper we provide the first public
evaluation of the redistribution of taxing rights associated with the leading
proposals of the OECD, IMF and the Independent Commission for the Reform of
International Corporate Taxation (ICRICT). The first key finding is that that
reallocation of taxing rights towards “market jurisdictions”, as it is currently
understood, is likely to be of little benefit to non-OECD countries. Indeed, the
proposal is likely to reduce revenues for a range of lower-income countries.
Second, all of the proposals deliver a much broader distribution of benefits if some
element of taxing rights is apportioned according to the location of multinationals’
employment, and not only of sales.

Alex Cobham: alex@taxjustice.net; Tommaso Faccio: tommaso.faccio@nottingham.ac.uk; Valpy Fitzgerald:
edmund.fitzgerald@qeh.ox.ac.uk. Alex Cobham is chief executive of the Tax Justice Network; Tommaso Faccio is
Head of Secretariat of ICRICT; and Valpy Fitzgerald is professor emeritus of international development finance
at the University of Oxford, and an ICRICT Commissioner. We are grateful to Javier Garcia-Bernardo for
excellent research assistance.
1

1

1. Introduction
Tax is rightly recognised, in target 17.1 of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, as
the primary means of implementation. The ability of states to meet their obligations –
indeed, to function at all – depends, in a simple and direct way, on the availability of
resources.
A significant challenge to resource availability – and to the prospects for sustainable
development – stems from the iniquities of international tax rules. Estimates of the
global revenue losses due to the tax abuses of multinational companies vary
significantly, from $100bn to $600 billion each year2. Low income countries (LICs)
are especially exposed to profit shifting and tax competition, and have limited
alternatives for raising revenue (IMF, 2019).
Faced with the scale of this problem, the OECD is consulting on the biggest
reshaping of international tax rules for ninety years, following an earlier attempt
(through phase 1 of the OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting initiative, 2013-2015)
to patch up the existing tax rules.
Negotiations are ongoing within the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework on BEPS 3
(Inclusive Framework), which brings together 134 countries (both OECD and nonOECD members). The basis for the current negotiations is the Work Programme
agreed by the Inclusive Framework published in June 20194.
Now, the organisation and its members – the richest economies – appear to have
embraced three much more radical changes (Cobham & Nelson, 2019) and the
workplan considers the introduction of novel features to address some of the failings
of the current international tax system.
First, the decision has been taken to move beyond the arm’s length principle that the
League of Nations settled upon in the 1920s and 1930s. Limitations of the arm’s
length principle—under which transactions between related parties are to be priced
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/cmsdata/161049/2019%2001%2024%20%20Petr%20Jansky%20written%20questions%20-%20Ev_TAX%20GAP.pdf Page 3, Table 1
3 https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/flyer-inclusive-framework-on-beps.pdf
4 https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/programme-of-work-to-develop-a-consensus-solution-to-the-tax-challengesarising-from-the-digitalisation-of-the-economy.pdf
2

2

as if they were between independent entities—and reliance on notions of physical
presence of the taxpayer to establish a legal basis to impose income tax have allowed
apparently profitable firms to pay little tax.
Alternative directions for progress do exist (IMF, 2019), and tax justice advocates
have long proposed the alternative of a unitary approach: recognising profits at the
unit of the multinational group, and then apportioning these as tax base between the
countries of operation on the basis of the location of groups’ real economic activity .
The European Commission has proposed a ‘Common Consolidated Corporate Tax
Base’ (CCCTB) for the EU5. Worldwide formula apportionment has been proposed
by, for example, the Independent Commission for the Reform of International
Corporate Taxation (2018). Several scholars have also advocated such an approach,
see e.g. the contributions in Picciotto (2016).
The great breakthrough of ‘Pillar One’ of the reforms is a recognition that (at least
some) profit must be allocated in this way, if the scale of tax abuse is to be reduced.
Second, at the prompting of lower-income countries that are not members of the
OECD but have been promised a voice through the ‘Inclusive Framework’, the new
reforms are framed explicitly as addressing the distribution of taxing rights between
countries. This should ensure that for the first time, policy proposals are evaluated
on precisely the basis of the extent to which they achieve desired redistribution of
taxing rights. As noted, the current rules generate a systematic inequality in taxing
rights to the detriment of lower-income countries. They also cost most high-income
OECD member countries, however, with only a relatively small number of profitshifting jurisdictions benefiting alongside multinationals and their professional
advisers.
Third, the new reforms include in ‘Pillar Two’ a proposed minimum tax (Global Antbase Erosion or GloBe”6), which if implemented well has the potential to put a floor
under the race to the bottom. There are a range of questions here, about how to
5

https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/com_2016_683_en.pdf

https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/programme-of-work-to-develop-a-consensus-solution-to-the-tax-challengesarising-from-the-digitalisation-of-the-economy.pdf p 27 onwards
6

3

ensure such a proposal genuinely curtails the actions of jurisdictions seeking to
procure profit-shifting from elsewhere, but without unduly curtailing sovereignty
over industrial policy levers for others. The principle of establishing a common
minimum tax rate is however a powerful and important one, which should stymie
the current race to the bottom in corporate tax rates.
In this paper, we focus on the proposals made under Pillar One: the allocation of
profits as tax base between countries. In order to find consensus, the OECD
secretariat has been tasked with assessing the potential economic implications so
that Inclusive Framework members are provided with an indication on their impact
on taxing rights and revenues before they commit to any solution. Many countries
are also carrying out their own assessments. But there are two major obstacles to this
work.
The first is the speed of progress being demanded, and the rapid evolution of the
working basis for proposals. As the head of the OECD secretariat told journalists this
month (September 2019), bilateral discussions between the USA and France have
been especially important in setting direction, and G7 countries are driving the
discussions (Tax Notes Talk, 2019). The G7 have reiterated the intended timeline of
“reaching in 2020 an agreement to simplify regulatory barriers and modernize international
taxation within the framework of the OECD7”. With proposals first laid out only in June
2019, the OECD and many Inclusive Framework members are struggling to carry out
analysis in time.
The OECD secretariat is currently testing a unified approach on a solution to tax
digitalisation, which tries to bring together three proposals: (i) a proposal put
forward by the U.K to recognise the value of ‘sustained engagement and active
participation of users’; (ii) a proposal by the USA to give market jurisdictions a
greater allocation of taxing rights based on the more active engagement by all kinds
of businesses with customers (recognising the concept of ‘marketing intangibles’)
and (iii) the proposal put forward by the G24 group of lower-income countries, a

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2019/08/26/g7-leaders-declaration-biarritz-26august-2019/
7

4

more comprehensive approach which combines a new definition of taxable nexus
based on significant economic presence with an allocation of income using fractional
apportionment, which allocates profits of multinational through the use of a
balanced formula with supply and demand factors. A version of the unified
proposal is expected to be made public only in October 2019, after the Inclusive
Framework is scheduled to have agreed the direction – raising real issues for timely
analysis of the effects on the distribution of taxing rights.
The second obstacle to such analysis is the paucity of publicly available data. It is
unclear whether any of the economic analysis carried out by the OECD will be made
public before an agreement is reached. Some OECD countries are able to perform
such analysis independently of the OECD, using their private access to data, but
most Inclusive Framework countries are not in a position to do so.
We survey the main possible data sources and their strengths and weaknesses in the
following section, but the best option is the country-by-country reporting that
multinationals are now required to submit to tax authorities, following the adoption
in the BEPS process of a longstanding Tax Justice Network proposal. Multinationals
have so far been successful in their lobbying to keep this data out of the public
domain, but the OECD has managed to garner agreement on publishing aggregate
statistics in January 2020. The USA has already published aggregate statistics from
the country-by-country reporting of its own multinationals. At present, this US data
provides the clearest insight into the likely redistribution of taxing rights associated
with various proposals, despite its limitations, and it is this that we use in the
current paper.
We use the data to calculate the (static) changes in tax base and revenues for
individual countries that would arise under what is currently understood to be the
core OECD proposal. For comparative purposes, we also assess competing proposals
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF8) and of the Independent Commission for
the Reform of International Corporate Taxation (ICRICT, 2018).

https://ntanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/What-Do-We-Know-About-Global-Residual-ProfitAllocation-A-First-Assessment-of-its-Efficiency-and-Revenue-Impact-SLIDES-1.pdf
8

5

In the third section, we lay out the four models we evaluate, with eight variations in
total. The fourth section presents the key results, and final section summarises the
policy implications of the different distribution formulae.

2. Data
There are multiple data sources on the economic activity and tax behaviour of
multinational companies, but all are lacking in important ways (see the surveys in
Cobham & Janský, forthcoming 2020; and in Garcia-Bernardo, Janský & Tørsløv,
2019). The main sources of company balance sheet data, Orbis and Compustat, are
available to purchase access but suffer from systematic gaps that impede
understanding of profit shifting behaviour in particular. Compustat focuses on large
US companies. Orbis, while often exhibiting broad coverage for parent companies
and subsidiaries in large, high-income economies, typically lacks data on the
accounts (and even the existence) of entities in smaller, financially secretive
jurisdictions and in lower-income countries.
Eurostat provides some data on the activities of foreign affiliates of multinationals
operating in the EU (as used by Tørsløv, Wier, & Zucman, 2018, for example); while
the Bureau of Economic Affairs publishes data on the activities of US multinationals
abroad (as used by Cobham and Janský, 2019). Both provide a useful, if partial
picture.
In terms of strictly private data, national tax authorities also have access to corporate
tax returns for companies operating in their jurisdiction. In most cases, these have
only recently begun to be exploited for public research. Bilicka (2019) uses UK data
to reveal a much wider gulf than previously understood between the tax payment of
domestic firms, and that of subsidiaries of foreign multinationals of equivalent size
and industry sector, which tend systematically to declare near-zero profits.
None of these sources, however, provide the level of public transparency for
multinationals, consistently across each jurisdiction of operation, that would be
expected for a standalone domestic business that files its accounts publicly. The long
battle for this type of country-by-country reporting by multinationals (detailed in

6

Cobham, Janský & Meinzer, 2018), entered a new phase in 2013, when the G20 group
of countries gave the OECD a mandate to develop a reporting standard. This
standard, based on the original Tax Justice Network proposal (Murphy, 2003), was
agreed and implemented as part of the BEPS process in 2015.
Although the data are currently restricted to private reporting to OECD tax
authorities, with problematic information exchange arrangements to allow limited
sharing with lower-income countries, there is a commitment for the OECD to
publish aggregate statistics based on the reporting to individual tax authorities,
annually from January 2020. The USA has pressed ahead and published the
aggregate statistics for its multinationals, for 2016, already.
Garcia-Bernardo, Janský & Tørsløv (2019) provide a comprehensive comparison of
these statistics with the other publicly available sources, and show that the new data
both confirm existing knowledge and also allow analysis to go further – with a
particular focus on the patterns of profit shifting, including the particular
jurisdictions that benefit and those that lose most, and the underlying pattern of
differentials in effective tax rates.
The major limitation of the data, for our purposes, is that it relates only to the
operations of US multinationals; and only to those with annual turnover exceeding
$750 million. Without directly comparable data, it is not possible to conclude with
certainty as to whether these large US multinationals are more, less or equally
aggressive in their profit shifting, compared to multinationals from other countries.
Nonetheless, US multinationals are the biggest single group and the US accounts for
a disproportionate share of global foreign direct investment.
A further attraction of this data is that is will soon be available for the majority of the
world’s leading multinationals. The OECD secretariat is understood by now to hold
equivalent aggregate statistics for most OECD economies, in advance of its
publication in January 2020, and the data is already in use for private analyses of
various proposals. This means that work carried out with the US data can be
replicated quickly for a near-representative global dataset, should the OECD choose
to do so; and in January at the latest, by any independent researcher.
7

We draw on a variety of additional data sources for the analysis that follows. Data
on tax revenues (total and those from corporate income tax) we take from the
ICTD/UNU-WIDER Government Revenue Dataset (GRD) 2019. For full details see
Prichard, Cobham & Goodall (2014), and McNabb (2017). Data on GDP in US dollars
we take from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook database. Data on statutory tax
rates we take from Janský & Palanský (2018). Lastly, data on population are drawn
from the World Bank database.
The summary Country by Country Reporting (CbCR) for a large sample of US
MNEs (for the year 2016) is published by the Internal Revenue Service.9 In relation to
the BEA survey of all US MNEs in 2016, which is at least in theory comprehensive,
the CbCR sample accounts for 84 % of sales and 59 % of employment. This implies
an even greater coverage of profits because these are clearly the larger firms. The
data show how in 2016 the US MNEs paid total income tax at an average effective
rate of 19 percent on their worldwide profits; but that the rate paid in lower-income
countries was on average 43 percent, in high-income countries 21 percent, and in ‘tax
havens’ only 5 percent.
The decision as to how to allocate profits between tax jurisdictions is largely made
by these companies; who have many methods of shifting their profits and thus the
tax base. The current OECD reform process is based on the recognition that existing
tax rules do not constrain companies sufficiently to declare profits where their real
activity takes place. In what follows, we use the CbCR data to model the effects of
three leading approaches to address this failing.

3. Models to apportion taxing rights
The object of this exercise is to compare the distributive effects of the models
currently under discussion for an alternative system to BEPS for assigning the tax
base – that is, taxing rights over MNE profits – between the jurisdictions where they

This database is discussed in depth in Garcia and others (2019), with particular attention to its coverage.
Original data can be found at https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-country-by-country-report
9

8

operate. We look at three models: a simulation10 of the models proposed by IMF and
the OECD, and a proposal for ‘global formulary apportionment’ (GFA) supported by
the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation
(ICRICT) and others. In addition, in line with recent media statements from the
OECD secretariat (see e.g. Tax Notes, 2019), we consider a substantially less
ambitious version of the OECD model. We also explore two different variants for
each case: one where allocations in line with multinationals’ real economic activity
are based on their sales only, and one that reflects the location of both their sales and
their employment.
A key concept in this policy debate is the distinction made between ‘routine’ and
‘residual’ profit. Economists divide ‘profits’ (i.e. operating income) into two parts:
the ‘normal’ or ‘routine’ rate of profit on the one hand, and a residual variously
known as ‘rent’, ‘excess profits’ or ‘residual profits’ on the other; where the former
refers to the opportunity cost of capital – what it can earn elsewhere – and the latter11
to the fruits of market power, technical innovation etc. In corporate finance, the
weighted average cost of capital (WACC) is a common measure of the minimum
expected weighted average return of all investors in a company given the riskiness
of its future cash flows. 12 In other words, the minimum return that a company must
earn on an existing asset base to satisfy its creditors, owners, and other providers of
capital, or they will invest elsewhere.
In principle, so long as corporate income tax does not reduce the firm’s rate of return
below the cost of capital, production and investment will continue to be worthwhile
– in other words, Corporate Income Tax (CIT) is a charge on rent and thus has no
Full details of IMF and OECD proposals have not been published, so simulations included in the paper are
based on authors’ understanding of the proposed models.
11 Stiglitz (1976, 2018).
10

See Frank and Shen (2016). The WACC takes into account the relative weights of each component of the capital
structure as well as the cost of each The capital structure of an MNE can be complex, but the simplest case where
the capital is only debt and equity illustrates the approach: WACC= (Cost of Equity) x (Equity Share) + (Cost of
Debt) x (Debt Share). There are several possible proxies for each element of cost (expressed as an annual rate)
such as the return on the stock market for the ‘cost of equity’ and the corporate bank lending rate for the ‘cost of
debt’ Each will contain a risk premium - measured as the difference between the cost of capital and the long-term
riskless (e.g. government bond) rate. The cost of capital will also vary considerably by line of business (e.g.
industrial sector) because technology, markets, uncertainty etc are all different.
12

9

disincentive effect. In the theoretical models of textbook economics, it is assumed
that the profit rate is equal to the cost of capital (‘at equilibrium’) and so this issue is
eliminated by definition, and thus CIT does reduce investment and growth – but only
by assumption. The empirical evidence is not nearly so clear.
Recent estimates based on market data for the cost of capital13 (defined as “the
weighted average of the cost of equity and after-tax cost of debt, weighted by the
market values of equity and debt”) identify the 2016 cost of capital for the US (11%),
EU (6%), Japan (4%) and Emerging Markets (14%) - leading to a global average
figure of 8%. The cost of capital to MNEs does not necessarily vary by region to this
extent because they can source funds in all major capital markets due to their global
reach; while as large firms, they may also present less risk to the lender and thus
enjoy cheaper funding.
The CbCR data on US MNEs discussed below yields for 2016 an overall rate of
return on fixed assets (before tax) of 22 %, so if the cost of capital (‘routine profit’) is
8%, then almost two-thirds of profits are ‘residual’. The same source shows that the
rate of return after tax is 18%, in which case the residual after tax is just over one half
of total profits. In short, the tax base subject to reallocation from just these firms
alone in one year is of the order of US$ 700 billion – and by implication potential tax
revenue of the order of US$ 150 billion.
The three current proposed models for redefining the tax base (or ‘taxing rights’) all
aim to reallocate profits away from ‘tax havens’, the jurisdictions that most
aggressively procure profit shifting from elsewhere, and back to the jurisdictions
where the firms’ economic activities take place – the conceptual basis for this going
back to the ‘Massachusetts Formula” in the USA and similar federal mechanisms in
Canada and the EU.14

The Stern Business School compiles extensive data for cost of capital for quoted companies sourced from
Bloomberg, Morningstar, Capital IQ and Compustat (Damodaran, 2019).
13

Clausing (2017) shows that even within the US federal system, tax competition does not affect investment.
“This … is consistent a long literature in public finance that emphasizes a hierarchy of behavioral response to
taxation timing and financial responses are generally much larger than real behavioural responses.” (p. 98
emphasis in original). See also Saez and others (2012).
14

10

We consider first the “IMF model”. This proposes that the routine profits of an MNE
to be attributed to each jurisdiction are defined by the global cost of capital applied
to the capital assets located there – say, a 7.5% return. Residual profits (the difference
between total group profits and the sum of these routine profits) are then
apportioned in proportion to sales in each jurisdiction. By construction, this would
lead to a major shift of taxing rights away from tax havens towards market
jurisdictions where sales actually take place. We also apply a variant where residual
profits are apportioned in line with an equally weighted combination of sales and
employment.
The “OECD model” proposes that routine profits be defined in terms of the rigorous
application of BEPS rules in each jurisdiction to establish the ‘true’ local profit
generated locally on the “arms-length” principle. Some or all of the residual profits
(the difference between total group profits and the sum of these routine profits) are
then apportioned in proportion to sales in each jurisdiction.15
Earlier discussions at the OECD suggested that this approach would work as
follows. First, the current distribution of taxable profits under the arm’s length
approach would be respected, and labelled as ‘routine’, for all but some predetermined group of ‘tax havens’. Profits currently declared in these jurisdictions
would be labelled as ‘residual’, and then distributed globally in proportion to sales.
This has the political attraction of ensuring that no non-tax haven jurisdiction can
lose taxing rights in the reform. The obvious drawbacks, however, are two. First,
there is no universally agreed definition of ‘tax havens’, and any lists historically
have been highly politicised – with smaller, weaker jurisdictions much more likely to
be listed than larger, powerful states, regardless of their actual behaviour (Cobham,
Janský & Meinzer, 2015). Second, the sharp difference in treatment between the two
groups creates a clear question of fairness – to say nothing of political feasibility.
More recently, it seems likely that a version of the IMF model will be used instead.
This would assess a rate of return on fixed capital as determining routine profit, but

15

Clausing and Avi-Yonah (2007)

11

at the global level rather than for individual jurisdictions. That is, a multinational’s
total routine profit would be determined by applying a return of e.g. 7.5% on their
(global) fixed capital. This global routine profit would then be allocated between
jurisdictions in proportion to their current share of profits, as determined by the
current tax rules. The remaining global profit would be labelled ‘residual’, and
apportioned according to the location of sales, which effectively results in a
redistribution of taxing rights to market jurisdictions.
This version allows for jurisdictions to lose out, where they have enjoyed current
profits much higher than the determined ‘routine’ level, and do not have
proportionate sales to account for this. This remains likely therefore to generate
losses for ‘tax haven’ jurisdictions with excess profit currently; but has the attraction
that all jurisdictions are treated equally. Again, we also apply a variant where
residual profits are apportioned in line with an equally weighted combination of
sales and employment.
As it is possible that not all residual profits will be distributed in a formulaic manner
to market jurisdictions, we also estimate the impact of a limited (20%)
reapportionment of the residual profit. In this version, the other 80% of the residual
profit would be allocated in proportion to current profits – that is, in line with the
distribution under arm’s length pricing. The overall redistribution would of course
be much smaller under what we label the ‘OECD 20%’ model.
The final “GFA model” (global formulary apportionment) abandons the separation
of routine from residual profits as unworkable and apportions all group profits by
jurisdiction according to a simple formula of one or more ‘factors’ in the tradition of
the Massachusetts Formula. In one variant, the ‘Destination Based Sales Tax’16 ,
taxing rights are claimed on the basis of the proportion of the MNEs sales in each
jurisdiction – the justification being that final sales are territorially specific and thus
cannot be manipulated by firms in order to avoid tax liability. In the other variant,

16

Auerbach (2010)

12

the taxing rights are claimed on the basis of the proportion of MNEs’ shares of both
sales and employment in each jurisdiction (the so-called ‘Canada Formula’).
We can now apply these models to the data for US MNEs in 2016. In order to do this,
we need to operationalize the three models in a tractable fashion to obtain estimates
of the scale of reallocation of the tax base between countries that might occur under
each scheme. The operationalized models are as follows:
a. For the “IMF Model” we estimate routine profits arising in each
country as a 7.5 % return on fixed assets. Residual profits are then the
difference between this figure and reported profits in the US CbCR
data. These residual profits are summed globally, and then reallocated
to each country in proportion to: (i) the country’s share in total US
MNE sales in the survey; and (ii) the combined shares of sales and
employment in the survey. The final allocation of taxable profits to
each jurisdiction c is then given as:

where FAc is the jurisdiction’s share of global fixed assets; P is profits
(under the current rules); and Factorc the jurisdiction’s share of the
apportionment factors, so variously:

i.
ii.
b. For the “OECD Model” we estimate routine profits at the global level
as a 7.5% return on fixed assets. This value is attributed between
jurisdictions according to arm’s length pricing: that is, for our purposes
they are distributed between jurisdictions according to the current
proportions of taxable profit. Second, the ‘residual’ profit (i.e the
13

remaining global value of profits that is not covered by the return on
fixed assets) is then apportioned between jurisdictions according to (i)
the country’s share in total US MNE sales in the survey; and (ii) the
combined shares of sales and employment in the survey

c.

“OECD 20% approach”: First, identify routine profits at the global
level as a 7.5% return on fixed assets. Then add 80% of the remaining
‘residual’ profits. This value is attributed between jurisdictions
according to arm’s length pricing: that is, for our purposes they are
distributed between jurisdictions according to the current proportions
of taxable profit. Second, the remaining 20% of ‘residual’ profit (i.e the
remaining global value of profits that is not covered by the return on
fixed assets) is then apportioned between jurisdictions according to (i)
the country’s share in total US MNE sales in the survey; and (ii) the
combined shares of sales and employment in the survey:

d. For the “GFA Model” we do not need to estimate routine profits: total
profits reported for all countries in the 2016 US CbCR data are summed
and then apportioned to jurisdictions using the two formulae. This
means, therefore that one the one hand the sales-based apportionment
version of this model reproduces the proposed Destination Based Sales
Tax; while on the other hand, the sales-and-employment (‘Canada’)
version reflects the Global Unitary Taxation proposal:

14

In all our models, reallocation based on sales reflects where sales are currently
booked by US MNEs for accounting purposes and reported in the CbCR data, as
information on sales by destination of customers is not publicly available.

4. Key results
We created four versions of the CbCR data. In one, used throughout the paper, we
excluded countries for which the total reported profits were negative. In the second,
we maintained all countries. The results for these two versions are highly similar,
since firms report profits or small losses in most countries. The only countries where
firms report large losses in 2016 were Switzerland ($-6 billion), Venezuela ($-3
billion) and Luxembourg ($-2 billion).
In the third version of the data, we excluded countries for which the total gains
according to the model were negative. Finally, the fourth version excludes both
countries for which the total reported profits were negative, and for which the gains
were negative. The last two versions allow us to focus on the countries that do not
attract disproportionate amounts of profits. The results found are similar to those
found using the first two versions of the data for all income groups and regions,
except in those groups featuring major profit shifting hubs. All results are available
publicly, along with the replication code.
For the main results, to allow straightforward comparison of the potential
redistribution in taxing rights, we proceed on the basis that redistributed profit (tax
base) would be taxed at the statutory corporate income tax rate, and present the
resulting revenues as a proportion of total tax revenues or total corporate income tax
revenues. We also present the projected revenue changes as a share of countries’
GDP, and on a per capita basis by population. The overall results can be seen in
Table 1, which shows how the different models affect the overall distribution of
profits between countries (grouped based on World Bank income classification17)
and the percentage gain compared to the current distribution of profits.

17

https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lendinggroups

15

Table 1 Profit distribution under different models ($bn)
`

CURRENT
ALLOCATION

HIGH
INCOME
UPPER
MIDDLE
INCOME
LOWER
MIDDLE
INCOME
LOW INCOME
TAX HAVEN
TOTAL
ABSOLUTE
GAIN, $BN

HIGH
INCOME
UPPER
MIDDLE
INCOME
LOWER
MIDDLE
INCOME
LOW INCOME
TAX HAVEN18
% GAIN

HIGH
INCOME
UPPER
MIDDLE
INCOME
LOWER
MIDDLE
INCOME
LOW INCOME
TAX HAVEN19

GFA SALES

1010.4

1120.6

1098.5

1130.4

1115.6

1025.2

OECD
(20%) SALES +
EMP
1022.2

45.7

74.1

131.8

73.1

111.8

49.5

57.3

64.8

103.6

20.2

15.6

53.0

20.0

45.1

19.6

24.6

17.1

42.3

-0.3
344.5
1420.5

0.3
209.9

0.7
136.4

0.6
196.4

0.9
147.0

-0.2
326.4

-0.1
316.5

0.1
254.1

0.4
204.7

OECD Sales

74.0

59.2

GFA Sales

GFA SALES +
EMP

OECD SALES +
EMP

1084.4

1069.6

120.0

105.2

14.8

28.4

86.1

27.4

66.1

3.8

11.6

19.1

57.8

-4.6

32.8

-0.2

24.9

-0.6

4.4

-3.1

22.0

0.6
-134.6

1.0
-208.0

0.9
-148.1

1.2
-197.4

0.1
-18.1

0.1
-28.0

0.4
-90.4

0.7
-139.8

OECD Sales

7%

6%

OECD
(20%) Sales

OECD Sales +
Emp

11%

9%

12%

10%

1%

OECD
(20%) Sales +
Emp
1%

62%

188%

60%

145%

8%

25%

42%

126%

-23%

162%

-1%

123%

-3%

22%

-15%

109%

n.a.
-39%

n.a.
-60%

n.a.
-43%

n.a.
-57%

n.a.
-5%

n.a.
-8%

n.a.
-26%

n.a.
-41%

18

IMF Sales +
Emp

OECD
(20%) Sales

OECD SALES

88.2

IMF Sales

IMF Sales +
Emp

OECD
(20%) SALES

110.2

GFA Sales +
Emp

IMF Sales

IMF SALES +
EMP

OECD
(20%) Sales +
Emp
11.8

GFA Sales

GFA Sales +
Emp

IMF SALES

OECD Sales +
Emp

The following jurisdictions are classified as tax havens for the purposes of this analysis: Mauritius, Aruba,
Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Curacao, Panama, St. Kitts and Nevis,
Puerto Rico, St. Lucia, Trinidad and Tobago, Virgin Islands, Guam, Hong Kong, Macau, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
United Arab Emirates, Cyprus, Guernsey, Ireland, Jersey, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands,
Switzerland plus income currently attributed to “Stateless entities and other country”.
19
The following jurisdictions are classified as tax havens for the purposes of this analysis: Mauritius, Aruba,
Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Curacao, Panama, St. Kitts and Nevis,
Puerto Rico, St. Lucia, Trinidad and Tobago, Virgin Islands, Guam, Hong Kong, Macau, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
United Arab Emirates, Cyprus, Guernsey, Ireland, Jersey, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands,
Switzerland plus income currently attributed to “Stateless entities and other country”.

16

Figure 1 shows the projected revenue changes as a proportion of country groups’
existing corporate income tax revenues. The figure shows the aggregate scale for the
G7, EU and OECD groups of rich countries; the G24 and G77 groups of lowerincome countries; and the G20 group of leading economies. In addition, the figure
isolates the US, and looks that the G7 without the US; the OECD without the US; and
the G20 excluding OECD members.

Figure 1: Projected revenue increases, % of current CIT revenue

There are a range of important points here, and we highlight six in particular.
First, the scale of benefits is potentially large. The higher projections of revenue gain,
from addressing the tax abuse of US multinationals only, are substantial. A number
exceed 5% of the total revenues currently raised through corporate income taxes. The
full projection, using the complete OECD country-by-country dataset, can be
expected to be significantly higher.
Second, compare the sales-only variants (the pale bars of each colour). Of the three
full proposals (setting aside the ‘OECD 20%’ model for now), the OECD model is the
least beneficial for all groups (with the narrow exception of the EU, where the IMF
model is marginally less beneficial).
Third, if the US is set aside, all groupings benefit more from the options where
apportionment is based on a combination of employment and sales, rather than sales
alone. This holds for the IMF and OECD models, where these institutions have
proposed to look at sales alone, as well as for global formulary apportionment
approaches where ICRICT and others support a balanced formula including
17

employment. The differences are especially large for lower-income countries, with
the balanced formula often yielding a benefit more than three times as great.
Fourth, the US appears as an outlier. As the headquarters country for the
multinationals in the sample, this may point to a wider pattern. There may be
particular features of OECD headquarters countries that means they are relatively
poor at capturing tax base from their own multinationals’ operations at present, and
so would stand to gain more from rule changes. It is possible that the full set of
country-by-country reporting data for all OECD members would show that all
benefit more from a sales-only approach – which is true for the US here but not for
the rest of the OECD or G7 nor for the EU. It is also possible that the proposed
reforms are, in effect, most favourable to home countries rather than host countries.
Alternatively, or in addition, it is possible that the scale of the US market means it
stands to benefit uniquely from a switch to a sales basis. In this case, the full OECD
dataset might reflect the pattern here more closely, with the US gaining more than
others and potentially remaining an outlier in benefiting most from a sales-only
approach.
Fifth, the benefits from a watered-down OECD approach, on the lines of the variant
modelled here which apportions only 20% of the assessed residual profit, are small
and regressively distributed. For G7 countries as a whole, the redistribution is
projected to yield just half a percentage point of current corporate income tax
revenues (made up 0.8% for the US, and less than half that for the rest). For the G24
and G77 groups, the return is projected barely to exceed a tenth of a percentage point
of current corporate income tax revenues; it is lower still for the non-OECD
members of the G20.
Considerations of Equity
Traditionally, tax design is based on considerations of ‘equity’ as well as ‘efficiency’
– by which is meant the reduction of both administrative costs of collection and of
negative incentive effects on production. By ‘equity’ is meant fairness as between
taxpayers in different lines of business (‘horizontal equity’) on the one hand and

18

fairness between those of different levels of income or wealth (‘vertical equity’) on
the other.
Of course, corporation tax is essentially a withholding tax on dividends (and capital
gains) and thus within a single economy, highly progressive in nature.
Internationally, it becomes a developing country claim on developed country
wealth-holders who could not otherwise be reached. It is, therefore, a progressive tax
which increases equity both nationally and internationally.
Essentially, economic rents (‘residual profits’ in our models) arise from the global
operations of MNEs, and thus cannot in fact be attributed to any one country as the
‘economic presence’ arguments (and apportionment weights) attempt to do. To the
extent that they arise globally, they can only be taxed globally - as the unitary
taxation model argues. By extension some part of the taxing rights in fact belong to
the citizens of the world.
This notion is quite as radical and unrealistic as it might seem. The existing
apportionment formulae (in the US, Canada and potentially the EU) were
established in a federal context where a population-based entitlement is expressed
though the expenditure of the tax revenue, while the central government commits to
particular levels of health and education on the one hand, and the common
provision of defense and law on the other. Further, the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) can be interpreted in a similar light as a common commitment by all
governments to the economic entitlements of the global population (“we the
peoples”). This too would mean that international equity should at least be a leading
criterion in evaluation any proposed apportionment scheme.20
Figure 2 shows the inter-country equity in tax base reapportionment on a per capita
basis as an indicator of horizontal equity. Here the projected revenue increases for
the OECD 20% model are shown for country groups, but this time in dollars per

This cannot be achieved by simply adding another weight – for instance the inverse ratio of national
income per capita to the global mean – to the apportionment formula because it would imply that a
country (which administers taxing rights) could receive tax revenue from a MNE which is not in fact
present in that country!
20

19

person in each group’s population. The OECD’s proposed sales-only approach
would yield over $8 per capita for the US; around $4 per capita for other G7
members and $2 per capita for the OECD without the US. For non-OECD members
of the G20, and for the G24 and G77 groups, the projected benefit is between $0.08
and $0.18 per capita. Simply including employment in the formula would increase
those projected benefits to between $0.80 and $1. (A full global formulary
apportionment, on the basis of sales and employment, would yield a projected
revenue benefit for these groups of between $6 and $7.40 per capita.)

Figure 2: Projected per capita revenue increases, OECD (20%) model

The variation at the country level and by income group (as figure 3 highlights) is
potentially troubling. There is no usable data on low-income countries. Uppermiddle income countries stand to gain under most models, albeit less than highincome countries. But lower-middle income countries would gain strongly under
approaches that include an employment element in the apportionment, and would
actually lose tax base, in aggregate, under approaches that rely on sales only –
precisely those that benefit high-income countries most.

20

Figure 3: Projected revenue increases by income group, % of current CIT revenue

This variation should be especially concerning for governments that are members
of the Inclusive Framework. It is one thing to be confronted with policy options
that may not yield great gains, but quite another to be asked to go ahead in a
direction that may actually lose revenues in some of the countries that most sorely
need funds to support their sustainable development strategies.
Employment as an Apportionment Factor
It is evident from the discussion and evidence above that the inclusion of
employment as a factor in the apportionment leads to a substantial increase in the
taxing rights of developing countries under all the models considered. The inclusion
of employment is also conceptually relevant, because more than sales it reflects a
true ‘nexus’ of production in the economy. What is more, MNEs logically tend to
locate employment in developing countries where possible because labour costs are
lower. This indeed is why this factor has this effect. In the data base discussed here,
the firms sampled employ some 16 million people.
However, there is an apparently logical concern that inclusion of an employment
factor in tax apportionment could have an undesired negative consequence in the
longer run for developing countries, despite the short-term gains in taxing rights. In
the case where this increases the firm’s tax burden – because the effective tax rate in
that jurisdiction is high enough – there would be an incentive to either shift
employment to another (lower tax) jurisdiction, or else shift employment locally to
sub-contractors with probable loss of wage and other job benefits such as security.
This secondary effect would be a further stimulus to tax competition between
21

developing countries, as well as worsening employment conditions. Much the same
could be said of the use of capital assets as an apportionment factor – these can be
shifted to other countries (at least by future investment) or sold to subcontractors so
as to reduce the tax burden in that jurisdiction.
This of course is one of the attractions of the use of sales as the unique driver; sales
are far less responsive to tax differences across markets, as the customers themselves
are far less mobile than firm assets or employment. However, it is possible that it is
possible that MNEs may try to avoid taxation by using “independent” distributing
agents for their sales and it should not be forgotten that in the long run a sales-based
corporation tax might well metamorphose into a sales tax (e.g.VAT).21 More
positively, firms are interested in competitive unit labour costs rather than low
wages as such. Further, much foreign investment is driven by natural resource
availability (not only mining but also tourism) and access to large consumer
markets. In consequence labour skills, productive infrastructure and efficient
government are now widely recognized as the driver of MNE investment and thus
employment generation.
Finally, an agreement on a global minimum tax would counter the effect of tax
concessions in competing countries, by making base shifting – and by extension, the
potentially negative effect on employment of these apportionment weights –
ineffective.

5. Conclusions
Our analysis of a representative sample of Country by Country Reporting (CbCR) by
large MNEs from the US has demonstrated that there are considerable differences
between the IMF, OECD and global formulary apportionment models in terms of the
reallocation of tax bases between economies.
Overall, the OECD approach favours OECD countries, while delivering little or no
benefits for other groups such as the G24 and G77. Lower-middle income countries
would, in the aggregate, suffer revenue losses if this approach is followed (in respect

21

Indeed this may well be the unstated ultimate objective of its supporters.

22

of US multinationals at least). A watered-down OECD approach, in which perhaps
only 20% of an identified ‘residual’ profit is apportioned by sales, would yield much
smaller benefits – just a fraction of a percentage point of current corporate income
tax revenues for lower-income countries compared to 2 per cent for OECD countries
on average and almost 4 per cent for the US; or from 8 cents to 18 cents per capita for
lower-income country groups on average, compared to $8 per capita for the US.
The use of a double apportionment factor (sales and employment) is preferable in
all the models examined, from the point of view not only of lower-income countries
but also of the G7 and OECD groups of countries, once the US is removed. Any
concern that use of an employment weight would become an incentive for jobshedding by MNEs is probably exaggerated and could be countered by appropriate
agreements on anti-base erosion taxes.
The main apparent ‘losers’ in the process of reapportionment are of course the tax
havens, or profit-shifting hubs. However, the ‘loss’ is likely to be largely a nominal
one because the MNE capital held there by MNEs is notional book value only, and
lightly taxed if at all. In contrast, the income from ancillary financial services could
be sustained by appropriate specialization (Foot, 2009). Moreover, the
apportionment model would provide a tax base from local sales and employment by
MNEs which could sustain fiscal revenue.
Whilst discussions continue within the Inclusive Framework to identify a
“consensus” solution to redistribute taxing rights between countries, with a view to
reach an agreement by 2020, this paper shows that different formulae will likely
result in significantly different distributional outcomes among countries.

23

References
Auerbach, Alan J. (2010) A Modern Corporate Tax Brookings Institution Washington
DC.
Beer, Sebastian, Ruud de Mooij, Shafik Hebous, Michael Keen and Li Liu (2019)
Exploring residual profit allocation IMF Fiscal Affairs Department, Washington
DC
Bilicka, Katarzyna Anna (2019). "Comparing UK Tax Returns of Foreign Multinationals
to Matched Domestic Firms." American Economic Review, 109 (8): 2921-53.
Clausing, Kimberley A.; Avi-Yonah, Reuben S. (2007), Reforming Corporate Taxation in
a Global Economy: A Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment , The Hamilton
Project, Brookings Institution, Washington DC
Clausing, Kimberly (2017) ‘Lessons for International Tax Reform from the US State
Experience under Formulary Apportionment’ in Picciotto (2017)
Cobham, A., & Janský, P. (2019). Measuring misalignment: The location of US
multinationals’ economic activity versus the location of their profits.
Development Policy Review, 37(1), 91–110.
https://doi.org/10.1111/dpr.12315
Cobham, A., & Janský, P. (2020, forthcoming), Estimating Illicit Financial Flows: A
critical guide to the data, methodology and findings, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Cobham, A., Janský, P., & Meinzer, M. (2015). The Financial Secrecy Index: Shedding
New Light on the Geography of Secrecy. Economic Geography 91: 3, 281–303.
Cobham, A., Janský, P., & Meinzer, M. (2018). A half-century of resistance to
corporate disclosure. Transnational Corporations, 25(3), 1–26.
Cobham, A. & Nelson, L. (2019). The greatest opportunity for reallocating taxing
rights in a generation: now or never for the OECD. Tax Justice Network
Briefing, https://www.taxjustice.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Theglobal-reallocation-of-taxing-rights-Tax-Justice-Network-April-2019.pdf.

24

Damodaran, Aswath (2019) Risk-Return Data Base
http://people.stern.nyu.edu/adamodar/New_Home_Page/datahistory.html
Foot, Michael (2009) Final Report of the Independent Review of British Offshore
Financial Centres. London: HM Treasury
Frank, Murray; Shen, Tao (2016). "Investment and the Weighted Average Cost of
Capital". Journal of Financial Economics. 119: 300–315.
doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2015.09.001. SSRN 2014367.
Garcia-Bernando, Javier, Petr Janský and Thomas Tørsløv (2019) Effective Tax Rates
and Corporate Profits in Tax Havens: Evidence from Country by Country
Reporting (mimeo) https://osf.io/ew67b/
ICRICT (2018). A Roadmap to Improve Rules for Taxing Multinationals. A Fairer
Future for Global Taxation. Available at:
https://www.icrict.com/resources/icrict-documents.
International Monetary Fund (2019) Corporate Taxation in the Global Economy, IMF
policy paper (Washington)
Janský, Petr; Palanský, Miroslav (2018) : Estimating the scale of profit shifting and
tax revenue losses related to foreign direct investment, WIDER Working
Paper 2018/21.
McNabb, K., (2017) 'Toward Closer Cohesion of International Tax Statistics', WIDER
Working Paper 2017/184
Murphy, Richard (2003) A Proposed International Accounting Standard Reporting
Turnover and Tax by Location. Association for Accountancy and Business
Affairs. Available at: http://visar.csustan.edu/aaba/ProposedAccstd.pdf
[Accessed 30 03 19]

OECD (2018). OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework on BEPS: Progress Report July 2017-June
2018 - OECD. Available at: http://www.oecd.org/ctp/inclusive-frameworkon-beps-progress-report-june-2017-july-2018.htm [Accessed 30 03 19]

25

Piccioto, Sol (2016). “Taxing Multinational Enterprises as Unitary Firms.”
International Centre for Tax and Development. Working Paper No. 53.
(Brighton, United Kingdom: International Centre for Tax and Development)
Prichard, W., Cobham, A., & Goodall, A., (2014) 'The ICTD Government Revenue
Dataset', ICTD Working Paper 19.
Stiglitz, Joseph (1976) The corporation tax Journal of Public Economics 5 pp303-311
Stiglitz, Joseph (2018) Pareto Efficient Taxation And Expenditures: Pre- And ReDistribution Working Paper 23892

NBER Washington DC

http://www.nber.org/papers/w23892
Tax Notes Talk (2019) From London: OECD Update on BEPS 2.0 - Available at:
https://www.taxnotes.com/tax-notes-talk/podcast/london-oecd-updatebeps-20/29ytr [Accessed 30 09 2019]
Tørsløv, T., Wier, L., & Zucman, G. (2018). The Missing Profits of Nations. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, (24071).
https://doi.org/10.3386/w24701

26

