Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.15

Pp. 220- 232

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program
Learners Towards Learning English: A Case Study
Rola A. Massri
English Language Institute
University of Jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
Abstract
Learning English in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) can be a challenging experience.
Nevertheless, being proficient in English language guarantees better job opportunities in various
fields and thus learners need to acquire an acceptable level of proficiency. Recognizing its
significant role in the learners’ academic and professional excellence, the English language has
gained the status of a mandatory language in the Saudi higher education institutions. As students
enter universities for higher studies, they are often required to take prerequisite courses in English
to gain a higher level of proficiency. This qualitatively driven descriptive case study investigated
the attitudes of EFL students who were enrolled in the Foundation Year Program. This study
aimed to examine the learners’ feelings, emotions, and attitudes in the light of their academic
performance. In total, thirteen male and seventeen female students were interviewed using semistructured interviews as a main tool for the data collection. They were asked to recall and write
their narratives regarding their experience of learning the English language throughout the
foundation year program. The socio-constructivist nature of this qualitative case study offered an
opportunity to participants to share their stories. Consequently, it highlighted the factors that
motivated them for a language learning experience. Moreover, it allowed them to reflect on the
challenges that they encountered during their learning odyssey of the English language course as
part of the preparatory year program (PYP). Findings from this research study suggest that the
participants’ motivations to learn English are primarily related to socio-economic reasons.
Besides, students were particularly motivated to learn English when they were encouraged by
their families and by ‘good’ teaching practices. Nevertheless, these findings failed to establish an
association between the learners’ attitudes and their performance on the assessments during the
course. This case study adds to the existing literature by examining a context that lacks empirical
evidence on the topic of EFL learners’ beliefs about English learning. More research in this area
is required to determine why this discrepancy occurred.
Keywords: EFL, learners’ attitudes, qualitative research, sociocultural, Saudi Arabian context
Cite as: Massri, R. A. (2019). The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program
Learners Towards Learning English: A Case Study. Arab World English Journal, 10 (3) 220- 232.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.15

220

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

1 Introduction
In 2008, the Saudi government initiated educational reforms in the realm of the English as a
Foreign language (EFL) teaching and learning that led to massive transformations in pedagogy
and learning in schools and universities. Although the reforms appeared to be promising, these
changes have yielded various challenges for teachers, course designers and other stake holders in
educational institutions, such as using teaching methods. Moreover, the newly introduced
changes gave rise to concerns related to the learners’ attitude towards English language learning
that might influence the implementation of teaching and learning plans (Hult, 2017). In the Saudi
EFL setting, the major concern of the teachers and course designers is the learners’ low level of
motivation that often makes it difficult to implement the reform agenda in educational institutions.
This situation in itself has caused various societal and cultural factors (Costa & Norton, 2017;
Pennycook, 2017), which are related to language.
Language is considered the most “important channel of social organization embedded in
the culture of the community where it is used” (Dörnyei, 1998, p. 118). When learners undertake
to learn a second language (L2), their attitudes and learning are influenced by the culture of their
mother tongue and the culture of the target language. Since language is socially and culturally
bound, it makes language learning a deeply social experience that involves the integration of a
wide range of elements of the target culture (Dörnyei, 2003). This can be deemed a vital issue
due to the nature of the English language in a non-English society where EFL learners have
limited access to the target culture and its language. Hence, it is significant in the case of Saudi
EFL learners who attempt to negotiate with two very different cultures and languages that include
Arabic as their L1 and English as the target language and their learning goal in the classroom.
We can assume that the enormous challenge of adapting to the new ‘culture’ and worldview
correlated to learning English has impact on the attitudes of the Saudi EFL learners. This
challenging situation also suggests that the EFL learner attitudes and motivations may play an
important role in determining the outcomes of an EFL reform agenda (Ushioda & DÖRnyei,
2017). Bearing in mind the associated hurdles related to the reform agenda, it is vital to explore
and understand the EFL learners’ attitudes that stem from their cultural and social milieus and
they impact the teaching and learning practices of English language (Savignon, 2018). More
rigorous research in this direction will help the practitioners as well as add to the existing literature
on the learners’ beliefs, dispositions, attitudes and opinions about English language learning
which will improve the pedagogical practices in the Saudi EFL context. Hence, this study aims
to examine the attitudes and beliefs of the Saudi students enrolled in an EFL program and explore
their experiences, perceptions, and motivations.
2 Literature Review
The constructivist paradigm recognizes the learner’s functional role in creating personal
knowledge. It holds the view that due to the expression of the self and the individual perspective;
the creation of knowledge varies in its exemplification of reality. These four basic principles form
the basis for pedagogical process in classrooms, which is described as constructivism (Wilson,
2017). Romanowski, Alkhateeb, and Nasser (2018) and Bosman and Schulze (2017) also suggest
that knowledge is not passively acquired and that it is acquired when a person is thinking actively.
They also posit that behavior is transformed through cognition so that individuals can function
Arab World English Journal
221
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

irrespective of their social settings. The understanding offered by Nguyen (2016) proposes the
description of the constructivist approach into two precise categories, which encompass the
constructivist and socio-cultural worldviews, also identified as socio-constructivist perspective.
Within the socio-constructivist realm, attitudes towards English language learning play a
vital role. Many researchers have defined “attitude” from a socio-cultural perspective (Jones &
Moreland, 2015; Norton & Toohey, 2001; Singh & Richards, 2006). Some researchers believe
that second language (L2) achievement is influenced by attitudes, although this influence is
mediated by motivation (ho Kang, 2014). In early research, attitudes were defined as: “sum of
beliefs about a particular behavior weighted by evaluations of these beliefs” (Miller, 2005, p.
126), which influenced how the individual responded towards related subjects in addition to
situations. Later definitions defined attitudes as “the overall positive or negative evaluation of the
behavior. In general, the more favorable the attitude toward the behavior, the stronger the
individual’s intention is to perform it” (Lipnevich, MacCann, Krumm, Burrus, & Roberts, 2011,
p. 106). Some researchers perceive attitudes as biologically driven (Cantril, 1947; Gonzalez,
2007), while others have theorized that these are learned and hence susceptible to modification
(Spencer & Horowitz, 1973; Xuan & Yihong, 2017). According to Maio and Haddock (2010),
“they all emphasize the notion that reporting an attitude involves the expression of an evaluative
judgment about an object. Indeed, most attitude theorists would argue that evaluation is the
predominant aspect of the attitude concept. In other words, reporting an attitude involves making
a decision about liking versus disliking, or favoring versus disfavoring a particular issue, object,
or person. Thus, we define an attitude as an overall evaluation of an object that is based on
cognitive, affective, and behavioral information” (p. 3). However, Chambers (1999) offers a
different perspective on attitudes towards language leaning. He argues that socio-cultural
elements affect attitudes to language learning which are perceived as a set of values that the
language learners bring to the Foreign Language (FL) classroom. In classroom environment, these
values are shaped by anticipated psychological benefits and benefits of learning the target
language. Several factors affect the values that the learner holds which might be manipulated by
a range of factors including the language learning experience, the community of the target
language and the attitudes towards the target language demonstrated by parents and peers of the
language learner.
There is an agreement in the current research that the language learners’ attitudes affect
the overall outcome of a foreign language learning program (Cook, 2016; Gardner, 2014), and
that motivation has a vital role to play in this process (Gardner, 2014; Lasagabaster, 2017;
Woodrow, 2017). Therefore, various pedagogical approaches mainly stemmed from the notion
of social interaction, have occurred and progressed in a bid to developing positive language
learner attitudes. A survey of these illustrates the role these approaches has to play in supporting
EFL learners to develop a positive outlook of English language learning in their classrooms. In
the first instance, family-school partnerships are believed to represent approaches that focus on
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

222

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

the child within a framework of cooperation, coordination and collaboration established between
families and educators so as to improve opportunities for “children and adolescents across social,
emotional, behavioral, and academic domains” (Kim et al., 2012, pp. 3-4). Understanding the
impact of such partnerships upon the language learning of English learners, research shows that
parents of ELLs play an essential role in their children’s motivation to learn English (Rowe,
Ramani, & Pomerantz, 2016). In this respect, Peeters (2015) argues that peer collaborations have
the potential to influence learner attitudes in a positive and beneficial manner. More importantly,
learners’ motivation is “socially distributed [and] created within cultural systems of activities
involving the mediation of others” (Rueda & Moll, 1994, p. 131). Therefore, social interaction
seems to be an important factor in language learning (Savignon, 2018), which engages learners
in peer collaborations and helps teachers to use it a as a teaching tool for developing learners’
attitude towards EFL learning.
Literature suggests an alternative teaching approach which can be useful in developing
EFL learners’ attitude. This approach involves creating a supportive environment and developing
learners’ autonomy. It is a positive approach “as learner control characterized by selfdirectedness” (Huang, Chandra, DePaolo, & Simmons, 2016, p. 738).
A contemporary pedagogical approach that has recently been suggested for shaping EFL
learners’ positive attitudes is the utilization and integration of technologies and the Internet into
classroom practices. The incorporation of educational technology in teaching practices has a
positive influence on the EFL learners attitudes, which is supported by the relevant literature
(Healey, 2016; Liu & Lan, 2016). As Yang (2018) contends, web-based language learning can
stimulate learners to engage in creative and collaborative learning through self-directed learning.
The fourth approach thought to be of considerable usefulness in influencing EFL learner
attitudes is that of Extensive Reading (ER). The ER approach is a “reading pedagogy in which
language learners freely choose reading material of their interests and, in a rather fast pace, they
read large quantities of material for enjoyment, information and comprehension” (Lin, 2014, p.
48). The ER approach encourages EFL learners to read and comprehend texts that are reflective
of their proficiency level and aims to motivate them to continue reading. Moreover, this flexible
approach allows the learners to choose the texts they want to read, same as they may enjoy in
their first language as well as to stop reading a text, they do not find exciting or too challenging
to read.
3 Methodology
This study adopted a qualitative and descriptive case study design. According to Edgar and Manz
(2017), “descriptive studies focus in-depth on a specific case of some system” (p. 131). The
qualitative research descriptive case study design is appropriate for uncovering the meanings
individuals attach to an event, situation, or phenomenon (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015).
The study utilized semi-structured interviews as its mail tool supported by learners’ diaries and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

223

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

their life histories, which were collected in Arabic. Similarly, the collected data from the semistructured interviews were transcribed in Arabic. Excerpts included in the findings section of this
paper were translated into English. Twenty-nine students enrolled in the Preparatory Year
Program (PYP) at a leading Saudi university were selected to take part in the study. Aged between
eighteen and twenty, thirteen of these students were male and sixteen were female. All the
participants studied at separate, gender-segregated campuses. It is important to note that these
students had no exposure to the English language or classrooms where English was the medium
of instruction. Although the participants were sciences and arts entry-level students enrolled in a
foundation years program who were all required to take the similar subjects for a year. The
participants shared a similar socio-economic background who had both both native and nonnative EFL teachers on the foundation year program, hence having a considerable consistency in
terms of learning English as a foreign language. This particular study utilized the flexible design
method for sampling the students. The aim was to collect relevant data to improve the individual
learning environment, methodology, setting, and approach depending upon what the findings
showed (Lumley, 2011). Due to the nature of this study, convenience sampling was conducted.
This approach allowed the researcher to conveniently choose the participants based on their
location and accessibility on the campus (Robinson, 2014). As the data collection involved three
main sources, such as semi-structured interviews, diaries and life histories, the researcher
gathered the data from the same participants to ensure the trustworthiness of their views.
3.1 Data Analysis
The collected data was presented in the form of words, phrases, quotes and excerpts that offered
valuable insights into the learning experiences of the participants. These extracts helped the
researcher to analyze the data in the form of codes, categories and themes. Those formed codes
were extracted from the specific text, phrases, or ideas that were shared by the participants
(Saldana, 2015).
3.2 Thematic Analysis
The collected data were thematically analyzed. As thematic analysis is effective for its flexibility,
it suited the nature of the current qualitatively driven study since the focus was on the content of
a participant’s story, the ‘what’ rather than ‘how’ it is told (Willig & Rogers, 2017). According
to Braun and Clarke (2006), “through its theoretical freedom, thematic analysis provides a
flexible and useful research tool, which can potentially provide a rich and detailed, yet complex,
account of data” (p. 5). More importantly, as the study’s aim was to inform the program designers
and policymaker, the thematic analysis proved to “… be useful for producing qualitative analyses
suited to informing policy development” (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 37).
The researcher considered both the advantages and the disadvantages of employing
thematic analysis and took extra steps to guarantee the validity of the identified themes, which
were evidently supported by the primary data. The validity procedure included member checking
since the researcher aimed at shifting the validity procedure from the researcher herself to the
participants (Creswell & Miller, 2000). Lincoln and Guba (1985) describe the importance of
member checks in a research study by stating that it is: “the most crucial technique for establishing
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

224

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

credibility” (p. 314). Furthermore, the researcher conducted a triangulation of the data as an
additional validity procedure (Flick, 2018). Creswell and Miller (2000) consider triangulation a
crucial tool for researchers as “it [triangulation] is a systematic process of sorting through the data
to find common themes or categories by eliminating overlapping areas” (p. 126).
In the first stage of the thematic analysis, initial codes were put together in order to merge
the identical ones and create broader categories. This was followed by merging categories and
developing overarching themes. Some of the major themes included: the influence of friends and
family on the EFL learners’ attitudes towards English language learning; the impact of education
on EFL learners’ attitudes towards learning English; the influence of economic status on the EFL
learners’ attitudes towards learning English as a foreign language, and key motivations for
learning English. As part of the data analysis, conceptual and thematic labels were ascribed to the
words, phrases and sentences in the interview transcripts in order to apprehend what each
participant had expressed. From this point, themes were defined and named, and a report on the
findings was created utilizing NVIVO.
4 Findings and Discussion
The qualitatively driven case study research aimed to determine the attitudes and emotions of the
EFL learners studying English in a foundational year program at Saudi Arabian university. This
case study aimed to explore the impact that English language learning had on the EFL learners
who strived to achieve their academic goals. There are particular complexities of teaching EFL
in the Gulf States (Belhiah & Elhami, 2015; Mahmoud & Al-Mahrooqi, 2012) and in Saudi
Arabia (Barnawi, 2017; Elyas & Picard, 2018; Shah, Hussain, & Nasseef, 2013). Hence, this case
study tackled a vital issue to explore EFL learners’ views and understand their motivations behind
English language learning. To achive the objectives of the study, the following four key questions
were answered via discussing the qualitative findings.
1. What are the key attitudes of the foundation year students towards learning English as a
foreign language in the Saudi EFL context?
2. What are the factors, according to the foundation year program EFL learners, which shape
their attitudes towards learning English as a foreign language in the Saudi EFL context?
3. What, if any, is the relationship between the attitudes of the Saudi EFL students in EFL
classes and their wellbeing and performance?
4. Is there a relationship between the EFL learners’ attitudes and academic achievement in
EFL classes?
This case study research has a significance in the Saudi educational realm as the government has
invested in the foundation year program across the country and hopes to achieve the desire
outcomes in the light of the Vision2030. To be specific, the Saudi Ministry for training and
development has taken major steps to improve the EFL teaching practices and enhance learning
outcomes (Elyas & Picard, 2010). As part of the teacher development, the ministry has focused
on teacher evaluation and on employment on non-Saudi teachers in order to diversify the teaching
and learning experience in the Saudi EFL context. (Al-Omrani, 2008; McMullen, 2009). This
primary plan of teacher evaluation had inherited issues as it failed consider the sociocultural
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

225

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

differences in pedagogical practices (e.g. the teachings of Islam) for classroom practices (Ali,
2009; Barnawi & Le Ha, 2015; McMullen, 2009). This case study intended to benefit the
educational program designers, curriculum designers, teacher trainers and strategy makers who
had the responsibility to develop and improve the quality of the existing EFL education in the
Saudi EFL context.
The predominant themes were consistently reflected in the collected data in different
forms as it was the needed for learning the English language. This does not suggest that all the
students felt the need for learning English, rather it was mandatory for them to learn it.
Nevertheless, their ability to communicate in English would certainly benefit them later in their
professional life. For some, this ‘benefit’ was an entry into a program of their choice. While others
associated it to securing a better job. Some of the participants found English would as a helping
tool in their travels and studies abroad, whereas others believed that English would assist their
understanding of English media, books and culture. It is also evident that not every student liked
English, and some even admitted to hating it. The findings conclusively suggest that at the end of
the Foundation Year Program, all the students on this study successfully completed the program,
regardless of their feelings towards learning English.
4.1 Attitudes
Dörnyei (2003) considers language learning as a deeply rooted social event that leads to the
construction of new knowledge in a given context. From this perspective, various sociocultural
aspects such as, such as history, culture, and the learners’ L1 context provide the foundations for
developing target language proficiency. Giles and Rakić (2014) propose that attitudes are
acquired and related directly to the sociocultural constituents of a society where learning is taking
place. The findings showed that the EFL learners expressed their opinions which could be
attributed to specific categories, such as cognitive, affective and behavioural. In the process,
certain limitations were placed on these categories to code the participants’ responses
appropriately. Outcomes from the cognitive attitudes section focused on the importance of
learning English, which was to some extent, focused on its necessity. Responses were classified
as positive, negative, or neutral. Overall, there were more positive answers than negative or
neutral ones, though numerically, because of the small sample size, this is not particularly
relevant. What was perhaps more useful was the diversity in the positive cognitive responses.
This diversity-related in part to the idea of the ‘self.’ According to Dornyei, (2003), ‘self’ can be
recognized in three different manners; first the ideal L2 self, second the ought-to-be L2 self, and
third the L2 learning experience in a given context. In the light of the cognitive framework of
attitudes, the EFL learners could show the presence of all three constructs of ‘self’ and how they
might influence their future endeavors in relation to learning English as a foreign language in the
Saudi EFL context. Moreover, affective and behavioral attitudes were recognized to show how
much they appreciated the English language and how their views were associated to the learning
outcomes. It is evident from the data the key goal of the EFL learners was to learn English
irrespective of their use if it in near or far future. The participants of the study were expected to
show individual attitudes due to internal or external social pressures which would push them to
come up with their own justifications for learning English or successfully completing the FYP.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

226

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

4.2 Factors affecting attitudes
The literature shows various factors that can have an impact on an EFL learner’s attitude. These
factors include, social pressure or family obligations, economic propositions, goals related to
higher studies and intentions to travel or study abroad. These findings were consistent in the Saudi
context within the participant group of this study. Within this study, motivation seems to be
closely linked to these factors which was categorized into integrative, instrumental and
developmental motivation. These three types of motivation were abundantly found in the
literature. In the case of the current research, there appears to be no big difference between the
males’ and females’ responses on this issue. However, some differences were apparent, as some
females had a more positive attitude than males towards learning English in an EFL context.
Beyond the motivational factors, it was the role of the teachers and chosen pedagogy within the
participants’ previous learning experiences of English language that emerged as an essential
theme. The participants could recall a particular language teacher and specific learning events
that might have contributed to their own learning and development. In some cases, the participants
who could recall positive experiences from their past seemed to be more motivated to learn
English than those learners who could not recall any positive experiences related to their
classroom learning. This difference in the level of motivation did not necessarily propose that a
positive teaching experience of the past led to a higher level of motivation. Instead, it could be
the learners’ positive attitude and individual motivation that helped them recall their good
learning and teaching memories. However, more research is required in this area to determine the
full extent of this relationship.
The findings also indicate a link between the teaching material, its implementation and
the learners’ motivation. For example, the students suggested that when the language material
was taught through active learning, such as games or other interactive activities, there was a
higher level of motivation to learn from the same material. Irby (2017) suggests that technology
integration in the classroom was strongly and positively associated with desire and motivation of
the EFL students. As in the Saudi EFL context, EFL teachers often consider a more traditional
and lecture-type approach at the university level, there is an urgent need for updating this
pedagogical method and introducing more innovative approaches into teaching the EFL
classrooms.
4.3Relationship between attitude and performance of EFL learners
The findings explicitly indicated the wellbeing of the EFL learners. In the coding process and the
framework of this project, the wellbeing of EFL learners centered mainly upon the feelings and
emotions of the participants. In the light of the findings, we can divide wellbeing into positive,
negative, and neutral constituents. The participants were specifically asked to know whether there
was a relationship between their feelings and their performance. The participants who were able
to suggest a positive association scored better on the final assessment than the students who
indicated a negative relationship. However, given the relatively small sample size of the
participant group, more research is required to understand this relationship more conclusively. In
some of the existing literature, emotions and wellbeing have been linked to stress and anxiety as
seen in the work of Bennett and Dorjee (2016). In these instances, students undergoing a higher
level of stress are more likely to show negative emotions and feelings. This study did not
explicitly consider the learners’ stress and anxiety and the participants were not asked about their
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

227

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

level of stress; however, it was obvious that pressures of academic success and acceptance on a
desired program could have played a considerable role in their stress levels. It would be
interesting to examine whether there is relationship between the participants’ performances
reflected on their academic achievement over more extended period and a more standardized or
rigorous examination of the testing instruments, as both of these factors could have significant
influence on the final outcomes.
4.4 Attitudes and academic achievement
The findings from this study included the grades that the participants received on their four
assessments that they were required to take in order to complete the foundation year program.
These findings indicate a lack of relationship between the EFL learners’ achievement on the final
assessments and their level of motivation or attitudes towards learning English as a foreign
language in the Saudi EFL context. This absence of connection seemed particularly baffling;
therefore, it requires further research. The EFL learners that took part in this case study research
all scored particularly high on all of the required assessments. Their good performance raised
questions to the validity of the evaluation tool that tested and determined the level of academic
English demonstrated by the students. One of the final research questions aimed to determine
whether or not there was a relationship between the students’ attitudes and their academic
achievement. The findings of this study suggest that no relationship could be established but the
future research on the topic would further contribute to the understanding of the research
phenomenon.
5 Recommendations for further research
The future research may consider the possibilities of investigation afar from the EFL learners’
domain and include EFL teachers’ perspectives. As the findings of this study indicated that the
Saudi EFL learners had a clear picture of their past learning experiences, more research on this
topic can develop better understanding of what factors lead learners to remember their good or
bad learning experiences in an EFL classroom. The future research may also consider the attitudes
of EFL teachers who teaching professionals currently work in the Saudi EFL context. While some
previous research indicates that teachers may not be culturally equipped to work in the Saudi
context, much of this outdated research assumes that teachers lack contextual knowledge due to
which their pedagogical practices are impacted. As more and more Saudi teachers are trained and
equipped with top-notch pedaogical tools, there is a need for further research on classroom
practices to see the current level of teaching and how to take it to the next level. It may also be
useful to assess the effectiveness of existing teaching approaches, as new and innovative
strategies might not only benefit the students but the teachers who need to consistently upgrade
their pedagogical repertoire.
It may also be possible to examine students over an extended period of time. Most of the
participants in the current study suggested that their motivation to learn English was linked to the
necessity entering a degree program, finding job opportunities, travelling or studying abroad, etc.
It would be interesting to explore whether or not the students achieved these goals, and possibly
if their attitudes or emotions changed over the course of any future study or employment period.
There is also room for negotiating what is meant by ‘attitude’ or ‘emotion’. As this case study
has considered and assessed the definitions of ‘attitude’ and ‘emotion’ in a language learning
Arab World English Journal
228
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

milieu, they appear to be two very different constructs. Future research may take both into account
as different notions that might lead to varied interpretations of the teachers’ and learners’
perspectives. Moreover, investigators can use the findings of this research as a guideline and
pursue other areas related to the learners’ motivations, dispositions, attitudes and emotions in the
EFL context of Saudi Arabia. More research in this direction will assist course designers to
develop a new framework or model related to testing, evaluatinon and assessment and provid a
new longer-term context-specific plan to enhance the effectivness of the foundationa year
programs acrros the Kingdom.
About the Aiuthor:
Dr. Rola Ahmed Massri is an Assistant Professor at the English Language Institute, University
of Jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. She has been a TEFL lecturer since 2003 and
was appointed into several administrative positions. Dr. Massri is interested in learner
psychology, educational psychology, attitudes, learning beliefs, and motivation. She is also
interested in English Phonetics and Phonology. Dr. Rola had participated in a number of
conferences around the world presenting her studies.
References
Al-Omrani, A. H. (2008). Perceptions and attitudes of Saudi ESL and EFL students toward native
and nonnative English-speaking teachers: Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
Ali, S. (2009). Teaching English as an international language (EIL) in the Gulf Corporation
Council (GCC) countries: The brown man’s burden. English as an international
language: Perspectives and pedagogical issues, 34-57.
Barnawi, O. Z. (2017). Neoliberalism and English language education policies in the Arabian
Gulf: Routledge.
Barnawi, O. Z., & Le Ha, P. (2015). From western TESOL classrooms to home practice: a case
study with two ‘privileged’ Saudi teachers. Critical Studies in Education, 56(2), 259-276.
doi:10.1080/17508487.2014.951949
Belhiah, H., & Elhami, M. (2015). English as a medium of instruction in the Gulf: When students
and teachers speak. Language Policy, 14(1), 3-23.
Bennett, K., & Dorjee, D. (2016). The impact of a mindfulness-based stress reduction course
(MBSR) on well-being and academic attainment of sixth-form students. Mindfulness,
7(1), 105-114.
Bosman, A., & Schulze, S. (2017). Learning style and achievement in English of secondary school
students : the relationship with demographic variables. Journal for Language Teaching =
Ijenali Yekufundzisa Lulwimi = Tydskrif vir Taalonderrig, 51(1), 95-113.
doi:doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.4314/jlt.v51i1.4
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
Cantril, H. (1947). The Place of Personality in Social Psychology. The Journal of Psychology,
24(1), 19-56. doi:10.1080/00223980.1947.9917337
Chambers, G. N. (1999). Motivating Language Learners: Multilingual Matters.
Cook, V. (2016). Second language learning and language teaching: Routledge.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

229

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

Costa, P. I., & Norton, B. (2017). Introduction: Identity, Transdisciplinarity, and the Good
Language
Teacher.
The
Modern
Language
Journal,
101(S1),
3-14.
doi:doi:10.1111/modl.12368
Creswell, J. W., & Miller, D. L. (2000). Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry. Theory Into
Practice, 39(3), 124-130. doi:10.1207/s15430421tip3903_2
Dörnyei, Z. (1998). Motivation in second and foreign language learning. Language Teaching,
31(3), 117-135.
Dörnyei, Z. (2003). Attitudes, orientations, and motivations in language learning: Advances in
theory, research, and applications. Language learning, 53(S1), 3-32.
Edgar, T. W., & Manz, D. O. (2017). Chapter 5 - Descriptive Study. In T. W. Edgar & D. O.
Manz (Eds.), Research Methods for Cyber Security (pp. 131-151): Syngress.
Elyas, T., & Picard, M. (2010). Saudi Arabian educational history: Impacts on English language
teaching. Education, Business and Society: Contemporary Middle Eastern Issues, 3(2),
136-145.
Elyas, T., & Picard, M. (2018). A brief history of English and English teaching in Saudi Arabia.
In English as a Foreign Language in Saudi Arabia (pp. 78-92): Routledge.
Flick, U. (2018). Managing Quality in Qualitative Research: SAGE Publications.
Gardner, R. C. (2014). Attitudes and motivation in second language learning. In Bilingualism,
multiculturalism, and second language learning (pp. 63-84): Psychology Press.
Giles, H., & Rakić, T. (2014). Language attitudes: Social determinants and consequences of
language variation. The Oxford handbook of language and social psychology, 11-26.
Gonzalez, C. M. (2007). The Effect of Doing Good: An Experimental Analysis of the Influence
of Corporate Social Responsibility Initiatives on Beliefs, Attitudes, and Behavioral
Intentions.
Healey, D. (2016). Language learning and technology: Past, present and future. In The Routledge
handbook of language learning and technology (pp. 35-49): Routledge.
ho Kang, D. (2014). Effects of L2 motivation on motivated behavior in English movie classrooms.
STEM Journal, 15, 35-50.
Huang, X., Chandra, A., DePaolo, C. A., & Simmons, L. L. (2016). Understanding transactional
distance in web‐based learning environments: An empirical study. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 47(4), 734-747.
Hult, F. M. (2017). More than a lingua franca: Functions of English in a globalised educational
language policy. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 30(3), 265-282.
Irby, D. R. (2017). Middle School Student and Teacher Perceptions About the Effectiveness of
the Technology Integration in the Classroom.
Jones, A., & Moreland, J. (2015). Considering pedagogical content knowledge in the context of
research on teaching: An example from technology.
Lasagabaster, D. (2017). Language learning motivation and language attitudes in multilingual
Spain from an international perspective. The Modern Language Journal, 101(3), 583-596.
Lin, C.-c. (2014). Learning English reading in a mobile-assisted extensive reading program.
Computers & Education, 78, 48-59. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.05.004
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, Y. S. L. E. G. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry: SAGE Publications.
Lipnevich, A. A., MacCann, C., Krumm, S., Burrus, J., & Roberts, R. D. (2011). Mathematics
attitudes and mathematics outcomes of US and Belarusian middle school students.
Journal of educational psychology, 103(1), 105.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

230

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

Liu, S. H.-J., & Lan, Y.-J. (2016). Social Constructivist Approach to Web-Based EFL Learning:
Collaboration, Motivation, and Perception on the Use of Google Docs. Educational
Technology & Society, 19(1), 171-186.
Lumley, T. (2011). Complex Surveys: A Guide to Analysis Using R: Wiley.
Mahmoud, A., & Al-Mahrooqi, R. (2012). Issues in Teaching and Learning English as a Foreign
Language in the Arab World. In: Al-Khoudh: SQU’s Academic Publication Board.
Maio, G., & Haddock, G. (2010). The Psychology of Attitudes and Attitude Change. In. London:
SAGE Publications Ltd. Retrieved from http://sk.sagepub.com/books/the-psychology-ofattitudes-and-attitude-change. doi:10.4135/9781446214299
McMullen, M. G. (2009). Using language learning strategies to improve the writing skills of Saudi
EFL students: Will it really work? System, 37(3), 418-433.
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2015). Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design and
Implementation: Wiley.
Miller, K. (2005). Communication theories: Perspectives, processes, and contexts.
Nguyen, M. H. (2016). Responding to the Need for Re-Conceptualizing Second Language
Teacher Education: The Potential of a Sociocultural Perspective. International Education
Studies, 9(12), 219-231.
Norton, B., & Toohey, K. (2001). Changing perspectives on good language learners. Tesol
Quarterly, 35(2), 307-322.
Peeters, W. (2015). Tapping into the educational potential of Facebook: encouraging out-of-class
peer collaboration in foreign language learning. Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal.Place of publication unknown, 6(2), 176-190.
Pennycook, A. (2017). The cultural politics of English as an international language: Routledge.
Robinson, O. C. (2014). Sampling in interview-based qualitative research: A theoretical and
practical guide. Qualitative research in psychology, 11(1), 25-41.
Romanowski, M. H., Alkhateeb, H., & Nasser, R. (2018). Policy borrowing in the gulf
cooperation council countries: Cultural scripts and epistemological conflicts.
International
Journal
of
Educational
Development,
60,
19-24.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2017.10.021
Rowe, M. L., Ramani, G. B., & Pomerantz, E. M. (2016). Parental involvement and children’s
motivation and achievement. Handbook of motivation at school, 459.
Rueda, R., & Moll, L. C. (1994). A sociocultural perspective on motivation. Motivation: Theory
and research, 117-137.
Saldana, J. (2015). The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers: SAGE Publications.
Savignon, S. J. (2018). Communicative competence. The TESOL Encyclopedia of English
Language Teaching, 1-7.
Shah, S. R., Hussain, M. A., & Nasseef, O. A. (2013). Factors Impacting EFL Teaching: An
Exploratory Study in the Saudi Arabian Context. Arab World English Journal, 4(3).
Singh, G., & Richards, J. C. (2006). Teaching and learning in the language teacher education
course room: A critical sociocultural perspective. RELC journal, 37(2), 149-175.
Spencer, M. B., & Horowitz, F. D. (1973). Effects of systematic social and token reinforcement
on the modification of racial and color concept attitudes in black and in white preschool
children. Developmental Psychology, 9(2), 246.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

231

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019

The Perceptions and Beliefs of Saudi Preparatory Year Program

Massri

Ushioda, E., & DÖRnyei, Z. (2017). Beyond global English: Motivation to learn languages in a
multicultural world: Introduction to the special issue. The Modern Language Journal,
101(3), 451-454.
Willig, C., & Rogers, W. S. (2017). The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research in Psychology:
SAGE Publications.
Wilson, B. G. (2017). Constructivism for active, authentic learning. Trends and Issues in
Instructional Design and Technology, 61-67.
Woodrow, L. (2017). Motivation in language learning. In Essential competencies for Englishmedium University teaching (pp. 235-248): Springer.
Xuan, Z., & Yihong, G. (2017). Language Attitude Education as ICC Facilitation: An Explorative
Class. Chinese Journal of Applied Linguistics, 40(1), 3-20.
Yang, Y.-F. (2018). New language knowledge construction through indirect feedback in webbased collaborative writing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31(4), 459-480.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

232

