Becoming a steward of data science
Rochelle E. Tractenberg
Reprint requests:
Rochelle Tractenberg
Neurology Department, Building D, Suite 207
Georgetown University Medical Center
4000 Reservoir Rd. NW
Washington, DC 20057 USA
rochelle.tractenberg@gmail.com
KEYWORDS: Stewardship; Mastery Rubric for Stewardship; Data Science; ethical practice.

2
Abstract
This article introduces the concept of the steward: the individual to whom the public, and other
practitioners, can entrust the integrity of their field. The concept will be defined, particularly
with respect to what about stewardship can be demonstrated by the practitioner so that others –
including other stewards – can recognize this professional identity. Stewardship is an important
aspect of professionalism, and although data science is a very new profession, its growth in terms
of the number of practitioners should also include growth in the commitment to integrity in
practice. Although an undergraduate program may seem early to begin understanding what this
commitment means, and how to generate evidence of that commitment for yourself, those with a
strong understanding of stewardship and how to recognize it will be better able to select jobs in
contexts where this commitment to integrity is nurtured and valued. Learning about stewardship
engages students in taking responsibility for their role in the profession, and so taking
responsibility for the profession and the professional community. Once the construct is
understood, learners can focus on the nature of the evidence they can compile - as well as the
types of activities that can generate that kind of evidence- and on why this is meaningful over
their career.

3
1. What is stewardship?
“Upon entry into practice, all professionals assume at least a tacit responsibility for the quality
and integrity of their own work and that of colleagues. They also take on a responsibility to the
larger public for the standards of practice associated with the profession”. (Golde & Walker
2006: 10)
A steward is defined as one to whom “we can entrust the vigor, quality, and integrity of the field”
(Golde & Walker 2006: p. 5). Note that “integrity” is a key factor of stewardship, but the steward
is entrusted to preserve and promote the integrity of the field. To do so, or to be entrusted to do
so, implicitly entails personal and professional integrity as well. We would entrust an ethical
practitioner to have this personal and professional integrity; so in this discussion we consider the
“ethical” practitioner to be stewardly and to have personal and professional integrity. These
words (ethical; stewardly; with integrity) are used somewhat interchangeably, but they differ in
terms of what is observable. This article discusses stewardship and how it can be/be made to be
observable; elsewhere (Tractenberg, 2019) I discuss ethical reasoning as a way of rendering
“ethical” behaviors more observable. Being stewardly involves both ethical practice and
professional integrity; if you are stewardly and practice data science ethically, these serve to
make your professional integrity observable. Together, stewardship and ethical practice promote
the integrity of the field.
Rios, Golde & Tractenberg (2019) refined the construct of stewardship from its origins as
specific to people who earn their PhDs, so that it could be applied to any person practicing in any
field. As long as the practitioner seeks to become one to whom “we can entrust the vigor, quality,
and integrity of the field”, irrespective of the level of schooling they complete (or have yet
completed), this construct can apply to them. In fact, the original authors also envisioned the
applicability of the stewardship construct more widely, stating that, “Upon entry into practice, all
professionals assume at least a tacit responsibility for the quality and integrity of their own work
and that of colleagues. They also take on a responsibility to the larger public for the standards of
practice associated with the profession”. (Golde & Walker, 2006: p 10). It is important to
recognize that the profession currently labeled “data scientist” has many – highly varied –
definitions. Not only that, but people can move into a job with that, or a similar, title from a
highly diverse range of training and education. In a 2015 article discussing ethics and “big data”,
Tractenberg et al pointed out that this variability in how people come to be prepared to practice
in the data science domain complicates the preparation for professional practice: “(t)his diversity
presents a significant problem: no single discipline exists to govern, or even to create norms
around ethical practices in, Big Data use or research.” (Tractenberg et al. 2015, p. 1486) Thus,
the concept of stewardship is an important one: Rios et al. argue that anyone can become an
individual to whom the integrity of a field can be entrusted, as long as they develop the particular
range of knowledge (K), skills (S), and abilities (A) associated with the steward.
To facilitate the development of these KSAs, Rios et al. created a curriculum tool called a
Mastery Rubric that is specific to the KSAs of stewardship. “A Mastery Rubric is a tool for
curriculum development and evaluation that articulates a curriculum’s intended outcomes and
integrates a developmental trajectory that moves learners from novice to more expert
performance within an evidence-centered design framework.” (Rios et al. p. 9). The Mastery

4
Rubric (MR) as a tool is fully discussed in Tractenberg (2017). What is important for our
discussion is that the MR for stewardship (MR-S) describes both eight distinct, but interrelated
KSAs that together are demonstrated by those who are, or who seek to become, stewards,
together with performance level descriptors that can generally guide the creation of evidence that
each KSA can be achieved at each of four levels. The eight KSAs that define stewardly behavior
are:
1. Requisite knowledge/situational awareness (which includes knowledge of professional
practice standards)
2. Create and/or generate new methods/new knowledge in/for the profession or discipline
3. Critically evaluate extant and emerging ideas in/for the profession or discipline
4. Conserve ideas in/for the profession or discipline (or not, if deemed rejectable & nonconservation is justified)
5. Responsibly write (disciplinary scholarship)
6. Responsibly teach/mentor/model (formally and informally)
7. Responsibly apply the knowledge and principles of the discipline
8. Responsibly communicate (outside of scholarly venues)
The four stages at which each of these is demonstrated are:
Novice: The novice is just beginning to engage with the discipline.
Apprentice: The apprentice is actively engaged in study of the profession or discipline,
who is learning that “tacit responsibility for the quality and integrity of their own work
and that of colleagues”, and the “responsibility to the larger public for the standards of
practice associated with the profession” that Golde & Walker (2006) asserted are
essential to any professional.
Journeyman: The journeyman is an independent practitioner who is a steward of the
discipline.
Master: The Master steward is recognized by evidence and consensus as one who
teaches effectively.
Rios et al. (2019), p. 16-17
If this role appeals to you, you can develop the stewardly mindset and commit to learning
and following (modeling, and promoting) your profession’s practice guidelines. Elsewhere
(Tractenberg, 2019) I discuss how to do this with the guidelines from the American Statistical
Association (ASA) and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), both of which should
be influential for anyone who handles and works with data – at any point along the stream from
collection to analysis to interpretation. Here we focus on stewardship and how data science and
data scientists can benefit from this construct.
2. Why is stewardship relevant?
Consensus is building: Responsibilities accrue when data are “ingested” and analyzed. Part of
this consensus comes from the fact that data breaches are increasing at a worrying rate
(Techworld, 12 March 2019). In their “year in review” of artificial intelligence, The AI Now
Institute created an astonishing timeline:

5

Image attributed to Varoon Mathur; captured 25 March 2019 from
https://medium.com/@AINowInstitute/ai-in-2018-a-year-in-review-8b161ead2b4e
Importantly for this figure, only “news events” are presented, and some of those events include
testimony and other activities that did not involve data science directly. What the figure
demonstrates includes the following.
A. “ethical problems” include both frankly illegal activity, such as violating privacy and
other laws to illegally obtain data; and other activities that were not intentional but still
raise ethical challenges, such as the deaths caused by driverless cars.
B. Violations that were not (or have not yet been) reported would not have been included in
the figure. If you explore any of the cases in the figure you will undoubtedly find that the
report of the case followed, sometimes by months, the events in question (see Wong
2019). So this figure represents only a fraction of the actual ethical violations that
happened just in this timeframe.
C. The Cambridge Analytica scandal, revealed on 17 March 2018 according to the figure
(see
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook%E2%80%93Cambridge_Analytica_data_scandal
for details), involved the illegal access of personal data from Facebook users. According
to reports, a data scientist at Cambridge University created a program that either did, or
was modified to do, the illegal harvesting of data from across Facebook (instead of just
collecting what was supposed to be collected from only those who consented to have
their data collected). This is only one example of the potential harms that can accrue to
the public even if the data scientist did not intend for that to happen.
D. While Cambridge Analytica was able to steal data using the product from one data
scientist who did not work there, other data scientists needed to engage in the work to
utilize the data that was collected. We know for certain that none of the professionals who
were hired or paid to engage in any of these activities had been trained to be stewards,
because stewardship is not (yet) a widely taught or practiced construct. Awareness of the

6
potential for unethical behavior by data scientists has led to the profession “data science”
becoming a target requiring ethical guidelines of some kind (e.g., Simonite 2018;
Loukides et al. 2018). Public trust in this discipline was harmed by each of these events,
and legislation in the United States and European Union was created specifically to limit
the potential for data science to engage in harmful behaviors.
There is no real consensus, though, on how to respond to what is obviously a growing problem:
data science being used in harmful ways. Part of the motivation for this article is raising
awareness of responsibilities to the profession and to those served or affected by the profession.
Training new practitioners and the people with whom they work to “do the right thing” needs
attention; hopefully this article will convince each reader that a stewardly mindset is a
worthwhile mindset to begin to cultivate and to as you move forward in your training and career.
For example, if faced with the decision of those hired or asked to specifically modify or deploy
the tool that led to illegal access of the Facebook data from millions of users, the data scientist
could have simply used the KSAs of stewardship for guidance.
Table 1. Do the stewardship KSAs provide any guidance to a data scientist with a questionable
request?
Stewardship KSA:
Requisite
knowledge/situational
awareness (which includes
knowledge of professional
practice standards)
Create and/or generate new
methods/new knowledge
in/for the profession or
discipline
Critically evaluate extant and
emerging ideas in/for the
profession or discipline
Conserve ideas in/for the
profession or discipline (or
not, if deemed rejectable &
non-conservation is justified)
Responsibly write
(disciplinary scholarship)
Responsibly
teach/mentor/model (formally
and informally)
Responsibly apply the
knowledge and principles of
the discipline

Should I fulfill this request?
Check professional practice standards to see if modifying
someone else’s work is problematic. Professional guidelines
also stipulate uniformly that harms should be limited – not
created - by ethical professional activities
If I do this, I will create new knowledge (adapting the
existing program) that will decrement trust in this profession.
Adapting this program could make this profession the target
of legal action.
This program may need refinements (or warning labels) if it
can easily be hacked to result in harms.
Fully documenting this program (and/or my adaptations of
this program) could help warn users or potential targets of its
use.
Fulfilling this request could signal to the requestor, or to
others, that creating harms is an OK thing to do for any data
scientist.
Creating something that leads to harms is not a responsible
application of my data science knowledge.

7
Responsibly communicate
(outside of scholarly venues)

Telling the requestor or user that the program (or my
modifications of it) could lead to harms is responsible
communication; failing to warn the public or the requestor is
irresponsible communication.

Table 1 suggests that the simple consideration of the KSAs of stewardship could have led to
different decisions by data scientists, possibly also leading away from the borderlineillegal/clearly unethical activities by the Cambridge Analytica team. While those who intend to
do harm will never be swayed by arguments that “doing harm is not stewardly” (nor will they be
dissuaded from doing harm by the fact that it is illegal), if more data scientists raised objections,
refused to participate, or notified authorities than agreed to participate in such practices, the
harms could possibly be mitigated.
This example is extreme, and there are many decisions that happen at virtually every stage in the
practice of data science as a profession. That is why it is so important for us to promote the
integration of a stewardly mindset early in professional development, and for every practitioner.
The demand for data scientists will not diminish because of these breaches, even when laws are
passed to prevent them and to constrain data science and its applications; even as data science
violations (whether illegal or simply unethical yet legal) have become increasingly common,
more people are seeking to be trained in this field because the job is in high demand. However, at
some point, negative views by the public of the profession may lead to less interest in –and
opportunities for - learning to do the job well and carefully.
You may have heard the quote, “Be the change you wish to see in the world”; this is typically
misattributed to the leader of the peaceful independence movement in India starting in 1915
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahatma_Gandhi#Biography), Mohandas Ghandi.
What he actually said was: “If we could change ourselves, the tendencies in the world would
also change. As a man changes his own nature, so does the attitude of the world change
towards him. ... We need not wait to see what others do.”
MK Ghandi, 1913
More recently, and specifically relating to data science, Loukides et al. (2018) suggest that
“Cultural change may take time, but it will happen—if we are that change. That’s what it means
to do good data science.” Irrespective of whether your role is that of a data wrangler, data
scientist, statistician, or person who occasionally uses data - obtained, managed, analyzed by
others - to make decisions, a stewardly approach will tend to limit the harms that may result from
those decisions. Changing yourself, as Ghandi said, is the first step towards changing the culture
to one that values and promotes stewardship.
3. How do I become a Steward?
The first step in becoming a steward is to accept the responsibility of being a steward: Accept
it, model it, and promote it. For some practitioners, there is a ‘fear of missing out’ or an
unwillingness to engage with stewardship when no one else is doing that. This actually drives a
lot of possibly surprising behavior – data scientists may accept assignments or carry out tasks
they’re given because if they do not, the asker/assigner will simply hire someone else who will

8
do that task. This is one of the ongoing challenges of dissemination and education - and the
development of professional identity - to encourage all practitioners to say NO to unethical
requests, or requests to engage in behaviour that is not stewardly or not consistent with existing
professional guidelines. It is not that the people accepting the tasks are not ethical, or that they
are not competent, but rather that they believe that there will be someone (possibly someone who
IS unethical, or incompetent, or both) who will accept the job. Simply considering decisions that
you make using the stewardship KSAs can help you as well as the profession: consider how
much more trust people would have in the profession of data science if everyone knew that data
scientists were trained to consider their stewardly obligations.
The visible steward
Stewardship is a mindset, but it ends up having the potential to be very visible. Rios et al. (2019)
describe both all the KSAs of stewardship and also, how performance of these KSAs can (and
should) change over time as the steward evolves. Important for your understanding of the
observable changes in KSA performance is a brief discussion of the complexity of your thinking
and reasoning skills. This complexity is summarized in Bloom’s Taxonomy of Cognitive
Behaviors (Bloom et al. 1956). The taxonomy is a six-level hierarchy of cognitive skills or
functioning. The fact that the taxonomy is a hierarchy is important for our discussion, because it
means that earlier or lower levels need to be developed before the next levels can be initiated.
These six levels are:
1.
Remember/Reiterate, where performance is based on recognition of already-seen
example(s);
2.
Understand/Summarize, where performance utilizes information that has already
known/given;
3.
Apply/Illustrate, where performance extrapolates from seen examples to new ones by
applying rules;
4.
Analyze/Predict, where performance requires analysis and prediction, using rules.
The majority of tests in formal education require Bloom’s levels 1-4. However, it is the
higher levels of cognitive abilities that we use in our daily lives and in the workplace – and these
are the most difficult abilities to cultivate:
5.
Create/ Synthesize, where performance yields something innovative and novel. The
creation, description, and justification of something new –whether or not it is derived from
existing things/ideas – is highly complex and abstract.
6.
Evaluate/Compare/Judge, the most complex type of thinking because it does not
involve rules but does require consideration and prioritization of abstract features of material.
Bloom’s level 6 is the most complex cognitive level because performance involves applying
guidelines –if they exist, and can involve subtle differences arising from comparison or
evaluation of abstract, theoretical or otherwise not-rule-based decisions, ideas or materials.
Methods for demonstration that you are growing in your commitment and abilities to act
in a stewardly way include professional portfolios, which can show a commitment by those in
early stages of developing a stewardly mindset - or achievement by those in later stages of the
stewardly mindset development process. In fact, evidence of stewardship, and of the
development of this identity, can be derived from many activities one already does – from
coursework or your individual, self-directed study; or from engagement in your job, your

9
profession, your context. Sharing this evidence can promote the culture change that is needed: if
you take the time to create and cultivate the evidence, it transmits your value for stewardship and
observable evidence of its existence. When you share that evidence, you demonstrate that –
beyond a transcript – you can show both the level at which you perform each KSA and also, the
types of opportunities you would like to have in order to continue your development.
Creating and sharing evidence, stage by stage
The novice is just beginning to engage with the discipline. This individual is just
beginning to learn about each KSA, so the work they do is usually at Bloom’s levels 1-2 of
cognitive complexity 1-2 (understand, summarize). The novice steward does not yet recognize
that, or act as if, failures to act in a stewardly manner have ramifications beyond themselves.
Thus, to ensure that you move out of the novice stage, it is essential to begin to consider what it
means to you, to your profession, and to the public trust in your profession when you do not act
in a stewardly manner. Making your commitment to becoming - and then being - a steward
visible is how you begin to move out of the novice stage – not simply to get to the next level, but
to engage with the idea of stewardship of data science, and recognize your responsibility for
performing – whatever you do – in a stewardly way. It is important to point out that an
experienced data scientist who does not recognize that, or act as if, failures to act in a stewardly
manner have ramifications beyond themselves is not even a novice steward, in spite of their
years of experience. These stages do not depend on time-in-position, they reflect, in observable
ways, how you do your job (ethically vs not) and demonstrate your responsibility for the
integrity of the profession or field.
Whether learning in an academic setting or even on the job, the novice steward is
prepared to reason with facts and pre-defined problems, using legal (rules) and the most concrete
professional practice standards. Apprentices are in the process of developing an awareness of the
dimensions of stewardship and professionalism, and also of their own development or place in
the continuum. This is and requires a more abstract level of thinking about what are fairly
abstract concepts (stewardship, professionalism) and therefore, require the practitioner to bring
more advanced thinking to bear. That is, the novice tends to perform stewardly KSAs at Bloom’s
levels 1-2 (understand, summarize), moving towards developing levels 3 (apply) and 4
(analyze/predict) while the apprentice is more firmly performing at levels 3-5. The apprentice
stage is likely to be a long one, because the formation of professional identity and the
opportunity to develop and demonstrate achievement at the apprentice steward level may take
time. While you may be eager to demonstrate that you are in fact fully committed to, and
engaged in establishing, the “tacit responsibility for the quality and integrity of their own work
and that of colleagues”, and the “responsibility to the larger public for the standards of practice
associated with the profession” that Golde & Walker (2006) describe, some level of real-world
experience is required in order to be recognized as an individual to whom the vigor and integrity
of the field will be entrustable (once the journeyman level is achieved).
The journeyman is a steward of the discipline, performing all of the KSAs with
understanding, analysis, and synthesis of their experience with their knowledge, functioning at
the highest Bloom’s levels in their working life. This individual is recognizable as someone to
whom the integrity of the field can be entrusted; someone whose integrity, and whose
commitment to their field or profession, is observable. Journeyman level performance of each

10
KSA is reflective, and includes analysis and synthesis of their experience with their knowledge
(Bloom’s 4-6).
To focus our discussion of evidence on the formation of the steward of data science, we
will explore just the first three levels of the developmental trajectory – to initiate your evolution
from a novice steward to the journeyman, the person who is stewardly in practice.
Table 2. General performance descriptors from The Mastery Rubric for Stewardship. Adapted
with permission of the Authors from Rios et al. (2019).
Developmental
Novice
Apprentice
Journeyman
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship

General
descriptor of
performance:

Has interest but
limited experience in
the discipline or
profession, but is
being introduced to
the ideas and
commitments that
the Apprentice will
build upon.
Is discovering the
importance of
disciplinary and
professional
stewardship.

Actively engaged in
study of the discipline
and seeks opportunities
to demonstrate and grow
the KSAs.
Developing the full
range of Bloom’s
cognitive abilities, a
greater awareness of
their own limitations,
and a commitment to
professional and
disciplinary
stewardship.

Demonstrates the KSAs
and commitments of a
steward of the
discipline, including
preserving disciplinary
integrity.
Is engaged in a
disciplinary or
professional community,
and seeks additional
opportunities to
reinforce less-well
developed skills.

These are important, general, descriptions of how you can recognize in yourself – and in
others – the level of stewardship a person has reached. As you learn more about stewardship you
will be able to both describe the “importance of disciplinary and professional stewardship” and
document how this is demonstrated in your work (whether in school or the workplace). Your first
objective should be to create or compile evidence that you are performing at the novice level on
all KSAs. This may not happen all at the same time, and you might have evidence that you are
performing at the apprentice level on some KSAs while you continue to grow towards that level
on other KSAs. The point is,
While we are focused on your initiation of growth as a steward, you can also use these
descriptions to help you identify ethical and stewardly collaborators, mentors, and workplaces.
Rios et al. (2019) describe the development of the Mastery Rubric for Stewardship; here we
focus on each KSA and how you can utilize the performance level descriptors to document the

11
level at which you perform today, make plans to grow your performance level, and then
demonstrate that growth.
Table 3. Stewardship KSA 1: Requisite Knowledge/Situational Awareness
Novice
Largely unaware of the
professional community
and standards within
which their academic or
professional interests
operate.

Apprentice
Learning to recognize when
and how to demonstrate
stewardship, that professional
standards of practice involve
both legal/illegal and
ethical/unethical continua, and
how to recognize and respond
to these features.

Journeyman
Exercises professional practice
standards and recognizes
situations in which stewardship
should be modeled and/or
applied with respect to
themselves and others, and to
interactions within and outside
of the profession or discipline.

The first KSA comes “first” because it is essential to all the others. The content of this
KSA is mainly professional standards in general– specific standards (American Statistical
Association, 2018 and Association of Computational Machinery, 2018) are discussed more fully
elsewhere (Tractenberg, 2019). However, applying Bloom’s levels 1-3 to the professional
practice standards will not be enough to understand when such guidelines are needed, or how to
prioritize guideline principles in the events that more than one applies in any situation. Moreover,
knowing and being able to use/prioritize the guidelines that outline ethical professional practice
is necessary, but not sufficient, to being a steward. Instead, this describes the apprentice steward
– and this can also describe the long-time practitioner who is new to the stewardship construct.
To perform this KSA at the journeyman level requires in depth understanding of when and how
to use the professional practice standards. Importantly, the journeyman is not acting stewardly
for themselves alone, but also modeling this mindset for others – inside and outside the
discipline.
Table 4. Stewardship KSA 2: Create and/or generate new methods/new knowledge
Novice

Apprentice

Journeyman

12
Has limited awareness of
the knowledge and
activities of the discipline,
and limited exposure to
the ethical issues involved
in their creation and use.
Learning that
knowledge is generated;
and that the creation of
new methods or
knowledge may have
ramifications beyond the
original intent.

Learning to create methods and
knowledge in a manner that
strengthens and advances the
field and disciplinary
community.
Developing the ability to
recognize when new methods
or knowledge can be used for
unethical ends, and how
stewards of the discipline
respond.
Learning how to balance a
commitment to strengthen and
advance the discipline with
advancing one’s career

Generates, and transparently
communicates, new methods
and knowledge to strengthen
and advance the field.
Considers how new ideas can
be used for unethical ends, and
models how to respond when
such action occurs.
Prioritizes the disciplinary
community over metrics that
devalue it. Challenges such
metrics whenever possible.

This KSA is clearly a direct reflection of data science practice, so the novice is still in the
process of learning what “data science” is all about, and will have limited responsibility for
making contributions to the field. However, rather than committing this new knowledge to
memory, the novice steward of data science will also be internalizing the process by which
knowledge is generated. Understanding that generating new methods, like the data scientist who
created the technology that was exploited by Cambridge Analytica, must be balanced against
your commitment to creating ethical methods, or methods that mitigate, rather than cause, harms,
is essential to ethical practice as well as the development of stewardship. If that developer had
achieved the apprentice level on this KSA, and recognized that their method could be used for
unethical ends (as it was), perhaps he might have acted to prevent those unethical uses or notified
the public that they were possible. The journeyman applies this level of stewardship to both their
own and others’ work.
Table 5. Stewardship KSA 3: Critically evaluate extant and emerging ideas
Novice

Apprentice

Journeyman

Limited ability to evaluate
ideas or differentiate
between assertions and
arguments within the
discipline.

Learning how professionals
review, critique, and challenge
each other’s ideas and
arguments.

Critically evaluates knowledge
and ideas within the discipline
or profession and the
paradigms by which this
knowledge is derived, and
promotes this evaluation by
others.

Uncritically treats vetted
ideas and materials as
“true.”

Practicing these skills through
guided work with increasing
levels of disciplinary
engagement and independence.

Learning how warrants
and claims function

Developing the intellectual
humility necessary to critically

Participates in the vetting of
new and emerging ideas within
the profession or discipline.

13
together to form
arguments and evidencebased reasoning.

evaluate their work according
to disciplinary standards.

Exhibits intellectual humility
and ensures their contributions
to the field are well-reasoned
and well-supported.

Much of our formal education is spent learning and remembering “extant ideas”, or what
constitutes “current knowledge” for the field in which we study. Not much time is spent critically
evaluating such ideas during schooling, but this can be an important activity in the workplace.
Learning how to be critical and constructive, if that is needed, is essential for team or group work,
and is especially crucial for those in managerial, mentoring, or supervisory positions. In the
workplace, there is rarely –if ever – one “right” answer (unlike every multiple-choice exam you
have ever taken). Therefore, it is not surprising that the novice may be unprepared to critically
evaluate either existing or emerging ideas. However, as an apprentice data scientist (and steward),
you may be cultivating new and emerging ideas of your own, so it is important to be able to
evaluate these in a critical and constructive way. Once these skills can be demonstrated for your
own work, they can be applied to other work and ideas. Intellectual humility
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellectual_humility) is the correct perception of your own
knowledge in terms of its strengths and weaknesses. Understanding that “what you know” may
actually be mistaken, and the “correct” perception means you can balance this knowledge with
your abilities to discover additional evidence, so that your perception does not overwhelm you
into a total inability to make any kind of decision at all (because you don’t trust yourself). Your
new and growing awareness of how well you exhibit the different abilities in Bloom’s taxonomy
is evidence of intellectual humility – but being able to justify your confidence in your, or others’,
ideas with rational arguments is an essential part of stewardship. The journeyman steward insists
on well-reasoned and well-supported contributions to the field, and can critically and
constructively evaluate such ideas. The apprentice must develop sufficient intellectual humility
to do this, meaning that in the novice stage, you must develop the understanding that reasoning
and evidence are key to effective arguments for the discipline. In order to eventually demonstrate
journeyman level performance, this understanding as well as the abilities to deploy it must be
developed.
Table 6. Stewardship KSA 4: Conserve ideas (or rejects ideas if non-conservation is justified)
Novice
Apprentice
Journeyman
Entering the field by
learning about the
fundamental ideas,
thinkers, and
accomplishments of the
past.
Attention is focused on
remembering and
understanding core
(highly conserved) ideas;
justifies neither their
conservation nor rejection

Learning to conserve
fundamental ideas of the field
through engagement,
application, relation, and
extension, as well as
qualification and critique.

Critically conserves the ideas
that advance the field and
preserve its integrity.

Recognizes multiple
perspectives, including cultural
and extra-disciplinary
Learning to recognize
influences, in describing and
processes by which ideas in the justifying decisions of
field are vetted and that reconservation or nonevaluation and conservation
conservation of ideas, models,
are essential to the integrity of and views.
the field.

14
of ideas or arguments.
Learning to describe and
justify decisions about
conservation or nonconservation.

Recognizes their role in
shaping the field/ profession
and its history.

Learning how these decisions
have shaped the history of the
field and the ideas that
are/have been conserved.
In some data science projects, particularly early in training or education, it can sometimes
seem like “whatever was done before” must be retained (conserved) because it worked before. In
other cases it can seem like whatever is to be done must be innovative – so early work must be
rejected simply because “it has already been done”. The ability to justify decisions to conserve or
reject would be based on concrete criteria by the novice, and as the novice transitions to the
apprentice stage, a better understanding of more abstract justifications will be possible (and
should be developed). It is up to the journeyman steward to be critical of decisions to both
conserve and reject – meaning that achieving this level of performance requires those high-level
Bloom’s cognitive abilities, to evaluate and judge. As discussed earlier, developing the abilities
to evaluate and judge requires that the earlier abilities have been learned and can be/are practiced.
The history of the field of data science, while not particularly long, is full of examples where
decisions about conservation and rejection have been made by those in practice as well as
outside forces. Tracing the Cambridge Analytica scandal is only one recent example of decisions
to keep and deploy the technology that led or lead to harms to individuals who did not consent to
have their data accessed; the leaders of this firm then decided to close that firm and start another
one with the same technology – effectively conserving the idea that it is justified to unethically
and in some contexts illegally obtaining other people’s data. Clearly, those making such
decisions have no interest in being stewardly; learning to recognize examples and individuals
like this is essential to both your becoming a journeyman steward and also avoiding working
with or for such nonstewards.
Table 7. Stewardship KSA 5: Responsibly write
Novice
Apprentice
Learning disciplinary
writing standards with
attention to the details of
what must be recorded,
how to construct written
reports, and why
responsible writing
requires transparency.

Gaining greater proficiency in
discipline-specific writing.
Demonstrating increased
sophistication in writing,
including content, rhetoric and
argumentation, and
transparency and professional
integrity.

Journeyman
Independently writes in the
diversity of contexts and styles
specific to the field, to
generate, conserve, challenge,
and reject field-specific
knowledge and to engage
others in and outside the field.
Practices and promotes
transparency in their writing
for the sake of the discipline
and field.

15

Not every practitioner needs to write much, and in data science there might be more
writing, across more contexts, in the formal education context than at work. However, all
science- and most technical jobs – requires careful and thorough documentation. Thus, a novice
data science steward may be learning both how to write “like a data scientist” and also why
doing so in a responsible manner is an integral part of ethical practice. As we saw in the
Cambridge Analytica example, if the data scientist that created the technology that was exploited
to unethically access private Facebook data (from those who did not authorize its access) had
transparently documented this potential application, maybe protections might have been created
to prevent the harm that was done. The apprentice will undoubtedly have more opportunities for
discipline-specific writing, and so will also be able to document their attention to transparency –
in their own and in others’ writing. This KSA is likely to continue to develop well into the
workplace, because writing for peer-practitioners can require extra care, so that transparency
becomes automatic across multiple audiences (boss, peer, user, etc.). Moreover, in the workplace
it will be essential to also be able to determine the level of transparency in other people’s writing.
If the data scientists at Cambridge Analytica had recognized that the developer of the technology
they utilized had not written the documentation of his work with sufficient transparency, they
may have pointed this out, identified the potential to do harm, and taken steps to correct it.
Performing this KSA at the journeyman level is essential to ethical practice as well as to
promoting the integrity of the field: clearly and transparently communicating both the technical
details, and potential uses/misuses of the technology can only serve to raise awareness and can
also serve to prevent harms that might otherwise be unintended, yet very real.
Table 8. Stewardship KSA 6: Responsibly teach/mentor/model
Novice
Apprentice
Journeyman
As someone
Growing in disciplinary knowledge,
Possess the knowledge, skills,
uninitiated in the
skills, and abilities and the ability to
and abilities of the discipline
field, the Novice
pass these on to others.
and is able to pass these along
does not
to others.
undertake
Develops an understanding of the
teaching or
importance of competent mentoring
Teaches, mentors, and models
mentoring roles.
and modeling inherent in professional
professionalism and the
practice and disciplinary
commitments of stewardship in
responsibilities.
both formal and informal
settings, within and outside the
Seeks opportunities to learn about
field.
workplace appropriate teaching and
learning, and to practice teaching, with
supervision if available.
The novice is does not tend to have teaching or mentoring roles when they are early in
their careers, but as noted earlier, the developmental stages are not time-dependent. It is
important to recognize that a long-time practitioner who is unaware of stewardship will also not
be able to teach or mentor with respect to stewardship in the field. However, in order to “be the
change” (misquoting Ghandi again), or to promote and model stewardship, it is important to
recognize and accept that your own commitment to ethical and stewardly practice sends signals

16
to others- effectively, if implicitly, teaching. The apprentice is beginning to understand what
actually constitutes a visible (and thereby, teachable) commitment to stewardship. In peer-topeer teaching (e.g., of new methods or methods that you developed), a focus on the responsibility
to use the new technique/technology responsibly could be evidence of apprentice level
performance on this KSA. Because stewardship is not commonly integrated into formal
education, you may not observe a commitment to responsible use of data science KSAs in your
instructors. The apprentice recognizes this and also seeks new opportunities where this
commitment is available and prioritized. Once you begin to recognize such opportunities and
document their importance for your own professional identity development, you will be better
able to demonstrate that you perform this KSA at the journeyman level. Keep in mind how
important it is that the KSA must be demonstrated at the stage you target in an observable way:
you must be able to recognize this, and that will in turn facilitate your documentation that you
perform this KSA at that level for others who will seek opportunities to develop stewardly habits
with you.
Table 9. Stewardship KSA 7: Responsibly apply disciplinary knowledge
Novice
Apprentice
Journeyman
As someone inexperienced
in the KSAs of the field,
the Novice is not expected
to apply them but is
learning that application
entails responsibilities for
the practitioner.

Learning how and when to apply the
KSAs of the discipline and how
application entails professional and
ethical responsibilities, including
integrity, transparency, and respect.
Seeks opportunities to deepen their
knowledge of their professional and
ethical responsibilities.

Applies the KSAs in a
way that preserves and
advances the field by
demonstrating integrity,
transparency, and respect
in interactions within and
outside of the profession
or discipline.

The novice is still learning the KSAs of their specific field, so would not have many
opportunities to apply their disciplinary knowledge – yet. However, consideration of cases like
the Cambridge Analytica example discussed earlier does demonstrate that you are becoming
aware of that – and how – applying data science KSAs as you (learn to) practice entails
responsibilities. These were not considered in the Cambridge Analytica example, and there are
undoubtedly many more such examples currently (and will be in the future). Each time you are
tasked with the application of new data science-specific knowledge –for example, as homework
or final projects, you might also generate a brief “analysis” of what responsibilities this
application creates for you. The apprentice is consolidating such experience and also actively
seeking new opportunities to deepen their knowledge of their responsibilities. Taking an extra
course on ethics would be an example of this, but it is the demonstration of your growth as a
steward, not simply additional items on your transcript, that constitute evidence of apprenticelevel performance on this KSA. This might be one of the most important KSAs to demonstrate as
you apply for jobs - that you perform this KSA at the journeyman level but also that you are
committed to the integrity of the field as well as your own ethical practice. This type of evidence
could easily distinguish such an applicant from among all those that would be considered: if an
organization does not value (or, as might have been true for Cambridge Analytica, seeks to avoid
employing those who promote) stewardship, then you definitely need to carefully consider such

17
an environment. However, if the organization does value stewardship, or would appreciate the
opportunity to pursue it, journeyman performance on this KSA will be highly valuable.
Table 10. Stewardship KSA 8: Responsibly communicate
Novice
Apprentice
Discovering the rules for
communicating in the
discipline or profession.
Learning that stewards of
the discipline have a
responsibility to represent
their field to others in a
way that promotes the
integrity, transparency, and
respect of their profession.

Learning how and when to
communicate with insiders and
outsiders about their discipline or
profession.
Recognizes that communicating as
a steward imparts responsibilities
that include demonstrating
integrity, transparency, and respect,
and seeks to exhibit their
commitment to these
responsibilities.

Journeyman
Clearly and effectively
communicates the ideas,
perspectives, and content
of the discipline to
insiders and outsiders in a
way that promotes
integrity, transparency,
and respect.

The novice is discovering rules and is mainly concerned with concrete and objective
features of communication, while the apprentice is beginning to engage with more abstract
features of what it means to “communicate responsibly”. As you compile evidence of your
novice-level performance, you would focus on rules and possibly, laws that you follow. Once
you have demonstrated the novice level performance, you can seek out more abstract features
(seeking itself is part of the apprentice level performance) to learn and to demonstrate. If you are
able to compile evidence at both levels by the time your pre-professional preparation is
completed, you should then be able to begin compiling evidence of your clear and effective –
responsible – communication in the workplace, to demonstrate that you perform this KSA at the
journeyman level.
4. Conclusion.
“. . . ethics is not a vaccine that can be administered in one dose and have long-lasting
effects no matter how often, or in what conditions, the subject is exposed the disease
agent. Teaching individual students and postdoctoral fellows good professional practices
cannot be highly and widely efficacious until academic culture and society also model
and reward ethical behaviour.”
(National Academy of Engineering, 2009: 34; emphasis added)
Whether early in training or well into practice, orientation towards stewardship can be
accomplished and built upon. Culture change towards stewardship is needed - and has to start
somewhere. The stewardship model promotes ethical practice, but does so in an ongoing way –
one that explicitly avoids the current problem many disciplines face: how to “teach ethics” in a
way that does not assume, as the National Academy of Engineering identifies as an incorrect
assumption, that a one-time ethics course will suffice to prepare practitioners for their whole
career. Stewardship is an active, purposeful mindset, so requires time to learn, as well as to grow.
Each practitioner, manager, and instructor can be the change, become a steward, promote,

18
discuss, and reward this mindset, and embrace/model/promote stewardship and integrity in
the profession. The National Academy of Engineering report (2009) echoes Ghandi and is
reiterated, in part, by Loukides: culture change is needed and it must promote (“model”) and
reward ethical behavior.
In the discussion of evidence that you perform each KSA at any level, we have touched
on the possibility of convincing a potential employer of your achievements. This is an essential
part of your evidence: you do not need to simply compile any evidence, but it should be specific
and supportive of your claim that you do in fact perform that KSA at the target level. Evaluating
your evidence from the perspective of someone who does not know you, someone you need to
convince, is a crucial part of leveraging your stewardship evidence in your professional life.
Introducing the idea of stewardship into our conversations with our peers, supervisors,
and collaborators, can help create the culture change - and encourage ongoing conversations that is essential to more ethical practice of statistics and data science worldwide and across
contexts like academia, government, and business/industry. This article is intended to help you
begin your evolution from novice steward to journeyman, so that you can follow Ghandi’s
(1913) suggestion: to “ …change ourselves, (so that) the tendencies in the world would also
change.”
Employers, managers, supervisors, mentors, and instructors should be stewards of their
field, encouraging employees, team members, mentees, and students to join them in embodying
and promoting this mindset. Hiring and promotion criteria may not currently include evidence of
stewardly behaviors (and opportunities to create this evidence), but this is one “tendency in the
world” that could be changed if new practitioners lead the way. New practitioners can also bring
this mindset to their work in observable – shareable and therefore, culture-changing – ways.
Applicants for data science positions may distinguish themselves from others with evidence of
their commitment to their own professional integrity and to the integrity of the field. Applicants
can also utilize “commitment to ethical practice” and “entrustable with the integrity of the field”
as indicators that a potential workplace is going to promote or hinder their own development and
demonstration of stewardship.

19
References
American Statistical Association (ASA) ASA Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice-revised
(2018) downloaded from https://www.amstat.org/ASA/Your-Career/Ethical-Guidelines-forStatistical-Practice.aspx on 30 April 2018.
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). Code of Ethics (2018) downloaded from
https://www.acm.org/about-acm/code-of-ethics on 12 October 2018.
BS Bloom (Ed.), with Engelhart MD, Furst EJ, Hill WH & Krathwohl DR. (1956). Taxonomy of
educational objectives: Handbook I: Cognitive domain. New York, NY: David McKay.
Golde CM, & Walker GE. (Eds.). (2006). Envisioning the future of doctoral education:
Preparing stewards of the discipline-Carnegie essays on the doctorate. San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Ghandi, MK. (1913). (MK Ghandi, 1913) General Knowledge About Health; VOL 13, Ch 153,
Page 241. Printed in the Indian Opinion on 9/8/1913 From The Collected Works of M.K.Gandhi;
published by The Publications Division, New Delhi, India.
Loukides M, Mason H, Patil DJ. (10 July 2018). Doing good data science. Downloaded from
https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/doing-good-data-science on 15 July 2018
National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council. (2009). Ethics education and
scientific and engineering research: what’s been learned? What should be done? Summary of a
workshop. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. Downloaded from
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/12695.html on 20 Dec 2013.
Rios CR, Golde CM, Tractenberg RE. (2019). The preparation of stewards with the Mastery
Rubric for Stewardship: Re-envisioning the formation of scholars and practitioners.
https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/vw7j5/
Simonite T. (2018). Should data scientists adhere to a Hippocratic Oath? Accessed from
https://www.wired.com/story/should-data-scientists-adhere-to-a-hippocratic-oath/
Techworld. (2019). The most infamous data breaches. 12 March 2019. Accessed from
https://www.techworld.com/security/uks-most-infamous-data-breaches-3604586/ on 25 March
2019.
Tractenberg RE, Russell AL, Morgan G, FitzGerald KT, Collmann J, Vinsel L, Steinmann M,
Dolling LM. (2015) Amplifying the reach and resonance of ethical codes of conduct through
ethical reasoning: preparation of Big Data users for professional practice. Science and
Engineering Ethics 21(6): 1485-1507. DOI 10.1007/s11948-014-9613-1
Tractenberg, RE. (2017). Preprint. The Mastery Rubric: A tool for curriculum development and
evaluation in higher, graduate/post-graduate, and professional education. Published in the Open
Archive of the Social Sciences (SocArXiv), osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/qd2ae
Tractenberg RE. (2019). Preprint. Strengthening your practice and your profession using ethical
guidelines. Published in the Open Archive of the Social Sciences (SocArXiv), DOI in progress.
Wong, Julia Carrie (2019-03-22). "Facebook acknowledges concerns over Cambridge Analytica
emerged earlier than reported". The Guardian. Retrieved online 2019-03-25.

