AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number1. February 2019

Pp. 257 -275

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.20
Modified proverbs in al-Maḥmūd’s Novel Muftaraq al-Maṭar (The Parting of the Rain)

Huwaida Issa
Department of Arabic, Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies
University of Leeds, United Kingdom

Abstract
This paper, which develops ideas in my Ph.D. thesis (Issa, 2014), identifies a number of modified
proverbs in a modern Arabic novel, Muftaraq al-Maṭar, by the Syrian novelist Yūsuf al-Maḥmūd.
The study delves into how different scholars define modified proverbs (also sometimes referred to
as deformed proverbs or anti-proverbs). The researcher will study a sample of adapted proverbs,
regarding their new representation, and the effect of formal changes on their meaning, especially,
when compared with their original structure. The study focuses on how the use of proverbs in
narrative helps to flesh out the material and cultural life of 20th century Syria. This is done mostly
by re-contextualizing the adapted proverbs. In so doing, the paper also discusses the different
techniques of modification identified by various researchers. Then the focus moves on Alan
Partington’s (1998, pp.126-8) four techniques for modifying phrases: substitution, insertion,
abbreviation, and rephrasing. This is followed by an examination of sixteen modified proverbs,
which are classified into four groups, each one representing the implementation of one of
Partington’s four techniques. Finally, the study examines the semantic effect of applying these
techniques.
Key words: modified, proverbs, semantics, Syrian, technique
Cites as: Issa, H. (2019). Modified proverbs in al-Maḥmūd’s Novel Muftaraq al-Maṭar (The
Parting of the Rain).Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (1) 257 275. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.20

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

257

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

Introduction
This paper examines the linguistic, semantic and cultural dimensions of a number of modified
proverbs in Yūsuf al-Maḥmūd’s modern Syrian novel, Muftaraq al-Maṭar. This is achieved
through studying these adapted proverbs in the light of Alan Partington’s four techniques for
modifying phrases: substitution, insertion, abbreviation and rephrasing (Partington, 1998, pp.1268), and subsequently analyzing the semantic effects of these modifications on the new forms of the
original proverbs. There are two possible outcomes of such adaptation: it either gives the new
proverb an opposite meaning to that of the original, thus setting up an antonymous relationship
between the adapted proverb and its original form, or instead it establishes a relationship between
the modified proverb and its original form that is synonymous or near-synonymous.
Al-Maḥmūd uses modified proverbs to give credibility to his text. This is mainly due to the
long history of proverbs, as described by the paremiologist (scholar of proverbs) Wolfgang Mieder
(2004, p.xii), who mentions that proverbs are a long-standing cultural device which yields both
codes of conduct and anthropological observations. Al-Maḥmūd also uses modified proverbs to
provide an authentic depiction of Syrian life and culture in the first half of the 20th century, thus
giving further credibility to his narrative. Another function of these adapted proverbs is to highlight
the specific characteristics of rural Syrian culture, fleshing out the cultural and material life that
grounds the narrative. Moreover, the rich background of folkloric elements in Arabic novels, only
scantily examined by current scholarship, demonstrates that techniques of adaptation and
modification play a vital role in preserving and expanding the cultural roots that inform alMaḥmūd’s narrative. To conclude, proverbs make the narrative feel authentic, and they do so
thanks to their enduring authoritative status, their inherent cultural specificity and the depth of the
cultural background they implicitly refer to.
1. Critical context of modified proverbs and their modification techniques
I will, first of all, analyze the reception and modification of proverbs. Many scholars have studied
modified proverbs in connection with theories of literary and cultural traditions, the role of
semantics within a dystopian world, and the necessity for proverbs to be adapted in certain
contexts. For instance, according to Mieder, modified proverbs (what he terms ‘anti-proverbs’) are
“parodied, twisted, or fractured proverbs that reveal humorous or satirical speech play with
traditional proverbial wisdom” (2004, p.28; cf. Mieder, 2003; Mieder & Litovkina, 1999). Mieder
proposes various ways in which proverbs can be changed. One possibility is a slight difference in
form between the original proverb and the modified one, as in the example provided by Mieder
and Mieder (2004, p.314): “Do unto mothers” instead of “Do unto others”. Here the modified
proverb has been changed by adding one single letter, but in other cases modified proverbs may
deviate drastically from their original form. Therefore, reception is always a matter of adaptation
to a new context.
Furthermore, I will analyze how adaptation functions by relying on the old versions of the
proverbs and the reader’s familiarity with these original forms. Mieder (2004, p.28) emphasizes
the importance of the cultural dimension of proverbs for the reader, who seizes upon their original,
authentic form in order to figure out the meaning of the new guise in which they sometimes appear
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

258

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

in the novel. According to Mieder (2004, p.28), it is highly likely that a reader familiar with the
cultural background of a novel will identify the original proverb, despite its adaptation, even
though, in some cases, a modified proverb may, in fact, convey an opposite meaning to that of the
original. In this context, Mieder (2004, p.28), suggests that questioning the original form of the
proverb through “adding a contradictory phrase beginning with the conjunction ‘but’” is one way
of transforming a proverb. However, this modification or addition does not undermine the
importance of the adapted proverb because this changed form is still able to serve a certain
function. Mieder notes that with the existence of many transformations of the original proverbs, it
is difficult to maintain the idea of the sacredness of the proverbs’ frames, forms or stable
appearance. As Mieder (2004), argues:
The fixity of proverbs is not as rigid as it once was believed to be. Unintentional
variants have also been part of the use and function of proverbs, both oral and written.
And yet, more often than not proverbs are cited in their standard traditional form to
add some common sense to human communication (p.28).
Overall, the adaptation of proverbs is necessary for them to remain operative in novel
contexts.
Martinez (2006), supports Mieder’s view about adapting proverbs to operate in certain
contexts. In his article “Occasional Phraseological Synonymy” (pp.133-34), Martinez refers to the
original, base forms of a phrase as “canonical phraseological units” (p.132), and examines the
semantic connection between the original phrase and the adapted one. Martinez proposes that when
there is a replacement of one word or more in a proverb, but the meaning remains the same, the
new form can be called an “occasional synonymous unit”. According to Martinez (2006), “this
type of occasional productivity is not directly related with the lexemes that take part in the process
of substitution” (pp.133-34). Rather, re-contextualization is the underlying reason for adaptation
and transformation. This is highlighted by Martinez, who is interested in studying how a change
of lexemes produces a “new synonymous creation” (2006, p.134). He also stresses the importance
of the “contextualization of the original unit” (2006, p.134). This means that such a change is
determined by the adaptation of the proverb to a new context. However, the original form of the
proverb maintains its authority. Martinez (2006, p.134) explains the vitality of the context: “The
contextual information is so important that sometimes the interchange of synonymous lexemes in
a specific context yields an utterance which is semantically very distant from the original form in
a specific context”.
A similar view is taken by Naciscione (2001), who refers to the way in which proverbs are
re-contextualized or re-written as “instantial use” (p.55). Martin (2011), further articulates this
point, taking as an example “the clean sweep of the proverbial new broom” (p.185). In this case,
although the structure of the original proverb “a new broom sweeps clean” has been modified, the
meaning has not changed. He also points out (2011, p.185), however, that modification may bring
about a change in meaning such that the meaning of the modified proverb only to a certain extent
overlaps with the canonical meaning of the original proverb. According to Martin (2011, p.185),
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

259

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

the workings of proverb modification can be summarized as follows. The speaker/writer first of
all chooses a canonical proverb with a suitable meaning. Then, she/he alters one or more of its
constituents in a way that changes its interpretation in view of its new wording. Nonetheless, the
original proverb can still be recognized by hearers/readers, thus making both versions of the
proverb overlap. This can be presented as follows: 1) original proverb; 2) new context; 3) semantic
shift preserving or altering original meaning (semantic shift but also preservation of the “authority”
of the original proverb).
In order to analyze how re-contextualisation causes a semantic shift, various scholars have
suggested different interpretive categories. According to Fernando (1996), there are four different
ways to transform or adapt a phrase or an idiom: “substitution, addition, permutation and deletion”
(p.54). These are explained as follows. Substitution involves exchanging one letter or word for
another. Addition involves adding a letter, a word or even a phrase to the original proverb.
Permutation involves having the same wording as the original proverb but in a different order.
Finally, deletion means subtracting/extracting/removing a part of the original proverb. Partington
(1998) similarly identifies four techniques for modifying a phrase: “substitution, insertion,
abbreviation and rephrasing” (pp.126-8). In this paper, the researcher will make use of Partington’s
classification, because it provides a clearer analysis than, for example, Zaikauskienė (2012), who
has studied Lithuanian proverbs and their methods of modification, and is also clearer than the
classification of Fernando, in fact partially revising Fernando’s categories.
As noted, the first modification technique in Partington’s classification is a substitution.
Partington (1998) defines this as: “homophone-to-heterograph or single phoneme alteration[s]”
(p.126). Partington (1998) explains this further as follows: “one of the items of the original
collocation is replaced by another, but the replacement must not change the phrase so drastically
as to make the original unrecognizable to the text receiver” (p.126). Partington (1998) provides
the following example: “‘Prints Charming’ for ‘Prince Charming’” (p.126). He (1998) explains
that there are two types of substitution: “whole-word substitution” (p.126) and “grammatical
substitution” (p.126). He (1998) provides the following example, which illustrates both types:
“Murder of the cathedral” (p.126) for “Murder in the Cathedral” (p.126) (a verse play by T.S.
Eliot). Here, replacing a whole word also entails a grammatical change. Likewise, Zaikauskienė
(2012) states that substitution may entail a minor change in the original proverb. Such a shift,
which does not affect the overall meaning of the canonical proverb (paremia), will generate a
modified proverb, which is a variant of the original, basic proverb.
Partington’s second modification technique is insertion, which occurs whenever “an
element has been added to the original”. Partington (1998, p.127), exemplifies this as follows:
“‘Play up and play the word game’ [is the adapted form of the original phrase] ‘Play up and play
the game’”. According to Zaikauskienė (2012), similarly, the most popular way of creating
Lithuanian modified proverbs (anti-paremias) is a combination of equal lexical substitution (in the
case of two-part proverbs) plus extension of the traditional paremia by a comment or reference –
i.e. insertion, in Partington’s terms. Later in this paper, the researcher will present examples of the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

260

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

modified proverbs which use Partington’s insertion technique (Zaikauskienė’s extension
technique).
Partington’s third modification technique is an abbreviation. This occurs whenever only
part of the original proverb or traditional phrase is reproduced. Partington (1998, p.127) gives
the example, “‘Lessons of another lost Arc for Britain’ recalling the film title ‘Raiders of the Lost
Ark’ (and referring to the French horse race ‘Le Prix de L’Arc de Triomphe’).”
Finally, Partington’s fourth modification technique classification is rephrasing. He defines
this as a technique whereby the original form is made almost unrecognizable to the reader.
Partington (1998, pp.127-28), gives the following example: “England’s biggest rugby union club
are prepared to conquer at the Stoop in Saturday’s semi-final […]”. Here, the phrase ‘conquer at
the Stoop’ recalls the original phrase ‘She Stoops to Conquer’, the title of the well-known play by
Oliver Goldsmith , but the radical change in meaning, structure, and context obscures its original
form almost completely.
Proverbs may undergo a semantic shift. This is mainly done in order to re-contextualise old
proverbs in a new light or context. However, re-contextualising demands different categories to
interpret it. This is relevant to this article, because it is useful to analyse how either obvious or
more obscure cultural backgrounds flesh out the cultural life of 20th century Syria in al-Maḥmūd’s
narrative. Therefore, the relationship to tradition established by the usage of proverbs is not direct
but mediated by forms of semantic change that problematize the cultural roots of modern Syrian
society.
2. The function of modified proverbs in literature
As noted, proverbs within al-Maḥmūd’s narrative serve to flesh out material and cultural life in
the first half of 20th century Syria. This is achieved through the method of modification as both
reception (rich cultural background, ancient roots) and adaptation (new context means new
meaning, which can be either the same meaning revived or an ironical subversion of the original
meaning). This view is supported by a number of critics, who argue that there is a purpose in using
the modified form of the proverb instead of employing the original one. One of the functions is to
serve a specific meaning in the context, where it seems odd to use the canonical proverb in this
particular narrative space. The context may require clothing the proverb with new specific
referents. Thus, in a certain situation and/or location in a literary text, the new proverb works
perfectly, producing an occasional synonymous proverb (Martinez, 2006, 138). This point is
reiterated by Naciscione (2010, p.41), who argues that Phraseological Units (PUs), such as
proverbs, may appear in different forms or structures, and convey various meanings. Naciscione
(2010), speaks of the “instantial use” (p.41) of PUs, which works when the reader makes a
connection between the “base form of the PU and the textual reality” (Naciscione, 2010, p.41).
Szpila (2011) argues that when proverbs are placed in a literary context, it is relatively easy
to play with their structure and meaning. He offers this explanation: “Obviously, literary language
permits greater freedom in the creative manipulation of both the form and semantics of proverbs,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

261

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

but the differences are perhaps only in quantity, not the quality of deployment” (p.173). Similarly,
Martin (2011) argues that proverbs have the flexibility to adapt to the literary milieu of the text:
“One of the most powerful social institutions that can be creatively modified in dystopian fiction
is language, and within the vast linguistic realm, proverbs are particularly suitable for stylistic
modification” (p.182). He also (2011, 185) argues that inventing new societies demands to find
suitable new proverbs. Thus, in a literary work such as Huxley’s Brave New World, whose main
theme revolves around a dystopian society, the original proverbs cannot fit the context without
adaptation. Martin (2011) explains this as follows: “Proverbs, for the most part, reveal themselves
as optimal tools for dystopian writers, since they are ubiquitous elements in folklore and most
other cultural phenomena worldwide. Their canonical form, however, belongs to a particular
society with a particular culture in a specific period of history. If authors are to create a fictional
society in the near future, they need new proverbs of their own” (p.185).
Martin (2011, p.186) examines the proverb in Brave New World uttered by the character
Lenina: “A gramme in time saves nine”, which is modified from the original proverb “a stitch in
time saves nine”. Here, Lenina replaces the lexeme “stitch” with the lexeme “gramme”, because
this seems more appropriate to the context. Lenina is advising the importance of taking a dose of
a drug to deal with sleep problems. It is obvious that the canonical meaning of the proverb does
not change, but interconnects with the new one. Martin (2011) states that the modified proverb is
used by the author to fulfil a specific intention:
Of course, a stitch in time saves nine potentially applies to a wider range of situations
than Huxley’s creative exploitation of it. The fact that it is the canonical proverb which
carries the most comprehensive meaning supports the argument that ad hoc
modification usually performs a likewise ad hoc function such as supporting
background information in the plot, as is the case here (p.186).
The discussion of the appropriateness of proverbs to certain contexts is as vital in al-Maḥmūd’s
novel as it is in Huxley. Like Huxley, al-Maḥmūd makes use of the lineal features of proverbs and
adjusts them in a way that suits his theme. For example, the adjusted proverb ‫أوالد الحاره الشرقيه أكثر‬
.)44 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫ من الحب على الزيتون (المحمود‬awlād al-ḥāra al-ŝarqiyya akṯar min al-ḥabb calā al-zētūn
(The children of the eastern quarter are more than olives on the olive trees) is derived from the
proverb in its original form )60‫ ص‬،1‫ ج‬،1953 ،‫( أكثر من اله ّم على القلب (فريحة‬More than worries in the
heart). This expresses abundance or fecundity. Al-Maḥmūd modifies this general proverb into a
very specific form to serve this specific situation in the narrative. In this scene, the author pictures
how boys go to the neighbour’s olive grove and steal olives from the olive trees. Thus, he adds the
words ‫( أوالد الحاره الشرقيه‬the children of the Eastern Quarter) at the beginning of the proverb. This
is to emphasise a certain location in his village, which serves the overall theme of the novel, as
being a realistic one. Moreover, because the situation is about the olive season, al-Maḥmūd
replaces the word ‫( ه ّم‬worries) in the original proverb with the word ‫( حب‬olives) in the modified
proverb, and the word ‫( قلب‬heart) in the original proverb with the word ‫( زيتون‬olive trees) in the
modified proverb. This example emphasises the role of modified proverbs in fleshing out the
culture.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

262

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

3. Modified proverbs and their formation techniques in Muftaraq al-Maṭar
In this section, I will analyse modified proverbs in Yūsuf al-Maḥmūd’s novel Muftaraq al-Maṭar
(‘The Parting of the Rain’). Al-Maḥmūd is a superbly expressive writer. This is in part due to his
prolific use of proverbs and modified proverbs in comparison to other Syrian novelists. The flux
of proverbs and modified proverbs in this text illustrates the author’s phraseological repertoire,
especially his use of these phrases not only to ornament his literary work but as a thematic device
to stress certain social and cultural aspects of the life as lived along the Syrian coastline and in its
rural hinterland, after the Ottoman occupation and the French Mandate, or even to portray certain
characters or events. This is reflected in the contextual meaning of the sample proverbs, which are
listed below.
4.1 Discussion of modified proverbs in Muftaraq al-Maṭar
This section presents sixteen modified proverbs in Yūsuf al-Maḥmūd’s novel. All the examples
are taken from my thesis (Issa, 2014). Each set of four examples illustrates one of Partington’s
modification techniques. Further discussion will be provided on the operation of modification in
each modified proverb.
4.1.1 Examples of Partington’s technique of rephrasing
Example 1:
Modified proverb:

.)332‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫لنأكل لحمه حيّا ً حتّى ال نراه في المنام (المحمود‬
Lina’kula laḥmahu ḥayyan ḥattā lā narāhu fī al-manām

Let us eat his living flesh so that we do not dream of him!
Original proverb:
.)235‫ ص‬،2001 ،‫ البعلبكي‬،12 :‫أيحبّ أحدكم أن يأكل لحم أخيه ميتا ً فكرهتموه! (الحجرات‬
‘a-yuḥibbu ‘aḥadukum ‘an ya’kula laḥma ‘axīhi mayyitan fa-karihtumūh!
Does one of you like to eat his dead brother’s flesh when you have hated him!
Discussion
The modified proverb is an adapted form of the Qur’anic sura, which refers to the act of “snitching
on others”. However, the sense of the modified proverb is in sharp contrast to that of the original,
which means: “to speak about a person while he is absent is not a good habit”. The modified
proverb is presented in the imperative mood and encourages “eating one’s brother’s flesh”, while
the original is in the interrogative, rhetorically indicating a rejection of this. The modified proverb
also adds three words at the beginning a-yuḥibbu aḥadukum ‘an. in addition, it substitutes the
adjective ḥayyan, which means “alive”, for the adjective mayyitan which means “dead”. It
substitutes another lexeme fa-karihtumūhu with ḥattā lā narāhu fī al-manām. Finally, it substitutes
the two lexemes laḥma axīhi for the lexeme laḥmahu.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

263

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

On the literal level, both proverbs deal with “eating human flesh”. On the metaphorical level,
the idea is backbiting and snitching – the modified proverb encourages backbiting, while the
original one discourages people from it through the rhetorical use of the interrogative form.
However, despite the reversal of the message in the modified proverb, the reader who has some
knowledge of Islam can easily identify the original proverb. The writer has modified the original
Qur’anic sura to fit the context of the situation and the conversation. In doing so, he has added a
humorous flavour to the text and has given an idea about the habits and traditions of his milieu –
how men in his village spend their evenings gossiping about others or sharing news of the other
villagers. The technique used is Partington’s rephrasing. This modified proverb is antonymous to
the original one.
Example 2:
Modified proverb:
.)42‫ ص‬،1983،‫أين ذبت مثل الملح (المحمود‬
‘ayna ḏubti miṯl al-milḥ
Where did you melt away like salt?
Original proverb:
.)213 ،‫فص ملح و داب (األسود‬
Faṣṣ milḥ ū dāb.
(There was) a clove of salt but it dissolved.
Discussion
Both the modified proverb and the original mean “to disappear so quickly, just as salt dissolves in
water”. The modified proverb begins with the interrogative adverb ‫‘ أين‬ayna (where) and the past
tense of the verb ḏāba (here in the form ḏub), plus the second person feminine singular suffix -ti.
The verb form ḍubti is Standard Arabic, while in the original proverb the verb dāb is colloquial
and occurs at the end of the proverb. The modified proverb ends with al-milḥ ‘the salt’ preceded
by miṯil, while the original proverb begins with milḥ without the definite article al ‘the’, but
preceded by faṣṣ, which is an amount of salt as small as the gem of the ring. The writer slightly
modified the proverb to fit the context. However, although there is a change in the form of the
original proverb, the modified proverb has not deviated from the overall metaphorical meaning of
the original. According to Partington’s classification, the technique used in this modified proverb
is rephrasing. Moreover, this modified proverb is semantically similar to the original. The two
proverbs can be regarded as synonymous.
Example 3:
Modified proverb:

ّ ‫ال تبحثي فيها عن نجوم ال‬
.)42‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫ظهر (المحمود‬
Lā tabḥaṯī fīhā can nujūm al-ḏ̟uhr

Do not look for the midday stars.
Original proverb:
.)28‫ ص‬،2008 ،‫فرجاه نجوم الضهر (عبد الحميد‬
Farjāh njūm al-ḍihr
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

264

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

I will show the midday stars, or By God, I will show you the midday stars.
Discussion
The context of this modified proverb is that the mother Xadra al-cAli asks her daughter Xātūn to
go to the water source and fill up the clay jug as soon as she can and without becoming distracted.
The original proverb ‫ فرجاه نجوم الضهر‬farjāh njūm aḍḍuhr (he showed him the midday stars) means:
‘to beat someone until they are unable to distinguish day from night’. In the modified proverb,
there is advice and a warning– not to search for stars at midday in order not to be distracted from
one’s tasks, while the original proverb involves the threat of a beating that will make the person
unable to distinguish day from night. The modified proverb is in the negative form, while the
original in the affirmative. The original begins with the verb ‫ فرجاه‬farjāh (showed him), which is
in the past tense and, in the original proverb, means ‘[he] tortured him’. cAbd al-Ḥamīd’s version
(farjāh njūm al-ḍihr) is purely colloquial. The modified proverb begins with ‫ال تبحثي فيها عن نجوم‬
ّ ‫( ال‬Do not look at it [the sky] for the midday stars). The remaining lexemes, nujūm aḏ̟-ḏ̟uhur
‫ظهر‬
‘the midday stars’ are shared by both proverbs. But the lexeme aḍ-ḍihr (midday) is in Colloquial
Arabic in the original proverb, while it is in Standard Arabic in the modified proverb: aḏ̟-ḏ̟uhr.
The modified proverb is used in a similar way to the original, because it involves the threat of
beating Xātūn in case she gets distracted from fulfilling her task. According to Partington’s
classification, the technique used in the modified proverb is rephrasing. The modified proverb is a
synonym of the original one.
Example 4:
Modified proverb:
.)425‫ ص‬1983 ‫ّللا الجوع ما أكفره! (المحمود‬
ّ ‫قاتل‬
c
Qātala al-lāh al-jū mā ‘akfarah!
TT
May God fight starvation for how it makes (the person) lose faith (in God)!
Original proverb:

.)2007 ،‫لو كان الفقر رجالً لقتلته (قول لإلمام علي) (الجعيثن‬
Law kāna al-faqru rajulan la-qataltuh
If poverty were a man, I would kill him.
Discussion
The context of the modified proverb is as follows: A pious man spent a night in a house in one of
the local villages. When they offered him food, he did not like it. So, he went to sleep without
eating anything. But later, at midnight, he woke up hungry, uttering this proverb. Both the original
proverb and its modified version refer to severe poverty and hunger.
The original is attributed to the central Shia religious figure, Imam cAlī Bin Abī Ṭālib (600
AD): ‫ لو كان الفقر رجالً لقتلته‬law kāna al-faqru rajulan la-qataltahu (2007 ،‫)الجعيثن‬. It means: “If
poverty were a man, I would kill him”. It expresses the concern that poverty may lead people to
disbelief, and other sins – adultery, theft or even murder. The original proverb involves a nominal
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

265

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

sentence. It begins with the conditional article law (if), followed by the imperfect verb ‫ كان‬kāna
(was), and ‫ الفقر‬al-faqru (poverty). This is substituted by the lexeme ‫ الجوع‬al-jūc (hunger) in the
modified proverb, followed by the interrogative article mā followed by a noun, ending with the
object pronoun suffix -hu (he) in ‫ أكفره‬akfarahu (how great an unbeliever is he). By contrast, in the
original proverb al-faqru is followed by the predicate of the imperfect verb kāna, followed by the
verb ‫ لقتلته‬laqataltuhu (I would kill it). Here, the basic verb form ‫ قتل‬qatal ‘killed’ is followed by
two pronoun suffixes, – tu ‘I’, expressing the subject and -hu ‘it’, expressing the object. The verb
with its subject and object are the apodosis (main clause) complementing the protasis (subordinate
clause) in the first part of the conditional sentence. From this analysis, we notice that the new form
of the proverb has a drastically different form to that of the original. According to Partington’s
categorisation, the technique used in the new form of the proverb is rephrasing. The modified
proverb is in effect synonymous with the original one.
4.1.2 Examples of Partington’s technique of substitution
Example 1:
Modified proverb:
.)44 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫]أوالد الحاره الشرقية[ أكثر من الحب على الزيتون ( المحمود‬
[Awlād al-ḥārah al-ŝarqiyya] akṯar min al-habb calā al-zētūn
[The children of the eastern quarter are] more than olives on the olive trees.
Original proverb:
.)60‫ ص‬،1‫ ج‬،1953،‫أكثر من الهم على القلب (فريحة‬
akṯar min al-hamm calā al-qalb
[This thing is available in quantities] more than the heart’s worries (Frayḥa, 1953,
p.60).
Discussion
In the novel, the author describes how in the olive season children go to their neighbour’s olive
groves and steal the fruit. The original proverb is used to indicate the large number of
preoccupations that perturb human beings. Similarly, the modified proverb describes the large
number of children that come to disrupt and frustrate the farmers’ hard work. The modified proverb
substituted three lexemes al-ḥabb, ᶜalā and az-zētūn for al-ḥamm and cal-qalb. All the lexemes in
both the original and the modified version belong to the same grammatical category. Both the
proverb and its modified form express the same idea: abundance. Therefore, they are synonymous.
The writer has made this slight change to the original proverb to fit the context better. According
to Partington’s classification, the technique used in the modified proverb is substitution.
Example 2
Modified proverb:

ّ ‫ليس بال‬
.)541‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫شعر وحده ينمو التّفّاح! (المحمود‬
Laysa bi-al-ŝic r waḥdahu yanmū al-tuffāḥ
Apple trees cannot grow by poetry alone!
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

266

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

Original proverb:
.)4:4:‫ليس بالخبز وحده يحيا اإلنسان (متى‬
Laysa bi-l-xubz waḥdahu yaḥyā al-insān
Man shall not live on bread alone (Matthew 4:4).
Discussion
The context of the original proverb is Jesus’ period of fasting in the wilderness. In the Gospel of
Matthew, Satan tried to tempt Jesus by mocking Him and telling Him that if He really was the Son
of God, He should turn stones into bread; but Jesus replied that his sustenance came from God’s
words. The context of the modified proverb is that the character Musallim wonders whether his
teacher’s apple trees grow better than other neighbouring apple trees because their owner is a poet,
as if reciting poems to them could encourage them to grow. The poet, however, rejects Musallim’s
speculation, by implicitly denying that his poetic words may have the same creative power as
God’s Word. Although the words bi-š-šiᶜri, yanmū and at-tuffāḥ in the modified proverb replace
the words of the original proverb, bi-l-xubz, yaḥyā and al-insān, the reader can recognize the
original form of the modified proverb. Here the modification motivates the reader to think more
about the sentence and ponder the original form. It catches the reader’s attention and makes the
modified proverb more effective in the narrative context because it highlights the sense of humour.
The technique used is Partington’s substitution. The two proverbs are antonyms of one other. In
terms of Partington’s classification, the technique used in forming this modified proverb is
substitution.
Example 3:
Modified proverb:
.)496‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫مطرح ما يسري يهري (المحمود‬
Maṭraḥ mā yisrī yihrī
Wherever it passes, it harms.
Original proverb:
.)2003 ،131‫ ص‬،‫مطرح ما يسري يمري (زيادنة‬
Maṭraḥ mā yisrī yimrī
Wherever it passes, it comforts.
Discussion
Umm-Maḥmūd has slaughtered the only cockerel among many hens, and cooked it for her guest
and future son-in-law Nibrās. As a consequence, the hens are “unhappy” about losing their sole
male boss, the cockerel. Therefore, they wish for those who eat the cockerel’s meat to suffer harm
because of their unjust meal. Usually, the proverb ‫ مطرح ما يسري يمري‬maṭraḥ mā yisrī yimrī
(wherever it passes, it comforts) is said by the host/hostess to a beloved guest, friend, or child when
having his/her food. It is like a prayer that he/she may enjoy good health as a result of the meal.
The lexeme yimrī in the original proverb is substituted by the lexeme yihrī in the modified one.
Both the original and the substitute belong to the same grammatical category of 3 rd person,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

267

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

masculine, imperfect verb. Both verbs describe the effect of food on the human body – either it
harms when it is not digested properly or it brings health when it passes easily. In terms of
Partington’s classification, the technique used in this modified proverb is substitution. The
modified proverb works as an antonym to the original one.
Example 4:
Modified proverb:

.)597 ‫ ص‬1983 ‫ال تغنّي ّإال لليالها (المحمود‬
Lā tuġannī ‘illā li-laylāhā

It only sings as it likes.
Original proverb:

.)442‫ ص‬،1978 ،2‫ ج‬،‫كل من بغنّي على ليلو (قوشاقجي‬
Kull man biġannī calā lēlū

Each one sings as he like.
Discussion
Musallim says that people in his village gather to celebrate happy events such as weddings. This
gives them a sense of autonomy and the feeling that life is worth living. This contrasts with their
being oppressed by the landlord and the Beg. The proverb thus provides a metonymy of love and
domesticity among people, and indicates that there is unity, love and good relations between
people in this village. The original proverb is ‘Each one sings as he likes’. This means, by contrast,
that each person has his own individual opinion which is different from that of other people, thus
indicating disparity, disunity and disorder. This is opposite to the meaning of the modified proverb.
This modification of the original proverb acceptable and usable, without any objection.
The modified proverb begins with the negative particle lā, unlike the original one. The colloquial
verb biġannī is replaced by the Standard Arabic verb tuġannī in the modified proverb, with the
preposition min deleted. The preposition calā is substituted by the preposition li, preceded by the
added exceptive particle illā ‘except’ with the pronoun suffix –hā added to the end of the lexeme
to become li-laylāhā, which is Standard Arabic, while lēlū is colloquial Arabic. Here the writer
does not use the original colloquial Arabic form of the proverb, despite the fact that this colloquial
form is more in keeping with the peasants’ milieu. Rather, it seems that the narrator uses the form
which he does on purpose, in order to show that Musallim is an educated man. In the modified
proverb, there is a sense of unity among the villagers, while in the original there is a sense of
disunity. In this case, the modified proverb works as an antonym of the original. In terms of
Partington’s classification, the technique used in this modified proverb is substitution.
4.1.3 Examples of Partington’s technique of abbreviation
Example 1:
Modified proverb:
.)40 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫الجمل ال يرى حردبته (المحمود‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

268

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

Al-jamal lā yarā ḥirdabbatahu
The camel does not see his hunched back.
Original proverb:
.)351‫ ص‬،2008 ،‫ وقع وانكسرت رقبته (عبد الحميد‬،‫الجمل لو شاف حردبّته‬
Al-jamal law šāf ḥirdabbtuh, wiqic ū inkasrit raqubtuh
Had the camel seen its hump it would have fallen and broken its neck.
Note that of the four original forms of the proverb found in various sources I have
chosen the one which is most commonly used on the Syrian coast.
Discussion
Xaḍrā al-cAlī addresses this proverb to her husband, who claims that Xātūn’s curly hair is lovely.
This means that Abā Maḥmūd does not see this deficiency in his daughter, exactly as the camel
cannot see the hump on his own back which shows the ugliness of his uneven body. Looking at
c
abd al-Ḥamīd’s original proverb, we notice that it is more extensive and expressed as a conditional
form. The modified proverb is in the negative form and is an abbreviated version of the original–
it mentions only the first half of the original proverb, with a slight substitution. In the modified
proverb the lexemes lā and yarā are substituted for the lexemes law and šāf. The verb šāf in the
original proverb is in the past tense and in Colloquial Arabic, while the verb yarā is in the present
tense and in Standard Arabic in the modified proverb. It is easy for the reader to recall the original
proverb. In this case, the modified proverb and its original are synonyms. According to
Partington’s classification, the modified proverb uses the abbreviation technique.
Example 2:
Modified proverb:
.)84 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫تغدّى وتمدّى (المحمود‬
Tġaddā ū tmaddā
Have lunch and then lie down.
Original proverb:

ّ ‫شى وتم‬
ّ ‫ تع‬،ّ‫تغدّ وتمد‬
.))221‫ ص‬،1‫ ج‬،1953 ،‫شى (فريحة‬
c
Tġaddā ū tmaddā, t ašša ū tmaššā
Have lunch and lie down, have dinner and take a walk.
Discussion
This is what Musallim and his brother, Abū Myzīad, say to their cousin, Ḥabīb, when he asks
them to go back to work immediately after their lunch rather than taking a rest. The proverb
means that a man should take a rest after having his lunch and not return to work immediately.
The modified proverb is in an abbreviated form of the original– it mentions only the first
half of the original proverb, with a slight substitution. The lexemes tcaššā and tmaššā are omitted
in the modified proverb. In terms of Partington’s classification, the modified proverb uses the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

269

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

abbreviation technique. However, the modified proverb and the original are synonyms, because
they both recommend healthy eating habits.
Example 3:
Modified proverb:

.)113 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫ال تتد ّخل بما ال يعنيك (المحمود‬
Lā tatadaxxal bimā lā yacnīk

Do not interfere in what is not your business.
Original proverb:

.)672 ‫ ص‬،2‫ ج‬،1953 ،‫من تكلّم بما ال يعنيه سمع ما ال يرضيه (فريحة‬
Man takallam bimā lā yac nīh samic a mā lā yurḍīh

Those people who talk about things that aren’t their business will hear things that
they’re not happy with.
Discussion
Zainab’s husband asks his wife why the two brothers, Abu Miyzād and Musallim, came to his
house. But Zainab asks him not to interfere in the matter. She utters this proverb in order to point
out her contempt for her husband: this is not his concern and he should not bother about it. The
modified proverb is an abbreviated form of the original – it mentions only the first half of the
original proverb, with a slight substitution. The modified proverb is in the form of a prohibition.
The lexemes lā and tatadaxxal are a substitute for man and takallama at the beginning of the
original proverb. However, the most obvious change in the modified proverb is the omission of
the second part of the original: samica mā lā yurḍīh. According to Partington’s classification, the
modified proverb uses the abbreviation technique. Here, the modified proverb and the original can
be regarded as synonyms.
Example 4:
Modified proverb:
.)209 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫تعشيت وتمشيت (المحمود‬
tcaššēt ū tmaššēt
I had my supper and went for a walk.
Original proverb:
.)220 ‫ ص‬،2‫ ج‬،1953 ،‫ تغدّ وتمد (فريحة‬،‫وتمش‬
‫تعش‬
ّ
ّ
tc aššā ū tmaššā, tġaddā ū tmaddā
Have supper and take a walk, have lunch and lie down.
Discussion
The modified proverb is in an abbreviated form of the original – it mentions only the first half of
the original proverb, with a slight substitution. The modified proverb uses verbs in the past tense,
with the first-person singular suffix -t on both lexemes in the modified proverb. By contrast, the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

270

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

original proverb takes the form of a piece of advice. It is also more extensive than the modified
one, with the extra words tġaddā, ū and tmaddā. According to Partington’s classification, the
modified proverb uses the abbreviation technique. The modified proverb and the original are
synonyms.
4.1.4 Examples of Partington’s technique of insertion
Example 1:
Modified proverb:
.)88 ‫ ص‬1983 ‫ عوراء (المحمود‬،‫ كما يقولون‬،‫ابنة العم‬
Ibnat al-camm, kamā yaqūlūn, cawrā’
The cousin, so they say, is one-eyed.
Original proverb:
.)50‫ ص‬،1995 ،‫بنت العم عورة (شقير‬
Bint alcamm cawra
The cousin is one-eyed.
Discussion
Ḥabīb, Musallim’s cousin, says that Sacda, Ḥabīb‘s brother’s wife, is only good for singing at
weddings. Then Kafa says: “Ask your God to have a woman like her”, quoting to him the
proverb ibnat al-camm, kamā yaqūlūn, cawrā (the cousin, as they say, is one-eyed). Kafa’s point
is that a person we are familiar with is always underestimated. People do not recognize her virtue
and beauty, as if she was one-eyed. They prefer the stranger over her, even if that stranger is
inferior to her in beauty and morals.
The two proverbs can be regarded as synonymous. The modified proverb has two extra
elements,‫ كما يقولون‬kamā yaqūlūn (so they say), but this addition is merely emphatic and does not
affect the meaning of the original. The modified proverb is Standard Arabic while the original is
colloquial. Both proverbs have the same metaphorical meaning. According to Partington’s
classification, the modified proverb uses the insertion technique.
Example 2:
Modified proverb:
.)115 ‫ ص‬1983 ‫لكن صوفتي أنا حمراء (المحمود‬
Lākin ṣūftī ‘anā ḥamrā’
But my own wool is red
Original proverb:
.)395‫ ص‬،1953 ،2‫ ج‬،1953 ،‫صوفته حمرا (فريحة‬
ṣūftuh ḥamrā
His wool is red

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

271

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

Discussion
Sheikh Maḥmūd says that he does not have any luck with his aunt’s family, because they do not
love him, no matter how faithfully he works for them. He refers to the proverbial redness of wool
to indicate that he is not loved by people, but regarded with suspicion. In Syrian culture, “a person’s
wool is red” is said in order to indicate that an individual is unloved and untrustworthy. The
modified proverb has two extra elements, lākin at the beginning and ‘anā in the middle. There is
also a slight substitution in the modified proverb, which consists in the addition of the )‫ )ء‬hamza
to the word “ḥamrā’” and the substitution of -ī for -h (to change from “his” to “my”). However,
this addition does not alter the meaning. The modified proverb is in Standard Arabic, while the
original one is in colloquial. The two proverbs can be regarded as synonymous, but the modified
one is more emphatic. According to Partington’s classification, the modified proverb here uses the
insertion technique.
Example 3:
Modified proverb:

.)215 ‫ ص‬1983 ‫ حتّى يأتيك الحشيش (المحمود‬،‫ يا كديش‬،‫ عيش‬،‫ايه‬
ēh, cīš, yā kdīš, ḥattā ya’tīk al-ḥašīš

Eh, donkey, live, till the grass comes to you
Original proverb:
.)49‫ ص‬،2008 ،‫عيش يا كديش تا ينبت الحشيش (عبد الحميد‬
c
īš yā kdīš, tā yinbut al-ḥašīš
Live, you donkey, till the grass grows.
Discussion
The original proverb conveys a sense of procrastination and uncertainty: “when someone makes a
promise, no one knows if she or he will keep it”. The pessimistic implication is that the promise
will not be kept. The modified proverb has one extra lexeme ēh at the beginning, which emphasises
procrastination. There is also a slight substitution in the modified proverb, in the replacement of
the word tā in the original with ḥattā. Another slight substitution is the use of the word yā’tīk in
the modified proverb, replacing yinbit in the original. According to Partington’s classification, the
modified proverb uses the insertion technique. The original proverb and its modified version have
the same meaning.
Example 4:
Modified proverb:
.)300 ‫ ص‬،1983 ،‫الرب رضى ورحمة (المحمود‬
ّ ‫استفقاد‬
Istifqād al-rabb riḍā ū raḥmih
God’s trial is contentment and mercy.
Original proverb:
.(15‫ ص‬،2008 ،‫الرب رحمة (عبد الحميد‬
ّ ‫استفقاد‬
Istifqād al-rabb raḥmih
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

272

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

God’s trial is mercy.
Discussion
Illness took away the lives of many young men and women in the village. Therefore, the villagers,
who believe in Fate and God’s will, surrender to their sorrows and grief by quoting this proverb.
This is a proverb that references a specific Islamic subculture. It is usually said when a person is
put into a difficult position, whether this health-related or financial, or even encountering death.
This is mainly because those who have faith believe that everything is predestined and that Allah
has the ultimate power over everything. The modified proverb is an expanded version of the
original. In the modified proverb, we find the insertion of the lexemes riḍā and ū. The rest of the
modified proverb is similar to the original. However, this addition strongly emphasises the
message of the original proverb. Therefore, the two proverbs are synonyms. According to
Partington’s classification, the technique used in the modified proverb is insertion.
5. Semantic relationship of modified proverbs to original proverbs in Muftaraq al-Maṭar
I have applied Partington’s analysis of the four techniques of modification to sixteen examples.
The first four cases illustrate the semantic effects of Partington’s rephrasing technique on modified
proverbs. We can observe here that one modified proverb is an antonym of its original, and three
are synonyms. In the case of modified proverbs which involve Partington’s substitution technique,
the modified proverbs stand in only two different semantic relationships with their original
proverbs: three are antonymous and one is synonymous. By contrast, the third group of modified
proverbs, which involve Partington’s abbreviation technique, are all synonymous with their
original proverbs, as are the last four examples, which involve Partington’s insertion technique.
In these cases, the additional words in the modified proverbs merely function to provide a more
emphatic statement of the message conveyed by the proverbs, but do not alter their fundamental
meaning.
6. Conclusions
The novel under investigation in this paper employs a large number of proverbs and modified
proverbs. The study of the sixteen examples chosen shows diversity in the use of Partington’s four
types of modification techniques. These examples illuminate different semantic relations between
the modified proverbs and their corresponding originals: synonymy and antonymy. The great
majority of the modified proverbs, thirteen out of sixteen, preserve the meaning of the original
proverb. However, a few of the modified proverbs give an opposite meaning to that of the original.
This is the case in three of the modified proverbs involving Partington’s substitution technique,
and one of the proverbs involving his rephrasing technique. The four examples that use
Partington’s insertion technique also convey a more emphatic message.
Yūsuf al-Maḥmūd makes abundant use of proverbs and modified proverbs in Muftaraq alMaṭar. Such traditional formulas provide a strong expressive tool for the author to describe how
characters communicate with each other, to depict the life of Syrians under the French colonial
mandate, and to adapt a generic cultural background to a specific narrative situation. With great
compositional skill, the writer creates a tapestry involving both tradition and innovation, deploying
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

273

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019

different proverbs from various religious and folkloric sources and reshaping them to suit his own
narrative. In this way, his prolific and creative usage of proverbial popular wisdom serves to
express the complex relation of modern Syria to its cultural roots, combining affectionate
traditionalism and ironic innovation.
About the Author:
Huwaida Issa is a visiting scholar at the University of Leeds. She got her PhD in Arabic
Literature under the supervision of professor James Dickins at the University of Leeds in the UK.
Her thesis researched proverbs, modified proverbs and curses in two Syrian novels. She got an
MA in Literary Criticism, a Higher Diploma and a BA in English Language and Literature.
References
Bible Gateway.
https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew+4%3A4&version=NIV [Accessed 28
September 2018].
English Oxford Dictionary. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/us/lexeme [Accessed 23
May 2017].
Fernando, C. (1996). Idioms and idiomaticity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Honeck, R. (1997). A Proverb in Mind: the Cognitive Science of Proverbial Wit and Wisdom.
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Issa, H. J. (2014) Proverbs, Modified Proverbs and Curses in Two Novels of the Syrian Coast.
PhD thesis, University of Leeds.
Litovkina, A.T. & Mieder, W. (2006). Old Proverbs Never Die, They Just Diversify. Burlington:
University of Vermont.
Martín, G. (2011). ‘Proverb Modification in Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World’. Paremia. (20),
179-190.
Martinez, F. (2006). ‘Occasional Phraseological Synonymy’. International Journal of English
Studies, 6 (1), 131-158. Available at: http://revistas.um.es/ijes/issue/view/4781 [Accessed
16 December 2016].
Mieder, W. (2004). Proverbs: A Handbook. Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.
Mieder, B., & Mieder, W. (2004). ‘Tradition and Innovation: Proverbs in Advertising’. The
Journal of Popular Culture, 11 (2), 308-319.
Naciscione, A. (2010). Stylistic Use of Phraseological Units in Discourse.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamin Publishing.
Naciscione, A. (2001). ‘Phraseological Units in Literary Discourse: Implications for Teaching
and Learning’. Riga/ Latvia: Latvian Academy of Culture. CAUCE (24), 53-67.
Net Bible. Matthew 4. http://biblehub.com/net/matthew/4.htm [Accessed 30 Jan 2017].
Partington, A. (1998). Patterns and Meanings: Using Corpora for English Language Research
and Teaching. John Benjamin Publishing Company: Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
Szpila, G. (2011). ‘Literary Paremic Loci in Salman’s Rushdie’s Novels’. Studia Linguistica
Universitatis
Iagellonicae
Cracoviensis
(128),
171-177.
http://www.filg.uj.edu.pl/documents/41616/8969068/12812-Szpila.pdf [Accessed 23 May
2017].
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

274

‫‪AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019‬‬

‫‪Zaikauskienė, D. (2012). Lietuvių Paremijos XX–XXI a. Sandūroje: tradicija ir inovacija‬‬
‫‪(Lithuanian Paremias at the Turn of the 20th-21st Centuries: Tradition and Innovation). PhD‬‬
‫‪thesis. Vilnius University.‬‬
‫‪Arabic printed and electronic sources‬‬

‫شعبيّة ال ّ‬
‫أسود‪ ،‬نزار (ال)‪( .‬ال يوجد تاريخ النّشر)‪ .‬األمثال ال ّ‬
‫شاميّة‪ .‬دمشق‪.‬‬
‫الكتاب المقدس‪ :‬العهد الجديد‪ .‬إنجيل متى‬
‫‪https://st-takla.org/pub_newtest/Arabic-New-Testament-Books/01-Matthew/Engeel‬‬‫‪Matta_Chapter-04.html [Accessed 28 September2018].‬‬
‫بعلبكي‪ ،‬روحي (ال)‪ ،2001 .‬الطبعة الثّالثة‪ .‬روائع الحكمة واألقوال الخالدة‪ .‬بيروت‪ :‬دار العلم للماليين‪.‬‬
‫الريثثثا ‪ 26 ،‬كثثثانون‬
‫جعيثثثثن‪ ،‬عبثثثد )‪( ،‬ال)‪’ .2007 .‬لثثثو كثثثان الفقثثثر رجثثثالً لقتلتثثثه‘ لكنثثثه مثثثع األسثثثر رجثثثل وامثثثرأة! ّ‬
‫الثّاني‪.‬‬
‫‪Available at (http://www.alriyadh.com/219556) [Accessed 03 October2014].‬‬
‫عبد الحميد‪ ،‬نزيه‪ .2008 .‬أمثال وتعابير شعبيّة من منطقة السّاحل السّوري عموما ً و صافيتا خصوصاً‪ .‬دمشق‪ :‬وزارة الثّقافة‪.‬‬
‫فريحة‪ ،‬أنيس‪،1953 .‬ج‪.1‬األمثال العاميّة اللبنانيّة من راس المتن‪ ، .‬جونية‪ :‬مطابع المرسلين اللبنانيّين‪.‬‬
‫فريحة‪ ،‬أنيس‪،1953 .‬ج‪ .2‬األمثال العاميّة اللبنانيّة من راس المتن‪ .‬جونية‪ :‬مطابع المرسلين اللبنانيّين‪.‬‬
‫قوشاقجي‪ ،‬يوسر‪ .1977 .‬ج‪.1‬األمثال ال ّ‬
‫شعبيّة الحلبيّة وأمثال ماردين‪ .‬حلب‪ :‬مطبعة اإلحسان‪.‬‬
‫قوشاقجي‪ ،‬يوسر‪ .1978 .‬ج‪.2‬األمثال ال ّ‬
‫شعبيّة الحلبيّة وأمثال ماردين‪ .‬حلب‪ :‬مطبعة اإلحسان‪.‬‬
‫محمود‪ ،‬أحمد يوسر (ال)‪ .1983 .‬مفترق المطر‪ ، .‬دمشق‪ :‬اتحاد الكتّاب العرب‪.‬‬

‫‪275‬‬

‫‪Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies‬‬
‫‪ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org‬‬

