Antonio Sirianni
Dartmouth College
The Specialization of Informal Social Control: Fighting in the National Hockey League
from 1947-2019
Abstract:
Fighting in ice hockey has long been of interest to sociologists of sport and serves as a highly
visible and well-documented example of informal social control and peer punishment. Drawing
on over 70 years of play-by-play records from the National Hockey League, this paper examines
how the ritual of fighting has changed over time in terms of context (when fights happen),
distribution (who fights), and patterns of interaction (who fights whom). These changes highlight
the subtle transformation of fighting from a duel-like retaliatory act, towards the status-seeking
practice of specialized but less-skilled players commonly referred to as “enforcers”. This analysis
not only broadens our understanding of ice hockey fighting and violence, but also informs our
understanding of the theoretical relationships between specialization, status, and signaling
processes, and provides a highly-detailed look at the evolution of a system of informal control and
governance.

*Earlier versions of this work have been presented at the 2015 Conference for the International
Network of Analytical Sociologists in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the 2016 Meeting of the
American Sociological Association in Seattle, Washington. The author wishes to thank Benjamin
Cornwell, Thomas Davidson, Daniel Della Posta, Josh Alan Kaiser, Sunmin Kim, Michael
Macy, and Kimberly Rogers, as well as several anonymous reviewers, for helpful comments and
suggestions.

1

Introduction:
The sport of ice hockey, particularly at the professional ranks within North America, has long
hosted a somewhat peculiar ritual: routine fist fights between members of opposing teams. These
fights are in part an element of a larger honor culture that has risen in response to a game that has
not been adequately policed by league-appointed referees. Fighting is understood as a form of
retaliation and informal punishment after an offending player endangers an opponent through an
act of aggression or carelessness. Referees can impose formal penalties in games, but their ability
to monitor can be limited (Colburn 1986). Like other contexts that give rise to informal and
decentralized control processes (Erikson and Parent 2007), penalties can also be difficult to
calibrate with infraction severity.
Fighting in hockey has been commonplace for generations, and is part of an alleged “code” that is
adhered to by all players (Roubidox 2001; Bernstein 2006; Atkinson and Young 2008), but it is
also the semi-specific domain of archetypical players, referred to as “enforcers” or “goons”, who
participate in a disproportionate number of fights. This article examines how fighting manifests
its honor code-based origins and justifications by examining over 70 years of National Hockey
League (NHL) player statistics and play-by-play data, including over 25,000 fighting interactions.
The payoff of this analysis is three-fold: (1) it builds on extant literature on ice hockey violence,
an often-studied topic in the sociology of sport, with a definitive and comprehensive quantitative
analysis of the history of fighting in the game, (2) introduces a detailed dataset illustrating the
historical evolution of informal social control within a controlled context, and (3) examines the
relationship between specialized roles and signaling behavior.
The results shed new light on a well-known and well-researched empirical phenomenon with
public health and social welfare implications. Fighting in ice hockey is a highly visible and often
celebrated form of violence that can lead to negative health outcomes for players and can spillover into broader attitudes about violence and masculinity in general (Bloom and Smith 1996;
Pappas et. al 2004). To this extent, quantitively tracing the evolution of fighting at hockey’s highest
and most popularized level is important, as changes in the fighting norms exhibited by high-profile
players may influence how younger or amateur players embrace fighting and violent behavior
more generally, both on and off the ice.
2

This case also adds an empirical and quantitatively robust example to our understanding of
informal social control. There has been a great deal of simulation-based and analytical work
exploring peer-sanctioning (Heckathorn 1988; 1989; 1990; Macy 1993), laboratory studies of
peer-punishments in groups (Yamagishi 1986; Fehr and Gachter 2000; 2002; Sigmund 2007;
Baldassarri and Grossman 2011), and detailed but predominantly qualitative descriptions of
cultures and systems of informal control that exist in weak states or under-policed contexts
(Ellickson 1991; Varese 1994; Gambetta 1996). The data compiled provides an unprecedented set
of self-organized violent interactions within a structured and well-documented setting. The high
volume of data makes both longitudinal and situational effects on interactions clearly visible. The
analysis ultimately shows the gradual specialization of informal control and sanctioning behavior
within a larger institution that provides some order but effectively permits vigilantism.
Finally, while retaliation and honor characterize most defenses of fighting in hockey, the primary
social processes that shape this dataset include not only sanctioning, but also specialization, statuspreservation, and signaling. The data reveals gradual but profound changes in how fighting is
distributed across players, the in-game events that precede fights, and the network structure of
combatant pairs. These findings suggest that the “enforcer” role gradually emerged in the later part
of the 20th century. This process of player specialization has changed the motives of fighting itself,
with certain players fighting not only to punish deviant opponents, but also to establish and
maintain the reputation of an enforcer who is worthy of a coveted roster spot on an NHL franchise.
After briefly reviewing the origins of retaliatory behavior and honor cultures, I discuss the
problems of social control within the world of ice hockey and the role of fighting, and introduce a
highly detailed and multi-faceted data set featuring both player statistics and play-by-play game
records. A progression of situational, individual, and network analyses reveals an emergent pattern
of specialization, underlying a shift in the practice of fighting and the rise of the enforcer role.
This specialization, I argue, gives rise to fighting behavior that is driven by signaling motives
rather than sanctioning motives. I conclude by discussing implications of these findings for the
game itself, and how they can inform sociological perspectives and future research on status,
governance, and collective action.

3

Collective Action, Retaliation, and Honor Cultures
The game of ice hockey presents a collective action problem: competing teams have an incentive
to play in a manner that could physically harm their opponents but maximizes their own probability
of winning. Dangerous play may give one team an edge, but if all players and teams play
aggressively and with reckless abandon, the overall well-being of the players and quality of the
game will suffer, especially over the course of a 9-month season. The ideal solution to this problem
is a strong governing body that punishes infractions. All-powerful institutions can align individual
and collective interests by punishing selfish behavior (or rewarding altruistic behavior) (Oliver
1980). Experimental work on public goods games has shown that individuals prefer environments
where institutions are in place to enforce pro-social behavior to those where such institutions are
absent (Gürerk, Irlenbusch and Rockenbach 2006).
However, centralized solutions are not always possible or desirable, and cognitive impulses to
punish and retaliate evolved long before the development of social institutions. The origins of
retaliatory punishment, or negative reciprocity, are often assessed from an evolutionary
perspective. Negative reciprocity is a common feature in many animal societies and deters parasitic
or predatory behavior (Clutton-Brock and Parker 1995). Retaliation may be irrational in the shortterm, but signaling a willingness to impose costly sanctions on others can be rational in the longterm (Schelling 1960; Elster 1990; Gambetta 2009). While the impulse to punish may have been
naturally selected for because of the benefits of forward-looking deterrence, the proximate
mechanisms may be driven by backwards-looking vengeance. Punishment in laboratory trust
games persists even when recipients will not necessarily realize they are being punished,
suggesting that punishment is driven by a sense of vengeance as opposed to explicitly forwardlooking motives (Crockett, Ozmedir, and Fehr 2004). A universal “taste for vengeance” also turns
the prisoner’s dilemma into a coordination game that rewards cooperative behavior (Friedman and
Sing 1999), and negative reciprocity is at the heart of the well-known solution to the repeated
prisoner’s dilemma, “Tit-for-Tat” (Axelrod 1981).
Beyond biologically evolved impulses to retaliate, certain contexts may promote cultures or norms
that encourage retaliation. Legal scholars have emphasized the importance and prevalence of
negative reciprocity, or “self-help”, as an alternative to centralized sanctioning (Black 1983;
4

Ellickson 1987; Ellickson 1991). Criminologists, sociologists, and anthropologists have found
various forms of self-help in areas that have an ineffective, weak, or absent central authority, from
the Pacific to the Mediterranean (Colson 1953; Boehm 1987; Gould 2000). Honor cultures, which
are characterized by retaliatory norms, hyper-sensitivity to insult, and high rates of risk-taking (as
a means of signaling) are found in both rural parts of the U.S. South (Nisbett 1993; Cohen et. al
1996; Cohen and Nisbett 1997; Barnes, Brown and Tamborski, 2012) and portions of certain U.S.
cities (Anderson 2000; Stewart and Simons 2010). In the U.S. South this culture was brought over
from Scots-Irish herders, whose wealth came from a source that was especially vulnerable to
predation (Cohen and Nisbett 1994) and reinforced by weaker state institutions. In inner-city areas
in the United States, such cultures are motivated by the belief that the state is unresponsive to acts
of crime (Kirk and Papachristos 2011). Simulation-based work has also supported the idea that
honor cultures are evolved cultural responses to stateless contexts. (Nowak et. al 2016).
Fighting and The Problem of Social Order in North American Ice Hockey
Ice hockey’s collective action problems predate the formation of the National Hockey League in
1917. In late 19th and early 20th century Canada, the elite level amateur hockey played between
clubs around Montreal and across Canada transitioned from a ‘gentleman’s game’, to a game
where the rational pursuit of winning became the norm and expectation (Barlow 2009). Violent
and ‘strenuous’ play became common. Lawrence Scanlan writes in his study of hockey violence:
“My overwhelming impression from reading the literature, from hearing the
testimony of players from the early to mid-1900’s and from poring over the news
clippings, is that early hockey was very much like war, the blood flowed freely.”
(2002: 30)
Some early incidents of players swinging sticks at their then helmetless opponents ended in death,
while other incidents ended in criminal charges of assault (Lorenz and Osborne 2009). In 1904
alone, four players died while playing in Ontario (Metcalfe 1997). Fighting is perceived as a ritual
outlet to curb the more extreme incidents of violence that occurred more frequently during the
early days of the sport. In this view, fighting is a relatively safe way of retaliating against play
that is dangerous or aggressive and may deter many of these incidents from occurring in the first
5

place. In another study of hockey violence, Kenneth Colburn nicely summarizes the causes of
fighting:
“Here we come to the problem of why fist-fights occur in ice hockey…it is due
partly to the contingent features of the sport such as speed which make detection
difficult, and it is due partly to the cultural value placed on honor, the right of the
individual to take matters of violation of the law into his own hands.” (1986: 169)
In this view, fighting is part of a larger unspoken ‘code’ among players that keeps the game
honorable and safe (Roubidox 2001; Bernstein 2006; Atkinson and Young, 2008). Fighting is also
largely approved by younger players, their coaches, and their parents as both an appropriate
reaction to violence and as a means of improving their teams’ success (Smith 1979a; Smith 1979b;
Loughead and Leith 2001). Ironically, two of the more dangerous incidents in recent NHL history
occurred when players who refused to fight were assaulted.1
Alternative Interpretations of Fighting
Fighting is also understood by some as a cultural anachronism that perpetuates outdated norms of
masculinity, a marketing ploy, or a way to shift momentum in a game.
Ice hockey is argued to perpetuate a violent and aggressive form of masculinity in a society with
shifting gender roles (Gruneau & Whitson 1993; Allain 2008). Violent behavior is accepted and
celebrated (Smith 1974) and violent play is judged as competent play even amongst younger
players (Weinstein, Smith and Wiesenthal 1995). The approval of violence on the ice also may
translate into more violent behaviors off the ice (Bloom and Smith 1996; Pappas et. al 2004). In
particular, much academic attention has been paid to Don Cherry, a former NHL coach and
television personality, who defends fighting and violence within the game as both a means of
deterrence and as a moral virtue in its own right during Canadian Broadcasting Corporation hockey

1

In both incidents, a player attempted to provoke a player into a fight to address a prior
infraction, and the targeted player refused. These incidents occurred between Martin McSorely
and Donald Brashear in 2000, and Todd Bertuzzi and Steve Moore in 2004.

6

broadcasts (Knowles 1995; Gillet, White, & Young, 1996; Elcombe 2010; Allain 2015). Fighting’s
decline in recent years has arguably caused more people to defend the practice in public discussion
(Sailofsky and Orr 2020).
Fighting is also thought to generate popularity and revenue. The notion that violence is explicitly
used by teams to fill seats is widely held (and is the premise of the popular film, Slap Shot), but
research on its profitability has been mixed (Stewart, Ferguson, and Jones 1992; Rockerbie 2015).
The NHL and its feeder leagues have a standardized penalty for fighting (both players are excluded
for five minutes, therefore, unless one player is given an additional penalty for instigating neither
team is put at a disadvantage), but strictly forbid a third player from joining: this keeps the fight
fair, and may encourage more fights to proceed (Collins 2008). In contrast, other leagues have
been able to curb fights through excessive penalization, including most European and North
American Collegiate leagues, suggesting that the NHL may have been reluctant to suppress the
ritual in the past due to its popularity (although this may be beginning to change).
Considering the potential strategic implications of fighting requires separate consideration of
short-term (winning the game at hand) and long-term interests (winning games in the future). An
individual fight could change the outcome of a game as a means of generating momentum or
restoring “emotional energy” (Collins 2008), but research on the influence of fighting and violence
on winning is mixed (Widmeyer and Birch, 1979; 1984; Englhardt 1995). In the short-term, it is
theoretically impossible for both teams to improve their odds of winning a game, so a purely shortterm strategic explanation seems implausible given that fights are consented to by parties on both
teams. However, there may be a long-term deterrence value for either team to signal their
willingness to fight to other teams in the league. While the problem of social control within the
game is amplified by the difficulty of monitoring by on-ice officials, the fights that do (and do not)
occur are televised and highly visible to all other teams and players. A team that does not retaliate
against predatory play by other teams may be quickly found out.
While fighting may be a vessel of masculinity, a form of entertainment, or a means of inspiring
teammates and intimidating opponents, this does not change the fact that fighting is largely
experienced by players and coaches as an element of a larger system of social control. There is
little question that the NHL and other leagues could further reduce fighting by punishing it more
7

severely, and in recent years this has been the case. It is unclear that they could prevent the type
of violent incidents that fights allegedly deter, and players and teams have long perceived the need
to police the game themselves. Fights have occurred, ultimately, because players find fights
appropriate in certain situations, the culture of hockey permits and encourages fighting, and it is
tacitly permitted by the bodies governing the game (Colburn 1985).
The Enforcer
“But our game is improved tremendously by players’ ability to police the game. It
makes it more exciting and honorable. It allows skill players to focus on the skilled
aspects of the game because someone else can watch their back. And it
fundamentally makes our game safer.” (Burke 2013)
The “someone else” of the above USA Today op-ed quote refers to an informal group of players
known as “enforcers”. Enforcers participate in a disproportionate amount of fighting and typically
are less skilled in other aspects of the game. These players in some cases have had tragic outcomes.
Derek Boogaard, a well-known NHL enforcer, died in 2011 of an overdose of alcohol and
painkillers that was likely mediated by brain damage from repeated head-trauma (Branch 2011a;
2011b; 2014).
The unofficial designation of an enforcer offers a solution to a more subtle collective-action
problem that occurs within teams as opposed to between teams. When a teammate is attacked, how
do players decide who should impose costly sanctions on behalf of the group? While one solution
is to simply have the violated player, or the most proximate teammate, deliver sanctions to the
offending player, this is sub-optimal if the most convenient sanctioner is ineffective or vulnerable.
Having a subset of players who are designated to avenge their teammates solves this problem, but
these players then have career and reputation maintenance as an extra motive to fight. An analysis
of the 2011-12 season salaries found that enforcers are rewarded differently than their less-violent
peers (Burdekin and Morton 2015). Like mafiosi who must continuously perform violent actions
to maintain their reputation (Smith and Varese 2001), enforcers may be concerned with their
continued status as producers of violence. Status is especially important when the underlying

8

quality is difficult to ascertain (Podolny 2001), and it is difficult to measure the exact influence an
enforcer or a fight has on the outcome of a game or season.
Furthermore, status is thought to “leak” across relationships (Benjamin and Podolny 1999;
Podolny 2005). To the extent that fighting is a relationship, two players with strong reputations as
fighters may have an incentive to fight one another. For similar reasons, players with reputations
as enforcers may wish to avoid fighting with players who are not known fighters, as this may harm
their reputation. Conflict is also more likely to occur between individuals of similar status (Gould
2003) seeking to resolve status ambiguity, which may also incentivize conflict between enforcers.
Furthermore, players who typically do not fight will likely wish to avoid experienced fighters.
Using a vast dataset of play-by-play records and individual player statistics, a 70-year history of
hockey fighting is outlined with a multi-faceted set of descriptive analyses and statistical models.
The results shed light not only on the role of fighting within the game, but also on status,
specialization, and signaling processes. The findings also offer a detailed quantitative and
empirical description of an evolving system of social control and introduce promising avenues for
future work on governance and collective action.
Data Sources and Analytic Strategy:
The analysis draws on a record of regular season play-by-play data from the 1947-48 season
through the 2018-19 season acquired via the NHL API. Data is available from 51,276 of 52,183
(98.2%) regular season games and 7,046 individual players. The historical accuracy of the data is
corroborated by two additional websites where fans of the game have compiled their own records
of fighting incidents, hockeyfights.com and the now defunct dropyourgloves.com. Data from
HockeyFights.com is available from 1960-2016, and data from HockeyFights.com is available
from 2000-2019. These data sets are largely in agreement in terms of year-to-year fighting rates
(see Figure 1), indicating that notions of fighting are consistent between fans and officials.
Individual-level records of player performance are also acquired via the NHL API.
The data is almost completely exhaustive given the time and space being considered, and the
empirical strategy has descriptive, analytical, and deductive components: the aim is to illustrate
9

the broader contours of fighting in the NHL, explore the social mechanisms and changes that
underlie these patterns, and test explanations proposed by prior work on ice hockey and inferred
from other social science research. Taken together, the analysis synthesizes several descriptive
analyses, and the results from hundreds of negative binomial regression models (290 in total) and
exponential random graph models (142). Visualizations are used whenever possible for the sake
of brevity and narrative clarity, and sample tables of model coefficients and visual summaries of
all estimated coefficients are left to appendices B and C.

Figure 1 – Rates of fighting per regular season game observed in the National Hockey League
API, and fan-compiled websites ‘DropYourGloves.com’ and ‘HockeyFights.com’. Trends are
mostly consistent between these three sources.
While prior work has analyzed overall rates of fighting (Depken et. al 2019), I present a three-part
analysis highlighting the shifting situational, individual, and interactional nature of fighting. The
first portion consists of a situational analysis of the game-contexts in which fighting is most likely
to occur, and longitudinal assessment of fighting as both a retaliatory and signaling mechanism.
The second portion traces the distribution of fights across individual players and the emergence of
the enforcer role. The final portion of the analysis examines fighting-dyads and the structure of
fighting networks for evidence of whether fighting reflects a gradually emergent status-

10

consciousness among enforcers. Altogether, the data reveals how norms of enforcement have
shifted and how this change has shifted the fighting motives of individual players.
The Situational Determinants of Fighting
The in-game situations that lead to fights reflect the broader norms that govern the outbreak of a
fight. Prior research has examined whether fighting overall in hockey is either impulsive or
calculated (Goldschmeid and Espindola 2013), but the play-by-play data allows for the
identification of both motives. There are two main situations of interest, the first is the cooccurrence of fighting and in-game penalties. This reflects the notion that fighting is likely an
impulsive retaliatory act and when it is a supplement to formal punishment provided by officials.
It is also likely retaliatory in many instances when no other penalties are given, but these cannot
be identified through the data available. The second situation is when fights immediately follow
“face-offs”, which are used to begin and resume play. Fights are found to be common after faceoffs, but in this situation immediate retaliation is not the motive. Rather, the fight reflects a
calculated act of signaling or deterrence, or a premeditated act of retaliation addressing an earlier
infraction.
Fighting as Immediate Retaliation and Supplemental Social Control
If fighting occurs as a supplement or substitute to official punishment for violent incidents that
occur in ice hockey, we should expect that a sizable fraction of fights occur at the same time as
penalties for other violent events. Looking at the proportion of fights that occur in conjunction
with another penalty, and conversely, the proportion of penalties that occur with a fight, will
provide a sense of how changes in fighting norms are related to changes in violent play more
generally.
Nearly 600,000 penalties are recorded in the play-by-play dataset. These are divided into classes
based on their nature and rates of co-occurrence with fighting events overall (see Table 1). Some
penalized acts are violent and are accompanied by a penalty in cases where they are particularly
extreme (cross-checking, spearing, and roughing) whereas other common penalties are not
particularly dangerous (interference, hooking, tripping) and are far less likely to be followed by a
11

fight. Three other classes of penalties are also identified: one for fighting itself, one for
supplemental penalties that often accompany fighting penalties but do not cause reflect fightcausing incidents, and one for unsportsmanlike penalties that tend to occur after play has stopped.
Class

Description

Examples

Frequency Fighting Co(%)
occurrence rate
226,500
6.2%
(37.8%)

Violent

Illegal play that may
endanger players.

“Roughing”,
“Slashing”, “HighSticking”, “CrossChecking”

Non-Violent

Illegal play that
typically does not
endanger players.

“Holding”,
“Hooking”,
“Tripping”,
“Interference”

280,098
(46.7%)

0.6%

Fighting

Penalties assessed for
fighting.

“Fighting”

57,023
(9.5%)

100%

Supplemental

Penalties for fighting
under certain
circumstances.

“Instigator”;
“Misconduct”

25,067
(4.2%)

50.8%

Unsportsmanlike

Penalties for
unsportsmanlike
activity - generally
after play has
stopped.

“Unsportsmanlike
Conduct”

11,138
(1.9%)

12.5%

Table 1 – A classification of 599,826 penalties observed in NHL regular season play-by-play data
from the 1947-48 season through the 2018-19 season. Penalties are manually collapsed into 5
categories based on their perceived danger to other players and their relationship with fighting.
The tendency for fighting to be used as a retaliatory norm can be operationalized by looking at
what percentage of fights occur at the same time as violent penalties. This peaks at around 45-50%
in the mid-1970s. Conversely, the number of violent penalties that co-occur with a fight reaches
its maximum at around 12% in the mid-1980s (see Figure 2a). By these measures, the use of
fighting as a retaliatory norm peaks just before overall rates of fighting reach their peak in the late
1980s. A portion of this shift coincides with a sudden increase in ‘supplemental’ penalties on
fighting itself that occurred from 1986-1993. Yet the decline of fighting as a direct response to
other violent events continues through about 2010.
12

Figure 2a (Top) shows how the co-occurrence of fighting penalties and violent penalties has
shifted over time, this serves as a proxy for how often fighting is used as an immediate retaliatory
sanction. Figure 2b(Bottom) shows the number of seconds that transpired between a faceoff and
the next fighting penalty (green) or violent penalty (purple) from 2003-2019. Fighting often occurs
in the first 10 seconds after a faceoff, suggesting that it is also frequently premediated or
calculated.

13

Fighting as Signal or Delayed Retaliation
While fights are often immediate transgressions to other in-game infractions, they can also take a
more calculated or premediated character. In play-by-play data from 2003-2019, fighting penalties
are far more likely to be given almost immediately after a face-off, which is the event that begins
play and resumes play after a stoppage, compared to penalties given for other violent infractions
(Figure 2B). (Unfortunately, data on face-offs is not available prior to the 2003-04 season.) If
fighting penalties and violent penalties were to occur randomly and independently, we would
expect the ratio of fighting penalties to violent penalties to have a constant value of roughly 0.027
given our dataset. In actuality, the ratio vastly exceeds this until roughly 10-15 seconds after the
most recent faceoff.
This finding reflects accounts that two players on opposing teams will often line up for a face-off
with the intention of fighting one another. These two types of fights show opposing sides of the
same ritual: one impulsive and retaliatory, the other planned and calculated. Later analysis will
show how these fights differ not only in terms of motive, but also in terms of participants. The
emerging norm of specialized enforcement is largely reflected in calculated or premeditated fight.
Attention is now turned towards changes in the distribution of fights across players and the
emergence of the specialized enforcer.
Distributional Analysis and The Emergence of the Enforcer
Just as the frequency of fighting and its relationship to other in-game events has changed over
time, the distribution of fighting across players has also shifted drastically. However, while
fighting frequency and retaliatory character has waxed and waned, changes to how fighting is
distributed among players have persisted. This change has two main elements. First, the
distributional inequality of fighting has increased drastically – a larger portion of fighting penalties
are concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of players. Second, fighting behavior has
become negatively correlated with scoring behavior. These trends are illustrated in Figure 3 which
shows the Gini Coefficient for fights (adjusted for differences in games played by each player),
and the Kendall Correlation of rates of fighting per game and scoring per game for each season
from 1947-2019. In the mid-1980’s there is a clear acceleration towards both (1) specialized
14

enforcement, fighting becomes inversely correlated with scoring, and (2) concentration, fighting
becomes concentrated in the hands of only a few players. Somewhat surprisingly, this change
occurs most rapidly during the 1980’s, when fighting is most deeply embedded in the fabric of the
National Hockey League.

Figure 3 – Changes in the concentration of fighting among players (Gini Coefficient) and the
specialization of fighting with scoring abilities (Kendall Correlation) from 1947-2019.

Negative binomial regression models are estimated for each year to examine how fighting is a
function of traditional measures of player success (goals, assists, plus/minus rating) and the rate at
which players commit violent penalties, while holding player position (Left Wing, Right Wing,
Center, or Defense – goalies are omitted) constant.

The number of games played in a year is

included in the models as an exposure variable. Furthermore, fights are estimated for each of the
two different subtypes estimated in the prior portion of the analysis: “retaliatory” fights, where
fights occur at the same time as another violent penalty, and “calculated” fights, where fights occur
within 10 seconds of a playoff. (“Calculated” is only estimated for seasons from 2004-2019, when
face-off data is available.) Players who have played in less than 20 games, players who did not
15

record at least one goal or assist, and goalies (who rarely fight and have different sets of
performance metrics), are all omitted from the analysis.
For each year, separate models are estimated for all fighting penalties, “retaliatory” fighting
penalties, and “calculated” fighting penalties. Two models are estimated for each fight, one
featuring plus-minus ratings (a metric used to measure defensive success) and one excluding this
term. The full form of the negative binomial regression models (including the plus-minus (+/-)
term) estimated for each season is as follows:
𝐹𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑃𝑒𝑛
𝐺𝑃

=𝑒

(𝑎+ 𝛽1 𝑙𝑜𝑔(

𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑠+1
)+𝛽2
𝐺𝑃

log(

𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑠+1
𝑉.𝑃𝑒𝑛.
+/−
)+𝛽3 (
)+𝛽4 (
)+𝛽5 (𝑃𝑜𝑠.=𝐿)+ 𝛽6 (𝑃𝑜𝑠.=𝑅)+𝛽7 (𝑃𝑜𝑠=𝐶))
𝐺𝑃
𝐺𝑃
𝐺𝑃

In addition, an overdispersion term is estimated to account for whether variance for the fighting
rate is higher or lower than what would be predicted by a standard Poisson model (the mean) in
each season.
In Figure 4, results of these models are displayed in terms of the predicted number of fighting
penalties for “high-skill”, “medium-skill”, and “low-skill” players for any given season and type
of fight. (Each of these six models for one year (2012) and graphical summaries of all model
coefficients across all years are included in Appendix B.) “High-skill” players are hypothetical
players who have log-transformed goal-scoring and assist-scoring rates that are two-standard
deviations above average, “medium-skill” players have average scoring rates, and “low-skill”
players are two-standard deviations below average. Each hypothetical player has a mean-level of
violent penalties, participates in 80 games, and is a ‘Center’. Consistent with expectations and
prior findings, the expected number of fights is much higher for low-skill players. Furthermore,
this tendency clearly has a longitudinal component, with differences becoming more pronounced
from roughly 1970 to 2000. These results are understated if other violent penalties are inversely
correlated with player success metrics. Furthermore, we see that these differences are muted for
fighting penalties given to “retaliatory fights” and are exaggerated for fighting penalties given for
calculated fights. This finding clearly shows that specialized fighters are more likely to participate
in pre-meditated fights immediately after play resumes. Enforcers do not only fight more and score
less than their teammates, they also tend to participate in a fundamentally different type of fight.

16

Figure 4a (Top) shows the predicted number of fighting penalties per 80 games and retaliatory
fighting penalties, with 95% confidence intervals, for hypothetical high-skill, medium-skill
(average), and low-skill players, based on two series’ of negative binomial models from 19472019. Significant differences emerge between players over time, from roughly 1970 to 200. The
gap between players shrinks for retaliatory penalties, which align more closely with honor-based
and impulsive conceptions of fighting. Figure 4b (bottom) compares models for retaliatory and
calculated fighting penalties from 2003-2019. Participation in calculated fights is far more likely
for low-skill players, but differences are less pronounced for retaliatory fights.
17

The origins and causes of the rise of the enforcer remain less clear. While distributional changes
may in part due to the aforementioned increase in the supplemental penalization of fighting from
1986-1993, the shifting size and composition of the league also points towards a more
comprehensive explanation: parallel organizational responses to changes in the availability of
more skilled players. A descriptive analysis supporting this explanation is left to Appendix A for
the interested reader.
Pairwise and Network Analysis of Fighting Interactions
The evidence of enforcer specialization provided and prior research on status and conflict suggest
that there should be meaningful patterns in who fights whom. The expectation is that players who
fight frequently should be disproportionately likely to fight one another, and that this tendency will
increase with enforcer specialization. To assess this, individual fighting penalties in the play-byplay dataset are transformed into a set of fighting pairs. A pair is identified when exactly one player
on each team receives a fighting penalty at the exact same time in a game. Across 71 seasons of
data there are a total 25,576 such pairs.
Two analyses, one dyadic and one network-based, confirm this tendency. Once again, players who
are in less than 20 games, have no goals or assists, and goalies are all excluded from analysis. At
the dyadic-level, I calculate Kendall correlations in the fighting rates and scoring rates of opposing
pairs of fighters. The results for each season are plotted in Figure 5a. In accordance with prediction,
these correlations increase over time, mainly from 1970 to 2000, which is when enforcer
specialization was found to increase in the prior distributional analysis.
Each seasonal set of fighting pairs is also transformed into a large social network, as network
analysis methods allow us to better account for the non-independence of fighting pairs. Two sets
of exponential random graph models (ERGMs), which estimate the predictors of tie (fight)
formation given the properties of nodes, the properties of dyads, and structural features of the
networks (Robins et. al 2007) are estimated for seasonal fighting network. The chief variable of
interest in this case is dyadic, which is whether pairs of players with similar fighting rates are more
likely to have fights.
The likelihood of each tie in the fighting network forming is estimated as a function of five
elements. The first is a baseline constant for edge formation that will vary from year to year. This
accounts for seasonal changes in overall fighting rates. The second is a term accounting for the
18

number of isolates in any given network. The third is the fighting rate of each player, which absorbs
variance in tie formation at the level of the nodes. One set of models is estimated where the fighting
rate is simply the rate observed by each player, another is estimated with the fighting rate predicted
for each player from the previously estimated negative binomial models. The fourth, and the key
variable of interest, is the difference in fighting rates (actual or predicted), between the two players.
A large negative estimate for this coefficient indicates that players with vastly different fighting
rates are very unlikely to pair up with one another. Differences in fighting frequency are expressed
in terms of percentile-rank of fighting rates, making these terms independent from year-to-year
changes in fighting distributions across players and comparable across models. Finally, a term for
geometrically weighted edgewise shared partners (GWESP), a “curved” term (Hunter and
Handcock 2006) which broadly speaking accounts for the level of triangle formation in the
network, is included in order to account for the fact that opportunities for interaction may cluster
along the lines of division or conference in certain years given the schedule of matches between
teams.2 This would also account for any tendency for transitivity among players but given that ties
have a negative valence in this context this is not expected to be a factor.
Maximal likelihood estimations yield coefficients for each of these five parameters. These
coefficients broadly inform the likelihood of any given edge being present, given the properties of
the nodes and the presence of other edges in the network. For example, higher positive values for
the isolates coefficient suggests that a network has a higher number of isolated than expected by
chance given other features, but negative values for the absolute difference in fighting rate
percentile coefficient indicate that ties are unlikely between nodes with different fighting rates
compared to what we would see given the other features. (For more detailed examples of ERGMs
in social networks, see Goodreau 2007; Goodreau et. al 2009.)
Full coefficient tables for two sample models, and figures showing coefficients and confidence
intervals for all models, are included in Appendix C. Figure 5b features the main coefficient of
interest: the absolute difference in fighting rate percentile. When the model is estimated using
actual fighting rates, terms become profoundly more negative in the 1980s, suggesting an
increasing level of status awareness among players as the enforcer role becomes more pronounced.
This pattern is less pronounced when predicted fighting rates from scoring and penalization rates

2

In each model the GWESP term τ is fixed at 0.25.

19

are used to estimate nodal and dyadic variance, but coefficients are still negative and statistically
significant from the late 1970s and onwards.

Figure 5a (top) displays the Kendall correlation of fighting pair scoring rates and fighting rates
by season. Over time player rates more closely resemble the rates of their fighting opponents.
Similarly, Figure 5b shows exponential random graph model coefficients for the absolute
difference term of fighting rate percentiles. More negative values indicate that, all else equal,
fights are more likely to occur between players the similar tendencies towards fighting.
20

In summary, dyadic (dis)similarity in fighting rates, a broad proxy for enforcer status, is a large
positive (negative) predictor of whether two players will fight. Mathematically it is expected that
enforcers will fight one another frequently given their collective proclivity to fighting behavior,
but the ERGM coefficients reveal an additional level of attraction between enforcers and/or
avoidance between enforcers and non-enforcers.
Calculated Fights Among Enforcers and Network Visualization
Visualizations of the broader fighting network add a final level of intuition to how the situational,
distribution, and interactional changes in fighting are all intertwined. Prior models of fighting
penalties per player and seasonal fighting networks suggest that the overall network structure of
fights will have a dense core of enforcers/low-scoring players connected to one another, and a
sparse periphery. Adding in the situational differences between fights, it is also expected that the
edges closer to the core of a fighting networks contain a higher rate of “calculated fights”.
Enforcers who have the chance to fight one another right after a faceoff should have sufficient
career-driven motivation to “drop the gloves.”
Figure 6 is a multi-paneled network visualization of fighting pairs during a 7-season period from
2005-2012, between the NHL labor disputes of the 2004-05 and 2012-13 seasons. During this
period the rules and league format are consistent, data on face-off timing is available for the
identification of calculated fights, and enforcer specialization is roughly at its peak.
The overall network includes 1306 players (goalies, players with no goals or assists, or less than
20 games during this period are again omitted) and 3891 fighting pairs. The panels illustrating the
network layout focus on the largest connected component, which contains 700 players and 3576
edges. Figure 6a shows the network layout with edges repressed to better highlight the nodes. It
reveals the predicted core-periphery structure, with the core being mainly comprised of players
who have lower scoring rates. Figure 6b shows how the network position of nodes (log eigenvector
centrality) is related to scoring rates of players. There is an inverse relationship between scoring
and network position, with the caveat that higher-skilled players who are also towards the center
of the graph (points towards the top right corner) have played in more games and have had more
opportunities for edge formation.

21

Figure 6a (top) shows the largest connected component of the fighting network from 2005-2012,
edges are repressed, and nodes are colored according to their percentile scoring rank (higherskill players are more yellow, lower skilled players are more purple). Figure 6b (bottom) shows
each player’s network centrality as a function of their scoring rate, with note colored according
to games played. Players who appear more central than what would be expected by their scoring
are simply players who played in more games and had more opportunities to form ties (i.e., fight).

22

Figure 6c (top) shows the largest component of the fighting network with an identical layout to
6a, but with nodes repressed instead of edges. The 25.5% of fights occurring within 10 seconds of
a faceoff are colored purple, and more concentrated towards the network core. Figure 6d (bottom)
further emphasizes this. Fighters are divided into five adjusted quantiles based on fighting rate
per game. Each cell shows the number of fights occurring between or within these quantiles in
parentheses, with squares sized proportional to fight counts and colored according to the
percentage of post-faceoff fights. Square sizes show that players target players in similar quantiles,
and square colors show that fights between higher quantiles are more likely to be calculated.
23

The network visualization in Figure 6c has the same layout as the network in Figure 8a, but nodes
are repressed instead of edges. The 963 edges (25.5% of all edges) that represent a “calculated”
fight are highlighted in purple and are located disproportionately in the core of the graph. This is
illustrated more clearly in Figure 6d, which shows a tabular classification of fights based on the
fighting rates of both fighters. Fighter are assigned to one of 5 adjusted quantiles based on their
fighting rates, such that the total number of fights participated in by each quantile is roughly 20%.
(The highest fighting rate quantile contains 35 players, while the lowest contains 456 players, but
each quantile is responsible for roughly 20% of fighting behavior.) The size of each square is
proportional to the total number of fights between members of each quantile. Each square is
colored according to the percentage of those fights that are within 10 seconds of a faceoff. If
players randomly select their opponents regardless of how frequently they fight, each square would
be equal in size. Confirming earlier findings, the squares along the symmetric diagonal of the graph
tend to be larger than smaller squares that represent lopsided matchups. Furthermore, the squares
towards the top right corner of the heat map are lighter in color, reflecting the fact that fights
between enforcers are more likely to occur after a faceoff.
In what we might call the late golden age of the specialized enforcer (2005-2012), enforcers tend
to score less than their teammates, tend to fight one another, and are more likely to fight when
fights seem completely unnecessary. In other words, specialized enforcement led to the emergence
of a separate “game within a game” played by hockey’s otherwise least talented players.
Discussion
On January 9th, 2007, Eric Godard of the Calgary Flames and Derek Boogaard of the Minnesota
Wild lined up across from one another during a second period face-off at the Calgary Saddledome.
Immediately after the puck is dropped and play resumes, both players drop their sticks, fling off
their gloves, and exchange punches. On the television broadcast, one announcer declares:

“And now we got a fight at center ice, the guys we’ve waited all night for, Boogaard
and Godard, two former Western Hockey Leaguers that can be tough …. Eric
Godard coming up from Omaha, there’s not a lot of reasons he’s here but to kind
of watch over what the big guy from Minnesota is (doing) is one of them.”
24

The other announcer notes that the two players spoke with one another during the pre-game warmup, and a slow-motion replay of the face-off then reveals more discussion between the two players.
After the fight, a dazed Boogaard skates first to the wrong penalty box and then to the locker
room.3 Eric Godard played 17 games for the Calgary Flames and 29 games for their minor league
affiliate that year. He participated in 8 fights for each team, scored only 2 points for Calgary, and
9 for Omaha. Boogaard played 48 of 82 possible regular season games for Minnesota, earning 1
assist, no goals, and participating in 13 fights.

This is an archetype of the calculated fights that characterize the system of informal but specialized
sanctioning that has emerged in the NHL. This type of fighting can be traced to teams within the
NHL hiring designated enforcers, and less-skilled players deliberately signaling their ability to
fulfill this role, regardless of whether a situation demands peer-punishment.

The shifting situational, distributional, and interactional nature of fighting in the NHL all reflect
the ritual’s transition from a shared cultural norm to a specialized practice. While fighting
originated as an arguably necessary and decentralized form of peer sanctioning, it proliferated as
the game became more violent, and then concentrated in the hands of low-skilled players over
time. (Appendix A explores how this transition may have resulted from an increase in league size
and then an increased influx of talent from outside of North America.) The emergence of the
enforcer role led to the occurrence of fights that had less to do with honor cultures or entertainment,
and more to do with status and job-maintenance. These findings not only broaden our
understanding of fighting in hockey in general, a social problem of frequent study within the
sociology of sport literature, but also have theoretical implications for our understanding of status,
governance, and collective action.
Implications within Hockey
Much has been made of the ‘fall’ of the enforcer, and the decline of fighting more generally, in
recent years. Whether fighting frequency will continue to decline is unclear. On one hand, it seems
like there is more than enough talent to fill each of the 31 (soon to be 32) rosters in the NHL
3

Video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d86wx-cU1n4
25

without resorting to excessively violent and physical play, and the league does appears to have a
public image motive to limit fighting. On the other hand, a drift towards more skilled or “finesse”
players may make a highly physical form of play again more attractive. During the late 1960s and
early 1970s the newly minted Philadelphia Flyers used violence as a collective strategy and
enjoyed great success. Finesses teams may give way to physical teams, who then give way to
specialized teams, who then give way to finesse teams. If fighting continues to decline, we might
expect some teams to experiment with a very physical style of play as a counter to an increasingly
skilled league overall. A game-theoretic analysis of how these broader team employment strategies
interact with one another could is a promising topic of study for scholars of sports management
and complex systems.
While extra penalties for fighting by the NHL may have depressed overall fighting, this does not
address the type of violent, dangerous, and semi-legal play that leads to fights. Increasing the cost
of fighting may in effect decrease the cost of other violent play. This is a potential area for future
work on both hockey fighting and the relationship between informal and formal sanctions more
generally.
Implications beyond hockey
A theoretical contribution of this article is the illustration of how the process of specialization can
transform backwards-looking reactive behavior into forwards-looking signaling behavior. While
this finding is situated here in a context of networked violence, we can imagine how this process
may manifest in other occupational or organizational settings. The specialization of an activity
may introduce rewards at the individual level that are dependent to the identity of the practitioner,
as opposed to collective rewards dependent on the situational relevance of the activity. Within the
context of sanctioning behavior more specifically, this possibility has interesting consequences for
our understanding of both governance and collective action.
Evolving Systems of Governance
This case also illustrates how systems of governance can evolve more generally. Typically studies
of governance assume a central collective interest that must be protected: be it a shared common
resource (Olson 1965), an investment pool in a laboratory experiment (Yamagishi 1986), or a preexisting state that has plundered and horded resources (Tilly et al. 1985). From these shared
26

interests and resources strong governing institutions are coordinated and funded. Yet little is
known about how sophisticated governance can emerge without strong collective interests. In the
case of competitive sports, players and teams are involved in a series of contests with one another
and shared interests are weaker. Not surprisingly, hockey’s shift towards specialized but informal
control – a middle layer between purely decentralized and purely formal governance – was likely
facilitated by decisions made at the level of the team, a smaller pool of collective interest nested
between the player and the league (for more detail on this, see Appendix A). Meso-levels of
organization may offer an alternative path for the evolution of governance when population-wide
interests are scarce.

Third-Order Collective Action Problems
While methods of informal sanctioning may arise in the absence of state governance, not all
informal sanctioning directly contributes to said governance. In this case, fighting at times can be
a forwards-looking act of signaling instead of a backwards-looking act of sanctioning. Roger
Gould’s analysis of vendettas in Corsica found that individuals performed violent acts on behalf
of the group to signal group solidarity (Gould 2000). In the case of hockey, groups are permeable
and transient, and can exclude individuals. Willingness to produce violence is a precondition for
some to group entry, and consequently, violent acts are performed to establish and maintain
membership. This suggests that prior work on the structure of violence between gangs
(Papachristos 2009) could be advanced by looking at how violence is distributed within rather than
between criminal organizations.

The emergence of the enforcer also illustrates an underexamined problem in the collective action
literature. First-order collective action problems are concerned with motivating contributions to
pools of public goods and deterring predation. The solution to these problems typically involves
punishing deviants and rewarding altruists. Hockey solves this via fighting (punishing deviants).
Second-order collective action problems focus on who takes on the costly responsibility of
rewarding and punishing (Heckathorn 1989). Hockey’s solution to this has evolved, as fighting
has become the responsibility not of the offended player, but rather of the specialized “enforcer”
who is preemptively rewarded for sanctioning behavior with a roster spot.

27

Just as rates of primary behavior (deviance or compliance) are influenced by secondary behavior
(sanctions and rewards), rates of secondary behavior are influenced by tertiary behavior, which in
this case is the rewarding (punishing) of those who (fail to) sanction. This may have the unintended
side effect of (third-order) rewards motivating (second-order) sanctions, regardless of (first-order)
deviance. The problems that stem from rewarding those who punish others are visible beyond the
case of ice hockey, from receiving moral and social rewards for “call-outs” and “take downs” on
Twitter (Bouvier 2020), to for-profit prisons bribing judges for stronger sentences.4
This is also relevant for policing, as those who are employed as agents of social control may have
an added incentive to sanction explicitly, even in more formal control systems. While in the case
of ice hockey enforcers may advertise this ability by sanctioning one another, other agents of social
control will likely not pick one another as targets. Scholars of policing may be wise to build upon
prior studies of how organization structure effects officer discretion (Chappel, MacDonald, and
Manz 2006) and examine how rates of employee turnover and promotion criteria influence rates
of officer enforcement.
Conclusion
The regular occurrence of fighting in ice hockey has attracted a fair amount of attention from
sociologists of sport, journalists, and public figures over the years. Comprehensively looking at
the broader ecology of hockey fighting with a quantitative lens not only deepens our understanding
of the practice, but also provides insights onto the nature of sanctioning, informal control, and
governance. The question of whether the risks associated with fighting are justified is beyond the
scope of this paper. It is likely that fights have in some cases deterred other violent play, and in
some cases, they are more directly motivated by career interests than peer-punishment. A broader
question is how distinct these two explanations really are: do the self-interested career aspirations
of enforcers create a generalized threat of retaliatory violence that keeps the game more peaceful?
Assessing this would be an important next step for both denizens of ice hockey and scholars of
collective action and conflict resolution.

4

http://edition.cnn.com/2009/CRIME/02/23/pennsylvania.corrupt.judges/
28

References
Allain, Kristi A. 2008. “’Real Fast and Tough’: The Construction of Canadian Hockey
Masculinity.” Sociology of Sport Journal, 25(4): 462-481.
______. 2015. "’A Good Canadian Boy’: Crisis Masculinity, Canadian National Identity, and
Nostalgic Longings in Don Cherry's Coach's Corner.” International Journal of Canadian
Studies, 52: 107-132.
Atkinson, Michael, and Kevin Young. 2008. Deviance and Social Control in Sport. Human
Kinetics.
Axelrod, Robert. 1981. "The Emergence of Cooperation Among Egoists." American Political
Science Review 75(2): 306-318.
Baldassarri, Delia and Guy Grossman. 2011. “Centralized Sanctioning and Legitimate Authority
Promote Cooperation in Humans.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(27):11023-11027.
Barlow, John M. 2009. “’Scientific Aggression’: Irishness, Manliness, Class and
Commercialization in the Shamrock Hockey Club of Montreal, 1894-1901.” Pp. 35-85 in
Coast to Coast: Hockey in Canada to the Second World War, edited by J.C.K. Wong.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Barnes, Collin D., Ryan P. Brown, and Michael Tamborski. 2012. "Living Dangerously: Culture
of Honor, Risk-taking, and the Nonrandomness of “Accidental” Deaths." Social
Psychological and Personality Science 3(1): 100-107.
Benjamin, Beth A., and Joel M. Podolny. 1999. "Status, Quality, and Social Order in the
California wine industry." Administrative Science Quarterly 44(3): 563-589.
Bernstein, Ross. 2006. The Code: The Unwritten Rules of Fighting and Retaliation in the NHL.
Chicago, IL: Triumph Books.
Black, Donald. 1983. "Crime as Social Control." American Sociological Review. 48(1): 34-45.
Bloom, Gordon A., and Michael D. Smith. 1996. "Hockey Violence: A Test of Cultural Spillover
Theory." Sociology of Sport Journal 13(1): 65-77.

29

Boehm, Christopher. 1987. Blood Revenge: The Enactment and Management of Revenge in
Montenegro and Other Tribal Societies. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Bouvier, G., 2020. Racist call-outs and cancel culture on Twitter: The limitations of the
platform’s ability to define issues of social justice. Discourse, Context & Media, 38,
p.100431.
Branch, John. 2011a. “A Boy Learns to Brawl,” The New York Times, December 4, p. SP1.
______. 2011b. “Blood on the Ice,” The New York Times, December 5, p. D1.
______. 2014. Boy on Ice: The Life and Death of Derek Boogaard. New York: Norton.
Burdekin, R.C. and Morton, M., 2015. Blood money: Violence for hire in the National Hockey
League. International Journal of Sport Finance.
Burke, Brian. 2013. “Guest Column: In Support of Fighting,” The USA Today, October 30
Chappell, Allison T., John M. MacDonald, and Patrick W. Manz. 2006. “The organizational
determinants of police arrest decisions.” Crime & Delinquency, 52(2): 287-306.
Colburn Jr., Kenneth. 1985. “Honor, Ritual and Violence in Ice Hockey.” The Canadian Journal
of Sociology 10: 153–70.
______. 1986. "Deviance and Legitimacy in Ice-hockey: A Microstructural Theory of
Violence." Sociological Quarterly 27(1): 63-74.
Colson, Elizabeth. 1953. "Social Control and Vengeance in Plateau Tonga Society." Africa
23(3): 199-212.
Cohen, Dov, and Richard E. Nisbett. 1994. "Self-protection and the Culture of Honor:
Explaining Southern Violence." Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 20(5): 551567.
______. 1997. “Field Experiments Examining the Culture of Honor: The Role of Institutions in
Perpetuating Norms About Violence.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
23(11): 1188–99.

30

Cohen, Dov., Richard E. Nisbett, Brian F. Bowdle, and Norbert Schwarz. 1996. “Insult,
Aggression, and the Southern Culture of Honor: An ‘Experimental
Ethnography.’" Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 70(5): 945-960.
Collins, Randall. 2008. Violence: A Micro-sociological Theory. Princeton University Press:
Princeton, NJ.
Clutton-Brock, Tim H., and Geoffrey A. Parker. 1995. "Punishment in Animal
Societies." Nature 373 (6511): 209-216.
Crockett, Molly J., Yagiz Özdemir, and Ernst Fehr. 2014. “The value of vengeance and the
demand for deterrence.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(6): 22792286.
Depken, Craig A., Peter A. Groothuis, and Mark C. Strazicich. 2019. "Evolution of a Social
Norm: The Rise and Fall of the Enforcer in the National Hockey League." Social Science
Research Network, 2831565.
Ellickson, Robert C. 1987. "A Critique of Economic and Sociological Theories of Social
Control." The Journal of Legal Studies 16(1): 67-99.
______. 1991. Order Without Law. Harvard University Press.
Elster, Jon. 1990. "Norms of Revenge." Ethics 100(4): 862-885.
Elcombe, T. (2010). The moral equivalent of "Don Cherry." Journal of Canadian Studies, 44 (2),
194-218.
Engelhardt, George M. 1995. “Fighting Behavior and Winning National Hockey League games:
A Paradox.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 80(2): 416-418.
Erikson, Emily. and Joseph M. Parent. 2007. “Central authority and order.” Sociological
Theory 25(3): 245-267.
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gächter. 2000. "Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of
Reciprocity." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(3): 159-181.
______. 2002."Altruistic Punishment in Humans." Nature 415: 137-140.

31

Friedman, Daniel, and Nirvikar Singh. 1999. On the Viability of Vengeance. Department of
Economics, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Gambetta, Diego. 1996. The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Private Protection. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
______. 2009. "Signaling." Pp. 168-194 in The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology, edited
by Peter Hedstrom and Peter Bearman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gillet, J., White, P. and Young, K., 1996. “The Prime Minister of Saturday Night: Don Cherry,
the CBC, and the Cultural Production of Intolerance.” Pp. 59-72 in Seeing Ourselves:
Media Power and Policy in Canada, edited by Helen Holmes and David Taras. Harcourt
Brace Canada.
Goldschmied, Nadav, and Samantha Espindola. 2013. "’I Went to a Fight the Other Night and a
Hockey Game Broke Out’ Is Professional Hockey Fighting Calculated or
Impulsive?" Sports Health 5(5): 458-462.
Gould, Roger V. 2000. "Revenge as Sanction and Solidarity Display: An Analysis of Vendettas
in Nineteenth-Century Corsica." American Sociological Review 65(5): 682-704.
______. 2003. Collision of Wills: How ambiguity about social rank breeds conflict. University of
Chicago Press.
Gruneau, Richard, and David Whitson. 1993. Hockey Night in Canada: Sport, Identities and
Cultural Politics. Garamond Press.
Gürerk, Özgür, Bernd Irlenbusch, and Bettina Rockenbach. 2006. "The Competitive Advantage
of Sanctioning Institutions." Science 312(5770): 108-111.
Heckathorn, Douglas D., 1988. “Collective sanctions and the creation of prisoner's dilemma
norms.” American Journal of Sociology, 94(3): 535-562.
______. 1989. "Collective Action and the Second-order Free-rider Problem." Rationality and
Society 1(1): 78-100.
______. 1990. “Collective sanctions and compliance norms: A formal theory of group-mediated
social control.” American Sociological Review, 55(3): 366-384.

32

Hunter, D.R. and Handcock, M.S., 2006. Inference in curved exponential family models for
networks. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15(3), pp.565-583.
Lorenz, S. L., & Osborne, G. B. 2009. “Brutal Butchery, Strenuous Spectacle: Hockey Violence,
Manhood, and the 1907 Season.” Pp. 160-202 in Coast to Coast: Hockey in Canada to
the Second World War, edited by J.C.K. Wong. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Loughead, Todd M., and Larry M. Leith. 2001. "Hockey Coaches' and Players' Perceptions of
Aggression and the Aggressive Behavior of Players." Journal of Sport Behavior 24(4):
394-407.
Kirk, David S., and Andrew V. Papachristos. 2011. "Cultural Mechanisms and the Persistence of
Neighborhood Violence." American Journal of Sociology 116(4): 1190-1233.
Knowles, R. P. 1995. “Post-, ‘Grapes,’ Nuts and Flakes: ‘Coach's Corner’ as Post-colonial
Performance.” Modern Drama 38 (1): 123-130.
Macy, Michael W. 1993. “Backward-looking social control.” American Sociological Review
58(6): 819-836.
Metcalfe, Alan. 1997. Canada Learns to Play: The Emergence of Organized Sport, 1807-1914.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nisbett, Richard E. 1993. "Violence and U.S. Regional Culture." American Psychologist 48(4):
441-449.
Nowak, Andrzej, Michele.J. Gelfand, Wojiciech Borkowski, Dov Cohen, and Ivan Hernandez.
2016. “The Evolutionary Basis of Honor Cultures.” Psychological Science 27(1): 12-24.
Oliver, Pamela. 1980. “Rewards and punishments as selective incentives for collective action:
theoretical investigations.” American Journal of Sociology, 85(6): 1356-1375.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public goods and the theory of groups.
Harvard University Press.
Papachristos, Andrew V. 2009. "Murder by Structure: Dominance Relations and the Social
Structure of Gang Homicide." American Journal of Sociology 115(1): 74-128.

33

Pappas, Nick T., Patrick C. McKenry, and Beth Skilken Catlett. 2004. "Athlete Aggression on
the Rink and Off-the-ice Athlete Violence and Aggression in Hockey and Interpersonal
Relationships." Men and Masculinities 6(3): 291-312.
Podolny, Joel M. 2001. "Networks as the Pipes and Prisms of the Market." American Journal of
Sociology 107(1): 33-60.
______. 2005. Status Signals: A Sociological Study of Market Competition. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Robidoux, M., 2001. Men at Play: A Working Understanding of Professional Hockey. Montreal,
Canada: McGill-Queen's University Press.
Robins, G., Pattison, P., Kalish, Y. and Lusher, D., 2007. An introduction to exponential random
graph (p*) models for social networks. Social networks, 29(2), pp.173-191.
Rockerbie, Duane.W. 2016. “Fighting as a profit maximizing strategy in the National Hockey
League: more evidence.” Applied Economics, 48(4): 292-299.
Scanlan, L., 2002. Grace under Fire: the state of our sweet and savage game. Penguin Books
Canada.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sigmund, Karl. 2007. “Punish or perish? Retaliation and collaboration among humans.” Trends
in Ecology and Evolution 22(11): 593-600.
Smith, Alastair, and Federico Varese. 2001. "Payment, Protection and Punishment the Role of
Information and Reputation in the Mafia." Rationality and Society 13(3): 349-393.
Smith, Michael D. 1974. "Significant Others' Influence on the Assaultive Behavior of Young
Hockey Players." International Review of Sport Sociology 9(3): 45-58.
______. 1979a. "Hockey Violence: A Test of the Violent Subculture Hypothesis." Social
Problems 27(2): 235-247.
______. 1979b. "Towards an Explanation of Hockey Violence: A Reference Other
Approach." Canadian Journal of Sociology 4(2): 105-124.

34

Stewart, Kenneth G., Donald G. Ferguson, and J. C. H. Jones. 1992. "On Violence in
Professional Team Sport as the Endogenous Result of Profit Maximization." Atlantic
Economic Journal 20(4): 55-64.
Stewart, Eric A., and Ronald L. Simons. 2010. “Race, Code of the Street, and Violent
Delinquency: A Multilevel Investigation of Neighborhood Street Culture and Individual
Norms of Violence.” Criminology 48(2): 569–605.
Varese, Federico. 1994. "Is Sicily the future of Russia? Private Protection and the Rise of the
Russian Mafia." European Journal of Sociology 35(2): 224-258.
Widmeyer, W. Neil, and Jack S. Birch. 1979. The Relationship Between Aggression and
Performance Outcome in Ice Hockey. Canadian Journal of Applied Sport Sciences 4(1):
91-94.
______. 1984. "Aggression in Professional Ice Hockey: A Strategy for Success or a Reaction to
Failure?" The Journal of Psychology 117(1): 77-84.
Yamagishi, Toshio. 1986. "The Provision of a Sanctioning System as a Public Good." Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 51(1): 110-116.

35

Appendix A: The Expansion of the NHL and Team-Level Specialization
Between 1967 and 1974 the number of clubs in the NHL tripled from 6 to 18. While part of this
expansion came from the NHL’s absorption of lesser leagues, the standards for entering the league
potentially lowered as the supply of talent caught up with demand. This caused immediate changes
in the international composition of the league, which was over 90% Canadian in its earlier years.5
To assess these changes, players are grouped into seven different geographic categories: three
regions in Canada6: Ontario, Western Canada, or Quebec/Atlantic Canada, the United States, the
former U.S.S.R., former Czechoslovakia, and Scandinavia. (The proportion of players from other
nations is rather small and excluded from the analysis presented.)
Figure A1a shows how the regional composition changed relative to the growth of the NHL.
Figure A1b shows fighting rates per game by year and region. The proportion of players from each
of the three regions of Canada diminished over the course of time, with more pronounced declines
in the Atlantic/Quebec and Ontario regions. As the league increases in size there is an increase
mainly in American talent, a relatively constant share of players from Western Canada, and a
corresponding decrease in players from Ontario and Quebec/Atlantic Canada.
As the NHL becomes larger and more violent, players from Western Canada and the United States
begin to shoulder relatively higher fighting rates. This drops off for players from the United States
in the 1980s, but rates from Western Canada remain consistently high (see Figure A1b). Overall,
this suggests that increased opportunities in the league may have created opportunities for less
skilled and more violent players, who were often from underrepresented parts of North America
(outside of Ontario/Quebec/Atlantic Canada).
In the 1990s and 2000s there is an increase in players from non-North American countries. These
players have tended to have lower rates of fighting per game. This may partly be due to different
styles of play in different parts of the world, but non-North American players also tended to record

5

While only one of the additional 12 teams was located in Canada as of the 1974-75 season
(Vancouver), only two of the “original six” franchises were located in Canada (Montreal and
Toronto). The shifting nationality of franchises themselves is likely not a major contributor.
6
In addition to making group sizes more comparable, this division reflects the current division of
the Canadian Hockey League, a main incubator for hockey talent for 16-21 year old players. The
league is divided into three separate leagues that draw players from western provinces (WHL),
Ontario (OHL), and Quebec/Atlantic Canada (QMJHL).
36

more goals and assists per game. As more players from outside North America enter the league,
fighting becomes increasingly specialized and concentrated, but fighting rates decrease overall.
Overall, the historical trends in the data indicate that violence became more prominent in the league
as more opportunities became available for arguably less-talented players, suggesting that violent
play and fighting behavior became an alternative player strategy for success. As time went on and
the supply of skilled players increased, the game retained much of its violent character, but teams
sought to assign this responsibility to a smaller number of relatively low-skill players.
Distribution of Fights Across Teams
The transition to increased violence and specialized enforcement was facilitated by the shifting
personnel strategies of NHL Franchises. The selection of players is made separately by competing
teams, not the league, and the shifting changes in the number of teams and the talent available
likely led to team-level changes of interest. Re-calculating the correlation of fights per game and
goals per game and the Gini coefficient for fighting concentration within each team, the patterns
exhibited by each organization mirror the overall patterns for the entire league. The shifting talent
pattern in the NHL, therefore, was not simply a small number of unsuccessful teams hiring
enforcers to entertain fans with violence, but was rather a shared norm adopted by teams.
The parallel specialization of enforcement across teams is shown visually in Figure A2, which
shows the specialization trajectory of teams in aggregate, and the trajectory of each of the ‘original’
six franchises that have been present through the entirety of the dataset. Each dot shows the level
of fighting inequality (green) and the Kendall correlation between fighting and scoring within each
team (purple). Consistent with other findings, fighting became more concentrated in the hands of
players on each team, particularly from the mid 1980’s through 1990’s, and more gradually
fighting became inversely correlated with scoring rates on each separate NHL Franchise.
Specialization processes seem to have occurred primarily at the within-team level, as opposed to
the across-team level. There are a finite number of spots afforded to players on each team who
are disproportionately willing to fight, but otherwise less skilled. This creates a situation where
enforcers need to fight to maintain the violent reputation necessary for employment.

37

Figure A1a (top) - The shifting composition of the NHL by player nationality and region over the
years. Labeled vertical lines indicate increases (and one decrease) in the number of teams (and
therefore roster spots) in the NHL over the years. Figure A1b (bottom) indicates the number of
fights per game for players by regional/national background and season. LOWESS smoothing with
confidence intervals is included to emphasize trends.

38

Figure A2a (top) – Rate of fighting concentration (Gini coefficent) and specialization (Kendall
correlation) within each NHL team from 1947-2019, with LOWESS smoothing included to
emphasize overall trends. Figure A2b shows how this pattern is replicated for each of the “original
6” NHL franchises. These trends appear mostly parallel across teams.

39

Appendix B: Coefficients from Negative Binomial Regression Models

Figure B1 – Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for Log (Assists/Game) and
Log(Goals/Game) for negative binomial models of fighting rate by year and model. Columns are
grouped by type of fight and rows are grouped by whether Plus-Minus is included in the model.
40

Figure B2 – Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for Violent Penalties Per Game and PlusMinus Per Game for negative binomial models of fighting rate by year and model. Columns are
grouped by type of fight and rows are grouped by whether Plus-Minus is included in the model.
41

Figure B3 – Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for binary variables for players who are
Left Wings or Right Wings relative to the reference group of defenders by year and model. Columns
are grouped by type of fight and rows are grouped by whether Plus-Minus is included in the model.
42

Figure B4 – Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for binary variables for players who are
Centers relative to the reference group of defenders and the theta overdispersion coefficient (values
of less than 1 indicate more variance than expected by a Poisson model). Columns are grouped by
type of fight and rows are grouped by whether Plus-Minus is included in the model
43

Model
Fight Type
Constant
Constant
Player Performance
Metrics
Log(Goals Per Game)
Log(Assists Per Game)
Violent Penalties Per Game

1
All

2
All

3
Retaliatory

4
Retaliatory

5
Calculated

6
Calculated

-7.553***
(0.24)

-7.645***
(0.25)

-7.974***
(0.31)

-7.904***
(0.31)

-9.517***
(0.41)

-9.797***
(0.43)

-0.592***
(0.12)
-0.811***
(0.13)
9.938***
(0.86)

-0.604***
(0.12)
-0.860***
(0.13)
9.913***
(0.86)
0.754*
(0.43)

-0.243
(0.16)
-0.546***
(0.16)
9.957***
(0.90)

-0.233
(0.16)
-0.501**
(0.16)
10.040***
(0.91)
-0.606
(0.56)

-0.866***
(0.19)
-0.835***
(0.19)
8.894***
(1.29)

-0.932***
(0.19)
-0.936***
(0.20)
8.806***
(1.28)
1.879**
(0.72)

0.700***
(0.15)
-0.384**
(0.14)
-0.018
(0.13)

0.732***
(0.15)
-0.404**
(0.14)
-0.022
(0.13)

0.1
(0.19)
-0.034
(0.18)
0.097
(0.17)

0.084
(0.19)
-0.017
(0.17)
0.101
(0.17)

1.233***
(0.24)
-0.462*
(0.21)
0.016
(0.21)

1.359***
(0.25)
-0.536*
(0.22)
0.044
(0.21)

Plus Minus Per Game
Player Position
Position = Left Wing
Position = Right Wing
Position = Center

Oversipersion
Theta
0.732**
0.741**
3.385
4.048
0.483***
0.496***
(Below 1 = Overdispersed)
(0.088)
(0.089)
(2.213)
(3.12)
(0.099)
(0.101)
Observations
675
675
675
675
675
675
Significance: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01
Table B1 – Coefficients for negative binomial regression models for fighting penalties in the 2011-12 National Hockey League
Season. Models are estimated for all fighting penalties, fighting penalties thought to stem from a retaliatory situation, and fighting
penalties thought to be the result of a calculated fighting event
44

Appendix C: Coefficients from Exponential Random Graph Models

Figure C1 - Exponential random graph model coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for
structural parameters of edge formation, isolates, and geometrically weighted edgewise shared
partner distribution. Coefficients are organized by season and model type (whether actual or
predicted fighting rates are used in dyadic/nodal terms). Positive terms indicate that edges are
more likely to exist when they create these structural features.
45

Figure C2 - Exponential random graph model coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for node
level tendency to form edges based on actual or predicted fighting rates, dyadic tendency to form
edges based on the absolute difference of fighting rank percentile between the nodes. Coefficients
are organized by season and model type (whether actual or predicted fighting rates are used in
dyadic/nodal terms). Positive terms indicate edges are more likely to form when nodal or dyadic
values of given variables are higher.

46

Model
Measure of Fighting Tendency
Structural Parameters
Edges
Isolated
GWESP (0.25)
Nodal Covariates
Fighting Penalties
Dyadic Covariates
Percentile Rank Difference in
Fighting Rate
Akaike Inf. Crit.
Bayesian Inf. Crit.
*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001

1
Actual Fighting
Penalties

2
Predicted Fighting
Penalties

-5.344***
(0.14)
1.443***
(0.14)
-0.072
(0.08)

-5.153***
(0.11)
1.897***
(0.15)
0.824***
(0.08)

0.162***
(0.01)

0.346***
(0.03)

-5.843***
(0.42)
4,135.07
4,186.75

-1.237***
(0.26)
4,760.92
4,812.59

Table C1 –Coefficients for exponential random graph models for fighting edges in the 2011-12
season. The first model uses the actual number of fighting penalties given to each player and
actual differences in fighting rates to estimate the likelihood of edge formation, the second model
uses the numbers of fighting penalties predicted by the negative binomial models.

47

