Preprint: May 10, 2019

osf.io/0000

Why should financial aid affect university participation? A
review of the literature
Elena Vettoretto, Davide Azzolini, Loris Vergolini

Abstract
This contribution reviews the literature on the role of financial aid in enhancing university
participation. This aim will be reached through three main steps. First, we describe a theoretical
framework based on rational action theory that could explain the effects exerted by the different
measures. Second, we analyse the main forms of financial aid developed by the policy makers
in Europe and in the US. More precisely, we look at the role played by: grants, tuition fees,
loans and a novel approach in the financial aid debate: asset building. The paper attempts to
provide an overview of the different measures’ effects on enrolment, academic performance
and completion. Third, based on the reviewed literature, the paper tries to derive some general
policy implications for the Italian case.
Keywords:

Financial aid, asset bulding, university participation

JEL codes:

A23, I22, H52

Financial aid and university participation

1. Introduction
Inequality of educational opportunity (IEO henceforth) is still a crucial concern in many
advanced countries. Despite a little decrease occurred in the past decades, IEO remains high in
many western countries (Breen et al. 2009; Ballarino et al. 2008). Inequalities between social
strata are evident in both educational attainment and achievement, determining consequent
inequalities in the intergenerational mobility chances. Therefore, increasing participation in
higher education of young people from disadvantaged background has been one of major
concern for policy makers. The majority of the programmes designed to enhance university
participation are designed to provide monetary resources through different kind of programmes
such as loans, tax deductions, tuition fees waiver and scholarships. In this paper we aim to
review the main form of financial aid to understand which are the channels through they work
and which kind of inequalities they should address.
The next section is devoted to the illustration of the theoretical framework that will
guide the description of the effects of the different forms of financial aid described in the third
section. The final section summarises the results of the review and try to develop some policy
lessons.

2. Theoretical background
Financial aid policies assume that lower class students do not enrol at the university because of
liquidity constraints. The idea is that they are not in the position to deal with the direct and
indirect costs connected with higher education. Hence, the logic behind this kind of policy is to
provide economic relief in order to make them able to bear the costs and foster their academic
career.
However, liquidity constraints do not fully explain inequalities in education: factors that
explain IEO include cultural and economic resources. An important contribution in
understanding IEO comes from Boudon (1974) who breaks down the total effect of social origin
on educational attainment into primary and secondary effects. Primary effects refer to all those
condition that affect the ability of pupils to more or less well satisfy the learning requirements
at school. They are expressed through the association between children’s social origins and
their school performances: parental class and education affect the educational achievements of
children, which in turn predicts the educational career choices. Elaborating on the work of
Boudon, children from higher socioeconomic background have better performances in lower
secondary schools and this leads them to enrol more often in academic tracks, and consequently
to a major participation to tertiary education. Jackson et al. (2007) show that the performance’s
distributions are differentiated by social class, with children from the salariat performing better
than the intermediate and working classes. However, differences in the educational choices
occur even when their academic performances are substantially the same. Indeed, educational
attainment is deeply influenced by economic resources available for each class. Hence,
secondary effects can be understood as the effect of social origins on educational choices
keeping constant the educational performances. The idea is that, following the rational action
theory (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997; Goldthorpe 2000), children from different social classes
will deal differently with the direct and indirect costs of education. The assumption of the socalled Breen-Goldthorpe model is that children and their families in their choices consider the
2

SocArXiv

potential benefit (B) of the educational path weighted by the probability of success (P) and the
(direct and indirect) costs (C) of attending this path:
=

∙

−

A rational actor will choose a path able to maximise their utility: among different
educational paths, children would take the one that guarantees higher benefits and higher
probability of success and requires lower costs. The mechanism underlying the rational action
theory includes the sensitivity to the so-called risk aversion. Students wish first to avoid
downward social mobility. Therefore, in order to maintain their social position, children from
higher social classes are compelled to attend academic track and afterwards the university.
While the offspring of lower social classes tend to enrol in less demanding tracks since the risk
of failure the costs linked to this choice are lower and they are sufficient to guarantee
intergenerational stability in social position (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997). Moreover, the choice
of an academic track for the lower-class families compared to the other classes can result not
only in a loss per se but also in additional costs whether they shift to a non-academic track.
Moreover, in context like Italy, where the access to university is guaranteed independently by
the high school track, the choice of a non-academic track could be also a sort of parachute for
lower-class students. Indeed, in particular the technical track prepares students for the labour
market, but thanks to the curricula centred on scientific subject, a good student can enrol and
conclude a remunerative field of study at the university level (Vergolini and Vlach 2017).
Going back to primary effects, they can be explained by means of cultural capital theory
(CCT) that is based on three assumptions (Bourdieu, 1986). First, each social stratum in any
given society has its own culture, expressed by shared values, lifestyle and language. Second,
there is the perception of a shared hierarchy between each culture and the implicit reception of
the standards of the upper classes as the dominant cultural standards. Third, dominant cultural
standards are taken for granted by educational institution, since they are continuatively
expressed through the teachers and textbooks, both reflecting the high-class standard.
Consequently, children of the upper classes have better performances because they are favoured
by the proximity between school and family cultural standards. Children coming from a highclass family find it easier to adapt and fulfil educational requirements because of their
familiarity with the culture expressed by educational institution. Barone (2006) provides
empirical evidence for the CCT, showing that cultural capital conceived in terms of possession
and communication has a strong positive influence on reading literacy in all 25 countries
examined. Furthermore, van de Werfhorst and Hofstede (2007) provide a test for CCT and RAT
to explain IEO in the Netherlands, concluding that differentials in performances are accounted
for the CCT rather than the RAT, while ambitions are better explained by RAT.1 Primary and
secondary effects are strongly interdependent so that it is difficult to estimate their separate
effect, since they blend with each other at every school transition. Indeed, what we identify as
1

One of the most widespread alternative to the cultural capital theory is the Pygmalion effect that is linked to the
idea of the self-fulfilling prophecy. Teachers have their own expectations concerning the performance of students
coming from different social classes: they expect children of the higher classes to perform better and
unconsciously act in a way that their expectations are fulfilled, in part devoting major amount of time and effort
to high-class students and unfairly evaluating student’s performance. Moreover, students on which the
expectations are higher tend to behave coherently with the expectations looming on them and thus having better
performances compared to those students who are expected to have worse academic results.

3

Financial aid and university participation

primary effects may include underlying secondary mechanisms. Moreover, the intensity of
primary and secondary effects can vary according to different educational transitions. At the
higher transitions there is a major homogeneity in terms of performance among students from
different social classes, because of selection at earlier transitions, hence secondary effects are
stronger at higher transitions, while primary effects are stronger at earlier transition, selecting
individuals transiting to the higher educational levels.
However, the acknowledge of the division into primary and secondary effects allows
for a better understanding of IEO and its causes and thus for the outline of more effective
solutions in order to reduce educational differentials between social strata. Therefore, if the
policy maker wants to foster participation in higher education, policies should act on both
primary and secondary effects, through different kind of programmes. For what concerns
primary effects, solutions should compensate early in life deficits in home learning environment
through public institutions and to offer support for weak learners. While the solutions that aim
to reduce secondary effects should focus mainly on the reduction of the costs of education for
students with scarce economic resources. Moreover, policy may aim to reduce the stratification
level of the education systems by postponing early selection to different school tracks as well
as providing better information about the different educational options.
However, the implementation of a policy requires the availability to sufficient economic
resources, contributing to harden the decisional process leading to a valuable solution, because
of a lack of resources. Consequently, it seems important to individuate what of the two effects
plays a major role in increasing educational inequalities, in order to elaborate the most efficient
intervention.

3. Effects of financial aid
In this section we provide an overview of the mostly widespread approaches to the reduction
of the costs of tertiary education, conceived both as direct costs (e.g., tuition and books) and
indirect costs (e.g., forgone income). More precisely, we are going to look at the role played by
tuition, loans, grants and asset building. Even if these measures are intended to reduce the costs
connected to the higher education participation, they can work through different mechanisms.
3.1. Tuition
As already mentioned, the costs connected to higher education are a crucial concern for the
educational choices of students from low-income families. Indeed, tuition fees represent one of
the possible direct costs of education that students have to deal with when they decide to enrol
at the university. For what concerns the US, Long (2004) analyses the effect of tuition fees for
three cohort of students (1972, 1982 and 1992). She finds that fees are an important determinant
for enrolment decision in the oldest cohort, but they do not have explicative power for the more
recent cohort. Hemelt and Marcotte (2011) also found a negative relationship with tuition
increase and enrolment decisions. More precisely, a $100 increase in tuition would lead to a
decline in enrolment of about 0.25 percent. In line with these results, measures allowing parents
to-lock in today’s tuition for a future enrolment are found to be positively related to enrolment
decisions (Shen 2016). More recently, Chen (2016) confirmed the negative impact of college

4

SocArXiv

costs on student enrolment in a study conducted on full-time resident freshman in a four-year
teaching institution in the years 2001-2013.
However, these studies, carried out in North America, analyse the effect of tuition
increases from already high tuition costs, while we have little knowledge about the relationship
between moderate tuition and enrolment decision in European countries. Hübner (2012),
exploiting the introduction of tuition fees in some German Länder as a natural experiment, tries
to fill this gap. He finds that this discontinuity in the costs of tertiary education at an annual rate
of 1000€ has a negative effect on enrolment decisions in the Länder which introduced tuition
fees. In the UK, Sà (2014) stresses that enrolment decrease in response to higher tuition fees
and the relationship is stronger according to the field of study: graduate courses with lower
expected salaries and employment chances after graduation have fewer application when the
tuition fees increase. Moreover, Sà also finds that there is no evidence of a larger effect for
students from lower class families. While Geven (2012), analysing the impact of the increase
of undergraduate tuition fees to £9,000 (€11.000), highlights a decrease in the enrolments by
15% in the treated groups as a result of the tuition fee increase. The increase of tuition fees has
particularly negative consequences for students coming from service class families, while the
decline in enrolments is not visible for students from the working class. More evidence of the
negative effect that tuition fees have on participation comes also from Dearden et al. (2011): an
increase of £1,000 in fees results in a decline in participation of 3.9 percentage points.
Furthermore, contrarily Karay and Matthes (2016), analysing the effect of tuitions on Cologne
medical students, find no effect on discontinuation rate or study duration. However, there is a
significant increase in time spent on earning money.
In the last years, several countries have considered to introduce tuition fees in tertiary
education institutions, while other economies are increasing them. In particular, the AngloSaxon educational system has always had the tendency to fix student tuition fees, resulting in a
more competitive model and with higher rates than the other countries (Escardìbul Ferrà et al.
2017). However, it is crucial that the policy maker that wants to increase or introduce the tuition
fees considers the negative impact of this decision on academic choices. Moreover, he/she
should also plan the implementation or the strengthening of specific measures (i.e., financial
aid) intended to mitigate the negative effects of tuition fees. Indeed, Rivard and Raymond
(2004) reveal that in Canada the tuition levels do not have a negative impact on transitions from
school to post-secondary education due to the presence of well-designed financial aid.
3.2. Loans
In the US over the past twenty years, loans have become increasingly prominent as a means of
financing tertiary education, until the point of raising concern about their efficacy and about the
risk of huge indebtment for the students who cannot afford the university costs.
Students who do not qualify for need-based financial aid programmes, due to a higher
Expected Family Contribution (EFC), are usually eligible for federal loan programmes (Long
and Riley 2007). The largest and most studied loan program is the Stafford Loan Programme,
half of which are need-based subsidized loans, whose interests are paid by the government,
while the other half are unsubsidized (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2006). Furthermore, another
need-based federal programme is the Perkins Loan Programme, which is managed directly by
the Universities and it was cancelled on 30 September 2017. Finally, another widespread Loan
5

Financial aid and university participation

Programme is the PLUS Loan Programme (Parent Loan for Undergraduate Students), which is
given to families of a dependent undergraduate students. What all these loan programmes have
in common is that at the end of the academic career, students have to repay the accumulated
debt, even if they are not able to graduate (Long and Riley 2007).
However, loans are the most controversial among all kind of financial aid programmes.
Therefore, independently from the academic outcomes, borrowing can have dangerous
consequences on students’ future lives. According to Dynarski (2016), US graduates owe $1.3
trillion in student loans, seven million borrowers are in default and even more in arrears.
Repayment burdens (RB) are indeed very large, moreover low-earner graduate students
struggle even more, particularly in their early career. However, as Barr et al. (2017) point out
a well-designed loan can protect low-earning graduates from defaulting or experiencing
financial distress, while simultaneously ensuring that taxpayer subsidies are kept low. Indeed,
concerns about RB do not arise in countries with income-contingent loan (ICL) because the
inherent design of these systems imposes an upper bound on RBs and hence avoids repayment
problems. ICLs ensure consumption smoothing and provide insurance against the adverse
exigencies that can lead to default (Barr et al. 2017).
However, as mentioned, empirical evidence provides controversial results, for both
enrolment and performance. For what concerns enrolment, in the US Malcom and Dowd
(2012), in a study conducted on STEM bachelor’s degree holders, show that undergraduate debt
has a negative effect on immediate post‑baccalaureate investments. While in Germany,
Baumgartner and Steiner (2005) analysed the effect of a policy shift in federal student aid in
Germany introduced by the BAföG (Berufsausbildungsfoerderungsgesetz) reform in 1990. It
ratified a change of the repayment regulations by reducing the debt burden by 50 percent. The
underlying assumption was that enrolment rates would raise together with the participation of
low-income students, but the results show that there is no effect of the reform on enrolment.
Although there is evidence that increasing non-repayable assistance leads to an increase
in enrolment probability, loans appear to increase only the probability of youth living away
from their parents’ house while studying. This group has a very high probability of receiving
the maximum student loan, given their higher assessed living expenses. Students whose parents
have relatively low education levels are also affected to a significant extent, while those whose
parents have relatively high education levels are not affected at all (Neill, 2008).
Studies about the effects of loans on persistence in the community colleges find that
borrowing during the first year has a positive effect on persistence at the end of the first year,
but it exerts a negative effect on persistence measured three and 6 years after initial enrolment
(McKinney and Burridge 2015). Moreover, loans do not contribute to higher persistence and
attainment rates. Indeed, has been observed that loans have a negative effect on persistence and
no effect on degree attainment (Dowd and Coury 2006). On the other side there is some
evidence about the positive effects of loans on credits and GPA: with a $4000 loan resulting in
a 3.7 credit and a 0.6 GPA increase over the academic year (Marx and Turner 2017)
3.3. Grants
Previous studies on the effects of grants on academic outcomes provide ambiguous results. This
is due to the differences in context in which the programmes are implemented and the eligibility
rules implied (see Herbaut and Geven (2019) for a detailed review). As for the former, the
6

SocArXiv

differences in the costs of education across countries and the variety of economic incentives
which support university students, make it difficult to compare studies in different countries.
While the latter may have important consequences in terms of social inequalities, since they are
crucial in determining who should benefit from the programme. Here we divide eligibility into
two categories: merit-based and need-based. The former may advantage students from higher
social strata due to the strong positive association between social origins and educational
attainment. On the other side, the need-based grants could push towards higher education even
those students who lack of motivation and ability.
In the US, Dynarski (2000) and Cornwell et al. (2006) show that HOPE, which is a
merit-based grant, has a positive effect on higher education attendance, while Goodman (2008)
finds that the Massachusetts' Adams Scholarship has a non-significant effect on college
enrolment rate, but it positively influences students in choosing a public college instead of a
private one.
On the other side, the studies on the need-based grants are more widespread than those
based on merit and the results are similarly ambiguous. Hansen (1983) and Kane (1994, 1995)
find no significant effects for the Pell grant, while Manski and Wise (1983) and Seftor and
Turner (2002) find a significant effect of the Pell grant. Moreover, Dynarski (2003) finds
significant effects for the Social Security Student Benefit Programme that was addressed to
children of deceased or retired social security beneficiaries. Similarly, Bettinger (2015) and
Castleman and Long (2016) show a positive effect on college attendance at public four-year
institutions together with an increased early persistence and the cumulative number of credits
and students earned in their first year at college. Furthermore, Castleman and Long (2016) show
also that the Florida Student Assistance Grant programme increased the likelihood of obtaining
a bachelor’s degree within six years in a public university. Goldrick-Rab (2016) states that grant
aid contributes to the attenuation of inequality in college graduation. Indeed, she provides new
experimental evidence indicating that increasing need-based grant aid is an effective tool for
inducing students to remain in college, earn more credits and better grades and to graduate on
time. According to Broton et al. (2016), an additional grant offered in Wisconsin succeed in
reducing the likelihood to work and the working hours of students from low-income families.
Moreover, for those who decide to work despite this grant, the programme was able to improve
the quality of work. Indeed, eligible students star to work less during the morning hours, or
overnight.
At the same time, financial aid combining merit and need show a positive relationship
with several academic outcomes. Angrist et al. (2016) finds positive effects on college
enrolment and persistence. The scholarship recipients were more likely to enrol, and the gains
are larger for non-white applicants, first generation college-goers and students with the lowest
grades and test scores in the eligible applicant pool. Scholarships also shift many students from
two- to four-year colleges. Despite their substantial gains in four-year college enrolment, the
recipients were less likely to graduate on time than controls, suggesting that scholarship may
delay degree completion for some students. Moreover, Boatman and Long (2016) show a
positive effect on a few academic and social engagement behaviours of recipients of the Gates
Millennium Scholars (GMS) Programme. They find weak evidence that he scholarship
influences college performances, but the results indicate that GMS has a positive effect on the
time students spend interacting with peers and performing community service.
7

Financial aid and university participation

Contrasting results are found also in Europe where the cost of attending university is
substantially lower. Lauer (2002) and Steiner and Wrohlich (2012) stress that the monetary
benefits supplied by the BAföG programme positively influenced the enrolment rates of
German students. The effectiveness of BAföG is not so clear because Baumgartner and Steiner
(2005) find non-significant effects of the programme on the student decision of attending
university.
In Italy, there are few studies about the effectiveness of financial aid. For what concerns
the main national programme (the Right to Education), Mealli and Rampichini (2012) provide
evidence of a positive effect of Italian university grants on reducing drop-out from tertiary
education in four Italian universities. While Agasisti and Murtinu (2016) find that financial aid
positively affects students’ performances and completion in a substantial and statistically robust
way, suggesting that the scholarship design contributes to reducing the probability of delayed
graduation. These results are confirming by two recent papers that exploit datasets at national
level (Modena et al. 2018; Facchini et al. 2019)
Looking at programmes that combine eligibility rules (merit and need), Covizzi et al.
(2012), Vergolini and Zanini (2013, 2015) and Vergolini et al. (2014) analyse the impact of a
grant implementation in the Italian province of Trento. They find out that the programme does
not have any effect on enrolment, but it has a significant influence in enrolling in a university
outside the province of Trento. Exploring the heterogeneity of this effect, the effect is higher
for students who moved to another region for studying and students attending the medical field.
3.4. Asset Building Programmes
Asset building programmes are incentivized savings programmes that help individuals and
families building long-term assets such as post-secondary education. This kind of programmes
are substantially different from other more traditional financial aid solutions. Low-income
families participating in these programmes are incentivized to save regularly a minimum
amount of money before their children enter college. A private donor or a public institution will
then multiply the final amount saved. Some of these programmes requires that all the expenses
must be related to educational purposes. The difference with traditional financial aid lies in the
active involvement of students and their families in the process, well before the decision to go
to college is taken. This involvement could enhance students’ motivation in participating to
higher education. This means that the possible effect of an asset building programme can affect
educational choices through two different channels. The first operates reducing the liquidity
constraints, while the second works in enhancing motivation and in creating a sort of collegebound identity (Elliot et al. 2011; Beverly et al. 2013).
Asset building programmes are mid- and long-term intervention, born in the US in the
‘80 and today widespread in other Anglo-Saxon countries and addressed to the economically
weak segments of the population, they emerged as a tool for fighting poverty and social
exclusion through the integrated savings mechanism.
An example of asset building in education is the Individual Development Accounts
(IDAs), that is a special savings accounts with savings subsidized for low-income families
(Sherraden 2014). To assess the impact of IDAs, the American Dream Demonstration (ADD)
was developed. This project shows that an IDA programme can have significant positive
impacts on asset building among low-income individuals. Indeed, the average monthly net
8

SocArXiv

savings is over 16$ for the treatment group and significantly higher for those defined as “active
savers” (Schreiner and Sherraden 2007). It is relevant to stress that also students from lowincome families tend to save and they save higher proportions of their incomes than students
from wealthy families.
Another IDA experiment has been carried out in Canada and it known as Learn$ave. It
targets asset building for education and livelihoods (Kingwell et al. 2004). Low-income
Canadians recruited into Learn$ave widely use the accounts and financial incentives offered by
the project. Nearly all opened an account, most saved something and indeed average deposits
amounted to about $1,100 over three years, and most used the matched credits. The Learn$ave
project also shows that a matched saving programme can be effective in promoting regular
saving behaviour and financial integration among low income people. Learn$ave demonstrates
that an IDA programme with a generous incentive to induce savings could contribute to increase
the number of low-income Canadians enrolling in education in a non-negligible way.
In Australia the Saver Plus programme provides evidence of high levels of continued
saving behaviour, better financial management and improved quality of life. This study also
shows the programme benefits to their children and family when financial skills and saving
habits were shared (Russel et al. 2008).
Similarly, to the IDA programmes, Individual Development Accounts (CDA) policies
are focused on asset building as well, but targeted to children development, education and
lifelong well-being. However, saving behaviour is not its primary focus, more attention is
dedicated to the effects of the programme on asset building for child development in terms of
education achievement and attainment (Sherraden 2014).
Even if asset building programmes in education are available now in several countries
(Loke and Sherraden 2009; Beverly et al. 2013), the evidence about their effectiveness is still
poor. The few studies that try to evaluate the effects of these programmes find remarkable
positive impacts on financial literacy and saving behaviour (Russel et al. 2008; Leckie et al.
2010; Elliot and Sherraden 2013; Mills et al. 2016) and on postsecondary education enrolment
rates (Leckie et al. 2010; Cheatham and Elliot 2013; Grinstein-Weiss et al. 2013). In the United
States, the number asset building programmes targeted to children’s educational attainment
(Children’s Savings Account, CSA) is on the rise, but robust evidence on their effectiveness is
limited to important, yet intermediate, outcomes, such savings behaviours, child social
emotional wellbeing and parental educational expectations (Markoff et al. 2018).
In Italy, a randomized controlled trial, called ACHAB (Affording College with the Help
of Asset Building) was conducted to assess the effects of subsidized savings on college
enrolment and performance (Azzolini et al. 2018). Students and their families can save up to €
2000 that will be supplemented with a 4:1 matching multiplier by a private donor. The results
of the experiment show a positive and huge effect on both enrolment and persistence (i.e. a
decline in the drop-out risks)
Asset building applied to education has several strengths. First, it foresees a mixed of
public and private resources that fit well with the idea that higher education can be intended at
the same time as a private and public good. Indeed, people invest in education in order to have
higher income, but at the same time, a high share of tertiary educated people is connected with
economic development (Hanushek and Woessmann 2015) and “civicness” (Almond and Verba
1963). Moreover, the possibility if saving for the university during the high school could lead
9

Financial aid and university participation

to a change in behaviours and attitudes toward school by the participant and their families. The
idea, as stressed before, is that asset building could enhance students’ motivation in pursuing
their studies beyond high school and at the same time to increase parental involvement: all
factors positively connected with university enrolment.
Despite these favourable points, a weakness point that should be taken into
consideration by policy makers and programme staff is the risk of regressivity embedded in
such programmes. The capability of saving is not equal for all the families below the income
threshold established by the policy maker. More precisely, poorest families could have more
problems in saving even small amounts of money leading to further social inequalities: the
poorest will have also the smallest benefit. To ensure equity in these programmes, it is
important, that these programmes are targeted to the most-in-need population and/or that these
programmes entail some extra support for the poorest households (e.g., higher match rates or
the provision of an initial seed).

4. Conclusions
In this paper we reviewed the literature on the effects of the main policies and programmes
centred on monetary subsidies aimed at enhancing university participation. From a theoretical
point of view, as highlighted in section 2, all these measures are intended to reduce the so-called
secondary effects being focused only on the costs’ reduction for students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. In general, the decision to enrol at the university can be seen as a
function of three distinct elements: i) costs; ii) expected returns; and iii) probability of success.
Financial aid is capable of modify only the first factor and nothing can do on the other two. In
particular, expected returns are linked primarily to the chosen field of study (Triventi et al.
2017) and to the economic situation (Vergolini 2018), while the probability of success strongly
depends on the previous school career in terms of grade retention, marks and above all in terms
of high school tracking. It is well known that graduating from an academic track provides higher
chances to enrol at the university than having studied in a technical or vocational track (Azzolini
and Vergolini 2014). Moreover, the choice of the tracking is deeply influenced by social origins
(Panichella and Triventi 2014; Romito 2016; Guetto and Vergolini 2017).
Given this state of affairs, it is clear why financial aid tends to perform better in the US,
where tuition fees and, in general, the direct costs are very high. For other contexts, such as
Italy, it becomes fundamental to design accurately the policies in order to target the right
population (i.e. those students who can benefit more from the measure). On this point, the policy
maker has to be clear about the rationale of the policy: does he/she want to reward the merit or
does he/she want to increase university participation? In the first case, grants should be awarded
only on the basis of merit, measured through academic and school performances. In the second
situation, the access to the programme has to be granted on the basis of financial need to identify
the so-called marginal students. The targeting procedure is a fundamental step to reduce the
deadweight: the share of students that would go at the university even in the absence of the
incentive. For these students a grant is useless and it will be a waste of money.
Furthermore, a monetary benefit granted via standard financial aid programmes could
not be enough to modify people choices for two reasons. First, the choice to enrol at the
university is not taken at the very last moment, where the decision to enrol in a financial aid
programme is taken. Parents and their children form their higher education expectations and
10

SocArXiv

their beliefs concerning the affordability of college well before. Hence, it is important that
financial aid takes up an early commitment strategy and that involves individuals when they
are still in high school or even before. In this regard, the potential of asset-building approaches
like Children’s Savings Accounts is evident as they give families a higher certainty concerning
college financial affordability and help them form higher and more realistic educational
expectations (Markoff et al. 2018). . Finally, students from disadvantaged socio-economic
backgrounds could have a biased perception of the economic returns of university, as well as
the necessary workload to complete the university. These beliefs have a strong influence in the
formation of risk aversion and they could be changed implementing guidance or counselling
interventions addressed to students and their families (Barone et al. 2017; Elhert et al. 2017).
These programmes should guide them through a better understanding of the university offer
and of the returns to education and of higher education in particular correcting in this way
student misperceptions. In other words, programmes based on information and guidance can be
particularly useful in helping children from disadvantaged socio-economic backgrounds to
navigate the higher education landscape.

11

Financial aid and university participation

References
Agasisti, T., & Murtinu, S. (2016). Grants in Italian university: a look at the heterogeneity of
their impact on students' performances. Studies in Higher Education, 41(6), 1106-1132.
Angrist, J., Autor, D., Hudson, S., & Pallais, A. (2016). Updated Results from a Randomized
Evaluation of Post-Secondary Aid, Columbia University, working paper.
Almond, G. A., & Verba, S. (1963). The civic culture: Political attitudes and democracy in five
nations. Princeton: Princeton university press.
Azzolini, D., & Vergolini, L. (2014). Tracking, inequality and education policy. Looking for a
recipe for the Italian case. Scuola democratica, (2), published online.
Azzolini, D., Martini, A., Romano, B., & Vergolini, L. (2018). Affording college with the help
of asset building: First experimental impacts from Italy. Economics Letters, 169, 27-30.
Ballarino, G., Bernardi, F., Requena, M., & Schadee, H. (2008). Persistent inequalities?
Expansion of education and class inequality in Italy and Spain. European Sociological
Review, 25(1), 123-138.1
Barone, C. (2006). Cultural capital, ambition and the explanation of inequalities in learning
outcomes: A comparative analysis. Sociology, 40(6), 1039-1058.
Barone, C., Schizzerotto, A., Abbiati, G., & Argentin, G. (2017). Information barriers, social
inequality, and plans for higher education: Evidence from a field experiment. European
Sociological Review, 33(1), 84-96.
Barr, N., Chapman, B., Dearden, L., & Dynarski, S. (2017). Getting student financing right in
the US: lessons from Australia and England. Centre for Global Higher Education.
Baumgartner, H. J., & Steiner, V. (2005). Student aid, repayment obligations and enrolment
into higher education in Germany–evidence from a ‘natural experiment’. Schmollers
Jahrbuch, 125(1), 29-38.
Bettinger, E. (2015). Need-based aid and college persistence: the effects of the Ohio College
Opportunity Grant. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37(1_suppl), 102S-119S.
Beverly, S. G., Elliott, W., & Sherraden, M. (2013). Child Development Accounts and college
success: Accounts, assets, expectations, and achievements. CSD Perspective 13-27.
Boatman, A., & Long, B. T. (2016). Does Financial Aid Impact College Student
Engagement? Research in Higher Education, 57(6), 653-681.
Breen, R., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (1997). Explaining educational differentials: Towards a formal
rational action theory. Rationality and society, 9(3), 275-305.
Breen, R., Luijkx, R., Müller, W., & Pollak, R. (2009). Nonpersistent inequality in educational
attainment: Evidence from eight European countries. American Journal of Sociology, 114(5),
1475-1521.
Broton, K. M., Goldrick-Rab, S., & Benson, J. (2016). Working for college: The causal impacts
of financial grants on undergraduate employment. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis, 38(3), 477-494.
12

SocArXiv

Boudon, R. (1974). Education, opportunity, and social inequality: Changing prospects in
western society. New York, John Wiley and Sons.
Bourdieu, P. (1986) The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.) Handbook of Theory and
Research for the Sociology of Education, New York, Greenwood, 241-258.
Castleman, B. L., & Long, B. T. (2016). Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect of needbased grants on college access, persistence, and graduation. Journal of Labor
Economics, 34(4), 1023-1073.
Cheatham, G. A., & Elliott, W. (2013). The effects of family college savings on postsecondary
school enrollment rates of students with disabilities. Economics of Education Review, 33, 95111.
Chen, S. J. (2016). College costs, freshman enrollment, and student quality: Evidence from an
urban state university. International Journal of Information and Education Technology, 6(9),
664.
Cornwell, C., Mustard, D. B., & Sridhar, D. J. (2006). The enrollment effects of merit-based
financial aid: Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE program. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(4),
761-786.
Covizzi, I., Vergolini, L., & Zanini, N. (2012). Gli effetti degli incentivi monetari a favore degli
studenti universitari. Una valutazione di impatto. Polis, 26(1), 5-32.
Dearden, L., Fitzsimons, E., & Wyness, G. (2011). The impact of tuition fees and support on
university participation in the UK. IFS Working Papers, No. W11/17.
Dowd, A. C., & Coury, T. (2006). The effect of loans on the persistence and attainment of
community college students. Research in higher education, 47(1), 33-62.
Dynarski, S. (2000). Hope for whom? Financial aid for the middle class and its impact on
college attendance. NBER Working paper, No. w7756.
Dynarski, S. M. (2003). Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college
attendance and completion. American Economic Review, 93(1), 279-288.
Dynarski, S. M. & Scott-Clayton, J. E. (2006). The Cost Of Complexity In Federal Student Aid:
Lessons From Optimal Tax Theory And Behavioral Economics. National Tax Journal, 59(2),
319-356.
Dynarski, S. (2016). The trouble with student loans? Low earnings, not high debt. Brookings
Note.
Escardìbul Ferrà J. O., Perez-Esparrells, C., Torre-Garcìa, E., Sequera, S. M. (2017). Tuition
Fees in Spanish Public Universities: A Regional Convergence Analysis Precios de matrícula en
las universidades públicas españolas: Un análisis de convergencia regional. Estudios Sobre
Educación, 32, 197-221.
Ehlert, M., Finger, C., Rusconi, A., & Solga, H. (2017). Applying to college: Do information
deficits lower the likelihood of college-eligible students from less-privileged families to pursue
their college intentions?: Evidence from a field experiment. Social science research, 67, 193212.
13

Financial aid and university participation

Elliott, W., & Sherraden, M. (2013). Assets and educational achievement: Theory and
evidence. Economics of Education Review, 33, 1-7.
Elliott, W., Choi, E. H., Destin, M., & Kim, K. H. (2011). The age old question, which comes
first? A simultaneous test of children's savings and children's college-bound identity. Children
and Youth Services Review, 33(7), 1101-1111.
Herbaut, E., & Geven, K. M. (2019). What Works to Reduce Inequalities in Higher Education?
A Systematic Review of the (Quasi-) Experimental Literature on Outreach and Financial
Aid. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper (8802).
Facchini, M., Triventi, M., & Vergolini, L. (2019). Do Grants Improve the Outcomes of
University Students in a Context with High Dropout Rates? Evidence from a Matching
Approach. SocArXiv, 8 Apr. 2019.
Geven, K. (2012). Equity of what?. Understanting Policy for equity in higher education. MA
thesis, Department of Public policy, Central European University.
Goldrick-Rab, S. (2016). Paying the price: College costs, financial aid, and the betrayal of the
American dream. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Goldthorpe, J. H. (2000). On sociology: Numbers, narratives, and the integration of research
and theory. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Goodman, J. (2008). Who merits financial aid?: Massachusetts' Adams scholarship. Journal of
public Economics, 92(10), 2121-2131.
Grinstein-Weiss, M., Sherraden, M., Gale, W. G., Rohe, W. M., Schreiner, M., & Key, C.
(2013). Long-term effects of Individual Development Accounts on postsecondary education:
Follow-up evidence from a randomized experiment. Economics of Education Review, 33, 5868.
Guetto, R., & Vergolini, L. (2017). Educational expansion without equalization: a reappraisal
of the ‘Effectively Maintained Inequality’hypothesis in children’s choice of the upper
secondary track. European Societies, 19(1), 1-27.
Hanushek, E. A., & Woessmann, L. (2015). The knowledge capital of nations: Education and
the economics of growth. MIT press.
Hansen, W. L. (1983). Impact of student financial aid on access. Proceedings of the Academy
of Political Science, 35(2), 84-96.
Hemelt, S. W., & Marcotte, D. E. (2011). The impact of tuition increases on enrollment at
public colleges and universities. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(4), 435-457.
Hübner, M. (2012). Do tuition fees affect enrollment behavior? Evidence from a ‘natural
experiment’in Germany. Economics of Education Review, 31(6), 949-960.
Jackson, M., Erikson, R., Goldthorpe, J. H., & Yaish, M. (2007). Primary and secondary effects
in class differentials in educational attainment: The transition to A-level courses in England and
Wales. Acta Sociologica, 50(3), 211-229.
Kane, T. J. (1994). College entry by blacks since 1970: The role of college costs, family
background, and the returns to education. Journal of political Economy, 102(5), 878-911.
14

SocArXiv

Kane, T. J. (1995). Rising public college tuition and college entry: How well do public subsidies
promote access to college? (No. w5164). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Karay, Y., & Matthes, J. (2016). A study on effects of and stance over tuition fees. GMS journal
for medical education, 33(1).
Kingwell, P., Dowie, M., Holler, B., & Jimenez, L. (2004). Helping people help themselves: An
early look at Learn $ ave. Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Lauer, C. (2002). Enrolments in higher education: do economic incentives matter?. Education+
Training, 44(4/5), 179-185.
Leckie, N., Hui, T. S. W., Tattrie, D., Robson, J., & Voyer, J. P. (2009). Learning to save,
saving to learn. Toronto: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation. Retrieved
February, 16, 2010.
Loke, V., & Sherraden, M. (2009). Building assets from birth: A global comparison of child
development account policies. International Journal of Social Welfare, 18(2), 119-129.
Long, B. T. (2004). How have college decisions changed over time? An application of the
conditional logistic choice model. Journal of econometrics, 121(1), 271-296.
Long, B. T., & Riley, E. (2007). Financial aid: A broken bridge to college access?. Harvard
Educational Review, 77(1), 39-63.
Malcom, L. E., & Dowd, A. C. (2012). The impact of undergraduate debt on the graduate school
enrollment of STEM baccalaureates. The Review of Higher Education, 35(2), 265-305.
Manski, C. F., & Wise, D. A. (1983). College choice in America. Harvard, Harvard University
Press.
Markoff, S., Loya, R. & Santos J. (2018). Quick Guide to CSA Research: An Overview of
Evidence on Children’s Savings Account. Prosperity Now report.
Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. (2017). Student Loan Nudges: Experimental Evidence on
Borrowing and Educational Attainment (No. w24060). National Bureau of Economic Research.
McKinney, L., & Burridge, A. B. (2015). Helping or hindering? The effects of loans on
community college student persistence. Research in Higher Education, 56(4), 299-324.
Mealli, F., & Rampichini, C. (2012). Evaluating the effects of university grants by using
regression discontinuity designs. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in
Society), 175(3), 775-798.
Mills, G., McKernan, S. M., Ratcliffe, C., Edelstein, S., Pergamit, M., Braga, B., & Elkin, S.
(2016). Building Savings for Success: Early Impacts from the Assets for Independence Program
Randomized Evaluation, Urban Institute Working Paper.
Modena, F., Tanzi, G. M., & Rettore, E. (2018). The effect of grants on university drop-out
rates: evidence on the Italian case. Temi di discussion No. 1193, Bank of Italy.
Neill, C. (2008). The effect of student loan limits on university enrolments. Canadian Labour
Market and Skills Researcher Network Working Paper.

15

Financial aid and university participation

Rivard, M., & Raymond, M. (2004). The effect of tuition fees on post-secondary education in
Canada in the late 1990s. Department of Finance Canada, No. 2004-09.
Romito, M. (2016). Una scuola di classe. Orientamento e disuguaglianza nelle transizioni
scolastiche (pp. 1-281). Milano: Guerini e Associati.
Sá, F. (2014). The effect of tuition fees on university applications and attendance: Evidence
from the UK. IZA Discussion Paper, No. 8364.
Schreiner, M., & Sherraden, M. W. (2007). Can the poor save?: saving & asset building in
individual development accounts. New Brunswick, Transaction Publishers.
Seftor, N. S., & Turner, S. E. (2002). Back to school: Federal student aid policy and adult
college enrollment. Journal of Human resources, 336-352.
Shen, Y. (2016). The Effects of the State Prepaid Tuition Program on College Attainment.
Sherraden, M. (2014). Innovations in asset building. Asia Pacific Journal of Social Work and
Development, 24(3), 196-204.
Steiner, V., & Wrohlich, K. (2012). Financial student aid and enrollment in higher education:
New evidence from Germany. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 114(1), 124-147.
Triventi, M., Vergolini, L., & Zanini, N. (2017). Do individuals with high social background
graduate from more rewarding fields of study? Changing patterns before and after the ‘Bologna
process’. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 51, 28-40.
Van de Werfhorst, H. G., & Hofstede, S. (2007). Cultural capital or relative risk aversion? Two
mechanisms for educational inequality compared. The British journal of sociology, 58(3), 391415.
Vergolini, L. (2018). Social Inequalities in Higher Education Participation in Trentino from the
Bologna Process to the Great Recession (2000-2012). Italian Journal of Sociology of Education,
10(3), 269-296.
Vergolini, L., & Zanini, N. (2013). Designing effective educational policies: what can we learn
from an Italian case study. Educational Research and Evaluation, 19(5), 426-441.
Vergolini, L., & Zanini, N. (2015). Away, but not too far from home. The effects of financial
aid on university enrolment decisions. Economics of Education Review, 49, 91-109.
Vergolini, L., Zanini, N., & Bazoli, N. (2014). Liquidity Constraints and University
Participation in Times of Recession. Evidence from a Small-scale Programme. FBK-IRVAPP
Working paper (No. 2014-11)

16

