Wealth Stratification in the Early School Career in Germany
Jascha Dräger and Nora Müller
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences

Abstract
Recent research has established parental wealth as an important determinant of children’s
educational achievement. However, parental wealth is often ignored in research on social
inequality in education, or its influence is only considered at later stages of children’s educational
careers. Our paper contributes to this research by examining the relationship between parental
wealth and (1) children’s math competences at the beginning of primary school; (2) the
development of children’s competences throughout primary school; and (3) children’s transition
from primary to secondary school. We are looking at Germany, where the early ability tracking
may make an early investment in education particularly important. Analyzing data from the
German National Educational Panel Study, we find that parental wealth has a distinct association
with children’s educational outcomes that adds to social disparities by other measures of parents’
socioeconomic status (SES). Our results indicate that children in wealthy households have higher
competences already in the first grade. This advantage remains stable throughout primary school
and translates into a higher probability to attend the highest secondary school track. Moreover,
children in these wealthy households are more likely to attend the highest secondary school track,
net of differences in competences and performance. Our results imply that ignoring wealth as a
component of parental SES leads to an underestimation of the level of social inequality in
education in Germany.
Keywords
Educational Decisions; Mathematical Competence; Primary and Secondary Effects;
Stratification; Wealth

1

1. Introduction
Children’s parental social background crucially shapes their educational achievement, thus
reproducing social inequality between generations (Blau & Duncan, 1967). Studies have found
that children of parents with high socioeconomic status (SES) have on average higher
competences and show better performance in school than children with low SES (Bradley &
Corwyn, 2002). As a consequence of their better performance, they are more likely to make more
ambitious educational decisions (i.e., primary effect of social origin) and they are more likely to
receive higher educational degrees. Yet, children of parents with high SES make more ambitious
educational decisions even when they have the same competences and school performance as
children of parents with low SES (i.e., secondary effect of social origin) (Boudon, 1974; Jackson,
2013).
To approximate parental SES, researchers usually use measures of parental education, income or
occupational class. However, recent research on the United States, Sweden and Norway suggests
that parental wealth should be added to the existing measures comprising parental SES, to better
capture social inequalities in education (Elliott & Sherraden, 2013; Hällsten & Pfeffer, 2017;
Pfeffer, 2018; Wiborg, 2017). Ignoring wealth as a specific dimension of SES may result in an
underestimation of social stratification in education.
Wealth possesses specific features that are not captured by traditional measures of SES, but that
contribute to social stratification in unique ways. Wealth can stem either from self-accumulation
over one’s own life-course or from transfers (e.g., inter-vivo transfers or bequests). Unlike earned
income, education or occupational status, the accumulation of which generally requires time,
effort, and ability, transferred wealth offers access to capital and goods independently of the
individual’s decisions or their abilities. Because wealth is less volatile than income, it is a more
accurate indicator of an individual’s or household’s long-term consumption potential and
capacity to maintain a particular standard of living (Spilerman, 2000). Yet, wealth does not have
to be consumed in order to affect behavior. The mere expectation of incoming wealth and the
potential use of wealth can impact individual behavior (Brown, Coile, & Weisbenner, 2010).
The association between children’s competences and their educational performance with parental
wealth follows the same pattern as what previous research has found for other measures of
parental SES. Children of wealthy parents have higher competences and show better performance
2

in school as compared to children of less wealthy parents. In the United States, children in
wealthy households were found to have higher test scores in math than children of less wealthy
households (Friedline, Masa, & Chowa, 2015; Orr, 2003; Williams Shanks, 2007; Yeung &
Conley, 2008). The findings for the association between parental wealth and reading test scores
are, however, inconsistent (Elliott, Destin, & Friedline, 2011). For Sweden, Hällsten & Pfeffer
(2017) found a substantial positive association between parental wealth and children’s grade
point average (GPA) in the ninth grade. Wiborg (2017) observed the same for Norway. Cesarini,
Lindqvist, Östling, & Wallace (2016), however, found no association between lottery wins and
children’s competences or GPA in Sweden. This last finding suggests that wealth may have
different impacts on children’s educational outcomes, depending on whether children grow up
with the knowledge of the existence of parental wealth or not (Hällsten & Pfeffer, 2017, p. 331).
Additionally, parental wealth has been found to be associated with more ambitious educational
decisions and higher educational attainment. Research on the United States showed that children
of wealthy parents were more likely to attend college as compared to children with less wealthy
parents (Conley, 2001; Jez, 2014; Pfeffer, 2018; Zhan, 2006). In Sweden, children of wealthy
parents were also more likely to attend and graduate from academic secondary school tracks and
to choose tertiary fields of study, which are associated with higher earnings (Hällsten & Pfeffer,
2017; Hällsten & Thaning, 2018). In the only study on Germany, Pfeffer (2011) analyzed the
effect of parental wealth on children’s educational attainment measured as the number of years of
schooling attained. He found a positive and statistically significant association between parental
wealth and children’s educational attainment. While parental education shows the highest partial
correlation with children’s educational attainment, the correlation with parental wealth was of
similar magnitude as the correlations with income and occupational class.
The relationship between parental wealth and children’s educational outcomes can be expected to
become even more relevant in the future, given that wealth inequality has grown during the last
decades in most Western countries (Piketty & Zucman, 2014). Yet, important research gaps
remain. First, there is a lack of research in countries other than the United States, Norway, and
Sweden. The results for these countries are probably not generalizable to most other countries
because of different educational and welfare state systems.

3

Second, there are few studies on the relationship between parental wealth and children’s early
educational outcomes. But past research has shown that social stratification of competences
emerges already for young children (Feinstein, 2003; Linberg, Schneider, Waldfogel, & Wang,
2019) and that early investments in competences are more effective than later ones (Cunha &
Heckman, 2008). With regards to parental wealth, research has not yet shown when social
disparities emerge, nor how these develop throughout the early years of schooling.
Third, most existing studies on wealth stratification in education looked either at performance in
school or test scores or at educational decisions. Therefore, they cannot differentiate between
primary and secondary effects of parental wealth or they only hinted at this differentiation
(Hällsten & Pfeffer, 2017; Huang, Guo, Kim, & Sherraden, 2010). Policy implications, however,
would differ depending on whether primary or secondary effects are more relevant for children’s
educational outcomes.
In this paper, we aim to make two contributions to reduce these research gaps: First, we assess
the association between parental wealth and early educational outcomes in an institutional
context with an early and important educational decision, namely the transition to different
secondary school tracks after elementary school in Germany. This early tracking may make an
early investment in education particularly important. Within this context, we examine the
relationship between parental wealth and (1) children’s competences1 at the beginning of primary
school; (2) the development of competences throughout primary school; and (3) children’s
transition to secondary school.
Second, we integrate wealth stratification in the transition to secondary school tracks in the
framework of primary and secondary effects, both theoretically and empirically.

1

In line with the OECD (2013), we understand competences to “refer to the ability or capacity of
an agent to act appropriately in a given situation” (p. 19), especially to someone’s proficiency in
performing certain tasks. In this sense, competences can be used interchangeably with skills.
4

2. The German Context
2.1 Educational System
Similar to Scandinavian countries and in contrast to the United States, most children in Germany
attend the public education system, which is free from tuition fees. Financial resources of schools
are more equally distributed in Germany as compared to the United States as schools are funded
centrally by the federal states and not by taxes levied in the municipality. German citizens enjoy a
more generous social security system than their American counterparts. Just like in the
Scandinavian countries, in Germany private institutionalized education is of limited importance.
Based on these characteristics, we expect a weak association between parental wealth and
children’s educational outcomes in Germany.
However, the early tracking in the German educational system may magnify the effects of
parental wealth on educational outcomes for young children. In the majority of German Federal
States, after only four years of schooling, children are tracked based on their academic abilities
into a tripartite system of secondary schooling. The least advanced track, Hauptschule, is nine
grades long, and it prepares students for manual jobs. Realschule is the intermediate track. Ten
grades long, it prepares students for skilled non-manual jobs. The most advanced track,
Gymnasium, is twelve or thirteen grades long, and it is the only track that offers students
immediate access to tertiary education. Schools usually offer one of the three tracks.
Additionally, there are comprehensive schools, which combine different tracks (Gesamtschule).2
Teachers give individual track recommendations in the fourth grade based on the student’s marks
and the teacher’s subjective evaluation of the children’s academic abilities. In most Federal
States, these recommendations are not binding and parents’ decisions regarding which secondary
school track to send their children may deviate from the teacher recommendation. In the Federal
States where track recommendations are binding, children can still attend a higher track than the
one recommended by the teacher, but only if they pass an entrance examination. Although it is
theoretically possible for students to change tracks, these changes occur rarely, particularly

2

In the school year 2016/17, 34 % of fifth-graders attended a Gymnasium, 21 % a Realschule, 10
% a Hauptschule and 31 % a Gesamtschule (Statistisches Bundesamt, 2018, p. 13).
5

changes to more advanced school tracks (Blossfeld, 2018; Tamm, 2007). Therefore, the initial
secondary school track has major implications for access to higher education and the students’
later professional career.
In contrast, tracking in Sweden starts after grade nine and there is no between-school tracking in
the United States. Compared to Sweden, the United States and most other countries, the German
educational system is very rigid and possesses a high level of institutional stratification (Glaesser,
2008). In contrast to the considerations we made above, the early tracking in the German
educational system might make parental wealth an important determinant of early educational
outcomes in Germany.

2.2 Distribution of Wealth
In 2018, the mean household gross wealth in Germany was about 215,000 USD, the median was
about 35,000 USD. The mean net worth (assets minus debts) was 184,000 USD. These values are
low compared to other European countries and the United States. The level of wealth inequality
in Germany (Gini: 0.82; share of the top 10 % of wealth: 58 %) is higher than in Norway (0.79;
50 %) but lower than in Sweden (0.87; 67 %) and the United States (0.85; 77 %) (Shorrocks,
Davies, & Lluberas, 2018). Yet, compared to most other European countries, wealth inequality is
high in Germany. One reason for this may be that large economic differences persist between
East (the former German Democratic Republic) and West Germany. During the time of the
German Democratic Republic (1949-90), almost no private capital property existed and the
average household wealth is still much lower in East Germany than in West Germany.
The lower end of the net worth distribution in Germany is comprised of 7 % of adults with
negative net worth and about 20 % of adults with zero net worth (Grabka, 2015, p. 383). At this
point, it is important to consider the ambivalent nature of debts (Hällsten & Pfeffer, 2017, p.
342). Having large amounts of debt may indicate economic deprivation, but it can also be an
indicator of high economic potential. In order to obtain substantial credit, households usually
have to provide proof of financial securities, and therefore, assets and debts are usually positively
correlated (Brown & Taylor, 2008). In Germany, this requirement is much stricter as compared to
the United States.

6

The asset portfolio of all but the wealthiest households is characterized by little variation. The
wealth of the households at the lower end of the gross wealth distribution consists mostly of
domestic appliances and vehicles. The asset of highest value in the average German wealth
portfolio is self-occupied residential property, which accounts for more than 60 % of the total
gross wealth (Grabka & Westermeier, 2014). About 40 % of all German households possess selfoccupied residential property. Although about half of all adults in Germany possess some
financial assets and insurance policies, these account for respectively 16 % and 11 % of the total
gross wealth. The wealthiest households have asset portfolios that are more diverse. These
households also typically hold valuable business assets and non-self-occupied real estate
(Skopek, Kolb, Buchholz, & Blossfeld, 2012). In contrast to other countries, in Germany,
household wealth has not been substantially affected by the 2008 financial crisis (Grabka &
Westermeier, 2014).
Typically, wealth has a strong positive correlation with income, education, and occupational
class. However, the correlation between wealth and the traditional measures of SES is relatively
weak in Germany. The correlation between net worth and income is about 0.30 in Germany
(Pfeffer & Hällsten, 2012, p. 21). In comparison, this correlation is 0.35 in Sweden (Hällsten &
Pfeffer, 2017, p. 355) and ranges between 0.50 and 0.65 in the United States (Killewald, Pfeffer,
& Schachner, 2017, p. 391). Therefore, excluding wealth in research on social stratification in
education in Germany may be more problematic than in other countries because income alone is
not a good indicator of a household’s economic standing with the correlation being comparatively
small.

3. Theory
3.1 Competence
Based on existing research, four interrelated mechanisms may explain the relationship between
parental wealth and children’s competences. The unit of analysis in this literature is usually the
family.
1)

Wealth increases resources for families’ investment in children. Parents can invest their
wealth in the purchase of resources, that foster the competences of their children (Becker &
7

Tomes, 1986). These resources include learning materials (e.g., books or educational
software) as well as educational institutions (e.g., child-care facilities and private schools).
Other resources in which parents can invest in their children’s education are activities that
stimulate learning, such as participating in extra-curricular activities, hiring private tutoring
lessons and also taking part in cultural activities, like attending concerts or visiting museums
(Orr, 2003). For poor families, wealth may enable these families to meet all basic needs of
their children (e.g., nutrition, healthcare, and housing conditions) (Bradley & Corwyn,
2002).
2)

Wealth reduces family stress. Economic hardship causes distress, as well as behavioral
problems and marital conflict for parents. This reduces the warmth and quality of parenting,
which may subsequently slow the competence development of their children (Conger &
Conger, 2002). These adverse effects of economic hardship can be softened by wealth
because wealth can be used to smooth consumption in periods of economic difficulties.
Even when wealth is not consumed, it can create a sense of economic security, thereby
reducing family stress.

3)

Wealth facilitates residential segregation. Wealth enables families to live in affluent
neighborhoods or to relocate to neighborhoods where kindergartens and schools have more
resources (Pfeffer, 2018, p. 1037). Living in these neighborhoods or being enrolled in these
institutions may foster children’s competence development through positive peer effects or
access to higher quality urban amenities (e.g., public parks and libraries) (Owens, 2016).

4)

Wealth fosters pro-educational norms and aspirations. Wealth may create a sense of
educational entitlement (Conley, 1999, 2001), leading wealthy families to promote proeducational norms among their children. These norms are likely to increase children’s
motivation for learning and, thereby, lead to higher educational performance (Hällsten &
Pfeffer, 2017). The literature proposes three reasons why wealthier parents are more likely
to have pro-educational norms: First, families aim to secure or increase their wealth
advantage across generations (Conley, 2001). One way in which families may secure this
wealth advantage is through (higher) education and the higher earnings and financial literacy
associated with it. Second, families with high economic but low cultural capital might use
education as a means to transform or legitimize their economic capital. The need to do so
8

arises from the perception that in meritocratic societies, economic advantages achieved
through educational attainment are viewed more positively than those achieved through
wealth transfers (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977). Third, wealth allows families to have a more
future-orientated attitude, which is correlated with having higher educational aspirations
(Shobe & Page-Adams, 2001; Zhan & Sherraden, 2011).
We expect parental wealth to affect investment, family stress, place of residence, and educational
aspirations additionally to the effects of parents’ education, class, and income. Yet, most of these
proposed mechanisms are derived from research done in the United States. While we may assume
that the mechanisms work similarly in the German context, they may cause less pronounced
differences. German households should be less likely to suffer from severe economic hardship
compared to households in the United States due to the more generous welfare state. Therefore,
fewer families should be restricted in their investments in children or be affected by constant
stress. We expect segregation to be a less relevant factor in Germany because educational
resources are less dependent on the neighborhood in Germany than in the United States (Pfeffer,
2011). Lastly, we assume that future orientation to be less stratified by wealth as education is free
of tuition fees.
We expect the early tracking in Germany, however, to strongly alter the association between
parental wealth and children’s early competences. Early tracking may make parents’ proeducational norms more salient in the first years of schooling and may increase parents’
investment in their children’s competences to increase their chances of qualifying for the highest
secondary school track.
In summary, we expect to find a positive relationship between parental wealth and children’s
competences in the early school career in Germany. Moreover, we expect that wealth
stratification in competences increases throughout primary school. Pro-educational norms may
become more salient the closer the children get to the important transition to secondary school.
Thus, when children reach those ages, parents may invest more time and money to realize the
high educational aspirations they have for their children.

9

3.2 Transition to Secondary School
If children in wealthy households have higher competences and perform better in school, they
should also be more likely to attend the highest track (i.e., primary effect of parental wealth).
Based on previous research on traditional measures of parental SES, we expect children from
wealthy families to be more likely to attend this highest track, net of competences and school
marks (i.e., secondary effect of parental wealth). Importantly to mention, early educational
decisions are more likely to be initiated primarily by the parents, with a less direct influence of
the child as compared to later decisions in the child’s educational career (Becker & Hecken,
2009).
Research in Germany found that secondary effects of parents’ education and occupational class
account for about 40 to 60% of differences in children’s transition rates to the secondary school
track (Neugebauer, 2010; Neugebauer, Reimer, Schindler, & Stocké, 2013). By comparison, in
Sweden, most of the differences in educational attainment can be attributed to primary effects of
wealth (Hällsten & Pfeffer, 2017; Hällsten & Thaning, 2018), while in the United States, the
secondary effects of wealth seem to dominate (Elliott et al., 2011).
Secondary effects of parental SES can be explained by the socially stratified expectations of the
costs and benefits of the different educational alternatives (Breen & Goldthorpe, 1997; Erikson &
Jonsson, 1996), or in our case the different secondary school tracks (Becker, 2003; Neugebauer,
2010). Families compare their expected utility from each educational track and choose the track
that maximizes it. The subjective expected utility (SEU) model proposes that the utility derived
from attending a track depends on the expected benefits (B) of graduating from the specific track,
on the expected probability to successfully complete this track and to obtain the expected benefits
(p), and on the expected costs of this track (C). Furthermore, parents are assumed to be riskaverse regarding their current socioeconomic status, which translates into educational decisions
aimed at avoiding status decline (SD). Children will experience status decline if they do not find a
job with a similar occupational prestige as their parents’. For children whose parents have a high
occupational class, status decline will occur with a high probability (q), if children do not manage
to graduate from the highest secondary school track (Becker, 2003; Breen & Goldthorpe, 1997).

10

Originally, these theories consider the effect of parents’ occupational class. We argue that it can
be applied in a similar manner to parental wealth. We expect parental wealth to affect the factors
of the SEU model systematically and, thus, affect educational decisions:
1)

Wealth, like income, decreases the relative costs (C) of schooling. While the direct costs of
all school tracks in Germany are similar, the opportunity costs of entering and staying in the
highest track are higher because children have to stay in school for more years and cannot
earn their living. Wealth allows parents to finance these additional years of schooling
without the need for children to earn their living.

2)

Wealth could increase the p or reduce its importance for the decision. Before the transition
to secondary school is made, wealthy parents are likely to have been able to increase their
children’s achievement and performance in school by providing them with intellectually
stimulating resources. Similarly, wealthy parents may also anticipate the opportunity to
invest in children’s achievement in the future. For instance, if their child struggles in school
because of a lack of specific abilities, wealthier parents can partially compensate for this by
investing in private tutoring. Importantly, parents do not actually have to invest their wealth
to affect this educational decision. The potential to fall back on their wealth - the insurance
function of wealth - may be sufficient to choose a more rewarding but riskier track (Hällsten
& Pfeffer, 2017). For instance, parents know that they could potentially use their wealth to
finance the additional year of school for repeating a grade if necessary. This implies that
secondary effects of parental wealth are more pronounced for children with medium or low
performance in school because parents of high-performing children can be certain that their
child will succeed in the highest track independent of their wealth. A so-called
compensatory effect of parental background for low-performing children has been found for
parents’ occupational class (Bernardi & Boado, 2014), education (Neugebauer, 2010), as
well as wealth (Prix & Pfeffer, 2017).

3)

Based on the educational entitlement argument (see section 3.1), we assume that parental
wealth increases the B of more advanced educational tracks because these tracks can
legitimize the advantages gained through economic capital (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977).
Moreover, specific asset components of parents’ wealth, especially having their own
business, may increase the labor market returns for specific educational degrees. For
11

instance, the returns to a medical degree are higher when the child can take over their
parents’ medical practice.
4)

Wealth can reduce q for less advanced educational tracks. This should be true under the
assumption that parents seek to avoid status decline with respect to their wealth (Conley,
2001). Without obtaining a high educational degree, it is more likely that children will
deplete their parents’ wealth instead of increasing it.

Parental wealth is thus likely to affect several factors of the SEU model above and beyond the
effect of parental occupational class, education, and income. Therefore, we assume that children
of wealthy parents are more likely to attend the highest track as compared to children of less
wealthy parents, even if these children show similar levels of competences and performance.
While most of these considerations for the SEU model are not relevant during the early school
career (e.g., opportunity costs only start to become relevant when children are not required to go
to school anymore), we assume that parents already anticipate the importance of the initial
secondary school track for later educational decisions. Thus, wealth stratification observed at
later educational decisions in other countries may be partially shifted to the transition to
secondary school in Germany, because of its importance for the educational career of children.

4. Data, Variables, and Methods
4.1 Data
We use data from the German National Educational Panel Study (NEPS) (Blossfeld, Roßbach, &
von Maurice, 2011) for our empirical analysis.3 NEPS provides longitudinal data on educational
processes from children’s birth until late adulthood by following six different starting cohorts.
The NEPS is the only German dataset that includes data about parental wealth and assesses

3

This paper uses data from the National Educational Panel Study (NEPS): Starting Cohort
Kindergarten, doi:10.5157/NEPS:SC2:7.0.0. From 2008 to 2013, NEPS data was collected as part
of the Framework Program for the Promotion of Empirical Educational Research that is funded
by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). As of 2014, NEPS is
carried out by the Leibniz Institute for Educational Trajectories (LIfBi) at the University of
Bamberg in cooperation with a nationwide network.
12

children’s competences via standardized tests. This allows us to trace children’s competence
development and educational transitions using a large number of observations over time. For our
analyses, we make use of the kindergarten cohort. The target population of this cohort was
children attending kindergarten two years prior to their enrollment in elementary school in
Germany in 2010/11. After kindergarten, children are followed throughout primary and
secondary school. The sample was extended when children started attending primary school. By
the time the most recent panel wave took place (wave seven: 2016/17), most children had reached
fifth grade, which means that they had just made the transition to secondary school.
For our analyses, we include all children who participated in all three math tests in primary
school and whose parents had participated in the survey at least once. This left our sample with
4,611 children for the analysis of competences (hereafter “Sample A”).
For the analysis of the transition to secondary school, we include all children that had reached
secondary school by 2017, excluding those who were attending a special-needs school. If
information on the attended secondary school track is not available, we substituted it with the
track in which the parents enrolled their children at the end of the fourth grade. Additionally, the
parents of these children have to have participated in the survey at least once. This left us with a
sample of 4,572 children for the analysis of the transition to secondary school (hereafter “Sample
B”).4

4.2 Variables
Competence
We operationalize our first outcome of interest using math competence test scores on
standardized tests which contained between 22 and 24 items (for details, see Neumann et al.,
2013). The tests took place on three occasions: in 2013 when children were enrolled in the first
grade; then again in 2014 when children were in the second grade; and finally in 2016 when
children had reached the fourth grade. We chose math competence for two reasons. First,
4

It is important to note that these two samples differ. Information about secondary school track is
missing for some children who participated in all math competence tests and vice versa. We can
only use 3,262 children in both analyses. Our substantive results do not change when we run the
analyses only with this sub-sample.
13

previous research showed consistent findings for the relationship between parental wealth and
competences only for math (Elliott et al., 2011). Using math competences thus makes it easier to
compare our results to those of previous research. Second, only math competences have been
measured in the NEPS at least three times throughout primary school, and thus, allow us to study
changes over time. However, as a robustness check, we ran our analysis also for test scores in
grammar, natural sciences, and reading.
To derive an estimate of the unobserved competence of the children from the test results, we used
the weighted maximum likelihood estimates (WLE) provided by NEPS (Warm, 1989). We
standardized WLEs for the analysis sample to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one for ease of interpretation.

Secondary School Track
Our second outcome of interest is the secondary school track attended by children in the fifth
grade. We distinguish between the highest track (Gymnasium) and all other tracks. We chose this
operationalization because Gymnasium is the only track common to all Federal States and is the
only track granting direct access to higher education.

Parental Wealth
In NEPS, parental wealth was measured when children were in the second grade during the year
2014. In a first step, NEPS participants were asked whether their household5 possesses different
kinds of assets: savings books and checking accounts; building loan agreements; life insurances
and private pension insurances; fixed-interest securities; other securities such as stocks, funds,
bonds; business assets; owner-occupied real estate property; and other real estate property. In a
second step, participants were asked to report the total value of all these assets and the total value

5

We are most likely underestimating the importance of parental wealth for children who are not
living with both of their parents in a household. The absent parent can be expected to invest his or
her wealth in the child’s education, too.
14

of all their liabilities.6 When respondents did not report a value, they were asked to pick range
categories that capture the values of their assets and debts.
In line with previous research, we use parents’ net worth as a measure of wealth. Given that the
distribution of net worth is highly skewed, we transformed our variable’s distribution using an
inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (Friedline et al., 2015). Moreover, exploratory analysis of
the distribution of wealth revealed a non-linear association between categories of net worth and
our outcome variables. Five polynomials of the transformed net worth were included to
approximate this non-linear association, which also helped to reduce the leverage of outliers.

Parental SES and Further Controls
To account for the effect of other measures of parents’ SES, we included parents’ income,
education, and occupational class in our analysis. Income was measured at the household level.
We converted this variable into income quintile categories. We use the International Standard
Classification of Education (ISCED) to measure parents’ education. We use the EGP to measure
occupational class. Following Erikson’s (1984) dominance coding strategy, we use the highest
value of the parents’ ISCED and EGP to classify the household.
Furthermore, we control for potential confounders of the association between parents’ wealth and
children’s educational outcomes. On the parental level, we use employment status, family status,
mother tongue, and age. On the child level, we use the sex, age, number of siblings, whether the
child lives with both biological parents, migration status, and whether the child lives in East or
West Germany.

4.3 Imputation of Missing Data
We applied multiple imputation to deal with missing values. On average, 14 % of the
independent variables in sample A and 11 % of the independent variables in sample B were

6

Thus, NEPS uses a similar procedure to assess wealth as, for example, the German SocioEconomic Panel (SOEP), but with less details. Most importantly, NEPS only asks for the total
value of all assets and not for the value of the different components and NEPS asks for household
wealth instead of individual wealth. The average net worth of households in the SOEP who had a
child in elementary school in 2012 is slightly lower than in NEPS but the distribution is similar
otherwise.
15

missing. One reason for this high share of missing values is that parents did not participate in all
panel waves. Additionally, parents did not answer all questions or did only provide rough
categories regarding their assets, debts and income. Most item non-response occurred for parents’
assets (36 % missings in sample A, 33 % in sample B) and debts (22 % missings in sample A, 19
% in sample B).
We imputed missing values using chained equations to reduce the bias caused by systematic nonresponse and to increase the statistical power of our analysis. We impute all missing values using
only cases that have no missing values in the respective dependent variable for our analysis (Von
Hippel, 2007). Following the approach of Burgette & Reiter (2010), we use categorization and
regression trees (CART) for imputation. CART is a nonparametric recursive algorithm that uses
binary splits to create groups with maximum intragroup homogeneity and minimum intergroup
homogeneity. We stop the algorithm when groups become smaller than 50 cases (Aßmann,
Würbach, Goßmann, Geissler, & Bela, 2017; Burgette & Reiter, 2010). Using CART for multiple
imputation has the advantage that the algorithm finds the best predictors among all potential
covariates, including non-linear patterns and interactions. Imputation values are drawn from the
terminal nodes of the trees. This means that we replace missing values using values that have
been observed for other households with similar characteristics. In our imputation model, we
include all the covariates that we will use in our analyses. We also include time-varying control
variables measured in 2015 and 2017, the variables measuring the existence of different kinds of
assets, results of other competence tests, and the meta-data about the interviews to get plausible
imputations. If information about the range categories about assets, debts or income is available
and the imputed values fall outside these specified ranges, we set the imputed values to the lower
or upper limit of the category. We create 100 imputed data sets and report average across all
imputed datasets and apply Rubin’s rules to obtain standard errors in the results section (Rubin,
1987).

4.4 Methods
We estimate two separate models: one for the association between parents’ wealth and children’s
test scores in math (using sample A) and one for the association between parents’ wealth and
children’s secondary school track (using sample B). Given that our data consists of repeated
measures on the child’s competence, we estimate a generalized linear mixed model with random16

effects for the child to evaluate the association between parental net worth and children’s
competence development. To predict a child’s math competence, we include parental net worth
and the control variables mentioned above. We also include an interaction term between year and
parental net worth in order to examine whether the association between net worth and test scores
varies over time.
Second, to assess the association between parental net worth and secondary school track, we
apply two logistic regression models. Here, the outcome variable captures whether the child
attends a Gymnasium or not. In a first step, we include parental net worth and all control
variables. For all time-varying variables, we use the values measured in 2016. In a second step,
we add math and reading competences and marks in math and German in the fourth grade to
assess secondary effects of parental wealth. We present our results as the predicted probabilities
to attend a Gymnasium. Predicted probabilities are generated for all individuals conditional on
their observed values on control variables and are then averaged. Contrary to logistic regression
coefficients, predicted probabilities are comparable across nested models and allow us to estimate
the relative importance of primary and secondary effects (Breen, Karlson, & Holm, 2018).

5. Results
5.1 Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 shows the distribution of all the variables used in our analyses. The first three columns
show the summary statistics of the variables used in the analysis of test scores (sample A),
separately for each year in which a test in math took place. In sample A, parental net worth
ranges from -3.75m EUR to 195m EUR, with the second-highest value being 16m EUR. The
mean of net worth in sample A is 195k EUR and the median is 100k EUR. About 9 % of the
households in sample A have a negative net worth, 6.5 % of the households have a net worth of
exactly zero. Only 6.2 % of the households report net worth above 500k EUR (for a more
detailed picture of the net worth distribution see Figures S1 and S2 in the online supplements).
The Gini coefficient of net worth in sample A is 0.70 and the wealthiest 10 % of the households
hold around 48 % of the total net worth. Thus, net worth is more equally distributed in our
sample as compared to the overall German population. Moreover, we see that household income
increases and parents move into higher occupational classes over the years.
17

The last column shows the summary statistics of the variables used in the analysis of Gymnasium
attendance (sample B). The average net worth is higher than in sample A (mean: 246k EUR;
median: 109k EUR) and net worth is more unequally distributed (Gini: 0.74; share of wealthiest
10 %: 56 %) because of selective panel attrition. Additionally, there is a higher social selectivity
in Sample B, with more highly educated parents and parents in higher occupational classes as
compared to Sample A.
[Table 1 over here]
In line with previous research, we find that the correlations among income, education and
occupational class are higher than the correlation of net worth with each of these measures. The
rank correlation between net worth and education as well as occupational class is 0.27 and 0.24,
while the rank correlation between income and these measures is 0.48 and 0.44 (for Sample A,
for all correlations see tables S1 and S2 in the online supplements). The correlation between net
worth and income is about 0.36. Thus, we claim that income alone does not fully capture the
economic resources of a household.

5.2 Math Competence
Figure 1 shows the predicted values of our random-effects linear regression of math competence
in the first, second and fourth grade on parental net worth and the control variables (see Table S3
in the online supplements for the underlying regression estimates).7 The 95% confidence intervals
of the predicted values are indicated by the vertical lines. A math competence level of zero,
indicated by the horizontal dashed red line, stands for average math competence. The figure
reveals three important findings:

7

Without adjusting for covariates the differences by parental net worth are about 2.5-times the
size of the differences reported here. The functional form of the association remains the same,
only the disadvantage of children in very wealthy households disappears (see figure A1 in the
appendix). The same holds for the association between parental net worth and transition to
Gymnasium.
Some of these control variables could be affected by parental wealth, and, therefore, may
introduce overcontrol-bias to our results. For instance, some households may generate a part of
their income through yields of their stocks. Differences in educational outcomes by parental
wealth become slightly stronger when we exclude these variables, but the general pattern remains
the same.
18

First, there is a distinct association between parents’ wealth and their children’s math
competences in primary school in Germany, even when we control for the traditional measures of
parental SES. We find that children in households with zero or small amounts of negative net
worth perform worst; their average math test score in the first grade is about 0.10 standard
deviations (hereafter SD) below the average test score (p<0.05). Children in households with a
moderately high net worth (between 100k EUR and 300k EUR) perform best; their average math
test score is about 0.05 SD above the average test score (p<0.05) in the first grade. Compared to
other components of parents’ SES, differences in math test scores by parental net worth are of
medium size. The difference in math competence between the worst- and best-performing
children by parental net worth (0.15 SD) is larger than the largest competence level difference by
parents’ occupational class (0.09 SD) as well as by parents’ income (0.07 SD). However, the
strongest predictor of children’s math competences in primary school is parental education. The
difference between parents with the lowest education compared to parents with the highest
education is more than 0.50 SD (see Table A1 in the Appendix).
Second, the association between parental net worth and children’s math test scores is non-linear.
Children in households with a high negative net worth show higher test scores than children in
households with low negative or zero net worth. For instance, in the first grade, children in
households with very high net worth have slightly better than average test scores in math, while
children in households with low negative net worth show a below-average test score. For
households with a net worth between zero and about 100k EUR, we see a monotone increase in
children’s test scores with increasing parental wealth. For children in households between about
100k EUR and 300k EUR net worth, we see few differences in test scores by wealth. Children in
households with even more net worth perform worse. For instance, in the first grade, the average
test score of children in households with a net worth of 1m EUR is about 0.09 SD lower than the
average test score of children in households with 300k EUR net worth (p=0.03). However, note
that the predicted values for children with high negative or high positive net worth are imprecise.
Third, the association between parental wealth and children’s math test scores remains rather
constant throughout primary school (see Figure A1 in the appendix for the results without the
interaction between net worth and year). Our estimates point towards a slightly bigger
disadvantage of children in households with a low negative or low positive net worth in the
fourth grade as compared to the first and second grade. The average test scores in math of
19

children in households with zero or low negative net worth are about 0.20 SD lower than the
average test scores of children in moderately wealthy households in the fourth grade. The
disadvantage of children in very wealthy households as compared to children in moderately
wealthy households becomes smaller in the fourth grade. The difference between children in
households with 300k EUR and children in households with 1m EUR net worth shrinks from
0.09 SD (p=0.03) in the first grade to 0.03 SD (p=0.41) in the fourth grade. However, these
changes are not of noticeable size, nor are they statistically significant.
[Figure 1 over here]
We find similar results for test scores in grammar in the first grade; for natural sciences in the
first and third grades; and for reading in the fourth grade (see figure A2 in the appendix). The
differences by wealth are slightly smaller for these measures. Yet, these differences are
statistically significant with the exception of effects in the competence in natural sciences among
first graders.
As already mentioned above, debts have an ambivalent nature, as they can indicate both
economic deprivation and economic potential. To find out, whether the non-linear association
between net worth and test scores in Figure 1 is driven by the ambivalent nature of debts, we
separate net wealth into gross wealth and gross debts and run our analyses again (see figure A3
the in appendix). For gross wealth, we find a similar picture as for the positive value of net worth:
Children in households with zero or very low gross wealth perform worst. Afterward, test scores
increase with higher levels of wealth but the effect levels off for children in moderately wealthy
households. For gross debts, we find that children in households with relatively small levels of
debt perform substantially worse than children in households with no debts; and worse than
children in households with very high amounts of debts.
Lastly, we try to find out, whether the association between wealth and math test scores is driven
by a specific wealth component. While we do not have information about the value of the
different wealth components, we do know which assets a household possesses, and use this to
infer the effects of specific components of wealth. We find that it is especially the small group of
children in households without a savings book or checking account who perform substantially
worse (-0.24 SD, p<0.01), while children whose parents own their house or apartment score on
average 0.08 SD higher (p=0.01) than children whose parents do not own their home (see Table
20

A2). Financial assets seem to be less relevant. Children in households with fixed interest
securities (0.05 SD, p=0.21) or those with stocks, funds or bonds (0.05 SD, p=0.07) seem to have
slightly higher math competences than children in households without these assets.

5.3 Transition to Secondary School
We expect the wealth-based differences in children’s math competence to translate into wealthbased differences in children’s likelihood of attending the Gymnasium. Figure 2 shows the
predicted probabilities of attending a Gymnasium by parental wealth with 95% confidence
intervals indicated by the vertical lines. The estimates presented with black dots and lines are
based on a logistic regression of Gymnasium attendance on parental net worth and the control
variables (see Table S4 in the online supplements for the underlying regression estimates). The
blue diamonds and lines show the predicted probabilities when math and reading competences, as
well as teacher assigned marks in math and German are controlled for (thus, secondary effects of
parental net worth). The dashed red line shows the average probability of Gymnasium attendance
in our analysis sample (61.7 %).
The relation between parental wealth and Gymnasium attendance exhibits a similar pattern to the
one we found between parental wealth and math test scores. Children in households with low
levels of negative net worth or net worth equal to zero have the lowest predicted probability of
attending a Gymnasium. The predicted probability of children in households with zero net worth
is only about 55.7 %. Thus, their probability to attend a Gymnasium is about 5.5 percentage
points lower than the average (p<0.01). Children in households with about 150k EUR have the
highest chances to attend a Gymnasium with a predicted probability of slightly above 64 %. The
gradient by wealth is rather flat around this part of the distribution.
As for math competence, we see that children in households with high negative net worth and
children in households with the highest positive net worth deviate from the linear trend of
Gymnasium attendance. For instance, the predicted probability to attend a Gymnasium of
children in households with a net worth of -100k EUR is average. At the other end of the wealth
distribution, children in very wealthy households are even slightly less likely to attend a
Gymnasium as compared to the average. Again, note that the estimates are imprecise at both ends
of the wealth distribution.
21

Compared to the difference in Gymnasium attendance based on parents’ education, occupational
class, and income, the difference in attendance rates that is associated with parental wealth is
moderate. Again, parental education is by far the best predictor of our outcome (see Table A3).
Children whose parents have an advanced research qualification (ISCED 6) are almost 40
percentage points more likely to attend a Gymnasium than children whose parents have lower
secondary education or less (ISCED 2 or less). Yet, the nine percentage points difference found
for parental wealth between about zero and 150k EUR is similar to the difference between upper
service class and working class.
The difference in Gymnasium attendance by parental wealth shrinks when we control for the
competences and marks in the fourth grade. For instance, the predicted probability of children in
households with zero net worth increases from about 55.7 % to 58.6 %, while the predicted
probability of children in households with a net worth of 100k EUR decreases from 64.3 % to
63.1 %. Yet, the 4.5 percentage points difference between these children is still statistically
significant (p=0.02). On average, differences in competences and marks account for about half of
the total difference in Gymnasium attendance by parental wealth. We interpret this as evidence
for a distinct secondary effect of parental net worth at the transition to secondary school.
[Figure 2 over here]
In line with previous research, we find that secondary effects of parental wealth are slightly more
pronounced for children with below-average marks. These results suggest that students from
households with small negative or zero net worth are less likely to attend a Gymnasium in all
marks categories, but this relation is more pronounced among students with satisfactory or worse
marks (see figure A4 in the appendix). This may indicate that parents of “poor performing”
children may use their wealth to compensate for their children’s disadvantage in performance.
However, these results should be interpreted with caution because the subgroups become rather
small.

6. Discussion
In this paper, we investigated the association between parental wealth and (1) children’s
competence, operationalized as test score results in math at the beginning of primary school; (2)
22

the development of children’s math competence throughout primary school; and (3) children’s
educational transition to secondary school, operationalized as attendance to the highest secondary
school track.
In line with prior research, we find that even after controlling for traditional measures of SES,
parental wealth has a distinct association with children’s math competence. While most previous
research focused on wealth effects for older children, we found that an association already exists
for children in primary school in Germany. These wealth-driven differences in children’s math
competence might be the result of the early tracking component of the German educational
system. Such a system incentivizes parents to invest their wealth early on in their children’s
competence so as to secure the opportunity for their children to attend the highest secondary
school track.
Our results suggest that there is a non-linear association between parental net worth and
children’s competence. Children in households with high negative parental net worth perform
better in math tests than children in households with low negative or zero net worth. A potential
explanation for the educational disadvantage of children in households with a low negative net
worth (compared to those in households with positive net worth) is that the low negative net
worth was caused by having unsecured debts, which can have a negative effect on children’s
competence (Williams Shanks, 2007). Families who have unsecured debts and, hence, struggle to
make ends meet, will probably also have trouble in providing a pro-learning environment to their
children at home. In additional analyses, we found that it is especially the small group of children
in households without a saving book or checking account who perform substantially worse.
These children are very likely to suffer from liquidity constraints if their parents do not have
these common types of assets.
Children in households with high negative net worth fare somewhat better than children in
households with low negative net worth. But this is probably due to these household’s high levels
of negative net worth as reflection of their good financial position. These households might have
secured debts that are backed up by strong financial credit. In order to take out a large loan in
Germany, households have to provide proof of a high level of financial securities. Thus, having
high negative net worth in Germany may indicate high economic potential instead of economic

23

disadvantage. Hällsten & Pfeffer (2017) find a similar pattern for the relationship between
parental wealth and children’s GPA in the ninth grade for Sweden.
The best performance is shown by children with medium to high parental net worth. Intriguingly,
children in households with very high parental wealth tend to perform worse than children in
households with medium or high parental wealth. This contrasts with previous findings for other
countries. However, in our sample, there are few households with these high amounts of net
worth. Further research is needed to establish whether wealthy households have worse
educational outcomes in the early school career, and if so to investigate why this could be the
case; or to establish if this is just an artifact in the data.
Contrary to our expectations, we found the association between parental wealth and math test
scores to remain stable throughout primary school. One explanation for the stable association
may be that the time interval we examine is too short to reveal noticeable changes. An alternative
explanation may be that important investments took place before primary school, such as
improving the children’s learning environment or moving to a neighborhood with better schools.
Finally, schooling may also decrease wealth disparities in competences because it provides all
students with a standardized learning environment (Downey & Condron, 2016).
Investigating the transition from primary to secondary school, we found a small but distinct
association between parental wealth and children’s probability of attending a Gymnasium.
Children in wealthier households are more likely to attend a Gymnasium. However, like for
competences, we see a non-linear association, where children in households with high negative
and very high positive net worth deviate from the trend in the middle of the wealth distribution.
The differences by parental wealth can be attributed in roughly equal parts to differences in
competences and performance by parental wealth (primary effect of parental wealth) and to
differences in educational decisions (secondary effect of parental wealth).
Similar to Pfeffer (2011), we found that parents’ education is by far the strongest predictor of
math competence and Gymnasium attendance. Differences by parental wealth are of similar size
as differences by parental occupational class or income. Compared to the results found for the
US, we find smaller associations between wealth and test scores (Friedline et al., 2015; Yeung &
Conley, 2008). The differences in secondary school track transition rates by parental wealth in
Germany are of a similar magnitude to those found for Sweden (Hällsten & Thaning, 2018) and
24

only slightly smaller than the ones found for the United States (Pfeffer, 2018). It might be the
case that the wealth stratification which was observed at later educational decisions in other
countries is partially shifted to the transition to secondary school in Germany, because of its
importance for the further educational career of children. Yet, these comparisons should be
interpreted with caution because of other differences between the studies and that no prior
tracking took place in these countries.
Some limitations should be considered in interpreting our results. Parental wealth was only
measured once in NEPS. Therefore, wealth may be measured with error (Goodman & Ittner,
1992) and we are unable to detect whether household wealth changed over time. According to
data from the German Socio-Economic Panel Study, wealth remained rather stable throughout the
five years (2013-17) of our study (Grabka & Westermeier, 2014). Yet, some families may have
experienced greater wealth increases than others, for instance, families with real estate in urban
areas affected by gentrification. Measurement error and treating wealth as time-constant may lead
to an underestimation of the impact of wealth in our analysis. However, we assume that shortterm changes in wealth are less relevant for educational achievement and attainment as compared
to wealth held by families during their children’s early childhood years (Cesarini et al., 2016;
Hällsten & Pfeffer, 2017).
Furthermore, unobserved factors may confound the association between parental wealth and
children’s educational outcomes. For instance, parents’ cognitive and non-cognitive competences
probably affect both their levels of wealth and their children’s educational outcomes (Doren &
Grodsky, 2016); but those were not measured in the NEPS. Therefore, our results may be
upwardly biased and should not be interpreted as causal estimates. However, we assume that a
big part of parents’ competences may be captured by their educational achievement, as well as
their income. Even if there was a strong partial correlation of these unmeasured confounders with
parental wealth and children’s test scores, we would observe smaller, but still statistically
significant differences by parental wealth. Therefore, despite these limitations, we interpret our
results as support for our claim that wealth is a distinct dimension of social stratification that
contributes to social inequality in education over and above the traditional measures of parental
SES in Germany.

25

We see two open questions remaining in the study of parental wealth effects of children’s
educational attainment. First, we only considered the association at an early stage in the
children’s educational careers. Especially regarding educational decisions, we expect that
parental wealth would have a stronger effect at later stages because financial considerations
should become more relevant at that time. While the financial costs of attending the different
secondary school tracks are similar, there are bigger differences in financial costs when students
have to choose between going to university or entering the labor market (Becker & Hecken,
2009). Thus, the secondary effects of parental wealth can be expected to increase at later stages
of children’s educational careers.
Second, more research is needed to uncover the mechanisms that drive the association between
parental wealth and children’s educational outcomes. In the theoretical part of our paper, we
propose several such mechanisms. Family investment, family stress, residential segregation, and
educational entitlement can be considered as potential causal mechanisms; and we proposed that
differences in family’s expected utilities could explain children’s educational decisions. We
encourage future research to examine these mechanisms. Knowledge of these will allow us to
propose policy interventions that can more effectively reduce social inequality in education.

References
Aßmann, C., Würbach, A., Goßmann, S., Geissler, F., & Bela, A. (2017). Nonparametric
Multiple Imputation for Questionnaires with Individual Skip Patterns and Constraints: The Case
of Income Imputation in the National Educational Panel Study. Sociological Methods &
Research, 46(4), 864–897. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124115610346
Becker, G. S., & Tomes, N. (1986). Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families. Journal of
Labor Economics, 4(3), 1–39. https://doi.org/10.1086/298118
Becker, R. (2003). Educational Expansion and Persistent Inequalities of Education: Utilizing
Subjective Expected Utility Theory to Explain Increasing Participation Rates in Upper Secondary
School in the Federal Republic of Germany. European Sociological Review, 19(1), 1–24.
https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/19.1.1
Becker, R., & Hecken, A. E. (2009). Higher Education or Vocational Training? An Empirical
Test of the Rational Action Modelof Educational Choices Suggested by Breen and Goldthorpe
and Esser. Acta Sociologica, 52(1), 25–45. https://doi.org/10.1177/0001699308100632
Bernardi, F., & Boado, H. C. (2014). Previous school results and social background:
Compensation and imperfect information in educational transitions. European Sociological
Review, 30(2), 207–217. https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jct029
26

Blau, P. M., & Duncan, O. D. (1967). The American Occupational Structure. New York, NY:
Wiley.
Blossfeld, H.-P., Roßbach, H.-G., & von Maurice, J. (2011). Education as a Lifelong Process
(NEPS). Zeitschrift für Erziehungswissenschaft, 14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11618-011-0179-2
Blossfeld, P. (2018). Social Background and Between-track Mobility in the General Education
System in West Germany and in East Germany after German Unification. Zeitschrift für
Soziologie, 47(4), 255–269. https://doi.org/10.1515/zfsoz-2018-0117
Boudon, R. (1974). Education, Opportunity and Social Inequality: Changing Prospects in
Western Society. New York, NY: Wiley.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J.-C. (1977). Reproduction in education, society and culture. London,
U.K.: Sage Publications.
Bradley, R. H., & Corwyn, R. F. (2002). Socioeconomic Status and Child Development. Annual
Review of Psychology, 53(1), 371–399. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135233
Breen, R., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (1997). Explaining educational differentials: Towards a formal
rational action theory. Rationality and Society, 9(3), 275–305.
https://doi.org/10.1177/104346397009003002
Breen, R., Karlson, K. B., & Holm, A. (2018). Interpreting and Understanding Logits, Probits,
and Other Nonlinear Probability Models. Annual Review of Sociology, 44(1), 39–54.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-073117-041429
Brown, J. R., Coile, C. C., & Weisbenner, S. J. (2010). The Effect of Inheritance Receipt on
Retirement. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), 425–434.
https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.2010.11182
Brown, S., & Taylor, K. (2008). Household debt and financial assets: Evidence from Germany,
Great Britain and the USA. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in
Society), 171(3), 615–643. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-985X.2007.00531.x
Burgette, L. F., & Reiter, J. P. (2010). Multiple Imputation for Missing Data via Sequential
Regression Trees. American Journal of Epidemiology, 172(9), 1070–1076.
https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwq260
Cesarini, D., Lindqvist, E., Östling, R., & Wallace, B. (2016). Wealth, health, and child
development: Evidence from administrative data on Swedish lottery players. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 131(2), 687–738. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw001
Conger, R. D., & Conger, K. J. (2002). Resilience in Midwestern families: Selected findings from
the first decade of a prospective, longitudinal study. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64(2),
361–373. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2002.00361.x
Conley, D. (1999). Being Black, Living in the Red: Race, Wealth and Social Policy in America.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

27

Conley, D. (2001). Capital for College: Parental Assets and Postsecondary Schooling. Sociology
of Education, 74(1), 59–72. https://doi.org/10.2307/2673145
Cunha, F., & Heckman, J. J. (2008). Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 738–782.
https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.43.4.738
Doren, C., & Grodsky, E. (2016). What Skills Can Buy: Transmission of Advantage through
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills. Sociology of Education, 89(4), 321–342.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038040716667994
Downey, D. B., & Condron, D. J. (2016). Fifty Years since the Coleman Report: Rethinking the
Relationship between Schools and Inequality. Sociology of Education, 89(3), 207–220.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038040716651676
Elliott, W., Destin, M., & Friedline, T. (2011). Taking stock of ten years of research on the
relationship between assets and children’s educational outcomes: Implications for theory, policy
and intervention. Children and Youth Services Review, 33 (2011), 2312–2328.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2011.08.001
Elliott, W., & Sherraden, M. (2013). Assets and educational achievement: Theory and evidence.
Economics of Education Review, 33, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2013.01.004
Erikson, R. (1984). Social Class of Men, Women and Families. Sociology, 18(4), 500–514.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038584018004003
Erikson, R., & Jonsson, J. O. (1996). Explaining class inequality in education: The Swedish test
case. In R. Erikson & J. O. Jonsson (Eds.), Can Education Be Equalized? The Swedish Case in
Comparative Perspective (pp. 1–63). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Feinstein, L. (2003). Inequality in the Early Cognitive Development of British Children in the
1970 Cohort. Economica, 70(277), 73–97. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0335.t01-1-00272
Friedline, T., Masa, R. D., & Chowa, G. A. (2015). Transforming wealth: Using the inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) and splines to predict youth’s math achievement. Social Science Research,
49, 264–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2014.08.018
Glaesser, J. (2008). Just how flexible is the German selective secondary school system? A
configurational analysis. International Journal of Research & Method in Education, 31(2), 193–
209. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437270802212254
Goodman, J. L., & Ittner, J. B. (1992). The accuracy of home owners’ estimates of house value.
Journal of Housing Economics, 2(4), 339–357. https://doi.org/10.1016/1051-1377(92)90008-E
Grabka, M. M. (2015). Income and wealth inequality after the financial crisis: The case of
Germany. Empirica, 42(2), 371–390. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10663-015-9280-8
Grabka, M. M., & Westermeier, C. (2014). Persistently High Wealth Inequality in Germany. DIW
Economic Bulletin, 4(6), 3–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11150-013-9229-2

28

Hällsten, M., & Pfeffer, F. T. (2017). Grand Advantage: Family Wealth and Grandchildren’s
Educational Achievement in Sweden. American Sociological Review, 82(2), 328–360.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122417695791
Hällsten, M., & Thaning, M. (2018). Multiple dimensions of social background and horizontal
educational attainment in Sweden. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 56, 40–52.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSSM.2018.06.005
Huang, J., Guo, B., Kim, Y., & Sherraden, M. (2010). Parental income, assets, borrowing
constraints and children’s post-secondary education. Children and Youth Services Review, 32(4),
585–594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2009.12.005
Jackson, M. V. (Ed.). (2013). Determined to succeed? Performance versus choice in educational
attainment. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Jez, S. J. (2014). The Differential Impact of Wealth Versus Income in the College-Going Process.
Research in Higher Education, 55(7), 710–734. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-014-9332-0
Killewald, A., Pfeffer, F. T., & Schachner, J. N. (2017). Wealth Inequality and Accumulation.
Annual Review of Sociology, 43, 379–404. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-060116-053331
Linberg, T., Schneider, T., Waldfogel, J., & Wang, Y. (2019). Socioeconomic status gaps in child
cognitive development in Germany and the United States. Social Science Research, 79, 1–31.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2018.11.002
Neugebauer, M. (2010). Bildungsungleichheit und Grundschulempfehlung beim Übergang auf
das Gymnasium: Eine Dekomposition primärer und sekundärer Herkunftseffekte. Zeitschrift für
Soziologie, 39(3), 202–214. https://doi.org/10.1515/zfsoz-2010-0303
Neugebauer, M., Reimer, D., Schindler, S., & Stocké, V. (2013). Inequality in Transition to
Seconday School and Tertiary Education in Germany. In M. V. Jackson (Ed.), Determined to
Succeed? Performance versus Choice in Educational Attainment, Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Neumann, I., Duchhardt, C., Grüßing, M., Heinze, A., Knopp, E., & Ehmke, T. (2013). Modeling
and assessing mathematical competence over the lifespan. Journal for Educational Research
Online, 5(2), 80–109.
OECD. (2013). The survey of adult skills: Reader’s companion. Paris: OECD publ.
Orr, A. J. (2003). Black-White Differences in Achievement: The Importance of Wealth.
Sociology of Education, 76(4), 281–304. https://doi.org/10.2307/1519867
Owens, A. (2016). Inequality in Children’s Contexts: Income Segregation of Households with
and without Children. American Sociological Review, 81(3), 549–574.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122416642430
Pfeffer, F. T. (2011). Status Attainment and Wealth in the United States and Germany. In T.
Smeeding, R. Erikson, & M. Jäntti (Eds.), Persistence, Privilege, and Parenting. The
Comparative Study of Intergenerational Mobility (pp. 109–137). New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
29

Pfeffer, F. T. (2018). Growing Wealth Gaps in Education. Demography, 55(3), 1033–1068.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-018-0666-7
Pfeffer, F. T., & Hällsten, M. (2012). Mobility Regimes and Parental Wealth: The United States,
Germany, and Sweden in Comparison. SOEPpapers on Multidisciplinary Panel Data Research,
500.
Piketty, T., & Zucman, G. (2014). Capital Is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries
17002010. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–1310.
https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju018.Advance
Prix, I., & Pfeffer, F. T. (2017). Does Donald Need Uncle Scrooge ? Extended-family wealth and
children’s educational attainment in the United States. In J. Erola & E. Kilpi-Jakonen (Eds.),
Social Inequality Across the Generations (pp. 112–135). https://doi.org/10.4337/9781786432568
Rubin, D. B. (1987). Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: Wiley.
Shobe, M., & Page-Adams, D. (2001). Assets, Future Orientation, and Well-Being: Exploring
and Extending Sherraden’s Framework. Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare, 28(7), 109–129.
Shorrocks, A., Davies, J., & Lluberas, R. (2018). Global Wealth Databook 2018. Zurich: Credit
Suisse Publications.
Skopek, N., Kolb, K., Buchholz, S., & Blossfeld, H.-P. (2012). Einkommensreich
vermögensarm? Die Zusammensetzung von Vermögen und die Bedeutung einzelner
Vermögenskomponenten im europäischen Vergleich. Berliner Journal für Soziologie, 22(2), 63–
187. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11609-012-0185-0
Spilerman, S. (2000). Wealth and Stratification Processes. Annual Review of Sociology, 26, 497–
524. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.26.1.497
Statistisches Bundesamt. (2018). Schulen auf einen Blick Ausgabe 2018. Wiesbaden: Statistisches
Bundesamt.
Tamm, M. (2007). Does money buy higher schooling?: Evidence from secondary school track
choice in Germany. Economics of Education Review, 27(5), 536–545.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2007.10.005
Von Hippel, P. T. (2007). Regression with missing Ys: An improved strategy for analyzing
multiply imputed data. Sociological Methodology. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14679531.2007.00180.x
Warm, T. A. (1989). Weighted likelihood estimation of ability in item response theory.
Psychometrika, 54(3), 427–450. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02294627
Wiborg, Ø. N. (2017). Family wealth and school grades in Norway - Exploring how the
immediate and extended family’s wealth matter for the children’s school performance. In J. Erola
& E. Kilpi-Jakonen (Eds.), Social inequality across the generations - the role of compensation
and multiplication in resource accumulation. (pp. 136–157). Cheltenham, U.K./Northampton,
MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
30

Williams Shanks, T. R. (2007). The Impacts of Household Wealth on Child Development.
Journal of Poverty, 11(2), 93–116. https://doi.org/10.1300/J134v11n02_05
Yeung, W. J., & Conley, D. (2008). Black and Family Wealth. Child Development, 79(2), 303–
324. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01127.x
Zhan, M. (2006). Assets, parental expectations and involvement, and children’s educational
performance. Children and Youth Services Review, 28, 961–975.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2005.10.008
Zhan, M., & Sherraden, M. (2011). Assets and liabilities, educational expectations, and children’s
college degree attainment. Children and Youth Services Review, 33(6), 846–854.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2010.12.006

31

Tables
Table 1: Descriptive statistics

Math competence
Gymnasium
Net worth
HH income
No full time employment
Number of siblings
Birthyear of parents
Birthyear of child
Living with biological parents
Mothertongue: German
East
Girl
Income quintile
1. Quintile
2. Quintile
3. Quintile
4. Quintile
5. Quintile
Highest ISCED
2 or less
3
4
5B
5A
6
Highest EGP
I
II
IIIa, IV
IIIb, V, VI, VII
Family status
married
divorced or widowed
single
Generation status
Native
First generation
Second generation
Third generation
N
Sample

2013
0.000
195000
3930
0.051
1.404
1973
2006
0.838
0.841
0.141
0.517

Competence
2014
0.000
constant
4404
0.051
1.417
constant
constant
constant
constant
constant
constant

2016
0.000
constant
4573
0.074
1.416
constant
constant
constant
constant
constant
constant

Track
2016
0.000
0.617
246000
4852
0.066
1.370
1973
2006
0.861
0.862
0.106
0.511

0.174
0.146
0.254
0.197
0.229

0.182
0.123
0.277
0.189
0.228

0.180
0.206
0.159
0.202
0.253

0.160
0.197
0.150
0.209
0.283

0.042
0.270
0.093
0.211
0.323
0.060

0.043
0.273
0.094
0.209
0.321
0.060

0.027
0.263
0.093
0.216
0.341
0.060

0.020
0.234
0.092
0.211
0.372
0.071

0.353
0.310
0.153
0.184

0.353
0.309
0.153
0.184

0.392
0.309
0.158
0.141

0.410
0.318
0.147
0.125

0.857
0.056
0.087

0.858
0.061
0.081

0.848
0.075
0.076

0.865
0.067
0.068

0.750
0.021
0.196
0.033
4611
A

constant
constant
constant
constant
4611
A

constant
constant
constant
constant
4611
A

0.770
0.018
0.179
0.033
4572
B
32

Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten. Average values across all
imputations. Means for continuous variables and proportions for categorical variables. Categories
of categorical variables with more than two values are indented and in italics. “-“ means that the
variable is not included in the analysis. “constant” means that value does not change over time.

33

Figures
Figure 1: Predicted math competence by parental net worth

N=4,611. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample A.
Horizontal lines show 95%-confidence intervals.

34

Figure 2: Predicted probability to attend the highest track by parental net worth

N=4,572. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample B.
Horizontal lines show 95%-confidence intervals.

35

Appendix
Table A1: Differences in math competence by parents' income, education, and class
(unstandardized coefficients, standard errors in parenthesis)
b
SE
Income
2. Quintile
-0.027
(0.029)
3. Quintile
-0.003
(0.029)
4. Quintile
0.040
(0.032)
5. Quintile
0.046
(0.034)
ISCED
3
4
5B
5A
6

0.057
0.200*
0.223**
0.431***
0.541***

(0.066)
(0.078)
(0.076)
(0.076)
(0.096)

EGP
II
-0.000
(0.026)
IIIa, IV
-0.057
(0.032)
*
IIIb, V, VI, VII
-0.092
(0.037)
Observations
4,611
Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten; Sample A. Reference
categories: Income: 1. Quintile; ISCED: 2 or less, EGP; I. Significance levels: *** = p<0.001, **
= p<0.01, * = p<0.05, + = p<0.10. All control variables are included in the regression.

36

Table A2: Random-effects regression of mathematical competence on possession of different
kinds of assets (unstandardized coefficients, standard errors in parenthesis)
b
SE
***
Savings books/checking account
0.240
(0.064)
Building loan agreements
0.013
(0.028)
Life insurances and private pension insurances
0.034
(0.035)
Fixed-interest securities
0.049
(0.039)
Other securities such as stocks, funds, bonds
0.052+
(0.029)
Business assets
0.002
(0.036)
Owner-occupied real estate property
0.079*
(0.031)
Other real estate property
-0.017
(0.034)
Other assets
-0.010
(0.063)
Observations
4,611
Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten; Sample A. Reference
categories: Income: 1. Quintile; ISCED: 2 or less, EGP; I. Significance levels: *** = p<0.001, **
= p<0.01, * = p<0.05, + = p<0.10. All control variables are included in the regression.

37

Table A3: Differences in predicted probabilities of Gymnasium attendance by parents' income,
education, and class (standard errors in parenthesis)
Model 1
Model 2
Difference SE
Difference SE
Income
2. Quintile
0.016
(0.030)
0.003
(0.027)
*
3. Quintile
0.068
(0.030)
0.035
(0.026)
4. Quintile
0.091**
(0.029)
0.045
(0.026)
***
**
5. Quintile
0.137
(0.029)
0.084
(0.026)
ISCED
3
4
5B
5A
6

0.150*
0.247***
0.245***
0.356***
0.402***

(0.060)
(0.064)
(0.062)
(0.063)
(0.069)

0.097
0.125*
0.137*
0.177**
0.184**

(0.059)
(0.063)
(0.061)
(0.062)
(0.067)

EGP
II
-0.040*
(0.018)
-0.041**
(0.015)
IIIa, IV
-0.040
(0.024)
-0.024
(0.020)
IIIb, V, VI, VII
-0.111***
(0.029)
-0.061*
(0.024)
Observations
4572
4572
Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten; Sample B. Reference
categories: Income: 1. Quintile; ISCED: 2 or less, EGP; I. Significance levels: *** = p<0.001, **
= p<0.01, * = p<0.05, + = p<0.10. All control variables are included in the regression.

38

Figure A1: Predicted math competence by parental net worth

N=4,611. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample A.
Horizontal lines show 95%-confidence intervals.

39

Figure A2: Predicted grammar, natural science and reading competence by parental net worth

N=4,611. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample A.
Horizontal lines show 95%-confidence intervals.

40

Figure A3: Predicted math competence by parental gross wealth and debts

N=4,611. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample A.
Horizontal lines show 95%-confidence intervals.

41

Figure A4: Predicted probability to attend the highest track by parental net worth and marks

N=4,572. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample B.
Horizontal lines show 95%-confidence intervals.

42

Online Supplements
Table S1: Association between parental net worth and parental SES (in 2014)
Net Worth
Income
ISCED
Income
0.360
ISCED
0.267
0.476
EGP
0.243
0.437
0.555
N=4,611. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample A.
Spearman’s rank correlations. Average values across all imputations. All values are significant at
1% level.

43

Table S2: Association between parental net worth and parental SES (in 2014)
Net Worth
Income
ISCED
Income
0.372
ISCED
0.271
0.480
EGP
0.249
0.431
0.543
N=4,572. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample B.
Spearman’s rank correlations. Average values across all imputations. All values are significant at
1% level.

44

Table S3: Random-effects regression of math competence (unstandardized coefficients, standard
errors in parenthesis)
b
SE
Year
2014
2016

-0.014
-0.040

(0.029)
(0.029)

Net worth (IHS)
Net worth (IHS)2
Net worth (IHS)3
Net worth (IHS)4
Net worth (IHS)5

2.59 *10-6
2.23 *10-10 **
-3.69*10-15 +
-6.19*10-20 +
7.64 *10-25

2.13*10-6
8.65*10-11
1.98*10-15
3.33*10-20
4.77*10-25

Year*Net worth
2014 * Net worth (IHS)
2014 * Net worth (IHS)2
2014 * Net worth (IHS)3
2014 * Net worth (IHS)4
2014 * Net worth (IHS)5

-3.39*10-7
4.38 *10-12
1.12 *10-15
2.31 *10-21
-3.71*10-25

1.94*10-6
7.83*10-11
1.86*10-15
3.03*10-20
4.54*10-25

2016 * Net worth (IHS)
2016 * Net worth (IHS)2
2016 * Net worth (IHS)3
2016 * Net worth (IHS)4
2016 * Net worth (IHS)5

4.99 *10-7
-1.87*10-11
5.96 *10-16
1.73 *10-20
-2.09*10-25

1.97*10-6
8.22*10-11
1.82*10-15
3.18*10-20
4.51*10-25

Income category (in EUR)
2. Quintile
3. Quintile
4. Quintile
5. Quintile

-0.027
-0.003
0.040
0.046

(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.032)
(0.034)

Highest ISCED
3
4
5B
5A
6

0.057
0.200*
0.223**
0.431***
0.541***

(0.066)
(0.078)
(0.076)
(0.076)
(0.096)

Highest EGP
II
IIIa, IV
IIIb, V, VI, VII

-0.000
-0.057+
-0.092*

(0.026)
(0.032)
(0.037)

Generation status
First generation

-0.082

(0.086)
45

-0.133**
-0.152*

(0.048)
(0.069)

Family status
divorced or widowed
single

-0.040
-0.058

(0.045)
(0.042)

Number of siblings
East
Unemployed
Parent’s age
Mothertongue: German
Biological parents
Girl
Child’s age

-0.054***
-0.060
-0.007
-0.008**
0.105+
0.101*
-0.188***
-0.004+

(0.012)
(0.035)
(0.035)
(0.002)
(0.055)
(0.040)
(0.024)
(0.003)

Constant

17.337***

(5.058)

Second generation
Third generation

Person-years
13,833
N
4,611
Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten; Sample A. Reference
categories: Year: 2013; Income: 1. Quintile; ISCED: 2 or less; EGP: I; Generation Status: native;
Family Status: Married. Significance levels: *** = p<0.001, ** = p<0.01, * = p<0.05, + =
p<0.10.

46

Table S4: Logistic regression of attending the highest secondary school track (log odds; standard
errors in parenthesis)
Model 1
Model 2
b
SE
b
SE
Net worth (IHS)
Net worth (IHS)2
Net worth (IHS)3
Net worth (IHS)4
Net worth (IHS)5

9.54 *10-6 *
5.24 *10-10 **
-1.06*10-14 *
-1.44*10-19 +
2.13 *10-24 +

4.86*10-6
2.02*10-10
4.74*10-15
7.50*10-20
1.12*10-24

8.21 *10-6
3.67 *10-10
-9.47*10-15
-8.42*10-20
1.67 *10-24

5.87*10-6
2.46*10-10
5.80*10-15
8.99*10-20
1.38*10-24

Income category (in EUR)
2. Quintile
3. Quintile
4. Quintile
5. Quintile

0.071
0.306*
0.413**
0.638***

(0.133)
(0.133)
(0.131)
(0.134)

0.018
0.219
0.288+
0.556***

(0.168)
(0.167)
(0.161)
(0.167)

Highest ISCED
3
4
5B
5A
6

0.655*
1.072***
1.066***
1.584***
1.831***

(0.277)
(0.295)
(0.287)
(0.291)
(0.331)

0.570+
0.739*
0.818*
1.081**
1.131**

(0.339)
(0.362)
(0.350)
(0.352)
(0.398)

Highest EGP
II
IIIa, IV
IIIb, V, VI, VII

-0.191*
-0.190+
-0.513***

(0.086)
(0.112)
(0.131)

-0.270**
-0.160
-0.395*

(0.102)
(0.136)
(0.155)

Generation status
First generation
Second generation
Third generation

0.543+
0.227+
-0.171

(0.278)
(0.132)
(0.187)

0.708*
0.286+
-0.189

(0.356)
(0.159)
(0.228)

Family status
divorced or widowed
single

0.101
-0.101

(0.173)
(0.146)

0.186
-0.107

(0.209)
(0.170)

Number of siblings
East
Unemployed
Parent’s age
Mothertongue: German
Biological parents
Girl
Child’s age
Math test score

-0.061+
0.035
0.190
-0.020**
-0.475**
0.165
0.175**
0.022**
-

(0.034)
(0.109)
(0.142)
(0.007)
(0.155)
(0.126)
(0.066)
(0.008)

-0.022
-0.288*
0.233
-0.017*
-0.717***
0.065
0.078
0.020*
0.416***

(0.041)
(0.129)
(0.176)
(0.008)
(0.190)
(0.154)
(0.084)
(0.010)
(0.057)
47

Math test score^2
Reading test score
Reading test score^2

-

-0.075*
0.333***
-0.074*

(0.035)
(0.056)
(0.035)

Math mark
2
3
4
5 or 6

-

-0.231+
-1.420***
-3.006***
-0.685

(0.126)
(0.165)
(0.712)
(0.760)

German mark
2
3
4
5 or 6

-

-0.280*
-1.120***
-2.347***
-1.293+

(0.130)
(0.159)
(0.464)
(0.758)

Constant
26.248+
(14.143)
23.342
(17.119)
N
4572
4572
Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten; Sample B. Reference
categories: Income: 1. Quintile; ISCED: 2 or less; EGP: I; Generation Status: native; Family
Status: Married; Math mark: 1; German mark: 1. Significance levels: *** = p<0.001, ** =
p<0.01, * = p<0.05, + = p<0.10.

48

Figure S1: Net Worth Distribution

N=4,611. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample A.

49

Figure S2: Net Worth Distribution

N=4,572. Multiple imputed data (M=100) of NEPS starting cohort Kindergarten, Sample B.

50

