"x"
"1" "Issue Alignment and Partisanship in the American Public:"
"2" "Revisiting the 'Partisans without Constraint' Thesis"
"3" "Austin C. Kozlowski 1"
"4" "James P. Murphy 2"
"5" "1 Department   of   Sociology,   University of Chicago"
"6" "2 Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "Prior studies of  American  polarization suggest that the public gradually sorted themselves into partisan camps  in the late 20 th  century  while remaining largely non-ideological .  Drawing  on  more  recent  data, w e  reassess these trends and  discover  a striking increase in the ideological organization of  American  public  opinio n   in the beginning of the 21 st  century . Using a  broad  set of issues from the American National Election Studies, w e  identify rapid growth  in the correlation s   between political attitudes   from 2004 to  2016.  This  emergence of issue alignment  is most pronounced  within   the  economic and civil rights   domains , challenging the  notion  that   current  “culture wars”  are grounded in moral issues .  While elite subpopulations show the greatest gains, we find that economic issues become more highly correlated across the electorate.   We also  find   accelerated  growth  in the association between issue attitudes and partisanship during this period .   These findings paint a new picture of the American electorate as not only highly partisan but increasingly ideological."
"9" "INTRODUCTION"
"10" "It is common to hear pundits  declare  that America is a divided county, split into two diametrically opposed partisan factions. However, among scholars of public opinion, the nature of current polarization and the extent of these divisions remain open questions. Democratic and Republican party elites have indeed gravitated towards opposite ideological poles in recent decades (McCarty et al. 2006), but whether the public at large has followed similar trends remains unclear ( Abramowitz  and Saunders 2008; Layman,  Carsey , and Horowitz 2006; Hill, and  Tausanovitch  2015;  Lelkes  2016; Park 2017). A central unanswered question is whether the public has truly become more ideological or if contemporary mass polarization is better described as a change in the structure of partisan allegiances in a largely non-ideological electorate (Fiorina 2017)."
"11" "One particularly influential line of research has argued that the distribution of political attitudes has changed little in recent decades. The apparent ly  growing rift between Left and Right is  in fact  a result of heightened partisan sorting rather than attitudinal change. According to this explanation, as the two major parties more clearly differentiate themselves, members of the public are better able to identify and select the partisan label that best corresponds to their own stances on issues. By this account, contemporary polarization is something of an illusion; through partisan sorting, conservatives appear to become more conservative and liberals more liberal when in fact  few  political opinions have changed ( Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope 2008;  Levendusky  2009) ."
"12" "Baldassarri and Gelman (2008) provide  some of the strongest evidence for the partisan sorting hypothesis.   They distinguish   between   attitudinal polarization and partisan sorting  by comparing trends in  issue alignment   —   defined as the correlation between  issue  positions   —  and  partisan alignment   —   the  correlation between partisan self-identification and issue attitudes.   Using data from the American  National Election Stud y  (ANES) from 1972 to 2004,  they show that  issue alignment increased  little   in the late  20 th  century   while  partisan  alignment rose precipitously.  Taken together,  these  findings  suggest that  “ the main change in people’s attitudes   has more to do with a resorting of party labels among voters than with  greater constraint in their issue  attitude s ”  (Baldassarri and Gelman 2008:443) ."
"13" "There are growing reasons to believe that issue alignment may have  heightened  since 2004, and that the “partisans without constraint” model is no longer accurate. First, classic theories of public opinion posit a lag between elite and mass polarization ( Zaller  1992). This suggests that the public's reaction to elite polarization at the close of the 20 th  century may not  have  manifest ed  until after 2004. The media landscape has also transformed since 2004, with online media rising to prominence and strongly partisan cable news taking viewers away from more centrist broadcast news (Prior 2013). Lastly, recent years have witnessed  a number of  momentous political developments that captured public attention. Social movements such as Occupy Wall Street, the Tea Party, and Black Lives Mater garnered widespread support and recentered economic and racial issues in political discourse. This same period also encompassed the rise of both Barack Obama and Donald Trump, both galvanizing and divisive figures in national politics. Prior theory suggests that all these factors could have polarized the electorate and heightened both partisan and issue alignments. However, no study has yet systematically measured developments in alignments in the years since  Baldasarri  and Gelman’s influential  statement ."
"14" "In this study, we revisit the “partisans without constraint” thesis to test if it still serves as an adequate description of polarization in the contemporary American electorate, updating  Baldassarri and Gelman’s analysis with more recent waves of the ANES. We use the same set of ANES questions and measures of alignment as Baldassarri and Gelman, but we apply a flexible modeling strategy that allows us to inductively identify changes in alignment in the electorate through 2016."
"15" "First, we find that partisan alignment continued to increase between 200 4  and 2016 at an accelerated pace.   Second , we identify a  notable  increase in issue alignment during  recent years .  We find  particularly great  increases in inter-issue correlations among economic and civil rights issues, and more modest gains among moral issues. This finding challenges academic and popular discourses that  foreground  morally-charged   “culture wars” in contemporary  politics and   instead  suggests that issues of race and class are key grounds of political division. W e also  identify  increasing issue alignment  between  domains , particularly among the politically engaged .  This  increase in inter-issue correlation  suggest s  that   the political opinions  of  the public  are, for the first time in at least  7 0 years,  consolidating  around a  few  clear  axes of ideological opposition .  While it is beyond this study to directly specify the precise forces driving these shifts, we argue that the patterns in issue alignment we identify are most readily interpretable as responses to recent social movements and political campaigns rather than lagged reactions to elite polarization or responses to polarized media."
"16" "The   emergence of  issue alignment   suggests  that Baldassarri and Gelman’s characterization of the American public as “partisans without constraint” is  a less accurate depiction now than in 200 4 .   Our findings instead indicate  that the public is not only becoming more partisan, but that their attitudes across a wide array of issues are becoming ideologically  organized.   These trends challenge  Philip Converse’s (1964:47) longstanding  dictum  that the public is “innocent of ideology , ”  and motivate new thinking about how the contemporary public understands and responds to political information."
"17" "BACKGROUND"
"18" "Alignment and Polarization"
"19" "One reason for the persistent debate around the state of American mass polarization is that p olarization  itself is  a multifaceted  process  and the  specific   phenomenon  being measured   often   varies  from study to study.   Two  key   dimensions  of  polarization  deserve  particularly  car e ful distinction:  bimodality and alignment.  Bimodality  refers to   the  dissolution of the cent er and gravitation to the poles of  a  political spectrum  (DiMaggio, Evans, and Bryson 1996) .   In terms of partisan identity,  bimodal  polarization  implies  that  a   shrinking  portion of the electorate  identifies  as “moderate” or “independent.” In terms of issue attitudes,  bimodality  manifests as a  movement away from answers such as “neither agree nor disagree” or “neutral,” and a   proliferation   of  extreme responses on both ends   of the response  set .   Most existing evidence has stressed that bimodality has not  substantially  increased   among partisan identification or attitude distributions,  with the  possible  exception of  a few key issues such as abortion  ( DiMaggio et al. 1996;  Lelkes  2016;  Mason 2015;  Park 2017) ."
"20" "Alignment is defined not by the absence of centrists, but by the linear relation between multiple political distributions, or in other words, their correlation. It is possible for high alignment to  manifest  in a  fairly centrist  public if the disagreements that do exist are consolidated along relatively few dimensions. While high alignment does not necessarily imply extremism, it does imply  widespread  organization of public opinion around  ideologically- opposed  poles and a shrinking of the full range of observed opinion configurations (Baldassarri and Gelman 2008; Martin 2002)."
"21" "Previous scholarship has distinguished between two distinct forms of political alignment: partisan alignment and issue alignment. Partisan alignment, defined as the correlation between issue attitudes and partisan identities (Democrat or Republican; liberal or conservative), captures the extent to which issue attitudes systematically differ across partisan lines. Partisan alignment is maximized when it is possible to perfectly predict an individual’s stance on an issue given their partisan affiliation and vice versa. Issue alignment—the correlation between issue attitudes— indicates how often certain pairs of opinions co-occur in the population. Issue alignment is thus closely related to ideological consistency; it is highest when attitudes are predictably bundled together such that a given position on one issue always corresponds with a certain position on another."
"22" "The study of issue alignment  stretches back to   Philip  Converse’s (1964)  seminal  work on ideology in the mass public. Converse referred to inter- issue  correlation not as issue alignment but as “constraint,” emphasizing how, for an ideological individual, holding one opinion  seemingly  constrain s  the set of possible opinions on other issues.  Converse found , however, that constraint was startlingly low  in  the mass  public ;  most individuals reported a mixed bag of attitudes, freely mingling liberal and conservative opinions. Finding only  minimal  constraint ,   as well as  low attitude stability and  a  widespread  inability to articulate ideological reasoning ,  Converse famously  proclaimed  the  American  public to be “innocent of ideology.” Although controversial  at the time , the basic finding that most Americans’ attitudes show little sign of ideological patterning has proven remarkably robust over decades of scrutiny (Kinder and  Kalmoe  2017)."
"23" "Baldassarri and Gelman ’s  (2008)  study  provided powerful evidence that the second half of the 20 th  century was a period of  heightening  partisan alignment  but   consistently low   inter- issue  correlation .  Encompassing  a  diverse  range of political issues and  spanning  more than three decades,  their analyses  were able to identify  general trends in partisan and issue alignment, as well as specific  variations in these trends acro ss  issue domains  and between  socio- demographic subgroups .  Baldassarri and Gelman were not the first to claim  that belief systems of the mass public lacked ideological organization (Converse 1964)  or  that  partisan sorting increased in the  late 20 th  century (Fiorina, Abram, and Pope 2004) , b ut   their study’s  broad empirical scope  paired with   clear, powerful  findings   helped  establish the “partisans without constraint” thesis as  a  dominant  assessment  of  contemporary American polarization ."
"24" "Contemporary Mass   Polarization"
"25" "The  beginning of the  2 1 st  century witnessed renewed interest in the question of  mass  polarization .   A number of   recent   studies have  shown  a  widening  rift  in political attitudes between self-identi fied liberals and conservatives. However, these   studies  rely  overwhelmingly  on cross-sectional data  and are unable to determine   whether  this  widening gap  is  due to  attitudinal  change or partisan sorting  (Abramowitz and Saunders 2008;   Della Posta, Shi, and Macy 2015 ;  Fiorina and Abrams 2008 ) .   C ompelling findings have come out of studies using an individual-level measure of ideological consistency  (Abramowitz 2010; Pew Research 2014), which  suggested  that  Democrat and Republican identifying individuals became substantially more ideologically-consi stent between the  1990s and the 2010s .   Yet  these  scales too have been  criticized f or focusing on partisans and paying inadequate attention to the  politically  moderate and  unaffiliated  (Fior ina and  Levendusky  2006, 96–97)."
"26" "There are several reasons to expect that issue and partisan alignments may have grown in recent years. First, scholars have long hypothesized that the public responds to cues from political elites, but the  general public  has still not reached elite levels of polarization. It is possible that the  general public  is still responding to these elite cues, but effects are lagged due to a general inattention to politics ( Delli   Carpini  and  Keeter  1996). This effect would likely manifest as increasing alignment across issue domains, led by more politically sophisticated and followed by the politically disengaged ( Zaller  1992)."
"27" "Second, highly partisan media outlets on television and online have grown in popularity as alternatives to relatively centrist broadcast news, and some recent evidence suggests that consumption of these programs may play a role in fueling mass polarization ( Levendusky  2013; Prior 2013). Social media has also  drawn   recent  scrutiny for fostering political echo chambers where opinions can  crystallize and intensify  without outside challenge ( Boutyline  and Willer 2017). If new media  has strengthened  political alignments, we would expect to find  recent  growth largely concentrated among  the most avid consumers of social media and news ."
"28" "Lastly, the 2004-2016 period witnessed a series of momentous developments in American politics. The 2008 financial crisis caused massive public reactions  across the political spectrum . Both Occupy Wall Street and the Tea Party emerged from this crisis, each demanding dramatic  shifts  in economic policy and garnering widespread public support. The same year also witnessed the election of the first black president, and prior evidence suggests that racial attitudes gained renewed prominence during the Obama administration  ( Tesler  201 6 ) . Lastly, many commentators have speculated that the rise of Donald Trump has spur r ed mass polarization since his 2016 presidential campaign, particularly around issues of race and  immigration (Bartels 2018; Jacobson 2019). If these events shaped political alignments, we would expect to find growth in the corresponding issue domains following the respective events."
"29" "Recent work by Park (2017) has gauged  contemporary  trends in partisan sorting and political alignment using  more  current  data than Baldassarri and Gelman (2008) .   Park’s  findings suggest that  partisan sorting increased along multiple metrics between 1980 and 2012 and that  issue  constraint has remained low during this period.  However, Park’s measures of both partisan sorting and  issue  constraint differ from the measures used by Baldassarri and Gelman (2008),  making i t difficult to directly compare  the studies’ results .  Furthermore, Park’s study does not include 2016  ANES  data and therefore misses very recent changes in alignment.   Decisively  adjudicating whether the “partisans without  constraint ” thesis continues to be an  adequate  description o f  contemporary polarization requires  the application of the same  methods and measures  to more recent data , which is precisely  the  objective  of this study ."
"30" "DATA  AND METHODS"
"31" "Our analyses rely on the American National Election Studies’ (ANES) cumulative data set . The ANES was administered biennially from 1972 to 2004 (17 total waves). Since then, it has only been fielded during presidential election years (2008, 2012, and 2016).  We include in our sample all waves of the ANES from 1972 to 2016  except the 2002 wave, which was fielded entirely by telephone .   The  ANES  solicits a wide array of opinions on social and economic issues as well as respondents’ ideological and party self-identifications. Many of the issue attitude questions are asked repeatedly, some for several decades. We analyze the same set of issues as Baldassarri and Gelman, who included only questions that were asked in three or more waves of the time series. A full list of the issues included in our analyses is presented in Appendix  Table A1 ."
"32" "We examine trends in partisan alignment and issue alignment.  We   distinguish between two distinct form s  of partisan alignment:  party alignment  and  ideological alignment .  Following Baldassarri and Gelman, w e operationalize party alignment as the correlation of each attitudinal item with the respondent’s party identification on a seven-point scale (strong Democrat to strong Republican)  and  operationalize ideological alignment as the correlation between each attitudinal item and the respondent’s ideological identification on a seven-point scale (extremely liberal to extremely conservative). Lastly, to measure  issue alignment ,  we use the correlation between pairs of issue attitudes  in a given year .  Issue responses are recoded such that, for all questions, higher values indicate more conservative responses."
"33" "As some ANES waves oversample certain subpopulations, we applied survey weights in estimating correlation coefficients.   Over its history, the ANES has complemented in-person interviews with other modes.  Between 1984 and 2000, the ANES   fielded a combination of telephone and in-person interviews , and i n  2012 and 2016,  the  ANES  sample  included a mix   of face-to-face and Internet respondents.  To avoid potentially confounding mode effects,  we  l imit our analyses  exclusively  to the face-to-face , in-person  sample for  all waves . This involved  dropping  all Internet respondents in 2012 and 2016 and dropping  and telephone respondents  in  six earlier waves.   Pooling face-to-face, Internet, and telephone respondents (including the 2002 wave  comprised entirely of telephone interviews ) does not substantively alter results."
"34" "Modeling strategy"
"35" "While ANES  is a uniquely powerful dataset for studying American public opinion over time , few attitudinal items are asked consistently  in  all waves . Baldassarri and Gelman’s original study offers a creative solution  this methodological  challeng e . Rather than focusing on change in the opinion distribution of single items over time, they  use a multilevel modeling framework to  analyze pairwise-correlations between items within each year. Thus, even if a pair of items is not present in every year of the time series, those years where they do appear remain informative. We adopt a similar multilevel modeling strategy but adapt  the  approach to  inductively  identify changes in alignment trends over time."
"36" "To account for the possibility of intricate nonlinearities in levels of alignment over time, we innovate on Baldassarri and Gelman’s approach by using semi-parametric models that allow for nonlinear patterns to emerge from the data rather than imposing a functional form beforehand (Andersen 2009;  Keele  2008). First, for baseline estimates of general trends across all issues, we adopt smoothing-splines mixed effects models (SMEs), analogous to the random coefficient models used by Baldassarri and Gelman. We then use generalized additive mixed models (GAMMs) to obtain separate trend estimates for each issue domain. The use of non-parametric  models is especially important for our purposes to separate long-term trends from short-term responses to specific events, which parametric models may mask."
"37" "Smoothing spline mixed effects (SME) models, like other smoothing-spline models, accounts for nonlinearities by modeling an outcome variable as a series of polynomial functions. There are  a number of  potential  knots  that define breakpoints between the polynomial functions. In our case, the interval between each ANES wave from 1984 to 2016 has a unique polynomial function fit to it. The pre-1984 waves have relatively few items asked per year; the sparsity of data during this period forced us to impose a single polynomial function from 1972 to 1984. The SME includes a  penalty term  that shrinks the spline coefficients towards linearity  in order to  prevent overfitting."
"38" "What distinguishes the  mixed effects  smoothing spline model from normal smoothing spline models is its multilevel structure.  Following Baldassarri and Gelman (2008), correlations between items are nested within years in our models. T he “level-2” unit is an item-pair ( i,j ).  For models of partisan alignment,  i   corresponds to an issue attitude and  j  corresponds to either party or ideological self-identification.  For models of inter-issue constraint,  i  and  j  both correspond to issue attitudes.   At “level-1” each observation represents the correlation of  i   and  j  at wave  t . The SME includes separate smoothing functions for (1) the mean trend across all subjects and (2) each item-pair,  similar to  a random coefficient multilevel model. We fit the SME model using the  sme  library for R (Berk 2018)."
"39" "G eneralized additive mixed models (GAMM)  similarly  model an outcome variable as a series of polynomial functions (Wood 2017). GAMMs include a random-intercept to account for baseline differences between item-pairs. The advantage of GAMMs relative SMEs is that they allow us to include separate splines for each  issue   domain  within a single model . We fit our  GAMMs using the  gamm4  library for R (Wood and  Scheipl  2017).  To examine differences between issue domains, we add dummy variables  at  level-2 in our models  designating  the  domain: economic, moral, civil rights, or security . For analyses of issue alignment, level-2 (issue-pair) also includes a dummy variable designating a “cross-domain” pair when the two issues are from different  topical  domains."
"40" "Our results are presented in three sections. First, we present general trends in  partisan and issue  alignment s  across all issues. Second, we investigate differences in  trends  between issue domains .  Lastly, we compare trends in issue and partisan alignments between socio-demographic and political subgroups. We compare subgroups by separately running the  GAMM  model described above for each  sub group."
"41" "RESULTS"
"42" "We begin with the  SME models  for  party, ideological, and issue  alignment s  over time, depicted in Figure 1. The shaded region around  each  trend line contains the 95-percent confidence interval for the trend. To clarify the contrast between the 1972-2004 period studied by Baldassarri and Gelman and  the  subsequent waves, we shade the background for the post-2004 period."
"43" "Figure 1.  Estimates from  S moothing- S pline  M ixed- E ffects (SME) models of ideological, party, and issue alignment, 1972-2016."
"44" "The two forms of partisan alignment – ideological alignment and party alignment – are represented with dashed and solid  lines  respectively. Pre-2004 trends in partisan alignment largely accord with Baldassarri and Gelman’s findings. Party alignment rises consistently, but ideological alignment displays a more complicated trajectory; it dips in the early  1980s,  but  experiences  a pronounced spike in 2004. After 2004, both forms of partisan alignment continue their growth, reaching historic heights in 2016."
"45" "Issue alignment is represented with a dotted line in Figure 1. Matching Baldassarri and Gelman’s results, we find inter-issue correlation to be relatively stable between the 1970s and early 2000s. However, between 2000 and 2016, issue alignment experiences notable growth.  These findings suggest that issue stances were more highly correlated in 2016 than at any point in the prior four decades."
"46" "Differences across Issue Domain s"
"47" "To clarify and elaborate the general trends in alignment described above, we   explore differences in alignment trajectories between four   issue domains :  economic, moral , civil rights, and security .     The civil rights  domain refers primarily t o issues pertaining to race relations, while  women’s rights and gay rights are  included in the  moral domain."
"48" "Figure 2 displays results from GAMM  estimates of  trends in  ideological and party alignment s.   In the left panel of Figure 2, we see how the increase in ideological alignment is spread across issue domains. Economic, civil rights, and moral issues all show similar levels of correlation with ideological self-identification and all undergo similar trajectories over time. Ideological alignment grows gradually in each of these domains unti l  2004, then experiences accelerated growth through 2016. The security domain follows a similar pattern, but exhibits lower absolute levels of ideological alignment over full enture time period."
"49" "Figure 2.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of ideological and party alignment by issue domain, 1972-2016"
"50" "The right panel of Figure 2 displays GAMM results for party alignment. As with ideological alignment, we see party alignment increasing in all issue domains, with growth accelerating in recent years. Interestingly, while economic, civil rights, and moral issues all correlate with ideological self-identification at similar levels, they correlate differentially with party identification. We see that economic attitudes are most closely correlated with party identification, followed by civil rights attitudes, then moral. As with ideological alignment, security issues are the least associated with party identification. This rank ordering of domains is generally conserved over the entire time period, although moral and security issues share similar levels of party alignment in the beginning of first decades of the time series."
"51" "We next examine trends in issue alignment   by  topical domain , with  GAMM  estimates  presented in Figure 3.  Again, separate lines indicat e  economic, civil rights, moral, and security domains, but also “cross-domain” issue alignment –  the  correlation between  pairs of  attitudes   from  different   issue  domains.   We see little consistent growth in issue alignment prior to 2004, but several domains have begun to trend upward in recent years .  Economic alignment grows steadily after 2004, and civil rights issues show a spike of alignment in 2016 .  Interestingly, we  see  relatively little growth in issue alignment within the moral domain.   This finding  contrasts  with both academic and popular narratives that  emphasize   a  “culture war”  grounded in moral differences  as the organizing principle of public opinion (Frank 2004; Hunter and Wolfe 2006), but corroborates recent findings by Park (2017)."
"52" "Figure 3.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of issue alignment by issue domain, 1972-2016."
"53" "We find that cross-domain alignment is consistently lower than economic, civil rights, or moral domains  in Figure 3 , which is unsurprising given that issues within common domains are  topically related whereas issues across domains are not. We see general stability in the level of cross-domain issue alignment prior to 2004, but the more recent waves of data indicate rather rapid growth. This increase is particularly important in light of dominant theories of public opinion which suggest that adherence to an ideology spanning very different issues should be rare in the general public (Converse 1964; Kinder and Kalmoe 2016; Layman and Carsey 2002). We note that the most prominent increase in cross-domain alignment occurs in 2016. Because more recent data is not available we cannot yet assess if this heightened alignment will persist beyond 2016 or whether this single year is a “blip.” However, 2008 and 2012 also display noticably higher levels of cross-domain alignment than the historic average, suggesting that cross-domain issue alignment is indeed on the rise, even if 2016 was a uniquely polarized year."
"54" "Finally,  we see   noticeable  growth in issue alignment in the security domain as well. However, we caution that the security domain contains the fewest questions  and that these estimates are therefore less robust than other domains . In  the 2016 wave, only three questions are asked  from  the security domain: federal spending on crime, spending on  the space program , and spending on defense. Much of the final rise in the security domain’s issue alignment reflects a spike in the association between supporting defense spending and supporting crime spending."
"55" "Patterns across  Population  Subgroups"
"56" "We have so far observed that  the American public  as a   whole experienced   growth  in   bot h  partisan  and issue  alignments  in recent years.  However,  engagement  with politics varies widely within the electorate, and it is likely that gains in political alignments are not evenly distributed across the population.  Moreover, a s we mention above, alignment can still be high in a population with a large share of respondents giving middling or centrist responses . A ggregate statistics  can  therefore  obscure the segments of the population that remain non-partisan and non- ideological.  Lastly, from aggregate statistics it is difficult to discern within-group changes from population-level compositional changes.  F rom population-level estimates  alone , we cannot determine whether social groups are increasing alignment ,  or  if  high alignment groups (such as the highly educated) are simply comprising a larger share of the overall population."
"57" "W e  next   empirically examine  how trends  in alignments   differ  across  socio- demographic divides  that  commonly  structure the political  landscape.   To discern these differences , we re-run the models from the previous section separately on different subgroups in the populatio n.  The  f igures based on these results are equivalent to Figures 2 and 3 above  but  a separate panel is devoted to each issue domain  for clearer visualization ."
"58" "Baldassarri and Gelman  (2008)  found that the politically engaged were more likely to display both issue alignment and partisan alignment than the less  involved .  These findings accord with a long stream of research arguing that   the majority of  the elect orate lacks the knowledge or political sophistication  required to  assemble  an ideologically aligned set of attitudes and identities  ( Delli   Karpini  and  Keeter  1996; Jacoby 1991) .  In Figure 4, we explore  the  relation ship  of political engagement  with  political alignments  in recent years  by comparing trends across levels of  political  activity and knowledge ."
"59" "We first disaggregate  the sample  by level of  political  activity .   The  activities considered by the ANES include trying to influence the votes of others, attending a rally, wearing a sticker or button for a campaign, donating money to a campaign, writing a letter to a public official, or working for a campaign.  Alignment estimates for high , medium, and   low  activity  populations are represented by  solid,  dashed ,   and  dotted  lines, respectively.   The first two rows of panels represent party alignment and ideological alignment.  The pre-2004 trends accord with  conventional accounts :  partisan  alignments  are  higher  among  more politically active  respondents , and most growth over time is   confined to  these  group s  as well.  We find that both party and ideological alignments continue to rise after 2004 , and often at an accelerate d  rate .  We see consistent growth across levels of political activity and across topical domains."
"60" "Looking next at issue alignment, displayed in the third row of panels, we see more varied trends. As with partisan alignments, we see that issue alignment is consistently highest among the most politically active and lowest among the  in active. We see modest growth in issue alignments before 2004 which is largely confined to the highest activity group. Moral issue alignment appears to grow substantially at the beginning of the time series, but few questions are fielded in those years, producing relatively uncertain estimates. Yet we find much clearer patterns of growth across domains after 2004. In the civil rights domain, issue alignment rises for the medium and high activity groups but stays relatively stable in the lowest activity group. Economic issue alignment shows surprising growth across all levels of political activity, including the least active. By contrast, moral issue alignment shows inconsistent growth among the most active, and no discernable growth in the other groups. Lastly, cross-domain issue correlation grows considerably among the high interest  subpopulation . We also see a substantial increase in cross-domain alignment among the  high  activity group and slight gains in the  medium and  low activity group s ."
"61" "Figure 4.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and  i ssue  alignment s  by issue domain, stratified by level of political  activity , 1972-2016."
"62" "We find  comparable  patterns when the sample is broken down by level of political  knowledge .   Results are displayed in Figure 5.  The measure we use is a single score based on the interviewers’ holistic assessments of the respondent’s knowledge. Prior analyses found this score to be an excellent measure of political knowledge, with this single question closely corresponding to an elaborate 27 question scale (Bartels 1996;  Zaller  1986).   First, we examine  partisan alignments. Both party and ideological alignment grow across all domains for the most politically knowledgeable respondents, in some cases accelerating after 2004.  Partisan alignments similarly grow across domains among  average knowledge respondents. Some areas show little growth prior to 2004 (party alignment around economic issues, ideological alignment around both economic and civil rights issues) ,  but these areas all trend upward in recent years .  The least politically knowledgeable show relatively little growth in partisan alignments over the entire time series.  In total, this  evidence suggests that partisan alignment is not confined to the most politically savvy members of the population; it has recently extended to individuals with only average  knowledge of  politics. However, the most inattentive members of the public still show little partisan alignment."
"63" "We next examine trends in issue alignment across levels of political knowledge. Prior to 2004, there is no clear increase in issue alignment for any group. Yet recent survey waves have shown clear differentiations in issue alignment by level of knowledge. The high knowledge group increases its inter-issue correlations in the civil rights and economic domains, as well as across different domains. The average knowledge group exhibits a spike in issue alignment in the economic domain, and a small bump in cross-domain issue alignment after 2004. The least knowledgeable respondents show no gains in issue alignment, and even appear to decline in cross-domain alignment. In sum, these findings again suggest that the most growth is taking place among more politically knowledgeable respondents, yet even average respondents show occasional signs of increased issue alignment."
"64" "Figure 5.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and   issue  alignments  by issue domain, stratified by level of political  knowledge , 1972-2016."
"65" "We  next  focus on  four   social divisions  widely theorized to shape the contemporary political field: education ,  income,  religiosity , and race .  More  socioeconomically advantaged  individuals tend to have greater political knowledge, and evidence suggests that education  can  improve the ability to make ideological connections between issues ( Delli   Carpini  and  Keeter  1996; Jacoby 1991 ).  W ealthy populations  often have greater  potential to influence politics, and therefore may  have greater interest in aligning  with  parties and ideological groups  ( Gilens  and Page 2014) .   Recent scholarship   also suggests  that  religion is playing a growing role in mass polarization ,  particularly with reference to moral-political issues  ( Frank 2004;  Hunter and Wolfe  2006;  Wuthnow  2011 ).  Race historically and currently plays a profound role in structuring American political attitudes and identifications   (Brooks and  Manza  1997;  Dawson 199 5 ;  Tesler  2016 ) , and b ecause of this, trends in public opinion  often  differ markedly between whites and African Americans.  To determine the relation of  these major   social cleavages   to  recent increases in political alignments, we disaggregate our sample by  each of these categories ."
"66" "First,  in Figure  6   we compare  those with any colleg e education to those with none.   We examine partisan alignment across issue domains in the first two rows.   In  line  with previous research,   we find that the more highly educated   do  exhibit higher  levels of  partisan  alignments  over the full range of years .  Yet,  we also find that  both the college-educated and non-college-educated  subgroups  show similar  boosts  in  both party and ideological  alignments after 2004.   Inter-issue  correlation  similarly rises among those with and without a college education  in the civil rights and economic domains.  The moral domain , by contrast,  sees relative stability . Both groups increase in their cross-domain issue alignment, although at a slower rate compared to the civil rights and economic domains."
"67" "It is notable that the non-college educated subgroup displays meaningful growth in partisan and issue alignments, while the subpopulation with lowest political knowledge in the previous figure shows little comparable growth. Education is often considered to be closely akin to political sophistication, but our evidence suggests that these attributes are not interchangeable. Rather, political knowledge is great enough  within  the subpopulation without college degrees for distinct growth of alignment to occur."
"68" "Figure 6.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and   issue  alignments  by issue domain, stratified by education, 1972-2016."
"69" "Figure  7  stratifies trends  by income tercile.  The first two rows show  general upward  trends in party and ideological alignme nts within all income groups.  We see a particularly strong uptick in partisan alignments among economic issues in recent years, even  in  the  low - income  group .  I ssue alignment shows more varied trends by income group.  In the civil rights and moral domains, we see that  the  recent  increase of constraint  is confined to  the most  affluent population.  Cross-domain issue alignment similarly increases  the most among the wealthy while only  exhibiting modest growth   among the  less affluent .  Interestingly, economic inter-issue  correlation  spikes after 2004 in all income groups. Indeed, by 2016 the estimated correlation between economic issues is approximately 0.4  within the lowest  income tercile , suggesting  a  recent emergence of ideological organization of  economic attitudes  that cuts across social classes."
"70" "Figure 7.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and issue  alignment s by issue domain, stratified by income terciles, 1972-2016."
"71" "We next compare alignments by level of religious attendance, comparing those who attend religious services “almost every week” or more to those who attend either less than weekly or never. The first two rows of Figure 8 show general increases in partisan alignment  among both religious and non-religious subgroups. Trends are quite similar across groups; we see little difference in either growth rates or absolute levels of alignments by frequency of religious attendance. Interestingly, even the domain of moral issues shows little difference between the more and less devout."
"72" "Figure 8.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and issue  alignment s by issue domain, stratified by religious attendance, 1972-2016."
"73" "The third row of Figure  8  shows patterns in issue alignment by religious attendance. None of the groups exhibit considerable growth in the moral domain, yet inter-issue correlation heightens for all groups in the economic domain. Issue alignment in the civil rights domain and  across domains appears to grow most among the less religious, but these differences are mostly confined to 2016."
"74" "Figure 9.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and issue  alignment s by issue domain, stratified by race, 1972-2016."
"75" "In Figure  9 , we disaggregate patterns in alignment by race, specifically comparing white and  b lack populations.  We see sharper differences by race than by any of the previous  social  cleavages .  Party, ideological, and issue alignments all show relatively little or no growth among African Americans , whereas growth is striking, especially after 2004, in the white population.   This evidence suggests that increases in both partisan and issue alignments, especially post-2004,  were  largely confined to whit es ."
"76" "Additional subgroup analyses that divide the population by gender, region, age , and political interest  are depicted in  the  Appendix. We find relatively little variation in political alignments across  any of these  socio-demographic lines  other than political interest, which exhibits similar patterns to political activity ."
"77" "Lastly,  we compare  trends in issue alignment by party identification. Dominant theories anticipate party identifiers to display greater issue alignment  because they follow  a single party’s  ideologically consistent  political cues (Layman and  Carsey  2002;  Zaller  1992). We investigate this empirically in  Figure 10 ,  examining differences in issue alignment trends between self-identified Democrats, Republicans, and Independents."
"78" "Figure 10.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of issue alignment by issue domain, stratified by party identification, 1972-2016."
"79" "The trajectories we identify fluctuate but display general tendencies. Alignments among Democrats generally decrease between 1972 and 2004 but stabilize or climb in each of the three domains and across domain after 2004. Republicans showed greater growth than Democrats prior to 2004, but they show no consistent growth in issue alignment after 2004."
"80" "Independents exhibit a general decline in issue alignment across all areas except the economic .  This downward trends we see in civil rights, moral, and cross domain alignments are likely results of improved partisan sorting; respondents holding relatively consistent liberal or conservative attitudes are less likely to identify as “Independent” in the 2010s than in the 1970s ( Levendusky  2009). Yet the   boost  in economic  issue  alignment we observe mirrors  what we  find  across  other  social group ings  – the correlation between economic issues grew after 2004 even among groups that typically display minimal alignments.  In sum ,  disaggregating by political party reveals  that  increases  in issue alignment were not  restricted to a  single  side  of the political spectrum, but  also that growth  did not follow a unified trend across party lines."
"81" "CONCLUSION"
"82" "The center has not disappeared from the American political spectrum ( DiMaggio, Evans, and Bryson 1996; Fiorina 2017;  Lelkes  2016 ;  Park 2017 ), but those  who  diverge from the center are increasingly  organized around  a  few  consolidated  dimension s  of  ideological   opposition.  For decades, mass polarization progressed primarily through the mechanism of partisan sorting  (Baldassarri and Gelman 2008) .  This created an apparently growing gulf between liberals and  conservatives when ,  in fact ,   most of the   electorate  remained   non-ideological  (Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope 2008) .  But   partisan sorting alone cannot account for the  findings  presented above .  The attitudinal configurations that  comprise  contemporary political landscape  importantly differ  from  those observed  at the close of the 20 th  century .  Namely,  we find that  issue alignment , measured as the correlation between  political  attitudes ,  is tighter  now  than at any period in  at least 70 years .  In the terms of Layman and  Carsey  (2002),  the American public is  undergoing a period of  “conflict extension ” as   a growing number of  issues are  folded into  the  existing  pattern of   partisan   opposition ."
"83" "We find that  the growth of  issue alignment  after 2004  differ s  by topical domain.  The greatest gains occur among civil rights and economic issues, whereas moral  and security  issues  exhibit  little  growth .  We also  find  increasing  correlation between issues across  distinct  domains , suggesting the  growing tendency  within the electorate  to broadly organize very different issues along a single ideological axis."
"84" "Examining  trends in issue alignment  by  population subgroups reveal ed  key differences in how alignment has changed across social cleavages.  As anticipated by prior theorizing, the greatest gains in cross-domain correlation are found among the  socioeconomically advantaged and  politically  sophisticated  (Converse 1964; Layman and  Carsey  2002) .  However, we find consistent growth in  the intercorrelation of economic attitudes   within populations without college education, with low income, and with low levels of political activity .   African Americans comprise the only population without an observable uptick in economic  inter- issue  correlation .   This finding challenges the common narrative that  cultural  issues are the  at the heart of political polarization  but  corroborates recent accounts  tha t describe the spread of economic ideologies  across  socioeconomic lines (Hochschild 2016; S kocpol  and Williamson 2011) ."
"85" "The increases in alignments we identif y  within social groups  further  suggests that the population-level growth of alignments  do not purely reflect  compositional change s .  For instance,  because we see increases in alignments within levels of education,  the growth of alignment does  not appear to be solely a consequence of higher rates of formal education in the public.  Within-group change  also grants reassurance that our findings are  not merely  artifact s  of declining response rates. Like many surveys, ANES response rates fell greatly in the past two decades  (see Appendix Table A2) , and some evidence suggests that those who still respond to surveys tend to be more politically sophisticated  ( Keeter  et al. 2017) . However, the growing alignments among the politically sophisticated (and occasionally among the politically disengaged) that we find are unlikely to result solely from declining response rates."
"86" "W e also show that partisan alignment has increased at an accelerated pace in recent years, meaning that the  labels   of  “Democrat” and “Republican,”  as well as  “liberal” and “conservative ”  now  correspond to  more ideologically distinct groups  than at any point since  at least  the 1940s.   The   precise  mechanism  driving this shift  remain s  difficult to identify.  Partisan alignment can increase either through partisan sorting or by existing partisans improving the ideological consistency of their attitudes.   Baldassarri and Gelman (2008)  concluded  that the increase in partisan alignment between 1972 and 2004  was   the result of  sorting because  partisan  alignment  produced by   attitudinal  change would  have  engender ed  a concurrent increase in issue alignment, which they did not  observe . However, because  i ssue alig nment does increase  after 200 4 , it is possible that  some of the  rising partisan alignment is  the  result  of   attitude change rather than sorting  alone .  Effectively a djudicating these two plausible mechanisms would require panel data and  remains   important grounds  for future investigation."
"87" "I t is  also  beyond the scope of this  paper to conclusively specify   the  macro-level  forces   underpinning  the increase in issue alignment, but t he evidence we provide ,  along with findings from   previous literature ,  point to several likely  factors . First,  it is unlikely that the trends  in issue alignment  we observe are simply lagged response s  to cues from political elites. Politicians and  political spokespersons are  highly divided across all issue domains, and have been since the  close of the 20 th   century   (McCarty, Poole ,  and Rosenthal 2006)  Yet  the trends we observe in issue alignment are not equivalent  across domains; economic issue alignment begins its growth in 2008, yet civil rights alignment does not spike until 2016 and moral alignment shows little growth at all in recent years.  Moreover, in several cases  groups that  are highly engaged  in politics  and those who are  only moderately engaged  show upticks in issue alignment at the same time, while the “lag” model would suggest that more engaged respondents would respond more rapidly to elite cues  ( Zaller  1992) ."
"88" "A second hypothesis is that the growing consumption of hyper-partisan news is driving the polarization of the electorate ( Levendusky  2013; Prior 2013). We do indeed find that the increase in issue alignment is most pronounced among the politically knowledgeable and engaged. Because the ANES does not ask consistent questions about media consumption over the full time series, and because the very nature and forms of media consumption have evolved so greatly since the 1970s, we cannot  systematically  test how alignments differ by level of media consumption.   To provide preliminary evidence to this point, we show  cross-sectional  differences in alignments by media consumption for the year 2016 in the Appendix  (Figures A 5  and A 6 ) . We find  surprisingly  little difference in partisan or issue alignments by frequency of news consumption  or  by frequency of social media use. Moreover, polarized media alone  do es  not explain the different timings and magnitudes of issue alignment’s growth  across  economic, civil rights, and moral domains. We do not doubt that news consumption plays a role in polarization processes (Prior 2013 )  but this factor does not sufficiently explain the patterns of alignment we observe."
"89" "The varying trends in issue alignment we observe are most easily interpretable as responses to key political events. The rise of economic issue alignment begins around 2008, coinciding with the financial crisis. Immediately following the financial crisis, the Tea Party and Occupy Wall Street articulated opposing ideological responses. The rhetoric and the goals of each of these movements have durably fixed themselves in national politics and continue to be voiced by political leaders such as Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders (Milkman 2017; Skocpol and Williamson 2011).  G iven its timing, the growth of economic issue alignment cannot be explained solely  by the   economic populist ideology  promoted by Donald Trump.  It is, however, illuminating to recognize that economic  alignment   had been growing among whites and the working class since 2004. Thus, while Trump did not cause the wave of working-class economic ideology we observe, his campaign may have responded to  it  and  effectively  capitalized  upon  it."
"90" "On the other hand, civil rights issue alignment shows relatively little growth until its surge in 2016. The lateness and abruptness of this growth seems to suggest a reaction to political events between  2012 and 2016 . Indeed, racial issues gained renewed prominence in the American politics with the emergence of Black Lives Matter in 2013 and were again brought to the fore in the 2016 election by Trump’s racially charged rhetoric, particularly surrounding the issue of immigration (Sides,  Tesler , and  Vavreck  2019). However, lacking panel data direct ly  measuring knowledge, interest, and sympathy for these movements, we leave direct testing of this hypothesis to future research."
"91" "Although the growth of alignment does not imply the  emergence  of extremism nor the dissolution of the center, it carries its own distinct set of  consequences  for democratic society.   Classic theories of public opinion posit  that a more aligned public  benefit s  from improved  understanding and communication with political elites  (Converse 1964 ;  Lazarsfeld  et al. 1944 ) .  Political elites  are typically display high consistency  with a liberal or conservative ideology across issues and  tend to  speak about issues in ideological terms. Ordinary citizens, on the other hand, are more likely to mix liberal and conservative stances,  with  evidence suggesting  that this inconsistency   reflects an inability to  think through politics in the terms of liberal/conservative ideology  ( Delli   Carpini  and  Keeter  1996 ; Jacoby 1995 ) .  Scholars  have long worried that the democratic process is compromised  if   members of the  public  are unable  to conceptualize issues in the same terms as their representatives (Converse 1964;  Somin  1998).  But a s issue and partisan alignment increase, citizens’ views more closely resemble those of their representatives,  potentially improving  political responsiveness  (Luskin 1990 ;  Zaller  1992 ) .  Indeed, recent analyses of the verbatim responses of ANES respondents has identified growing usage of ideological, politically sophisticated reasoning in the public over time  (Wattenberg 2019) . Taken with our findings above, this suggests that individuals with at least a moderate knowledge of politics are beginning to understand politics through the same liberal-conservative lens used by political elites."
"92" "Yet more recently, scholars have begun to emphasize the more troubling consequences of political alignment and polarization. Mounting evidence shows that “affective polarization” is on the rise, with each party’s affiliates reporting heightened animosity towards the opposing party (Iyengar et al. 2019). Recent studies suggest that affective polarization is greatest when there are strong attitudinal differences between the parties. Webster and Abramowitz (2017) find that dislike towards the opposing party is mediated by the degree of difference in issue attitudes, and  Bougher  (2017) finds issue alignment to be associated with greater political hostility, independent of partisan self-identification. Scholars have thus argued that partisan sorting can fuel cross-party antipathy by heightening the differences between the two parties’ supporters  (Mason 2015; but see  Yelkes  2018). Our findings suggest that not only partisan sorting but also issue alignment is intensifying attitudinal differences between the two parties’ affiliates. The growing political alignments that we observe are therefore likely to produce  yet firmer  grounds for  political hostility and  continued affective polarization."
"93" "These theories together suggest that heightened partisan and issue alignments may enhance understanding and responsiveness between political leaders and their constituents, but at the same time erode understanding and goodwill between opposing partisans within public. Moreover, as individuals organize their opinions around relatively few, well-defined political spectra, large swaths of the full “belief space” become sparse. This means both that political conflicts are consolidating around the same major ideological axes and that novel and creative configurations of political ideas are increasingly rare. Prior to this point, the unidimensional liberal/conservative division of political elites has been counterbalanced by more diffuse and cross-pressured divisions within the electorate. Although the public remains largely moderate in their political views, the evidence we present suggests that they are beginning to follow political elites in organizing their opinions around a few select axes of opposition. Theorists have historically puzzled over the problems posed by an ideologically disorganized electorate. If the trends we identify persist, theorists will have to begin to reckon with the implications of an organized one."
"94" "References"
"95" "Abramowitz,  A lan   I.   2010.   The Disappearing Center: Engaged Citizens, Polarization, and American Democracy . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press"
"96" "Abramowitz,  Alan I., and Kyle L. Saunders.  2008.  “ Is  P olarization a  Myth?”   The Journal of Politics  70(2) :542-555."
"97" "Andersen, Robert.  2009. “ Nonparametric  M ethods for  M odeling  N onlinearity in  R egression  A nalysis. ”   Annual Review of Sociology  35:67-85."
"98" "Baldassarri, Delia, and Andrew Gelman.  2008. “ Partisans without  C onstraint: Political  P olarization and  T rends in American  P ublic  O pinion. ”   American Journal of Sociology  114 (2) : 408-446."
"99" "Bartels, Larry M.  1996. “Uninformed Votes: Information Effects in Presidential Elections.”   American Journal of Political Science  40 (1) :194-230"
"100" "Bartels, Larry M.  2018. “ Partisanship in the Trump  E ra. ”   The Journal of Politics  80 ( 4 ) : 1483-1494."
"101" "Berk, Maurice. 2018. “ Smoothing-splines Mixed-effects Models in R using the  sme  Package:  a  Tutorial .” Available at  https://rdrr.io/cran/sme/f/inst/doc/Tutorial.pdf ."
"102" "Bougher , Lori D. 2017. “The correlates of discord: identity, issue alignment, and political hostility in polarized America.”  Political Behavior  39(3):731-762."
"103" "Boutyline , Andrei, and Robb Willer. 2017. “The social structure of political echo chambers: Variation in ideological homophily in online networks.”  Political Psychology  38(3):551-569."
"104" "Brooks, Clem, and Jeff  Manza .  1997. “ Social  C leavages and  P olitical  A lignments: US  P residential  E lections, 1960 to 1992. ”   American Sociological Review  62(6): 937-946."
"105" "Converse, Philip E. 1964 .  “The Nature of  Belief Systems in Mass Publics.” pp.206-61 in  Ideology and Discontent , edited by D . E.  Apter ,  New York : Free Press."
"106" "Delli   Carpini , Michael X. and Scott  Keeter . 1996.  What Americans Know about Politics and why it Matters . New Haven, NJ: Yale University Press."
"107" "DiMaggio, Paul, John Evans, and Bethany Bryson.  1996. “ Have Americans ’   S ocial  A ttitudes  B ecome  M ore  P olarized? ”   American  J ournal of Sociology  102 ( 3 ) :690-755."
"108" "Fiorina, Morris P., Samuel J. Abrams, and Jeremy C. Pope. 2004.  Culture War? The Myth of a Polarized America.  New York: Pearson Longman."
"109" "Fiorina, Morris P., and Samuel J. Abrams.  2008. “Political P olarization in the American  P ublic. ”   Annual Review of Political Science  11:563-588."
"110" "Fiorina, Morris P., Samuel A. Abrams, and Jeremy C. Pope.  2008.   “ Polarization in the American  P ublic: Misconceptions and  M isreadings . ”   The Journal of Politics  70 ( 2 ) :556-560."
"111" "Fiorina, Morris.  2017.   Unstable Majorities: Polarization, Party Sorting, and Political Stalemate .  Stanford, CA:  Hoover Press."
"112" "Fiorina, Morris P., and Matthew  Levendusky .   “Disconnected: The Political Class versus the People—Rejoinder.”  pp. 95-110 i n  Red and Blue Nation?  Characteristics and Causes of America’s Polarized Politics ,  edited b y Pietro S.  Ni vola  and David W. Brady.   Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press."
"113" "Frank, Thomas. 2004. What’s  the Matter  w ith Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart of America . New York: Henry Holt."
"114" "Gilens , Martin, and Benjamin I. Page.  2014.   “Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest G roups, and  Average C itizens. ”   Perspectives on P olitics  12 ( 3 ) : 564-581."
"115" "Hill,  Seth J., and Chris  Tausanovitch . 2015.   “ A  D isconnect in  R epresentation? Comparison of  T rends in  C ongressional and  P ublic  P olarization. ”   The Journal of Politics  77( 4 ) : 1058-1075."
"116" "Hunter, James  D.   and Alan Wolfe. 2006 .  Is There a Culture War ? A Dialogue on Values and American Public Life .   Washington DC: Brookings ."
"117" "Iyengar,  Shanto ,  Yphtach   Lelkes , Matthew  Levendusky , Neil Malhotra, and Sean J. Westwood.  2019.   “ The origins and consequences of affective polarization in the United States.\"  Annual Review of Political Science  22:129-146."
"118" "Jacobson, Gary C. 2019.  Presidents and Parties in the Public Mind . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"119" "Jacoby, William G.  1991. “ Ideological identification and issue attitudes.\"  American Journal of Political Science   35(1) :178-205."
"120" "Jacoby, William G.  1995. “ The  S tructure of  I deological  T hinking in the American  E lectorate. ”   American Journal of Political Science   39(2) :314-335."
"121" "Jennings, M. Kent.  1992. “ Ideological thinking among mass publics and political elites.\" Public Opinion Quarterly 56 ( 4 ): 419-441."
"122" "Kalmoe , Nathan P.  2019. “ Speaking of Parties… Dueling Views in a Canonical Measure of Sophistication. ”   Public Opinion Quarterly  83 ( 1 ) : 68- 90. Keeter , Scott, Nick Hatley, Courtney Kennedy, and Arnold Lau.  2017. “ What low response rates mean for telephone surveys. ”   Pew Research Center  Report,  1-39."
"123" "Keele , Luke John.  2008.  Semiparametric  R egression for the  S ocial  S ciences .  New York, NY:   John Wiley & Sons."
"124" "Kinder, Donald R., and Nathan P.  Kalmoe . 2017.  Neither Liberal nor Conservative: Ideological Innocence in the American Public . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"125" "Krosnick, Jon A.  1990.   “ Government policy and citizen passion: A study of issue publics in contemporary America. ”   Political  B ehavior  12 ( 1 ) :59-92."
"126" "Luskin, Robert C.  1990. “ Explaining political sophistication. ”   Political Behavior  12 ( 4 ) : 331-361."
"127" "Layman, Geof frey C., and Thomas M.  Carsey . 2002. “ Party Polarization and C onflict  Extension  in the American  E lectorate. ”   American Journal of Political Science   46(4): 786-802."
"128" "Layman, Geoffrey C., Thomas M.  Carsey , and Juliana M . Horowitz. 2006. “Party P olarization in American  P olitics: Characteristics,  C auses, and  C onsequences. ”   Annual  Rev iew of  Poli tical  Sci ence  9:83-110."
"129" "Lazarsfeld , Paul F., Bernard  Berelson , and Hazel Gaudet.  1944.  The People’s Choice: How the Voter Makes up his Mind in a Presidential Campaign . New York: Columbia University Press."
"130" "Lelkes ,  Yphtach .  2016. “ Mass polarization: Manifestations and  M easurements. ”   Public Opinion Quarterly  80 ( S 1 ) :392-410."
"131" "Lelkes ,  Yphtach .  2018. “ Affective polarization and ideological sorting: A reciprocal, albeit weak, relationship. ”   The Forum ,  16 ( 1 ):67-79 ."
"132" "Levendusky , Matthew.  2009.  The  P artisan sort: How liberals became Democrats and conservatives became Republicans . University of Chicago Press ."
"133" "Milkman, Ruth.  2017.  “ A new political generation: Millennials and the post-2008 wave of protest. ”   American Sociological Review  82 ( 1 ) :1-31."
"134" "Martin, John Levi.  2002. “ Power,  A uthority, and the  C onstraint of  B elief  S ystems. ”   American Journal of Sociology  107 ( 4 ) :861-904."
"135" "Mason, Lilliana.  2015.   “ I  D isrespectfully agree ’ : The  D ifferential  E ffects of  P artisan  S orting on  S ocial and  I ssue  P olarization. ”   American Journal of Political Science  59 ( 1 ) :128-145."
"136" "McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal.  2006.   Polarized America: The  D ance of  I deology and  U nequal  R iches .  Cambridge, MA:  MIT  Press ."
"137" "Park,  Barum . 2017. “ How Are We Apart? Continuity and Change in the Structure of Ideological Disagreement in the American Public, 1980–2012. ”   Social Forces  96( 4 ) :1757-1784."
"138" "Pew Research Center. 2014. “Political Polarization in the American Public.” Available at   http://www.people-press.org/2014/06/12/political-polarization-in-the-american-public/"
"139" "Prior, Markus.  2013.   “ Media and  P olitical  P olarization. ”   Annual Review of Political Science  16: 101-127."
"140" "Ryan, John Barry.  2011.   “ Accuracy and bias in perceptions of political knowledge. ”   Political Behavior  33 ( 2 ) :335-356."
"141" "Sides, John, Michael  Tesler , and Lynn  Vavreck . 2019.  Identity crisis: The 2016 Presidential Campaign and the Battle for the Meaning of America . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"142" "Somin , Ilya. 1998. “Voter ignorance and the democratic ideal.”  Critical Review  12(4):413-458."
"143" "Tesler , Michael.  2016   Post- R acial or  M ost- R acial?:  Race and  P olitics in the Obama Era .  Chicago, IL:  University of Chicago Press."
"144" "Wattenberg, Martin P.  2019. “ The Changing Nature of Mass Belief Systems: The Rise of Concept and Policy Ideologues. ”   Critical Review  31 ( 2 ):1 98-229."
"145" "Webster, Steven W., and Alan I. Abramowitz.  2017. “ The  I deological  F oundations of  A ffective  P olarization in the US  E lectorate. ”   American Politics Research  45 ( 4 ) :621-647."
"146" "Wood, Simon. 2017.  Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R .  New York, NY:   Chapman & Hall/CRC Press."
"147" "Wood S imon and Fabian  Scheipl .  2017 .  “ gamm4: Generalized additive mixed models using  mgcv  and lme4.R package version 0. 2 - 5 . ”  Available at http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=gamm4"
"148" "Wuthnow , Robert.  2011.  Red S tate  R eligion:  F aith and  P olitics in America's  H eartland .  Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press ."
"149" "Zaller , John. 1986. “Analysis of Information Items in the 1985 ANES Pilot Study,” ANES Pilot Study Report, No.  NES 002261."
"150" "Zaller , John. 1992.  The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion .  Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University Press."
"151" "APPENDIX"
"152" "Appendix  Table  A 1 .  List of issues included in analysis and ANES variable names."
"153" "Economic Issues"
"154" "Civil Rights Issues"
"155" "Federal spending on gov. services"
"156" "vcf0839"
"157" "Problem if some have better chances"
"158" "vcf9016"
"159" "Federal spending on the poor"
"160" "vcf0886"
"161" "Affirmative action"
"162" "vcf0867a"
"163" "Should government guarantee jobs"
"164" "vcf0809"
"165" "All people should be treated more equally"
"166" "vcf9018"
"167" "Government health insurance"
"168" "vcf0806"
"169" "Blacks got less than they deserved"
"170" "vcf9042"
"171" "Federal spending on childcare"
"172" "vcf0887"
"173" "Government should ensure jobs for blacks"
"174" "vcf9037"
"175" "Federal spending on assistance to blacks"
"176" "vcf9050"
"177" "Amount of government aid to blacks"
"178" "vcf0830"
"179" "Federal spending on homelessness"
"180" "vcf0893"
"181" "Have equal rights gone too far"
"182" "vcf9014"
"183" "Federal spending on welfare"
"184" "vcf0894"
"185" "Blacks should not have favors"
"186" "vcf9040"
"187" "Federal spending on food stamps"
"188" "vcf9046"
"189" "Society should ensure equal opportunity"
"190" "vcf9013"
"191" "Federal spending on public schools"
"192" "vcf0890"
"193" "Should worry less about equality"
"194" "vcf9017"
"195" "Federal spending on social security"
"196" "vcf9049"
"197" "School busing"
"198" "vcf0817"
"199" "Federal spending on AIDS"
"200" "vcf0889"
"201" "School integration"
"202" "vcf0816"
"203" "Federal spending on college aid"
"204" "vcf0891"
"205" "Conditions make it hard for blacks to succeed"
"206" "vcf9039"
"207" "Federal spending on the environment"
"208" "vcf9047"
"209" "Blacks must try harder"
"210" "vcf9041"
"211" "Does civil rights push too fast"
"212" "vcf0814"
"213" "Problem that not all have equal chances"
"214" "vcf9015"
"215" "How much has position of blacks changed"
"216" "vcf0813"
"217" "Moral Issues"
"218" "Security Issues"
"219" "Gays in military"
"220" "vcf0877"
"221" "Defense spending"
"222" "vcf0843"
"223" "Laws to protect homosexuals"
"224" "vcf0876a"
"225" "Dealing with urban unrest"
"226" "vcf0811"
"227" "Should adjust views of moral behavior"
"228" "vcf0852"
"229" "Cooperation with the USSR"
"230" "vcf0841"
"231" "Tolerance of different values"
"232" "vcf0854"
"233" "Federal spending on foreign aid"
"234" "vcf0892"
"235" "Gays allowed to adopt children"
"236" "vcf0878"
"237" "Federal spending on crime"
"238" "vcf0888"
"239" "Emphasis on traditional values"
"240" "vcf0853"
"241" "Federal spending on science and space"
"242" "vcf9048"
"243" "New lifestyles break down society"
"244" "vcf0851"
"245" "Women in the workplace"
"246" "vcf0834"
"247" "When should abortion be allowed"
"248" "vcf0837"
"249" "Prayer in schools"
"250" "vcf9043"
"251" "Appendix Table A2 . ANES Response Rates."
"252" "Year"
"253" "Response Rate"
"254" "2016"
"255" "50 †"
"256" "2012"
"257" "38 †"
"258" "2008"
"259" "59.5 †"
"260" "2004"
"261" "66.1 †"
"262" "2000"
"263" "60.5"
"264" "1998"
"265" "63.8"
"266" "1996"
"267" "59.8"
"268" "1994"
"269" "72.1"
"270" "1992"
"271" "74.0"
"272" "1990"
"273" "70.6"
"274" "1988"
"275" "70.5"
"276" "1986"
"277" "67.7"
"278" "1984"
"279" "72.1"
"280" "1982"
"281" "72.3"
"282" "1980"
"283" "71.8"
"284" "1978"
"285" "68.9"
"286" "1976"
"287" "70.4"
"288" "1974"
"289" "70.0"
"290" "1972"
"291" "75.0"
"292" "† AAPOR rr1 response rates."
"293" "All others calculated as number of interviews divided by number of “all age-eligible citizens, randomly selected among individuals living in sample households,” taken from https://electionstudies.org/data-quality/"
"294" "Appendix Figure A1.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and inter-issues by issue domain, stratified by gender, 1972-2016."
"295" "Appendix Figure A2.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and inter-issues by issue domain, stratified by region, 1972-2016."
"296" "Note : Respondents were coded “South” if they reside in any of the following states:  AL, AR, DE, D.C., FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA, WV."
"297" "Appendix Figure A3.  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and inter-issues by issue domain, stratified by age, 1972-2016."
"298" "Appendix Figure A 4 .  Estimates from Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) of party, ideological, and inter-issues by issue domain, stratified by  interest in political campaigns , 1972-2016."
"299" "Appendix Figure A 5 .  Issue and partisan alignments by issue domain stratified by  frequency of  news consumption; 2016."
"300" "Appendix Figure A 6 .  Issue and partisan alignments by issue domain stratified by  frequency of  social media consumption; 2016."
