The indelible weight of place: Childhood neighborhood disadvantage, timing of exposure,
and obesity across adulthood
Steven Elías Alvarado1
Cornell University
Abstract:
I use 28 (1986-2014) years of restricted geocoded NLSY data and find positive associations
between exposure to childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity and BMI among
individuals growing up and entering adulthood during the rise of obesity in the United States.
Sibling fixed effects and cousin fixed effects models partially address unobserved confounding
nested in the nuclear as well as extended family. Furthermore, exposure to neighborhood
disadvantage in adolescence is most salient, providing insight into when policy intervention may
be most effective. Results are robust to alternative specifications for neighborhood disadvantage,
ages of exposure, and to alternative sampling strategies.
Keywords:
Neighborhood disadvantage, obesity, fixed effects
Funding:
There are no funding agencies to report.

1

336 Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY 14850; alvarado@cornell.edu; 607.255.6289 (phone); 607.255.8473 (fax)

1. Introduction
Obesity threatens the well-being of over 93 million individuals in the United States
because it increases the risk of weight-related morbidity such as heart disease, stroke, type 2
diabetes and certain cancers (Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010; National Center for Health Statistics,
2015; OECD, 2014). Efforts to eradicate obesity in the U.S. have been generally unsuccessful
(Zylke and Bauchner, 2016), with obesity currently afflicting 40 percent of adults (Flegal et al.,
2016; Ogden et al., 2016). Its geographic concentration amidst pockets of poverty has also made
it a central feature of contemporary inequality research. Indeed, scholars have found that where
one resides can in fact predict the chances of becoming obese (Black and Macinko, 2008, 2010),
suggesting that variation in resources in the local residential context can predict unhealthy
weight. What remains underdeveloped, however, is an understanding of the long-term
association between residential context and obesity across the life course (Kravitz-Wirtz, 2016).
Specifically, we know little about how childhood neighborhood context and adult obesity are
associated and how variation in exposure across developmental stages may moderate this
association.
The rise in obesity has acutely affected individuals from low-socioeconomic backgrounds
(Lochner, 2011; Ogden et al., 2010; Sobal and Stunkard, 1989). Accordingly, placed-based
research on obesity and related health outcomes has proliferated (Black and Macinko, 2008;
Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010; Sampson, 2003a, 2003b). Given the negative consequences
associated with obesity on educational attainment, wages, employment, and medical care costs
(Cawley, 2015), it is imperative that scholars and policymakers gain a clearer understanding of
how neighborhoods contribute to obesity. Furthermore, of special interest to sociological theory

1

about neighborhood effects and policy is an understanding of how and when neighborhood
influence manifests (Ellen and Turner, 1997; Sharkey and Faber, 2014).
The current analysis asks two main questions: (1) Is childhood neighborhood
disadvantage associated with adult obesity and (2) does the timing of exposure moderate this
association? This paper capitalizes on 28 years of restricted geocoded data (1986 – 2014) from
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79) and the NLSY Children and Young
Adults cohort (NLSY:CYA) that, to my knowledge, have never been used before to assess the
association between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity. These data are
well-suited to study this topic because they extend across the exact same time period when both
income segregation and obesity expanded in the United States and because they allow for fixed
effects models that control for unobserved confounders.

2. Concentrated disadvantage
The geographic concentration of disadvantage limits individuals’ life chances by
restricting access to essential social and economic resources (Firebaugh and Farrell, 2015;
Massey and Denton, 1993; Sharkey, 2013; Sharkey and Elwert, 2011; Wilson, 1987). The trend
in segregation by socioeconomic status (SES), in particular, has had enormous impact on the
ability of residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods to improve their life-chances (Reardon and
Bischoff, 2011; Reardon et al., 2015; Wilson, 1987, 1991). Moreover, unhealthy environments
are often passed down from one generation to the next (Sharkey, 2013).
Neighborhoods need special attention as one source of the obesity epidemic because of
their ability to encapsulate the “obesogenic” conditions, which include prevailing norms, social
connectedness, conditions of the built environment, sources of food, and safe places to exercise,

2

that surround individuals and may be associated with weight (Lipek et al., 2015; Swinburn et al.,
1999).
Critical, however, to estimating neighborhood effects on obesity is addressing the
problem of unobserved selection (e.g., the bias introduced by imbalances of underlying timeconstant family characteristics that affect neighborhood selection and health such as motivation,
genes, behaviors, and other attributes that often go unmeasured in observational data) that could
render seemingly statistically significant effects spurious (Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010). Beyond
obesity and other health outcomes, selection bias challenges research that attempts to estimate all
contextual effects (Durlauf, 2004; Fleischer and Roux, 2008; Hauser, 1970, 1974; Oakes et al.,
2015). One method to address unobserved selection is by using fixed effects. Building on
previous neighborhood scholars that have used fixed effects (Aaronson, 1998; Vartanian and
Houser, 2012; Yang and South, 2018), I use both sibling and cousin fixed effects to control for
unobserved confounders nested at the level of the nuclear and extended family, respectively.
Fixed effect models adjust for anything that may be unobserved and invariant between family
members that could impact neighborhood selection and outcomes and therefore bias results
(Allison, 2009; Gangl, 2010; Greene, 2008; Halaby, 2004; Johnston and DiNardo, 1997; Oakes,
2004; Wooldridge, 2002). The major weakness of the FE approach is that unobserved
characteristics that differ between family members, such as parents’ psychological and emotional
states, could impact respondent’s differently and therefore bias results. Still, any psychological
dispositions, such as those that are genetically rooted and pose problems in the sibling FE
models, should be at least partially addressed in the cousin FE models.
Along with addressing issues of endogeneity, assessing the long-term consequences of
neighborhood disadvantage using panel data is an equally pertinent research goal (Boone-

3

Heinonen and Gordon-Larsen, 2012; Entwisle, 2007; Rodgers GP and Collins FS, 2012).
Studying the long-term effects of exposure to disadvantaged neighborhoods on obesity across the
life course can shed light on the lingering impact of childhood context on health.

2.1 Neighborhood SES and weight
The social and economic profiles of neighborhood residents mold the environment in
which behaviors and attitudes can become normative and can influence weight outcomes (Crane,
1991; Jencks and Mayer, 1990; Kawachi and Berkman, 2003; Sampson, 2003a). To my
knowledge, only three studies have examined the influence of childhood neighborhood
conditions on adult obesity. Kravitz-Wirtz (2016) used Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
data and found that childhood exposure, especially during adolescence, to neighborhood
disadvantage increased the likelihood of obesity in adulthood. The Kravitz-Wirtz paper provides
essential foundational knowledge about the relationship between childhood neighborhood
disadvantage and adult obesity. Key differences are that the Kravitz-Wirtz paper only examined
obesity between 18 and 30 while the current paper examines obesity through age 42, KravitzWirtz do not control for unobserved confounders, the sample size of the current paper is roughly
5.5 times that of the Kravitz-Wirtz paper, and the current paper examines all races and ethnicities
(rather than simply black and white respondents in the Kravitz-Wirtz paper). Therefore, the
current paper builds off of the Kravitz-Wirtz paper and extends our knowledge about this process
by examining obesity across a longer period of adulthood, controlling for unobserved
confounders, and including a much larger and diverse sample of respondents. Critically,
controlling for unobserved selection bias may yield stronger inferences about the relationship
between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity. Lippert (2016) found that

4

neighborhood poverty in childhood was positively associated with obesity in adulthood. This
study did not separate childhood and adult neighborhood conditions and did not account for
unobserved selection bias. Vartanian and Houser (2012) used sibling fixed effects and found that
socioeconomically advantaged neighborhoods amplified the positive influence of childhood
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) usage on BMI in adulthood. These authors
also found differential effects for the interaction between SNAP and neighborhood quality by
developmental periods.
Other scholars have focused on the influence of adult neighborhood SES on weight in
adulthood. For instance, Ruel and colleagues (2010) and Robert and Reither (2004) found that
neighborhood disadvantage was positively associated with adults’ BMI. The former study was
limited in its ability to even partially account for unobserved selection bias through quasiexperimental techniques and also only examined women. The latter study was similarly limited
in its ability to account for unobserved selection bias and was also limited because it only
examined cross-sectional data. Harrington and Elliot (2009) found similar results among a crosssection of Canadian adults, but were also limited by their ability to account for unobserved
selection bias. Yang and South (2018) use NLSY data – from the 1979 cohort only – and find
that adult neighborhood poverty is associated with adult BMI among whites, but not among
blacks or Latinos. They also control for unobserved confounders by using within-person fixed
effects. Experimental evidence from the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) project demonstrates
that the offer to move to a lower-poverty neighborhood can have beneficial long-term effects on
obesity and weight (Kling et al., 2007; Ludwig et al., 2011; Sanbonmatsu et al., 2012). However,
the specialized sample of families living in public housing in high poverty neighborhoods in only
5 cities, among other elements, largely limit the generalizability of MTO findings (Clampet-

5

Lundquist and Massey, 2008). Rarely have scholars been able to examine the long-term
association between childhood neighborhoods and adult obesity.

2.2 Life-course
Exposure to socioeconomically disadvantaged environments can have a lasting
detrimental effect on one’s health (Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010; Kawachi and Berkman, 2003),
and scholars are beginning to gain a clearer understanding of the pathways that facilitate how
neighborhoods “get under the skin” across the early life-course (Hertzman and Boyce, 2010).
Generally, scholars have explained the association between neighborhood SES and health
outcomes in two main ways: (1) the influence that the neighborhood physical built environment
has on health and (2) the influence that the neighborhood social environment has on health
(Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010). I will discuss the literature on these two pathways in turn before
discussing a third mechanism that has received much less attention; epigenetics. Although I
discuss potential pathways to provide a conceptual idea of underlying processes, I lack the data
to formally test these mechanisms.
Access to physical activity and the local food environment may affect obesity and BMI
(Black and Macinko, 2008; Black et al., 2010; Larson et al., 2009; Papas et al., 2007). Previous
studies also suggest that food insecurity may increase the likelihood of being obese (Beaulac et
al., 2009; Boone-Heinonen et al., 2011; Medicine and Council, 2009). While some residents of
disadvantaged communities travel substantial distances to purchase food (Hillier et al., 2011),
disadvantaged communities remain largely deficient in terms of nutritious food options. Yet,
scholars have found that adults’ dietary behavior or obesity are little affected by adding a grocery
store to a “food desert” (Cummins et al., 2014).

6

Aspects of the social environment such as prevailing norms, social stressors, and social
cohesion can also explain the association between neighborhood SES and health outcomes.
Some studies have examined neighborhood social environments and weight, generally finding
mixed evidence (Burdette et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2006; Glass et al., 2006; Mujahid et al.,
2008). Nevertheless, growing up in neighborhoods where residents are not only afforded the
opportunity to safely access aspects of the physical environment but are also surrounded by
peers, adults, and institutions that value healthy and active lifestyles may imprint on children and
mold their motivations for pursuing the activities that will lead to healthy weight in adulthood.
A life-course approach that incorporates early-life processes on disease outcomes in
adulthood and stresses the embeddedness of individuals in a life-long process of time-dependent
social roles and relationships nested within evolving ecological settings represents a theoretically
compelling but empirically challenging mandate of research (Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010; Elder
et al., 2015; Kuh and Ben-Shlomo, 2004). Indeed, attention to the idea of long-term
neighborhood effects coheres to the recent focus that medical researchers have placed on lifecourse health development, which stresses a dynamic model of health trajectories nested in
genetic, biological, behavioral, social, and economic contexts that evolve over time (Halfon and
Hochstein, 2002; Halfon et al., 2014). Early exposure to neighborhood disadvantage may
increase the likelihood of being obese in adulthood vis à vis encumbrances on healthy social,
economic, psychological, and physical development.
Embedded within the life-course perspective is the insight that constitutes the theoretical
foundation of the current study: Neighborhood effects may linger over time. However, beyond
correlational studies (Fletcher and McLaughlin, 2015), very little is known regarding the
association between neighborhood conditions in childhood on obesity in adulthood.

7

Lippert (2016) found that sustained exposure to neighborhood poverty throughout
adolescence and early adulthood increased the likelihood of women, but not men, becoming
obese in early adulthood compared to those who never lived in poor neighborhoods, net of
observed adjustments. Still, the Lippert (2016) study only examined neighborhood poverty,
ignoring other factors that can contribute to an obesogenic environment. Moreover, it did not
adjust for adult exposure, which may explain away any childhood neighborhood effects, or for
unobserved confounders.
An epigenetic (Hertzman and Boyce, 2010) framework suggests that changes in the
environmental conditions during sensitive developmental epochs may explain differences in
gene-expression that can lead to differences in obesity and other health outcomes. The effects of
the built and, in particular, social environment could very well play a role in gene expression.
The epigenetic model may help improve our understanding of the pathway linking childhood
neighborhoods and adult obesity because it combines the built environment, social development,
and genetic processes. That is, differences in gene-by-environment interactions may drive
differences in obesity outcomes if siblings, who share parental gene stems, are exposed to
different prenatal or postnatal neighborhood conditions. This approach to conceptualizing
disease is embedded within the larger framework provided by the developmental origins of
health and disease approach, which stresses how events that take place at the earliest possible
stages of development can have lasting effects on health throughout the life-course (Gillman,
2005; Mcmillen and Robinson, 2005; Oken and Gillman, 2003). In particular, the fetal origins
hypothesis (Barker et al., 2006) suggests that in utero disruptions such as stressful neighborhood
conditions could influence fetal nutritional development and could potentially affect the
likelihood of obesity. Moreover, sociologists are beginning to combine knowledge from biology

8

and genetics to inform long-held understandings of social behavior (Freese, 2008). Epigenetics is
therefore a potentially fruitful framework to augment traditional understandings of how
neighborhoods affect health.

2.4 Timing of exposure
Children’s sensitivity to their environment may change as they pass through different
stages of development (Aber et al., 1997; Elder et al., 2015; Hertzman and Boyce, 2010).
Epidemiologic and developmental literatures both stress the importance of critical ages when
children are most vulnerable to disease risk. For instance, the sensitive period model (BenShlomo and Kuh, 2002) stresses that exposure to deleterious conditions during developmentally
susceptible stages may have a stronger effect on disease risk than it does at other times during
development.
Scholars have argued that neighborhood contexts may have stronger effects during
adolescence because of the increased autonomy and interaction with neighborhood peers and
institutions during this stage of development (Aber et al., 1997; Ellen and Turner, 1997). Indeed,
researchers have begun to find more pronounced neighborhood effects during adolescence for
childhood developmental and obesity outcomes (Alvarado, 2016a, 2016b), teen childbearing
(Wodtke, 2013), and high school attainment (Wodtke et al., 2016). If neighborhood effects work
through engagement with neighborhood peers, institutions, adults (Jencks and Mayer, 1990;
Kawachi et al., 2008; Sampson and Raudenbush, 1999), or through aspects of the built
environment (Feng et al., 2010), then the influence of neighborhood ecology could change as
children become more engaged with that ecology as they mature.

9

As children age, their social connection outside of their immediate families begin to
expand (Berk, 2003). Although there are no strict age demarcation separating early childhood
from adolescence in the literature on developmental sensitivity to neighborhood ecology,
scholars often rely on transition points that coincide with key stages of the early life-course
(Ellen and Turner, 1997). These include educational shifts such as the transition from elementary
school to middle school, which represents a period of rapid physical, emotional, and social
development (Aber et al., 1997). Furthermore, in light of the previous discussion of epigenetics,
biological development during adolescent (e.g., puberty, growth spurts, and brain maturation)
may increase vulnerability for epigenetic changes (Aylwin et al., 2019; Mychasiuk and Metz,
2016), although research in this area is nascent and ongoing (Fisher et al., 2018). Scholars
studying heterogeneous neighborhood effects by age define childhood as approximately ages 10
and younger and adolescence as approximately 11 and older and use this cutoff as the
approximate age when the gradual shift away from the family as the center of influence and
toward neighborhood peers and institutions begins for many children (Aber et al., 1997;
Vartanian and Buck, 2005).

2. 5 Contributions
This study contributes to the larger neighborhood effects literature in five ways: (1) it
applies life-course concepts and methods regarding developmental stages; (2) it examines the
effects of neighborhood disadvantage in youth on adult obesity; (3) it overcomes place and timedependent constraints to understanding neighborhood effects by using 28 years of longitudinal
data at the national level; (4) it addresses the thorny methodological challenge of selection bias
by using fixed effects models that adjust for unobserved confounders nested within the family;

10

and (5) it introduces a new data set to the study of neighborhood effects on adult obesity. Here, I
expect that childhood neighborhood disadvantage will be positively associated with adult obesity
and that adolescent exposure will be more strongly associated with obesity than early childhood
exposure.

3. Methods
3.1 Data
I analyze two cohorts of restricted geocoded (tract-level) data from 15 waves (1986 –
2014) of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth: the 1979 cohort of mothers (NLSY79) and
the Child and Young Adult cohort (NLSY:CYA). The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has
deemed these data containing Census tract identifiers of the mother as highly sensitive and
therefore requires a federal clearance to access them on-site in Washington, DC. Only female
respondents who have ever had children are linked to the NLSY:CYA cohort. Yet, family
background measures remain mostly intact because I include key household information that
captures contributions from both parents.
The NLSY:CYA is composed of biennial data on all children born to the NLSY79 female
respondents and represents children born to a nationally representative sample of women aged
21-28 years on January 1, 1986.1 That is, the NLSY:CYA captures data for every child that was
born by 1986, and all children who were subsequently born after 1986 to female NLSY79
respondents. These data provide comprehensive information about parents and children as well
as capture all sibling pairs within families throughout childhood and into adulthood. By 2014,
10,503 of the children of the NLSY79 females had been interviewed at least once, the oldest
child being 42 years old. On average, NLSY79 women have had about two children spaced 3.5

11

years apart. Although the number of respondents with siblings changes from wave to wave, in
2014 there were 4,537 young adults over age 14 (out of 5,735 young adults [79%]) who had a
sibling in the sample. I imputed to correct for missingness using the “ice” command in Stata
(Allison, 2002; von Hippel, 2007).
I followed previous neighborhood effects researchers by operationalizing neighborhoods
using tracts (Brooks-Gunn et al., 1993; Vartanian and Buck, 2005; Wodtke et al., 2016) and
linearly interpolating for inter-Census waves. I merged neighborhood data from the Geolytics
Neighborhood Change database to the geocoded NLSY data. Geolytics provides data on tract
socioeconomic characteristics for 1980, 1990, and 2000 using the Census long form, normalized
to 2000 tract boundaries, and it also provides data from the 2005-2009 American Communities
Survey (ACS) that is also normalized to 2000 tract boundaries. The 2010 ACS is no longer
normalized to 2000 so it is incompatible with the NLSY79 geocode data (which is only
normalized to 2000 and before). All neighborhood characteristic data are from Geolytics.

3.2 Neighborhood disadvantage
I define neighborhood disadvantage as a constellation of factors that collectively proxy
the multidimentional underlying contextual disadvantage present in a neighborhood. First, I
created a scale which represents the mean of the following seven variables measured in each
wave when the child was between 0 and 18 and was presumably living with the mother: percent
of residents at or below 100% of the poverty threshold as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, the
percent of residents who are unemployed, the percent of residents out of the labor force, the
percent who have at least a Bachelor’s degree (reverse coded), the percent of managers and
professionals in the neighborhood (reverse coded), median income (reverse coded), and the

12

median housing value (reverse coded). Collectively, these variables cohered into a single
approximation of neighborhood disadvantage (𝛼 = .88). Second, I divided the scale into quintiles
(1 = the least disadvantaged neighborhood and 5 = the most disadvantaged neighborhood) and
assigned a quintile score to each respondent at each of the 15 waves. Finally, I calculated the
mean quintile score for each respondent across the following age ranges: (1) 0 – 18; (2) 0 – 10;
and (3) 11 – 18. This continuous quintile score serves as the main independent variable.

3.3 Obesity
I created a dichotomous outcome to indicate whether the NLSY:CYA respondents ever
experienced obesity at any point as adults (i.e., between ages 19 – 42). I first used the selfreported measure of height and weight in adult (over 18) wave T to calculate body mass index
(BMI) in wave T for NLSY:CYA respondents.2 Second, I created an obesity indicator (i.e., 1 =
having a BMI ≥30 and 0 = not) in wave T of adulthood so that a given respondent had as many
indicators of obesity as they had waves of observation. If respondents ever had 1 on any of the
per-wave indicators of obesity over the age of 18, then they received a 1 on the final obesity
dummy; otherwise 0. I also examine mean adult BMI (which varies per wave) as an outcome to
complement the obesity indicator.

3.4 Observed adjustments
Table 1 provides a full summary (means and standard deviations) of the observed
variables that I adjust for in this analysis. The BLS measured each variable at each of the 15
waves spanning childhood and adulthood. These include both time-varying and time-invariant

13

adjustments and all of the mother specific variables are limited to when the child was between 0
and 18 years of age.

[Table 1 about here]

These adjustments include whether the respondent’s mother was ever obese and whether
the respondent was ever obese in childhood (0 – 18). I also include a subjective measure of adult
neighborhood disadvantage for two reasons. First, geocodes are only tied to the NLSY79
respondents, not the NLSY:CYA respondents – so I do not reasonably know the census tract
residential locations of NLSY:CYA respondents once they become adults and presumably leave
the home. Second, debate continues to surround the proper definition of a neighborhood, with
many scholars arguing that tracts and other administrative units do not properly or completely
reflect individuals’ geographic contexts of influence (Cummins et al., 2007; Diez-Roux, 2001;
Matthews et al., 2005). These subjective assessments of the neighborhood characteristics that
respondents lived in as adults allow the respondent to define what s/he means by a
“neighborhood.” The adult neighborhood disadvantage scale is a composite of NLSY:CYA
respondents’ concern that the following conditions are a problem in their neighborhoods as
adults in each wave: 1) people do not respect rules/laws; 2) crime and violence; 3)
abandoned/run-down buildings; 4) parents do not supervise their children; 5) people do not
care/keep to themselves; and 6) people cannot find jobs. The Chronbach’s α is 0.81 for adult
subjective neighborhood disadvantage.

3.5 Statistical analysis
14

I begin by analyzing bivariate pooled logistic models to get a sense of the zero-order
association between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity. Next I include all
observed adjustments in multivariate pooled logistic models to assess how much of the
association is explained by observed adjustments. Finally, I incorporate sibling fixed effects that
improve upon the logistic models by addressing unobserved “hidden” confounding. There may
be some selection bias based on cultural and class sorting engrained in the FE models because of
the requirement that families must contain at least two children to be included in this analysis. In
addition, the sibling FE analyses may only generalize to families with siblings. Fortunately, most
(60%) families have at least two children while many have even more (e.g., 28% have three or
more and 10% have four or more). The FE model capitalizes on variation in neighborhood
conditions that result from 1) older and younger siblings experiencing different neighborhood
conditions due to moving and 2) neighborhood conditions changing around separate siblings
over time.3 It is the spacing of siblings (mean is 3.5 years between siblings), however, that
facilitates the estimation of sibling FE models from the NLSY:CYA data.
Following Allison (2009), the multivariate logistic sibling FE model where the outcome
is a dichotomous variable for adult obesity for child i in family f takes the following form:

log

𝑝!"
= 𝜇! + 𝛽𝒙!" + 𝛾𝒛! + 𝑎! , 𝑓 = 1, 2, … , 𝐹
1 − 𝑝!"

where 𝑝!" is the probability that the child ever experiences obesity in adulthood is equal to 1,
where 𝒙!" represents a vector of within-family varying predictors and 𝒛! represents a vector of
within-family invariant predictors, and where 𝑎! represents the combined effects of all
unobserved variables that are constant within families. Unobserved constant variables may
include the degree of love and warmth in the home, genes, parent’s emotional and mental
15

stability, and other salient characteristics of the home environment that are not measured. In the
logistic fixed effects approach, 𝑎! is assumed random and is able to freely associate with 𝒙!" in
any way. The logistic sibling FE model uses conditional maximum likelihood, which causes the
constant, 𝜇! , to go unreported because the constant is conditioned out of the likelihood function.
I supplement these models with cousin FE models that further adjust for unobserved
confounders nested at the level of the grandparent and that flow downstream across three
generations. That is, the cousin FE models account for any unobserved legacies of disadvantage
that are passed down from the parents of the NLSY79 female respondents to their grandchildren,
the NLSY:CYA respondents. The cousin FE models only control for unobserved confounders for
the maternal side of the family. However, unlike the sibling FE models, the cousin FE models
allow for the inclusion of respondents that a) did not have siblings and/or b) did not experience
within-family variation in neighborhood conditions or the outcome.

4. Results
4.1 Main results
I present results from analyses of pooled bivariate, pooled multivariate, and multivariate
fixed effects models that examine the association between childhood neighborhood disadvantage
and obesity in adulthood. Figure 1 depicts the bivariate association between childhood exposure
to neighborhood disadvantage and obesity across adulthood – demonstrating that growing up in
disadvantaged neighborhood increases obesity in adulthood. Specifically, a one-standard
deviation increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile between ages 0 and 18 increases the
odds of being obese in adulthood by 10 percent (e[0.41]*0.23 = 1.10); a one-standard deviation
increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile between ages 0 and 10 increases the odds of
16

being obese in adulthood by 13 percent (e[0.37]*0.34 = 1.13); and a one-standard deviation increase
in neighborhood disadvantage quintile between ages 11 and 18 increases the odds of being obese
in adulthood by 14 percent (e[0.35]*0.37 = 1.14). All of the bivariate coefficients are statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. Although suggestive, these baseline results are limited in
inference and could be spurious.

[Figure 1 about here]

The next series of models, summarized in Table 2, use logistic regression and introduce
adjustments for observed and unobserved confounders that may explain the zero-order results in
Figure 1. One should note that Models 4 and 8 adjust for childhood exposure while models 3
and 7 do not.
[Table 2 about here]

In models 1 – 4 of Table 2, the results suggest that exposure to neighborhood
disadvantage at any point in childhood has a positive association with obesity in adulthood, net
of observed adjustments. Models 2 and 3 suggest equivalent positive associations for early
childhood and adolescent exposure to neighborhood disadvantage. Model 4 demonstrates that the
coefficient for adolescent exposure decreases after adjusting for early childhood exposure. Yet, a
post hoc test of mean difference (see equation 4 in Paternoster et al., 1998) shows that the
difference between the coefficients in models 2 and 4 is not statistically significant, suggesting
that early childhood exposure to neighborhood disadvantage and adolescent exposure may be
equivalent in magnitude, net of observed adjustments.

17

Models 5 – 8 introduce sibling fixed effects to adjust for unobserved differences between
siblings that could bias results from the traditional logistic regression in models 1 – 4. The
sibling FE results, also depicted in Figure 2, suggest that youth exposure to neighborhood
disadvantage continues to be positively associated with obesity in adulthood, net of observed and
unobserved potential confounders. Specifically, the sibling FE results suggest that a one-standard
deviation increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile at any point between the ages of 0 and
18 (model 5) increases the odds of being obese in adulthood by 31 percent (e[1.19]*0.23 = 1.31), net
of observed and unobserved confounders. A one-standard deviation increase in neighborhood
disadvantage quintile between ages 0 and 10 (model 6) increases the odds of being obese in
adulthood by 13 percent (e[0.35]*0.34 = 1.13), net of observed and unobserved confounders. Finally,
a one-standard deviation increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile between ages 11 – 18
(model 8) increases the odds of being obese in adulthood by 29 percent (e[0.69]*0.37 = 1.29), net of
observed and unobserved confounders and net of early childhood exposure. Moreover, the
difference between early childhood and adolescent exposure is statistically significant after
testing for difference between these two coefficients (Paternoster et al., 1998), suggesting that
adolescent exposure to neighborhood disadvantage is more salient than early childhood exposure
for adult obesity. I also run non-FE analyses on the sibling sample to check if the sibling sample
is driving these results (see online Appendix A). These results demonstrate agreement with the
findings in Table 2, suggesting that the sibling sample is not driving the results.

[Figure 2 about here]

4.2 Alternative specification of timing of exposure

18

Although the previous analyses were based on developmental theory in regards to the
timing of exposure to neighborhood disadvantage, there is no standardized method of defining
“early childhood” or “adolescence.” Therefore, I created alternative specifications of the timing
of exposure to neighborhood disadvantage. For instance, I defined three age periods as “early
childhood” that spanned ages 0 – 7, “middle childhood” that spanned ages 8 – 12, and
“adolescence” that spanned ages 13 – 18.
Table 3 summarizes these results from sibling FE logistic regression models and suggests
that youth neighborhood disadvantage has statistically a significant positive association with
adult obesity and that this association grows in magnitude over developmental stages so that they
are most acute in adolescence. In fact, exposure during the earliest stage of childhood does not
exert any statistically significant association with adult obesity. The results in Table 3 suggest
that a one-standard deviation increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile in adolescence
(model 3) increases the odds of being obese in adulthood by 16 percent (e[0.76]*0.20 = 1.16), net of
observed and unobserved confounders. These alternative results are in line with the main results
in Table 2 and add credibility to the finding that youth exposure to neighborhood disadvantage
has a negative association with healthy weight in adulthood. Online Appendix B shows sibling
FE results for the analysis of a four-age-segment version of timing of exposure (0-5; 6-10; 11-14;
and 15-18) and these results show once again that (1) childhood neighborhood disadvantage is
positively associated with adult obesity and (2) that adolescent exposure is most salient, adding
further support for the findings in Table 2.
There remains the possibility that including child-level predictors measured during
adulthood could mediate and confound childhood neighborhood effects. Education, income, and
(perceived) neighborhood disadvantage may be especially likely to explain the association

19

between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity. Therefore, in Appendix C, I
summarize results for sibling fixed effects logistic models that remove these adult covariates.
The results are in line with the results from Models 5 – 8 in Table 2 and suggest that 1)
childhood neighborhood disadvantage is positively associated with adult obesity; 2) adolescent
exposure is more salient than early childhood exposure; and 3) the results from Table 2 are likely
underestimates of the true effect of childhood neighborhood disadvantage. Moreover, the adult
covariates present in the models in Table 2 do not explain away the effects of childhood
neighborhood disadvantage on adult obesity.

[Table 3 about here]

4. 3 Alternative neighborhood disadvantage specifications
The previous results are based on a continuous specification of neighborhood
disadvantage (i.e., the mean of the neighborhood disadvantage quintile scores across 0 – 18, 0 –
10, and 11 – 18). However, an alternative specification that compares respondents who grew up,
on average, in the most severely disadvantaged neighborhoods to those who grew up in less
disadvantaged (i.e., more advantaged) neighborhoods could alter the story further. That is, I
created a dichotomous variable to indicate whether the respondent grew up in a neighborhood
above the 60th percentile of disadvantage (coded as 1) or below the 60th percentile (coded as 0),
on average across all waves within specific ages ranges (0 – 18, 0 – 10, and 11 – 18).
Table 4 demonstrates the sibling FE logistic regression results for exposure to the more
severe specification of neighborhood disadvantage on obesity across adulthood (quintiles 1 – 3
versus quintiles 4 and 5). The results suggest that youth exposure to neighborhood disadvantage
20

continues to have a statistically significant positive association with adult obesity, in accord with
the findings in Table 2. For instance, a one-standard deviation increase in exposure to severe
neighborhood disadvantage between the ages of 11 – 18 (model 4) increases the odds of being
obese in adulthood by 11 percent (e[0.64]*0.16 = 1.11), net of observed and unobserved confounders
and net of early childhood exposure. Despite the large difference in the coefficient sizes between
early childhood and adolescent exposure in Table 4, they are technically statistically equivalent.
These results would likely align with the results in Table 2 in terms of the salience of adolescent
exposure were it not for the relatively extreme (and rare) comparisons being made between
siblings’ neighborhood contexts in Table 4 and the larger standard errors that this produces.

[Table 4 about here]

As an additional robustness check, I also created another continuous neighborhood
disadvantage score. Instead of using the mean of the quintiles, however, I created the mean of the
raw neighborhood scale scores in waves across the different age periods and then created the
quintiles for the age periods. Here, each respondent has a quintile value across the various age
periods that is based on the mean of the raw scale scores across waves (and therefore preserves
more variation in neighborhood context). Table 5 demonstrates that, when using the alternative
continuous measure of neighborhood disadvantage, the general conclusions remain the same as
those in Table 2. That is, youth exposure to neighborhood disadvantage is positively associated
with adult obesity; and adolescence is the most salient stage of development when these effects
take hold, net of observed and unobserved potential confounders. For instance, a one-standard
deviation increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile between the ages of 11 – 18 (model 4)

21

increases the odds of being obese in adulthood by 24 percent (e[0.41]*0.53 = 1.24), net of observed
and unobserved confounders and net of early childhood exposure. These results align with the
main findings in Table 2. In fact, the sibling FE results for adolescent exposure in the original
specification in Table 2 and in the alternative specification in Table 5 are quite similar,
increasing the odds of adult obesity by 29 percent and 24 percent, respectively. Finally, I simply
used the raw average index score (proportion). The results, summarized in Appendix D, also
align with the sibling FE (models 5 – 8) results in Table 2 – that is, childhood neighborhood
disadvantage is positively associated with adult obesity and adolescent exposure is more salient
than early childhood exposure. This provides further confidence in the main findings of this
paper.

[Table 5 about here]

4.4 Cousin fixed effects
Recent findings suggest that where one lives reflects inequality rooted in previous
generations (Sharkey, 2013; Sharkey and Elwert, 2011). The legacy of disadvantage that is
embedded in previous generations may also impact one’s outcomes. Therefore, to partially
account for disadvantage that cascades down from the grandparents’ generation to the
grandchildren, I examine cousin FE models.
Table 6 displays results from the cousin FE logistic regression models for the main
continuous measure of neighborhood disadvantage and suggests that, similar to the analysis in
Table 2, neighborhood disadvantage in childhood and adolescence is positively associated with
obesity in adulthood, net of observed and unobserved confounders nested in the grandparent

22

generation. A one-standard deviation increase in neighborhood disadvantage quintile between
the ages of 11 – 18 (model 4) increases the odds of being obese in adulthood by 31 percent
(e[0.62]*0.44 = 1.31), net of observed and unobserved confounders and net of early childhood
exposure. However, despite the fact that the coefficient for adolescent exposure is larger,
adolescent exposure is not technically statistically different from early childhood exposure in the
cousin FE models.

[Table 6 about here]
4.5 Body mass index
I supplemented the obesity findings with analyses of adult BMI to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of how childhood neighborhood disadvantage affects adult weight.
Table 7 shows results from sibling FE linear regression models and suggests that adolescent
exposure (model 4) has a statistically significant positive association with BMI in adulthood, but
early childhood exposure (model 2) does not. These BMI results for the main continuous
specification of neighborhood disadvantage are in line with the results for obesity in Table 2.

[Table 7 about here]

5. Conclusions
Obesity scholars have emphasized the need for more long-term studies that uncover the
connection between residential context and weight at different stages of the life-course (BooneHeinonen and Gordon-Larsen, 2012; Rodgers GP and Collins FS, 2012). Using restricted
geocoded NLSY data that spans both the rise in socioeconomic segregation and obesity in the

23

United States, I find that childhood exposure to neighborhood disadvantage increases the odds of
obesity in adulthood, net of observed and unobserved confounders, and that adolescent exposure
may be particularly salient.
This paper contributes to the understanding of the association between neighborhood
disadvantage during childhood and adult obesity by using novel data and a life-course theoretical
framework which stresses the developmental sensitivity of children to ecological influences.
Earlier findings from the five city MTO suggest that the opportunity to move to less-poor
neighborhoods reduces obesity among a select sample of poor adults (Kling et al., 2007; Ludwig
et al., 2011; Sanbonmatsu et al., 2012). Cohering to the national-level findings of the current
paper, Kravitz-Wirtz (2016) used PSID data and found that adolescent exposure to neighborhood
disadvantage was particularly salient in predicting obesity between ages 18 and 30. An analysis
of national Add Health data also found that neighborhood poverty increased obesity during the
transition to adulthood for women (Lippert, 2016). Further, a multiplicative sibling FE analysis
of PSID data found that receiving SNAP in childhood and growing up in an advantaged
neighborhood combined to increase adult BMI (Vartanian and Houser, 2012).4
Building off of this previous research, the sibling fixed effects analyses (Table 2) in this
paper reveal that exposure to childhood neighborhood disadvantage is positively associated with
obesity in adulthood, net of observed and unobserved confounders. This finding aligns with the
earlier finding by Lippert (2016) after adjusting for adult exposure and unobserved confounders
nested within the nuclear family. Moreover, the results in Table 2 may represent conservative
estimates of childhood neighborhood effects on adult obesity, given that inclusion of adult
covariates may suppress the true size of the childhood neighborhood effect (as suggested by the
models that exclude these adult covariates in Appendix C). Cousin fixed effects models that

24

further adjust for unobserved legacies of disadvantage that cascade across three generations
(Table 6) reinforce this finding for neighborhood effects on adult obesity. Moreover, the current
study expands upon earlier findings from MTO and Add Health by examining characteristics of
neighborhoods beyond simply the percentage of poor residents, addressing unobserved
confounding for a national sample, and adjusting for adult neighborhood disadvantage. The
finding here answer the first research question in the affirmative and is consistent throughout the
various modeling strategies. However, the sibling FE models also reveal that the timing of
exposure may be a relevant factor, as previous theories of neighborhood effects suggest.
The analyses here suggest that exposure to neighborhood disadvantage during
adolescence yields stronger associations with adult obesity compared to exposure during early
childhood, a finding that coheres to both prior theory on ecological sensitivity across stages of
development (Aber et al., 1997; Ellen and Turner, 1997) and to prior work on neighborhoods and
obesity in youth (Alvarado, 2016b) and adulthood (Kravitz-Wirtz, 2016). The earlier finding
from Kravitz-Wirtz (2016), however, was limited in that it only examined obesity between ages
18 – 30 and did not account for unobserved confounders. This finding also answers the second
research question in the affirmative. These findings suggest that it may behoove place-based
policies aimed at curbing obesity in adulthood to focus more on processes in adolescence, when
children’s engagement with their environments may be growing and their absorption of norms,
behaviors, and food may be highest. Alternative models where I use different age cutoffs (Table
3 and Appendix B), where I use more severe forms of neighborhood disadvantage (Table 4), or
where I increase the variation in the measurement of neighborhood disadvantage (Table 5) all
demonstrates that youth neighborhood disadvantage is positively associated with adult obesity
and that adolescence is a particularly acute developmental stage where the associations are the

25

strongest. Finally, examining BMI as an outcome (Table 7) not only reinforces the featured
effect of childhood neighborhoods on adult obesity, but also supports the finding that adolescent
exposure is most salient. The findings for BMI contradict the null findings from PSID (Vartanian
and Houser, 2012) – whom also use sibling FE. Possible explanations for the difference in BMI
findings between the current and previous studies include the fact that the NLSY:CYA
represents a more recent cohort of respondents that came of age during the rise of obesity and the
fact that the NLSY:CYA covers a more expansive adult age range compared to the PSID.
Despite the fact that the current study has applied FE models to estimate neighborhood
effects using a novel longitudinal dataset, there remain important limitations to this study. First,
the sibling FE model, while accounting for time-invariant unobserved confounders, does not
account for unobserved confounders that differ between siblings and is therefore no panacea for
the threat of unobserved selection bias. Second, the current study does not address the possibility
of cumulative and lagged effects, which could provide even more nuanced insights. Third, there
are alternative specifications to unhealthy weight (e.g., waist circumference) which researchers
can explore to contrast with the current specifications. Unfortunately, the NLSY is limited by
only offering height and weight data. Fourth, the chemical environment and other aspects of the
ecological health of neighborhoods are relevant and, unfortunately, missing from these analyses
due to data constraints. Future researchers who either have access to genetic data across the life
course or can collect it themselves could further investigate epigenetic pathways. The
interactions between the built environment, the social environment, and genes could help to
account for how neighborhood disadvantage during the critically important adolescent years
when social and biological change is happening rapidly can have lasting influence on health
outcomes. Fifth, school contexts could be an important missing variable given that students,

26

especially ones from disadvantaged households, may rely on schools for nutrition. However,
despite some correlational evidence that school nutrition policies can mitigate obesity (Veugelers
and Fitzgerald, 2005), other more rigorous studies have shown that school socioeconomic quality
does little to mediate the effects of neighborhood socioeconomic quality on children’s outcomes
(Owens, 2010; Wodtke and Parbst, 2017). Unfortunately, the NLSY does not contain school
identifiers so I cannot explicitly model both contexts simultaneously.
These limitations notwithstanding, the current analysis contributes new evidence for the
long-term association between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and obesity and BMI in
adulthood. Further, the current findings illuminate potential stages of development when policy
may be most effective at curbing obesity. This study provides evidence to support interventions
that are directed at adolescent youth given that exposure to normative and behavioral influences
in the neighborhood may have the strongest effects at this stage of development.

27

References
Aaronson, D. (1998). Using Sibling Data to Estimate the Impact of Neighborhoods on Children’s
Educational Outcomes. J. Hum. Resour. 33, 915–946.
Aber, J.L., Gephart, M.A., Gunn, J.B.-, and Connell, J.P. (1997). Development in Context: Implications for
Studying Neighborhood Effects. J. Brooks- Gunn, G.J. Duncan, and J.L. Aber, eds. (New York: Russell Sage
Foundation), p.
Allison, P.D. (2002). Missing Data (Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications).
Allison, P.D. (2009). Fixed Effects Regression Models (Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc.).
Alvarado, S.E. (2016a). Delayed Disadvantage: Neighborhood Context and Child Development. Soc.
Forces 94, 1847–1877.
Alvarado, S.E. (2016b). Neighborhood disadvantage and obesity across childhood and adolescence:
Evidence from the NLSY children and young adults cohort (1986–2010). Soc. Sci. Res. 57, 80–98.
Aylwin, C.F., Toro, C.A., Shirtcliff, E., and Lomniczi, A. (2019). Emerging Genetic and Epigenetic
Mechanisms Underlying Pubertal Maturation in Adolescence. J. Res. Adolesc. 29, 54–79.
Barker, D.J., Bagby, S.P., and Hanson, M.A. (2006). Mechanisms of Disease: in utero programming in the
pathogenesis of hypertension. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 2, 700–707.
Beaulac, J., Kristjansson, E., and Cummins, S. (2009). A systemic review of food deserts, 1966-2007. Prev.
Chronic Dis. 6.
Ben-Shlomo, Y., and Kuh, D. (2002). A life course approach to chronic disease epidemiology: conceptual
models, empirical challenges and interdisciplinary perspectives. Int. J. Epidemiol. 31, 285–293.
Berk, L.E. (2003). Child Development (Boston: Allyn & Bacon).
Black, J.L., and Macinko, J. (2008). Neighborhoods and obesity. Nutr. Rev. 66, 2–20.
Black, J.L., and Macinko, J. (2010). The Changing Distribution and Determinants of Obesity in the
Neighborhoods of New York City, 2003-2007. Am. J. Epidemiol. 171, 765–775.
Black, J.L., Macinko, J., Dixon, L.B., and Jr, G.E.F. (2010). Neighborhoods and obesity in New York City.
Health Place 16, 489–499.
Boone-Heinonen, J., and Gordon-Larsen, P. (2012). Obesogenic Environments in Youth: Concepts and
Methods from a Longitudinal National Sample. Am. J. Prev. Med. 42, e37–e46.
Boone-Heinonen, J., Gordon-Larsen, P., Kiefe, C.I., Shikany, J.M., Lewis, C.E., and Popkin, B.M. (2011).
Fast Food Restaurants and Food Stores Longitudinal Associations With Diet in Young to Middle-aged
Adults: The CARDIA Study. Arch. Intern. Med. 171, 1162–1170.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G.J., Klebanov, P.K., and Sealand, N. (1993). Do Neighborhoods Influence Child
and Adolescent Development? Am. J. Sociol. 99, 353–395.
28

Burdette, H.L., Wadden, T.A., and Whitaker, R.C. (2006). Neighborhood safety, collective efficacy, and
obesity in women with young children. Obesity 14, 518–525.
Cawley, J. (2015). An economy of scales: A selective review of obesity’s economic causes, consequences,
and solutions. J. Health Econ. 43, 244–268.
Clampet-Lundquist, S., and Massey, D.S. (2008). Neighborhood effects on economic self-sufficiency: A
reconsideration of the moving to opportunity experiment. Am. J. Sociol. 114, 107–143.
Cohen, D.A., Finch, B.K., Bower, A., and Sastry, N. (2006). Collective efficacy and obesity: The potential
influence of social factors on health. Soc. Sci. Med. 62, 769–778.
Crane, J. (1991). Effects of Neighborhoods on Dropping Out of School and Teenage Childbearing. C.
Jencks, and P.E. Peterson, eds. (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution), p.
Cummins, S., Curtis, S., Diez-Roux, A.V., and Macintyre, S. (2007). Understanding and representing
‘place’ in health research: A relational approach. Soc. Sci. Med. 65, 1825–1838.
Cummins, S., Flint, E., and Matthews, S.A. (2014). New Neighborhood Grocery Store Increased
Awareness Of Food Access But Did Not Alter Dietary Habits Or Obesity. Health Aff. (Millwood) 33, 283–
291.
Diez-Roux, A.V. (2001). Investigating neighborhood and area effects on health. Am. J. Public Health 91,
1783–1789.
Diez-Roux, A.V., and Mair, C. (2010). Neighborhoods and health. Biol. Disadv. Socioecon. Status Health
1186, 125–145.
Durlauf, S.N. (2004). Neighborhood Effects. J.V. Henderson, and J.F. Thisse, eds. (Madison: Social
Systems Research Institute), p.
Elder, G.H., Shanahan, M.J., and Jennings, J.A. (2015). Human Development in Time and Place. In
Handbook of Child Psychology and Developmental Science, (John Wiley & Sons, Inc.), p.
Ellen, I.G., and Turner, M.A. (1997). Does neighborhood matter? Assessing recent evidence. Hous. Policy
Debate 8, 833–866.
Entwisle, B. (2007). Putting people into place. Demography 44, 687–703.
Feng, J., Glass, T.A., Curriero, F.C., Stewart, W.F., and Schwartz, B.S. (2010). The built environment and
obesity: A systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence. Health Place 16, 175–190.
Firebaugh, G., and Farrell, C.R. (2015). Still Large, but Narrowing: The Sizable Decline in Racial
Neighborhood Inequality in Metropolitan America, 1980–2010. Demography 53, 139–164.
Fisher, H., Marzi, S., Arseneault, L., Wong, C., Kandaswamy, R., Moffitt, T., Roberts, S., Mill, J., and Caspi,
A. (2018). Epigenetic Signatures of Childhood and Adolescent Victimisation Using a Genetically Sensitive
Longitudinal Cohort Study. Schizophr. Bull. 44, S25.

29

Flegal, K.M., Kruszon-Moran, D., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., and Ogden, C.L. (2016). Trends in Obesity
Among Adults in the United States, 2005 to 2014. JAMA 315, 2284.
Fleischer, N.L., and Roux, A.V.D. (2008). Using Directed Acyclic Graphs to Guide Analyses of
Neighbourhood Health Effects: An Introduction. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 62, 842–846.
Fletcher, J.M., and McLaughlin, S.M. (2015). Neighborhood Factors During Adolescence: Modest Effects
On Cardiovascular Risk, Small Impact On Obesity And Depression. Health Aff. (Millwood) 34, 1472–1479.
Freese, J. (2008). Genetics and the Social Science Explanation of Individual Outcomes. Am. J. Sociol. 114,
S1–S35.
Gangl, M. (2010). Causal Inference in Sociological Research. pp. 21–47.
Gillman, M.W. (2005). Developmental Origins of Health and Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 1848–1850.
Glass, T.A., Rasmussen, M.D., and Schwartz, B.S. (2006). Neighborhoods and obesity in older adults - The
Baltimore Memory Study. Am. J. Prev. Med. 31, 455–463.
Greene, W.H. (2008). Econometric Analysis (Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall).
Halaby, C.N. (2004). Panel models in sociological research: Theory into practice. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 30,
507–544.
Halfon, N., and Hochstein, M. (2002). Life Course Health Development: An Integrated Framework for
Developing Health, Policy, and Research. Milbank Q. 80, 433–479.
Halfon, N., Larson, K., Lu, M., Tullis, E., and Russ, S. (2014). Lifecourse health development: past, present
and future. Matern. Child Health J. 18, 344–365.
Harrington, D.W., and Elliott, S.J. (2009). Weighing the importance of neighbourhood: A multilevel
exploration of the determinants of overweight and obesity. Soc. Sci. Med. 68, 593–600.
Hauser, R.M. (1970). Context and Consex: A Cautionary Tale. Am. J. Sociol. 75, 645.
Hauser, R.M. (1974). Contextual Analysis Revisited. Sociol. Methods Res. 2, 365–375.
Hertzman, C., and Boyce, T. (2010). How Experience Gets Under the Skin to Create Gradients in
Developmental Health. Annu. Rev. Public Health 31, 329–347.
Hillier, A., Cannuscio, C.C., Karpyn, A., McLaughlin, J., Chilton, M., and Glanz, K. (2011). How Far do LowIncome Parents Travel to Shop for Food? Empirical Evidence from Two Urban Neighborhoods. Urban
Geogr. 32, 712–729.
von Hippel, P.T. (2007). Regression with Missing Y’s: An Improved Strategy for Analyzing Multiply
Imputed Data. Sociol. Methodol. 37.
Jencks, C., and Mayer, S.E. (1990). The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor Neighborhood. L.E.
Lynn, and M.G. McGeary, eds. (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press), p.
30

Johnston, J., and DiNardo, J. (1997). Econometric Methods (New York: McGraw-Hill).
Kawachi, I., and Berkman, L.F. (2003). Neighborhoods and health (Oxford University Press).
Kawachi, I., Subramanian, S.V., and Kim, D. (2008). Social Capital and Health (New York: Springer).
Kling, J.R., Liebman, J.B., and Katz, L.F. (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
Econometrica 75, 83–119.
Kravitz-Wirtz, N. (2016). Temporal Effects of Child and Adolescent Exposure to Neighborhood
Disadvantage on Black/White Disparities in Young Adult Obesity. J. Adolesc. Health 58, 551–557.
Kuh, D., and Ben-Shlomo, Y. (2004). A Life Course Approach to Chronic Diseases in Epidemiology (New
York, NY: Oxford University Press).
Larson, N.I., Story, M.T., and Nelson, M.C. (2009). Neighborhood Environments: Disparities in Access to
Healthy Foods in the US. Am. J. Prev. Med. 36, 74–81.
Lipek, T., Igel, U., Gausche, R., Kiess, W., and Grande, G. (2015). Obesogenic environments:
environmental approaches to obesity prevention. J. Pediatr. Endocrinol. Metab. 28, 485–495.
Lippert, A.M. (2016). Stuck in Unhealthy Places How Entering, Exiting, and Remaining in Poor and
Nonpoor Neighborhoods Is Associated with Obesity during the Transition to Adulthood. J. Health Soc.
Behav. 57, 1–21.
Lochner, L. (2011). Non-production benefits of education: Crime, health, and good citizenship. In
Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol 4, (New York: Elsevier), p.
Ludwig, J., Sanbonmatsu, L., Gennetian, L., Adam, E., Duncan, G.J., Katz, L.F., Kessler, R.C., Kling, J.R.,
Lindau, S.T., Whitaker, R.C., et al. (2011). Neighborhoods, Obesity, and Diabetes — A Randomized Social
Experiment. N. Engl. J. Med. 365, 1509–1519.
Massey, D.S., and Denton, N. (1993). American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Matthews, S.A., Detwiler, J.E., and Burton, L.M. (2005). Geo-ethnography: Coupling Geographic
Information Analysis Techniques with Ethnographic Methods in Urban Research. Cartogr. Int. J. Geogr.
Inf. Geovisualization 40, 75–90.
Mcmillen, I.C., and Robinson, J.S. (2005). Developmental Origins of the Metabolic Syndrome: Prediction,
Plasticity, and Programming. Physiol. Rev. 85, 571–633.
Medicine, I. of, and Council, N.R. (2009). The public health effects of food deserts: Workshop summary
(The National Academies Press).
Mujahid, M.S., Diez-Roux, A.V., Shen, M.W., Gowda, D., Sanchez, B., Shea, S., Jacobs, D.R., and Jackson,
S.A. (2008). Relation between neighborhood environments and obesity in the multi-ethnic study of
atherosclerosis. Am. J. Epidemiol. 167, 1349–1357.

31

Mychasiuk, R., and Metz, G.A.S. (2016). Epigenetic and gene expression changes in the adolescent brain:
What have we learned from animal models? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 70, 189–197.
National Center for Health Statistics (2015). Health, United States, 2013, with Special Feature on
Prescription Drugs (Government Printing Office).
Oakes, J.M. (2004). The (mis)estimation of neighborhood effects: causal inference for a practicable social
epidemiology. Soc. Sci. Med. 58, 1929–1952.
Oakes, J.M., Andrade, K.E., Biyoow, I.M., and Cowan, L.T. (2015). Twenty Years of Neighborhood Effect
Research: An Assessment. Curr. Epidemiol. Rep. 2, 80–87.
OECD (2014). Obesity Update (OECD Publishing).
Ogden, C.L., (US), N.C. for H.S., and others (2010). Obesity and socioeconomic status in adults: United
States, 2005-2008 (US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics).
Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D., Lawman, H.G., Fryar, C.D., Kruszon-Moran, D., Kit, B.K., and Flegal, K.M.
(2016). Trends in Obesity Prevalence Among Children and Adolescents in the United States, 1988-1994
Through 2013-2014. JAMA 315, 2292.
Oken, E., and Gillman, M.W. (2003). Fetal Origins of Obesity. Obes. Res. 11, 496–506.
Owens, A. (2010). Neighborhoods and Schools as Competing and Reinforcing Contexts for Educational
Attainment. Sociol. Educ. 83, 287–311.
Papas, M.A., Alberg, A.J., Ewing, R., Helzlsouer, K.J., Gary, T.L., and Klassen, A.C. (2007). The built
environment and obesity. Epidemiol. Rev. 29, 129–143.
Paternoster, R., Brame, R., Mazerolle, P., and Piquero, A. (1998). Using the correct statistical test for the
equality of regression coefficients. Criminology 36, 859–866.
Reardon, S.F., and Bischoff, K. (2011). Income Inequality and Income Segregation. Am. J. Sociol. 116,
1092–1153.
Reardon, S.F., Fox, L., and Townsend, J. (2015). Neighborhood Income Composition by Household Race
and Income, 1990–2009. Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci. 660, 78–97.
Robert, S.A., and Reither, E.N. (2004). A multilevel analysis of race, community disadvantage, and body
mass index among adults in the US. Soc. Sci. Med. 59, 2421–2434.
Rodgers GP, and Collins FS (2012). The next generation of obesity research: No time to waste. JAMA 308,
1095–1096.
Ruel, E., Reither, E.N., Robert, S.A., and Lantz, P.M. (2010). Neighborhood effects on BMI trends:
Examining BMI trajectories for Black and White women. Health Place 16, 191–198.

32

Sampson, R.J. (2003a). Neighborhood-Level Context and Health: Lessons from Sociology. I. Kawachi, and
L.F. Berkman, eds. (New York: Oxford University Press), p.
Sampson, R.J. (2003b). The neighborhood context of well-being. Perspect. Biol. Med. 46, S53–S64.
Sampson, R.J., and Raudenbush, S.W. (1999). Systematic social observation of public spaces: A new look
at disorder in urban neighborhoods. Am. J. Sociol. 105, 603–651.
Sanbonmatsu, L., Potter, N.A., Adam, E., Duncan, G.J., Katz, L.F., Kessler, R.C., Ludwig, J., Marvakov, J.,
Yang, F., Congdon, W.J., et al. (2012). The Long-Term Effects of Moving to Opportunity on Adult Health
and Economic Self-Sufficiency. Cityscape 14, 109–136.
Sharkey, P. (2013). Stuck in Place: Urban Neighborhoods and the End of Progress Toward Racial Equality
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
Sharkey, P., and Elwert, F. (2011). The Legacy of Disadvantage: Multigenerational Neighborhood Effects
on Cognitive Ability. Am. J. Sociol. 116, 1934–1981.
Sharkey, P., and Faber, J. (2014). Where, When, Why, and for Whom Do Residential Contexts Matter?
Moving Away from the Dichotomous Understanding of Neighborhood Effects. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 40, 127.21.
Sobal, J., and Stunkard, A.J. (1989). Socioeconomic-Status and Obesity - a Review of the Literature.
Psychol. Bull. 105, 260–275.
Swinburn, B., Egger, G., and Raza, F. (1999). Dissecting obesogenic environments: The development and
application of a framework for identifying and prioritizing environmental interventions for obesity. Prev.
Med. 29, 563–570.
Vartanian, T.P., and Buck, P.W. (2005). Childhood and adolescent neighborhood effects on adult income:
Using siblings to examine differences in ordinary least squares and fixed-effect models. Soc. Serv. Rev.
79, 60–94.
Vartanian, T.P., and Houser, L. (2012). The Effects of Childhood SNAP Use and Neighborhood Conditions
on Adult Body Mass Index. Demography 49, 1127–1154.
Veugelers, P.J., and Fitzgerald, A.L. (2005). Effectiveness of School Programs in Preventing Childhood
Obesity: A Multilevel Comparison. Am. J. Public Health 95, 432–435.
Wilson, W.J. (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
Wilson, W.J. (1991). Studying Inner-City Social Dislocations: The Challenge of Public Agenda Research.
Am. Sociol. Rev. 56, 1–14.
Wodtke, G.T. (2013). Duration and Timing of Exposure to Neighborhood Poverty and the Risk of
Adolescent Parenthood. Demography 50, 1765–1788.

33

Wodtke, G.T., and Parbst, M. (2017). Neighborhoods, Schools, and Academic Achievement: A Formal
Mediation Analysis of Contextual Effects on Reading and Mathematics Abilities. Demography 54, 1653–
1676.
Wodtke, G.T., Elwert, F., and Harding, D.J. (2016). Neighborhood Effect Heterogeneity by Family Income
and Developmental Period. Am. J. Sociol. 121, 1168–1222.
Wooldridge, J.M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (Cambridge:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
Yang, T.-C., and South, S.J. (2018). Neighborhood effects on body mass: Temporal and spatial
dimensions. Soc. Sci. Med. 217, 45–54.
Zylke, J.W., and Bauchner, H. (2016). The Unrelenting Challenge of Obesity. JAMA 315, 2277.

34

Table 1. Descriptive statistics for analytical sample of NLSY79 mothers & NLSY:CYA youth
Mean
Standard deviation (between)
Mother & household characteristics
In poverty
0.25
0.44
Weeks unemployed
3.70
16.28
Number of children in household
1.35
1.24
Household income (logged 2014 dollars)
10.63
1.07
Single parent
0.46
0.50
Parental education: less than high school degree
0.16
0.37
Parental education: high school degree
0.45
0.50
Parental education: some college
0.19
0.39
Parental education: Bachelor's or higher
0.21
0.40
Foreign born
0.07
0.25
Armed Forces Qualifying Test
39843.75
28959.46
Obese
0.55
0.47
Child characteristics
White
Black
Latino
Female
Ever moved during childhood
Obese in childhood
Birthweight (ounces)
Childhood neighborhood
Neighborhood disadvantage quintile (1 = most advantaged;
5 = most disadvantaged)
Ages 0 - 18
Ages 0 - 10
Ages 11 - 18
Outcome
Obese in adulthood
Source: NLSY 1979 - 2014; NLSY CYA 1986 - 2014

35

0.52
0.27
0.15
0.49
0.43
0.43
115.92

0.50
0.44
0.36
0.50
0.14
0.32
19.03

3.14
3.31
2.94

1.09
1.13
1.20

0.66

0.40

Table 2. Logistic regression results (without and with sibling FE) for the association between childhood neighborhood
disadvantage and ever obese in adulthood (NLSY:CYA 1986-2014)
Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
Observed adjustments
effects
Exposure age
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
0.17*** 0.16*** 0.16*** 0.11***
1.19*** 0.35*** 0.59*** 0.69***
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.17) (0.10) (0.09) (0.10)
Constant
-2.00** -1.96** -1.98** -2.50**
−
−
−
−
(0.82)
(0.82)
(0.81)
(0.83)
−
−
−
−
Observations
8,430
8,190
8,430
8,190
3,320
3,230
3,320
3,230
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks unemployed, number of children in the household,
mother's logged household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign born status, mother's AFQT
score, mother's obesity history, whether or not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling, neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood,
child's birthweight, and child's adult household income. Additionally, Models 4 and 8 control for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering.
** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

36

Table 3. Logistic regression results for the assocaition between
childhood neighborhood disadvantage and ever obese in
adulthood by age of exposure: early childhood, middle childhood,
and adolescence (NLSY:CYA 1986-2014)
Observed adjustments & sibling
fixed effects
Obesity across adulthood
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
0-7
8-12
13-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
0.19
0.31* 0.76***
(0.14)
(0.13)
(0.16)
Constant
−
−
−
−
−
−
Observations
2,870
3,310
3,320
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's
logged household income, single parent, mother's education,
mother's foreign born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's
obesity history, whether or not the mother's household ever
moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's obesity history, child's
work limitations, child's highest year of schooling, neighborhood
disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's adult
household income.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are
corrected for clustering.
* p<0.05; ** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

37

Table 4. Logistic regression results for an alternative specification of
childhood neighborhood disadvantage (quintiles 1 - 3 vs. 4 and 5) and
ever obese in adulthood (NLSY:CYA 1986-2014)

Neighborhood disadvantage
Constant
Observations

Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
effects
Quintiles 1 - 3 versus 4 - 5
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18 11-18
0.49** 0.37** 0.55*** 0.64***
(0.20) (0.15) (0.16) (0.17)
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
3,320
3,230
3,320
3,230

Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling,
neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's
adult household income. Additionally, Model 4 controls for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

38

Table 5. Logistic regression results for the association betewen childhood
neighborhood disadvantage and ever obese in adulthood using
specification that averages the standardized continuous index first, then
quintiles these scores (instead of using an average of the quintiles)
(NLSY:CYA 1986-2014)
Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
effects
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
0.51*** 0.05
0.37*** 0.41***
(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.07)
Constant
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
Observations
3,320
3,230
3,320
3,230
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling,
neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's
adult household income. Additionally, Model 4 controls for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
* p<0.05; ** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

39

Table 6. Logistic regression results for the association between childhood
neighborhood disadvantage and ever obese in adulthood - cousin fixed
effects (NLSY:CYA 1986-2012)
Observed adjustments & cousin fixed
effects
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
0.32* 0.52*** 0.69*** 0.62**
(0.14) (0.14) (0.13) (0.20)
Constant
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
Observations
860
859
860
859
Notes: All models are fully adjusted. Model 4 also controls for early
childhood exposure.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
clustering.
** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

40

Table 7. OLS regression results for the association between childhood
neighborhood disadvantage and mean adult body mass index
(NLSY:CYA 1986-2014)
Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
effects
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
4.24*** 0.74
2.04** 2.28**
(1.25)
(0.78)
(0.67)
(0.77)
Constant
-27.24
-1.34
-14.93 -18.24
(22.24) (22.82) (21.38) (24.44)
Observations
3,980
3,950
3,980
3,950
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling,
neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's
adult household income. Additionally, Model 4 controls for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
clustering.
** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

41

Online Appendix A. Logistic regression results for the association
between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and ever obese in
adulthood using only those respondents with siblings (NLSY:CYA 19862014)
Observed adjustments
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
0.08*
0.08† 0.10** 0.11**
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
Constant
-0.95
-0.88
-1.25
-1.45
(1.20)
(1.98)
(1.19)
(1.20)
Observations
3,320
3,230
3,320
3,230
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling,
neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's
adult household income. Additionally, Model 4 controls for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
†p < .10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001

42

Online Appendix B. Logistic regression results for the association
between neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity by age of
exposure: 0-5; 6-10; 11-14; 15-18 (NLSY:CYA 1986-2012)

Neighborhood disadvantage
Constant
Observations

Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
effects
Obesity across adulthood
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-5
6-10
11-14
15-18
0.15 0.52*** 0.64*** 0.80***
(0.15)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.14)
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
2,350
3,230
3,320
3,320

Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling,
neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's
adult household income. Additionally, Model 4 controls for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
clustering.
* p<0.05; ** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

43

Online Appendix C. Sibling fixed effects logistic regression results for
the association between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and ever
obese in adulthood (NLSY:CYA 1986-2014)
Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
effects
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18 11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
1.42*** 0.52*** .66*** .75***
(0.15) (0.09) (0.08) (0.09)
Constant
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
Observations
3,510
3,400
3,510
3,400
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex,
child's obesity history, and child's birthweight. Additionally, Model 4
controls for exposure to neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

44

Online Appendix D. Logistic regression results (with sibling FE) for the
association between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and ever
obese in adulthood (NLSY:CYA 1986-2014): Raw scale score.
Observed adjustments & sibling fixed
effects
Exposure age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0-18
0-10
11-18
11-18
Neighborhood disadvantage
1.88*** 0.56** 0.98*** 1.15***
(0.34)
(0.20)
(0.19)
(0.20)
Constant
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
Observations
3,020
2,920
3,020
2,920
Notes: All models control for mother's poverty, mother' weeks
unemployed, number of children in the household, mother's logged
household income, single parent, mother's education, mother's foreign
born status, mother's AFQT score, mother's obesity history, whether or
not the mother's household ever moved, race/ethnicity, child's sex, child's
obesity history, child's work limitations, child's highest year of schooling,
neighborhood disadvantage in adulthood, child's birthweight, and child's
adult household income. Additionally, Model 4 controls for exposure to
neighborhood disadvantage in early childhood.
Coefficients are shown.
Robust bootstrapped standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
** p <0.01; ***p < 0.001

45

Childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity

.35
.3

Coefficient

.4

.45

No adjustments

Across childhood

0-10
Age of exposure to neighborhood disadvantage

11-18

Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, NLSY 1979 & Children & Young Adults (1979-2014)

Figure 1. Logistic regression results for the bivariate association between childhood
neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity.

46

Childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity

0

.5

Coefficient

1

1.5

Sibling fixed effects models

Across childhood

0-10
Age of exposure to neighborhood disadvantage

11-18

Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, NLSY 1979 & Children & Young Adults (1979-2014)

Figure 2. Logistic regression results for the fully adjusted sibling fixed effects association
between childhood neighborhood disadvantage and adult obesity.

47

Notes
1

Like the PSID Child Development Supplement before it, the NLSY:CYA is not nationally representative. Rather,
the PSID CDS and the NLSY:CYA both represent the children of nationally representative samples of the U.S.
population in 1968 and in 1979, respectively.
2
I used self-reported measures of height and weight to calculate BMI by dividing weight in pounds by height in
inches squared times 703 using the following formula: (weight[lb] / height[in]2 * 703).
3
For example, 57 percent of the sample never moved and therefore exclusively experienced variation in
neighborhood conditions exogenously through changes to their environment around them over time.
4
Vartanian and Houser also find differential effects for the interaction between SNAP and neighborhood quality
based on timing of exposure. However, one clear difference between my study and theirs lies in the fact that I am
not analyzing the interaction effects for receiving SNAP – or any other government aid program – and
neighborhoods.

48

