"x"
"1" "CyberSecurity and Technology: How Do They Fit into a Science Classroom?"
"2" "Andrea C. Burrows & Mike Borowczak – University of Wyoming"
"3" "Short abstract :  This study bridges discipline silos between science courses and cybersecurity/computer science by indicating how they complement each other. Eight K12 teachers and 26 secondary K12 students participated in a week-long GenCyber camp with Micro:bit technology. External camp evaluations show successes and how cybersecurity fits into STEM classrooms."
"4" "Long abstract :  This study bridges discipline silos between science courses and computer science by indicating how they fit into and complement each other. A study of eight K12 teachers and 26 K12 secondary students participated in a GenCyber (cybersecurity) camp for a week during July 2018. External evaluations of the camp show its success and how cybersecurity fits into science and mathematics classrooms. This GenCyber camp was a five-day introductory camp for middle school and high school teachers and students. The GenCyber camp offered morning modules of CORE instruction, or cyber-oriented reinforced education, with the afternoon focused on differentiated learning adventures for teachers and students in specialized subject options engaging in hands-on labs. Most instruction utilized Micro:bit technology. Teachers and students made explicit connections to chemistry (battery function chemistry, sensors), physics (frequency, particle vs. wave, movement, acceleration, photon detection, magnetic fields), biology (simulating biological behavior, synchronizing, pattern detection) and mathematics (matrix, functions, modeling, unit conversion)."
"5" "CyberSecurity and Technology: How Do They Fit into a Science Classroom?"
"6" "Andrea C. Burrows & Mike Borowczak – University of Wyoming"
"7" "1. Introduction and Challenge in science education:"
"8" "As there is currently a push for computer science and computational  thinking in K-12 US schools  (Google, 2016), the author s ’  of this study  questioned how  K-12  teachers  c ould connect science (as well as mathematics, technology, and engineering ) content wi thin a GenCyber camp curriculum.  GenCyber is sponsored by the National Security Agency and the National Science Foundation to expose and reinforce cybersecurity education.  The GenCyber camp at the University of Wyoming was called COWPOKES -CS  which stands for  CyberCamp of Wyoming: Providing Opportunities, Knowledge, Experiences, and Security through Computer Science."
"9" "Although as an educational community we realize that “ computer science is becoming ever increasingly important to our society. Computer science content has, however, not traditionally been considered a natural part of curricula for primary and secondary education” ( Heintz, Mannila, & Fanqvist, 2016,  p 1).   Since computer science has traditionally been a “university level discipline  with  no widely accepted general standards for what computer science at K-12 level entails” ( Heintz, Mannila, & Fanqvist, 2016,  p 1), science and mathematics teachers often do not see a connection with their disciplines and computer science.  The idea of teaching computer science in a science or mathematics class often seems foreign to K-12 US teachers. Additionally,  e ven though computer science is considered a pure subject with its  own  disciplinary structure and hierarchy,  ( like traditional biology, chemistry  and  physics)  a linear “programming-first” approach is used most often when teaching students computer science across North America (Cooper, Dann, & Pausch, 2003). There is debate to this programming first approach, as to whether it works well ( Burrows, Borowczak, Slater, & Haynes, 2012; Connolly, Murphy, & Moore, 2009 ). However, as an educational community we do know that real-world applications of computer science are not common in K-12 school settings (Barr & Stephenson, 2011), although this approach is accepted as best practice in STEM disciplinary content ( Burrows, Breiner, Keiner, & Behm, 2014; Jimoyiannis, 2010) . If computer science is not seen in K-12 schools, cybersecurity which has a high principle overlap with computer  science, is also not present.  Yet,   importantly,  Grover & Pea (2013) point to “computing as a medium for teaching other subjects\" (p. 42), or integration, as needing further exploration."
"10" "This GenCyber camp’s purpose  (and the place where the study was conducted)  was to use an active inquiry model to teach middle school and high school students and teachers about cybersecurity first principles, ethics, foundations of computer science (through B lock and Python programming of M icro : bits) and introduce concepts of computational thinking  for implementation into STEM coursework .  Micro:bits were chosen because they have high functionality, low cost (~$15), and provide an ease of integration into any IT setting. Thus, any K-12 school can afford and use them.  In the morning session both teachers and students worked together, and the focus was on three core areas: foundations of computer science, computational thinking, and cybersecurity first principles.  In the afternoon sessions, teachers and students were split into separate groups as they worked through a variety of lab sessions reinforcing concepts presented earlier in the day. "
"11" "The labs utilized included: physical security, password cracking, forensics, hardware hacks, AI/Robotics, and the future of cybersecurity. Hardware hacks and password cracking were required for all participants, but the other labs were optional, allowing participants to experience  all labs sessions or to focus on one or two and explore them  in-depth. All of the created labs, which speak directly to new innovative technology use, can be found at this link:  https://uwcedar.io/community/cowpokes/wikis/home ."
"12" "The following  four  figures , created using the NGSS Pathfinder ( https://concord.org/ngss/ ),  show the connections between the created labs and the Next Generation Science Standards including the disciplinary core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and science and engineering practices (NGSS Lead States, 2013)."
"13" "Figure 1: NGSS DCI, CCC, and SEP for the Microbit:Fitness:Tracker Activity."
"14" "Figure 2: NGSS DCI, CCC, and SEP for the Microbit:LockPick Activity."
"15" "Figure 3: NGSS DCI, CCC, and SEP for the Microbit:Bot Wars Activity."
"16" "Figure 4: NGSS DCI, CCC, and SEP for the Microbit:Beacon Activity."
"17" "For reflection, t he teachers were scheduled to have two sessions to discuss and develop lesson plans with the educational leader each day.  Questions about in-classroom technology use (e.g., Micro:bits) and integration into STEM disciplines were common.  For one of the sessions, teachers remained for an hour longer  working and reflecting  on lesson plan development. As proposed, teachers led these sessions and used their experiences to develop lesson plans tailored to their teaching assignments and aligned to the state’s curri culum.  The camp’s objectives included: 1. Helping K12 students and teachers understand correct and safe on-line behavior 2. Increasing participants’ interest in cybersecurity 3. Improving teaching methods for delivering cybersecurity content in K12 CS curricula – especially science and mathematics"
"18" "Specially, the research questions included:"
"19" "Was the GenCyber camp considered  beneficial  to teachers and students?"
"20" "How did the teachers and students connect science (and mathematics) content to the cybersecurity camp?"
"21" "An external evaluator examined interview and survey data of the camp and it is summarized here  as evidence of the camp’s success at integration of cybersecurity into the camp and K-12 classrooms . Additionally, the camp leaders utilized developed lesson plans and discussion to tease out teacher and student science (and mathematics) content connections."
"22" "2. The Study’s Research Results"
"23" "Overall, the GenCyber camp was considered  beneficial  to both the K-12 teachers  (n=10)  and secondary students  (n=60) . The camp’s teachers and students found and highlighted ways to connect cybersecurity to science and mathematics content."
"24" "Quantitative Findings"
"25" "Teachers and students engaged in the camp and found meaningful STEM connections."
"26" "The external evaluator noted that  student  participant engagement during  whole group instruction  with participants authentically on task at 75%, student participants passively engaged at 25%, and student participants disengaged/disruptive at 0%. Student participant engagement during  activities  with participants authentically on task at 85%, student participants passively engaged at 10%, and student participants disengaged/disruptive at 5%. For learning activities completed individually, 100% of students were reported authentically on task."
"27" "Similarly, the  teacher  participant engagement during  whole group instruction  with participants authentically on task at 85%, teacher participants passively engaged at 15%, and teacher participants disengaged/disruptive at 0%. Teacher participant engagement during  activities  with participants authentically on task at 80%, teacher participants passively engaged at 20%, and teacher participants disengaged/disruptive at 0%. For learning activities completed individually, 100% of teachers were reported authentically on task.  Significantly, 87% of the middle and high school teachers reported that they were already formulating plans for taking concrete actions to integrate cybersecurity into their classes."
"28" "Teachers showcased the integration of the technology use (e.g., Micro:bit) by including it in lessons directly from NGSS - DCI, CCC, and SEP including: 1) DNA (HS-LS1-1; HS-LS1-6; HS-LS3-1; HS-LS3-2; HS-LS4-1); 2) Structure and Function; 3) Earth’s Systems (MS-ESS2-6); 4) Weather and Climate; 5) Waves and  their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer (MS-PS4-1; HS-PS4-2); and 6) Waves and Electromagnetic Radiation."
"29" "Qualitative Findings"
"30" "Positive comments from teachers and students revolved around the micro:bits, computer part understanding, password security, and activities/labs. Teachers and students made explicit connections to chemistry (battery function chemistry, sensors), physics (frequency, particle vs. wave, movement, acceleration, photon detection, magnetic fields), biology (simulating biological behavior, synchronizing, pattern detection) and mathematics (matrix, functions, modeling, unit conversion). During the camp, teacher and student participants particularly enjoyed learning about security,  coding, the i nteractive projects, and the M icro:bit challenges. The STEM teachers reported that  they would be able to use the M icro:bits in their classrooms for math and science classes. All eight teachers felt they could incorporate lessons on safe on-line behavior and digital footprints in their classes. All eight teachers felt confident that they could create a quality STEM lesson plan incorporating cybersecurity. (Note: The created lesson plans will be shared during the ASTE session and available online in the public domain.)"
"31" "The ext ernal evaluator noted that the M icro:bit badge and  activities  were exceptional. The badge served as each participant’s nametag, a portable power source for other activities, an informal assessment tool, an interactive extension activity,  and with a different M icro:bit attached, it was used for the Beacon scavenger hunt. Each participant kept their badge, and all 34 participants were excite d about how they could use the M icro:bit for other activities at h ome and at school.  (Note: The M icro:bit Beacon scavenger h unt activity  - as well as the M icro:bit itself will be shared during the ASTE session.)"
"32" "Additionally, the external evaluator reported that “the unplugged (no computer necessary) activities were exceptional. These activities could be used in any classroom setting, but also could be used to scaffold lessons that then led to using technology. Many of the activities were also very challenging and required participants to think through the lesson that was presented and apply the concepts to their personal lives.” (Note: Several of the unplugged activities  are showcased  shared during the ASTE session  as well .)"
"33" "3. Items presented for those in attendance to learn in addition to the study details include:"
"34" "Researchers already know that computational thinking and computer science are important skills. However, what is not known is if a one-week cybersecurity experience can allow teachers and students to make connections to STEM subjects.  The GenCyber camp shows that computer science and cybersecurity fit into science and other STEM disciplines.  In addition to the quantitative and qualitative results presented here ,  materials for use with K-12 students and pre-service or in-service teachers are share d. During the ASTE session the M icro:bit itself, activities  with it, lesson plans, and unplugged activities are shared with the audience. The  authors  of this paper  argue that a cybersecurity focus can enhance STEM learning in K-12 classrooms."
"35" "4. Justification for inclusion in science teacher education:"
"36" "A major component of the cybersecurity camp was the development of skills within the science/math and cybersecurity context. The STEM teachers and students learned how to use cybersecurity concepts and make connections to S TEM content, while engaging in M icro:bit activities.   Furthermore, the cybersecurity camp aligns with standards  (e.g., NGSS)  that current science (and math) teachers are required to consider as they create lessons. If the computer science discipline is included in the advancement of the STEM mission, then the teachers of all disciplines – who also shape all careers – could be empowered to highlight these cybersecurity STEM aspects in schools."
"37" "Limitations: This camp covered a  small portion of time (two weeks) . By collecting data in other camps, a more detailed picture of the science (and mathematics) connections could emerge. Some of the data was collected and analyzed by an external evaluator and some by the camp leaders, and thus the process to reach a conclusion was surely different and no inter-rater reliability was conducted."
"38" "5. ASTE interested members:"
"39" "Methods instructors, educational researchers, teachers, curriculum developers, and those interested in STEM integration, computer science, and cybersecurity would be interested in this study."
"40" "Acknowledgements Wyoming’ (NSA/NSF# H98230-18-1-0095) participants participated in this  GenCyber  camp, and the authors are thankful for their engagement and the funding of the various agencies. Note that the information in this article does not reflect the beliefs of the funders."
"41" "References"
"42" "Barr, V., & Stephenson, C. (2011). Bringing computational thinking to K-12: What is involved and what is the role of the computer science education community? ACM Inroads, 2(1), 48-54."
"43" "Braund, M., & Reiss, M. (2006). Towards a more authentic science curriculum: The contribution of out ‐ of ‐ school learning.  International Journal of Science Education ,  28 (12), 1373-1388."
"44" "Burrows, A. C., Borowczak, M., Slater, T., & Haynes, C. (2012). Teaching computer science and engineering through robotics: Science and art form.  Problems of Education in the 21 st  Century, 47 , 6-15."
"45" "Burrows, A. C., Breiner, J. M., Keiner, J., & Behm, C. (2014). Biodiesel and integrated STEM: Vertical alignment of high school biology/biochemistry and chemistry.  Journal of Chemical Education, 91( 9), 1379-1389."
"46" "Chen, X. (2013). STEM Attrition: College Students' Paths into and out of STEM Fields. Statistical Analysis Report. NCES 2014-001.  National Center for Education Statistics ."
"47" "Cheryan, S., Master, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2015). Cultural stereotypes as gatekeepers: Increasing girls’ interest in computer science and engineering by diversifying stereotypes. Frontiers in psychology ,  6 , 49."
"48" "Connolly, C., Murphy, E., Moore, S. (2009). Programming anxiety amonsgst computing students – A key in the retention debate?  IEEE Transactions on Education , 52(1)."
"49" "Coop er, S., Dann, W., & Pausch, R. (2003). Teaching objects-first in introductory computer science. Proceedings of the 34th SIGCSE technical symposium on Computer Science Educati on, New York: New York, 191-195."
"50" "CSTA – Computer Science Teachers Association. About the CSTA K-12 Computer Science Standards. Retrieved from  https://www.csteachers.org/page/standards"
"51" "Denning, P. (2005). Is computer science science?  Communications of the ACM, 48 (4), 27-31."
"52" "Dym, C., Agogino, A., Ozgur, E., Frey, D., & Leifer, L. (2005). Engineering design thinking, teaching, and learning.  Journal of Engineering Education ,  94 (1), 103-120."
"53" "Edelson, D. C. (1998). Realising authentic science learning through the adaptation of scientific practice.  International handbook of science education ,  1 , 317-331."
"54" "Fairweather, J. (2008). Linking evidence and promising practices in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate education.  Status Report for the National Academies National Research Council Board of Science Education . Retrieved from  http://www7.nationalacademies.org/bose/Fairweather_CommissionedPaper.pdf"
"55" "García-Peñalvo, F. J. (2016). What Computational Thinking Is. Journal of Information Technology Research, 9(3), v-viii."
"56" "Google. (2016) Trends in the state of computer science in U.S. K-12 schools. Retrieved from  https://services.google.com/fh/files/misc/trends-in-the-state-of-computer-science-report.pdf"
"57" "Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013). Computational thinking in K–12: A review of the state of the field.  Educational Researcher , 42 (1), 38-43."
"58" "Heintz, F., Mannila, L., & Färnqvist, T. (2016, October). A review of models for introducing computational thinking, computer science and computing in K-12 education. In  Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2016 IEEE  (pp. 1-9). IEEE."
"59" "Honey, M., Pearson, G., & Schweingruber, H. (Eds.). (2014). STEM integration in K-12 education: Status, prospects, and an agenda for research . Washington, DC: National Academies Press."
"60" "Hubwieser, P., Armoni, M., & Giannakos, M. N. (2015). How to implement rigorous computer science education in K-12 schools? Some answers and many questions.  ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE) ,  15 (2), 5:1-5:12."
"61" "Israel, M., Wherfel, Q. M., Pearson, J., Shehab, S., & Tapia, T. (2015). Empowering K–12 students with disabilities to learn computational thinking and computer programming.   TEACHING Exceptional Children ,  48 (1), 45-53."
"62" "Jimoyiannis, A. (2010). Designing and implementing an integrated technological pedagogical science knowledge framework for science teachers’ professional development.  Computers and Education, 55 (3), 1259-1269."
"63" "Kalelioglu, F., Gülbahar, Y., & Kukul, V. (2016). A framework for computational thinking based on a systematic research review.  Baltic Journal of Modern Computing ,  4 (3), 583-596."
"64" "Lye, S. Y., & Koh, J. H. L. (2014). Review on teaching and learning of computational thinking through programming: What is next for K-12?.  Computers in Human Behavior ,  41 , 51-61."
"65" "McConnell, T. J., Parker, J. M., & Eberhardt, J. (2013). Assessing teachers’ science content knowledge: A strategy for assessing depth of understanding.  Journal of Science Teacher Education ,  24 (4), 717-743."
"66" "NGSS Lead States. (2013).  Next generation science standards: For states, by states. Washington D.C.: The National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www.nextgenscience.org/."
"67" "NRC – National Research Council. (2010).  Preparing teachers: Building evidence for sound policy . National Academies Press."
"68" "NRC – National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practice, crosscutting concepts, and core ideas. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press."
"69" "Weintrop, D., Beheshti, E., Horn, M., Orton, K., Jona, K., Trouille, L., & Wilensky, U. (2016). Defining computational thinking for mathematics and science classrooms.  Journal of Science Education and Technology ,  25 (1), 127-147."
"70" "Wing, J. M. (2008). Computational thinking and thinking about computing.  Philosophical transactions of the royal society of London A: mathematical, physical and engineering sciences , 366 (1881), 3717-3725."
"71" "NTLI Criteria"
"72" "Rating"
"73" "Research and/or ideas contribute important new knowledge to the area of technology integration in science teaching and learning, science teacher preparation, or development of instructional materials"
"74" "Work presented shows innovation in use or application of technology in science teacher preparation or research"
"75" "Technology is used in a manner consistent with prior research and new ideas being presented"
"76" "Evidence is provided to support effectiveness of technology in science teaching and/or learning"
"77" "Paper is relevant to the use of technology in science teacher education and is supported with a theoretical framework"
"78" "Paper has a clear focus on technology"
"79" "Paper and presentation is of interest to ASTE and SITE membership"
"80" "Presentation is informative and will be a highly regarded representation of ASTE at SITE."
"81" "Presentation is engaging and will be a highly regarded representation of ASTE at SITE."
"82" "Total Points"
