Towards an Economic Sociology of Race
Daniel Hirschman
daniel_hirschman@brown.edu
Brown University
Laura Garbes
laura_garbes@brown.edu
Brown University
Abstract
Race is central to economic life, but race is not central to economic sociology. We argue that
economic sociologists should treat racism as a constitutive, structuring force, analytically co-equal
with capitalism, patriarchy, and nationalism. Our article has three aims. First, we document how
canonical and award-winning works of economic sociology do not discuss race and racism, and
do not engage with the contemporary sociology of race. Second, we identify six key insights from
the sociology of race and suggest how they could influence economic sociology: the emergence of
race out of racism, an understanding of racism as structural, the role of whiteness, the intersections
between racism and other systems of oppression, the ideology of colorblind racism, and the
fundamental connections between racism and capitalism. Third, we conclude by discussing recent
research that bridges the two subfields and lays the groundwork for an understanding of "racialized
markets" and "racialized economies".
Keywords
Economic sociology, structural racism, colorblind racism,
whiteness, intersectionality, racial capitalism
JEL Codes
Z13
Word Count
~14,700
Acknowledgments
We thank Ellen Berrey, Mikell Hyman, Beth Popp Berman, Victor Ray, Donald TomaskovicDevey, and the members of Brown University's Work, Organizations, and the Economy workshop
for comments on previous drafts.

1

Introduction
Race is central to economic life, but race is not central to economic sociology. Capitalism was
founded on the exploitation of racialized slave labor and the work of colonized peoples, and
capitalism owes its continued success to the global color line. Thus, when sociologists discuss the
modern capitalist economy, both within the United States and globally, they are necessarily
discussing a racialized and colonial institution. Despite the foundational and persistent importance
of race in economic life, the modern canon of economic sociology largely ignores race and racism
in its analysis of economic systems.
Economic sociology is a well-delineated field, united by coordinating institutions and shared
theoretical tools derived from canonical, paradigm-defining works. The American Sociological
Association (ASA) Section on Economic Sociology has, since 2000, been the clearest home for
the discipline, alongside its counterparts in Europe like the Economic Sociology newsletter.1 As
part of its coordinating role, the ASA section recognizes outstanding work in the field through a
collection of awards, and thus sanctifies what work counts as the "best" in economic sociology.
Economic sociologists share a set of founding fathers, primarily from network analysis, the
sociology of organizations, and institutional theory (Convert and Heilbron 2007), and core
concepts, especially "embeddedness" (Granovetter 1985, Krippner and Alvarez 2007). These
authors are associated with a collection of canonical texts used in teaching economic sociology
classes (Wang 2012: 1-8). We show that both award-winning recent work and foundational texts
and readers used to teach the next generation of economic sociologists downplay or ignore the role
of race and racism in structuring economic life, and that race and racism are largely absent from
the major intellectual projects of the field.
Our purpose here is not simply to critique economic sociology for its blindspots. We hope that our
analysis highlights spaces within economic sociology where matters of racism are neglected in
order to illuminate possibilities for “bridgework” (Rodríguez-Muñiz 2016) with scholarship in the
sociology of race. Incorporating insights from the sociology of race into economic sociology may
lead to the rejection of existing theories in economic sociology, or demonstrate the value of those
theories in new empirical contexts, or lead to the development of entirely new theories. We suspect
it will entail a bit of each. Economic sociology and the sociology of race share common theoretical
assumptions, including their approach to history and their emphasis on relational modes of
analysis, that should facilitate work that makes use of the powerful insights from both traditions.
We hope that this article will spark a conversation in economic sociology similar to the ongoing
dialog in the sociology of organizations about how to make use of insights in the sociology of race,
and to center race in the analysis of organizations (Nkomo 1992, Wooten and Couloute 2017,
Rojas 2017, Ray 2019).2

1

http://econsoc.mpifg.de/
For the sake of tractability, we limit our focus here to economic sociology. Parallel
conversations are ongoing in political science (Henderson 2013, Blatt 2018), economics (Charles
and Guryan 2011, Hamilton et al 2015), as well as other subfields of sociology including social
movements (Watkins Liu 2018), political sociology (Bracey 2015), and the sociology of science
and technology (Rodríguez-Muñiz 2016).
2

2

The remainder of the article is structured as follows. First, we discuss the lack of engagement
between the sociology of race and economic sociology. We document how race and racism play
little to no role in the central texts and major paradigms of economic sociologists, and how awardwinning works of economic sociology do not engage with the sociology of race. Second, we
introduce six key insights from the sociology of race. In each section, we suggest possible
connections between the sociology of race and economic sociology. We root our review of the
sociology of race in discussions of the United States, without losing sight of the relationships
between global capitalism and both the domestic and global color lines (Christian 2018). We then
draw inspiration from recent trends in the sociology of organizations, especially the rise of the
"racialized organizations" perspective, as a model of bridgework that moves beyond studies of
racial inequality. We conclude by reviewing examples of recent research across four empirical
domains that center race in their analysis of economic life. These examples suggest how economic
sociologists might usefully adopt a "racialized economies" and "racialized markets" approach that
incorporates insights from both economic sociology and the sociology of race.
Current State of Race in Economic Sociology
In order to understand whether literature from the sociology of race might provide productive paths
forward for economic sociologists, we first review the core of economic sociology. We approach
this analysis in two steps: first, we analyze award-winning and agenda-setting works in economic
sociology. Second, we discuss four broad intellectual projects that shape the subfield. These
analyses jointly show that race is not a common topic of analysis in economic sociology, and that
economic sociologists have little engagement with the sociology of race.
As with all subdisciplines within sociology, there is some ambiguity in how to bound such a
review. For instance, it could be argued that sociological analyses of racial discrimination in real
estate (Rugh and Massey 2010; Hernandez 2009) fall at the intersection of stratification and
economic sociology. However, for the purposes of this article we rely on a review of texts that
explicitly fall within the subfield, either through their recognition by the ASA section on economic
sociology or by their presence in the handbooks used for teaching economic sociology. We
reviewed three major edited handbooks in the field,3 all of the award-winning books from the
American Sociological Association section on Economic Sociology, and section membership
demographics.4 Here, we focus primarily on the handbooks; in later sections, we draw on examples
from several award-winning books.

3

Dobbin, Frank, ed. The New Economic Sociology: A Reader. Princeton University Press, 2004;
Smelser, Neil J., and Richard Swedberg, eds. The Handbook of Economic Sociology. 2nd edition.
Princeton University Press, 2005; Granovetter, Mark and Richard Swedberg, eds. The Sociology
of Economic Life. 3rd edition. Westview Press, 2011. As Wang (2012) shows, Granovetter and
Swedberg's reader is particularly influential in shaping the content of economic sociology
courses.
4
See http://www.asanet.org/asa-communities/asa-sections/current-sections/economicsociology/section-economic-sociology-awards-recipient-history.
3

We began our analysis of the role of race and racism in economic sociology by examining three
prominent edited volumes that are commonly used in graduate seminars and PhD exam reading
lists. Race is not foregrounded in any of the handbooks’ introductory chapters, which serve as
helpful overviews of the field. After the introduction, each handbook contains twenty to thirty
essays chosen as illustrative of the field. Across all three, there is no handbook chapter devoted to
“the economic sociology of race” or “race and economic sociology” (in contrast, see England and
Folbre 2005 on "Gender and Economic Sociology").
Out of the 77 essays on economic sociology, just four treat race as salient to the authors’ analyses
of economic life, and only one of these discusses theories of racism. None of these four articles,
nor any of the 73 others, draws insights from the sociology of race to make their central argument.
Schnaiberg’s (2005) chapter on “The Economy and the Environment” draws primarily on
discussions of race from environmental sociology, more specifically environmental racism and
environmental justice (Schnaiberg 2005). The remaining three essays that engage with race focus
on the ethnic economy but tend to conflate race and ethnicity. For example, in her work on how
culture shapes consumption, Zelizer (2004: 340) opts to “use ethnic communities to signal both
race and national origin.” In contrast, sociologists of race have identified the importance of these
distinctions. In particular, sociologists of race have noted how individuals who share an ethnicity
can have different racial identities, such as white and black Hispanics on the census (Golash-Boza
and Darity Jr. 2008); furthermore, many ethnic identities, such as Italian or Irish, are racialized as
white in the contemporary U.S. context. By collapsing race into ethnicity, discussions of ethnic
economies in economic sociology downplay or ignore historical and contemporary forms of
structural racism that impact how both immigrant and non-immigrant communities are
conceptualized in the American racial order.
Another telling signal of the state of the subfield is the co-membership data of ASA’s Economic
Sociology section. Less than 5% of Economic Sociology Section members are also members of
the ASA section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities. The lack of cross-membership is indicative of a
relative lack of engagement with the subfield of race; in contrast, more than 20% of Economic
Sociology section members are also members of each of the sections on Theory, Collective
Behavior and Social Movements, Political Sociology, and Culture.
Furthermore, the Economic Sociology Section has one of the lowest rates of Black memberships
of any section, with just 1.7% of section members identifying as Black compared to 6.5% for ASA
as a whole.5 This statistic is both striking and troubling, given the history of overlooked scholarship
by Black sociologists (Morris 2015). Black scholars have a long intellectual tradition of creating
incisive analyses of phenomena across different sectors of the social world, which are attuned to
race and racism; observations on the social world from behind the veil of the color line (Du Bois
1903), or as the outsider within the academy (Hill Collins 1986) can often push a field blinded by
its own privilege (Ladner 1973). Furthermore, the 16 authors who have received the section's
Viviana Zelizer Best Book award include 11 men and four women who would be racialized as

5

Data available at http://www.asanet.org/research-and-publications/research-sociology/trendssociology/asa-membership#sections .
4

white in the U.S. context.6 These demographics are similar to the demographics of the field's
founders; of the top 20 "key authors" identified by Convert and Heilbron (2007: 36) in their history
of the new economic sociology, 18 are white men and two are white women. Disproportionately
white membership is not necessarily determinative of a lack of engagement with race literature;
however, scholars of standpoint theory and racialized subjectivity have shown that one’s social
location matters to the scholarship one tends to produce and value by shaping which types of
questions and social dynamics one considers relevant and important based on one’s lived
experience (Du Bois 1940; Itzigsohn and Brown 2016; Hill-Collins 1990).
If a field systematically overlooks a particular standpoint in its knowledge production, it risks
fieldwide blindspots. When assumptions of relevant features and dynamics about the social world
pervade a subfield, the subfield develops a set of particular ontological myopias (Rodríguez-Muñiz
2015). Indeed, from our analysis of the state of scholarship in economic sociology, it appears that
race is presumed peripheral to the sociological study of the economy.
Economic Sociology's Four Intellectual Projects
Economic sociology's contemporary blindspots reflect the priorities of its central intellectual
projects. Based on our survey of the field, and on prior theoretical and historical work, we
identified four such intellectual projects that we believe collectively constitute the core of
economic sociology: Polanyian embeddedness, Granovetterian embeddedness, the Performativity
approach, and Zelizer's cultural approach. We follow Krippner & Alvarez (2007) in identifying
the Granovetterian and Polanyian embeddedness projects as probably the most central and
distinctive projects in economic sociology. Additionally, we identify the Zelizerian and
Performativity approaches as important complements to the Granovetterian and Polanyian
projects. Zelizer’s work features prominently in the three major economic sociology handbooks
and the ASA section’s book award was named after her; the performativity approach is newer and
thus less well-represented, but MacKenzie’s work on the performativity of finance has received
three major awards from the Economic Sociology section which suggests its recognized
importance. In this section, we briefly summarize each of these four projects and discuss how race
features (or fails to feature) in each project.
Polanyian embeddedness establishes the historical specificity of market society; it emphasizes the
role of the state in creating and sustaining the conditions for an apparently autonomous market
economy. Polanyi’s work sat at the intersection of history, economics, and anthropology, but his
foundational text The Great Transformation (Polanyi 1944) focused on the struggle for power
within Europe, and especially the history of economic life within Britain. While situating Britain
within a field of global imperial struggles and international finance, Polanyi’s main account of
economic transformation and economic life is surprisingly nationally bounded. The major
dynamics are of the rise of certain styles of market fundamentalist thought (Block and Somers
2014), and debates over the (fictitious) commodification of land, labor, and money. The
6

We made race and gender determinations by consulting authors’ webpages; these observed-race
determinations are contingent upon us as the observers and as such may not match authors’ selfclassification (Roth 2016).

5

transatlantic slave trade does not feature in Polanyi's account of the rise of market society, for
example, and Africa’s role in the text is as an anthropological contrast (showcasing non-market
societies), not as an important site or actor in the rise of capitalism.7 Race and racism are not central
in this account.
While Polanyi's understanding of embeddedness was rooted in discussions of political economy
and the role of the state, Granovetterian embeddedness foregrounds the role of “meso-level” social
structure in shaping economic life to overcome the false dichotomies of over- and under-socialized
economic actors (Granovetter 1985, Granovetter 2017). Granovetterian understandings of
embeddedness are most associated with work on networks of individuals and organizations (e.g.
Uzzi 1996). The foundational texts in this approach (Granovetter 1974, Granovetter 1985) do not
discuss race and, notably, Granovetter’s sample for his canonical study of job-finding through
weak ties was restricted to white men. Beyond the simple absence of attention to race, the
embeddedness approach is linked to an argument against the primacy or importance of
characteristics understood as macro/demographic (i.e. gender and race) in favor of accounts that
privilege network location - what Emirbayer and Goodwin (1994) call the “anti-categorical
imperative”. As we will discuss below, contemporary research in the sociology of race argues
against treating race as an individual-level demographic characteristic, and for a relational
approach that we believe is compatible with insights from Granovetterian economic sociology.
Nonetheless, this anti-categorical imperative may help explain why race is not central in accounts
of embeddedness.
The performativity approach is the most recently developed strand of economic sociology,
emerging in the late 1990s from the work of sociologists of technology Michel Callon and Donald
MacKenzie and their collaborators. Callon and MacKenzie both argued that Granovetter’s account
of economic action was only half-right. Yes, economic action was embedded in local social
structure - but economic action was also embedded in what came to be called “market devices”
(Callon et al 2007), the technologies that make economic action possible. While Granovetter
argued that the rational, calculative action of economic theory was largely a fiction, Callon (1998)
and MacKenzie (2006) show how this action was an accomplishment, that is, they showed how
technologies and economic theories (along with various kinds of social and political institutions)
made it possible for actors to behave “as if” homo economicus, in some times and places. This
insight shares with the Polanyian approach an understanding of markets and market action as the
potentially precarious outcome of a set of social and political processes, while foregrounding
especially the technological aspects of those processes. Equipped with the right formulas, the right
calculator, and the right market infrastructure, a financial trader can act much more like economists
claim a rational actor should. Although the modern financial industry has strong historical roots in
the slave trade (Levy 2012), and the contemporary financial industry is dominated by white men
(Turco 2010), race and racism do not figure prominently in performativity accounts of the rise or
functioning of finance.
In contrast to the previous three approaches, the Zelizerian approach to economic sociology
eschews the language of embeddedness in favor of a cultural approach to economic life through
7

In later work, Polanyi (1968) himself studied the slave trade in Africa. Unlike The Great
Transformation; this work is largely unknown in economic sociology.
6

concepts like “connected lives” and “relational work”. Zelizer’s (2010) approach starts from an
attempt to overcome two extreme understandings of the relationship between culture and the
economy: “nothing but” (that culture can be understood as simply part of the economy and that all
action is economic action) and “hostile worlds” (that economic life intrudes on non-economic
spaces, perverting them). In contrast, Zelizer argues for an approach that emphasizes how culture
and economy are deeply imbricated (“connected lives”), and how actors work out the tensions
between the dictates of norms and markets through “relational work”. For example, women and
men constantly negotiate norms and taboos surrounding the “purchase of intimacy” (2005), finding
ways to engage in exchanges that appropriately match the medium of exchange and the character
of the relationship. While gendered interactions are at the center of many accounts of relational
work (both Zelizer’s, and later authors like Almeling [2007] and Mears [2015]), race and racism
have not featured prominently.
Each of these projects represents an important site of intersection between economic sociology
and other subfields and empirical processes: Polanyian with political and historical sociology,
Granovetterian with organizations and networks, Performativity with the sociology of science and
technology, and Zelizerian with cultural sociology (and, to some extent, the sociology of gender).
In contrast, no major intellectual project sits at the intersection of economic sociology and the
sociology of race.
In sum, contemporary economic sociology does not treat race or racism as central topics, and
largely ignores the sociology of race. To be clear, we are not saying that there is absolutely no
research by economic sociologists that foregrounds race and racism, or that engages with ideas
from the sociology of race. We are excited to note several new streams of research, often located
at the intersections of economic sociology with urban or political sociology, that foreground race
and racism as central objects of analysis (Robinson 2016, Pacewicz & Robinson 2019, Henricks
and Seamster 2017, Seamster and Charron-Chénier 2017, Sargent 2019, Wherry et al 2019). But
there is shockingly little, and what work does exist has not yet been recognized widely by the field,
nor incorporated into the main texts used to train economic sociologists.
Insights from the Sociology of Race
Economic sociology can do better. In the following sections, we introduce economic sociologists
to six key insights from the sociology of race. While we recognize the importance of an analysis
of the interaction between race, racism, and the state in economic life (Omi and Winant 1986), we
focus more explicitly on how the sociology of race may bring insights to more meso-level concepts
like markets and networks, a comparatively less developed intersection. The literatures we discuss
are large and heterogeneous; like economic sociology, the sociology of race is a dynamic and
changing subfield, and there are vibrant debates about how best to define and understand the
central objects of study. Rather than attempting to summarize all of these heterogeneous positions,
we focus on a subset of authors and claims that we find particularly useful for thinking about the
possibility of producing an economic sociology of race, with a focus on concepts from critical race
theory.8 Necessarily, these decisions imply that our treatment will be partial and not represent the
8

For a primer on critical race theory, see Fleming (2018: 23-48).
7

full breadth of conversation in the sociology of race; we encourage readers to treat these summaries
as a jumping off point for deeper engagement rather than definitive accounts. In each section, we
provide an overview of relevant literature and suggest how this literature has the potential to link
to economic sociology in order to provide a more complete picture of both economic and racial
structures.
Race is a Product of Racism
Sociologists have long argued that race is a social construction. In particular, recent scholarship
shows that racism produces race. In this section, we show how racism historically constituted race
as a concept and social structure, and the implications of this argument for attempts to tease out
the role of racism and race in present-day contexts. Recognizing that race is a product of racism is
an antidote to attempts to explain racially unequal outcomes through features of racialized
individuals. Race can never be an explanatory factor apart from racism because race is always
already a function of racism.
We draw our understanding of social construction from Ian Hacking. Hacking (1999: 6) identifies
a social constructionist argument as one that holds that the construct “need not have existed, or
need not be at all as it is” and that it “is not determined by the nature of things; it is not inevitable.”
To argue that race is a social construct is to argue that race need not have existed, and that race is
not an inevitable natural kind. Scholars largely agree that race should be understood as a social
construction (Haney-López 1994, Omi and Winant 2014, Golash-Boza 2016). In particular, as
science studies scholars have documented, human genetic and biological differences map poorly
onto contemporary racial categories (Nelson 2016, Roberts 2011, Fujimura et al 2014), categories
which are themselves in constant flux (Saperstein et al 2013).
Beyond arguing that race is a construct, contemporary scholars have emphasized how race was
constructed by racism. As Barbara and Karen Fields (2012) show, racial categories and meanings
emerge out of racism. As they define it, race “stands for the conception or the doctrine that nature
produces humankind in distinct groups, each defined by inborn traits that its members share and
that differentiate them from the members of other distinct groups of the same kind but of unequal
rank.” (Fields and Fields 2012: 16) Racism, as defined by Fields and Fields, “refers to the theory
and the practice of applying a social, civic, or legal double standard based on ancestry, and to the
ideology surrounding such a double standard.” (Fields and Fields 2012: 17) Racism is a mode of
social practice that naturalizes race as a category of difference.
When unequal outcomes emerge as a result of racist social practice, social actors in positions of
power then ascribe those differences to race rather than racism. Fields and Fields (2012) name this
process “racecraft” and compare this socially embedded illusion to witchcraft, the false belief that
particular outcomes were caused by the evil sorcery of witches. When social scientists point to
"the effect of race" in an explanation, rather than the effect of racism, they engage in racecraft.

8

Sociologists, historians, and philosophers have documented the historical formation of race as a
category of thought and a collection of practices of domination in the 17th and 18th centuries.9 As
Mattson (2014) shows, one of the earliest racial typologies, produced by Frenchman François
Bernier in 1684, identified four major races: Europeans, Africans, Asians, and Lapps. These
typologies shifted over the next three and a half centuries – most Americans would recognize the
first three racial categories, but not the last. Racial categories were deployed from the very
beginning by enlightenment theorists to justify political and economic inequality. Mills (1997)
showcases how early social contract theorists like Locke and Rousseau presumed a racial contract
between whites for the purpose of exploiting racial others as a part of the process of entering into
society. Liberal theorists defined personhood in racial terms, with racial others denied full access
to the political and economic rights.
These academic theories coincided with and justified newly-emerging racial hierarchies. Omi and
Winant (2014) foreground the role of states in particular in making and remaking race, tuning and
adapting the boundaries of racial categories through racial projects. Robinson (2000) showcases
how racial divisions emerged in part as a response to the needs of economic elites to separate and
control laborers, with British rule over the Irish (understood as racially different and inferior) in
the sixteenth century serving as a model for later forms of racialization, including most
prominently racialized slavery in the Americas (Du Bois 1935).
We cannot disentangle conversations about racial difference from conversations about racism
because racism is a necessary condition that makes possible the existence of race (Golash-Boza
2016). Two implications follow. First, while it may be possible to isolate the effect (or non-effect)
of individual prejudice on aspects of racial inequality, such an isolation is not equivalent to
understanding the effect of racism. Consider, for example, Nancy DiTomaso’s (2013; 2015: 58)
argument that “in the post-civil rights period, racial inequality is reproduced by whites helping
other whites more so than through the discrimination or racism of whites toward non-whites.”
While valuable for highlighting the role of seemingly race-neutral acts of favoritism towards
friends and family in reproducing racial inequality, DiTomaso’s claim is too quick to eliminate
racism from the conversation by equating it with acts of individual discrimination. One cannot
even talk sensibly of “whites” and “non-whites” without talking about racism as these very
categories are the consequences of historical and contemporary racism. Second, because race
emerges out of racism, the study of race is necessarily political. Race is not a natural kind, and
there is no innocent or apolitical way to study it. As Golash-Boza (2016: 130) writes “the study of
race must be political and politicized because there is no good reason to study race other than
working toward the elimination of racial oppression.”
Racism is Structural
Sociologists of race show that racism structures societal institutions, resulting in what BonillaSilva (1997) calls a racialized social system. Bonilla-Silva conceives of this system as the deeplyentrenched accumulation of social relations that support a racial hierarchy in which power and
9

Scholars somewhat disagree about the precise dating of the emergence of race and racism, and
about whether earlier typologies of difference laid the groundwork for race as we know it
(Saperstein et al 2013).
9

resources are concentrated in white-dominant spaces. Because race is a product of racism, and
racism is systematically embedded in social structures, the task of studying race involves the
unearthing of the mechanisms that undergird racialized social systems. For economic sociology,
this approach foregrounds the importance of understanding how race is inscribed and reinscribed
in markets and other economic structures.
In this structural approach to race relations, individual-level prejudices and biases are predictable
outcomes of racialized systems rooted in white supremacy (the assumption that white people, and
their practices, and norms, are superior to racialized subjects and their practices and norms). The
racialized social system perspective argues that conventional accounts of racism are too static,
individualistic, and focused on overtly racist behavior and beliefs rather than on the structures that
produce racist subjectivities (Bonilla-Silva 1997, Jung 2015). In contrast, the racialized social
system perspective analyzes how racism as a structure changes, and especially how those changes
have made possible the persistence of racial domination with declining levels of overt bigotry.
Racism, in this perspective, is not treated as an aberration but rather as a normal and routine, albeit
contested and mutable, part of society.
For example, in an ethnography of a Chicago court, Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve (2016) documents
how a racialized social system reinforces and reproduces racial inequality through higher rates of
incarceration of non-white defendants and the dehumanization of these defendants and their loved
ones. The courtroom procedures reveal how white prosecutors justify their roles as arbiters of
punishment by drawing a distinction between their morality and the immorality of the (majority
nonwhite) defendants. Wielding a colorblind rhetoric of morality, these prosecutors buttress the
court system’s racial inequities. Van Cleve shows that their individual actions not only replay
racist ideologies, but also inform the outcome of courtroom exchanges.
While much of the theoretical work on racialized systems foregrounds how individuals enact
racialized subjectivities, a growing literature at the nexus of race and organizations develops an
analytical framework wherein organizations themselves are seen as “raced” (Wooten 2006) or
“racialized” (Ray 2019), a perspective we discuss more below. For instance, Victor Ray
conceptualizes US military organizations as historically segregated spaces, contrary to scholars
who point to the military’s intentional racial integration initiatives and large proportion of people
of color as evidence of a racially inclusive space (Butler and Moskos 1996; Moynihan 1965). Ray
complicates that notion of racial integration through qualitative interviews with veterans of wars
in Iraq and Afghanistan. Ray's respondents reveal that supervising officers minimize complaints
of racial harassment, and soldiers are disincentivized by their superiors to report such behavior
(Ray 2018). Even in this organization with an integrationist approach and large presence of
nonwhite employees, racial hierarchies remain through systematic willful ignorance of individuallevel discrimination through organizational policy.
The insight that racism is structural would change how economic sociologists conceptualize race
within economic systems. For instance, while scholarship on the ethnic economy provides a
needed focus within economic sociology on racialized immigrant groups (Light 2005; Portes and
Sensenbrenner 2004), it does not account for racism faced by such groups. Light’s account of the
ethnic economy claims that while racial discrimination in lending practices exists, it is of minor
importance as compared to the role of the “strictly economic” measure of creditworthiness. Yet
scholarship on discrimination in real estate has shown how wealth disparities have been shaped by

10

housing segregation and unfair lending practices (Rugh and Massey 2010; Hernandez 2009). The
wider view of racially unequal wealth accumulation, informed by continued post-civil rights
housing segregation and racist lending practices, demonstrates that creditworthiness, while on its
surface purely economic, is racialized and produces racially unequal outcomes by design
(Seamster and Charron-Chénier 2017).
In contrast to defining racism by acts or beliefs by individuals or groups of individuals, the
racialized social system approach shows that individual and group-level racial prejudice is the
normal outcome of the larger system in which the individual is embedded. Studies of racialized
organizations also highlight how organizational-level policies and procedures create and sustain
racial hierarchy, independent of (or in conjunction with) the motives or prejudices of the
individuals enacting those procedures. Together, these studies point to possibilities for
understanding economic exchanges as embedded within racialized social systems and racial
inequities in exchange as a normal outcome of these systems.
Whiteness
Whiteness and white supremacy have been key social constructions in creating racism and then
creating racial categories within modern social systems (Bonilla-Silva 2001; Du Bois 1920). Du
Bois (1920) called attention to this ideology of whiteness, calling it an invention of the 19th and
20th century that “leads to curious acts,” from dispositional pity or hatred towards the so-called
darker races, to acts of suppression and violence. More recent scholarship has drawn attention to
the “white racial frame,” a worldview embedded with persistent racial stereotypes, racist
ideologies, and narratives about nonwhite individuals (Feagin 2013). First developed in the 17th
century when European elites ascribed hierarchical differences to human beings by biological
markers, the white racial frame operates four centuries later in both unspoken assumptions and
everyday practices that perpetuate racial inequality. Attention to this persistent frame challenges
studies of racial inequality to name the actors of discrimination rather than understanding
continuing racial inequity as a passive process of reproduction.
Part of the ideological power of whiteness rests on how whiteness itself so often goes unmarked;
race is always treated as being “about” non-whites, while white racial identity is obscured (Lewis
2004). Sociologists studying whiteness explore the cultural schemas of whiteness, i.e. white racial
attitudes, even (and especially) in instances in which white respondents do not recognize
themselves as racial actors. Studying whiteness reminds us that, in a racialized social system, race
is always present, including in situations where only white people are involved.
Whiteness scholars also demonstrate how trenchantly held white racial logics are for those
socialized as white in American society, due in part to an epistemological commitment to “not
see” their own role in racial matters (Mills 1997). Even when the white racial frame is challenged,
individuals perform epistemic maneuvers in their reasoning to obscure continued benefits through
racial privilege (Mueller 2017).
White racial ideology moves beyond individual sense-making and serves to “naturalize the status
quo” of racial inequalities (Lewis 2004: 632). Thus, sociological research on whiteness links
cultural schema to its power and material impact on social outcomes such as educational
inequality. For instance, when Lynn, a white, politically liberal respondent was asked about her
11

views on busing as a means to integrate schools, she indicated that she opposed intercity school
busing, yet wholeheartedly supports school integration in the abstract. However, scholars and
activists find that busing policy is one of the only ways to effectively integrate schools, due to
trenchant residential segregation (Bonilla-Silva 2015). Far from an isolated decision-making
process, white respondents consistently state their political position as not racist, yet resist
measures that would address racial inequities, citing choice as a remedy to school and residential
segregation.
These white racial attitudes pervade mainstream institutional logics, obscuring racism by
naturalizing white-dominant norms as the default within institutional contexts. White Logic, White
Methods, an edited collection of essays critiquing mainstream social scientific research, argues
that mainstream sociology commonly assumes whiteness as a default, and treats race as a fixed
variable rather than a social construction (Zuberi and Bonilla-Silva 2008). The collected essays
reveal the white logics behind taken-for-granted categorizations that social scientists use to
interpret the world.
From group dispositions to institutional norms, whiteness as a construct shaped the foundation of
the United States and shapes its current racial order. Given the pervasiveness of whiteness, it is
worth considering how white-dominant perspectives are reinscribed in economic markets. For
example, critical race theorist Sumi Cho (2008) draws on and critiques Granovetter’s (1985)
understanding of structural embeddedness in the context of explanations of racial inequality in
construction and labor markets. Cho notes that Granovetter’s pioneering studies of embeddedness
in labor markets drew on a sample that was 99% white, and yet Granovetter originally dismissed
race as an important mediating or complicating factor. Drawing on more recent research on
discrimination in labor markets, neighborhood segregation, and racial homophily in friend and
work networks, Cho advocates for a perspective of embedded whiteness. This perspective argues
that existing embeddedness research itself remains “undersocialized” by failing to consider how
racial structures shape the content and meaning of network ties. While embeddedness in horizontal
relationships produces trusts among white actors, embeddedness in hierarchical relations may
produce malfeasance between white and non-white actors, as when influential, white-owned
construction firms abuse smaller, less well-connected minority-owned firms (Cho 2008: 25).
Intersectionality
While studies of whiteness emphasize how race must be understood as being about more than just
racial minorities, studies of intersectionality showcase how race and racism must be understood in
relationship to other systems of oppression. Inspired by work in critical race theory (Crenshaw
1989; 1991) and Black feminist theory (Collins 1986; 2002), intersectional arguments foreground
the overlapping systems of dominations which constitute our social world.
Scholars of intersectionality have offered many different definitions of the term (Cho et al 2013,
Collins 2015). Intersectionality has been understood as a methodological imperative, an empirical
hypothesis about interaction effects, and a form of activist praxis. Intersectionality argues that we
must analyze the intersections of capitalism, patriarchy, racism, heterosexism, and
colonialism/empire rather than the intersections of class, gender, race, sexuality, and nationality
(especially understood as benign cultural differences). Identities here are understood as effects of

12

oppressions (as race is produced by racism, so too is class produced by capitalism, etc.) or at least
constrained and shaped by oppressions.
For scholars of intersectionality, identities are understood as sites of coalition-formation for
liberatory (or oppressive) social movements (Crenshaw 1991, Carastathis 2013). Intersectionality
recognizes that every identity category already contains a complex coalition of different
individuals, e.g. that not all women have the same interests. Simultaneously, intersectionality
recognizes the power and importance of forming coalitions across identity categories, for example,
looking at the formation of “women of color” as a strategy for intersectional organizing that
recognizes shared interests while attempting to preserve an awareness of the differences between
the experiences of Native, Black, Asian, and Latinx women (Luna 2016). Intersectional analyses
attend to the complexities of identities as outcomes of the complex relationships between different
forms of oppression.
Crenshaw’s (1989) foundational work on the experience of Black women attempting to pursue
claims of discrimination under American antidiscrimination law illustrates the insights of the
intersectional approach. Crenshaw documents how the law was not capable of recognizing that
Black women’s negative treatment could not be reduced to racism or sexism, but rather reflected
a specific combination of both. Black women’s claims were routinely rejected by courts in light of
evidence that employers hired Black men or white women, and thus that racism or sexism were
not operative. Crenshaw argued that analyzing the experiences of Black women showcased
limitations in existing antiracist and feminist politics and theorizing which tended to center the
experiences and needs of Black men and white women.
Intersectionality has significant methodological implications for scholars of race, gender, and, we
argue, economic sociology. Choo and Ferree (2010: 129-131) identify three related
methodological orientations derived from intersectionality: centering the perspectives of multiply
marginalized individuals (as in Crenshaw’s focus on Black women litigants), recognizing the
analytical interaction between forms of oppression (e.g. the experiences of Black women are not
simply the sum of the experiences of Black men and white women), and refusing to give analytical
primacy to one form of oppression (that is, treating racism, sexism, and capitalism as interactive
in each domain).
Similarly, McCall (2005) identifies three modes of intersectional research on inequality, which she
categorizes as anticategorical, intracategorical, and intercategorical. Anticategorical research
focuses on the artificiality of existing categories and argues for the deconstruction of those
categories. Intracategorical research highlights variation within existing categories, focusing on
those in marginalized positions to showcase how existing understandings of a category are too
narrow, following feminist theoretical dictates that foreground what can be learned by viewing the
center from the margins. Finally, intercategorical research “requires that scholars provisionally
adopt existing analytical categories to document relationships of inequality among social groups
and changing configurations of inequality along multiple and conflicting dimensions” (McCall
2005: 1774). McCall’s (2005: 1790) own intercategorical research highlights how the "effect" of
race on wages may vary based on gender, on class, and on labor market institutions, among other
things.

13

McCall’s argument is useful for identifying missed opportunities in economic sociology. For
example, in the 2014 Zelizer Book Award Winner Flawed System, Flawed Self, Ofer Sharone
(2013) draws on interviews with unemployed job-seekers to understand how they experience the
market in the U.S. and Israel. As reviews note, Sharone, in his argument that national-level
institutional context is the main determinant of job-seeking experiences, overlooks salient genderbased differences within each country and fails “to recognize the multidimensionality of culture
and how culture and class interact with institutional context to shape experiences” (Harrison 2014).
Beyond failing to examine gender, Sharone also overlooks how nationally-specific racialized
meanings, practices, and categorizations shape one’s experience of the national institutional
context, and thus misses an opportunity to analyze the intersection of raced, gendered, and national
contexts in shaping labor market outcomes.
As McCall’s work shows, intersectional approaches have gained significant traction in inequality
research but these insights have yet to be applied widely in economic sociology. Intersectionality
approaches ought to be well-suited to research on organizations, markets, and political economy.
While inequality research has historically foregrounded individuals and demographic groups,
economic sociologists are comfortable analyzing larger structural processes from states to
organizational fields to global value chains. This focus fits nicely with intersectionality’s attention
to overlapping systems of oppression. Intersectional approaches to these topics would ask
questions like, how do racism, sexism, and capitalism simultaneously shape the functioning of
markets? How are economic fields simultaneously racialized and gendered?
Colorblind Racism
Because racism and race are mutable properties of social systems rather than essential properties
of individuals, sociologists of race attend to how racialized social systems and the ideologies that
uphold them may take new forms in response to economic or cultural changes. In the contemporary
period, sociologists of race have identified how racialized social systems continue to perpetuate
racial inequalities after the end of overt discrimination characterizing the Jim Crow era.
Despite the end of legally sanctioned racial segregation and discrimination in the United States
through civil rights legislation, racial practices continue to exclude and discriminate against
nonwhite individuals through more covert mechanisms often embedded in institutional operations
(Bonilla-Silva 2017: 476). Continued inequality in the contemporary racial order is supported by
a new colorblind racist ideology. Colorblind racism is a set of beliefs that insists upon not
acknowledging racial difference in the interest of treating all individuals equally. Colorblind
ideology naturalizes unequal outcomes arising from racially unequal historical legacies and
contributes to the maintenance of racial inequality in the present.
Colorblind racism is supported in part by a discourse of abstract liberalism: the use of liberal ideals
- such as individual choice, egalitarianism, and universalism - to explain race relations in a
colorblind manner (Bonilla-Silva 2017). Abstract liberalism asserts that existing outcomes should
be understood as following from individuals’ free choices and capabilities absent incontrovertible
evidence of contemporary, immediate, egregious discrimination. This philosophy combines a
normative commitment to the idea that individual merit should determine one’s success in life with
a belief that individual merit in fact determines most outcomes in actually existing contemporary

14

society. For instance, the frame of abstract liberalism is commonly used to push back against
affirmative action, arguing that, under liberal principles of choice and egalitarianism, all
individuals should be treated equally in considerations for admission to educational institution.
However, when this abstract principle is applied to the racially unequal conditions of actually
existing society, it ignores the severe underrepresentation of people of color in high-paying and
high-prestige jobs and educational institutions.
Abstract liberalism facilitates colorblind racism through the cultivation of an epistemology of
white ignorance (Mueller 2017), or the continued position of not knowing or seeing racism in
everyday practice. In recent work on colorblind racism, Mueller conceives of colorblindness as an
epistemological framework that is upheld by white people's privileged position on the dominant
side of the color line and upheld by structural white supremacy. In analyzing white undergraduate
students’ assessments of their own familial wealth by generation, Mueller demonstrates that
students, even when faced with a contradiction between their ideals of abstract liberalism and
actually existing racial inequality, engage in epistemic maneuvers to maintain their colorblind view
of their own wealth. For example, Mueller reports how a student named Felicia reported in her
reflection her grandfather’s use of a veteran’s loan to buy his first home for him and his family
(Mueller 2017: 227). Felicia then engaged in an analysis of a racially unequal past, discussing how
veterans’ loans were given to white individuals in the military, the segregated neighborhoods with
good schools made accessible by such loans in her own family, and her parents’ subsequent wealth
accumulation. However, she disconnected this past from her own family’s present success,
reflecting that her success is due to more than wealth, and that her family, having been immigrants,
went through similar struggles as other immigrants.
This rupture between the past and present in racial histories represents a willfully conditioned
ignorance against racial explanations for continued racial inequality. This refusal to recognize the
advantages white privilege affords, as a direct result of racial discrimination, maintains racialized
social systems that systematically disadvantage people of color over time and across different
iterations of the color line.
As Mueller demonstrates in particular, wealth accumulation’s racial history is often obscured from
view through the frame of abstract liberalism. An economic sociology attuned to this insight would
examine how economic policies rely on colorblind language to characterize racist practices. In
particular, abstract liberalism is likely related to other liberal ideologies, including neoliberalism
(Mudge 2008) and market fundamentalism (Somers and Block 2005), although these connections
are only beginning to be explored. Hohle’s (2017) work offers one clear example of work linking
colorblind racism and neoliberalism in the United States. Hohle shows how elite Southern white
men redefined public as Black, and private as white, and thus enable neoliberalism to serve as an
entire language for creating colorblind racist policies, from tax cuts and the privatization of public
goods to lionizing wealthy white men as “job creators.” Similarly, Jackson (2017) argues in
ongoing research that late 20th century American politics can best be made sense of by
understanding the transformation of conservative politics through the alliance of the “libertarian
right” and the “racist right”, who found common cause as libertarians accepted the emergence of
racial segregation as a consequence of increased individual freedom, while racists believed that
(colorblind) libertarian arguments were their most effective tool for pushing back against state-led
attempts to promote integration.

15

Racial Capitalism
While it may be possible to imagine a capitalist system that was not imbricated with racism,
actually existing capitalism and racism were co-constituted. Scholarship on racial capitalism links
the foundation of the current U.S. economic system to racist ideologies, which facilitated the
dispossession of indigenous land to the hands of European settlers (Dunbar-Ortiz 2014) and a
consequent use of slave labor on the seized lands for an economic surplus (Baptist 2016). An
extensive body of scholarship in the new history of capitalism demonstrates how racialized slavery
was central to the Atlantic economies and the development of modern capitalist organizations
(Beckert and Rockman 2016; Rosenthal 2018). Slavery is inextricably linked to the foundation
and growth of U.S.’s financial system, and enslaved black subjects were a financial commodity in
the system of capitalism. More broadly, scholars of racial capitalism argue that racism enabled and
continues to enable capitalist development, even though racism has its own history that is not
reducible to the history of capitalism (Bhattacharyya 2018).
Sociologist Oliver Cox (1948) coined the term racial capitalism to describe how the social
construction of race and white supremacy made possible economic growth through the
dehumanization of black and brown bodies. Cedric Robinson (2000) built on the term in Black
Marxism to trouble the Marxist assumption that capitalism marks a negation of feudalism. Instead,
Robinson pinpointed the beginnings of both racialist ideologies and capitalist modes of production
within European feudal societies, in part as the outgrowth of international competition. In order to
grow their own nation-states, the small, well-networked, merchant elite who conducted
international trade began to draw from more vulnerable ethnic groups as migrant labor. English
merchants, for instance, relied on Irish labor for infrastructure-building and domestic labor. As
European modes of capitalism developed unevenly across nation-states, the bourgeois classes
needed to find a way to convince the proletariat within their own nations to destroy competing
nations’ infrastructures by force. Some nations, like Germany, relied on Herrenvolk, an ideology
of Aryan supremacy, to foster support from the proletariat based on a racialized national pride.
This racialism, or the naturalization of social hierarchies through racial categories, normalized the
dehumanizing practices of slavery and genocide that allowed the economic system of capitalism
to flourish and outgrow a declining feudalism.
Black Marxism notes the contributions of W.E.B. Du Bois to this Black radical critique of racial
capitalism. In Itzigsohn and Brown’s (2019) reading of Black Reconstruction, Du Bois “more fully
puts the Southern slave economy in its transnational context.” Du Bois linked the enslaved black
people of the American South to a global proletariat, tracing their place in a global supply chain
as a commodity. From the bourgeoisie planters’ standpoint, it was in their economic interest to
maintain slaves as a labor force. Black slaves came to comprise a fifth of the nation, and “the black
workers of America bent at the bottom of a growing pyramid of commerce and industry” (Du Bois
1935: 2). The U.S. economic system grew with exploitation of slave labor and the low-wage white
proletariat. The depiction of Blacks as inferior to whites kept worker movements disconnected
along a color line. Du Bois highlights that these racial divisions between workers continued after
the abolition of slavery in the United States, and ultimately led to the failure to secure civil rights
for Black freedmen in the Reconstruction era (Du Bois 1935). Robinson and Du Bois’s works

16

exemplify analyses of capitalism as infused with racial and racist ideologies. Insights from racial
capitalism place the U.S. economy in a larger global system of worker exploitation.
Thinking through these insights from racial capitalism can help economic sociology to understand
how ideological underpinnings of white supremacy allow capitalist modes of production to
flourish, both by naturalizing the exploitation of nonwhite races and inhibiting worker solidarity
through racialized national pride. Ruef's (2014) Between Slavery and Capitalism, recipient of the
2015 Zelizer Book Award, analyzes the role of the institution of slavery in the development of
capitalism. Ruef is one of the only contemporary sociologists studying American slavery, and his
work is an important step in understanding the shift from slave plantations to a freed labor force.
Ruef's analysis of the post-emancipation shifts in the economy of the American South focuses on
the economic uncertainties faced by freedpeople, white workers, and plantation owners and how
this uncertainty shaped the changes in social structure.
Ruef skillfully demonstrates through Works Progress Administration interviews that freedpeople
faced uncertainty around which work they would accept and for what wages they would accept it,
and he argues that their demands for better labor conditions helped to bring about the end of
plantation life. He identifies uncertainty as the main mechanism that shaped the behavior of social
actors following emancipation. He argues that Black freedpeople, white workers, and white
planters were all driven by categorical uncertainty, given that the post-emancipation landscape had
no clear precedent. For instance, Ruef demonstrates that Black freedpeople post-emancipation
faced uncertainty as they came to be valued differently than Black slaves in the antebellum era.
Given that slaves are kept over their lifetime, planters valued adolescents for their presumably
longer utility and women for their ability to birth more slaves. Post-emancipation, when white
planters faced new uncertainty in valuing Black labor, they began to prize occupational skill (in
place of youth and fertility) as a result of newly introduced labor contracts which were bounded in
time.
However, by focusing on how the case fits into a framework of categorical uncertainty within
economic markets, Ruef's analysis of how white planters viewed Black labor underestimates the
role of white supremacist ideologies in facilitating the dehumanization of black bodies as
exploitable labor. The abolition of slavery was not just a threat to the once-certain economic order;
it was a threat to the existing racial order. Ultimately, a commitment to maintaining this racial
order shaped the behaviors of white planters, who frequently resisted honoring labor contracts, and
who at times did not compensate Black workers as stated in contracts. Ruef’s analysis neglects the
entanglement of white supremacist ideology with the economy, ignoring that racism’s roots work
with and are as durable as material forces (Morris 2000).
Extant scholarship on the reconstruction-era Black radical tradition, by contrast, could have
enriched the account by considering the ideological wages of whiteness that shaped white planters’
and white workers’ responses to uncertainty. Du Bois’s (1935) Black Reconstruction, for instance,
provides a compelling model for analyzing the subjectivity of white workers in hindering class
solidarity in favor of the promise of relative social mobility through their own whiteness. An
analysis that included the impact of the color line on lived experience would recognize the role of
white supremacy as a necessary ideological underpinning of post-emancipation economic
development, and the modern U.S. economic system more broadly.

17

Following slave emancipation in the United States, American officials did not dismantle the
existing system of capitalism and reconstruct it from the root. Instead, American businessmen
“innovated” ways to extend this form of capitalism without legal slavery, through business
practices that continued to exploit the working class and ideological work that continued to pit
white workers against Black workers and racialized immigrant labor. An economic sociology
attuned to these insights would analyze how processes of commodification and financialization
(Rockman 2014) are justified in racial ideologies and enable the persistence of racial inequality in
a nation that has adopted legal measures prohibiting racial discrimination.
Learning from the Conversation on Racialized Organizations
In this section, we show how recent research in the sociology of organizations has successfully
incorporated insights from the sociology of race to move beyond documenting organizational
racial inequality towards a racialized organizations framework. In the final section, we will suggest
some avenues by which economic sociology might follow a parallel path through a research
agenda on racialized markets and racialized economies.
Organizational scholars have produced a long and successful line of research on the role of
organizations in the production and reproduction racial inequality. Public schools as institutions
reproduce disadvantage of black and Hispanic students (Roscigno 2000). Job segregation along
racial lines has been upheld through mechanisms of social closure and the devaluation of racialized
and gendered occupations (Tomaskovic-Devey 1993). Racial discrimination by employers
towards non-white applicants continues to limit job market prospects for black and Latinx workers
(Pager et al 2009) and lowers earnings potentials of non-white workers in higher prestige
occupations (Grodsky and Pager 2001). Merit-based rewards are often biased towards white men,
negatively impacting the earnings of people of color (Castilla 2008).
While valuable, this line of research remains limited by its treatment of race as a stable
demographic variable. Such an approach can limit our understanding of racism as a dynamic,
historical force (Zuberi and Bonilla-Silva 2008). In 1992, Stella Nkomo urged sociologists of
organizations to move beyond this conception to understand the racial relations that make up the
organizational form. While the above research points to important mechanisms that maintain
inequality along racial lines, it falls short of Nkomo’s call to analyze race as an ideological, powerladen construct rooted in Eurocentric ideals of whiteness as the universal.
In contrast, recent research has explicitly taken up this task, asking how organizations are
themselves racialized entities, how organizations enact and experience racial inequality within an
organizational field, and how race and racism shape and are in turn shaped by institutional
processes (Ray 2019; Wooten and Couloute 2017; Rojas 2017). These theoretical advances build
on emergent research that considers how white supremacy and patriarchy intersect as processes
that impact the lived experiences of people of color in the workplace through inequality regimes
(Acker 2006). For instance, the racialization of tasks in organizations shapes what work within the
organization is implicitly tied to racialized and gendered bodies, thereby affecting racial dynamics
within the organization (Wingfield and Alston 2014). This strand of divergent research also takes
a critical eye to diversity initiatives that take race as a static variable, finding that particular
initiatives such as diversity trainings are costly and ineffective at promoting racial inclusion in the
18

workplace (Kalev et al 2006), and more broadly that corporate diversity programs can obscure the
need for an accompanying change in underlying organizational culture that has been structured
with a logic of white normativity (Berrey 2015).
The emergent research articulated in Ray’s (2019) theory of racialized organizations answers
Nkomo’s call to move beyond race as a static variable by considering organizations as racial
structures, contrary to the dominant approach of considering organizations as race-neutral spaces.
Within this framework of racialized organizations, whiteness serves as a credential and unequal
distribution of resources is legitimated through this racial logic. Drawing on critical race theory,
Ray extends the framework of the racialized social system (Bonilla-Silva 1997) to consider how
intersectional systems of oppression (Crenshaw 1989) and whiteness as property (Harris 1993)
operate on the organizational level.
As we endeavor to bridge the divide between the sociology of race and economic sociology, this
turn to racialized organizations provides a useful model. An economic sociology of race should
not simply focus on racial inequality as a dependent variable, but should treat markets and
economies as racial structures, constituted by and constitutive of race and racism.
Towards an Economic Sociology of Race
Although there is not yet a systematic dialogue between economic sociology and the sociology of
race, nor a satisfying theoretical synthesis, there is an encouraging uptick of recent and in-progress
work that draws on insights from both subfields. In this section, we document examples of how
scholars have begun to bring these insights together in four empirical domains that span the breadth
of economic sociology. Some of these works explicitly engage both economic sociology and the
sociology of race; in other cases, we offer our own readings of how the reviewed research
implicitly connects ideas from the two subfields. Together, these works offer the empirical and
theoretical starting points for building a more synthetic treatment of "racialized markets" and
"racialized economies".10
Labor Markets
Labor market research has long been central to both economic sociology and the sociology of race.
This research has historically focused on documenting the extent of workplace racial segregation
and the pervasiveness of racial discrimination in employment in the United States, as well as
uncovering the mechanisms through which segregation and discrimination are enacted. This
research shows how segregation decreased in the 15 years following the passage of the Civil Rights
Acts of 1964, but has largely remained constant (and high) since 1980 (Tomaskovic-Devey et al
2006) and arguably has increased, due to the entrance of new, more racially segregated firms
(Ferguson and Koning 2018). This chronology roughly maps onto the emergence of robust
affirmative action hiring programs in the late 1960s and 1970s, and their rollback in the 1980s
(Kelly and Dobbin 1998). Similarly, scholars have also long documented the persistence of high
levels of racial discrimination in hiring. In a meta-analysis of audit studies, Quillian et al (2017)
10

We propose but do not yet define these terms in the hopes that they will serve as a springboard
for future empirical and theoretical work.
19

document no change in employers’ preference for white applicants over Black and Latinx
applicants since the 1970s.
Two theoretical approaches have helped to make sense of these trends. First, scholars inspired by
Granovetter’s (1974) foundational work on the role of networks in the job search process have
explored how network hiring has acted as a mechanism for workplace segregation and hiring
discrimination (e.g. DiTomaso 2015). Put simply: if hiring happens through networks and
networks are racially segregated then hiring will, in turn, reinforce racial segregation. Waldinger
and Lichter (2003) document this process across different industries in Los Angeles. More
recently, Silva (2018) expands on this line of work to show that referrals carry different weight
depending on who is doing the referring. Silva shows that white applicants benefit from same-race
referrals while Black applicants do not; Black applicants only benefit from referrals from white
employees and even then only when the potential employer is relatively less prejudiced. This
research documents that white applicants are doubly advantaged: on average, white applicants are
more likely to have a relevant network tie, and a referral from that tie is more likely to carry weight
with employers.
Second, scholars have emphasized that jobs become racially-typed within a given geographic and
historical context. Rather than focusing on the hiring dynamics of individual workers, these
scholars explore how certain classes of work become racialized - typically, “dirty jobs” being
associated with non-white workers. For example, Glenn (1992) traces the racialized and gendered
history of “reproductive labor,” including childcare and nursing. Glenn documents how, over the
last hundred years, reproductive labor moved from the household to more institutionalized settings
(e.g. hospitals, daycare centers), while largely maintaining institutionalized race and gender
hierarchies: “In both household and institutional settings, white professional and managerial men
are the group most insulated from dirty work and contact with those who do it. White women are
frequently the mediators who have to negotiate between white male superiors and racial-ethnic
subordinates. Thus race and gender dynamics are played out in a three-way relationship involving
white men, white women, and women of color.” (Glenn 1992: 34) This intersectional approach to
the race and gender of reproductive labor showcases how labor markets are constructed on top of
racial and gender divisions and also how those markets reinscribe those divisions. While the state
has traditionally been the focus of research on racial formation (Omi and Winant 2014), Glenn’s
work shows that the racialized and gendered division of labor also makes race and gender (and, of
course, class).
Bringing these two approaches together, López-Sanders (2019) shows how one factory in a New
Immigrant destination in the American South undertook an active project of replacing white and
Black factory workers with undocumented Latino men. Perceiving immigrant workers as both
cheaper and more docile, factory managers reduced the quality of existing jobs to induce existing
workers to quit (making clean jobs dirtier), while hiring bilingual supervisors to begin training a
new Spanish-speaking workforce. López-Sanders identifies the centrality of labor market brokers
in facilitating this transformation. Factory managers relied on these agencies in the initial
recruitment of immigrant labor, displacing some of the most overt hiring discrimination onto the
brokers. López-Sander’s work reminds us that brokers - not just pre-existing social networks - are
central to the racialization of employment, and that displacement may be an active process, not
simply an unintended consequence of market mechanisms or network hiring. More generally, her

20

research shows how race, gender, class, nativity, together shape responses to global economic
transformations and, in so doing, alter local patches of racial segregation.
Finance and Real Estate
Much as scholars of labor market have long tracked racial workplace segregation and
discrimination, scholars of real estate and finance have documented extensive residential
segregation underpinned by discriminatory practices by actors ranging from real estate agents to
bank loan officers to government-sponsored insurance underwriters (Rugh and Massey 2010,
Rugh and Massey 2014, Massey et al 2018, Korver-Glenn 2018). Beyond documenting the
extensive and persistent character of racial segregation, researchers have begun to draw on theories
from the sociology of race and economic sociology to identify how the real estate market produces
racial inequality.
In her study of the real estate market in Houston, Korver-Glenn (2018) shows how the structure of
compensation for real estate agents interacts with racially homogenous networks to advantage
white agents. Real estate agents are compensated based on a percentage of the final home sale
(typically 3% of the sale price to the buyer’s agent and 3% to the seller’s). Agents find most of
their listings through referrals, repeat business, and their own social network. These seemingly
race-neutral features of the market interact with the intense racial wealth gap and highly
homogeneous social networks to produce substantial disparities in the opportunities available to
white, Black and Latinx real estate agents. Non-white real estate agents are excluded from the most
valuable listings. At the same time, for fear of losing referrals or repeat business, white agents
catered to the explicitly racist whims of their wealthy white customers: “white real estate agents
told me they had white sellers who did not want to sell to black buyers, for example, because they
assumed this would mean a decrease in property value for their white neighbors. One white real
estate agent had a client who refused to sell his home to a Middle Eastern buyer because he did
not want to “support terrorists.”” (Korver-Glenn 2018: 638) Korver-Glenn also speculates that the
absence of competition among white agents for non-white business (due to the perception by white
agents that such clients were too difficult or poor to be worth serving) created a gap in the industry
which was exploited by predatory lenders seeking targets for deceptive subprime loans (as
documented by Massey et al [2016], among others).
Korver-Glenn’s work also shows how technical aspects of the real estate industry disadvantage
non-white neighborhoods and their residents. In Houston, the technical infrastructure for home
listings required agents to place a listing into one of 98 pre-defined market areas. Most of these
areas were, in turn racially homogeneous. But white, Black and Latinx neighborhoods were
defined with different levels of granularity: “50 of these 70 market areas were majority-white—a
disproportionately high number given that only 31 percent of the population within the
encompassing area is white.” (Korver-Glenn 2018: 641) White market areas were subdivided by
class, while Black market areas were homogenized. These practices, combined with a lack of
standardization in appraisal industry practices and appraiser norms of only comparing houses from
neighborhoods with similar racial demographics, in turn supported higher appraisals for houses in
white neighborhoods, and lower appraisals for houses in Black and Latinx neighborhoods (Howell
and Korver-Glenn 2018). Though Korver-Glenn does not theorize in these explicit terms, we read

21

her research as bringing together ideas about networks, market devices, intersectionality, and
colorbind racism into a thorough analysis of the racialized real estate market.
Immigrant Entrepreneurship
Literature on entrepreneurship within economic sociology has long attuned itself to ethnic
differences in entrepreneurial activity. Recent work engages with the topic of immigrant
entrepreneurship through theories of intersectionality and colorblind racism (see Nopper 2010),
complicating existing conceptions of immigrant entrepreneurs by highlighting intraethnic class
distinctions, racial stereotyping, and colonial legacies as factors that shape the conditions of
immigrant entrepreneurship.
Hoang (2015) brings an intersectional lens to the ethnic enclave literature, challenging the focus
on race as a stable category. In her study of Vietnamese American nail salons in predominantly
Mexican and African American neighborhoods she analyzes owner-client, owner-worker, and
worker-client relationships, and how these three sets of interactions comprise a triangular system
of labor relations. In this complex racialized system, English-speaking Vietnamese business
owners located their stores in Mexican or African American neighborhoods and employed
Vietnamese immigrants with limited English proficiency. Owners situated themselves as superior
to their workers because they were more linguistically and culturally proficient than their
immigrant labor; they also situated themselves as superior to their clients as they drew on broader
white-dominant conceptions of black and brown bodies as marginal, characterizing them as either
difficult or docile. Furthermore, owners took advantage of the linguistic gulf between workers and
clients. Workers offered clients routinized services; owners, proficient in English, were able to
provide clients more personalized and valuable services. These practices enabled the upward
mobility of the owners and their families, while limiting mobility for their workers. By analyzing
intraethnic and interracial power relations simultaneously, Hoang’s ethnography challenges the
notion of ethnic enclaves as evenly beneficial to an entire ethnic group. It shows, by contrast, the
class-based exploitation reproduced in the owner-worker relationship and the reproduction of
racial hierarchy in the owner-client relationship.
Recent scholarship also considers the racialized logic of larger market forces that profoundly shape
the entry and subsequent experience of racialized immigrant entrepreneurs into a particular
industry. Nazareno (2018) considers larger geopolitical forces in her study of how some Filipino
American women have agentically pursued entrepreneurship in healthcare over the past forty
years. Nazareno illuminates the macrolevel economic forces that bring particular middle-class,
well-educated Filipinas to the United States, including U.S. colonial presence in the Philippines
which Americanized healthcare training and thereby created laborers that were more easily
imported into the United States context. Some Filipina healthcare workers, once arrived, entered
into the long term care industry in response to governmental deinstitutionalization that created a
gap in health services to marginalized communities of color. Nazareno demonstrates that the
government subsequently shifted responsibility on to these entrepreneurs, blaming them when the
gap left behind by deinstitutionalization was not adequately filled. The study provides a racial
capitalism-inflected complement to Polanyian economic sociologists’ treatment of the return of
market fundamentalism and the attempt by states to avoid appearing responsible for negative
economic outcomes created by policy choices (Krippner 2011).

22

Digital Platforms
Over the past decade, digital platforms have emerged that mediate market relationships, both in
the conditions by which job candidates must interact with employers, and in the ways serviceproviders and clients screen and rank one another. Recent work has highlighted the racialized,
classed and gendered implications of these new technologies.
Employers increasingly use existing digital platforms such as Facebook to recruit job candidates.
Ajunwa (2018) argues that this reliance on digital platforms, which she terms platform
authoritarianism, restricts the amount and type of potential candidates that ultimately apply to
positions within the organization. Advertising algorithms predict age, gender, and ethnic affiliation
based on, e.g. Facebook usage patterns. As a result, the screening, while automated, ends up
recreating human biases in targeting and recruitment. Much like labor market brokers charged with
recruiting Latino immigrants (López-Sanders 2019), this targeted marketing filters out some
potential candidates out while simultaneously displacing responsibility away from employers.
Economic sociologists attuned to the sociology of race will connect this demonstration of unequal
targeting of candidates to the reproduction of existing racial bias in hiring processes.
Beyond the use of digital platforms in the recruitment process, digital platforms that bring together
workers and clientele introduce screening systems that have been shown to reinforce racial
hierarchies (Schor and Atwood-Charles 2017). First, the screening process in the selection of jobs
allows workers to act on racist preferences: Taskrabbit workers in Chicago are less likely to accept
tasks in poor neighborhoods, and when they do, they charge more on average (Thebault-Spieker
et al 2015); AirBnb hosts were 16% more likely to reject potential guests with stereotypical
African‐American names (Edelman et al 2017). Clientele use the screening process in racist ways,
as well: nonwhite AirBnb hosts get significantly lower ratings (Cansoy and Schor 2016);
experimental studies found that product sales and lending on sites like eBay and Prosper fare
significantly better when the product is modeled with a white hand versus a black hand (Doleac
and Stein 2013; Ayres, Banaji and Jolls 2015).
This racial bias extends to the ranking systems within digital platforms, as when nonwhite drivers
are rated lower when they do not conform to particular white middle class norms and signifiers
within their cars (Rogers 2015). As Noble (2018) notes, these ranking systems do not just
disadvantage those ranked lower; they can disadvantage those not ranked at all. One of her
respondents, the owner of a small black hair salon, had relied on a word of mouth referral system,
especially with the students in the university town that came and went in a matter of years. The
arrival of Yelp inhibited this process as new arrivals began to ask Yelp rather than their peers for
referrals; furthermore, even when these users search for “black hair salons,” results for bigger
white-appealing hair salons edge out this salon in the result due to their existing clientele’s higher
tendency to use the rating system, and the investment they make in paying for ads on Yelp.
The way that digital platforms restructure market relationships is key to a sociological
understanding of the changing economy and the implications of sociotechnical tools in
transforming markets. As economic sociologists increasingly take up the study of these emerging
platforms, the above insights will facilitate the corresponding analysis of how sociotechnical

23

mechanisms reify the racial order in both the institution of biased algorithms in the labor market
and the information flows that allow for racial bias in the screening and rating processes of the
digital economy.
Conclusion
Economic sociologists should treat racism as a constitutive, structuring force, analytically co-equal
with capitalism, patriarchy, and nationalism. We have outlined six insights from the sociology of
race that, combined with the analytical tools of economic sociology, provide generative
frameworks for thinking through markets and economies as racialized. In some cases, this research
might require overhauling existing theoretical frameworks and rethinking existing accounts of
economic life; in others, it might involve their creative extension and recombination to address
important problems that had previously been omitted from economic sociology's purview. While
such insights have not been systematically engaged within the subfield, the research projects
discussed above serve as promising examples of the analytical power of bringing such insights on
race and racism to bear on economic life.
Race is central to economic life, but race is not yet central to economic sociology. Let's change
that.
References
Acker, Joan. 2006. “Inequality Regimes: Gender, Class, and Race in Organizations.” Gender &
Society 20(4):441–64.
Almeling, Rene. 2007. “Selling Genes, Selling Gender: Egg Agencies, Sperm Banks, and the
Medical Market in Genetic Material.” American Sociological Review 72(3):319–40.
Ajunwa, Ifeoma. 2018. “The Rise of Platform Authoritarianism.” American Civil Liberties
Union. Available at https://www.aclu.org/issues/privacy-technology/surveillancetechnologies/rise-platform-authoritarianism.
Ayres, Ian, Mahzarin Banaji, and Christine Jolls. 2015. “Race Effects on EBay.” The RAND
Journal of Economics 46(4):891–917.
Baptist, Edward E. 2016. The half has never been told: Slavery and the making of American
capitalism. Hachette UK.
Beckert, Sven and Seth Rockman, eds. 2016. Slavery’s Capitalism: A New History of American
Economic Development. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Berrey, Ellen. 2015. The Enigma of Diversity: The Language of Race and the Limits of Racial
Justice. University of Chicago Press.
Bhattacharyya, Gargi. 2018. Rethinking Racial Capitalism. Rowman & Littlefield International.

24

Blatt, Jessica. 2018. Race and the Making of American Political Science. University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Block, Fred and Margaret R. Somers. 2014. The Power of Market Fundamentalism: Karl
Polanyi’s Critique. Harvard University Press.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 1997. “Rethinking Racism: Toward a Structural Interpretation.”
American Sociological Review 62(3):465–80.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2001. White Supremacy and Racism in the Post-Civil Rights Era. Lynne
Rienner Pub.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2015. "The structure of racism in color-blind, “post-racial” America”.
American Behavioral Scientist, 59(11), 1358–1376.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2017. Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence
of Racial Inequality in America. Fifth edition. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo, Carla Goar, and David G. Embrick. 2006. "When whites flock together:
The social psychology of white habitus." Critical Sociology 32(2-3): 229-253.
Bracey, Glenn E. 2015. “Toward a Critical Race Theory of State.” Critical Sociology 41(3):553–
72.
Butler, John Sibley, and Charles C. Moskos. 1996. All that we can be: Black leadership and
racial integration the Army way. Perseus Book Group.
Callon, Michel. 1998. “Introduction: The Embeddedness of Economic Markets in Economics.”
Pp. 1–57 in The Laws of the Markets. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Callon, Michel, Yuval Millo, and Fabian Muniesa. 2007. Market Devices. Wiley-Blackwell.
Cansoy, Mehmet and Juliet B. Schor. 2016. “Who Gets to Share in the ‘ Sharing Economy ’ :
Understanding the Patterns of Participation and Exchange in Airbnb.” Working paper. Available
at http://www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/schools/cas_sites/sociology/pdf/SharingEconomy.pdf .
Carastathis, Anna. 2013. “Identity Categories as Potential Coalitions.” Signs 38(4):941–65.
Castilla, Emilio J. 2008. "Gender, race, and meritocracy in organizational careers." American
Journal of Sociology 113(6): 1479-1526.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan. 2011. “Studying Discrimination: Fundamental
Challenges and Recent Progress.” Annual Review of Economics 3(1):479–511.

25

Cho, Sumi. 2008. “Embedded Whiteness: Theorizing Exclusion in Public Contracting.” Berkeley
La Raza LJ 19:5.
Cho, Sumi, Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw, and Leslie McCall. 2013. “Toward a Field of
Intersectionality Studies: Theory, Applications, and Praxis.” Signs 38(4):785–810.
Choo, Hae Yeon and Myra Marx Ferree. 2010. “Practicing Intersectionality in Sociological
Research: A Critical Analysis of Inclusions, Interactions, and Institutions in the Study of
Inequalities.” Sociological Theory 28(2):129–49.
Christian, Michelle. 2018. “A Global Critical Race and Racism Framework: Racial
Entanglements and Deep and Malleable Whiteness.” Sociology of Race and Ethnicity.
Collins, Patricia Hill. 1986. “Learning from the Outsider within: The Sociological Significance
of Black Feminist Thought.” Social Problems 33(6):s14–s32.
Collins, Patricia Hill. 2002. Black Feminist Thought. Routledge.
Collins, Patricia Hill. 2015. “Intersectionality’s Definitional Dilemmas.” Annual Review of
Sociology 41(1):1–20.
Convert, Bernard and Johan Heilbron. 2007. “Where Did the New Economic Sociology Come
From?” Theory and Society 36(1):31–54.
Cox, Oliver Cromwell. 1948. Caste, Class, and Race. Monthly Review Press.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé. 1989. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black
Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.”
University of Chicago Legal Forum 1989:139–68.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé. 1991. “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and
Violence against Women of Color.” Stanford Law Review 43(6):1241–99.
Darity, William A., Darrick Hamilton, and James B. Stewart. 2015. “A Tour de Force in
Understanding Intergroup Inequality: An Introduction to Stratification Economics.” The Review
of Black Political Economy 42(1–2):1–6.
DiTomaso, Nancy. 2013. The American Non-Dilemma: Racial Inequality Without Racism.
Russell Sage Foundation.
DiTomaso, Nancy. 2015. “Racism and Discrimination versus Advantage and Favoritism: Bias
for versus Bias Against.” Research in Organizational Behavior 35:57–77.
Doleac, Jennifer L. and Luke C. D. Stein. 2013. “The Visible Hand: Race and Online Market
Outcomes.” The Economic Journal 123(572):F469–92.

26

Du Bois, W. E. B. 1920. "Darkwater: Voices from behind the Veil." The Oxford WEB Du Bois
Reader, ed. Eric Sundquist (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996) 557, no. 555: 553.
Du Bois, W. E. B. 1935. Black reconstruction in the United States, 1860–1880. Atheneum, New
York.
Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne. 2014. An indigenous peoples' history of the United States. Vol. 3.
Beacon Press.
Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Luca, and Dan Svirsky. 2017. “Racial Discrimination in the
Sharing Economy: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 9(2):1–22.
Emirbayer, Mustafa and Jeff Goodwin. 1994. “Network Analysis, Culture, and the Problem of
Agency.” American Journal of Sociology 99(6):1411–54.
England, Paula, and Nancy Folbre. 2005. “Gender and economic sociology.” The handbook of
economic sociology(2): 627-649.
Eubanks, Virginia. 2018. Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and
Punish the Poor. St. Martin’s Press.
Feagin, Joe. 2013. The White Racial Frame. 2nd edition. New York: Routledge.
Ferguson, John-Paul and Rembrand Koning. 2018. “Firm Turnover and the Return of Racial
Establishment Segregation.” American Sociological Review 83(3):445–74.
Fields, Barbara and Karen Fields. 2012. Racecraft: The Soul of Inequality in American Life.
Verso.
Fleming, Crystal Marie. 2018. How to Be Less Stupid About Race. Beacon Press.
Fourcade, Marion and Kieran Healy. 2013. “Classification Situations: Life-Chances in the
Neoliberal Era.” Accounting, Organizations and Society 38(8):559–572.
Fujimura, Joan, Deborah Bolnick, Ramya Rajagopalan, Jay Kaufman, Richard Lewontin, Troy
Duster, Pilar Ossorio, and Jonathan Marks. 2014. “Clines Without Classes: How to Make Sense
of Human Variation.” Sociological Theory 32(3):208–27.
Glenn, Evelyn Nakano. 1992. “From Servitude to Service Work: Historical Continuities in the
Racial Division of Paid Reproductive Labor.” Signs 18(1):1–43.
Golash-Boza, Tanya. 2016. “A Critical and Comprehensive Sociological Theory of Race and
Racism.” Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 2(2):129–41.

27

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
Embeddedness.” American Journal of Sociology 91(3):481–510.
Granovetter, Mark. 2017. Society and Economy: Framework and Principles. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Belknap Press: An Imprint of Harvard University Press.
Grodsky, Eric, and Devah Pager. 2001. "The structure of disadvantage: Individual and
occupational determinants of the black-white wage gap." American Sociological Review 66(4):
542-567.
Hacking, Ian. 1999. The Social Construction of What? Harvard University Press.
Haney-López, Ian. 1994. “The Social Construction of Race: Some Observations on Illusion,
Fabrication, and Choice.” Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review 29:1.
Harris, Cheryl. 1993. “Whiteness as Property.” Harvard Law Review 106(8):1707–91.
Harrison, Jill. 2014. Review of Flawed System/Flawed Self: Job Searching and Unemployment
Experiences by Ofer Sharone. American Journal of Sociology 120(2): 592-594.
Henderson, Errol. 2013. “Hidden in Plain Sight: Racism in International Relations
Theory.” Cambridge Review of International Affairs 26(1):71–92.
Henricks, Kasey and Louise Seamster. 2017. “Mechanisms of the Racial Tax State.” Critical
Sociology 43(2):169–79.
Hernandez, Jesus. 2009. "Redlining revisited: mortgage lending patterns in Sacramento 1930–
2004." International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33(2): 291-313.
Hoang, Kimberly Kay. 2015. “Nailing Race and Labor Relations: Vietnamese Nail Salons in
Majority-Minority Neighborhoods.” Journal of Asian American Studies 18(2):113–39.
Hohle, Randolph. 2017. Racism in the Neoliberal Era. Routledge.
Howell, Junia and Elizabeth Korver-Glenn. 2018. “Neighborhoods, Race, and the Twenty-FirstCentury Housing Appraisal Industry.” Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 4(4):473–90.
Itzigsohn, Jose and Karida Brown. 2019. The Sociology of W.E.B. Du Bois. NYU Press.
Forthcoming.
Jackson, John. 2017. “Reflections on Libertarianism and Racism.” Available at
https://altrightorigins.com/2017/07/28/reflections-on-libertarianism-and-racism/ .
Jung, Moon-Kie. 2015. Beneath the Surface of White Supremacy: Denaturalizing U.S. Racisms
Past and Present. Stanford University Press.

28

Kalev, Alexandra, Frank Dobbin, and Erin Kelly. 2006. “Best Practices or Best Guesses?
Assessing the Efficacy of Corporate Affirmative Action and Diversity Policies.” American
Sociological Review 71(4):589–617.
Kelly, Erin and Frank Dobbin. 1998. “How Affirmative Action Became Diversity Management
Employer Response to Antidiscrimination Law, 1961 to 1996.” American Behavioral Scientist
41(7):960–84.
Korver-Glenn, Elizabeth. 2018. “Compounding Inequalities: How Racial Stereotypes and
Discrimination Accumulate across the Stages of Housing Exchange.” American Sociological
Review 83(4):627–56.
Krippner, Greta. 2011. Capitalizing on Crisis: The Political Origins of the Rise of Finance.
Harvard University Press.
Krippner, Greta and Anthony Alvarez. 2007. “Embeddedness and the Intellectual Projects of
Economic Sociology.” Annual Review of Sociology 33:219.
Levy, Jonathan. 2012. Freaks of Fortune: The Emerging World of Capitalism and Risk in
America. Harvard University Press.
Lewis, Amanda. 2004. “‘What Group?’ Studying Whites and Whiteness in the Era of ‘ColorBlindness.’” Sociological Theory 22(4):623–46.
Light, Ivan. 2005. “The Ethnic Economy.” The Handbook of Economic Sociology.
López-Sanders, Laura. 2019. Displacement: Race, Gender and Legality in the Transformation of
Work in Rural America. Book manuscript.
Luna, Zakiya. 2016. “‘Truly a Women of Color Organization’ Negotiating Sameness and
Difference in Pursuit of Intersectionality.” Gender & Society 30(5):769–90.
MacKenzie, Donald. 2006. An Engine, Not a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets.
The MIT Press.
Massey, Douglas S., Jacob S. Rugh, Justin P. Steil, and Len Albright. 2016. “Riding the
Stagecoach to Hell: A Qualitative Analysis of Racial Discrimination in Mortgage Lending.” City
& Community 15(2):118–36.
Mattson, Greggor. 2014. “Nation-State Science: Lappology and Sweden’s Ethnoracial Purity.”
Comparative Studies in Society and History 56(2):320–50.
McCall, Leslie. 2005. “The Complexity of Intersectionality.” Signs 30(3):1771–1800.
Mears, Ashley. 2015. “Working for Free in the VIP Relational Work and the Production of
Consent.” American Sociological Review 80(6):1099–1122.

29

Mills, Charles. 1997. The Racial Contract. Cornell University Press.
Moynihan, Daniel P. 1965. The Negro Family: The Case for National Action, Washington, D.C.,
Office of Policy Planning and Research, U.S. Department of Labor.
Mudge, Stephanie. 2008. “What Is Neo-Liberalism?” Socio-Economic Review 6(4):703–31.
Mueller, Jennifer C. 2017. “Producing Colorblindness: Everyday Mechanisms of White
Ignorance.” Social Problems 64(2):219–38.
Nazareno, Jennifer. 2018. “Welfare State Replacements: Deinstitutionalization, Privatization and
the Outsourcing to Immigrant Women Enterprise.” International Journal of Health Services
48(2):247–66.
Nelson, Alondra. 2016. The social life of DNA: Race, reparations, and reconciliation after the
genome. Beacon Press.
Nkomo, Stella. 1992. “The Emperor Has No Clothes: Rewriting ‘Race in Organizations.’” The
Academy of Management Review 17(3):487–513.
Noble, Safiya Umoja. 2018. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism.
NYU Press.
Nopper, Tamara K. 2010. “Colorblind Racism and Institutional Actors’ Explanations of Korean
Immigrant Entrepreneurship.” Critical Sociology 36(1):65–85.
Omi, Michael and Howard Winant. 2014. Racial Formation in the United States. 3rd edition.
Routledge.
Pager, Devah, Bart Bonikowski, and Bruce Western. 2009. "Discrimination in a low-wage labor
market: A field experiment." American sociological review 74(5): 777-799.
Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation. Beacon Press.
Polanyi, Karl. 1968. Dahomey and the Slave Trade: An Analysis of an Archaic Economy.
University of Washington Press.
Portes, Alejandro and Julia Sensenbrenner. 2004. "Embeddedness and Immigration: Notes on the
Social Determinants of Economic Action." The New Economic Sociology: A Reader: 274-301.
Quillian, Lincoln, Devah Pager, Ole Hexel, and Arnfinn H. Midtbøen. 2017. “Meta-Analysis of
Field Experiments Shows No Change in Racial Discrimination in Hiring over Time.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(41):10870–75.

30

Ray, Victor. 2018. "Critical Diversity in the US Military: From Diversity to Racialized
Organizations." In Challenging the Status Quo, pp. 287-300. BRILL.
Ray, Victor. 2019. "A Theory of Racialized Organizations." American Sociological Review.
Roberts, Dorothy E. 2011. Fatal Invention: How Science, Politics, and Big Business Re-Create
Race in the Twenty-First Century. New Press.
Robinson, John. 2016. “Race, Poverty, and Markets: Urban Inequality after the Neoliberal Turn.”
Sociology Compass 10(12):1090–1101.
Robinson, Cedric. 2000. Black Marxism. 2nd edition. The University of North Carolina Press.
Rockman, Seth. 2014. “What Makes the History of Capitalism Newsworthy?” Journal of the
Early Republic 34(3):439–66.
Rodríguez-Muñiz, Michael. 2016. “Bridgework: STS, Sociology, and the ‘Dark Matters’ of
Race.” Engaging Science, Technology, and Society 2(0):214–26.
Rogers, Brishen. 2015. “The Social Costs of Uber.” U. Chi. L. Rev. Dialogue 82:85.
Rojas, Fabio. 2017. "Race and Institutionalism." Pp. 786-807 in The Sage Handbook of
Organizational Institutionalism.
Roscigno, Vincent J. 2000. "Family/school inequality and African-American/Hispanic
achievement." Social Problems 47(2): 266-290.
Rosenthal, Caitlin. 2018. Accounting for Slavery. Harvard University Press.
Roth, Wendy D. 2016. “The Multiple Dimensions of Race.” Ethnic and Racial Studies
39(8):1310–38.
Ruef, Martin. 2014. Between Slavery and Capitalism: The Legacy of Emancipation in the
American South. Princeton University Press.
Rugh, Jacob S. and Douglas S. Massey. 2010. “Racial Segregation and the American Foreclosure
Crisis.” American Sociological Review 75(5):629–51.
Rugh, Jacob S. and Douglas S. Massey. 2014. “Segregation in Post-Civil Rights America.” Du
Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 11(2):205–232.
Saperstein, Aliya, Andrew M. Penner, and Ryan Light. 2013. “Racial Formation in Perspective:
Connecting Individuals, Institutions, and Power Relations.” Annual Review of Sociology
39(1):359–78.

31

Schnaiberg, Allan. 2005. "The economy and the environment." The handbook of economic
sociology: 703-725.
Schor, Juliet B. and William Attwood‐Charles. 2017. “The ‘Sharing’ Economy: Labor,
Inequality, and Social Connection on for-Profit Platforms.” Sociology Compass 11(8):e12493.
Seamster, Louise and Raphaël Charron-Chénier. 2017. “Predatory Inclusion and Education Debt:
Rethinking the Racial Wealth Gap.” Social Currents 4(3):199–207.
Sharone, Ofer. 2013. Flawed System/Flawed Self: Job Searching and Unemployment
Experiences. University of Chicago Press.
Silva, Fabiana. 2018. “The Strength of Whites’ Ties: How Employers Reward the Referrals of
Black and White Jobseekers.” Social Forces 97(2):741–68.
Somers, Margaret R. and Fred Block. 2005. “From Poverty to Perversity: Ideas, Markets, and
Institutions over 200 Years of Welfare Debate.” American Sociological Review 70(2):260–87.
Thebault-Spieker, Jacob, Loren G. Terveen, and Brent Hecht. 2015. “Avoiding the South Side
and the Suburbs: The Geography of Mobile Crowdsourcing Markets.” Pp. 265–75 in
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing - CSCW ’15. Vancouver, BC, Canada: ACM Press.
Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald. 1993. Gender & Racial Inequality at Work: The Sources and
Consequences of Job Segregation. Cornell University Press.
Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald, Catherine Zimmer, Kevin Stainback, Corre Robinson, Tiffany
Taylor, and Tricia McTague. 2006. “Documenting Desegregation: Segregation in American
Workplaces by Race, Ethnicity, and Sex, 1966–2003.” American Sociological Review
71(4):565–88.
Turco, Catherine J. 2010. “Cultural Foundations of Tokenism Evidence from the Leveraged
Buyout Industry.” American Sociological Review 75(6):894–913.
Uzzi, Brian. 1996. “The Sources and Consequences of Embeddedness for the Economic
Performance of Organizations: The Network Effect.” American Sociological Review 61(4):674–
98.
Van Cleve, Nicole Gonzalez. 2016. Crook County: Racism and Injustice in America’s Largest
Criminal Court. Stanford, California: Stanford Law Books.
Wang, Dan. 2012. "Is There a Canon in Economic Sociology?" Accounts 11(2): 1-8.
Watkins Liu, Callie. 2018. “The Anti-Oppressive Value of Critical Race Theory and
Intersectionality in Social Movement Study.” Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 4(3):306–21.

32

Wherry, Frederick, Kristin Seefeldt, and Anthony Alvarez. 2019. Credit Where It’s Due:
Rethinking Financial Citizenship. Russell Sage Foundation.
Winant, Howard. 2001. The World is a Ghetto: Race and Democracy since World War II. Basic
Books.
Wingfield, Adia Harvey and Renée Skeete Alston. 2014. “Maintaining Hierarchies in
Predominantly White Organizations: A Theory of Racial Tasks.” American Behavioral Scientist
58(2):274–87.
Wooten, Melissa E. 2006. “Race and Strategic Organization.” Strategic Organization 4(2):191–
99.
Wooten, Melissa E. and Lucius Couloute. 2017. “The Production of Racial Inequality within and
among Organizations.” Sociology Compass 11(1):n/a-n/a.
Zelizer, Viviana A. 2004. "Pricing the priceless child: The changing social value of
children." The New Economic Sociology: A Reader: 135-161.
Zelizer, Viviana A. 2005. The Purchase of Intimacy. Princeton University Press.
Zelizer, Viviana A. 2010. Economic Lives: How Culture Shapes the Economy. Princeton
University Press.
Zuberi, Tukufu and Eduardo Bonilla-Silva. 2008. White Logic, White Methods: Racism and
Methodology. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

33

