"x"
"1" "Dr. Corey L. Wrenn"
"2" "University of Kent School of Social Policy, Sociology, and Social Research Canterbury, England"
"3" "Completed: July, 2018 Accepted Presentation: February 1, 201 9 Conference: American Sociological Association Annual Meeting, August 12, 2019"
"4" "Building a  Vegan Feminist Network  in the  Professionalized Digital Age of  Third Wave  Animal  Activism"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "Despite its legacy of feminist leadership and a continued female majority, the Nonhuman Animal rights movement  has exhibited  structural sexism  across its various waves of protest . This institutionalized sexism not only inhibits women’s ability to protest safely and effectively , but  also permeates the activist imagination and aggravates interpersonal violence.  Even Nonhuman Animals as a feminized group are unwittingly disparaged in popular campaigns.  This essay suggests that structural sexism in the Nonhuman Animal rights movement is nourished by its patriarchal organization, specifically its decision to professionalize. Twenty-first century vegan feminist activism on the margins has been able to circumvent the hegemony of professionalized power and challenge taken-for-granted bureaucratic structures.  Yet, d espite indications that vegan feminist activists are influencing the movement dialogue, the movement’s patriarchal norms have encouraged considerable pushback. Indeed, the patriarchal influence of professionalization has even created division between second wave and third wave vegan feminists."
"7" "Introduction"
"8" "T he Nonhuman Animal  rights movement was founded on the labor of hundreds of women  in the 19 th  century, many of whom were explicitly conscious of the connections between their  own  oppression and that of other animals  (Beers 2006) . This  first wave of vegan feminism  in the West  thrived with the endeavors  of  Annie Besant,  Frances Power Cobb,  Margaret  Damer  Dawson ,  Charlotte  Despard ,   Lind  af   Hageby ,  and others.   These w omen  forged  charities  and  shelters,  negotiated pioneering  legislation, and  established  a basic  societal  recognition that Nonhuman Animals are sentient and deserve care and attention.  Sparked by the social upheaval of the late industrial revolution ,  multiple wars  and  rebellions, and  Progressive Era initiatives, these women saw anti-speciesism as deeply relevant to social justice efforts  (Kean 1998) .  Indeed, this intersectional praxis and female predominance  was indicative of  an inherent feminist element to  the movement’s formative  years."
"9" "Animal activism of the 20 th  century  was  also  influenced by concurrent movements , adopting contemporary  concepts of civil rights, grassroots mobilization, and the personal as political.  Second wave activists rallied in a society that now recognized the moral importance of animal welfare but , paradoxically,  had also industrialized animal suffering on a large scale. Strategies of this era involved a resistance to this industrialization, specifically in  the industries of  vivisection and factory farming . In doing so,  these activists  furthered  the notion that vegetarianism  (and sometimes  veganism )  was an important component to resisting speciesism and a variety of other social ills.  The emphasis on compassion and community campaigning ensured that women remained in the majority, but the  formal  establishment of the movement since the late 19 th  century entailed a steady encroachment of male leadership."
"10" "This establishment gradually transformed into   a strategy of  formal incorporation whereby the  autonomous and  community-based grassroots collectives of the 1970s and 80s  became  state-recognized nonprofits  (McCarthy and  Zald  1973) . While many of these charities were female-headed, many more were not. Indeed, the hierarchical nature of most organizations inevitably disempowered  and disadvantaged  women, and the movement took on an increasingly male face  (Kheel 1985) . While first wave women activists boldly entered the public sphere to do women’s work  in a man’s world ,  many  second wave women found themselves shut out  and shut up  as the movement went corporate.   This is not to abscond women from  culpability . Sociological research has uncovered that  anti-speciesist  activists of all genders willingly suppress stereotypically feminine behavior and promote a masculine front to the public (Groves 2001). Activists recognized that maleness brings with it a sense of credibility, legitimacy, and authority  which is  believed  to  more effectively  solicit  attention to the plight of Nonhuman Animals."
"11" "Ve gan feminists of this era , too,  hoped to maintain patriarchal critiques while adopting patriarchal values. Feminist s  for Animal Rights (FAR), the preeminent force in second wave vegan feminism, for instance, maintained its grassroots structure throughout its lifetime, but  its  unmet goal for   nonprofitization  was a consistent worry  (Cite Author’s Work Here 2019) . As the  Nonhuman Animal rights  movement professionalized  in the 1990s , it altered the  political  ecosystem . G rassroots, chapter-based collectives  that  operated along a more feminist organizational st ructure and either refused to or were unable to adapt to the new standard  were starved out of existence. This appears to have been the case with FAR , which ceased operations on the eve of its final  and  most concentrated push for professionalization after having finally achieved charitable nonprofit status. T he dozens of other feminist collectives  (remembered only in their sporadic mention in FAR newsletter archives)  also failed to professionalize or survive the second wave.   In retrospect, it  was clearly necessary to play by men’s rules  of conduct in the public sphere  in order to play at all."
"12" "Today’s movement remains largely professionalized, but  the 21 st  century  format   is  structurally  distinct .  As was the case with  other movements,  vegan activism  moved  online.  A ctivists  now  employ  social media for organizing protest s  and disseminating information , privileges that  elite-controlled institutional channels  had otherwise blocked .  Where once a professional, bureaucratic  nonprofit had been a requirement for successful activism, now effective online engagement has become requisite.  This  digital  shift has  an especially potent impact on vegan activism given the  inherent distances between vegan activists  in a deeply speciesist world. My research into the  21 st  century  vegan community finds that most   activists  come to veganism of their own volition  and cognitive deliberation ,  and only to a lesser  extent do they emerge through   personal connections to individual vegans, activists, or collectives  ( Cite Author’s Work Here  2017) .  Consequently, t he interne t has become  the movement’s most important organizer.  Online activism increases  the  reach  of a movement’s message  (Earl and  Schussman  2003)  and can  overcome  media bias in protest coverage (Almeida and  Lichbach  2003)."
"13" "T his t hird wave  of activism  is also global. Advancements in technology have surpassed the barriers of long-distance phone charges, slow postal mail, and miles of physical distance. Today’s activists are working in a terrain that is deeper, more rapid ly functioning , and, in many ways, more personal.  For  vegan feminists, the intimacy of online engagement and the influx of new ideas and cultures created renewed relevancy of feminist thought. Emboldened by  women’s liberation  and sharpened by ecofeminist scholarship, 20 th  century vegan feminists had developed a strong analysis of intersectional oppression. This privileged third wave vegan feminists such as myself with an existent platform of knowledge to apply and extend. The challenge was how to make relevant the wisdom learned, developed, and, frankly, forgotten, since the movement had professionalized and moved online  to a new generation’s fingertips ."
"14" "For  some time,  Name of Organization   ( NO )  was a relatively lone  feminist  voice in the movement  in this regard .  NO  was largely a p roject of necessity and personal validation.  When I began blogging about contemporary problems of sexist movement culture and the horrible pushback I  ha d experienced from colleagues and organizations I  trusted and admired , there were no other  vegan feminist  blogs, podcasts, or  Youtube  channels to which I could turn.  Although I felt alone, I knew that I was not.  Indeed, t he 2010s marked a new feminist turn in the vegan community.  Gaarder’s  (2011) survey of women in the  Nonhuman A nimal rights movement  documented  underlying misogyny within activist circles , but it was a  problem  that remained uncritiqued since  Marti Kheel and her comrades   ceased typing handmade FAR newsletters  a decade earlier . Dr. Breeze Harper was perhaps the leader in tackling  intramovement  violence in third wave activism, evidenced in her 2010  edited book   Sistah  Vegan  and her 2011  open-access  article, “Race as a ‘Feeble’ Matter , ”  both of  w hich balance out a large catalog of blog essays  on this  topic of intersectional failure in vegan advocacy. Outside of Harper’s blogging, however, little vegan feminist research  had  escaped the ivory tower of academia to permeate the activist imagination."
"15" "For these reasons,  I would not be so brazen as to suggest that  Name of Organization  was the reason for the  intersectional  shift .  I can , however,  venture to  guess  that it was an accelerant.  This  essay  will outline the emergence of my work through  NO ,  what  movement conditions  necessitated its formation, and the  general  resistance  that vegan feminist campaigning has faced . In doing so, I argue that 21 st  century vegan  feminism  is uniquely characterized by new channels of online communication and the threat of neoliberalism.  I suggest that online communication provides a rare platform for marginalized groups such as women , disabled persons,  and people of color to disseminate their critical theory, but this privilege is counterbalanced by the negative  influence of movement professionalization which feeds on sexism, racism, and even, as I will argue, speciesism. However, I also  suggest  that professionalization brings with it a sense of continuity and securit y, the lack of which  undermines the stability of decentralized feminist advocacy . F eminist advocacy  contends with  its own  internal  difficulties in maintaining a healthy  and viable activist community ."
"16" "Building a Network  after  The Sexual Politics of Meat"
"17" "When I began teaching gender studies in 2012,  I  quickly  came to realize the vital importance of feminist theory to the anti-speciesist cause. I n fact, it  became a turning point in my career . As  feminist research was coming to inform my activism, it  became apparent  that   my vegan  activist community was generally ignorant to and  sometimes  even  adverse  to fem inism .  This revelation was both shocking and unsettling to me.  I think it is fair to say that Carol Adams’  The  S exual Politics of Meat  (2000)  (vegan feminism’s magnum opus)  had successfully seeped into the movement culture  in the decades since its initial release , but Adams was and, in many ways still is, the movement’s token feminist.  The popularity of  The Sexual Politics of Meat  has allowed activists to superficially align with anti-sexist values  without having to do the difficult task of self-evaluation or community accountability .   This  allowance could owe to the  limited  focus of  Adams’  catalog  which  pertains to wider cultural misogyny and offers precious little critique of how that misogyny persists within  vegan circles . Placated by their familiarity with Adams’ theory, m ost activists have failed to delve deeper into the critical work of other  feminist  theorists , a practice that  might encourage  serious attention to problematic  movement structures. Feminist w orks of this kind which “air the dirty laundry” of the movement  are largely  ignored, suppressed, or shamed into obscurity. Activists,  urged  by the enormity of violence facing  Nonhuman  A nimals and  swayed by  victim-blaming mentalities  that pit women as conniving ,  are more likely to  disparage   feminist writers a s  selfish,  gossiping,  disgruntled women  who should  suck it up.  After all,  the movement has   The S exual Politics of Meat ,  so it cannot be sexist."
"18" "This post-feminist ideology  is not unique to vegan spaces but  challenges mainstream feminists as well  (McRobbie 2005).   With all the glitz and glamor of consumer choice foisted on modern women, f eminism in the 21 st  century simply reads as redundant  and no longer relevant .  It is a cruel twist that the lessons  of  second wave  feminism have educated folks such that they  believe  themselves  “woke” and  no longer in need of feminist teachings even though gender inequality remains painstakingly rife.   In the Nonhuman Animal rights movement, t his  assuredness  is probably complicated by the misleadingly obvious fact that most activists are female-identified. How can a movement of women be sexist?  Well,  I would argue that it is  because  the movement has a female majority that it becomes vulnerable to sexism. Femininity is interpreted as a vulnerability,  thereby  encouraging activists to align with patriarchy in order to resonate. A female majority also invites predatory men  who can enjoy a glass escalator to the most powerful and celebrated positions and easy pickings from an especially caring and trusting female constituency made doubly vulnerable by their empathetic  vegan leanings and female socialization."
"19" "Since 2012, I  ha ve  committed myself to  exploring and challenging this anti-feminist resistance in the post- Sexual Politics of Meat  age of  third wave  Nonhuman Animal rights activism.  While the  movement is composed primarily of women, it is still largely a reflection of the patriarchal structures that characterize broader society.   As evidenced in an infographic I created for  Name of Organization  in 2016  ( fig.  1) , two-thirds of the Animal Rights Hall of Fame inductees are male and only 38% of the most influential charities are led by women.  As just one example of how sexism manifests within these patriarchal arrangements,  the most high-ranking women of the Humane Society of the United States were only making 54 cents to a man’s dollar . A s would later emerge, these women were also dealing with systemic sexual harassment  by male superiors  (Bosman, Stevens, and Bromwich 2018) ."
"20" "Despite these glaring inequities, women , people of color, and other vulnerable groups have been victimized, alienated, and silenced in advocacy efforts on behalf of other animals.   Prior to  Name of Organization ’s launch in July 2013 , there  had  not been ,  to my knowledge ,  any  organized effort to  specifically   resist  vegan sexism  since the efforts of Feminists for Animal Rights which had folded  at the turn of the 21 st  century . Activists lost FAR at  the critical point in which the movement was  entering a third wave characterized by  online advocacy and  neoliberal bureaucratization of formal groups.  The modern movement required modern measures of feminist critique, but the “old guard” of vegan feminism was largely unplugged and  either  unable or unwilling to enter fields of online discourse where so much movement - making now takes place.  Through my internet activism, I knew of several like-minded young women   who were full of innovative new ideas about intersectional activism, but our knowledge was  wasted  in the  short-lived and quickly buried  comments sections of various online channels.   I founded the website and online advocacy organization  Name of Organization   to  manifest  this lacking platform.  Its mission   was (and  is )  to eradicate oppression from the Nonhuman Animal rights movement and improve inclusiveness through dialogue and educational resources.  We were in our 20s, plugged in, and eager  to  transform the movement with the newfound power  of blogging ."
"21" "Our  cyber strategy of  social media education and critique may have been innovative in the vegan community, but we were  only employing advocacy strategies that had been  in successful operation in the  larger social justice realm.  Indeed, t he internet was dramatically altering collective action everywhere (Castells 2012). It impacted who could participate, how they participated, and the extent of their reach.  The neighboring feminist movement , for instance, had embraced  online activism as an accessible means of bringing  a   platform to traditionally excluded participants ( Thelandersson  2014).   Second wave feminists were limited by the cost of photocopies and stamps, but third wavers thrived on clicks, likes, and shares.  Online channels provide a n accessible, low cost  means to form communities, construct  social identities , and “redefine social realities”  (Dixon 2014 ,  39 ).  These possibilities are tantalizing in a   movement landscape that has largely professionalize d, and, subsequently, had adopted  a masculinized structure that privileges the interests of elites  to the effect of alienating  most participants from decision-making.   Young activists no longer needed to wade through tomes of archaic feminist literature to learn basic theory, an endeavor generally available only to  privileged  college students  and professors . They could now access blogs  that distilled this information  at the click of a mouse. Furthermore, these activists no longer needed to assimilate into formalized movement channels in order to contribute to the dialogue. They could create blogs themselves.  Knowledge was democratizing.  Internet technology, in other words, was poised to disrupt movement hegemony and provided a rare channel of dissemination for radical ideas."
"22" "Understanding  Vegan  Sexism"
"23" "In light of these new possibilities, p erhaps the most fundamental task at hand for vegan feminists is not  to educate  the public  on  the intersection of sexism and speciesism,  but to first educate  the  movement,  the  A nimals’ ambassador.  Patriarchy is a male-dominated social structure that  necessitates  the oppression of  feminized groups . As a microcosm of larger society, the Nonhuman Animal rights movement demonstrates many forms of sexism that are designed to protect male power and entrench female   powerlessness.   The disparities  discussed thus far and to be discussed below are   typical and predictable  patriarchal symptoms, which, left ignored and unattended, are not likely to self-correct. The following survey of institutionalized sexism was  originally  published on the  NO  website and outlines how  macrolevel  societal sexism  is linked to  the  microlevel  vis-à-vis  vegan organizations and interpersonal relationships."
"24" "Gender Capital"
"25" "As of 2016,  only 22.8% of national parliamentarians were women, and, as of 2017, only 11 women serve as head of state (UN Women 2018).  More than  half of the world’s population  is female , but women hold only  a fifth  of  the world’s  legislative seats.  Why should vegans care? T his leadership distortion  extends into  the Nonhuman Animal rights movement.   Approximately four out of five activists are women  ( Gaarder  2011) ,  but  they represent much fewer positions of leadership  (fig. 1) .   When positions of power and decision-making are granted  primarily  to men,  it  can reasonably  be  expect ed  that men will , whether  intentionally or not ,  privilege their own interests.   Women  require  equal participation in  political processes  to  ensure that  their needs are being met and that women’s interests are being represented appropriately.  Sexism invites  critics  to dismiss  women’s desire for  political gender parity  as a selfish pursuit  (a cardinal sin for women)  given the magnitude of Nonhuman Animal suffering ,   but effective activism for other animals requires effective organization. If women are excluded,  this is not indicative of  effective organizational structure.  It is instead indicative of a movement that is unable to employ the most basic principles of social equality  with in its own ranks."
"26" "V egan feminism argues that  patriarchal oppression provides the logic to speciesism  such that a failure to acknowledge women’s oppression is symptomatic of a movement that has a limited grasp on species oppression.  It also suggests to me an  underlying resistance to establishing more equitable social arrangements despite its posturing to the contrary.   This is understandable. Sociologists recognize that those who have power rally to protect and hoard that power  via the construction of  prohibitive  institutional  barriers  and ideological norms  (Adamson 2014; Bourdieu 1977) ."
"27" "Beyond politics, the gender disparity is also evidenced in the corporate world.  As of this writing, l ess than 5% of   CEOs leading  Fortune 500 companies  are women ( Fortune  2018) .  Women are systematically  and  actively blocked from accessing powerful positions, often due to exclusion from important networks and stereotypes about their suitability for leadership  (Barnett and Rivers 2004) .  Again ,  vegans  have reason to  care because  the absence of women in powerful positions is reflected in the Nonhuman Animal rights movement . This, in turn, suggests  a general devaluation of women’s ability and input.   In advocacy efforts, women are far more likely to  make up the “rank and file,” working hard behind the scenes to accomplish the necessary, but largely uncelebrated, mundane tasks  of social movement maintenance .   Men write the theory, lead the protests, and lecture on podcasts, while women “make the coffee” so to speak.  Although I have argued that the Nonhuman Animal rights movement is particularly vulnerable to regressive gender norms, it is also true that many social movements grapple with sexism in thought and practice (Lawson and Barton 1980). For instance, the Civil Rights movement relied heavily on the community organizing and microlevel leadership of women, but high-profile positions were reserved predominantly for men ( Robnett  1996). Although some might suggest that this gender segregation is functional  in its division of labor and task-sharing , I would counter that it constitutes  a terrible squandering of a  potentially  powerful demographic  by failing to channel  the creativity and capabilities of thousands of women."
"28" "Gendered  Violence"
"29" "Most insidiously,  the systematic exclusion of women is directly related to their social devaluing and susceptibility to violence. A t least one in three women will be raped, beaten,  or otherwise abused  by  a man or men  at least once in her lifetime  (United Nations 2008) .   This number is much higher for college students  (who constitute the bulk of social movement participation)  and would be higher still  except that many women do not feel safe reporting assault or, due to patriarchal conditioning, do not  recognize their assault as such .  Vegans  have reason to  care about th is gendered terrorism because men’s v iolence against women  flourishes  in the Nonhuman Animal rights movement."
"30" "In my own activist career, I have  personally anguished through  countless  experiences with  anti-speciesist  men’s  misogynistic bullying, stalking, sexual harassment, and intimidation .  Many men pursued their attacks on me for  years  with horrifying determination, goaded   by  my feminist resistance and  encouraged by  the movement’s culture of silence and collusion. I felt  at times that  I was enduring a movement-wide gaslighting campaign .  I blogged about my experiences  only to  endure torrents of angry comments, anonymously  delivered  abusive emails, and overwhelming silence  or victim-blaming comments  from second wave feminists and organizational leaders of charities both professionalized and grassroots. As a professor of gender studies, I recognize this behavior as endemic to a misogynistic culture that protects status quo power relations by  invisibilizing , ignoring, or demonizing survivors , but that did not make it any less disturbing."
"31" "It is most ironic that feminists are  routinely  dismissed as attention-seekers, when, in reality, our daring to put words to the injustices we experience quickly shrinks  the   community spaces available to  us.   Male colleagues ,  unwilling to acknowledge their male privilege and feeling “oppressed” by my feminist politics ,  turned on me. Leading professors and theorists in the movement who had propped  up  their  personal  brand though softcore, pop feminism ,  labeled me a bigot, refused to write  me  letters of recommendation, sided with avowed sexists, or awkwardly ignored my direct pleas for help. Experiencing gendered abuse can be extremely  isolating  for these reasons .  Targeted women are left to question their own sense of reality and morality, while aggressors are not held accountable. The sanctified suffering of Nonhuman Animals is given precedence, while women, historically expected to put the needs of others before their own, are made to feel selfish and traitorous.   G ender abuse  characteristically  makes  victims  feel alone,  obscuring the fact that  it is collectively experienced."
"32" "As a sociologist, I understood that a collective consciousness is transformative. When I made my stories public, a cquaintances shared their own stories with me privately . S o me even published them publicly on  NO .  NO  helped to resist feelings of isolation , and I hoped it could demonstrate that the horrible personal tragedies dotting the movement were actually evidence  of  a systemic problem.  In the years since  NO ’s launch, my work has come to recognize  that  sexual violence undergirds the oppression of women and other animals, and, more specifically,  that  the Nonhuman Animal rights movement regularly contributes to rape culture in its bid for resonance. Rape culture refers to a social landscape  in which  rape and violence against women  are  trivialized, normalized, and even condoned  (Harding 2015) .  This culture does not stop short at the borders of the vegan community."
"33" "It  seems that v egan women are offered one of  two options . They may d o the  unglorified  drudgery  and invisible labor of collective organization  behind the scenes or , if they meet the racial and corporal standards of beauty,  they may  g et naked “for the cause”  in “I’d Rather Go Naked” campaigning popularized by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA).  Although most vegan women may choose (or be  default ed into) the  nonsexualized  role, the fact that “sex object” is a role expectation for  vegan  women and not men  essentially  s ecures  women’s vulnerable, second class status  at the institutional level . Sexualizing female activism could be a strategic mistake however, given that  the   sexual objectification of women is directly responsible for women’s low self-esteem, low self-efficacy, self-objectification, and  even  eating disorders  (Szymanski, Moffitt, and  Carr  2011) .  Downtrodden and distracted women are not likely to be an effective force for change.   Sexual objectification  is also directly related to prevailing misogyny and violence against women.   Most assuredly , sexual objectification is a fundamental component to rape culture."
"34" "Turning persons into things is a necessary precursor for enacting violence on those “things.” Sometimes the Nonhuman Animal rights movement explicitly pulls on narratives of victim-blaming when sexually objectifying female activists.  For instance,  LUSH , a luxury soap company that also brands itself a force against speciesism (despite the fact that most of its products contain  Nonhuman Animals’ milk, eggs, oils, and honey ),  once hosted  a  ten-hour  street  spectacle  featuring a n animalized  woman  costumed to appear naked  who was  tortured by a man  in a lab coat . Responding to criticism,  LUSH’s  spokesperson  declared ,  in so many words, th at the publicity stunt   intentionally chose to target women in order  to teach women (who purchase tested cosmetics) a lesson  ( Cite Author’s Work Here  2016 a ) .   Most  nonvegan  products are sold to men, however, suggesting that the campaign was  instead  relying on  tried-and-tested  misogyny  to grab attention.  As this example demonstrates , Nonhuman Animal rights campaigns use women’s bodies as sites of sexualized violence  to  register with a woman-hating public socialized by a pornographic, hyper-sexualized media  ( Cite Author’s Work Here  2015) . Violence against women–a lived reality for millions–is made sexy in campaign after campaign. W ith w omen’s bodies are used as bait  so as to invite  predation  ( Cite Author’s Work Here  2016b) , i t is unclear  how a body of new participants swayed by these oppressive scripts will be equipped to take speciesism seriously and effectively combat it."
"35" "Rape and sexual assault in activist circles may fail to solicit concern given  the numbing effect of  rape culture, but sexual violence is not unrelated to battering and homicide.  Might this connection warrant serious attention?  In the United States, the Center for Disease Control  (2015)  reports that one of  the leading causes of death  for girls and women is men’s violence.  In 2015  alone , over 1,600 American women were killed by men (Violence Policy Center 2017).   To put this into perspective, a pproximately 3,000 persons were killed during the attack on New York’s World Trade Center , and fo llowing that attack, the entire infrastructure of American international relations   and global air travel  were  transformed. Yet, women are  raped, terrorized, and  killed  by the thousands each and every year without inspiring  meaningful state action or intervention.  Given the Nonhuman Animal rights movement’s flippant use of misogynistic imagery in its campaigning, these levels of violence do not seem to alarm vegans either."
"36" "Selling Animal Rape"
"37" "Ironically, t he Nonhuman Animal rights movement’s  ignorance to sexism and rape culture manifests in its treatment of Nonhuman Animals as wel l . Indeed, due to the intersectional nature of sexism and speciesism, sexism—which entails the exploitation and derogation of feminized bodies—encourages activists to treat animals as women, just as speciesism—which entails the exploitation and derogation of animalized bodies—encourages activists to treat women as irrational, bodied, inferior, animal-like beings. This intersectional logic of oppression means that Nonhuman Animals, thus feminized, serve as a pool of  female labor  to be tapped for movement ends   just  as vegan women are . Specifically,  this exploitation transpires in  the form of pornography. Pornography, like prostitution, relies on the sale of women’s bodies in return  for various  resources  to  the organization’s benefit. It is an institution which is highly correlated with women’s subjugation (MacKinnon 1989). Perhaps the only meaningful distinction between prostitution and pornography (both institutions commodify the female body for the profit of predominantly male owners) is that pornography is recorded in picture, be it photograph or video, creating an easily reproduced product with a greater market reach.  The pornification of female activists is well documented in anti-speciesist spaces (Cudworth 2011 ;   Deckha  2008 ;   Gaarder  2011 ;   Cite Author’s Work Here  2015), but l ess discussed in the research   is the pornification of nonhuman females."
"38" "Although most vegans come to the movement of their own volition, t he Nonhuman Animal rights movement relies on two primary tactics of recruitme n t, the first being networks (familiarity with and proximity to other activists), and, failing that, the use of morally shocking imagery (Jasper and Poulsen 1995 ;   Cite Author’s Work Here  2013). A wide variety of revolting images of Nonhuman Animal suffering are utilized by activists, often with the intent of creating intense feelings of disgust, empathy, or outrage. These reactions are hoped to “shock” the viewer out of complacency and into action. Common themes include victims of vivisection riddled with research instruments, food animals in the slaughterhouse, or pitiful castaways huddling in cages awaiting “euthanasia.”  T hese images are inherently feminized, as they objectify a  subjugated  group for the human gaze. However, many images take this even further and specifically feature the sexual violation of female animals  (fig. 2) ."
"39" "The purpose of pornography is to titillate via the sexual degradation and humiliation of an oppressed body (Dworkin 1981).   Those who consume pornography are consuming it specifically to “get off,” so to speak, on the demonstrated powerlessness of otherized bodies.   The relationship between the viewer and the viewed is one that reproduces and reinforces a hierarchy of domination.   Pornography users also report experiencing a “tolerance,” meaning that increasingly degrading and shocking imagery is needed for them to  register   and respond .   The pornography industry is happy to serve that need by producing increasingly disturbing media (Jensen 2007). In anti-speciesist mobilization efforts, another unfortunate intersection of sexism and speciesism thus surfaces through the sensationalizing of anthroparchal  rape which, I argue, not only derives from rape culture, but also serves to  aggravate  rape culture. As animal law scholar Lee Hall (2010) insists, these images revictimize Nonhuman Animals. The depiction of objectified victims in pictures does not encourage the human subject to respect their personhood. Rather, it reinforces their subordinate status."
"40" "MacKinnon (1989) suggests that survivor’s stories become an “oral pornography,” with narratives soliciting a sexualized or victim-blaming response, which actually confirm the legitimacy of women’s subjugation to the audience.   For Nonhuman Animals prostituted in pictures, e mpathy, if extracted at all from the viewing experience, exists within the context of human superiority thus created in this relationship between the viewer and the viewed.  Furthermore,  there  is no  possibility of consent from these  depicted  Nonhuman Animals . Nonhumans, distant and frequently dead,  do not have the capacity to  allow for their traumatic experiences to be publicly displayed and exploited for the movement.  A case can be made that using  an  Animal’s image without consent is in the interest of the greater good, but this does not negate the fact that the consent of Nonhuman Animals is treated as overridable ."
"41" "The sexual violence inflicted on female nonhumans is eternally documented and replayed in activist pornography, but the human survivors of sexual violence made witness to these images are revictimized as well. True, rape is a trans-species experience, and rape is systematically utilized by a capitalist society to control the feminized, but the context in which the institution of rape is engaged by activists is problematic. Morally shocking anti-speciesist images are designed to trigger; they are constructed in such a way as to set off a complex and powerful emotional response in the viewer’s psyche. As with any pornography, they are intended to emotionally arouse.  I posit that t actics that intend to trigger women’s collective memory with male violence rely on scripts of misogyny.  In this way, w omen are prostituted once again by vegan activism as their bodily  and psychological  violation is capitalized upon for the benefit of others without their consent. Women, historically stereotyped as giving, selfless, and docile, are not expected to have a problem with th e movement’s potentially traumatic imposition ."
"42" "I challenge that t he  movement’s systematic exploitation of female suffering and disregard for consent is not likely to be  successful in dismantling oppression.   Indeed,  these tactics  only facilitate it.   R ecall, images  of animals suffering  are intentionally selected with the expectation of rousing a reaction, and ,  in the corporatized movement space, that reaction is generally hoped to be a monetary one ( Cite Author’s Work Here  2015). But this approach is  surely  alienating to women in a society where rape, assault, and murder at the hands of men or the state , as was previously outlined,  are  standard practice. In addition to alienating women in the broader public,  these tactics also alienate women in the ranks  as well . With remarkable cruelty, the intersections of human and nonhuman violation are juxtaposed in such a way as to create  barricades  instead of connections. The Nonhuman Animal rights movement’s misogynistic repertoire becomes one more means of alienating women from anti-speciesist work. It becomes one more means of solidifying male rule over advocacy spaces.   Scripts of misogyny keep women in a constant state of not-belonging, victimhood, and hurt. Adams suggests that pornography is inherently speciesist because “[…] women’s orifices are a part of the accessible environment available to men” (1996 ,  177). That is, the same logic that entitles those in power to exploit nature is the same logic that allows those in power to exploit women. I suggest that this domination logic persists when human activists enact their entitlement to exploit the devaluation of Nonhuman Animals."
"43" "While this trend began to emerge in second wave advocacy materials given its heavy reliance on shocking visuals, I would argue that it  is  amplified in the third wave.  Th e  exploitation of women ’ s bodies in the movement is not simply a result of patriarchy; it is also a result of capitalist pressures. As social movement organizations struggle to exist, they often turn to the nonprofit model. The social movement arena is crowded and competitive , and so t he exploitation of women is used strategically. Although much of this activity is condoned as a matter of personal choice made by individual participants (Mirk 2015), what little  is  acknowledged as exploitative and nonconsensual (audiences and Nonhuman Animals cannot consent) is frequently dismissed.  Again, s ome activists may insist that consent should be waived  if  exploiting this female suffering  is  believed to be in  the best interest of other animals or the  “ common good. ”  This paternalistic position , however,  is  itself  oppressive as activists and organizations thus position themselves as the guardians and custodians of infantilized women and other animals."
"44" "Anti-speciesist activists are increasingly coming to recognize that slavery and Holocaust analogies are problematic tactics for “selling” Nonhuman Animal rights to a public still smarting from the ongoing trauma of institutionalized racism and ethnocentrism ( Socha  2013). However, the frequently employed analogy of rape (particularly in reference to dairy production) goes practically unexamined by movement actors. Women are  sometimes  depicted as the recipients of physical and sexual assault to make a point about the experiences of  cows .   I find it curious that, w hen  female audiences  are targeted, there seems to be little objection  even though  tactics of this kind represent a very similar act of violence to that of slavery and Holocaust analogies."
"45" "The exception made for misogynistic scripts in the Nonhuman Animal rights marketplace is an intriguing one, one that speaks clearly to the woman-hating nature of Western culture. One of the more frequent rationales employed to justify the exploitation of female bodies and trauma in the service of social justice is the need to expose the  “ truth ”  of speciesist industries. But the demonstration of “truth” is constrained by a number of rarely-crossed boundaries in the activist repertoire. Again, race and ethnicity analogies, while  admittedly  still e mployed   by some in  the movement, are coming under scrutiny from a number of movement pundits. Pedophilia, however, is even less frequently utilized . I n fact, no campaign that draws on the sexual abuse of human children to make an argument against speciesism comes to my mind at the time of this writing .  This is a strange omission if activists are simply interested in exposing the “truth” of species-based violence because the cows in the dairy industry are still babies and children  themselves when they are hoisted onto “artificial insemination breeding chutes”   and vaginally or anally penetrated by male farmers who inspect or alter their reproductive organs. Pedophilia analogies might actually be more accurate than those that draw on violence against adult women. This  recognition of boundaries for groups other than women  suggests that singling out the female experience is intentional and formulaic. The  “ truth ”  here is carefully framed, not objectively reported. In a woman-hating society,  presumably  only misogynistic scripts will sell. Misogyny is the only language the public is expected to understand and feel comfortable consuming. Adams adds that analogies of this kind assume the “reducibility” of suffering and objectify it. Instead, she suggests a retreat from anthropocentric metaphors: “[…] why not say animal suffering in their body is theirs?” (1996 ,  184)."
"46" "Misogynistic imagery is intended to titillate the audience to the point of purchase. Pornography is deliberately designed and delivered to stimulate the viewer to a point of emotional excitement and physical reaction. In the realm of online pornography, where millions upon millions of websites offer photographs and short video clips for free, the creators hope to work up the audience to such a point where they will be more willing to offer their credit card information for paid content (Dines 2010). The institution of pornography specializes in consumer manipulation, and pornography is manufactured at a cost to vulnerable female bodies with the intention of turning a profit for predominantly male capitalists. When social movements use graphic images of female nonhumans being violated (sexually or otherwise) by those in power with the human/male gaze in mind and with hopes of extracting capital from the viewer  (since most depictions of Animal suffering are associated with nonprofit campaigning) , this system can only be understood as pornographic. This is not the type of pornography that is likely to empower Nonhuman Animals. It is more likely to reinforce their lower status."
"47" "The exploitation of feminized Nonhuman Animals in morally shocking imagery also acts as a cheap plot device in the narrative of the benevolent human savior. Demeaning images are heavily shared within the activist community as a means of exciting rage and desire for vengeance. Crude images of Nonhuman Animals being kicked, beaten, sexually assaulted, dismembered, and murdered in the most horrific ways are swapped among (or forced upon) activists with encouragements to feel anger and an intense desire to “do something”  ( Jacobsson , Lindblom, and  Jacobsson  2013).  Ecofeminist Marti Kheel wrote at length about the dangers of this “savior complex” in anti-speciesist spaces  throughout  her career. Instead of examining the root cause of exploitation, activists and theorists look to nonhuman pornography to feed their inner vigilante. The vegan feminist perspective, however, sees social change grounded in respect for the exploited and peaceful, non-violent education for the exploiters. Kheel  (1993)  explains:"
"48" "Whereas nature ethicists have tended to concentrate on “rescuing” the “damsel in distress,” ecofeminists have been more likely to ask how and why the “damsel” arrived at her present plight. [ . . . ] The natural world will be “saved” not by the sword of ethical theory, but rather through a transformed consciousness toward all of life."
"49" "“Victims in pictures , ”  as Hall (2010) describes them,  become further oppressed when their experiences are shared in a ma nn er that does not   respect their personhood. In doing so, they simply become objectified in the storyline of activism. Given that the Nonhuman Animal rights movement already operates according to patriarchal norms and generally celebrates violent direct  action (Hall 2006), it seems quite fitting that Nonhuman Animals are presented as victims . This victimhood presents  androcentric activism the justification needed to engage further  in  patriarchal violence. While violent activism is done in the name of social justice, the “might makes right” logic that supports this approach is firmly situated within an ideology of patriarchy."
"50" "Measuring Success"
"51" "I have argued that the third wave of  anti-speciesist  activism is characterized by democratic online access and widespread nonprofit professionalization. These structural shifts had major consequences for vegan feminism.  I nternet advocacy  offers  a powerful platform for the heretofore  overlooked feminist critique, but this advantage  i s countered by the deeply patriarchal professional model and its capitalist requirements for competitive campaigning that inevitably exploi t  feminized labor, both human and nonhuman.  Yet, t his  professionalization  could  intriguingly  offer another window of opportunity for vegan feminism since it  also requires a deradicalization that invites organizations to  dabble with diversity."
"52" "With any social movement, it is difficult to determine at what point “success” has been achieved  b ecause movements are generally quite multi-faceted  and adaptive .  I nf luence can  sometimes  be interpreted through cultural impacts, policy changes, and institutional restructuring , but,  it is usually the case that  only a few  elements of a movement’s goals  manifest in a social structure .  Social movement goals  generally  only achieve assimilation  in a heavily compromised form  unless the goal is  extremely single-issue .  Queer liberation, for instance, settled into the not-so-queer fight for marriage equality  (Healy, Sheehan, and Whelan 2015) . To succeed, the movement funneled a huge array of grievances into  a single , more achievable goal   that strategically  spotlighted middle-class , monogamous  white males .  Vegan feminists such as  Aph  and Syl Ko (2017) have been cynical of diversity initiatives in the Nonhuman Animal rights movement for this reason.  Vegan feminist demands for diversity have been somewhat addressed by professionalized  anti-speciesist  organizations, but  mostly  in a form that is very limited in its representativeness of actual diversity in the community and constituency. Ko and Ko observe that vegan d iversity quotas are generally qualified by idealized expectations and respectability politics."
"53" "Post-feminist ideology permits this faux diversity to pass as true progress, but  this “progress”  is rendered even more vacuous by its marketability.  In an analysis of over forty years of movement literature   following Western Nonhuman Animal rights mobilization  through  the peak of late 20 th  century second wave activism t o  the era of professionalization in the third wave,  I have uncovered that the  increase in  vegan  intersectionality rhetoric generally coincides with movement deradicalization.  Nick  Pendergrast’s  (2014) doctoral research  also  supports this finding.  Anti-speciesism claimsmaking  is , for the most part, rather radical, and movement organizations, having adopted the nonprofit model, become beholden to bureaucratic  inertia  and the constant need for funds. I  suspect that i ntersectionality rhetoric shifts  attention from the radical notion that animals are persons by centering humans."
"54" "Diversity is  subsequently  employed to the  professionalized  organization’s advantage in two ways. First, social movement organizations can appeal to post-feminist myths that sexism and other forms of human oppression are no longer relevant. Second, social movement organizations  can decenter  contentious   Nonhuman  Animal liberation . In both cases, true diversity is thwarted  in favor of a veneer of carefully controlled inclusivity . This maneuvering is necessary given the threat that feminism and veganism pose to existing power structures.  D espite the good intentions of  many  charity workers and volunteers, the nonprofit model has been criticized as a  tool of the state, one  nurtured  since  the late 20 th  century to temper rebellion, squash radical collectives, increase activist transparency, and provide affordable social services (Smith 2007)."
"55" "Given th e  potent influence  of professionalization  on the trajectory of Western charities, it is difficult to declare with any certainty that the early efforts of  NO  and other likeminded projects have  manifested the movement’s new interest in intersectionality .  I am wary of professionalized nonprofits such as PETA celebrating women’s empowerment  and   Farm Animal Rights Movement’s (FARM)  inclusion of feminist speakers at its annual conference given their general commitment to  patriarchal  movement structures and  financial  dependence on  industry and state elites.  Yet, the explosion in grassroots vegan feminist projects like A Privileged Vegan,  Black Vegans Rock,  Collectively Free,  Project Intersect,  Vegan Princess Warriors Attack, and Vegan Vanguard   suggests that a space  has  been  claimed  for critical thinking."
"56" "Further evidence to the effectiveness of a critical vegan feminist message is the development of countermovement efforts,  as evidenced in  the fan base of Gary  Yoroufsky , Gary Francione, 269life, and other male-dominated entities which fiercely resist feminist critique.  Vegan feminists may easily  find  themselves  downtrodden  by  the  retaliatory  misogynistic abuse  emanating from these spaces , but, as a scholar of social movements, I recognize that this contentious resistance is likely a sign of success.  Countermovements cannot develop without the presence of a viable threat, as countermovements exist only to protect  elite interests and  the status quo  (Meyer and  Staggenborg  1996 ) . Countermovement activity is thus powerful evidence that vegan feminist critique is registering.  Response, even  if negative , is the sincerest form of flattery in the crowded social movement space that so often  invisibilizes  the contributions of women.   For that matter, this movement-countermovement dialectic can encourage ideological development and  tactical  refinement. I certainly would not have sharpened my feminist framework to such an extent without the regular pushback."
"57" "Coping with the Pushback"
"58" "That said, social movement research warns that countermovement activism can easily escalate into violence when elites whose privilege is challenged reach a certain point of frustration ( Mottl  1980 ).  Given the general societal danger facing women, the post-feminist mentality of vegan communities, and the documented threats and harms already beleaguering women in the feminist movement, vegan activists have every reason to take seriously the risks involved in vegan feminist agitation.  It is my observation that m ost activists in the Nonhuman Animal rights movement have adopted a do-gooder, hyper-moral identity to differentiate themselves as people who care about animals,  an identity that , ironically, impedes their ability to acknowledge contrary behavior in the ranks.   This is compounded by the everyday ideological barriers of sexism.  In  The Revolution Starts at Home  (Chen,  Dulani , and  Piepzna-Samarasinha  2011),  social justice activists and collectives working in liberation efforts for women,  children,  racial and ethnic minorities,   trans and queer persons , and immigrants  have identified that  intramovement   violence can be just as unsettling as the structural violence they originally organized to resist, if not more so.  It can also be just as tricky to dismantle, especially  if  plans for  this dismantlement  intend  to eschew  traditional channels of state control and oppression such as the criminal justice system."
"59" "The load is a heavy one.  As I write this  piece , I recognize that  Name of Organization , like many grassroots collectives, has entered a  period of abeyance  and m a y very well cease to operate.  Unprofessionalized  radical groups  like  NO  may  have the luxury of speaking truth, but this comes at a cost of resources  like funding and powerful networks .  Taking a critical stance entails an element of precariousness.  Eventually ,  the steam runs out , t he compassion fatigue sets in , or the trolls wear  us  down .   For me, i t was not long into my stint as a non-tenure track lecturer at a small  liberal arts college  before I felt the  disarming  pull of heavy teaching loads and  tenuous  three-year contracts .  Like the large charities I had long criticized for failing to maintain a radical position, I, too,  felt the  need to protect my paycheck in a depressed economy .  I come from poverty, am unmarried, and have no safety net, so it was not difficult for university employment to professionalize me. T his  has entailed a  chilling  of  my activism and  a  pandering  of  my message."
"60" "After one high profile vegan misogynist who  worked at a neighboring institution  began to escalate hi s  abuse, I found myself in the dean’s office discussing measures of personal and professional protection.  My dean was familiar with this abusive behavior in academia and was very supportive of me, but I still felt embarrassed and unprofessional for having to address it in the first place.   As a young woman who lives alone, I  feared  for my safety.  I knew this man watched every move I made online; was he also watching me offline?   I knew he had destroyed the reputations of other female junior scholars in the field. I was now in his crosshairs; could my career withstand his attack  in an industry that already devalued and demeaned women ?  I developed eczema. I cried a lot. I worried a lot more. The terrifying recognition that vegan men’s countermovement activity was beginning to threaten my career and mental health  forced a reckoning.  I  began  to reinvest my efforts away from online activism to  professional pursuits .  Teaching four to five introductory classes every semester distracted me.  Eventually, I had no more time for blogging.  I convinced myself that teaching and publishing were equally valid means of advocating for  Nonhuman  Animals."
"61" "In a lot of ways, cooling my online activism meant disengaging with the vegan community. This split was not entirely one-sided. Another  co nsequence  of radical feminist critique in  a  male-dominated space is  the general discouragement  that  women experience. This is  precipitated by   a  lack of solidarity and support, especially from older, better - established activists who are in a position to ease  young women’s  burden through their greater credibility and  richer  networks.  I have always found this failed sisterhood an especially stinging quality of a professionalized movement culture  that seems to be  determined to keep up appearances no matter the cost.   It smarts all the more when diversity rhetoric  plasters conference lineups, annual reports, book jackets, and mission statements while women  continue  to suffer in isolation, unbelieved, tone - policed, or victim-blamed."
"62" "Conclusion"
"63" "Gender equality matters in the vegan movement for three reasons. First, social movement research indicates that a diversity of representatives will be more likely to resonate with a diverse audience ( Reger  2002 ;  Staggenborg  2010).  A diverse audience is needed for social change.  Second, diversity in leadership provides role models  who  attract and nurture a diverse activist pool. Social psychological research supports that marginalized people find a sense of agency and belonging when they see people like them selves  doing important work (Beaman et al. 2012). Third, a white-centric and male-centric movement  invariably  relies on the very same hierarchies of power that facilitate speciesism.  The sexualizing of  violence against women masked as a metaphor for speciesism and the  selling of  Nonhuman  Animal rape  in pornographically - charged graphic imagery  both  demonstrate some of the tactical concerns that emerge from a movement exhibiting intersectional failure.  Vegan feminism has advanced a campaign to challenge limiting ideologies of privilege and power by suggesting that women and other marginalized groups in the Nonhuman Animal rights movement be given platform and mutual respect."
"64" "The internet  opens up  to activists  a n   enormous , global community  and valuable networks through which to disseminate radical ideas  in the service of  a more just society. Yet,   vegan feminists such as myself who espouse  unpopular feminist opinion s  in a single-issue-minded  social movement  environment  may still find themselves alienated  since a radical vegan feminist message can run contrary to the political logic of the nonprofit model . It remains to be seen if the vegan  feminist flank  can overcome  the structural barriers of professionalization and its diversity  tokenism  to  nurture a community that embodies the communal ideals that feminism has long espoused.   It is not only professionalized organizations but also g rassroots collectives  that  must invest in solidarity and value accountability . With professionalization uprooting traditional means of community building , leaving  radicals  t o fumble together online, the need for mindful comradery is only heightened.  However, o nline relationships are inherently more distant and prone to miscommunications.  It is also much easier for participants to drift away and drop out .  I wonder if it is possible to overcome this isolationist tendency in movement culture."
"65" "Thus, I conclude this  essay  on the landscape of third wave vegan feminism in the era of internet technology and  nonprofitization  with an emphasis on the alienating nature of these new structures. The internet may bring activists together, but it  also  keeps activists at a distance. Professional decorum and basic neighborliness are difficult norms to maintain between solitary individuals  restrained by  screens and keyboards.  Third wave online activism also brings with it misogynistic trolling, astroturfing, bots, culture clashes, and a variety of other cyber-oriented difficulties that stretch and pull vegan feminists. For older generation activists, these  tribulations  may be dismissed  as  “drama ”  that an activist brings on herself and could easily ignore. But ,  for many young people, unplugging is not always an accessible  or realistic  solution. Doing so could risk their complete social isolation , and social isolation is antithetical to  sustainable,  quality collective action (and mental health) . In the present  service economy,  some are also tied to cyberspaces  since  an  online presence is  increasingly  required for work. Advice to “ignore the haters” and  reprimands to not “ feed the trolls”  diminish  the real psychological difficulties that minorities face online. Cyberbullying is notoriously white supremacist and misogynist. It is also frequently orchestrated. Facebook is known to encourage this violent communication ,   because  intense emotional response to comments can increase a user’s screen time (and thus their  exposure to paid advertisements)  ( The Daily Show  2018) .  Nonprofitization , meanwhile,  erode s traditional measures of activist congregation. With membership generally relegated to a regular donation or petition-signing, activists today are less likely to come together in physical proximity to discuss tactics, campaign, or protest.   Third wave activism  thus runs into difficulties with  community-building.  To remain successful, vegan feminism must counter these negative consequences by creating buffers and breathing room."
"66" "Acknowledgements"
"67" "The author would like to thank  xxx  for her valuable and graci ous assistance in editing this manuscript ."
"68" "References"
"69" "269life. 2013.  Women Forcefully Milked in the Street . Retrieved September 22, 2018 from  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3R6bqSzAsc8"
"70" "Adams, C arol .  2000.  The Sexual Politics of Meat: A Feminist-Vegetarian Critical Theory . New York: The Continuum Publishing Company."
"71" "------.  1996. “Caring About Suffering: A Feminist Exploration.”  In   Beyond Animal Rights: A Feminist Caring Ethic for the Treatment of Animals ,  e ds.  J osephine  Donovan and C arol  Adams , 170-196 . New York: Continuum."
"72" "Adamson, Walter. 2014.  Hegemony and Revolution . Brattleboro: Eco Point Books & Media."
"73" "Almeida, Paul and Mark  Lichbach . 2003. “To the Internet, From the Internet: Comparative Media Coverage of Transnational Protest.”  Mobilization  8(3 ) :  249-272."
"74" "Barnett, Rosalind and Caryl Rivers. 2004.  Same Difference: How Gender Myths Are Hurting Our Relationships, Our Children, and Our Jobs . New York: Basic Books."
"75" "Beaman, L ori,  Duflo , Esther ,  Pande , Rohini, and  Topalova ,  Petia . 2012. “Female Leadership Raises Aspirations and Educational Attainment for Girls.”  Science  1212382."
"76" "Beers, Diane. 2006.  For the Prevention of Cruelty:  The History and Legacy of Animal Rights Activism in the United States . Athens: Ohio University Press."
"77" "Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977.  Outline of a Theory of Practice . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"78" "Bosman, Julie, Matt Stevens, and Jonah Bromwich. 2018.  Humane Society C.E.O. Resigns Amid Sexual Harassment Allegations . Retrieved September 22, 2018 from  https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/02/us/humane-society-ceo-sexual-harassment-.html"
"79" "Castells, M anuel . 2012.  Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age.  Malden: Polity."
"80" "Center for Disease Control. 2015.  Ages 1-44 by Age Group – All Females . Retrieved June 30, 2018 from  https://www.cdc.gov/women/lcod/2015/all-females/index.htm"
"81" "Chen, Ching-In,  Dulani , Jai, and  Piepzna-Samarasinha , Leah . Eds. 2011.  The Revolution Starts at Home: Confronting Intimate Violence Within Activist Communities . Brooklyn: South End Press."
"82" "Cudworth, E rica . 2011.  Social Lives with Other Animals: Tales of Sex, Death and Love . New York: Palgrave Macmillan."
"83" "Deckha ,  M aneesha . 2008. “Disturbing Images: PETA and the Feminist Ethics of Animal Advocacy.”  Ethics and the Environment  13 (2): 35-76."
"84" "Dixon,  K itsy . 2014. “Feminist Online Identity: Analyzing the Presence of Hashtag Feminism.”  Journal of Arts & Humanities  3 (7): 34-40."
"85" "Dworkin, A ndrea . 1981.  Pornography: Men Possessing Women . New York: Plume."
"86" "Fortune . 2017.  These are the Women CEOs Leading Fortune 500 Companies . Retrieved  June 30, 2018 from  http://fortune.com/2017/06/07/fortune-500-women-ceos/"
"87" "Earl, Jennifer and Alan  Schussman . 2003. “The New Site of Activism: On-line Organizations, Movement Entrepreneurs, and the Changing Location of Social Movement Decision Making.”  Research in Social Movements   24 :  155-187."
"88" "Gaarder , E mily . 2011.  Women and the Animal Rights Movement .  New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press."
"89" "Groves, J ulian . 2001. “Animal Rights and the Politics of Emotion.”  I n  Passionate Politics ,  eds.  J eff  Goodwin, J ames  Jasper, and F rancesca  Polletta , 212-232 . Chicag o : The University of Chicago Press."
"90" "Hall, L ee .  2006.  Capers in the Churchyard: Animal Rights Advocacy in the Age of Terror . Darien: Nectar Bat Press."
"91" "------.  2010.  On Their Own Terms: Bringing Animal-Rights Philosophy Down to Earth . Darien: Nectar Bat Press."
"92" "Harding, Kate. 2015.  Asking  For  It: The Alarming Rise of Rape Culture--and What We Can Do about It . Boston: Perseus Books Group."
"93" "Harper, B reeze . 2010. “Race as a ‘Feeble Matter’ in Veganism: Interrogating Whiteness, Geopolitical Privilege, and Consumption Philosophy of ‘Cruelty-Free’ Products.”  Journal for Critical Animal Studies  8(3 )   :  5-27."
"94" "------ . 2010. Ed.  Sistah  Vegan . Brooklyn, NY: Lantern Books."
"95" "Healy,  Gr á inne , Brian Sheehan, and Noel Whelan. 2015.  Ireland Says Yes: The Inside Story of How the Vote for Marriage Equality was Won .  Sallins : Merrion Press."
"96" "Jacobsson , K erstin and  Lindblom , Jonas . 2013. “Emotion Work in Animal Rights Activism.”  Acta  Sociologica  56(1 )   :  55-68."
"97" "Jasper, J ames and  Poulsen , Jane . 1995. “Recruiting Strangers and Friends: Moral Shocks and Social Networks in Animal Rights and Anti-Nuclear Protests.”  Social Problems   42   :  493-512."
"98" "Jensen, R obert . 2007.  Getting Off: Pornography and the End of Masculinity . Cambridge: South End Press."
"99" "Kean, H ilda . 1998.  Animal Rights . London:  Reaktion  Books."
"100" "Kheel, M arti .  1985. “Speaking the Unspeakable: Sexism in the Animal Rights Movement.”  Feminists for Animal Rights Newsletter  2(1 )   :  1-6."
"101" "------.  1993. “From Heroic to Holistic Ethics.”  I n  Ecofeminism: Ethics and Action ,  ed.  G reta   Gaard , 243-244.  Philadelphia: Temple University."
"102" "Ko,  A ph  and S yl  Ko. 2017.  Aphro -ism . Brooklyn: Lantern."
"103" "Lawson, R onald  and S tephen  Barton. 1980. “Sex Roles in Social Movements.”  Signs  6(2 )   :  230-247."
"104" "MacKinnon , C atherine . 1989.  Toward a Feminist Theory of the State . Cambridge: Harvard University Press."
"105" "McCarthy, J ohn  and M ayer   Zald . 1973.  The Trend of Social Movements in America: Professionalization and Resource Mobilization . Morristown: General Learning Press."
"106" "McRobbie, A ngela . 2005. “Post-feminism and Popular Culture.”  I n  Media and Cultural Theory ,  eds.   James  Curran and D avid  Morley , 59-70 . New York: Routledge."
"107" "Meyer, D avid  and S uzanne   Staggenborg . 1996. “Movements, Countermovements, and the Structure of Political Opportunity.”  American Journal of Sociology  101(6 )   :  1628-1660."
"108" "Mirk, S arah.  2015. “Liberal Problems.”  Popaganda   [Podcast]. Retrieved  September 22, 2018  from:  https://soundcloud.com/bitch-media/wtf-peta"
"109" "Mottl ,  T ahi . 1980. “The Analysis of Countermovements.”  Social Problems  27(5 )   :  620-635."
"110" "Omond , Tasmin. 2012.  Power, Oppression and Abuse: Performing Animal Tests . Retrieved September 22, 2018 from  https://www.fightinganimaltesting.com/our-blog/power-oppression-and-abuse-performing-animal-tests-2/"
"111" "Pendergrast , N icholas . 2014.  A Sociological Examination of the Contemporary Animal Advocacy Movement . Dissertation. Perth: Curtin University."
"112" "Reyer , J o . 2002. “More than One Feminism: Organizational Structure and the Construction of Collective Identity.”  I n  Social Movements ,  eds.  D avid  Meyer, N ancy  Whittier, and B elinda   Robnett , 171-184.  New York: Oxford University Press."
"113" "Robnett , B elinda . 1996. “African-American Women in the Civil Rights Movement, 1954-1965.”  American Journal of Sociology  101 (6 )   :  1661-1693."
"114" "Socha , K im . 2013. “The ‘Dreaded Comparisons’ and Speciesism: Leveling the Hierarchy of Suffering.”  In   Confronting Animal Exploitation: Grassroots Essays on Liberation and Veganism ,  ed s.  K im   Socha  and  S arahjane  Blum , 223-240 . Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers."
"115" "Smith, A ndrea . 2007. “Introduction.”  I n  The  Revolution Will Not Be Funded: Beyond the Non-Profit Industrial Complex , ed.  INCITE! Women of Color Against Violence , 1-20 . Cambridge: South End Press."
"116" "Staggenborg , S uzanne . 2010. “Research on Social Movement Coalitions.”  I n  Strategic Alliances ,  eds.  N ella  Van Dyke and H olly  McCammon , 316-329 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press."
"117" "Szymanski, D awn , L auren  Moffitt, and E rika   Carr . 2011. “Sexual Objectification of Women: Advances to Theory and Research.”  The Counseling Psychologist  39(1 )   :  6-38."
"118" "The Daily Show . 2018.  Facebook Cashes in on Conflict . Retrieved June 30, 2018 from  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XxVFssljoLY"
"119" "Thelandersson ,  F redrika . 2014. “A Less Toxic Feminism: Can the Internet Solve the Age Old Question of How to Put Intersectional Theory into Practice?”  Feminist Media Studies  14(3 )   :  527-530."
"120" "United Nations. 2008.  How Widespread is Violence Against Women?  Retrieved on June 30, 2018 from  http://www.un.org/en/women/endviolence/pdf/VAW.pdf"
"121" "UN Women. 2018.  Facts and Figures . Retrieved on June 30, 2018 from  http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/leadership-and-political-participation/facts-and-figures"
"122" "Violence Policy Center. 2017.  More Than 1,600 Women Murdered by Men in One Year, New Study Finds . Retrieved June 30, 2018 from  http://www.vpc.org/press/more-than-1600-women-murdered-by-men-in-one-year-new-study-finds-3/"
