"x"
"1" "Pre-print uploaded in July 2019"
"2" "Published as  Aptekar, S. (2019), The Public Library as Resistive Space in the Neoliberal City.  City & Community . doi: 10.1111/cico.12417"
"3" "The Public Library as Resistive Space in the Neoliberal City"
"4" "Sofya Aptekar, PhD"
"5" "UMass Boston"
"6" "Contact : Sofya Aptekar  sofya.aptekar@umb.edu , UMass Boston Department of Sociology, 100 Morrissey Blvd., Boston, MA 02125"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "With reduced hours, decaying infrastructure, and precariously positioned staff, local p ublic libraries  provide much needed services in cities  devastated  by inequalit y and slashed safety nets . In this article , I draw on ethnographic research of a small public li brary in a diverse, mostly working class  neighborhood in Queens, New York. I show that  in addition to providing an alternative to the capitalist market by distributing resources according to people’s needs, the  library serves  as  a moral underground  space, where m iddle class people bend rules to help  struggling city residents. Although the library  occasionally  replicate s  hegemonic ideologies about immigrant assimilation, it provides a striking example of cross-class and inter-class solidarities and resistance to the neoliberal social order.  I conclude by discussing the potential of public li braries as  everyday spaces of subversion and emancipation, as well as  research sites for  urban scholars ."
"9" "The Public Library as Resistive Space in the Neoliberal City"
"10" "Surveys indicate that roughly half of Americans have visited a public library in the past year, and three quarters say that their local public library provides them with the resources they need (Horrigan ,  2016). Yet, sociologists and urban scholars have largely left the study of the  over 17,000  public libraries in the US to the field of library studies ( Audunson ,  2005 ;  Wiegand ,  2015) , even as public libraries’ significance as key institutions intensifies in the context of neoliberal austerity and skyrocketing inequality.  The archetypal image of  libraries  conjures up  places  with rows of  dusty  books, presided over by shushing librarians.  The social imaginary also includes  grand iconic library spaces, like the New York Public Library with its carved lions and  hallowed  reading room . Municipal leaders tout the  new multi-story flagship libraries whose coffee shops put the visitor in mind of a chain bookstore at the mall .  But American cities are full of a different breed of library. These small public libraries  are  buffeted by  budget cut s  as  they attempt to cover expanding gaps left by the failing social safety net and other public institutions. L ibrarians  become  more like social workers struggling to provide a myriad of services and a safe space for struggling urbanities under siege in increasingly unequal cities."
"11" "This paper presents a case study of one such library. Located in a   gentrifying  working class immigrant neighborhood in Queens, New York, it  is composed  basically  of one room, with scuffed  linoleum  floors and  a  periodically flooded basement. Much of the time, the  library is filled with boisterous children ,  people  struggling with mental illness  and memory loss,  and  others making the most of its handful of outdated compu ters and one printer to apply for  jobs  and government benefits , check email, or  study for citizenship tests. It is a place to cool off in the summer under the struggling air conditioning,  warm up  in the w inter,  use the  bathroom ,  and  chat with friends and neighbors."
"12" "Drawing on extended ethnographic fieldwork, I analyze the way patrons and staff use and make sense of this small library space.  I consider the ways in which the library enforces and reproduces the hegemonic social order, from immigrant assimilation to individual self-improvement.  At the same, I show the ways in which the library  f ill s  in the  expanding gaps in essential services for the increasingly marginalized sections of the city .  The primary focus of the article is the analysis of the ways in which  the library operate s  as an alternativ e and resistive space, with  practices of cross-c lass and inter-class solidarity ."
"13" "Public  Libraries  as Hegemonic Institutions and Emancipatory Spaces"
"14" "From their beginnings in the mid-19 th  century, American public libraries have been much more than storehouses of reading material.  Public libraries reflect  and reproduce  societal inequalities  (Sin and Kim, 2008; Wiegand, 2015) .  At the same time, they have the potential to serve as sites of resistance to capitalism-induced alienation, and some argue for their role in  supporting democracy,  tolerance , and right to the city (Buschman, 2003; Iveson and Fincher, 2011) .  Public libraries are set up as an alternative to market exchange  (Wright, 2013) , and they provide vital services in cities disciplined by neoliberal austerity  measures  (Terrile, 2016) . As alternative spaces, public libraries can function as sites of resistance to economic injustice."
"15" "P ublic libraries have a long history of participating in the reproduction of social class through social control, enforcement of social norms, and representations of dominant ideologies and hierarchies .   The hundreds of  public  libraries founded through Andrew Carnegie’s philanthropy in the early 20 th  century  stressed individual improvement over class solidarity, helping to reproduce an atomized and compliant workforce (Augst, 2011; Wiegand, 2015).   At the same time, library policies  reflected  prevailing mechanisms of exclusion along l ines of class, gender, and race   ( Wiegand, 2015).  Today, as in the past, public libraries are hailed as key nodes for acculturation of  the urban immigrant  into the American culture, creating English-speaking workers who improve themselves through library resources  (Audunson, 2005; Gitner a nd Rosenthal, 2008; Shen, 2013).  Libraries often privilege middle-class norms and focus on helping people conform to these norms (Hodgetts et al., 2008), as  happens  in the case of homeless patrons (Terrile, 2016).  They  reproduc e  hegemonic narratives , including those about race and belonging,  and serv e  as arenas for powerful political agendas . In a study of a public library in Monterey Park, California,  Chu and Honma  ( 2007 ) demonstrate how a  public  library can become a site of struggles over community identity, collective memory, and racist ideologies. Their analysis of contestation over languages in the library collections underscores the power of elite representations of space (LeFebvre  1991 )."
"16" "Public libraries can also be viewed as microcosms of society, reflecting larger patterns of stratification (Molz and Dain, 1999).  There is significant inequality in  resources among library systems as well as between neighborhoods in the provision of library services (Ottensmann, 1994; Sin, 2011). There are also patterns of inequality in library access and use. Research on the circulation of library materials and neighborhood characteristics indicates that higher socioeconomic status, higher proportions of white and Asian residents, and neighborhood social capital are associated with higher circulation figures in New York City (Gong, Japzon, and Chen, 2008; Japzon and Gong, 2005). On the individual level, there appears to be an overall positive correlation between library use and levels of education and income (Horrigan, 2016; Sin and Kim, 2008)."
"17" "Although there are clearly ways in which public libraries  reproduce social hierarchies and hegemonic ideologies  undergirding exploitation ,  there is theoretical grounds for expecting that  they also host practices of resistance. As  Certeau (2011 ) argues for space in general, everyday activity of ordinary urbanites is never completely colonized by  the capitalist order  (see also Shepard and Smithsimon ,  2011). The imperative s of   the  elites who control the libraries can be subverted by the interests and quotidian behavior of library users. These users can impose their own meani ngs on the space, appropriating it and challenging  or subverting  authority (LeFebvre  1991). In theorizing space, both   Certeau (2011) and LeFebvre (1991 ) point to  everyday practices as holding the potential for liberation.   LeFebvre’s (1991; 1996 ) theories of urban space and the right to the city highlight the promise of spaces like public libraries to center the needs of users, fostering cooperation, solidarity, meaningful connections, and grassroots democracy (Purcell 2013).   Libraries can be seen as crucial nodes in people’s right to the  city, with potential for redistribution of resources and power (Buschman, 2013; Iveson and Fincher, 2011)."
"18" "Others con nect libraries to  democracy and tolerance.  Using Habermas’s (1989) conceptualization of the public sphere as essential for democracy, some have argued that libraries are a part of the public sphere, and therefore have an important potential effect on democracy (Buschman, 2003; Frederiksen, 2015) .  Like other public spaces, libraries can provide opportunities for interaction with diverse others, development of tolerance, and formation of ties that transcend categorical identities (Audunson, 2005, Iveson and Fincher, 2011). Iveson and Fincher (2011) qualify this promise of tolerance by pointing to its tension with  the typical  segregation of library space to suit different types of users (children, teenagers, seniors)."
"19" "Although they are not perfectly emancipatory or liberating institutions,   Eric Olin Wright (2013) uses libraries specifically as an example of  a “real utopia”,  an alternative institution  that empowers  people to transcend capitalist  markets   and move away from consumption-centric ways of living. He points out that libraries “increase equality in access to the material conditions necessary to live a flourishing life” (Wright, 2013, p. 10). In their very set up, public libraries are organized to distribute resources bas ed on need rather than payments, illuminating the workings of an alternative economic system.  Access to materials that are scarce are r egulated through waiting lists.  L ibraries are institutions t hat can  help move society  towards  eliminating oppression and help people live fulfilling , meaningful, and connected  lives (Wright 2013)."
"20" "L ibraries  have  become  spaces of essential service provision  at a time when many US cities are in the grip of neoliberal austerity policies .  The American Library Association includes helping the poor as part of librarians’ job description (Anderson, Simpson, and Fisher, 2012), and some urban libraries even add social workers to their staff (Blank, 2014). While themselves under assault, libraries often compensate for the decline of other public services by providing educational opportunities for poor children, job search assistance, free access to information, as well as helping bridge the digital divide (Bertot, McClure, and Jaeger, 2008; Frederiksen, 2015; Hodgetts et al., 2008; Terrile, 2016 ).  As access to formal education becomes more difficult, libraries can provide alternative spaces for learning (Mickiewicz, 2015).  They also offer a safe place for the marginalized (Blank, 2014) or even space of privacy for those who find little privacy at home (Sequeiros, 2013).  Although earlier I noted the potential of libraries to impose middle class social norms, there is evidence that in some libraries,  those who deviate sharply from mainstream societal norms and suffer high levels of exclusion can find a  relatively  safe and tolerant space that caters to their needs  ( Mickiewicz,  2015) .   These functions are not new, poignantly echoing the experience of Depression Era libraries, which provided shelter and information for millions of unemployed amidst draconian budget cuts (Wiegand, 2015).  Notably, measures of circulation fail to take into account many of these ways in which people use libraries, and surveys measuring library use are unlikely to adequately represent the most marginalized library patrons, such as the homeless (Terrile, 2016). Even though libraries in poor communities often have relatively few resources, they can become institutions of central importance (Mickiewicz, 2015)."
"21" "As spaces organized around non-capitalist principles, public libraries are critical in providing much needed services to vulnerable populations whose access to them would otherwise be limited by poverty. They are also settings of class intersections where middle class library staff routinely encounter low income patrons.  Putnam (1989) and Oldenburg (2000) identify libraries as places of solidarity, which can reduce social fragmentation.   I show that that the cross-class solidarity at the public library examined in this article is an example of   resistance to economic injustice through what Lisa Dodson (2013) defines as the  moral underground . Dodson (2013) shows how some employers and supervisors of minimum wage workers, those who work with children in schools and childcare settings, and health care workers all bend and break the rules to help the struggling poor survive daily challenges. These workers take considerable risks because they derive meaning from taking the side of “others who are being damaged by an unjust system” (Dodson, 2013, p. 7). I argue that library staff, as well, participate in the moral underground, and subvert the system in their everyday practices to help those in need."
"22" "T he  public  library can be a moral underground  space   characterized by practices of solidarity and resistance to the neoliberal urban order. F acilitated by institutional structures , library workers as well as library patrons subvert hegemonic logics through everyda y use of the space (Certeau 2011; Lefebvre 1991 ).   I demonstrate that although the library is not a perfect emancipatory institution, there are institutional and contextual factors that  lead to re sistive practices and  potential for emancipation . I begin by describing the institutional context of the Queens Library as a whole and the neighborhood context of this particular branch. I follow with a description of my  ethnographic methodology, a presentation of results, and a discussion of findings and their implications for the role of public libraries as resistive institutions in th e neoliberal city."
"23" "Institutional and Neighborhood Context"
"24" "There are three  public  library systems within New York City ,  with  a combined total of  over 200 locations:   (1)   New York Public Library,  serving  the boroughs of Manhattan, the Bronx, and  Staten Island, (2) Brooklyn Pub lic Library, and (3) Queens Public Library.  Queens is the most ethnoracially diverse borough  of New York , and one with the highest percen tage of immigrants (48 %,  Lobo and Salvo ,  2013 ) . The Queens Library is a system of 62 local public libraries with over 2 million users , and is the highes t circulating US library (Gitner  and Rosenthal ,  2008).  Its funding comes overwhelmingly from the local city government, supplemented by the state and federal governments, as well as private donations. The library system aims to address the needs of the  diverse population of Queens.  With the help of a staff demographer, a  unionized  library staff representing dozens of language backgrounds, partnerships with local organizations, and a 40-year-old New Americans Program, the library assesses evolving needs of the local  population.  Special multilingual collections include books, CDs, videos, and periodicals in 25 languages, with the largest collections in the United States in Spanish and Chinese, and extensive collections in Korean, Russ ian, and South Asian lang uages ( Berger ,  2012;  Queens Library ,  2013).  The library explicitly aims to guarantee equity of access to the diverse population, and  to  “assist in the acculturation process and to help maintain a  connection t o native languages and cultures ”  (Queens Library ,  2017).  There is extensive programming in a multitude of languages, including workshops on immigration law, tenant right s, job training, parenting, and  health,  as well as literary events  and cultural performances. Local branches host English classes and resources  for English-language learners.  Library cards are easily obtained by presenting a piece of mail w ith a New York City address, and  many events and services are available even  to those without library cards."
"25" "This paper presents a case study of one local Queens library branch. It is housed i n a small and dilapidated  building located in a mixed neighborhood of small homes and apartments, light i ndustry, and car repair shops.  The library  is a five minute walk from a large public housing development, as well as several new buildings cate ring to affluent new residents , which herald gentrification .   The neighb orhood around the library is a  diverse mix of immigrant groups and native-born Americans of various  racial and class backgrounds : 41 percent non-Hispanic white, 31 percent Latino, 9 percent Black, 16 percent Asian, and 13 percent some other race, with 42 percent foreign born (Social Explorer, 2017).  In the decade prior to fieldwork, there was influx of new immigrant groups from many different Asian, Latin American, and North African countries. This wave of immigration was the latest in a long history of working class immigrants living in the neighborhood, creating a population diverse in immigration status, length of residence in the US, immigrant generation, and English language fluency.  As is typical of New York, where walking and public transportation are common ways of getting around,  residents tend to go to  the  local branch library, rather than travel to a branch in another neighborhood, unless seeking special services (Japzon and Gong ,  2005)."
"26" "Inside the extremely limited library space, patrons can access books, periodicals, CDs, and DVDs in languages such as Spanish, Greek, Urdu, Bengali, French,  Chinese, Italian, and Arabic.  There is a children’s section with a large selection in Spanish and , at the time of research, a children’s librarian who was  a local resid ent and native Spanish speaker.  A mong the staff members there were  also  native  speakers of C hinese, Portuguese, Greek, and Macedonian,  although no one on staff spoke  Arabic or one of the South Asian lang uages common among the patrons.  An important and m uch utilized library resource were  five computers with internet access and a printer available for library card holders for half hour intervals an d a  daily  limit of 20 printed pages.  The library provided  the scarce amenity of a public bathroom, as well as  air conditioning  in the summer. A city-run f ree  lunch program  for anyone under 18  operated out of the library basement during  the summer , filling in for public schools that normally provide this vital service .   Due to budget austerity,  at the time of research,  the library was  not  open on the weekends and was  open  in the evenings  only one  day per week.   Throughout its history, library hours fluctuated between an even more limited schedule to being open on the weekends and evenings.  Waves of budgets cuts also threatened the jobs of library sta ff, or as one of the staff members put it in an interview : “the politicians are always playing with our livelihoods.”   There were  young women hired as part time homework helpers  for the dozens of students who used the library after school .  As in other Queens Library branches, children’s  and young adults’  late fines on library materials can be “ read  down ” by reading in the library: fines are reduced one dollar per 30 minutes of reading to oneself or to another child."
"27" "Methodology"
"28" "The library was selected as a research site as part of a larger research project focusing on diverse public space  in one area  of  Queens .  I identified this library branch as a key public space in a resource-poor neighborhood. It appeared to reflect the demographic diversity of the area, and promised to serve as a rich research site for observing interactions, institutional norms, and the construction of social space. The library also allowed me to conduct ethnographic research year-round, which was more difficult in outdoor public spaces like parks and gardens.  I   conducted research from the summer of 2011 through the spring of 2013. I  used the library as a patron  at different times during its  open  hours . I borrowed and returned material, sat at the tables reading and writing,  attended programs,  signed up to use the c omputers and printed. I also became a volunteer in various capacities, including shelving books and tidying up DVDs and children’s materials and  helping children with homework . I  conducted semi-structured  interview s with  the manager of the library and another  staff member , and engaged in less  formal conversations with additional  library staff and patrons. Because this research was part of a broader project, I knew some of the patrons from other places in the neighb orhood.   I am a white middle class immigrant woman in my thirties. While there were many immigrant women who patronized the library, the vast majority were not white or middle class, and did so while accompanying their you ng children. Therefore, I was  a bit of an unusual  presence at the library, and my regular visits and participation in homework help positioned me more as a teacher/social worker type rather than someone visiting the library to meet her own needs.  Given my positionality, it is was easier for me to establish relationships with library employees than with some of the patrons to who perceived me an authority figure (although the latter facilitated patron relationships in other cases , when I was seen as resource ).  In some cases, being an immigrant and having grown up in New York helped me gain trust of other immigrants.  It is likely that I missed some of what was going on in the library among the working class immigrant patrons due to my language limitations and caution that some patrons might have exercised around a white middle-class appearing person."
"29" "I took abbreviated notes and wrote more detailed fieldnotes at the end of each fieldwork day. Altogether,  I spent more than  125 hours at the library, and wrote  close to 100 single-spaced pages of fieldnotes.  For comparison, I spent about five hours over several visits to another local branch of the Queens Library.  I analyzed data by reviewing the fieldnotes and interview transcripts, identifying emerging themes  and categories, such as different ways people used the library and types of assistance provided by differently positioned social actors.  I analyzed interactions among patrons and staff, and the meanings that people attached to the library.  I  began  fieldwork while immersed in a range  of theories about public space, diversity, and gentrification  – from  urban culturalism to contact theory and theories of everyday life  and  conviviality –  which shaped my fieldwork and questions.   Following an abductive approach,  I moved back and forth between empirical observation and theoretical generalizations, continuously returning to  my fieldnotes and the field   (Tavvory and Timmermans ,  2014) . I tested  my evolving theoretical explanations of the  nature of library space and its social relations ."
"30" "Uses and Users of the L ibrary"
"31" "In analyzing social patterns in this public library, I focused on the everyday use of the space to identify  practi ces and meanings that reinforced and challenged the dominant social order.  The public library that serves as the site for this case study accommodated a variety of users and uses.  After the nearby elementary schools let out around 3pm, dozens of  agitated and rowdy  children flood into the library, some with caretakers, and many without. Noise levels spike as the kids fill the children’s area, the homework help area, and spill over into the main library space. Every chair is taken, and kids, mothers, baby siblings, and some middle schoolers share the floor.   The library  was a safe supervised space  for children  to be until their parents could  care for  them, as well as a place to get help with homework and socialize. These children were overwhelmingly Latino, Asian, and North African immigrants, including those with limited or no English skills, children of immigrants, and African American and Puerto Rican children.  Mothers spent time in the library to socia lize with each other, often in  languages  other than English , as their children sought help with their school worksheets from English-speaking staff and patrons."
"32" "The library’s computers and printer were used by older children and poor and working class  adults  for  whom the library provided  access to the internet.   A sampling of the uses I observed includes: adults checking their facebook pages and email, groups of  middle schoolers clustered aroun d a video game or a K-pop  video, young adults typing up community college homework, people editing and printing their resumes and filling out online job applications for entry level jobs, an elderly couple watching videos about the citizenship exam, men flipping between sports sites and pornography, other men looking up Thanksgiving recipes, and a woman  filling out  a  FEMA relief form 1 , and a man printing out images to give to his friend in prison who put them on handkerchiefs.     A few brought their own laptops  to connect to  the library’s wifi  network .   Public libraries are often the only source of free public internet access in communities , as was the case here  ( Bertot,   McClure,  and  Jaeger ,  2008 ).   Some older adults were regulars for whom the library was part of a daily routine  and a place to com panionably share the local paper.     African American women of all ages came into the library to browse through and borrow from the book collection, particular ly from  the shelves of urban literature.  Some locals,  such as  residents of the nearby public housing, came in for short and long periods of time to chat with the staff and each other.   T he library was also a space more comfortable than the homes (or lack of homes) for some patrons in terms of space, temperature, and potential for companionship , as I learned both from speaking to patrons and overhearing their statements to that effect."
"33" "In its current state, this particular library meets many needs, but certainly not all, and s everal  categories  of people are rare at the library. Despite a collection of teen-oriented graphic novels, there are few high school age children, who likely prefer a space with more privacy than this one-room library can provide. Since the library is not wheelchair-accessible and has a considerable number of steps at the entrance, mobility- impaired people cannot get in. Although  the neighborhood experienced  an influx of white middle class  US-born   residents , few in this group ca me to the library. When they d id, they came and left  immediately after picking up materials they had put on h old through the library website ."
"34" "I visited another nearby library for comparison, as well as speaking to library staff on several occasions about their sense of the differences between neighborhood libraries.  The other library I observed was roomier, with newer computer equipment and larger staff.  One librarian  at the case study library reported that the newer, larger nearby branches were able to obtain grants from local non-profits for programming, but that their library was too small to interest these  organizations  in investing.  Another librarian said that the library system as a whole was focused on “renovating and doing flashy stuff …  like the Central Library with  the Children’s Discovery Center, ”  rather than improving the local branches.  He also explained that at  larger and better resourced local libraries,  librar ians  themselves  did not help with homework,  as he often did,  but tha t “I am s ure other, smaller branches…  have some of this issue too because if you don’t have enough staff, and you don’t have an activity assistant, or you don’t have like, homework helpers, or volunteers.”"
"35" "Reproduction of  Hegemonic  I deologies  and Social Relations"
"36" "American public libraries have a long history as spaces where powerful elites attempt to shape the behavior of the working class and immigrant urban populations ( Augst ,  2001 ; Wiegand ,  2015). Neither are libraries so isola ted from their social contexts  that they fail  to replicate at least some of the prevailing processes of exclusion and stratification.  In the Queens Library bran ch analyzed here, the treatment of immigrants and non-English speakers by the staff  occasionally  highlighted the ways in which the library was a space where  ideologies of assimilation  could be  reproduced."
"37" "Queens Library has a dual mission of acculturation and maintenance of immigrant languages and cultures  (Queens,  2017) . In the context of New York City, linguistic diversity and accommodation is coupled with an  expectation that  immigrants learn English  (A uthor xxxx) . Part of a normative story of immigrant assimilation and success in the city, these expectations are  not pervasive but are certainly  present in the library as well. In one instance,  Jonah 2 ,  a native-born white staff person ,  reprimanded a recently arrived young Haitian man for not following turn-taking rules around computer use. As an aside to me, he expressed his suspicion that the man was pretending not to understand English to get out of following the rules.  In general,  Jonah  was quite friendly and accommodating of library patrons.  In  this instance , I happened to know  Jean-Pierre,  th e young Haitian  immigrant ,  from my position as a volunteer English conversation teacher at a nearby  charity , and he, indeed, had very poor English comprehension skills. No one at the library spoke his native language, as was the case for the even more numerous speakers of Urdu and Arabic, although materials in all these languages were available.  The staff person had acted on an assumption of a level of fluency in English, perhaps based on  Jean-Pierre’s youth , normalizing it, rather than attempting to accommodate linguistic diversity  or at least giving him the benefit of the doubt ."
"38" "While some staff members were themselves immigrants or children of immigrants and expressed solidarity with immigrant patrons,  Mrs. Harrison,  an older African American  employee  consistently expressed frustration with language difficulties among immigrant patrons  and was rude even to children of immigrants who spoke English fluently .  While this worker’s selectively  unfriendly demeanor and tone were  an outlier at the library, it remained unaddressed by other staff.  Mrs. Harrison’s treatment of immigrant patrons reflected tensions in the neighborhood at -large over  demographic changes  resulting from  the recent influx of new immigrant groups from North A frican, Asian, and Latin American countries .  Another staff member,  Maria,  herself a Latina immigrant but one who has lived in the neighborhood for many decades,  told me: “Remember that movie,  The Invasion of the Body Snatchers ? A while ago, a lot of Asians moved to [the neighborhood] and I would tell my sisters, ‘It’s  the invasion  of the Asians . ”  Maria was particularly struck by  the rapid influx of Pakistani and Bangladeshi immigrants.  Deprived, isolated, and long racially segregated, the area around the library continually hosted new waves of struggling immigrants who were able to find  shelter  in its substandard  and crowded housing stock, as well as, increasingly, diversifying the mostly African American and Puerto Rican public housing. While there were no overt racialized conflicts,  multiple poor and marginalized populations relied on  the same set of  eroding public services like schools and libraries , which  were continually gutted by budget cuts."
"39" "Tensions over English-speaking abilities among immigrant patrons of the library also indicated the pull of assimilative ideologies tied up with the function of the library  system as an acculturative institution.  For example, t he library organized events such as Mother’s Day, Valentine’s Day, and even Christmas celebrations that engaged discourses of diversity and tolerance while communicating  typically American versions of such holidays.  Maria, the Latina staff person mentioned above,  criticized immigrant mothers for not trying to l earn English hard enough : “T he only thing that frustrates me to no end, is that the moms do not make an effort to get out of from, from wherever they are.”   This criticism of mothers, specifically, fits with the broader cultural tendency to blame bad parenting choices of impoverished mothers   for their children’s problems. Dodson (2015) identified this narrative  of personal blame  as a major way in which middle class  workers , such as teachers, made sense of working with  poor  children  who struggled  with instability and lack of resources.  Thus, the library was an institutional space that sometimes reproduced the social order, particularly through ideologies of assimilation and personal responsibility  that undermined the right to this space by immigrants and their families .  While surfacing occasionally, th ese narratives were not central, nor seemed to pose a significant challenge to access.  More often than not,  the library  wa s  instead  a promising case of moving towards solidarity  and anti-capitalist logics  (Wright 2013)."
"40" "Solidarity and resistance"
"41" "T he library provided for a diverse set of needs among  the  local population, including those underserved by other institutions and lacking access to informational and material resources.  In doing so, the library distributed  resources  based  on  need, creating an  emancipatory  alternative to  the capitali st market, and exemplifying  Wright’s ( 2010 )  concept of real  – if imperfect –  utopia. The library improve d  the living conditions of marginalized urban residents, helping even out access to re sources and knowledge.  Furthermore, the library revealed emancipatory potential beyond the ways in which it distributed resources. In their everyday exchanges and interactions, library staff and patrons created a moral underground space where they resisted economic inequalities and ideologies that supported  the neoliberal social order."
"42" "Like all librarie s, the library profiled here had  rules about the use of its space and materials. Patrons are not supposed to eat or drink, shout, or run, and there are processes for checking out and returning books and DVDs and using the computers.  Other rules are less formal and arise from the use of the library as a public sp ace (Shepard and Smithsimon ,  2011 ).  For instance, while library staff do make attempts to enforce turn-taking around computer use, the users often negotiate with each other  without staff intervention , letting  someone with particular ly urgent  needs  jump ahead in line, or donating their daily allotment of printing to each other.  For instance, one day, I observed an older white woman  ask a Latina middle schooler to use her account to print. The woman had signed herself up for a computer, but did not actually want to take it, as she just needed to print and had used up her allotment on utility bills earlier in the day. The girl, who had not been on the list of a computer, logged into her account so she could print. The librarian, holding the clipboard with the computer line, watched as they negotiated, as the staff tended to do. I t is regular patrons who can be observed enforcing rules over computer use when newcomers break them or teenagers ignore them."
"43" "What is notable in this library, however, is how much the rules are bent by the staff to accommodate people’s needs. For instance, library staff may look the other way when children  eat or drink in the library , and they tolerate  a high level of noise and running around in the afterschool hours. O ne fall afternoon, there was a new volunteer – a white woman in her late 30s – who sat among the chaos of the children’s area attempting to help a small Latino boy with his homework. She looked visibly discomfited, and got up several times to ask  Maria  whether she could not make the children be quite.  Maria  patiently explained that she would not do so, and point ed  out that the low ceilings amplified the noise. To me,  Maria  and other  library workers   not ed  the children’s need for activity after hours of sitting and doing worksheets  in school .  Similarly, library staff defended the children and advocated for them in interactions with guest service providers, such as a visitor running the gardening prog ram . This white middle class gardening enthusiast  was seen as too harsh  because she did not allow the children to harvest produce . Library staff allowed children to use the office phone to call home, bandaged cuts and scrapes, and celebrated milestones like birthdays and graduations."
"44" "A wider-than-expected range of behavior was tolerated among adult users of the library.  The library often sounded  like a coffee shop, with multiple friendly con versations. Some people even mad e calls on their cellphones from within the library.  Sleeping patrons were left alone.  (Notably, at the comparison library, I observed library staff yell at sleeping patrons to wake up.   When I asked  Jonah,  the librarian at the case study library about it, he said that he would not yell to wake people up . At the same time,  Jonah  expressed  sympathy for the other , female,  librarians, who had to deal with intoxicated  male  day laborers who came from the bar across the street.)  Homeless people ca me in to us e the bathroom and rest, and were  usually not disturbed.   The staff exhibited a supportive attitude towards  patrons with  mental illness , picking up the slack for the set of institutions that serve this population .  For instance, one of the regulars, an African American man in his thirties, often talked to himself while in the library.  Jonah and another white man on library staff, Dino,  were concerned that the content of these conversations was sometimes violent . Yet, Jonah and Dino  explained that  this patron  was quite self-aware of his behavior and tried to normalize it by wearing a broken Bluetooth headphone so it would look like he was talking on the phone. Like they do with other regulars, the  Jonah and Dino  knew of this patron’s interests, and showed him relevant new books when they came in.  Dino  pointed out that  Rob,  a middle aged Latino  janitor ,   who  had been working there the longest , remembered when this patron was younger and acted “normal” .   For the library staff, t olerance toward sleeping, body odor, and the use of the library by the homeless  to meet   basic needs, as well as not calling the police, fell within the institutional imperative.  Jonah  explained that the Queens Library does not want to hear about problems like that and does not want them to call police  because it would  conflict  with their  image of welcoming immigrants.  Thus, even as some institutional aspects of the library undermined the right to this space by immigrants and their families, others legitimated the presence of marginalized and stigmatized people."
"45" "In addition to placing a high premium on accommodating the needs of patrons, which  clashed  with keeping the library quiet and food-free, and providing a safe space for  marginalized members of the community, the library filled in gaps left in the provision of services by other institutions. This was especially clear in the case of the public school system.   In addition to providing help with homework and school projects, library staff were cognizant of the high stakes  standardized tests  faced by the mostly poor and immigrant children visiting the library. They used  scarce  library resources to photocopy test  prep booklets for the children, trying to bridge the gaps in preparation in the overcrowded schools, particularly for children whose parents were unfamiliar with the testing system, and had difficulty navigating it due to language and literacy barriers.  Despite her frustration over what she saw as their lack of initiative in escaping their circumstances, Maria reported  accompan ying  Spanish-speaking mothers to parent-teacher conferences on her own time.   Maria  expressed a strong sense of solidarity with fellow immigrants, denouncing the disrespectful behavior of the local school principal towards immigrant parents: “I will tell you because you are an immigrant too. They just want to keep the immigrants down… They want our kids to be wiping their bottoms.”  On days that they got their test scores or report cards, children rushed into the library to share their results with  the library staff and regulars ."
"46" "The library serve d  as a local node for access to information  and resources for adults .   Library staff provided crucial bridges between public agencies and city residents.  Staff helped write and translate letters from government agencies and bill collectors, and assisted in filling out forms to get government benefits like food stamps or  to  apply for jobs.  They referred battered women to shelters.  As  Jonah  explain ed to me in an interview:"
"47" "Ever since I came here.. it’s not necessarily.. it’s not technically my job to do that… but you end up doing it because it’s the focus of this library. You have to make adjustments. Not everything is going to be under your  [job]  title."
"48" "By bending the rules and working wel l beyond their job descriptions – even as they faced threats of layoffs –  the staff made the library into a site of the moral underground (Dodson ,  2015) . They  help ed  the struggling locals to patch together resources or simply provid ed  a safe place.  Like some of the teachers of poor children that Dodson (2015) interviewed, these librarians have let go of their job descriptions to embrace the much wider range of services, even describing their work as that of social workers.  Branch library staff work in difficult conditions for relatively low pay, yet their college degrees and unionized positions place them in much more secure economic situation than most of the patrons they help.  Daily confronted with evidence of  urban inequality and the erosion of the public safety net, library staff derived meaning from siding with their patrons, even if it meant going above and beyond their duties and bending rules.  For some, like  Maria,  who was herself a n  immigrant, the choice to do much more than what was required of her to meet the needs  of  struggling families was a matter of  immigrant  solidarity .   For others   who blurred lines of professional roles,  like Jonah and Dino,  it is  their  identi fication  of the library as a key local space for addressing urgent needs of a marginalized population  that  pushed  them to bend  the  rules. In this way, the library became a moral underground space, driven by a combination of the institutional prerogatives of the larger organization, high-need local population, staff members’ moral orientations, and small size where  specialization and pr ofessional boundaries were  more difficult to enact.  Thus,  aside from the emancipatory potential of the library stemming from its  non-market resource distribution system,  it became a space of resistance to the neoliberal urban order through the everyday work of its staff."
"49" "As a resistive space, the library fostered  flexibility and even elision of  class  hierarch ies . Given  its  small  size, the staff took on a wide range of tasks to fill in for coworkers who were on breaks, late, or out.  For example, I observed  Rob,  the Latino custodian ,  sit in the library manager chair behind a desk, pick up the clipboard containing the line for computers, and call the next patron. He did so when he noticed an open computer and his supervisor ’s  absence from his desk.  Rob  also picked up the phone when it rang and wrote down requests for DVDs.  The use  of space by the patrons, too, was  indicative of this flexibility with hierarchie s. While the head librarians took  turns sitting behind a desk at a computer, the patrons routinely circle d  the desk to come around and stand or sit next to the librarians to chat and look at the compute r screen together while they were  getting  help. All but one librar y worker –  the selectively rude Mrs. Henderson  –   were  usually addressed by their first names, although the children add ed  Mr. or Ms.  It is not that the library became a place without hierarchy as library workers did exercise power over patrons on other occasions . B ut the fluidity of these hierarchies complemented the bending of the rules and professional job descriptions, and stood in contrast to what I observed at an other local library, where such  routine interactions reinforced power differentials."
"50" "While much assistance  flowed from the better resourced , more educated staff to  the patrons, there were also many examples of  everyday  help and solidarity among the patrons.   In addition to  the  staff, fellow library patrons, especially the regulars,  provided  homework help to children. Children would approach these regulars, some of whom they knew from the community, and others only through the library, and asked for assistance.   On multiple occasions, I watched very young children come up to  Jorge, a slight Latino man in his 30s, who spoke haltingly with a speech impediment and appeared to have a mild development disability. Despite these difficulties, Jorge was able to help the youngest of students with homework. One April afternoon, a young Latina first grader ran up to Jorge to ask, in English, what time he would be in tomorrow because her mother (who spoke Spanish only) wanted to know when they could count on his help. Later that same afternoon, I could hear Jorge helping another young child with an assignment, saying “You can write…”."
"51" "People who were less computer literate asked those who were more proficient for help in looking up information or negotiating online forms, email, and websites.   One of the regulars, Jane, an older US-born white woman who was living in public housing after a spell of homelessness, was particularly popular with both children looking for homework help and adults who did not know how to use computers or internet. One time, I was using a computer between Jane and  David,  a middle aged Puerto Rican man.  Squinting at the screen through a broken pair of glasses, David was trying to fill out an online form.  As on other occasions, h e asked Jane for help with spelling various words, which she did, but still had trouble typing them. I typed the words on my screen in a large font, and he painstakingly copied them, musing that this was why it is good to get an  education an d explaining, sadly, that he had  been working since he was 11.  After observing Jane help  multiple middle school age children with school projects, I asked her about her helpfulness and she told me a story of helping a girl she had never met before with a  school  report on the Bubonic plague, which involved showing her how to copy and paste from Wikipedia  and print within  the daily all otment of p ages .  Jane said that  one of the librarians intervened to  claim  that Wikipedia was kn own for false information, and she  defended her strategy by explaining how to use Wikipedia as a research tool. At times like these, Jane was able to not only provide help to fellow library users but to buttress her own identity as a competent citizen.  One day, while updating me on her facebook feuds, she kept being interrupted by an older white woman who had serious trouble operating the computer. This woman complimented Jane on how well she understood computers, and Jane generously, but with obvious pride, said: You should have seen me two years ago, I couldn’t do anything!” Jane was occasionally confused for a staff person.  Notably, this was not because  her  presentation of self conformed to the stereotypes about female librarians: she  spoke in a booming voice and laughed loudly, and  often  wore  a combination of denim and bright pink  that exposed extensive tattoos ."
"52" "N etworks of assistance  among the patrons added another dimension to the moral underground space of the library. Breaking down assumptions stemming from neoliberal ideologies about individual self-improvement and family responsibility, adults helped children who were not their own, in ways that may have drawn scrutiny  and criticism from middle class  teachers and parents. These unofficial helpers challenged dominant perceptions of competent tutor or mentor figures, due to their own stigmatized status as  variously unemployed, disabled, and poor. Adults helped each other, as well, pooling skills they may have developed through access to resources, such as computers and internet, at the public library itself. The moral underground space of the library housed inte ractions and relationships of resistance to the  alienating  social order, with rules bent to provide assistance across class lines, and fostering opportunities for collective empowerment.  Although in some ways, the library  reproduced  the  hegemonic social order,  it was  not all encompassing. Emancipatory practices flourished, driven by the needs of the people using the library space , pointing to the library as an institution with the potential to challenge the logic s  of capitalism."
"53" "Conclusion"
"54" "Although this small public library  occasionally  replicated some hegemonic ideologies, particularly those about immigrant assimilation, it was, at the same time, a resistive space that   featured  cross-class  and intra-class  solidarities  and helped struggling urbanites meet some of their needs in a context of  neoliberal  austerity .  As Wright (2013) pointed out for public libraries in general, this library d istributed resources  outside of capitalist  market  exchange,  making it a real  utopia.  But this  library functioned as an alternative space of resistance in ways that extended beyond the principles of resource distribution typical of all  public  libraries.  D aily life at the library was not fully colonized by the capitalist order, with users making the space their own through everyday practices (Lefebvre  1991 ).  R ather than  merely  being an example of ordinary  interstitial spaces , th e  bloom of  practices  of resistance, solidarity, and care holds out promise for emancipation  (Certeau  1991 ). This promise is particularly significant in the context of a stagge ringly unequal metropolis  where  business  elites  and real estate development trump  the right to the city  for working class New Yorkers (Moody ,  2007)."
"55" "It is not unusual to find users of urban space push back against the hegemonic representations of space through everyday practices that meet their needs  (Lefebvre  1991 ). More  striking i s when paid  employees   of a major urban institution like the Queens Library system   help create a moral underground space , driven by imperatives such as solidarity and care  (Dodson, 2013) .   The se  middle c lass  library  staff, albeit themselves with not much more than a  precarious  hold on middle class,  bent rules and  exceeded their job descriptions to assist marginalized groups of children and adults.  T he moral underground  space   facilitates a cross-class subverting of the system to help those in need. The  everyday  social interactions, relationships, and formal and informal norms that constitute the library help create a space that is conducive to resisting the dominant  social order . Even though ideologies emphasizing individual responsibility and atomizing citizens are present in the library as well, the practices of inter- and intra- class solidarity provide an alternative.  The library’s moral underground space was facilitated by the larger institutional framework of the Queens Library, which discouraged reliance on police,  and  the small size of the library that blurred hierarchies and placed staff as well as patrons in close proximity to each other’s strengths and needs.  In New York, the right of the wealthy to live in the most desirable locations and access the best resources is often painted as an inevitable and unquestioned condition of capitalism . L ocal libraries  can serve as  spa ces   where the presence and needs of poor and working class residents is  legitimated (Lefebvre  1996 ), in  ways that subvert  the imperative to shape them into compliant and assimilated subjects."
"56" "In this article, I have focused on a local library branch in Queens, New York, to investigate the formation of solidarities and resistance to the atomizing neoliberal order.  Due to the limitations of this study, I focus on the processes within one public library, and am not able to generalize to other libra ries within and outside Queens.  Yet, my results  suggest further exploration of the workings of interstitial non-market spaces within capitalist systems, with a focus on analysis of existing everyday practices that serve as a source of practical resistance strategies and critique (Certeau  2011 ). Mundane and taken for granted, public libraries allow us to see real utopias (Wright, 201 3 ) and imagine  other  alternatives. This ability to imagine alter natives  does not only make for a more hopeful vision for social change, but is a key  analytical method that is increasingly more difficult to put in to  practice. Today, s tudies and critiques of neoliberalism contribute to  a  sense of monolithic pervasiveness of the dominant order and induce a sense of paralysis regarding the possibility of change (Roelvink, 2016). This study does not only illuminate an overlooked but widespread alternative to the capitalist economy, but shows how it can become a space where ordinary individuals  resist authority and hegemonic representations of space and subvert the reproduction of the social order i n a myriad of small everyday acts of resistance and solidarity."
"57" "Outside of library studies, social scientists, particularly in the US, have rarely examined public libraries (Audunson, 2005).  For instance, libraries are public spaces, but scholars of public space are far more likely to focus on parks, sidewalks, and cafes  (Frederiksen ,  2015).  Yet, public libraries are important urban institutions.  In neoliberal cities like New York, in particular, public libraries can play a key role in meeting  the  needs of vulnerable and increasingly marginalized communities facing continually eroding public services and skyrocketing inequality.  At the same, libraries themselves are under assault. In cities suffering the effects of the foreclosure crisis, the dearth of property taxes can results in drastic cuts to library services at a time when local residents need them the most (Terrile ,  2016).  There is inequality across and within library systems (Sin ,  2011).  In this context,  those interested in exploring everyday dynamics of urban poverty and inequality,  everyday practices of resistance,  diversity management, immigrant adaptation, racial segregation, the role of public space   in building local democracies, and formal and informal social control, all would find fertile  research sites in unremarkable- seeming branches of the local public library. Conversely, expanding the study of public libraries beyond the field of library and information studies is much needed to create a fuller portrait of the contemporary city life."
"58" "References"
"59" "Anderson, Keith A., Chaniqua D. Simpson, and Lynette G. Fisher .  2012 . “ The Ability of Public Library Staff to Help Homeless People in the United States: Exploring Relationships, Roles and Potential. ”  J ournal of Poverty & Social Justice  20(2): 177–190."
"60" "Audunson, Ragnar .  2005 . “ The Public Library as a Meeting ‐ place in a Multicultural and Digital Context: The Necessity of Low ‐ intensive Meeting ‐ places. ”   Journal of Documentation  61(3): 429–441."
"61" "Augst, Thomas .  2001 . “ Introduction. American Libraries and Agencies of Culture. ”   American Studies  42(3): 5–22."
"62" "Berger, Joseph .  2012 . “ Queens Libraries Serve 59 Languages. ”  T he New York Times , January 2. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/03/nyregion/queens-libraries-serve-59-languages.html, accessed January 11, 2017."
"63" "Bertot, John Carlo, Charles R. McClure, and Paul T. Jaeger .  2008 . “ The Impacts of Free Public Internet Access on Public Library Patrons and Communities. ”   The Library Quarterly  78(3): 285–301."
"64" "Blank, B arbara. 2014 . \"Public libraries add social workers and social programs.\"  In  Th e New Social Worker: Th e Social Work Careers Magazine .   Fall 2014: 12-14."
"65" "Buschman, J ohn . 2003 .  Dismantling the public sphere: Situating and sustaining librarianship in the age of the new public philosophy . Westport, CT: Libraries   Unlimited/Greenwood"
"66" "Buschman, John .  2013 . “ Libraries and the Right to the City: Insights from Democratic Theory Prepared for the 2013 LACUNY Institute:  Libraries, Information, and the Right to the City. ”   Urban Library Journa l 19(1)."
"67" "Certeau, Michel de. 2011.  The Practice of Everyday Life . Oakland, California: University of California Press."
"68" "Chu, Clara, and Todd Honma .  2007 . “ Libraries as Contested Community and Cultural Space: The Bruggemeyer Memorial Library of Monterey Park, California. ”   AAPI Nexus: Asian Americans & Pacific Islanders Policy, Practice and Community  5(1): 33–57."
"69" "Dodson, Lisa .  2013 .  The Moral Underground: How Ordinary Americans Subvert an Unfair Economy.  New York: The New Press."
"70" "Frederiksen, Lia .  2015 .  “’ Our Public Library ’ : Social Reproduction and Urban Public Space in Toronto. ”   Women’s Studies International Forum  48: 141–153."
"71" "Gitner, Fred J. and Stuart A. Rosenthal. 2008 . \"Reaching immi grant populations: serving the culturally and  linguistically diverse, the Queens Library Model\".  BiD: textos universitaris de biblioteconomia i documentació , 21 (December) DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1344/105.000000336"
"72" "Gong, Hongmian, Andrea C. Japzon, and Cynthia Chen .  2008 . “ Public Libraries and Social Capital in Three New York City Neighbourhoods. ”   Tijdschrift Voor Economische En Sociale Geografie  99(1): 65–83."
"73" "Habermas, Jurgen .  1989 .  The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry  i nto a Category of Bourgeois Society . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press."
"74" "Hodgetts, Darrin, Ottilie Stolte, Kerry Chamberlain,  Alan Radley, Linda Nikora, Eci Nabalarua, and Shiloh Groot.  2008 . “ A Trip to the Library: Homelessness and Social Inclusion. ”   Social & Cultural Geography  9(8): 933–953."
"75" "Horrigan, John B.  2016.   “Libraries 2016”. Report.  Pew Research Center, September 2016 .  http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/09/09/2016/Libraries-2016/  "
"76" "Iveson, Kurt, and Ruth Fincher .  2011 . “’Just Diversity’  in the City of Difference. ”   In   The New Blackwell Companion to the City . Gary Bridge and Sophie Watson, eds. Pp. 407–418. Wiley-Blackwell."
"77" "Japzon, Andrea C., and Hongmian Gong .  2005 . “ A Neighborhood Analysis of Public Library Use in New York City. ”  Library Quarterly  75(4):446-463."
"78" "Lefebvre, H enri .  1991.   The Production of Space .  Oxford :  Blackwell ."
"79" "Lefebvre, Henri. 1996.  Writings on Cities . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell."
"80" "Lobo, Arun Peter, and Joseph Salvo.  2013.  \"A portrait of New York’s immigrant mélange.\"  Pp. 35-63 in  One out of three: Immigrant New York in the twenty-first century , edited by Nancy Foner . New York: Columbia University Press."
"81" "Mickiewicz, Paulina. 2015 .  “ Marginal scenes and the changing face of the urban public library: The Vancouver Downtown Eastside's Carnegie. ”   Observatorio (OBS*) , 125-143."
"82" "Molz, Redmond Kathleen, and Phyllis Dain.  1999.  Civic space/cyberspace: The American public library in the information age .  Cambridge, MA: MIT   Press."
"83" "Oldenburg, Ray. 1999.  The Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee Shops, Bookstores, Bars, Hair Salons, and Other Hangouts at the Heart of a Community . New York : Marlowe & Company."
"84" "Ottensmann, John R. 1994. “Evaluating Equity in Service Delivery in Library Branches.”  Journal of Urban Affairs  16 (2): 109-1 23 ."
"85" "Purcell, Mark. 2013. “Possible Worlds: Henri Lefebvre and the Right to the City.”  Journal of Urban Affairs  36 (1): 141–54."
"86" "Putnam, Robert. 2000.   Bowling Alone: The Collapse and  Revival of American Community.  New York: Si mon &  Schuster."
"87" "Roelvink, Gerda. 2016.  Building Dignified Worlds: Geographies of Collective Action . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press."
"88" "Queens Library. 2013. Queens Library Facts. 12464_rev. 9/14  https://www.queenslibrary.org/sites/default/files/about-us/Facts%20Sheet.pdf"
"89" "Queens Library. 2017. Collection Development.  http://www.queenslibrary.org/about-us/collection-development"
"90" "Sequeiros, Paula .  2013 . “ Reading in Public Libraries: Space, Reading Activities, and User Profiles ” .  Qualitative Sociology Review  9(3): 220–240."
"91" "Shen, Lan. 2013. “Out of Information Poverty: Library Services for Urban Marginalized Immigrants”.  Urban Library Journal ,  19 (1):"
"92" "Shepard, Benjamin Heim, and Gregory Smithsimon .  2011 .  T he Beach beneath the Streets Contesting New York City’s Public Spaces.  Albany, N.Y.: Excelsior Editions/State University of New York Press."
"93" "Sin, Sei-Ching Joanna .  2011 . “ Neighborhood Disparities in Access to Information Resources: Measuring and Mapping U.S. Public Libraries’ Funding and Service Landscapes. ”   Library & Information Science Research  33(1): 41–53."
"94" "Social Explorer. 2017. Tables: ACS 2015 (5-Year Estimates) (SE), ACS 2015 (5-Year Estimates), Social Explorer; U.S. Census Bureau."
"95" "Tavory, Iddo, and Stefan Timmermans. 2014.  Abductive Analysis: Theorizing Qualitative Research . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"96" "Terrile, Vikki C.   2016 . “ Public Library Support of Families Experiencing Homelessness. ”   Journal of Children and Poverty  22(2): 133–146."
"97" "Wiegand, Wayne A.   2015 .  P art of Our Lives: A People’s History of the American Public Library .  New York: Oxford University Press."
"98" "Wright, Erik Olin.  2010.  Envisioning  R eal  U topias . London: Verso."
"99" "Wright, Erik Olin .  2013 . “ Transforming Capitalism through Real Utopias. ”   American Sociological Review  78(1): 1–25."
"100" "Footnotes"
"101" "Hurricane Sandy devastated New York City during the period of fieldwork."
"102" "All names have been changed."
