1

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a
Unit of Analysis
Ricardo Licea
ABSTRACT
This article reviews the literature on the impact of phenotype on those classified as
Latino to ascertain whether Latino is a suitable unit of analysis. The literature shows
that phenotype has statistically significant effects on educational attainment, wages,
job prestige, and other life outcomes; further those with more European phenotypes
generally have more favorable life outcomes. These differences are obscured when
Latino is used as a unit of analysis, suggesting that Latino is not a viable unit of
analysis. Using Latino as a unit of analysis serves to misallocate resources intended
to benefit victims of racial discrimination to Latinos with European phenotypes, as
well as hiding the impact of discrimination on those with African or Amerindian
phenotypes. The origin of Latino as a political term that attempted to distance and at
the same time bring its members closer to whiteness makes its failure as a scientific
tool unsurprising. Further research is needed on the impact of phenotype, and other
areas of heterogeneity such as culture, religion, and language.
This article explores whether the classification of a phenotypically heterogeneous
population as Latino, is sufficient to counter the importance that race, or phenotype has
historically held in the United States in determining life outcomes. If all members of the

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

2

Latino category are treated the same because they belong to the same Latino category,
then one would expect that their phenotype would have no or little impact on life
outcomes. However, if phenotype is indeed significant then consistent with historical
precedent those Latinos with a more European phenotype should be advantaged.
Moreover, if phenotype is significant using Latino as a unit of analysis is departing from
a false premise that Latinos are a homogenous group with shared experiences.
In considering the impacts of phenotype, it is not feasible to simply ask Latinos
what their race is and assuming that this correlates with their phenotype. Latinos have
been constantly told that they are Latino and not Amerindian, black, white, or some
combination thereof. The absence of mixed-race categories also leads to inaccurate
reports. (Roth 2010). The perils of relying on self-identification are shown in the
predictively distorted results produced by the Census, which in 2010 found that Mexican
Americans were 55.6 percent white, 41.5 percent some other race, and only 1.5 percent
American Indian and Alaska Native (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2011). These results
compare very poorly with the results from the last Mexican census that asked for the
respondent’s race, which found that 29.16 percent of Mexicans were Indigenous, 59.33
percent were mixed race, and 9.8 percent were white (Departamento de la Estadistica
Nacional 1928:62).
Phenotype can also be measured more directly through facial features and skin
color. Although, these measurements are not entirely objective (Ben-Zeev et al. 2014;
Hill 2002), they are superior to relying on distorted self-identification surveys. Therefore,
this article considers only studies that measured phenotype. I have also included specific

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

3

nationalities when that information is provided. Different countries of Latin America
have different racial compositions and so including this information can provide some
clues as to the impact of phenotype. Further, the dates in which the underlying data was
collected are included, as the strength and impact of classification as Latino category
should have grown since its creation in 1970 (Rumbaut 2006). If phenotype continues to
be significant decades after the creation of Latino category, then we can question when, if
ever, classification as Latino will erase the significance of phenotype. The studies
reviewed show that phenotype continues to have a significant effect, with those Latinos
with a more European phenotype more likely to attain superior life outcomes. The
continued significance of phenotype, despite nearly 50 years of efforts to racialize and
homogenize Latinos, calls into question the viability of Latino as a unit of analysis.
PHENOTYPE’S EFFECT ON EXPERIENCES OF DISCRIMINATION
Perhaps the simplest way to ascertain whether phenotypical heterogeneity has any impact
is to survey those classified as Latinos about their experiences with discrimination. If
Latinos are discriminated because of their status as Latinos qua Latinos then their
phenotype should not matter, however if Latinos suffer discrimination differentially
according to their phenotype then one can conclude that phenotype still matters.
The 1979 National Chicano Survey in which phenotype was measured by skin
color and physical features on a continuum from light to dark and from European to
Native American (Arce, Murguia, and Frisbie 1987), found that those respondents in the
dark/Indian group reported a significantly greater amount of perceived discrimination
than did the “medium” group or the light/European respondents (Arce et al. 1987). Over

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

4

20 years later, the 1998 to 2002 Mexican American Study Project also found that having
darker skin, as measured by interviewer rating (Ortiz and Telles 2012), results in more
experiences of discrimination (Ortiz and Telles 2012), and seemingly contradictorily that
skin color was unrelated to experiences of stereotyping (Ortiz and Telles 2012). Darker
men experienced more discrimination then lighter men or women (Ortiz and Telles
2012). The 2004 Chicago Area Study in which 76.19 percent of the respondents were
Mexican, and 12.06 percent were Puerto Rican (Uzogara 2018), and that measured skin
tone based on interviewer rating (Uzogara 2018), found that among those with higher
socioeconomic statuses, income and education, those with the medium and dark skin
reported higher levels of discrimination (Uzogara 2018). Data from the 2006 Latino
National Survey, which interviewed Dominicans, Cubans, and Puerto Ricans, and in
which respondents described their own skin color (Araujo-Dawson 2015), shows that
lighter-skinned Latinos were less likely to report experiencing discrimination than darkskinned Latinos (Araujo-Dawson 2015). Latinos who describe themselves as having a
dark skin tone perceived more discrimination at the workplace and in their neighborhood
(Wilkinson and Earle 2012).
These findings are also supported by other measures of discrimination such as the
impact of phenotype on socioeconomic status and educational attainment.
PHENOTYPE’S EFFECT ON SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS

The 1979 National Chicano Survey found substantial earning advantages for those with a
light phenotype when compared to those with a dark phenotype but no statistically

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

5

significant difference in earnings among Mexican American men with medium and light
phenotypes (Telles and Murguia 1990). The differences persisted even after controlling
for factors known to affect earnings (Telles and Murguia 1990). Further, despite
respondents having achieved higher levels of socioeconomic status then their fathers the
same statistically significant pattern in which those with lighter skin and more European
features had higher socioeconomic status was reproduced amongst respondents (Arce et
al. 1987). For Mexican American women skin color had a positive, but near zero
relationship with income (Hunter 1999). Neither did skin color correlate to greater access
by women to high status, well-educated spouses (Hunter 1999), although in qualitative
interviews some Mexican American women expressed their belief that lighter skin was
advantageous in the dating or marriage market (Hunter 1999). An article using the same
data from the 1979 National Chicano Survey, but considering only skin color and not
whether respondents’ had a more Amerindian or European features, described the
differences in income per level of lightness as statistically insignificant, although it found
that light skinned Mexican Americans were more likely to have higher incomes (Allen,
Telles, and Hunter 2000). It’s likely that studies considering only skin color, without
considering facial features and hair texture are not fully capturing the effects of
phenotype. The San Antonio Heart Study found that the skin color of Mexican Americans
was darkest in the low-income neighborhood, lighter in the middle-income neighborhood,
and lightest in the high-income neighborhood, suggesting an inverse relationship of social
class and Native American admixture (Relethford et al. 1983). Skin color data was
measured using a Photovolt Model 670 portable reflectance spectrophotometer following

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

6

standard methods (Relethford et al. 1983); measurements were taken at the upper inner
arm (Relethford et al. 1983). Whereas interviewer ratings of skin color are to some extent
vulnerable to bias the use of a scientific instrument negates that possibility while
confirming the results obtained through interviewer ratings. The 2004 Chicago Area
Study in which 76.19 percent of the respondents were Mexican, and 12.06 percent were
Puerto Rican (Uzogara 2018) found that the lightest skinned had higher socioeconomic
status (Uzogara 2018). Socioeconomic status was a combination of income and education
(Uzogara 2018). The 1992 to 1994 Los Angeles Study of Urban Inequality in which the
Latino respondents were mostly of Mexican and Central American origin found that
employment discrimination constrains those with darker skin, as measured by a
“coethnic” interviewer (Morales 2008), to lower paying and less desirable jobs. Dark
skinned workers were more likely to be employed in ethnic niches (Morales 2008), while
those with medium and lighter skin were 72 percent less likely to be a niche worker
(Morales 2008). Regardless of human capital the lighter skinned are better able to gain
employment in non-niche work (Morales 2008). The 1990 Latino National Political
Survey found that among Mexican and Cuban Americans the lighter skinned, as
measured by interviewer rating (Espino and Franz 2002), had jobs with higher
occupational prestige ratings, even when controlling for factors that affect performance in
the labor market (Espino and Franz 2002). However, among Puerto Ricans those with
medium-skin tones had the highest occupational ratings, although not at a statistically
significant level (Espino and Franz 2002).

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

7

Among Puerto Ricans residing in New York those classified as black by
enumerator observation in the 1950 Census were 37 percent more likely to suffer from
especially severe underemployment (Katzman 1968). An estimated 19 percent of the
underemployment was due to discrimination on the basis of color (Katzman 1968).
However only minor differences were found in ability to obtain white-collar employment
(Katzman 1968). The 1950 census was conducted before the Latino concept existed and
before racial self-identification was permitted (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2002). The
1992 to 1994 Boston Social Survey among Latinos who were mainly from Puerto Rico
and the Dominican Republic (Gomez 2000), found that those with lighter skin were more
likely to own homes and to be married (Gomez 2000). Men with darker skin had lower
earnings, however skin color did not affect women’s earnings (Gomez 2000). The effects
of skin color on women might have been muted by the types of jobs available to women
(Gomez 2000). Dark skin continued to have a negative effect even when controlling for
human capital variables, meaning that phenotype caused labor market discrimination
(Gomez 2000).

The 2006 Latino National Survey found that Latinos who perceive themselves as
being very light skinned have higher household income levels than those who identify as
being dark skinned or as being neither very dark nor very light in complexion (Wilkinson
and Earle 2012). A study of “Hispanic Influentials” in business found them to be
particularly light skinned (Zweigenhaft and Domhoff 2006).

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

8

Segregation and exposure to the criminal justice system are also influenced by
phenotype. Data from the 1990 Latino National Political Survey shows that darker
skinned Puerto Ricans and Cubans were more segregated, while dark skinned Mexicans
were also more segregated although the effect was statistically nonsignificant (South et
al. 2005). The difference might be explained by the African features of the darker skinned
Puerto Ricans or Cubans (South et al. 2005). Discrimination against African and Native
Americans has historically taken different forms; therefore, it should not be surprising if
Latinos with an Amerindian phenotype are discriminated in a different and likely lesser
extent than those with a black phenotype. Data from the first four waves spanning 1994
to 2008 of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health shows that
Latinos with darker skin tones, as rated by an interviewer (Finkeldey 2014), were more
likely to be arrested as an adult (Finkeldey 2014). Skin color was measured as either
white, light brown, medium brown, dark brown, and black (Finkeldey 2014); each darker
skin tone was associated with a 25 percent increase in the odds of arrest (Finkeldey
2014). Controlling for factors like delinquency and substance use reduced the impact of a
darker skin tone to an increased risk of arrest of 18 percent (Finkeldey 2014).
Phenotype’s Effect on Educational Attainment

Phenotype can impact educational attainment, not because of any intrinsic relationship
between phenotype and intelligence, but because of the direct and indirect impacts of
discrimination. According to data from the 2012 American National Election Study
“whites” find lighter, as measured by interviewer rating Latinos (Hannon 2015), to be

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

9

more intelligent (Hannon 2015). Likewise, interviewers in the 1979 National Chicano
Survey judged the lighter and more European looking respondents as having a greater
comprehension of questions and of being more articulate in their responses (Hurtado
1994). The more European looking respondents were also judged as more cooperative
(Hurtado 1994). These stereotypes seem to have a significant effect on educational
outcomes.

Data from the 1979 National Chicano Survey shows that among Mexican
Americans, those with a more European phenotype, had the most education (Murguia and
Telles 1996). This difference persists even after controlling for other variables that might
impact educational attainment such as generational status, religion, and region (Murguia
and Telles 1996). However, analyzing the same data but considering only skin color
shows that skin color was only a significant predictor of educational attainment for
Mexican American women, but not for men (Hunter, Allen, Telles 2001). Judgments
about an individual’s racial or ethnic identity are not made based solely on skin color, but
also consider other aspects of phenotype like facial features and hair texture—studies that
consider only skin color are unlikely to fully capture the effects of phenotype. The 1992
to 1994 Boston Social Survey found that among Latinos in Boston who were mainly from
Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic (Gomez 2000), those with lighter skin had more
education (Gomez 2000). Data from wave 4 (2008 to 2009) of the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health, shows that among Mexican Americans those with white skin
were 27 percent more likely to complete high school, while those with dark brown skin
were 24 percent less likely to obtain a baccalaureate or more advanced college degree

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

10

than those with a light brown skin tone (Ryabov 2016). For Puerto Ricans those with a
white skin tone were 41 percent more likely to graduate from college with a bachelor’s
degree than those with a light brown skin tone (Ryabov 2016). For Puerto Ricans skin
color was significant even after controlling for parental occupation and occupational
prestige (Ryabov 2016). Data from the 1995, 1996, and 2001 waves of the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health and Adolescent Health and Academic
Achievement shows that the effect of skin tone on GPA was not statistically significant
among Latinos (Thompson and McDonald 2016). However, the trend was for those with
lighter skin to have higher GPAs (Thompson and McDonald 2016). The 2006 Latino
National Survey shows that Latinos who identify as being very light skinned have more
education than those who identify as dark skinned or as neither very dark nor very light
(Wilkinson and Earle2012). A survey of 81 Latina college students in Western
Massachusetts (Telzer and Vazquez-Garcia 2009), also found a larger proportion than
would be expected were light skinned (Telzer and Vazquez-Garcia: 2009).

DISCUSSION
The studies reviewed show that phenotype has a significant impact on life outcomes of
Latinos, and that consistent with historical practice non-European phenotypes are
disfavored. Those classified as Latinos perceive discrimination as affecting more severely
those with darker skin and other non-European features. This perception is borne out by
surveys across nationalities, locations, and time periods consistently finding that those
with more European phenotypes are more likely to have higher incomes, jobs with higher

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

11

occupational prestige, more education, be less segregated, and less likely to be arrested.
Further they are more likely to have these things when controlling for other variables
known to affect those outcomes.
Only one study found that Latinos with less European phenotypes were likely to
have equivalent or superior life outcomes to Latinos with more European phenotypes at a
statistically significant level. The 1990 Latino National Political Survey found that at a
non-statistically significant levels Puerto Ricans with medium-skin tones had more
prestigious jobs than light-skinned Puerto Ricans (Espino and Franz 2002). This did not
extend to Cuban or Mexican Americans (Espino and Franz 2002), and the result for
Puerto Ricans is contradicted by data on Puerto Ricans from the 1950 U.S. Census,
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, the 2004 Chicago Area Study, and the
2006 Latino National Survey. Because the finding for Puerto Ricans with medium-skin
tone is not statistically significant and is not replicated it can be discarded as an outlier.
The significance of phenotype to Latinos extends from before the concept of
Latino was created as shown by data from the 1950 U.S. Census, to around the time the
concept of Latino was created as shown by the 1979 National Chicano Survey, to decades
after efforts to racialize Latinos began as shown by the 1990 Latino National Political
Survey, the 2004 Chicago Area Study, and the 2012 American National Election Study.
The boundaries of the American idea of “white” have varied and at certain points
it has excluded various European groups now considered white. Nonetheless, it has
always been more advantageous in the United States to have a European phenotype then

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

12

to have a Native American or African phenotype. It should not be surprising that this
extends to people of European descent who have been classified as Latinos. There is
injustice in that Latinos with European phenotypes are able benefit from “white
privilege” because of their appearance but are also able to claim a minority status in the
situations when that is advantageous. Meanwhile the underrepresentation and
discrimination of people of indigenous or African ancestry is hidden behind a Latino
façade that portrays all Latinos as “brown” but diminishes the discrimination experienced
by those who are actually “brown” or “black” by averaging it with a group that
experiences less discrimination. For example, a company that hires only Latinos with
European phenotypes as employees is not doing much for diversity but is rewarded by the
government’s and social scientists’ use of Latino as the relevant unit of analysis. The full
extent of the underrepresentation of those Latinos indigenous or African ancestry cannot
be understood and addressed when Latino is employed as the unit of analysis.
Much of the literature considers only skin color in studying effects of
“phenotype,” however this is an incomplete measure of phenotype and as such is likely to
produce only an incomplete measure of the effects of phenotype. Judgments about an
individual’s racial or ethnic identity are not made based solely on skin color, but also
consider other aspects of phenotype like facial features and hair texture. Studies that
measure only skin color do not reflect how phenotype is perceived in the world. Further,
skin color alone may not distinguish individuals with different phenotypes but with
similar skin colors. For example, someone with solely Amerindian ancestry might have a
similar skin tone to someone of mixed African and European ancestry or someone of

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

13

predominantly European ancestry with a tan. An example of the incompleteness of the
picture presented by skin color alone is found in the data from the National Chicano
Survey which gathered data on both skin color and whether respondent’s phenotype was
closer to that of a European or of a Native American. When considering only skin color
data from the 1979 National Chicano Survey appears to show that phenotype has only
minimal effect (Allen 2000; Hunter 2001). However, considering whether the
respondent’s appearance is more European or Native American shows that phenotype
does produce statistically significant effects on the life outcomes of Latinos (Murguia and
Telles 1996; Telles and Murguia 1990). More studies should emulate the approach taken
in the 1979 National Chicano Survey.
Skin color alone may not explain why dark-skinned Mexicans are less segregated
than dark skinned Puerto Ricans and Cubans (South et al. 2005), or why the gap between
light and dark skinned is greater among Puerto Ricans than among Mexican Americans
(Ryabov 2016). The likely explanation is that darker skinned Puerto Ricans and Cubans
are more likely to have black features, while darker skinned Mexicans are more likely to
have Amerindian features. Those with black features classified as Latinos might face
more discrimination then those with Amerindian features. Without studies that consider
both skin color and other aspects of phenotype it is difficult to know for sure.
Interviewer ratings of skin color may to some extent be subjective as higher status
respondents might be subconsciously assigned to the higher status phenotype.
Nonetheless the results from studies employing interviewer rating were consistent when
respondents were rated by a “coethnic” interviewer or when respondents rated their own

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

14

appearance. The San Antonio Heart Study used a Photovolt Model 670 portable
reflectance spectrophotometer to measure skin color (Relethford et al. 1983), and the data
came to the same conclusion.
The Latino category is a simplification of a more complex reality; ignoring
language, culture, and phenotypical differences. Massey (1993) has criticized the Latino
category as revealing “little or nothing about likely attitudes, behaviors, beliefs, race,
religion, class or legal situation in the United States” (p. 454). Massey (1993) notes that
the only thing reasonably certain about a Latino is that “either the person or some
progenitor once lived in an area originally colonized by Spain” (p. 454). Forbes (1992)
has rightly criticized the erasure of Native Americans, and the inordinate focus on Spain
that are a product of the Latino/Hispanic category. Considering only the indigenous
population in Mexico a United Nations Children’s Fund report found 67 different
Amerindian ethnic groups speaking 64 different languages (UNICEF 2009). Yet in the
United States this diversity is erased in favor of the imposition of a bland and artificial
Latino category. Forbes (1992) estimated that there were 8,100,000 persons of Native
American ancestry mislabeled as Hispanic. Gimenez (1989) argued that the
interpopulation variations “render statements about ‘Hispanics’ in general either
meaningless or suspect” (p. 560). The artificiality of the category creates a reliance on
imputed commonalities or stereotypes (Gimenez 1989). Although Gimenez analyzed
heterogeneity regarding immigration and nationality she came to the same conclusion as
Forbes; the Hispanic category is unworkable and should be abandoned.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

15

No other ethnic or racial group has been constructed in a similar fashion to
Latinos, although the underlying logic could be easily extended to the English, French,
and Portuguese empires (Forbes 1992). If Latino really captures something of unique
importance then it would behoove us to also include “Anglic,” “Gallic,” and “Lusitanic”
ethnic groups in our governmental forms and academic studies (Forbes 1992: 76). Of
course, one would undoubtedly fail to understand American society if it was analyzed
under the premise that all its members were part of one Anglic ethnic group. The focus
on a purportedly homogenous Latino group means the averaging of experiences.
The failure of Latino to provide a suitable unit of analysis can be traced to its
origins. After African American’s civil right struggles made governmental aid available
to African Americans, some Mexican Americans desirous of obtaining similar assistance
shifted from attempts to maintain a “white” identity to attempts to establish a “nonwhite” identity (Mora 2014). These activists worked with Puerto Rican activists as well
as the Nixon Administration, which was interested in buying political support, to tabulate
data so as to direct federal aid to the new minority group. (Mora 2014; Skrentny 2004).
Indeed, Richard Rodriguez has dubbed Richard Nixon “the dark father of Hispanicity,”
properly acknowledging the predominant role of the individual most responsible for its
creation (Rodriguez 2004). This was not the only attempt to leave the “white” group to
access the new benefits of minority status, but the attempts of “white ethnic” groups were
unsuccessful or aborted (Skrentny 2004). Only understood as the product of political
compromises does the Latino category make any sense.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

16

While it’s definitely true that labeling Mexican Americans as “white” was
problematic, creating a Latino category was not the correct way to address this issue and
is itself similarly problematic. First, all Latinos are not in fact viewed or treated in the
same way. The literature reviewed here shows that phenotype still affects socioeconomic
status. There are also many cultural differences subsumed by the Latino category.
Second, it is difficult to understand the experiences of those with indigenous or African
ancestry when they are grouped with those of European descent in studies of
discrimination. Consider that the four current “Latino” senators are of European or
predominantly European descent. Consider that the most prominent “Latino” Spanish
language journalist is a blue-eyed Mexican criollo. Most Latinos are not of European or
predominantly European descent, yet their exclusion doesn’t register when everyone is
“Latino.” The Latino category has often resulted in people of European descent
masquerading as people of color while keeping indigenous people out of leadership
opportunities (Forbes 1992). There is no reason why the descendants of European
colonists—who like their counterparts in the United States benefitted from genocide and
slavery—should be receiving the same types of aid originally intended for the victims of
slavery in the United States.
Creating the Latino Category was not a historic inevitably. Around the same time
that the Latino Category was created there emerged a new Chicano identity—this identity
emphasized the indigenous heritage that predominates in Mexico. Allowing Mexican
Americans to identify as indigenous or as a Chicano could have allowed for data to be
gathered on their socioeconomic statuses and for governmental assistance to have

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

17

followed. However, such an identity, tinged with radicalism, was not in favor with the
Nixon Administration. Instead, the Mexican Americans in the Nixon administration
seemed ambivalent about leaving the white group. This is reflected in the names they
chose Spanish Surnamed, Spanish Origin, and Hispanic. While saying they were not
white, they seemed hesitant to reluctant to distance themselves from whiteness. We can
see this reflected in statements made by Martin Castillo (2010), former director of the
Cabinet Committee on Opportunities for Spanish Speaking People, speaking at an event
at the Richard Nixon Library. Castillo begins by discussing the impending expiration of
the Interagency Committee on Mexican American Affairs which he had been appointed
to head.
I didn’t find this out till I got there it had a shelf life of six to eight months,
so I was going to be out of a job in six to eight months after I’d shut down
my practice you know. So, I figured something had to be done. So, I went
to the White House and I told them I want to get a bill through congress.
The president says well go do it. I never, how do you get a bill through
congress? Well we figured out a way and I’m sure that the White House
helped us, and we lobbied the Democrats; Senator Montoya, I remember
Congressmen Menhaym. Senator Javits, the big Republican guy from New
York with a constituency of Puerto Ricans helped us a great deal. Rubicoff
helped us a great deal. All the guys from Texas most of them helped us
Senator Tower certainly did, and it was a lot of Mexicans in Chicago,
Kansas City. The Cubans helped us because we changed it to Cabinet
Committee on Opportunity for the Spanish Speaking. And the reason that
came about is one we had to get it through congress, okay and we couldn’t
get it through with Mexicans in the word, just Mexican. Although we were
six to eight million the Puerto Ricans were one and half million the
Cubans were half a million, and the others were a million, million and a
half. We were the dominant group, but we didn’t have a national presence,
Bob Finch pointed that out to me one day when I was riding with him.
And I said, “Mister Finch don’t you think it’s a little unfair? All the
dollars that go out of here for the poverty programs for needy people,
minority people, the majority goes to blacks: I said why is that?” It just
doesn’t seem fair. He says, “well look around you, you see any brown

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

18

faces?” We were riding through Washington, I said no. He says, “well
neither do they.” So, I realized we had to have a national presence. So this,
this idea, we had to get the bill through to keep alive, and we had to
include the Hispanics too, Spanish Speaking, to get the votes, but it was
also a great idea because all of a sudden we had a national presence. All of
a sudden, we meant something to politicians. So now the first thing to do,
I suppose, and probably the greatest accomplishment that the cabinet
committee made, by the way we had to shape the bill, and we got it
through and we became the Cabinet Committee on Opportunity for the
Spanish Speaking and I was the first chairman. But the next thing we had
to do was get some money and the way you get money in the federal
government, especially for the minorities programs and everything by
numbers, they go by numbers. Politicians do everything by the numbers,
haven’t you noticed? So, to get numbers we had to get into the census as a
group, well that was pretty tricky business because after all Mexicans are
Caucasians, a lot of people forget that, but we all know that. And in fact, it
really bugs me when a Mexican says, “Well those white people.” I say,
“god damn it, god damn it, you’re white.” Anyhow that’s another story for
another day, isn’t it? So, we had to get it, we had to get into the census and
so Maurice Stans, was a very nice man, he was Secretary of Congress he
helped us and of course the president was all for it. And so, we met with
the Census people, with the help of Secretary Stans, we convinced them,
they believed it, they bought it. A lot of White House pressure, I must say.
Cause it was good for everybody. And we got it through. Well the money
started coming in that way and our job as ombudsman was to see that
various government agencies got it out to the right places and that’s where
we had our staff for, we had a bunch of bright guys, bright young guys,
some of whom are here... Carlos Conde wherever he is, he stepped out. He
says it’s probably this effort of the cabinet committee, probably produced
the greatest in equal opportunity, for the longest time of any of the things
the cabinet committee did. And I firmly believe that, cause it’s still there,
it’s still ginning on and a lot of people are mad at the word “Hispanics”,
they call it a mythical term. Well it was a political term, okay? But it
worked.

While efforts to assist a historically disenfranchised community are laudable, the mythic
nature of the Hispanic category means that is a flawed vehicle to do so. We can do better.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

19

CONCLUSION
The continued significance of phenotype, in a way that favors those with European
phenotypes and disfavors those with non-European phenotypes, despite nearly 50 years
of efforts to racialize and homogenize Latinos shows that Latino is not a viable unit of
analysis. Using Latino as a unit of analysis is starting from a false premise that Latinos
are a homogenous group with shared experiences. Although this article has focused on
the impact of phenotype, phenotype is just one intra-group difference obscured by the
Latino concept. Studies that ignore these intra-group difference produce distorted results.
Given that the Latino category fails to reflect reality and hides the discrimination of those
with Amerindian or African phenotypes. I propose that both social scientists and the
federal government cease to utilize it. 15 U.S.C. §1516a should be repealed, so as to stop
the misallocation of scarce resources meant for the victims of racial discrimination. These
resources should be shifted to those who are actually harmed by racial discrimination.
Further research is needed on how to best capture the real-world experiences now
obscured by the Latino category.
REFERENCES
Allen, Walter, Edward Telles and Margaret Hunter. 2000. “Skin Color, Income and
Education: A Comparison of African Americans and Mexican Americans.” National
Journal of Sociology. 12(1):130–180.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

20

Araujo-Dawson, Beverly. 2015. “Understanding of the Complexities of Skin Color,
Perceptions of Race, and Discrimination Among Cubans, Dominicans, and Puerto
Ricans.” Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences. 37(2):243–256.

Arce, Carlos H., Edward Murguia, and W. Parker Frisbie. 1987. “Phenotype and Life
Chances Among Chicanos.” Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences. 9(1):19–32.

Ben-Zeev, Avi, Tara C. Dennehy, Robin I. Goodrich, Branden S. Kolarik, and Mark W.
Geisler. 2014. “When an “Educated” Black Man Becomes Lighter in the Mind’s Eye:
Evidence for a Skin Tone Memory Bias.” Sage Open January-March 2014:1-9.
doi:10.1177/2158244013516770

Castillo, Martin. “Creating Opportunities for Latino Americans.” Youtube video, 2:09:20,
“Richard Nixon Foundation” October 1, 2010, (at 1:02:48),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jSuAzlIWQo.

Departamento de la Estadistica Nacional. 1928. Resumen del Censo General de
Habitantes de 30 de Noviembre de 1921. Mexico City: Departamento de la Estadistica
Nacional.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

21

Ennis, Sharon R., Merarys Rios-Vargas, and Nora G. Albert 2011. The Hispanic
Population: 2010. Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Espino, Rodolfo and Michael M. Franz. 2002. “Latino Phenotypic Discrimination
Revisited: The Impact of Skin Color on Occupational Status.” Social Science Quarterly.
83(2):612–623.

Finkeldey, Jessica G. 2014. “The Influence of Skin Color on the Likelihood of
Experiencing Arrest in Adulthood.” Master of Arts Thesis, Department of Sociology,
Bowling Green State University. Retrieved from Worldcat, 888967813.

Forbes, Jack D. 1992. “The Hispanic Spin: Party Politics and Governmental
Manipulation of Ethnic Identity.” Latin American Perspectives. 19(4):59-78.

Gibson, Campbell, and Kay Jung. 2002. Historical Census Statistics on Population
Totals by Race, 1790 to 1990, and by Hispanic Origin 1970 to 1990, for the United
States, Regions, Divisions, and States. Population Division. Washington, DC: U.S.
Bureau of the Census.

Gimenez, Martha E. 1989. “Latino/Hispanic—Who Needs a Name?: The case against a
standardized terminology.” International Journal of Health Services. 19(3):557-571.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

22

Gomez, Christina. 2000. “The Continual Significance of Skin Color: An Exploratory
Study of Latinos in the Northeast.” Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences. 22(1):94–
103.

Hannon, Lance. 2015. “White Colorism.” Social Currents. 2(1):13–21.

Hill, Mark E. 2002. “Race of the Interviewer and Perception of Skin Color: Evidence
from the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality.” American Sociological Review. 67(1):
(99–108).

Hunter, Margaret. 1999. “The Lighter the Berry? Race, Color, and Gender in the Lives of
African American and Mexican American Women.” PHD Dissertation, Department of
Sociology University of California at Los Angeles. Retrieved from ProQuest
Dissertations & Theses Database 9939034.

Hunter, Margaret, Walter R. Allen, and Edward E. Telles. 2001. “The Significance of
Skin Color Among African Americans and Mexican Americans,” African American
Perspectives 7(1): 173–184.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

Hurtado, Aida. 1994. “Does Similarity Breed Respect? Interviewer Evaluations of
Mexican-Descent Respondents in Bilingual Survey.” The Public Opinion Quarterly.
58(1):75–95.

Katzman, Martin T. 1968. “Discrimination, Subculture, and the Economic Performance
of Negroes, Puerto Ricans, and Mexican Americans.” The American Journal of
Economics and Sociology. 27(4):371–375.

Massey, Douglas S. 1993 “Latinos, Poverty, and the Underclass: A New Agenda for
Research.” Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences. 15(4):449–475.

Mora, G. Cristina. 2014. Making Hispanics: How Activists, Bureaucrats & Media
Constructed a new American. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Morales, Maria C. 2008. “The Ethnic Niche as an Economic Pathway for the Dark
Skinned: Labor Market Incorporation of Latina/o Workers.” Hispanic Journal of
Behavioral Sciences. 30(3):280–298.

Murguia, Edward and Edward E. Telles. 1996. “Phenotype and Schooling among
Mexican Americans.” Sociology of Education. 69(4):276–281.

23

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

24

Ortiz, Vilma and Edward E. Telles. 2012. “Racial Identity and Racial Treatment of
Mexican Americans.” Race and Social Problems. 4:41–56.

Relethford, John H., Michael P. Stern, Sharon P. Gaskill and Helen P. Hazuda. 1983.
“Social Class, Admixture, and Skin Color Variation in Mexican-Americans and AngloAmericans Living in San Antonio, Texas.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology.
61(1):97–102.

Rodriguez, Richard. 2002. Brown: The Last Discovery of America. Viking Penguin.

Roth, Wendy D. 2010. “Racial Mismatch: The Divergence Between Form and Function
in Data for Monitoring Racial Discrimination of Hispanics.” 91(5):1288-1311.

Rumbaut, Ruben G. 2006. “The Making of a People.” Pp. 16–65 in Hispanics and the
Future of America, edited by M. Tienda and F. Mitchell. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.

Ryabov, Igor. 2016. “Educational outcomes of Asian and Hispanic Americans: The
significance of skin color.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility. 44:1–9.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

25

Skrentny, John D. 2002. The Minority Rights Revolution. Cambridge: Belknap Pres of
Harvard University Press.

South, Scott J., Kyle Crowder and Erick Chavez. 2005. “Migration and Spatial
Assimilation among U.S. Latinos: Classical versus Segmented Trajectories.”
Demography. 42(3):497–521.

Telles, Edward E. and Edward Murguia. 1990. “Phenotypic Discrimination and Income
Differences among Mexican Americans.” Social Sciences Quarterly. 71(4):682–696.

Telzer, Eva H. and Heidie A. Vazquez Garcia. 2009. “Skin Color and Self-Perceptions of
Immigrant and U.S.-Born Latinas: The Moderating Role of Racial Socialization and
Ethnic Identity.” Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences. 31(3):357–374.

Thompson, Maxine S., and Steve McDonald. 2016. “Race, Skin Tone, and Educational
Achievement.” Sociological Perspectives. 59(1):91–111.

United Nations Children’s Fund, Atlas Sociolinguistico de pueblos indigenas en America
Latina, (Cochabamba: United Nations Children’s Fund, 2009).

Phenotypic Heterogeneity and the Unviability of Latino as a Unit of Analysis

26

Uzogara, Ekeoma E. 2019. “Gendered Racism Biases: Associations of Phenotypes with
Discrimination and Internalized Oppression among Latinx American Women and Men.”
Race and Social Problems. 11(1):80–92.

Wilkinson, Betina C., and Emily Earle. 2012. “Taking a New Perspective to Latino
Racial Attitudes: Examining the Impact of Skin Tone on Latino Perceptions of
Commonality with Whites and Blacks.” American Politics Research. 41(5): 783–818.

Zweigenhaft, Richard L., and G. William Domhoff. 2006. Diversity in the Power Elite:
How it Happened, Why it Matters. United Kingdom: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

