Homicides and the Age of Criminal Responsibility:
A Density Discontinuity Approach
Francisco J. M. Costa∗

João S. de Faria†

Felipe S. Iachan†

Bárbara Caballero‡
March 20, 2018

Abstract
We employ a density discontinuity design to evaluate the deterrence effect of more
severe punishments around the legal age of criminal responsibility in Brazil. Motivated
by the criminology literature, we propose a novel proxy based on the inherent risk
underlying criminal activities. Using violent death rates as a proxy for an individual’s
involvement in violent crime, we find no discernible deterrence effects. We additionally
study arrest data from the country’s third most populous state, Rio de Janeiro, and
discuss the advantages of our proxy in light of potential underreporting biases from
using criminal records.
JEL Codes: J18, J22, K14, K42, O12.
Keywords: crime, deterrence, homicide, legal majority age.
We would like to thank Daniel Cerqueira, Bruno Ferman, Cecília Machado, Joana Monteiro, João Pinho
de Mello, Rodrigo Soares, and seminar participants at FGV/EPGE, FGV/EESP, PUC-Rio, IPEA, SBE 2015,
the 7th CAEN-EPGE Meeting, the 2015 REAP meeting, and the 9th Brazilian Forum on Public Security.
We also thank the Instituto de Segurança Pública-RJ for sharing important data. Latest version here.
∗
Corresponding author. FGV EPGE Escola Brasileira de Economia e Finanças. E-mail: francisco.costa@fgv.br. Address: Praia de Botafogo, 190/1100, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22250-900, Brazil.
†
FGV EPGE Escola Brasileira de Economia e Finanças, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. E-mails: joaodefaria@gmail.com, felipe.iachan@fgv.br.
‡
Instituto de Segurança Pública-RJ (ISP-RJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. E-mail: bcaballero.isp@gmail.com.

1

1

Introduction

Crime is a prominent public concern in urban areas worldwide. Violent crime participation and
victimization are known to be higher among young males, especially those from disadvantaged
neighborhoods. Although the problem is not restricted to developing countries, it takes
dramatic contours in Latin America. In the region, more than a hundred cities exceed twenty
murders per one hundred thousand inhabitants annually. Additionally, public safety is listed
in opinion pools by almost every Latin American country as the top public concern.1 As part
of an effort to reduce youth involvement in violent crime, lawmakers and the general public
have considerably debated the age of criminal responsibility, that is, the age above which a
young offender is subjected to the stricter legal treatment of adults.2
An analysis of criminal behavior and the deterrent effects of punitive policies is part of
a long literature that, among economists, has has strong roots in Becker’s (1968) rational
model of crime and punishment. The general focus has been on understanding the responses
of potential criminals to incentives, in particular to severe or more likely punishments. The
legislation regarding violent crimes in many countries and U.S. states determines that only
people older than a particular age cutoff – the age of majority – are processed by the adult
justice system. People younger than this cutoff are subject to the juvenile justice system,
usually with more lenient punishments. The Beckerian model would imply that the severity
of potential punishments faced by people when they reach the age cutoff would reduce their
propensity for involvement in violent criminal acts.34
We aim to provide novel empirical evidence of the crime-deterrent effects of stronger
punishments using data from a country in which 16 people per thousand people under the
age of nineteen were murdered in 2013 alone (Waiselfisz, 2014): Brazil. Our approach seeks
to complement previous studies by using a new proxy variable for criminal involvement in a
natural quasi-experiment design.
The common difficulty for every empirical study of criminal behavior is that individual
1

See Igarapé (2016) and FBI (2012) for the murder rate and Latinobarometro (2015) for opinion poll data.
Also, more than thirty cities in the United States display homicide rates above this threshold, indicating the
problem of urban violence is not restricted to developing countries.
2
We will employ (with some abuse of legal terminology) the terms “criminal responsibility” and “criminal
majority” interchangeably. From a legal standpoint, it could be more precise to define the age of criminal
responsibility as the age above which children are responsible for their offenses and can be tried in court
(currently set at twelve years in Brazil), even if still under a special juridical system, and criminal majority as
the point above which people are subject to the penal treatment assigned to adults.
3
See Chalfin and McCrary (2014) for a recent review of the empirical tests of this theoretical prediction.
4
Based on this argument, many states in the United States reduced the age of majority in an attempt to
deter juvenile criminality (Rubin, 2003). But given the absence of consensual evidence on the effectiveness of
this reduction, some states have recently revised the age threshold upward (Brown, 2012), this time with a
stronger focus on rehabilitating young offenders (Loeffler and Chalfin, 2015).

2

propensities to participate in crimes are, by nature, not directly observable. Thus, we need
to resort to proxy variables. The most natural and commonly used proxies lie in criminal
records, such as arrest and conviction data. Our main concern, previously shared by Lee and
McCrary (2009) and Chalfin and McCrary (2014), is that too many obstacles lie between
a criminal offense and an official record identifying the offender. Importantly, the severity
of most of these obstacles depends on enforcement efforts and the discretion of authorities,
both of which may vary with the offender’s characteristics or the type of crime, leading to
potential biases.5
For policy evaluation purposes, the main threat is that, conditional on a crime committed,
the propensity of the criminal justice system to generate a formal arrest or conviction record
is likely to depend on the procedures and potential sanctions the law itself prescribes. For
example, in responding to a possible offense, a public agent might issue only an informal
warning if the offender is a minor, subject to an unlikely conviction; whereas, if the offender
were an adult, the agent might instead choose to arrest him. In such cases, the likelihood of
a crime committed by a minor showing up in arrest records is lower than if the same crime
is committed by an adult. Therefore, proxies based on criminal records have a potential
underreporting bias of unknown magnitude that would compromise any age-based estimates.
We first provide new evidence of this bias and its magnitude by studying the comprehensive
police arrest records from Rio de Janeiro, the third largest Brazilian state.
To circumvent this differential underreporting bias of criminal records, we propose a
novel proxy for an individual’s involvement in violent crime: the change in the number of
violent deaths by age.6 We base our proxy on the well-documented fact from the criminology
literature that criminal offending and violent victimization partially overlap. We know that
if an individual is more likely to engage in criminal activities, he will offend more often and
will therefore be more likely to be arrested, all else equal. This is in fact the rationale behind
the use of police records as proxies for criminal activity. Analogously, potential offenders are
also more likely to become victims of a violent death while committing a crime, whether by
the hands of law enforcement agents or by those of other criminals, like rival gang members.
In other words, violent death rates by age, although far from being uniquely determined
by individual offenses, increase on the degree to which the individual is engaged in violent
criminal acts (Jennings et al., 2012). Our proxy originates from the evidence that this overlap
5
Curry and Klumpp (2009) show that a bias, manifested through differential conviction rates by offenders’
characteristics (e.g., race, gender, wealth, and age), can emerge with a Bayesian jury.
6
Although the use of murder rates is common in the literature as a proxy for general crime rates, to the
best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to use the previously documented overlap between victimization
and offending at the crime scene to suggest the use of violent death as a proxy for individual episodes of
violent crime.

3

between offending and victimization is not only due to selection but also depends on actual
individual behavior.7 This is particularly true for riskier and more severe crimes; for example,
Carvalho and Soares (2016) find that the two-year mortality rate of gang members in Rio
de Janeiro is as high as 20%. We thus look for evidence of higher propensities to engage in
violent criminal activities in Brazil through the effect they may have on violent mortality.
The behavior of this measure around the age of criminal majority also might be of direct
interest for public policy.
We focus on Brazil for two reasons. First, we have access to reliable and detailed data
from the universe of death certificates for the country as whole as well as police records for its
third largest state by population. Second, the country has one of the strictest rules regarding
the age of criminal responsibility. Under no condition can people younger than eighteen
years be prosecuted, tried, or sentenced under the standard penal law. Instead, these young
offenders are subject to special treatment under the juvenile justice system, governed by the
Estatuto da Criança e do Adolescente (Statute of Children and Adolescents). Among other
provisions (see, e.g., Shecaira, 2004), minors must be sent to specialized police departments
and preference is then given to rehabilitating measures like warnings, damage reparations,
and social services if a minor is convicted. In a few cases in which the judge may rule for
detention, the minor is nonetheless sent to special detention facilities, where he will stay for a
maximum of three years and no later than his 21st birthday. To put this in perspective, the
penalty for first-degree murder by an individual eighteen years of age or older (to whom we
will refer here as an “adult”) is imprisonment for a period ranging from six to twenty years.
The sharpness of the age rule for criminal prosecution in Brazil lends itself to a natural
quasi-experiment, which we exploit to measure the degree to which a more strict punishment
may influence the decision to engage in a crime. More specifically, we employ methods of
density discontinuity designs (McCrary, 2008; Jales and Yu, 2017) to the frequency of (male)
violent deaths by age using national death records in Brazil from 1996 to 2013 and looking
for evidence of a discontinuous fall at the age of eighteen.8 The key difference between our
analysis and the traditional regression discontinuity design lies in that we are not working
with a dependent variable that is a function of other covariates that determine treatment
7

The criminology literature has noted that participation in crimes increases the odds of violent victimization
(Lauritsen et al., 1991; Nieuwbeerta and Piquero, 2008; Muftić and Hunt, 2013; Pyrooz et al., 2014, , among
others). Homicides are also frequently used as the best proxies for overall crime rates in other contexts.
As UNDOC (2011) argues, “homicide data are considered among the most representative and comparable
crime indicators” and because of its more scrupulous recording, “may be considered not only as a single
phenomenon in isolation, but also as a reasonable proxy for violent crime in general”. See, e.g., the argument
in Kleck (2004) for choosing deaths by firearms as the best proxies to gun ownership and diffusion in the U.S.
8
The idea that discontinuities in density functions also could be used for econometric identification has
been exploited in different contexts (such as Meyer and Wise, 1983; Saez, 2010).

4

assignment. Instead, we have data on violent deaths by fine measures of individual ages and
wish to investigate whether its frequency changes at eighteen years old.
The central identifying assumption is that all factors affecting violent death rates have
continuous effects on the number of violent deaths around the cutoff age; therefore, the only
factor discontinuously affecting violent death rates around an individual’s 18th birthday must
be his propensity to engage in criminal behavior as a result of the sudden change in penal
sanctioning. Importantly, this strategy does not even require that a large share of violent
deaths coincide with the deceased’s criminal behavior, only the continuous behavior of other
death probability determinants.9
We discuss and investigate, to the furthest possible extent, potential threats to this
assumption. These threats include other rules believe to change at the eighteenth birthday.
First, we survey the literature on the legal drinking age in Brazil, also set at eighteen years of
age, and alcohol abuse. We complement the general consensus of extremely weak compliance
with direct evidence of a continuous behavior of alcohol-related deaths around that age.
Second, we discuss the right to apply for a drivers license. In this case, the lengthy and
costly process mitigates coincidence concerns, especially regarding the low-income at-risk
young population. We also provide direct evidence that this should be a lesser concern
for identification by documenting the absence of a of discontinuity of traffic-related deaths
around the eighteenth birthday. Third, we show that the the military conscription process
is not a sharp function of the age. Fourth, we clarify that the compulsory education age
in Brazil is far from the 18th-birthday threshold. Fifth, we discuss the minor changes in
labor market regulation that take place at that same threshold. Last, we provide direct
evidence on potential changes in risky behaviors of young people, which could be affected
by a symbolic psychological change brought by a milestone “coming of age” event. Overall,
there are mitigating reasons and complementary direct evidence that reduces concerns about
these threats.
Beyond identification issues, the use of any proxy raises concerns about the power of
the statistical tests being performed. In our particular case, any randomness in underlying
violent victimization that has origins unrelated to an individual’s criminal engagement adds
noise to the test statistics, reducing power and creating the need for a large sample for good
statistical inference. That we are dealing with a very large sample (all violent deaths in a
9
Note that an increase in criminal activity makes one more prone to suffering a violent death very close
after the commission of the criminal act – because of the immediate reaction of the police or third-parties
– or later on because of revenge (e.g., by a gang) or after the police investigation. Only the former link
between offending and victimization would discontinuously change at the age of criminal majority; the latter
link, victimization due to past crimes, continuously evolves at the age cutoff and would be captured by the
density’s underlying polynomial.

5

large country over a 18-year period) helps mitigate concerns over the potentially low power of
tests based on the proxy. We calculate the power of the main exercise and propose a simple
model linking criminal involvement and victimization. This calculation rules out deterrent
effects on criminal involvement greater than 10%, under standard power and significance
levels.
We find no discernible change in the density of violent deaths at the age of criminal
responsibility in the Brazilian metropolitan areas. We interpret this result as additional
evidence of weak deterrent effects of the threat of stricter adult sentencing rules on violent
criminal behavior around the cutoff age. Our finding is also true among the more vulnerable
group of black males. We perform a series of additional robustness and placebo tests.
We also find evidence of underreporting bias when using the police arrests records. For
that, because of data availability, we restrict our focus to the state of Rio de Janeiro between
the years of 2010 and 2014. For the category of “Other Crimes” – offenses that police officers
may have more leeway on deciding whether or not to register a transgression – we find a 30%
increase in the frequency of offenses at eighteen years of age, an increase that is statistically
significant at 1%. We also observe a 9.5% reduction in the frequency of drug-related crimes at
the age cutoff, but we find no evidence of a change in arrests related to “Violent” or “Property
Index Crimes”.10 An increase in reports of less damaging crimes, with no effect or a drop in
reports of serious crimes, is an expected consequence of a differential underreporting bias.
These main findings are in line with the bulk of the empirical literature that investigates
the deterrent effects of judging juveniles as adults. Many studies have already employed
a regression discontinuity strategy, mostly to estimate the effect of the age of majority on
criminal recidivism. To our knowledge, all of these use either official criminal records in
the United States as a proxy for criminal behavior or self-reported data. Two studies in
particular come the closest to our own. Lee and McCrary (2009) follow a longitudinal cohort
of youngsters and use an RD design to search for evidence of a discontinuous drop in offense
rates after the cohort reaches the age above which they are judged in a standard adult court.
They find a low deterrent effect, illustrated by a reduced-form elasticity of -0.05. Loeffler and
Grunwald (2015b) find that processing young offenders on drug-related felonies reduces the
probability of recidivism, but that the effect is concentrated on the least risky adolescents.
Loeffler and Grunwald (2015a) and Loeffler and Chalfin (2015) study the recent rise in the
age cutoffs in Illinois and Connecticut, respectively, and find no discernible change in the
number of offending juveniles.11
10

Index Crimes follows the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) system and include seven crimes fundamental to
comparing crime rates: murder and non-negligent manslaughter, rape, burglary, aggravated assault, larceny,
motor vehicle theft, and arson.
11
Using self-reported criminal behavior, Hjalmarsson (2009) finds that, although people perceive an increase

6

As far as we know, this is the first study of the deterrent affects of the stricter adult
punishment outside a developed country using a causal identification framework. The
Brazilian setup brings a sharp change in de jure criminal treatment and a much higher
violence incidence. Also, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to employ
a different proxy – violent deaths – to estimate the deterrent effect of the age of criminal
majority.12 Our work also differs from the literature cited above in at least one other important
way. Because their strategy employs criminal records, which exist only for offenders and not
the public in general, they exclusively follow people who have already been prosecuted, either
as minors or as adults. Their focus on deterring recidivism specifically targets a high criminal
propensity segment of the population.

2

Proxies: Criminal and Mortality Data

Deterrence effectiveness and individual criminal propensities are not directly observable, so
quantitative research has to focus on the frequency of documented crime involvement.The
most natural and commonly used proxies lie in individual criminal records. If a treatment has
a deterrent effect, then we would expect to see a decrease in the number of people arrested.
There are, however, a few hurdles that an offense has to clear in order to appear in the
criminal records and be made available for study. First, the crime needs to be detected
and the offender, identified. However, the officers in charge might still find themselves with
enough discretion to determine whether to conduct the formal procedures that generate an
arrest record or to release the individual. At later stages, and depending on the location,
there also might be laws preventing access or effectively erasing the criminal records that
apply to minors, to arrests that later led to acquittals, or to first-time offenders.
The propensity to generate a formal arrest record might itself depend on age and the
potential sanction to which the offender is subject. This generates a non-standard measurement
error that biases the estimates using the age threshold. In Brazil, where a strict potential
punishment change is centered on the individual’s 18th birthday, it is generally recognized
that police officers have a weaker motivation for arresting minors than they have for adults,
mostly due to differences in criminal procedures and potential sanctions.
Lee and McCrary (2009) acknowledge this problem in their Florida youth delinquency
study and, to address it, restrict attention to reoffenders (who already have an open criminal
record) and index crimes, for which stricter reporting procedures limit discretion in releasing
in the expected punishment at the age of criminal majority, harsher punishments only deter juveniles from
committing small crimes (less than US$50) in the United States.
12
The literature on deterrent effects of criminal law in Brazil is still small and has focused more on correlations
between aggregate variables than on identifying causality (e.g., Araujo Jr et al., 2014; Nadanovsky, 2009).

7

a suspect. The behavior of non-index crimes reported in their paper provides strong evidence
of biases affecting less serious crimes (see figures 3 and 4 in Lee and McCrary, 2009). The
magnitude of the bias and its relevance for index crimes, however, cannot be directly assessed,
a fact that is a significant threat to identification.

.07
.04

.06

.07

.05

Arrests

Arrests
.08
.09

.06

.1

.11

Figure 1: Police Arrest by Type of Offense – Rio de Janeiro

-2

-1
0
1
Distance from the 18 Years of Age Cut-off

2

-2

2

.02

.06

.03

.08

Arrests
.1

Arrests
.04
.05

.12

.06

.07

(b) Property Index Crime

.14

(a) Violent Index Crime

-1
0
1
Distance from the 18 Years of Age Cut-off

-2

-1
0
1
Distance from the 18 Years of Age Cut-off

2

-2

-1
0
1
Distance from the 18 Years of Age Cut-off

2

(c) Drug Non-Index Crimes
(d) Other Non-Index Crime
Local linear density estimates, by crime type, following FBI’s classification of index and non-index crimes.
The bandwidth is of one year to each side and the year is decomposed into 25 bins. Panel (a) shows the
number of arrests disaggregated for murder, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault, Panel (b) burglary,
larceny, and motor vehicle theft, Panel (c) drug-related crimes and Panel (d) shows arrests for all other
non-index felony offense. Source: ISP-RJ.

We use restricted-access data on all arrests registered by the police in the state of Rio de
Janeiro, in Brazil, in order to study the behavior of criminal data around the age of criminal
responsibility. Figure 1 plots local-linear density estimates centered on the 18th birthday.13
13

Section 3.1 presents a formal description of the data and a more through analysis.

8

The only striking, significant, and robust feature of these estimates is the large increase
in arrests for non-drug-related non-index crimes, that is, the least damaging and the least
violent offenses. The magnitude of this estimated increase is higher than 25%. Its presence is
in line with the results obtained in Lee and McCrary (2009). We interpret it as evidence of a
strong underreporting bias for minor crimes committed by young offenders.14 More generally,
the possibility that a large reporting bias could affect all criminal data is what motivates our
search for a different proxy of criminal involvement.
The criminology literature already provides us with some indications by identifying a strong
pattern of overlap between victimization and offending behavior.15 Our proxy follows from
the conclusion that this overlap is not only due to selection on the demographics of the most
vulnerable groups but also depends on the fundamental degree of actual individual behavior:
choosing to participate in criminal activities increases one’s odds of violent victimization.16
Whenever an individual chooses to engage in crime, especially violent forms, he accepts the
risks of being a victim of a violent death whether brought on by the reactions of his potential
victims, law enforcement agents, rival criminals, or intervening third-parties. We therefore
look for those discontinuities in mortality data that would mirror the potential discontinuities
in criminal involvement and its associated risk-taking. A further advantage of this proxy
is that any measurement error on death reporting is likely to be orthogonal to the age of
the victim around the threshold. That is, the probability that a homicide is reported as a
function of the victim’s age is smooth around the threshold. If, on the one hand, this proxy is
unlikely to suffer from the endogeneity that arrests and convictions have with relation to the
penal code itself; on the other hand, it is more indirect and, therefore, noisier. This makes
necessary a discussion of the statistical power of the tests conducted (see Section 5.2).
Additionally, if engagement in illicit activities increases one’s risk of suffering a violent
death, this is particularly more intense for offenses generally regarded as more serious: rape,
murder, kidnapping, armed assaulting, or involvement in drug-related conflicts. Those are the
crimes for which we expect a violent death to be a more probable outcome when compared
to less serious offenses, such as speeding, or shoplifting. Consequently, changes in violent
victimization are expected to serve as a better proxy for an individual’s involvement in violent
14

We do not find any evidence that incentives for involvement in minor crimes would be weaker, constraints
tighter, or punishments stronger just before the 18th birthday. Section 5.1 presents a more thorough discussion
of confounding effects.
15
See Jennings et al. (2012) for a survey of 34 recent studies on the overlap pattern and its robustness
across countries. The literature is at least as old as Wolfgang (1958), who in a early study of homicide victims
documented that homicide was often a consequence of another crime perpetrated by its victim.
16
See, for instance, Lauritsen et al. (1991); Wittebrood and Nieuwbeerta (1999); Nieuwbeerta and Piquero
(2008). Pyrooz et al. (2014) study the role of gang participation in contributing to the victim-offender overlap,
and Muftić and Hunt (2013) study the role of victim-precipitated homicides.

9

crime than for broader notions of illegal behavior.17 This has an important bearing on the
interpretation of the estimates, which we take into account in the following sections, as only
changes in violent criminal engagement are likely to be detectable.
For instance, a drop in death numbers following the threshold at eighteen can be less the
result of people abandoning crime altogether and more of them turning away from riskier
and more serious crimes toward less severe ones. We stress, however, that this substitution
effect should still be regarded as a deterrent impact from harsher penalties at eighteen years
of age, that is, the very thing we are ultimately trying to measure. We revisit this discussion
when presenting the results in Section 4.

3

Data and Empirical Strategy

This section discusses the data employed and our empirical approach. As a rule, when
we speak of “people” we are referring to males. We focus on males because the period
between the ages of sixteen and twenty coincides with the age interval in which young women
are more likely to be victims of assault, particularly of a sexual nature (Waiselfisz, 2013),
adding a particular amount of noise to the proxy. This could severely weaken links between
victimization and criminal involvement.

3.1

Data

Death Records. In Brazil, violent deaths (homicides, suicides, and accidents) are reported
following a unified set of rules determined by a National Law (number 6.015/1973). In
particular, no burials can be performed without a death certificate (Declaração de Óbito),
which contains information such as the full identification of the deceased (with date of birth
exactly as stated in his ID), some of his social and personal characteristics (race, gender,
etc.), and, most relevantly to our purposes, the precise date, the location, and the probable
cause of death.18
These death certificates are consolidated into a national database called Sistema de
Informações sobre Mortalidade (SIM or Mortality Information System). As of 2011, its
coverage had reached over 96.1% of the total annual deaths inferred using the National
17

If deterrent incentives are the only factor changing discontinuously at the 18th birthday, a drop in
mortality would be the sum of the death drop induced by lower participation in high-risk criminal activities
and by lower participation in low-risk criminal activities. The former plausibly dominates. This heterogeneity
in the sensitivity of victimization to different crimes does not threaten our identification (see Section 3.2).
18
A useful description of the procedures, as well as reports on how they have changed over the years, can
be found, among other sources, in Borges et al. (2013). Accounts on the limitations of the data generated by
these procedures and how they can be improved can be found in Cerqueira (2013).

10

Census. In our sample, the classification of death causes follows the 10th revision of the
International Statistical Classification of Disease and Related Health Problems (ICD-10),
endorsed by the World Health Organization.19
Our interest lies in those deaths deemed unnatural or violent, that is, in those that
occurred as the result of aggression. For these deaths, the law requires an autopsy and the
determination of a “basic cause” of death..
For the broader definition and classification of homicides, we consider the choice of ICD
codes for deaths known to be the result of aggression by others (homicides) and those of
which intention (whether self-inflicted or accidental) could not be determined. These are
all under ICD’s Chapter XX, “External causes of morbidity and mortality”. We use this
broader category of violent deaths, following Cerqueira (2013), to attenuate concerns about
the misclassification of death causes. Table 9.1 in the appendix lists these codes and provides
a brief description of the instrumental cause of death.20 For robustness, we also adopt
alternative and narrower definitions of homicides and verify if results hold if we restrict
attention to deaths by firearms. The conclusions are always qualitatively equivalent.21
Criminal Records. In Brazil, most investigative police work is the responsibility of the
state government, and different state records are not integrated in a national repository.
Thus, for the tests on our assumptions and specifications, we focus on the criminal records of
one state, Rio de Janeiro, where we know there is reliable and sufficiently large data. More
specifically, we consider its local official records from the Instituto de Segurança Pública (ISP),
at the Bureau of Public Security.
The data consists of arrests of identified crime suspects as registered at police stations
from 2010 to 2014, which together represent around 8% of all offense registries. As we
discussed in the previous section, identifying the offender is always a hurdle in generating full
criminal records. Because of other technical issues, to identify offenders at their individual
level, we restrict attention to records issued in districts and specialized police stations that
were already part of the central information system – Sistema de Delegacia Legal 22 – by 2010.
This amounts to 118 police stations, covering a territory that was home to 74.5% of the Rio
de Janeiro state’s population, according to the 2010 demographic census.23 Finally, we use
19

As of March 2018, the database and the coverage statistics were available at http://tabnet.datasus.
gov.br/cgi/sim/dados/cid10_indice.htm.
20
Note that this classification includes, e.g., deaths classified as homicides but with “unknown” (or
undetermined) death instruments.
21
Appendix Table 9.2 displays the summary statistics of violent deaths by age ranges and other covariates.
22
This is the computerization and modernization program of the police stations in the state of Rio de
Janeiro. It involves standardizing records and procedures within a central database.
23
The total population served by these specialized stations is likely to be underestimated, since the
calculation does not take into account the people who are assisted by the police in a given area but live
outside of it.

11

only records that have at least the following information: color of skin, gender, and date of
birth of the offender.
Like Lee and McCrary (2009), we divide crimes into four categories: Violent Index Crimes,
Property Index Crimes, Drug-Related Non-Index Crimes, and Other Non-Index Crimes.24

3.2

Empirical Strategy

The strictness of the age-based rule for criminal responsibility in Brazil, as well as the sharp
contrast between minor and adult penal systems, lend themselves naturally a discontinuity
design approach. Framing our discussion in the language of the “Rubin causal model” (Rubin,
1974), the treatment effect to be identified is the consequence of the more rigorous set of
sanctions to which adult offenders in Brazil are subject when compared to juveniles. The
treatment group (D = 1) then comprises young adults who have just turned eighteen, whereas
the control group (D = 0), which will serve as the counterfactual for comparisons, comprises
young people who are just short of reaching eighteen years of age.25
In the ideal sampling design, the researcher would observe a random sample of the pair
(Y, X), where Y (D) is a propensity to commit crimes (assumed to be binary for simplicity)
for each assignment into group D ∈ {0, 1} and X is age, normalized to zero at the cutoff,
the variable that sharply assigns people to treatment and control groups. Then, given the
treatment assignment around zero, the difference in the height of the conditional mean
functions at this cutoff identifies the local average treatment effect (Hahn et al., 2001).
Researchers in the literature often have no access to data on the pair (Y, X). Instead,
suppose one observes only the density of X (age) conditional on Y = 1 (crime engagement).
Jales and Yu (2017) show that it is possible to identify the local average treatment effect of
this policy in this setup. Under the standard RDD assumptions,26 we have
lim ln f (X|Y = 1) − lim ln f (X|Y = 1) = ln

X&0

X%0

E [Y (1) |X = 0]
,
E [Y (0) |X = 0]

(1)

as scaling factors involving the density at X = 0 and the overall probability of Y = 1 cancel
out.27 Thus, the difference in the limits of the log-density at the threshold is equal to the
standard local average treatment effect of the policy. In other words, a discontinuity in the
conditional mean of Y given X at the threshold will necessarily imply a discontinuity at the
24

See footnote 10 for definitions.
We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting the current presentation of the empirical strategy.
26
Most notably, the unconditional density f (X)is continuous and positive at the critical age X = 0.
Additionally, P r {Y (D) |X = x} is continuous in x for D ∈ {0, 1}.
(x)
27
, so the result above follows easily.
We have that f (x|Y = 1) = Pr{YP=1|X=x}f
r{Y =1}
25

12

density of X given Y = 1. Consequently, despite not observing the pair (Y, X), we have
enough information to infer whether there is a discontinuity at the conditional mean of Y
given X by estimating this function.
Yet another challenge presents itself. Criminal propensities Y are not observable, so
proxies are required. Suppose that instead of observing the pair (Y, X) the researcher observes
the density of X (age) given that W = 1 (a violent death occurred). The goal is still to infer
whether the policy has any effect on (unobservable) criminal propensities, Y . However, we
observe another variable W that is caused by Y ; that is, Y lies in the causal path between
the treatment and W . Assume that
P [W = 1|Y, X] = g (Y, X, u) ,

(2)

that is, that the probability of death by a violent cause is a function of criminal behavior,
age itself, and other unobserved factors u. Under continuity of the function g with respect to
the last two arguments, if we only observe the density of X given W = 1, then the best we
can do is to look at discontinuities of density around the threshold. If we do that, under the
standard continuity assumptions of the typical discontinuity design approach and following
the arguments in Jales and Yu (2017), we identify the following object
ρ = lim ln f (X|W = 1) − lim ln f (X|W = 1) = ln
X&0

X%0

E [g (Y (1) , X, u) |X = 0]
.
E [g (Y (0) , X, u) |X = 0]

(3)

This is the local treatment effect of age of majority on the number of deaths, mediated by
criminal behavior changes, as measured in terms of a log change. This expression makes it
clear that the difference between the two directional limits with respect to age (given that
the individual has suffered a violent death) is a combination of the effect that the harsher
punishment has on the criminal behavior itself and the effect that criminal behavior has on
the probability of dying from a violent death. The value cannot be zero for the proxy to be
valid.28 We discuss the power of this approach in Section 5.2.
We follow McCrary (2008) in our estimation procedure of ρ. To avoid confusion, an
important observation to have in mind is that although we are thinking of people and
the number of deaths, we estimate a relation between histogram bin midpoints and their
associated frequencies. This will have an important bearing on the interpretation of the
28

Again, we restate that all studies on criminal offenses employ proxies. Those looking at the frequencies
of arrests in particular are implicitly assuming that more arrests are the result of more people engaging in
crime when the right control variables are used. Using the language developed above, our key concern is
that for arrest data, P [arrest = 1|Y, X] jumps up at X = 0 for any intensity of criminal activity Y . As a
consequence, estimates based on arrest data show a bias for the causal effect of the policy on the number of
arrests as mediated by criminal behavior changes.

13

results: the estimates for ρ are then estimates of how much the frequency of a bin with
predetermined binwidth b would immediately change after it began to include people (and
only those) whose ages have surpassed the eighteenth threshold. The trade-off is clear: as we
increase the bandwidth window (which spans several bins of a histogram), each bin becomes
lengthier, and we are thus looking at a larger group of young adults, but at the cost of using
observations that are farther away from the cutoff, thus potentially biasing estimates. This
way of correctly interpreting results shall become clearer as we turn to specific examples.
Additional Estimation Issues. A first estimation concern is with the bandwidth selection
for the local regressions above: when trying to provide estimates at a single point, we aim at
finding the right balance between the competing goals of using observations as close as possible
to the cutoff, as demanded by the identifying assumptions in Section 3.2, while assuring
ourselves that enough data are being used. This is true for all regression discontinuity designs,
but since we are dealing here with possible discontinuities in density functions, moving away
from the cutoff gives us a larger sample and thus a histogram that is smoother and closer to
the actual distribution of frequencies. Unfortunately, there is no widely agreed on method for
selecting optimal bandwidths in the semi-parametric regression discontinuity context (Ludwig
and Miller, 2007), and so our strategy is to run the regressions and report the results for
a broad range of candidate bandwidths. Our most local estimates have a window of three
months on each side of the eighteen-year mark, and our least local, a window of seventeen
months on each side. Still, to find some formal guidance on which bandwidth to choose, we
calculate the rule-of-thumb bandwidth selection proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996). We
find that the suggested bandwidth using an uniform kernel is 12 months.
A second issue has to do with the choice of functional forms. In our preferred specifications
we allow for higher-order polynomial forms of f + and f − , like in McCrary (2008). However,
having in mind that the main recommendation in Gelman and Imbens (2014) favors linear
polynomials, we run a density test with linear polynomials in the robustness section.29

4

Results

This section reports the main results using death records and compares them with those
obtained from the criminal records in Rio de Janeiro. Like all other discontinuity designs,
we are less interested in the significance of each individual estimate and more interested
in identifying significant effects that do not depend on a particular combination of bins,
29

Their basic argument is threefold: the implicit weights for high-order (third, fourth, or higher) polynomials
are not attractive; the results are too sensitive to the choice of polynomial order; and traditional inference in
these settings has poor properties.

14

bandwidth, and functional form, but instead show up across different specifications. To
target urban crime, we investigate violent death by age for the combination of all the large
metropolitan areas and state capitals in the country. We focus on this subset because one
could be reasonably concerned that motivations for violent crime in rural areas have more to
do with acts of impulse and less with crime being a rational, economically driven choice.

4.1

Main Results

As an almost defining characteristic of RD designs, a graphical illustration provides a basic
understanding of the approach. Figure 2 presents the distribution of male homicides across
ages between 16 and 20 years in Brazil. We normalize age relative to the cutoff of 18 years old,
so -2 means 16 years of age. The pairs of dashed lines denote the 95% confidence intervals.
The figure shows the age threshold at which our regressions will look for sudden changes
in an otherwise continuous relationship. In the absence of treatment effects (i.e., heavier
punishments decreasing the number of homicides through discouraging criminal behavior),
we would expect to see the relationship continuing on its path in a smooth fashion, without
any jumps at the treatment change point.

.02

.03

.04

.05

Figure 2: Distribution of Violent Deaths (All Metropolitan Areas)

-2

-1

0

1

2

This figure plots the frequency of violent deaths of males per age of death (in the horizontal axis: age of
death minus 18 years old) for all victims who died older than 16 and younger than 20 years old in the
metropolitan areas and state capitals of Brazil, between 1996 and 2013. The solid line is the n-order
polynomial that best fits the scatter points and the two dashed lines represent the confidence intervals. The
red vertical dashed line marks the age of criminal majority. This figure was generated using the default
bandwidth and procedures from McCrary (2008). Source: SIM/Datasus.

15

From (3), ρ is our measure of discontinuity in the number of violent deaths for varying
specifications; it is the log difference of the height of the density function at the age cutoff.30
For completeness, the tables that follow also include the total number of deaths across the
chosen bandwidth and the number of deaths within the closest bins to the left and to the
right of the cutoff. Bandwidths are typically a few months long, whereas bins are much
shorter, spanning less than a week and reflecting the granularity of our data.
Table 1 Panel A presents our main results, the estimates of ρ̂ from equation (3) considering
all violent deaths of men across all metropolitan areas and state capitals in Brazil. Our
preferred bandwidth, calculated with the rule-of-thumb bandwidth selection proposed by
Fan and Gijbels (1996), is approximately 12 months around the age cutoff (97.007% of a
year to be precise). The first column of Table 1 presents the results for this case. The point
estimate implies a fall in violent death occurrences of approximately 2% when one crosses
the criminal responsibility threshold. The density used in this test is based is discretized
into several bins that are only 3 days long, with observations more than 12 months away
(and therefore outside of the bandwidth) receiving no weight for the estimation. The drop
obtained is quantitatively small and has no statistical significance (t-statistic equal to 0.95).

30
Therefore, using a standard first-order approximation, a small point estimate in log-points can be
interpreted as a percentage change.

16

Table 1: Density Discontinuity on the Frequency of Violent Deaths by Age
Bandwidth in months (from the point of cutoff)
12
(1)

3
(2)

6
(3)

Panel A. Total Violent Deaths
ρ̂
-.02
.02
.006
Total Deaths
L & R bins

17
(4)

-.025

(.021)

(.042)

(.03)

(.017)

41150

10577

21139

60349

133/191

0/68

63/125

263/295

Panel B. Deaths in confrontation with the police
ρ̂
.021
-.208
-.096
.049
Total Deaths
L & R bins

(.168)

(.371)

(.237)

(.136)

709

178

350

1001

21/22

4/2

9/11

30/25

.004

-.018

Panel C. Homicides
ρ̂
-.009
-.008
Total Deaths
L & R bins

(.023)

(.046)

(.032)

(.019)

35183

9089

18123

51497

170/204

0/55

54/105

222/246

Panel D. Deaths by firearm (any)
ρ̂
-.012
-.002
-.003
Total Deaths
L & R bins

(.024)

(.048)

(.034)

(.02)

31862

8248

16408

46676

154/180

0/47

51/92

201/219

Panel E. Homicides by firearm
ρ̂
-.003
.007
.007
Total Deaths
L & R bins

-.019

-.013

(.024)

(.049)

(.035)

(.02)

30498

7896

15738

44666

149/172

0/44

49/87

192/209

Panel F. Homicides in the street
ρ̂
-.011
.065
.038

-.023

(.036)

(.072)

(.051)

Total Deaths

14042

3627

7230

(.029)
20539

L & R bins

86/95

23/43

42/64

139/163

This table presents the discontinuity estimate and standard errors (in parenthesis) from the discontinuity
density test proposed by McCrary (2008). Output variable is the number of violent deaths by age around
18 years old according to death cause as indicated in each panel. The discontinuity estimate, ρ̂, is the
log difference in height just before and after the 18 years old cutoff. Our sample are all violent deaths of
males between 16 and 20 years old who died in Brazilian metropolitan areas. Columns present estimates
for different bandwidths measured in months (rounded). Bandwidth in column (1) is the rule-of-thumb
bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996); precise bandwidth is .970066 of a year. Remaining columns
show results with a 1/4, 1/2 and 1.5 times bandwidth and binwidths in column 1. From columns 1 to 4,
binwidth (in days) is equal to 3, 1, 1 and 4. Total Deaths is the number of deaths in the chosen bandwidth
and L & R bins displays the number of deaths in the closest bins to the left and to the right of the cutoff.
Source: SIM/Datasus. Significance levels: *10%, **5%, ***1%.

17

We interpret a 2% frequency drop as small in light of the evidence presented in the
recent literature. Biderman et al. (2010) study the consequences of a late-night dry law
on mortality and finds a causal drop of 10% in homicides.31 Callaghan et al. (2014) and
Carpenter and Dobkin (2009) study the consequences of the minimum drinking age in Canada
and the United States, respectively, and estimate increases in mortality after crossing the age
threshold of 14.2% in the former and 9% in the latter.32
For robustness, we also consider bandwidths that represent multiples of the optimal
bandwidth of Fan and Gijbels (1996). In particular, we consider smaller bandwidths, with
a quarter and a half of a year in columns 2 and 3 and larger bandwidth of 1.5 times the
reference bandwidth in column 4. The trade-off here is that at the same time that smaller
bandwidths compare death rates of more similarly aged agents, they also include fewer
observations, producing less precise estimates. As we see in columns 2 to 4, estimates of
density discontinuity are all small in magnitude, change signs, and all indicate a failure to
reject a continuous behavior of the violent death rate across the age of criminal responsibility.
Table 1 Panels B through F repeat this exercise using five different classifications of violent
deaths; all estimates are statistically equal to zero. Results are also consistent with a series
of placebo tests and robustness checks we perform and report in Web Appendix 8.33
These initial results, however, may mask a great deal of variation not only along the
characteristics of the population in the different regions in the country but also along
other local metropolitan characteristics. We thus run the same exercise for each of the 32
metropolitan areas and state capitals. In Appendix Figure 9.1, we plot the t-statistics from
each estimated ρ̂ using the different bandwidths and the histogram of these statistics. The
estimates are centered around zero and show a pattern of statistical insignificance. Only in
few cases the estimated effect is statistically significant, including the single metropolitan area
in the state of Rio de Janeiro, but is consistent with the occurrence of 5% of false positives.
In sum, our theoretical starting point is that heavier punishments decrease the net benefits
from crime participation, a decrease that should then be reflected in the number of homicides.
We see little evidence of this when looking at all deaths in Brazil between 1996 and 2013 and
in the near totality of metropolitan regions and state capitals.
31

De Mello (2015) suggests a large connection between criminal activity related to drug trafficking and
homicide rates, attributing 30% of the cross-sectional variation in homicides to the dispersion in the prevalence
of crack cocaine in the state of São Paulo.
32
Our exercise would have power to identify an effect of this magnitude on mortality (see Section 5.2).
33
In Web Appendix 8, we use lower-order polynomials as recommended by Gelman and Imbens (2014);
we break our exercise in different time windows; we estimate placebo exercises using age cutoffs of 17 and
19 years old; and we run a regression discontinuity exercise on death rates by cohort using the Brazilian
Demography Censuses from 2000 and 2010.

18

4.2

Results Using Criminal Records

We now turn to the estimation of a possible discontinuity on the distribution of criminal
involvement using criminal record data. In particular, we use data on all arrests registered
by the police in the state of Rio de Janeiro. As we showed in Section 2, Figure 1 plots local
density estimates of criminal offenses by age for different types of crime, always centered
centered on the 18th birthday. This figure reveals a large increase in offenses for non-drugrelated non-index crimes (panel (d)) and a drop in the frequency of drug-related non-index
crimes in panel (c).
Columns 2 to 5 in Table 2 present the estimates from (3) and define precise magnitudes
for these observations. First, we find a 0.35 log-point increase in the density of “other” crimes
that is statistically significant at 1%. If we interpret this observation as criminal involvement,
it would follow that young adults are discontinuously 30% more likely to commit crimes when
they turn eighteen years of age. Like Lee and McCrary (2009), however, we do not interpret
these results as such. Instead, we see it as evidence consistent with a strong underreporting
bias for minor crimes committed by young offenders. “Other” crimes are the least violent
offenses – non-violent, non-property, and non-drug-related crimes – where police officers may
use a particularly large degree of discretion on whether to follow the official procedures or
simply issue a warning before releasing the offender. It should thus represent a reasonable
upper bound on the differential underreporting bias.
On the other hand, we also estimate a 0.1 log-point drop in the frequency of drug-related
crimes that is statistically significant at the 10% level. Rio de Janeiro is one of the most
violent states in Brazil, and its capital records the largest absolute number of violent deaths.
Crime in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro is also uniquely distinguishable as a large
drug-consuming market with drug-dealer gangs that are in a near-permanent state of turf
wars (see Cerqueira, 2014; Carvalho and Soares, 2016). Also, with the strong evidence of
underreporting bias, the estimated effects represent a lower bound for the underlying effect
on criminal involvement.
To shed additional light on the magnitude of this reporting bias, we confront the point
estimates with the density discontinuity estimates using violent deaths as proxy for criminal
involvement, restricting the sample to the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro. The result is
shown in column 1 in Table 2, where we estimate a 0.13 log-point drop in the frequency of
violent deaths at the cutoff of 18 years old. This effect is also statistically significant at the
10% level and approximately of the same magnitude as the reported drop in drug-related
arrests. It is, however, in contrast with the nationwide results.
Two possible interpretations exist. First, Rio de Janeiro might represent a particular
scenario of detectable deterrence effects. Second, and more convincing in the absence of
19

Table 2: Density Discontinuity on the Frequency of Violent Deaths and Police
Arrests by Age – Rio de Janeiro, 2010 to 2014
Violent

Arrests (2010-2014)

Deaths

ρ̂
Bandwidth (months)
Binwidth (days)

Index Crime

Non-Index Crime

(1)

Violent
(2)

Property
(3)

Drug
(4)

Other
(5)

-.13*
(.07)

-.05
(.07)

.00
(.12)

-.10**
(.05)

.35***
(.06)

8
7

9
7

9
14

8
7

7

7

This table presents the discontinuity estimate and standard errors (in parenthesis) from the discontinuity
density test proposed by McCrary (2008). The discontinuity estimate, ρ̂, is the log difference in height just
before and after the 18 years old cutoff. In Column 1, the output variable is the number of violent deaths
of men between 1996-2013 in Rio de Janeiro metropolitan area. In Columns 2 to 5, the output variable is
the number of police arrests by crime type, following FBI’s classification of index and non-index crimes,
between 2010-2014 of men in Rio de Janeiro state, as in 1. Bandwidths and binwidths calculated using the
rule-of-thumb bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996). Source: SIM/Datasus and ISP-RJ. Significance
levels: *10%, **5%, ***1%.

definitive evidence on the singularity of this metropolitan area, it is likely to simply represent
a false positive among a set of large Brazilian urban areas. In light of the evidence from
Appendix Figure 9.1, we favor the second interpretation.

5

Discussion

In this section, we first discuss challenges to the identification of deterrent effects through
the methodology we have employed. Then, we evaluate the statistical power of tests based
on violent mortality to detect changes in underlying criminal engagement.

5.1

Threats to Identification

The identifying assumption for the treatment effect of stronger punishment after the age of
eighteen is that any cause of violent death risk other than participation in crimes continuously
changes with age at the 18th birthday threshold. We now assess some possible threats to
the validity of that assumption, with particular focus on other rights and legal treatment
changes that could occur around the same age threshold.
The legal drinking age. The minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) in Brazil is also set
to eighteen years old. Evidence suggests a the link between drinking, criminal engagement,
20

and (both directly and indirectly) violent victimization.34 As such, if compliance with the
law were strong, one would expect an increase in the number of violent deaths at the age
of eighteen due to a sudden change in alcohol consumption at 18 years of age. However,
evidence suggests weak compliance with the MLDA determination in Brazil.
Romano et al. (2007) documents that underage test subjects were able to purchase alcohol
in their first attempt more than 80% of the time in the metropolitan area of São Paulo. Souza
et al. (2005, see Figure 2, in particular)( presents evidence of high alcohol consumption and
continuous growth with age among adolescents in the Cuiabá metropolitan region. Several
other studies, like Madruga et al. (2012), reinforce the failure of MLDA compliance and
document a dramatic prevalence of alcohol consumption and binge drinking among underage
adolescents in Brazil. In related work, Cerqueira (2014), for instance, finds that alcohol does
not have a relevant role in explaining either the rise or the fall in homicide rates in Brazil for
the past three decades.
We, therefore, view the minimum legal drinking age as a minor, but still potentially
relevant, threat to the identification of deterrent effects. We directly assess this point by
employing our empirical strategy to test for a discontinuity in the density of deaths related
to alcohol around the age of majority.35 As can be seen in Table 3, Panel A, we find no
statistically significant change in the number of deaths involving alcohol. The results are
qualitatively the same if we include illegal drug abuse.
Driver licenses and traffic accidents. Another legal allowance that follows a threshold
rule at eighteen years of age is the right to drive standard cars and motorcycles.36 Immediately
after turning 18 years old, people might start a training process in specialized driving schools
and, after its completion, take a practical examination to obtain a restricted-use temporary
license.37 The training takes a few months, and the costs involved are significant (equal to
around one and a half months of work at minimum wage), especially in light of low-income
at-risk groups. These costs and delays, in turn, make a sudden increase in mobility and traffic
exposure when turning eighteen an unlikely threat to identification.
Besides its role as a placebo outcome, we are also interested in assessing any concurrent
34

See, Carpenter and Dobkin (2009) and Callaghan et al. (2014) for impacts of the MLDA on mortality.
These are deaths directly related to alcohol abuse and any other death causes (e.g., car crashes and other
accidents) where non-trivial levels of alcohol were found in the blood at the autopsy. We discuss below deaths
related to risky behavior more generally. These could, potentially, increase after the 18th birthday if a large
increase in binge drinking occurred, since this is known to induce impulsive behavior. We find no evidence of
an increase in these more general measures either.
36
The process for buses, trucks, and other specialized heavy-duty vehicles requires an minimum of one
or two years in these previous categories. Additionally, a stricter 21-year minimum age rule applies for the
categories with the heaviest vehicles.
37
The theoretical effect of driving and licensing on criminal behavior is ambiguous; at the same time, it
increases non-crime-related job opportunities and also expands the types of crimes the individual can commit.
35

21

effects of the minimum legal age for driving. We run density discontinuity tests looking at
deaths caused by car accidents and related causes.38 In Table 3, Panel B, we see that reaching
the age of criminal majority has no effect on the frequency of deaths by vehicle accident.
Conscription, military draft. In the first six months of each year, male Brazilian citizens
who turn eighteen on that calendar year have to present themselves to an office of the Armed
Forces and officially make themselves available to join the military. Essentially, after a series
of brief stages without any significant time dedication, only those who wish to follow a
military career and have proved their mental, physical, and health competencies are drafted.
If selected, the young male is incorporated into the force and actually starts military service
in the following calendar year.39 However, because of a so-called “excess military contingent”,
more than 95% of young males are discharged throughout the procedure.40
The main concern is that a training internship and other forms of time dedication would
incapacitate the young male at his 18th birthday, affecting his criminal activities. First,
given its restricted reach, the military draft should be a limited cause for concern in our
case. Even more importantly, a serious threat to the RD design requires any confounding
treatment under analysis to be a sharp function of the age. The military draft is not this:
when presenting for the draft, people lie randomly from zero to eleven months away from
their eighteenth birthday; those roughly 5% actually drafted had a 18th birthday happen six
to twelve months prior to the start of military service.
Compulsory education. During the period of study, the compulsory education threshold in
Brazil was set at fourteen years of age and was, therefore, outside even our largest bandwidth
window. As a consequence, we do not see education policies as a threat to the identification
of deterrent effects.41
Labor market regulation. The other set of legal rights that change at the majority
threshold and could be relevant to our identification strategy are labor regulations. Starting
at age 16, people can already be formally employed with full rights,42 but with some special
working conditions. In particular, minors cannot work more than 40 hours a week (extra hours
are not allowed), work in an unhealthy workplace, or work at night shifts. Although these
changes do expand the set of job opportunities at age eighteen, we find it unlikely that the
38

We considered fatal accidents by car, motorcycles, and trucks, and explicitly discarded buses since they
are essentially means of public transportation.
39
For example, someone who turned 18 in 2010 had to present himself to the Armed Forces between January
and June 2010 and, if drafted, started his military service in January 2011.
40
According to the Brazilian Army (Exército Brasileiro, 2010), in 2006, 4.5% of agents that signed up were
drafted at the end of the process. The estimated figure for recent years is roughly the same.
41
It was only recently, with the signing of Law number 12.796 in April 2013 (and following a Constitutional
amendment from 2009), that mandatory education was set to last until the age of seventeen.
42
Teenagers between 14 and 16 years old can be formally hired, but need the consent of the parents.

22

Table 3: Density Discontinuity on the Frequency of Non-Violent Deaths by Age
Bandwidth in months
12
(1)

3
(2)

6
(3)

17
(4)

Panel A. Deaths caused by alcohol abuse
ρ̂
.208
.802
1.466
.356
(.76)

(1.305)

(1.352)

(.642)

Total Deaths

31

6

17

44

L & R bins

4/5

1/2

1/4

6/8

Panel B. Deaths by vehicle accidents
ρ̂
.086
.151
.135

.068

(.088)

(.176)

(.125)

(.072)

Total Deaths

2630

632

1279

4008

L & R bins

31/48

7/14

15/25

49/64

Panel C. Deaths caused by accidents (excl. vehicle)
ρ̂
-.121 -.246 -.218**
-.096
(.077)

(.16)

(.111)

Total Deaths

3184

805

1653

(.062)
4737

L & R bins

56/41

11/13

21/23

79/63

Panel D. Suicides
ρ̂
.018
.414

.042

.011

(.122)

(.257)

(.177)

(.1)

Total Deaths

1325

322

667

2015

L & R bins

24/35

5/5

10/11

37/53

Panel E. All other non-violent deaths
ρ̂
-.072 -.023
-.116*

-.028

(.047)

(.096)

(.067)

Total Deaths

8513

2139

4296

(.038)
12781

L & R bins

70/92

12/30

34/53

115/120

This table presents the discontinuity estimate and standard errors (in parenthesis) from the discontinuity
density test proposed by McCrary (2008). Output variable is the number of deaths by age around 18 years
old according to death cause as indicated in each panel. The discontinuity estimate, ρ̂, is the log difference in
height just before and after the 18 years old cutoff. Our sample are all non-violent deaths of men between 16
and 20 years old who died in Brazilian metropolitan areas. Columns present estimates for different bandwidths
measured in months (rounded), calculated as in Table 1. Total Deaths is the number of deaths in the chosen
bandwidth and L & R bins displays the number of deaths in the closest bins to the left and to the right of
the cutoff. Source: SIM/Datasus. Significance levels: *10%, **5%, ***1%.

23

age threshold of labor law by itself would lead to a substantial increase in hiring in the formal
sector at eighteen substantially affecting criminal behavior, particularly in a setting where the
informal sector is so large. In the period of this study, the degree of informality in the labor
market in metropolitan areas in Brazil ranged between 38% and 49% percent (PNAS/IBGE).
As illustrated, using data from the Ministry of Labor and Employment (RAIS/MTE) to plot
the age distribution of new hires in the formal sector in 2000, we find that the greatest jump
in hires happened at 19 years old (see Figure 9.4 in the Web Appendix).
Symbolism and psychological triggers. Last, the 18th birthday may be charged with
symbolism, marking a milestone “coming of age” event that could discontinuously affect
individual behavior. This could affect not only violent criminal behavior specifically, but also
risky behavior and non-violent crimes, more generally. These psychological considerations,
which point to greater responsibility, would reinforce the potential deterrent effects of criminal
majority. Still, we fail to estimate any discontinuity for violent deaths by age.
We assess potential discontinuous changes in risky behavior at the majority age by testing
for a discontinuity on other death causes in Table 3. First, in Panel C, we assess the number
of deaths in unintentional accidents excluding vehicles accidents (category “W” in ICD-10
excluding vehicles and codes related to violent deaths). These include deaths that could
be related to imprudent behavior, such as unintentional falls, being struck by/against large
objects, drowning, and electric discharges. Since psychological triggers could also affect the
likelihood of self-harm, we also directly look at the age distribution of suicides in Panel D. Last,
we run our density discontinuity tests by looking at deaths from all other non-violent deaths
in Panel E. We see that reaching the age of criminal majority has no effect on the frequency
of deaths in any of these cases. We thus interpret that as evidence that a psychological or a
social mechanism does not seem to impose a major threat to our identification strategy.

5.2

Power Calculation

Our proxy hinges on the link between a reduction in violent criminal behavior and a decrease
in violent deaths. If this link is too weak, we could be facing a weak proxy issue, which would
manifest itself in large standard errors for a given sample size.
While we cannot directly assess the power of this link, we can calculate the power of our
test to identify a drop in the density of violent deaths directly. Appendix Figure 9.3 presents
the minimum detectable effect (approximately measured in percentage points) against the
power of the test, for three different significance levels. At 5% significance level and power of
80%, our exercise would be able to detect a drop in the density function of around 5%. A
minimum detectable effect of 10% has power close to one for the three standard significance

24

levels. This means our empirical strategy has enough power to identify meaningful effects of
the age of criminal majority on the frequency of violent deaths among young adults.
In Appendix 7, we provide additional meaning to this exercise by laying out a model linking
the identification discussion and the power calculation of our estimates for the treatment of
interest: a reduction in criminal involvement induced by the stronger penal code. The model
clarifies that the key parameter to this calculation is a non-identified nuisance parameter γ.
This parameter relates, for people at the critical age, the ratio of the baseline victimization
rate to the part of the victimization rate that is due to criminal behavior under the less strict
juvenile code.
In the limit case in which γ = 0, violent victimization is only a function of criminal
involvement, and detectable falls in death rates are related one-to-one to changes in this
treatment ratio. Away from that case, with knowledge of γ, one could still move from
detectable effects on violent victimization toward detectable effects on criminal involvement.
In particular, the minimum detectable effect of criminal involvement is a linear function of
γ and the minimum detectable effect on violent deaths. This means that even when the
baseline victimization rate is equal to the victimization rate due to criminal behavior under
the less strict juvenile code (γ = 1), a minimum detectable effect of 5% on violent deaths (at
5% significance level and power of 80%) relates to a detectable effect on criminal involvement
equal to 10.25%. That is, we are able to rule out relatively small deterrent effects.

6

Coming to terms with insignificant deterrent effects

We have searched for evidence of criminal deterrence effects from stronger potential punishments through the use of a novel proxy and a density discontinuity test. We studied Brazilian
metropolitan areas using potential changes in the frequencies of young male violent death as
a proxy for criminal involvement. Legal adults convicted of crimes are subject to stronger
potential sanctions when compared to minors, with the distinction in legal treatment being
defined by a sharp rule at the eighteenth birthday. Strong deterrence effects should lead to a
drop in criminal involvement and, given the high risk involved in violent criminal activities, to
a downward jump in the frequency of violent deaths around the eighteenth birthday. We have
discussed advantages and potential shortcomings of this approach, especially in comparison to
the more traditional use of arrest and conviction records as proxies for criminal involvement.
The data on several violent mortality measures show no jump in the frequency of violent
deaths around the age of criminal responsibility. Based on the well-documented partial
overlap between victimization and criminal engagement, this evidence adds to a body of
research that concludes that deterrent effects of harsher punishments for youth violent crime
25

are weak.
Insignificant deterrent effects of more severe penalties can still be reconciled with rational
theories of criminal behavior. These theories prescribe that for sanctions to serve their
fundamental purpose of deterring crime, punishment must be considered in all three of its
main dimensions: severity, certainty, and celerity. A change only in the severity with which
young offenders are punished probably falls short of its intention to deter crime, due to the
extremely low crime resolution rates prevalent in Brazilian cities. For instance, a report by
the Brazilian Ministry of Justice and the Public Prosecutor’s Association (ENASP, 2012, p.
22) indicates a homicide resolution rate below 10%, in sharp contrast with the rates obtained
in developed countries of 65% for the United States and 90% for the United Kingdom.
Our results are also consistent with the general theory of crime of Gottfredson and
Hirschi (1990), who point out that criminal behavior is often impulsive and reflects a lack
of self-control. Moffitt et al. (2011) show that individuals with poor self-control more often
make mistakes as adolescents, such as getting involved in crimes . In these cases, the threat
of harsher punishments would have an even smaller deterrent effect in practice.
Lastly, we emphasize that while the current discussion focuses on punishment-based
policies, some alternatives focus more on the benefit side of rational calculations. Many
policies may reduce criminal involvement by increasing the payoff from staying away from
crime, such as education and social inclusion programs. Thus there still remains an important
role for future research on the effectiveness of particular policies guided by this logic.

References
Araujo Jr, A. F. d., Pereira, D. M., Shikida, C. D. and Shikida, P. (2014). O efeito do
encarceramento sobre as taxas de homicídio no Brasil. Revista do Instituto do Direito Brasileiro,
3 (9), 6359–6388.
Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. In The Economic Dimensions
of Crime, Springer, pp. 13–68.
Biderman, C., De Mello, J. M. and Schneider, A. (2010). Dry laws and homicides: evidence
from the são paulo metropolitan area. The Economic Journal, 120 (543), 157–182.
Borges, D., Miranda, D., Duarte, T., Ettel, F. N. K., Guimarães, T. and Ferreira, T.
(2013). Mortes violentas no Brasil: uma análise do fluxo de informações. Coleção Pensando a
Segurança Pública Vol., 1.
Brown, S. A. (2012). Trends in juvenile justice state legislation: 2001-2011. Denver, Colorado:
National Conference of State Legislatures.
Callaghan, R. C., Sanches, M., Gatley, J. M. and Stockwell, T. (2014). Impacts of
drinking-age laws on mortality in canada, 1980–2009. Drug and alcohol dependence, 138, 137–145.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D. and Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence
intervals for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82 (6), 2295–2326.
Carpenter, C. and Dobkin, C. (2009). The effect of alcohol consumption on mortality: regression
discontinuity evidence from the minimum drinking age. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1 (1), 164–182.
Carvalho, L. S. and Soares, R. R. (2016). Living on the edge: Youth entry, career and exit in
drug-selling gangs. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 121, 77–98.

26

Cerqueira, D. R. (2013). Mapa de Homicídios Ocultos no Brasil. Discussion Papers 1848, Instituto
de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada - IPEA.
— (2014). Causas e consequencias do crime no brasil. 33 Premio BNDES de Economia.
Chalfin, A. and McCrary, J. (2014). Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature. Journal of
Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Curry, P. A. and Klumpp, T. (2009). Crime, punishment, and prejudice. Journal of Public
Economics, 93 (1), 73–84.
De Mello, J. M. (2015). Does drug illegality beget violence? evidence from the crack-cocaine
wave in sao paulo. Economía, pp. 157–185.
ENASP (2012). Metas 2: a impunidade como alvo. http://www.cnmp.gov.br/portal/images/
stories/Enasp/relatorio_enasp_FINAL.pdf - Accessed on 01/10/2018.
Exército Brasileiro (2010). Dúvidas Mais Frequentes. http://www.28csm.eb.mil.br/index.
php?option=com_content&view=article&id=76&Itemid=48 - Accessed on 01/10/2018.
Fan, J. and Gijbels, I. (1996). Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications. Chapman and
Hall.
FBI (2012). Federal Bureau of Investigation - The Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR). https:
//www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr - Accessed on 01/10/2018.
Gelman, A. and Imbens, G. (2014). Why High-order Polynomials Should not be Used in Regression
Discontinuity Designs. NBER Working Papers 20405, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Gottfredson, M. R. and Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of crime. Stanford University
Press.
Hahn, J., Todd, P. and Van der Klaauw, W. (2001). Identification and Estimation of Treatment
Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design. Econometrica, 69 (1), 201–09.
Hjalmarsson, R. (2009). Crime and Expected Punishment: Changes in Perceptions at the Age of
Criminal Majority. American Law and Economics Review, 11 (1), 209–248.
Igarapé, I. (2016). Homicide Monitor. https://igarape.org.br/en/homicide-monitor/ - Accessed on 01/10/2018.
Jales, H. and Yu, Z. (2017). Identification and estimation using a density discontinuity approach.
Regression Discontinuity Designs: Theory and Applications (Advances in Econometrics, volume
38), eds. MD Cattaneo and JC Escanciano, Emerald Group Publishing.
Jennings, W. G., Piquero, A. R. and Reingle, J. M. (2012). On the overlap between
victimization and offending: A review of the literature. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 17 (1),
16–26.
Kleck, G. (2004). Measures of gun ownership levels for macro-level crime and violence research.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 41, 3–36.
Latinobarometro (2015). Latinobarometro - Banco de Datos. http://www.latinobarometro.
org/latOnline.jsp - Accessed on 01/10/2018.
Lauritsen, J. L., Sampson, R. J. and Laub, J. H. (1991). Link between offending and victimization among adolescents, the. Criminology, 29, 265.
Lee, D. S. and McCrary, J. (2009). The Deterrence Effect of Prison: Dynamic Theory and
Evidence. Working Papers 1168, Princeton University, Department of Economics, Center for
Economic Policy Studies.
Loeffler, C. E. and Chalfin, A. (2015). Estimating the crime effects of raising the age of
majority: Evidence from connecticut.
— and Grunwald, B. (2015a). Decriminalizing delinquency: The effect of raising the age of
majority on juvenile recidivism. The Journal of Legal Studies, 44(2), 361–388.
— and — (2015b). Processed as an adult a regression discontinuity estimate of the crime effects of
charging nontransfer juveniles as adults. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 52(6),
890–922.
Ludwig, J. and Miller, D. L. (2007). Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence
from a Regression Discontinuity Design. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1), 159–208.

27

Madruga, C. S., Laranjeira, R., Caetano, R., Pinsky, I., Zaleski, M. and Ferri, C. P.
(2012). Use of licit and illicit substances among adolescents in brazil—a national survey. Addictive
Behaviors, 37 (10), 1171–1175.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design:
A density test. Journal of Econometrics, 142, 698–714.
Meyer, R. H. and Wise, D. A. (1983). Discontinuous distributions and missing persons: The
minimum wage and unemployed youth. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp.
1677–1698.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J., Harrington,
H., Houts, R., Poulton, R., Roberts, B. W., Ross, S. et al. (2011). A gradient of childhood
self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108 (7), 2693–2698.
Muftić, L. R. and Hunt, D. E. (2013). Victim precipitation further understanding the linkage
between victimization and offending in homicide. Homicide studies, 17 (3), 239–254.
Nadanovsky, P. (2009). O aumento no encarceramento e a redução nos homicídios em São Paulo,
Brasil, entre 1996 e 2005. Cadernos de Saúde Pública, 25, 1859 – 1864.
Nieuwbeerta, P. and Piquero, A. R. (2008). Mortality rates and causes of death of convicted
dutch criminals 25 years later. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 45 (3), 256–286.
Pyrooz, D. C., Moule, R. K. and Decker, S. H. (2014). The contribution of gang membership
to the victim–offender overlap. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 51 (3), 315–348.
Romano, M., Duailibi, S., Pinsky, I. and Laranjeira, R. (2007). Pesquisa de compra de
bebidas alcoólicas por adolescentes em duas cidades do estado de são paulo. Revista de saúde
publica, 41 (4), 495–501.
Rubin, D. B. (1974). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized
studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66 (5), 688–701.
Rubin, T. (2003). Juvenile justice: Policies, practices, and programs. Vol. 1. Kingston, NJ: Civic
Research Institute.
Saez, E. (2010). Do taxpayers bunch at kink points? American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 2 (3), 180–212.
Shecaira, S. S. (2004). Brazil: Criminal responsibility of minors in national and international
legal orders. Revue internationale de droit pénal,, 75 (1), 201–212.
Souza, D. P. O. d., Areco, K. N. and Silveira, D. X. d. (2005). Álcool e alcoolismo entre
adolescentes da rede estadual de ensino de cuiabá, mato grosso. Revista de saúde Pública.
UNDOC (2011). Global Study on Homicide: Trends, Contexts, Data. Vienna: United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
Waiselfisz, J. J. (2013). Mapa da Violência 2013. Brasilia: Secretaria Nacional da Juventude.
— (2014). Mapa da Violência 2014. Brasilia: Secretaria Nacional da Juventude.
Wittebrood, K. and Nieuwbeerta, P. (1999). Wages of sin? the link between offending, lifestyle
and violent victimisation. European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, 7 (1), 63–80.
Wolfgang, M. E. (1958). Patterns in criminal homicide.

28

7

Appendix: Power Calculation

To provide additional meaning to this exercise, let us return to the identification discussion
from Section 3.2. Participation in a crime is an individual decision that depends on the
treatment (assigned deterministically as a function of the age) Y (D) and, potentially, over
other characteristics. Assume that the probability of death (W = 1) for an individual of age
X and unobservable characteristics u takes the following form

P r (W = 1|X, u) = α (X, u) + βY (D) ,

where Y (D) ∈ {0, 1}is the criminal involvement of the agent for D ∈ {0, 1}. In this set-up,
the probability of dying from a violent cause at age X is the combination of the baseline
victimization rate if the agent does not engage in crime – α (X, u) – and the additional
propensity of being killed when participating in a criminal activity – βY (D). The key
functional assumption is then that the effect of criminal involvement on the probability of
violent victimization is separable and constant across individuals.
It follows that the density discontinuity parameter we estimate satisfies
!

E [Y (1) |X = 0]
ρ = lim ln f (X|W = 1) − lim ln f (X|W = 1) = ln γ +
− ln (γ + 1) ,
X&0
X%0
E [Y (0) |X = 0]
(4)
where γ =

E[α(X,u)|X=0]
βE[Y (0)|X=0]

is a non-identified nuisance parameter. This parameter relates, for

individuals at the critical age, the ratio of the baseline victimization rate to the part of
the victimization rate which is due to criminal behavior under the less strict juvenile code
(D = 0).
Notice that the term E [Y (1) |X = 0] /E [Y (0) |X = 0] in equation 4 is the treatment
ratio of interest: the reduction in criminal involvement induced by the stronger penal code.

29

Appendix (Not for Publication)
8

Placebos and Robustness Checks

The basic question we address in this section is whether in Brazil young individuals who have
just turned eighteen are different from those who are slightly younger than this threshold in
other aspects besides being subject to different penal systems. Before discussing it, let us
first consider another way of dealing with RD estimates on frequency data that has been
already advanced by the literature.

8.1

Linear Density Test

As we mentioned in section 3.2, the estimation procedure we employ (McCrary, 2008) uses
high-order polynomials. But more recently, Gelman and Imbens (2014) makes the case that
RD designs should favor low-order polynomials. As a robustness check, we then investigate
whether the results above carry over when we run a analogous density test but with low-order
polynomials for the density functions f + and f − and a rectangular kernel. Standard errors
used are bootstrapped to properly take into account the non-standard data generating process
and small-sample properties of the estimator. In this exercise, we use K = 25 bins on each
side.
Table 9.3 presents the results. Note that the coefficients in this table are expressed in
number of deaths. Its estimates should always be interpreted relative to the average sizes of
the bins that are constructed. For the ease of interpreting the magnitude in the drop (or
jump if positive) at 18 years, we include in brackets the size of the coefficient relative to the
frequency of the closest bin to the left of the cutoff. We find no evidence of discontinuity in
the frequency of violent deaths at the age cutoff.
We show more specifications using low-order polynomials.

I

8.2

Regression Discontinuity Design

One could be reasonably concerned that, by pooling together deaths from different years, we
may be comparing rates across cohorts of different sizes. We use the Brazilian Demography
Censuses from 2000 and 2010 which contain the cohort size per age in each metropolitan
region in these two years. In the census data we observe the age of individuals in number of
years, so it is not possible to observe the cohort size for each date of death. To circumvent
this, we interpolate the size of the cohort to calculate the death rate by age in weeks for every
metropolitan region in 2000 and 2010. We use this data to estimate a standard regression
discontinuity as Calonico et al. (2014), with the results shown in Table 9.6. Again we find no
evidence of a drop in violent mortality which could argue in favor of a a deterrence effect
around the age of majority.

8.3

Different Time Windows

Total death numbers have time trends of their own, either natural or influenced by policy
interventions or economic activity. Also, the death record database is itself in a continuous
improvement process, increasing its coverage and generating more detailed data
When we pool death observations from 1996 to 2013, these trends in death numbers and
death records do not violate our identification assumption unless there were distinct trends
for deaths just below or just above the cutoff at eighteen. For instance, if in this ten-year
period policies had been enacted that had reduced crime among recent adults but not among
soon-to-be adults, or if death records had improved solely for one of the two groups. To
the best of our knowledge, this does not seem to be the case. Still, in Table 9.4 we divide
our original time interval into four different time periods. The null effects for metropolitan
regions in Brazil remain in all time periods.

II

8.4

Placebo Age Cutoffs

We also evaluate alternative cutoff points besides the age of eighteen to check if our data
would point to a discontinuity in a value of our assignment variable that we know is not the
true cutoff for treatment assignment. Figure 9.2 plots the local density of violent deaths for
four different age cutoffs: 17, and 19 years old. Table 9.5 summarizes the results from the
formal procedures. We find a zero effect for every placebo cutoff.

9

Additional Figures and Tables

0

Bandwidth (in months)
5
10
15
20

Figure 9.1: t Statistics and Histogram (All Metropolitan Areas)

-2

-4

-2

Pseudo-t (from bootstrap)

0

2

0

2

0

.2

Density
.4
.6

.8

-4

Pseudo-t (from bootstrap)

This figure plots the t statistics calculated for violent deaths of males estimated separately for each
metropolitan area and state capital in Brazil, estimated in an analogous way as in Table 1. We present the t
statistic calculated for different bandwidths (3, 6, 12 and 17 months) as indicated in the vertical axis. Source:
SIM/Datasus.

III

.03

.01

.035

.02

.04

.03

.045

.04

.05

.05

Figure 9.2: Placebo cutoffs

-3

-2

-1

0

1

-1

0

1

2

3

(a) cutoff 17 years old
(b) cutoff 19 years old
This figure plots the frequency of violent deaths of young males per age of death (in the horizontal axis: age
of death minus 18 years old) for all victims who died in the metropolitan areas and state capitals of Brazil,
between 1996 and 2013. Each graph looks for a discontinuity in the death number for placebo age thresholds:
17 (figure a), and 19 (figure b) years old. We present the number of deaths per age of death for two years
around the placebo year threshold. The solid line is the n-order polynomial that best fits the scatter points
and the two dashed lines represent the confidence intervals. in each graph, the red vertical dashed line marks
the age of criminal majority (0 in the vertical axis); the gray vertical line marks the placebo threshold.
Figures generated using the default bandwidth and procedures from McCrary (2008). Source: SIM/Datasus.

IV

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 9.3: Power Test

0

.05

.1
epsilon

Significance 10%
Significance 1%

.15

.2

Significance 5%

This figure plots the power of our test to identify a drop in the density of violent deaths at eighteen years of
age. It plots the minimum detectable effect, M DE , defined by ln(1 − M DE ) = ln f − − ln f + . We consider
three different significance levels as indicated.

V

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Figure 9.4: Histogram of age of new hires in 2000

14

16
18
Age of workers hired in 2000

20

This figure plots the histogram of the age of hires in formal jobs in 2000. Sample males in metropolitan areas
and state capitals. Absolute number in each age: 588 (14); 4,549 (15); 27,223 (16); 34,861 (17); 57,015 (18);
100,845 (19); and 90,976 (20). Source: RAIS/MTE.

VI

Table 9.1: Codes from the ICD-10 and Categorization According to Intention

Intention

Characterizing
Instrument

Subdivision
of the ICD-10

Poisoning
Hanging
Drowning
Firearm

X85-X90
X91
X92
X93-X95
Y350
X96, Y01-Y03
Y351
X97-X98
Y352
Y00, Y04-Y05
W50
Y353
Y06-Y09
Y356, Y357

Impact
Homicide
Fire
Blunt

Unknown

Poisoning
Hanging
Drowning
Firearm
Indetermined

Impact
Fire
Sharp
Blunt
Unknown

Y10-Y19
Y20
Y21
Y22-Y24
W32-W34
Y25, Y30, Y32
Y26-Y27
Y28
W25-W26
Y29
Y33-Y34

Notes: Since we are following Cerqueira (2013), this table is part of his more detailed table 1, which includes
suicides and accidents (not related to motor vehicles).

VII

Table 9.2: Summary Statistics Homicides in Brazil (Largest Metropolitan Areas)
Bandwidth in months (from the point of cut-off)
-12

+12

-3

+3

-6

+6

-17

+17

Total Deaths

26246

30453

7227

7362

14160

14844

36442

47018

Marital Status
Single
Married
Others
Missing

21965
2826
678
777

25189
3420
989
855

6055
787
187
198

6040
869
247
206

11852
1542
366
400

12276
1705
477
386

30586
3861
914
1081

38820
5337
1538
1323

Last Level of Schooling Completed
Year
650 761
st
th
5 -8 Year
2736 3154
High School
7382 7894
Incomp. College or more
5398 6543
Missing
10080 12101

164
740
1997
1488
2838

162
760
1896
1572
2972

337
1451
3978
2926
5468

364
1542
3830
3166
5942

878
3808
10364
7432
13960

1171
4989
12001
10198
18659

Type of Place Where Death Took
Hospital
9712
Domicile
2167
Public Venue
13784
Missing
115

2686
618
3756
34

2765
609
3829
39

5222
1191
7425
61

5538
1239
7766
64

13643
2960
19062
146

17403
3958
24633
209

Source of Information for the Death Declaration
Police Report
9687 11136 2650
Hospital
801 931
225
Other
1895 2208
513
Missing
13863 16178 3839

2696
198
543
3925

5196
415
1027
7522

5474
443
1092
7835

13441
1127
2681
19193

17039
1430
3433
25116

Autopsy

5544

10587

11196

27464

35343

1st -4th

19796

Place
11367
2561
15881
135

22884

5429

This table presents the number of violent death declarations for each value of the covariates listed. The
distance to the point of cut-off at the age of 18 is measured in months. 1st year of school in Brazil starts
usually at age 6 and High School generally encompasses the ages between 14 and 18.

VIII

Table 9.3: Density Discontinuity on the Frequency of Violent Deaths by Age –
Lower order Polynomials
Bandwidth in months (from the point of cutoff)
3
(1)

6
(2)

9
(3)

12
(4)

1.18
(11.86)
[.3%]

-21.71
(14.45)
[-3.6%]

-15.68
(16.65)
[-1.8%]

Panel A: Linear
2.87
ρ̂
(8.33)
[1.5%]
Panel B: Quadratic
5.73
ρ̂
(12.66)
[2.9%]
Panel C: Cubic
25.06
ρ̂
(16.82)
[12.9%]

1.75
(17.83)
[.4%]

8.91
(21.64)
[1.5%]

-23.09
(25.09)
[-2.6%]

5.63
(24.07)
[1.3%]

14.66
(29.01)
[2.4%]

17.21
(34.11)
[2%]

L & R bins

440\478

607\653

878\890

195\244

Notes: RD estimates from a (local) linear, quadratic or cubic regression given a choice of bandwidth indicated
in the columns and using 25 age bins on each side of the cutoff. Bootstrapped standard errors are in
parentheses (10000 replications). The percentage increase (if positive) or decrease (if negative) in the
frequency of homicides relative to the size of the closest bin to the left of the cutoff are shown in brackets. L &
R bins displays the number of deaths in the closest bins to the left and to the right of the cutoff. Significance
levels: *10%, **5%, ***1%.

IX

Table 9.4: Homicides in Brazil (Largest Metropolitan Areas) – different years
Bandwidth in months (from the point of cutoff)
12

3

Panel A: Years 1996-1999
-.011
.083
ρ̂
(.047)
(.094)
Total Deaths
8224
2161
L & R bins
333/353 333/353
Panel B: Years 2000-2003
.006
-.048
ρ̂
(.041)
(.084)
Total Deaths
11405
2847
L & R bins
400/399 400/399
Panel C: Years 2004-2008
-.028
.039
ρ̂
(.042)
(.082)
Total Deaths
10545
2702
L & R bins
440/451 440/451
Panel D: Years 2009-2013
-.067
-.087
ρ̂
(.046)
(.091)
Total Deaths
8531
2232
L & R bins
466/438 466/438

6

17

.04
(.066)
4266
333/353

-.005
(.038)
12021
333/353

.016
(.058)
5796
400/399

-.016
(.033)
16814
400/399

.007
(.059)
5392
440/451

-.035
(.034)
15422
440/451

-.063
(.065)
4392
466/438

-.059
(.038)
12412
466/438

This table presents the discontinuity estimate and standard errors (in parenthesis) from the discontinuity
density test proposed by McCrary (2008). Each panel restricts the sample to deaths in the years indicated.
Output variable is the number of violent deaths by age around 18 years old. The discontinuity estimate, ρ̂, is
the log difference in height just before and after the 18 years old cutoff. Our sample are all violent deaths
of men between 16 and 20 years old who died in Brazilian metropolitan areas. Columns present estimates
for different bandwidths measured in months (rounded). Bandwidth in column (1) is the rule-of-thumb
bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996). Total Deaths is the number of deaths in the chosen bandwidth
and L & R bins displays the number of deaths in the closest bins to the left and to the right of the cutoff.
Source: SIM/Datasus. Significance levels: *10%, **5%, ***1%.

X

Table 9.5: Homicides in Brazil (Largest Metropolitan Areas) – different cutoffs
Bandwidth in months
12

3

6

Panel A: Cutoff at 17 years old
.008
-.07
ρ̂
(.024)
(.048)
Total Deaths
31997
8104
L & R bins
684/653 684/653
Panel B: Cutoff at 19 years old
.02
-.005
ρ̂
(.02)
(.041)
Total Deaths
46022
11492
L & R bins
903/874 903/874

17

-.006
(.034)
15932
684/653

.032
(.02)
47228
684/653

.015
(.029)
23130
903/874

.018
(.017)
68844
903/874

This table presents the discontinuity estimate and standard errors (in parenthesis) from the discontinuity
density test proposed by McCrary (2008). Output variable is the number of violent deaths by age around
different age cutoffs (in panels). The discontinuity estimate, ρ̂, is the log difference in height just before and
after the indicated age cutoff. Our sample are all violent deaths of men between 16 and 20 years old who died
in Brazilian metropolitan areas. Columns present estimates for different bandwidths measured in months
(rounded). Bandwidth in column (1) is the rule-of-thumb bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels (1996).
Total Deaths is the number of deaths in the chosen bandwidth and L & R bins displays the number of deaths
in the closest bins to the left and to the right of the cutoff. Source: SIM/Datasus. Significance levels: *10%,
**5%, ***1%.

Table 9.6: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Violent Death Rates by Age
Using Census
Bandwidth (in months)
7
(1)

2
(2)

3
(3)

10
(4)

ρ̂

1.16
(1.29)

.62
(2.75)

1.81
(2.43)

-.33
(1.59)

Number of observations

1374

340

688

2036

Estimates of a regression discontinuity design, as Calonico et al. (2014), of the violent deaths rate by age
around 18 years old. All deaths in 2000 and 2010. Death rates calculated using interpolation of metropolitan
area-cohort population using Censo data. Columns present estimates for different bandwidths measured in
months (rounded). Bandwidth in column (1) is the rule-of-thumb bandwidth proposed by Fan and Gijbels
(1996). Total Deaths is the number of deaths in the chosen bandwidth. Total number of observations 17153.
Source: SIM/Datasus. Significance levels: *10%, **5%, ***1%.

XI

