Social impacts of peer-to-peer energy
trading: a rapid realist review protocol
Michael J. Fell, UCL Energy Institute, michael.fell@ucl.ac.uk, @mikefsway

Abstract
This document outlines our approach to conducting a rapid realist review to identify evidence for
potential impacts on people and society of peer-to-peer energy trading (and of distributed ledger
technology used in this context). Our motivation for the study is to help anticipate who might stand
to win or lose (and how and why), inform policy/regulation to help maximize benefits and minimize
harm, and identify research gaps. While our focus is in the energy sector, we also plan to draw on
evidence (where relevant) from examples of sharing economy models in non-energy sectors. We
have already developed and engaged around a provisional programme theory (presented as a set of
Context-Mechanism-Outcome statements), which we will develop as the review progresses. We set
out where and how we will seek to identify evidence (through online searching, reference checking
and calling for evidence). In line with our exploratory and iterative approach, we propose broad
inclusion criteria. We will assess evidence quality subjectively on the basis of relevance and rigour
for each Context-Mechanism-Outcome group, not at document level. Synthesis will be achieved
through developing our programme theory and connecting evidence to it. We will disseminate
findings through an academic paper (or papers), one or more policy briefings (with associated
engagement events), one or more public blogs, and materials will be openly shared on an ongoing
basis through an Open Science Framework page.

Introduction
Peer-to-peer energy trading (where prosumers trade energy directly with each other) is the subject
of much industry, policy and research interest because of the potential it holds to optimize use of
distributed energy resources (DER) and energy networks. It is also currently the most common use
case for startups in the energy-blockchain space (see Lacey [2018]). If widely adopted it would
represent a significant move away from the status quo in established energy markets. For this
reason it is necessary to anticipate and understand the positive and negative effects it could have on
people and society
This document is a protocol for a rapid realist review which aims to respond to this need. Realist
reviews are appropriate for examining complex interventions and can help provide “an explanatory
analysis aimed at discerning what works for whom, in what circumstances, in what respects and
how” (Pawson et al., 2005: 21). Rapid realist reviews aim to do this in a way which is capable of
“responding to time-sensitive and/or emerging issues, while preserving the core elements of realist
methodology” (Saul et al., 2013: 1).
The protocol specifies the steps which will be taken in the review. Since realist review is inherently
an iterative, learning approach, this protocol will provide a starting point which is expected to evolve
as the review progresses. This protocol is being written after one stage – the production of
provisional Context-Mechanism-Outcome statements (see below for summary) – has been
completed, and therefore focuses on the evidence identification and synthesis stages.

Please note that we1 have kept this protocol relatively brief in order to get the evidence
identification stage underway as quickly as possible. Because we are tending to take an inclusive
approach, and because of the ability to iterate and adapt during the course of the review, we think
this will best balance the requirement to get early feedback and produce rapid learnings with
methodological best practice. We intend to produce future documents which go into more detail on
the background, motivations, justification for scope, etc. and will share these when available (see
dissemination section for more details of outputs).

Scope
For the purposes of this review we are interested in impacts as they might be experienced by people
as individuals and as part of families, households, communities and societies. This includes economic
impacts such as energy bills or revenue from selling energy, as well as factors such as way or life,
culture, community, health/wellbeing, and environment (as it directly impacts people)2.
Regarding the concept of peer-to-peer energy trading, we initially interpret this broadly to include
‘true’ peer-to-peer arrangements, where there is some direct energy-related transaction between
individuals, as well as an array of community-based, local and peer-to-market arrangements that fall
short of simply selling energy to a large-scale (e.g. national) network without any form of matching3.
Given that the expect the evidence base in this area to be limited, we will err towards taking an
inclusive approach. We expect the vast majority of identified evidence to relate to electricity trading,
but will not exclude other energy vectors or services (e.g. gas or heating) if examples are identified.
Recognising the limited evidence base, we also propose to expand the scope of the review to include
evidence on social impacts of sharing economy models more broadly, and across sectors. We do not
expect this exercise to be comprehensive, but through the approach outlined below we will seek to
identify the most relevant examples to the energy sector. Figure 1 summarises the scope of the
review.

Figure 1: Venn diagram showing the scope of the review. We expect greatest comprehensiveness in segment 1, while
evidence in segment 2 will be drawn on more selectively.

1

The author of this document (Michael Fell), and David Shipworth of UCL who is also working on this project.
Based on the International Association for Impact Assessment page on Social Impact Assessment.
3
This encompassing approach will be considered again depending on the quantity of relevant evidence that is
identified.
2

While by no means all peer-to-peer energy (or other) trading arrangements are enabled by
distributed ledger technologies (DLTs), we will pay particular attention to any impacts which appear
to be directly associated with the involvement of such technology. This will inform consideration of
the extent to which DLTs are should be viewed as a positive part of future services.
In a final point on scope, we intend the outputs of the review to be most relevant to countries (such
as the UK) which already have substantial established national energy infrastructure. We anticipate
the issues related to operating peer-to-peer models in these contexts will be different to those
connected with more basic energy access/reliability in countries without established infrastructure.
However, this does not mean that we will exclude evidence drawn from examples in countries
without substantial established infrastructure – rather that we will consider whether it is sufficiently
relevant to provide learnings for this context.

Aim and research questions
The overall aim of this project phase is to identify the range of, and weight of evidence for, possible
impacts on people and society associated with DLT-enabled peer-to-peer energy trading. The
research questions are:
1. What may be (a) the outcomes of introducing P2P energy trading, (b) the mechanisms by
which these outcomes may come about, (c) the contexts in which these mechanisms may or
may not operate, (d) the relative importance of outcomes and (e) the likelihood of
outcomes?
2. What is the evidence that expected social impacts are occurring (or could occur), how, and
in which contexts?
3. How, if at all, are social impacts being monitored and measured?
4. Which social impacts are (a) expected and (b) demonstrated to be associated with the use of
distributed ledger technologies, and what are the mechanisms/contexts for this?
5. What actual or proposed policy/practice responses exist to maximise social benefits and
minimize harms?
6. Where are the key gaps in the evidence regarding social impacts that future research should
address?
The purpose of this research is to inform mitigation of negative impacts (especially for otherwise
vulnerable groups), maximization of benefits, as well as to recognise and prioritise areas for
regulation and future research in this space. Aside from its intrinsic importance, considering social
impacts is also a requirement of the Social Value Act 2013 so will be a consideration for UKs public
bodies offering and procuring peer-to-peer trading. To make the research as relevant as possible in
the short-term we aim to identify specific contexts where the introduction of peer-to-peer trading is
likely to come with maximum benefit and least harm, so that these can be targeted first.

Development of programme theory
The first stage of a realist review involves production of hypothesised contexts, mechanisms and
outcomes (CMOs) which together make up the programme theory4. These CMOs may be
represented diagrammatically or spelled out in the form of CMO statements. We developed initial
CMOs for this project on the basis of informal reading and discussion with individuals representing
government, the energy regulator, consumer and community energy organisations. These
4

We use this term provisionally and further discussion of the precise meaning of this as compared to Theory of
Change and logic model approaches will be reserved for future documents.

provisional CMOs are available online here, and we also include CMO statements in the appendix.
The CMOs will be updated on a regular basis throughout the review the reflect the evidence we have
identified, as these updated versions will be made available at the link above.

Identifying evidence
It is not possible to specify fully in advance the full process by which a realist review will be
conducted. Such reviews are iterative by design (Pawson et al., 2005), and should adapt to follow the
evidence as the review progresses. This is (perhaps especially) the case in a rapidly developing area
such as this, where an exploratory approach is most appropriate. However, we hope that provision
of an initial plan will be useful here in giving readers an idea of the coverage we expect to achieve,
and in soliciting feedback on the approach. This and all subsequent sections are therefore subject to
variation depending on emerging findings of the review.
We intend to seek evidence in a number of ways: through database and other online searches;
through following references; and through direct engagement with individuals and organizations
working in areas relevant to the review. To inform online searches, we have identified a number of
key conceptual areas within this review: peer-to-peer and sharing economy; social impacts
(including concepts around people and concepts around impacts); and energy. Table 1 sets out the
sub-concepts we would like to include, and how we intend to operationalise these in searches.

Table 1: Concepts, search terms and example search string.

Concept

Search term

Scopus
example

Peer-to-peer
Peer-to-peer trading
Community selfconsumption
Transactive [energy]
Sharing economy5
Collaborative
consumption
Collaborative
economy
Peer economy
Platform economy

People
People
Society
Social
Consumers
Prosumers
Customers

Impacts
Energy
Distributional
Energy
Equity
Electricity
Equality/inequality Power (NB –
Fairness
this term is
Justice
also commonly
Poverty
used outside
Vulnerability
of the energy
Protection
context so use
Lifestyle
will be kept
Culture
under review)
Health
Quality of life
Bills
Socio-economic
“peer-to-peer”
people
distributional
energy
“peer to peer”
societ*
*equit*
electricity
p2p
social*
*equal*
power
“commun* self*sumer*
fair*
consumption”
customer*
justice
transactive
*pover*
“sharing economy”
vulnerab*
“collaborative
protect*
consumption”
lifestyle
“collaborative
health*
economy”
“quality of life”
“peer economy”
bill*
“platform economy”
socio*economic
( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "peer-to-peer" OR "peer to peer" OR p2p OR "commun* selfconsumption" OR transactive OR "sharing economy" OR "collaborative
consumption" OR "collaborative economy" OR "peer economy" OR "platform
economy" ) ) AND ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( people OR societ* OR *sumer* OR
customer* OR distributional OR equity OR fair* OR justice OR protect* OR
lifestyle OR health* OR “quality of life” OR bill* OR socio*economic) ) AND (
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( energy OR electricity) )

As depicted in figure 1, the search will have a primary and a secondary focus which can be expressed
(with reference to the concepts in table 1) as follows:
1. Peer-to-peer AND Energy AND (People OR Impacts)
2. Peer-to-peer AND Impacts
Since pilot searches on academic databases reveal a manageable number of publications focusing
specifically on P2P energy trading, searches in stream 1 (containing the ‘energy’ concepts) will
include the widest variety of sharing economy, people and social impacts terms where possible.
Searches in stream 2 (not constrained to energy) will not contain generic social terms (e.g. people,

5

These wider sharing economy terms are derived the list available here.

society) but instead focus on more specifically impact-related terms. This is because pilot searches
suggest that otherwise we would identify an unmanageably large number of potential sources.
The following bibliographic databases will be searched:




Scopus
Web of Science (all databases)
ScienceDirect

Searches will also be developed based on the above search terms for following6:










Government publications (using Google, restricting search to site:.gov.uk, .gov, .gov.au, etc.)
Non-profits, civil society organizations, etc. (using Google, restricting search to site:.org,
.org.uk, .org.au, etc.)
Academic institutions (using Google, restricting search to site:.ac.uk, .edu, etc.)
Google Scholar, using Publish or Perish software and downloading the first 1000 results
(Bramer et al., 2016; Haddaway et al., 2015).
Cambridge Energy Policy Research Group working papers
UK Energy Research Centre
European Commission Research and Innovation (Energy)
US Department of Energy (including SciTech Connect)
A general Google search with more focused terms from the above table.

In all cases the specific search string, date and number of results will be recorded. All hits from
database searches will be downloaded and imported in reference manager software (Zotero). For
searches of other sources, results will be downloaded where the title and/or initial screening
suggests the document is likely to meet the inclusion criteria.
In addition to the above searches, the reference lists of sources passing the inclusion criteria below
will be read, and any documents considered likely to be relevant on the basis of the bibliographic
information will be added to the database and screened. Depending on the number of sources
included, forward citation checking will also be employed (using Google Scholar, downloading
references which are thought likely to meet the screening criteria.
We will also proactively engage with others working in this area in case they are able to share any
unpublished relevant evidence. We will achieve this by emailing individuals whom we are aware are
working in this area, and by putting calls to share evidence on social media such as Twitter.

Inclusion screening
All references will be imported into the systematic review management software EPPI-Reviewer 4
and de-duplicated. They will then be screened by a single reviewer on the basis of the inclusion
criteria below. A first-pass screening will be done on title/abstract, with a second screening on the
full document. The inclusion criteria are as follows, all of which must be met (except where noted
otherwise):

6

Where Google is used in searching, results pages will be read with the inclusion criteria in mind, and those
results which the title/brief description indicate will likely meet the criteria will be saved. Where there are a
large number of potentially relevant search results, we may additionally specify filetype:PDF as previous
experience suggests that project reports are often made available in this file type.





Substantial consideration of sharing economy or related models (this to be interpreted
broadly when in doubt).
Contains empirical or model-based evidence, or reasoned conceptual/theoretical
consideration, of impacts on people or society
In context of energy (search 1 only)

The reference lists of all documents still included at this point will be checked, and any relevant
documents referred to will also be loaded into EPPI-Reviewer and passed through the screening
process.

Quality assessment
It is expected that the types and sources of evidence drawn upon in this review will be highly
heterogeneous. Rather than employing multiple quality appraisal checklists, this review will follow
the approach recommended by (Pawson et al., 2005) and rely more heavily on subjective judgement
as to the relevance of the evidence to the subject of the review, and its rigour. Furthermore, this
judgement will not be made for studies in their entirety but for each evidential claim as it relates to a
specific part of the developing programme theory. It is anticipated that low/medium/high ratings
will be assigned for relevance and rigour. Where external experts recommend the use of specific
documents, these recommendations will be taken into account when considered relevance/rigour
(as suggested by (Saul et al., 2013)).

Extraction
Basic information such as location, date and sector (see below) will be extracted from each, which
will allow generation of a simple quantitative overview of the included sources. The main extraction
will be in the form of open-ended text summaries describing key outcomes, mechanisms, context
and recommendations (see next section). We will set up the following codes in EPPI-Reviewer but
expect this to be adapted as appropriate as material is reviewed.











Geographical location of study (country list)
Date of deployment (>=2015, 2010-2014, 2005-2009, 2000-2004, <=1999)
About the source (tick all that apply: does it include: qualitative, quantitative,
modelling/simulation, primary data collection/analysis, secondary data analysis,
review/meta-analysis, primarily theoretical/conceptual, comments [description of study
including points such as sample size and representativeness, specific methods, if appropriate])
Sector (energy, accommodation, transport, other [more to be added if encountered
regularly])
Characteristics of peer-to-peer operation(s) (if applicable)
Types of impact considered (economic, lifestyle, cultural, community, quality of life, health,
other)
CMO summaries (open text summaries describing the main outcomes discussed, the
mechanisms by which they are suggested to arise, contextual factors, practice
recommendations, each with low/medium/high rating for relevance and rigour).
Is distributed ledger technology employed (yes/no – if yes, include details and CMOs
connected directly with DLTs).
Quantitative associations. Where sources give some indication of a level of association
between two or more relevant variables, this will be noted to inform future graphical
probabilistic modelling.

Analysis/synthesis
We will use EPPI-Reviewer to conduct basic quantitative analysis to describe the breakdown of the
included sources. For the main analysis, source bibliographic information and extracted CMO
summaries will be imported into NVivo and subject to qualitative content analysis (Hsieh and
Shannon, 2005). The approach will primarily be inductive (i.e. subjects/themes will be sought and
coded for in the text), but, where appropriate, codes based on the provisional CMOs will also be
applied.
The codes will be used to identify evidence which supports or undermines the provisional CMOs, and
which suggests new ones. The synthesis stage will involve mapping evidence onto the provisional
CMO table, and then iteratively producing new tables featuring amended and additional CMOs that
reflect the available evidence. The final product will be an augmented CMO table that includes the
CMOs, along with relevant summaries of supporting evidence (which references and links to the
original source) and flagging of gaps. A colour coding system to indicate where there is strong,
moderate or weak/no evidence will be employed if appropriate.

Dissemination
We intend to write an academic paper with a fuller explanation of the background, motivations and
process of the review, as we think there will be value to the community in setting out more detail on
the approach as we are applying it. We will also produce an academic paper on the findings. We
anticipate presenting the results at academic conferences.
Looking beyond academia, provisional summaries will be shared and discussed with the original
advisors based in government, the regulator and consumer/community organizations. Following this
engagement we will produce a policy briefing and explore opportunities to run an engagement
event (such as a workshop) around this. We will produce blog posts summarizing the findings and
share these as widely as possible. We will seek ways to tie the findings in with other engagement
projects we have underway (such as the development of a peer-to-peer energy trading board game).
The project has an Open Science Framework site (here) where project documents (including CMO
statements) are, and will continue to be, made available. We will explore ways or visualising the
programme theory in a way that clearly highlights the weight of evidence supporting it (ideally with
direct links to that evidence).
If you would like to discuss dissemination opportunities, or any other aspect of the project, please
contact Michael Fell (michael.fell@ucl.ac.uk).

Acknowledgements
This work is funded through the Centre for Research into Energy Demand Solutions (CREDS, grant
number EP/R035288/1).

References
Bramer, W.M., Giustini, D., Kramer, B.M.R., 2016. Comparing the coverage, recall, and precision of
searches for 120 systematic reviews in Embase, MEDLINE, and Google Scholar: a prospective
study. Syst. Rev. 5, 39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-016-0215-7
Haddaway, N.R., Collins, A.M., Coughlin, D., Kirk, S., 2015. The Role of Google Scholar in Evidence
Reviews and Its Applicability to Grey Literature Searching. PLOS ONE 10, e0138237.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0138237

Hsieh, H.-F., Shannon, S.E., 2005. Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis. Qual. Health
Res. 15, 1277–1288. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305276687
Lacey, S., 2018. How Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading on the Blockchain Might Work [WWW Document].
URL https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/how-peer-to-peer-energy-trading-onthe-blockchain-might-work (accessed 11.19.18).
Pawson, R., Greenhalgh, T., Harvey, G., Walshe, K., 2005. Realist review - a new method of
systematic review designed for complex policy interventions
Realist review - a new method of systematic review designed for complex policy
interventions. J. Health Serv. Res. Policy 10, 21–34.
https://doi.org/10.1258/1355819054308530

,

Saul, J.E., Willis, C.D., Bitz, J., Best, A., 2013. A time-responsive tool for informing policy making:
rapid realist review. Implement. Sci. 8, 103. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-8-103

Appendix
This document lists our provisional Context-Mechanism-Outcome (CMO) statements for (household)
economic and social implications of transition to peer-to-peer energy trading. In the statements we
have framed outcomes as positive. Where the mechanism doesn’t operate, the hypothesis is that
the outcome would not be observed. Where relevant we have highlighted possible negative
outcomes as risks – either in the table (if directly associated with a specific mechanism) or in an
additional list at the end.
These statements (and future iterations) are also available in table and graphical form at this link.
General context points:
All points relating to individual households assume that the household participates in a peer-to-peer
trading scheme – or highlights where this is not the case, if important. Unless otherwise detailed, we
expect participants to be exposed to possible benefits, while non-participants may be at risk of
disadvantage. (We are looking separately at the role of contextual factors in determining likelihood
of participation.)
The following points of context are likely to be important or of interest for all the
outcomes/mechanisms. If applicable, we have stated our broad expectation regarding the
implications of each contextual point here, which can be justified through reference to the
mechanisms in the table. Where additional context points are considered relevant they are included
in the appropriate column.






Level of communal/individual ownership of generation/storage assets. Broadly we expect
those households/communities which own assets to benefit more than those who do not.
Level of existing community energy activity. Broadly we expect the existence of community
energy schemes to increase community and social benefits.
Existing penetration of distributed generation within scheme. Broadly we expect schemes
with higher proportions of in-scheme generation to benefit more.
Spatial scale and location of scheme (e.g. local vs non-local, urban/rural/density, level of
insolation).
Level of non-domestic involvement.

Type

Outcome

Mechanism

Economic
Energy price
(for
decrease
prosumers/
consumers)

Participants will buy energy from peers if it
is cheaper than from the grid, driving
prices down for participants compared to
non-participants who only have access to
grid electricity. This may be due to lower
fuel costs and/or tax/network charge
reductions as below. RISK: Prices may
increase for non-participants as suppliers
seek to recoup losses.
Energy price
Participants have the opportunity to
decrease (through donate or offer discounts to other
donation)
participants (e.g. friend/relatives or those
at risk of fuel poverty), reducing prices for
those participants. RISK: Perceived role of
public sector in energy affordability or
providing social services may be
diminished.
Network cost
If there is cost-reflective network charging
reduction
and p2p schemes are locally focused, less
use of distribution/transmission system
leads to lower prices for participants. RISK:
Non-participants may be charged more to
cover network costs (connected with grid
defection).
Tax/levy reduction Depending on the tax regime, electricity
bought from peers may not be liable to
taxation in the same way as grid-purchased
electricity, leading to price reductions.
RISK: Taxes may have to increase for nonparticipants, and/or there is a reduction in
levy income for programmes providing
public goods.
Disintermediation- Participating consumers have less
related reductions exposure to the operating costs of
suppliers. RISK: Supplier operating costs
are disproportionately loaded onto nonparticipants.

Savings from
energy demand
reduction

Increased salience of energy motivates
installation of energy efficiency
improvements (e.g. fabric, appliance),
especially if promoted through, and for the
benefit of, the scheme. These and
behaviour-based reductions are motivated
by desire to minimize imports of grid
electricity. RISK: Low prices or desire to
consumer energy within the trading

Additional
context points
Affluence,
environmental or
community values
(e.g. it is possible
some people may
buy local energy
even if more
expensive).
Existing mix of
people who can
afford to donate
and people who
are perceived to
benefit from
donation.
Distribution or
transmission grid
constraints in
participant
localities.

Whether
participants
retain individual
relationship with
suppliers, or
share same
supplier who
operates scheme.
Level of
community
ownership of
scheme.
Potential to make
EE improvements
(e.g. new vs old
stock).

Type

Outcome

Mechanism
scheme that would otherwise be exported
increases energy use at times.

Income from
exports

Income/savings
from demand
shifting

Income from
other grid services

Social

Lifestyle/cultural
practice impacts
from demand
shifting

Participating prosumers are able to obtain
a better price for their exports by selling to
peers than if they sell to the grid,
increasing their income. RISK: If sales
revenues are lower than expected,
prosumers investing in renewables/storage
may not see sufficient return on
investment.
Fluctuating prices (or other signals linked
to availability of generation within the
scheme) lead to changes in energy
consumption patterns. RISK: Those unable
to short risk paying more. RISK: Price
comparison is harder, meaning people at
risk of not getting best deal.
Participants in possession of storage
and/or smart appliances are able to offer
services such as frequency response and
short-term operating reserve, for which
they are compensated.
See mechanism for demand shifting above.

(Local) training
and/or
employment
opportunities

(Local) schemes make it their aim to
employ (local) people (e.g. in scheme
administration, maintenance, etc.) and
provide training in these and related
roles/skills.

Increased social
trust

Distributed ledger technology reduces
opportunity to manipulate or make
fraudulent transactions and increase
transparency, improving trust within the
scheme and meaning
participants/organisers are more likely to
act in good faith.
Participants have more direct connection
with (and reliance on) each other
(household to household, and household
to business/organization such as school)

Increased
community
attachment

Additional
context points
Affordability of EE
improvements.
Household makeup, lifestyle and
practices.

Possession of
smart appliances
and/or storage.
Household makeup, lifestyle and
practices.
Possession of
smart appliances
and/or storage.

Possession of
smart appliances
and/or storage.
Household makeup, lifestyle and
practices.
Level of
community
ownership of
scheme.
Availability of
workers or
trainees.
Distributed ledger
technology
employed.

Level of
community
ownership of
scheme.

Type

Outcome

Temperaturerelated health
benefits

Mechanism
increasing sense of attachment to that
community. They have to coordinate with
each other to get the right diversity of
assets and reach balanced position. RISK:
Negative interactions between members,
neighbours, etc.
Energy efficiency improvements (see
above) reduce cold and/or overheating.

General health
and care benefits

Trading schemes which involve a strong
community care element are able to pick
up and provide support for participants’
health and care issues.

Air pollutionrelated health
benefits

Lower electricity prices and improved
returns from vehicle-to-grid increases
electric vehicle uptake by scheme
participants, while the grid management
improvement that such schemes offer
permit operation of more EVs in a local
area simultaneously.
Potential lack of a single identifiable legal
entity that can be held responsible for
consumer/prosumer protection issues.

Various consumer
protection issues
including: lack of
complaintshandling, lack of
redress, losses
connected with
bankruptcy of
enabling
platforms, lack of
contribution to
ombudsman costs

Additional
context points

Age.
Current
health/disability
status.
Level of
community
ownership of
scheme.
Current
health/disability
status.
Affordability of
EVs.

Particular risk if
participants less
able to
understand any
rights and
protection
entitlements that
are put in place.

Other contextual factors to consider:





Tenure
Digital engagement/exclusion
Being ‘time poor’
Ability to understand more complex schemes

Additional risks not captured above:


Algorithmic bias – design of algorithms used to inform trading (or the data they draw on)
unfairly benefit disadvantage participants on the basis of certain characteristics.






Composition of trading group – pursuit of ideal balance may preclude addition of new
participants or acquisition of new assets – this may result in people being tied in to
contracts.
Possibility that other models (e.g. based around energy services) that could present even
greater savings are precluded if not compatible with P2P trading (opportunity cost).
Marketization and individualisation of energy system – how do we decide if this is desirable
for people and society.

