"x"
"1" "Open educational resources and graduate social work students:  Cost, outcomes, use, and perceptions"
"2" "Matthew P. DeCarlo, PhD MSW"
"3" "Susan Schoppelrey, PhD MSW"
"4" "Courtney Crenshaw, MSW"
"5" "Radford University School of Social Work"
"6" "Radford, VA"
"7" "Mary C. Secret, PhD MSW"
"8" "Melissa Stewart, PhD MSW"
"9" "Virginia Commonwealth University School of Social Work"
"10" "Richmond, VA"
"11" "Author Note:"
"12" "This  project  was financially support ed  by the Radford University Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Quality Improvement and the Open Education Group’s OER Research Fellowship.  It was emotionally  support ed   by  Emily and Finn DeCarlo."
"13" "Correspondence should be directed to  Matthew P. DeCarlo, PO Box 6958, Radford, VA 24142. Email: mdecarlo1@radford.edu."
"14" "Abstract"
"15" "Researchers conducted a dual-site pilot experiment evaluating the impact of an open textbook on graduate social work students in research methods courses.  Students using the commercial and open textbook demonstrated equivalent final grades and test scores.  The open resource was more likely to be used  on a weekly basis  by students  and  was described as straightforward and  easy  to  access .  Among students who extensively used the open textbook, it was associated with improved attitudes towards research methods.  The impact of open textbooks on student use, perceptions, and access varied by hybrid and in-person course format.   These results validate the work of social work educators creating, sharing, and implementing open educational resources as way to address the barriers to access and engagement with  social work knowledge ."
"16" "Keywords: open educational resources, textbook costs, distance education, research methods, mixed methods, student-engaged research"
"17" "Open educational resources and graduate social work students: Cost, outcomes, use, and perceptions"
"18" "According to Willinsky (2006),  “ a ccess to knowledge is a human right that is closely associated with the ability to defend as well as advocate for other rights ” (p. 143).   Open education is based on the idea that access to higher education, and information, should be  accessible  to all.  Grounding  itself in the  Universal Declaration on Human Rights , open education is a radical alternative to existing  monopolistic  structures of knowledge creation and sharing.  Understanding   knowledge   through  a social equity lens highlights how inequitable access to information  replicates and exacerbates existing  privileges  and inhibits the ability of people to self-organize for social change  ( Ghanbari Baghestan  et al., 2019; Hare & Evanson, 2018) .  Although open education includes institutions such as open universities and massive open online courses (MOOCs), this article will focus on open educational resources  (OER)  which  UNESCO  defines as  “teaching, learning or research materials that are in the public domain or released with intellectual property licenses that facilitate the free use, adaptation and distribution of resources” (UNESCO,  2019 , p.  9 )."
"19" "In  North America,  open educational resources are generally associated with   making textbooks  more affordable  (Seaman & Seaman,  2018 ) .  O ver 56% of degree-granting institutions in the US use an open textbook from OpenStax, a  non-profit  OER publisher associated with Rice University (Kelly, 2019).  Since 2013, professors switching from a commercial textboo k  to  an open  alternative  saved students over one billion dollars   (Allen, 2018).  Although  OER  are free for students and professors to adopt and use, they are not free to create. OER funders — including the federal government, state governments, private foundations, and universities — have focused  on  high-enrollment courses with expensive textbooks .  As a  more specialized discipline , social work  f aculty who want to make their courses more accessible to students by using OER have few options other than to create their own resources.  This study evaluates the impact of a faculty-created open textbook on student learning in traditional and hybrid MSW classes."
"20" "OER  efficacy"
"21" "There are two prior studies of open educational resources in social work education. Anthony and Venable (2019)  piloted  an alternative educational resource  (AER) , a $10 workbook created  and  published   by the authors.  Students  reported that the book was convenient, concise,  streamlined,  relevant to  cl ass,  and easy to access , though it does not carry the open license required  to be   OER .  Similar results were found in DeCarlo and colleagues ’   (2019)  pilot study  of an open textbook on student learning outcomes in an undergraduate research methods class.  Although students using the open textbook did not improve  their  final grades ,  test scores , or attitudes towards research methods ,  they   found the open textbook to be   more accessible, of similar or better quality to commercial resources , eas y  to understand, and engaging to read."
"22" "The present study builds on  the existing literature  by evaluating the impact of open textbooks with graduate social work students.  This population is not only new to social work OER research but  to  OER research  in any discipline .  We  are unaware of any studies that investigate  learning  outcomes for graduate students  using OER , owing in part to the focus on  high-enrollment courses in  research and resource development funding .  Thus far,  empirical  studies of OER and AER  in social work   have found similar results to the overall literature, which indicate that students achieve similar learning outcomes   with open textbooks as with commercial textbooks but at a much lower cost   (Hilton, 2016, 2019; Clinton & Khan, 2019) ."
"23" "An emerging literature describes the impact of textbook costs on   social work  students.  In a study of Virginia schools of social work, MSW students reported higher textbook costs  than  undergraduates , spending between $400-$500 per academic year  with  10% of students spending over $1,000 per year (DeCarlo & Vandergrift, 2019).  In this study , as a result of high textbook costs  undergraduate and graduate  students took on additional paid employment and loans, engaged in piracy ,  did not buy required textbooks, and skipped meals , similar to previous studies in the literature ( e.g.,  Cengage, 2018).   Textbook costs are  the most common rationale  given by faculty  implementing OE R, and a majority of university faculty in a large national study  agreed that textbook costs are an important issue to students in their classes  (Seaman & Seaman,  2018 ).   The impact of textbook costs and OER  on student retention  was  noted  in a recent meta- analysis  (Clinton & Khan, 2019), though  this effect may not persist in graduate students due to the greater enrollment flexibility in  general education classes   which comprise most of the   underlying  literature."
"24" "Open pedagogy"
"25" "Costs are not the only reason open educational resources should be implemented with graduate students, and in particular ,  graduate students in distance education.  The pedagogies that inspire work in open educational resources ask interesting questions and lead course design towards new frontiers.   Open education centers  access and interactivity ,  and   open pedagogy  asks why student works are closed off to the public, created for an audience of one (the professor)  for a grade , and thrown away at the end of a semester (Wiley & Hilton,  2018 ).  Open pedagogy replaces this design with public-facing scholarship that allows for students to authentically engage with a topic in a way that will benefit future  scholars and the community .  For example, faculty using open pedagogy might design assignments in which students c reate derivative or ancillary  works from the content of  an open textbook.  Because open textbooks are rewriteable, students can make contributions to the text,  use its content to create  resources like test banks ,  or  provide  examples of how to complete  textbook  exercise s all  without contacting the author of the textbook for permission. Furthermore, these works can be shared openly so others may benefit from them while the student retains ownership of the content they created."
"26" "The promise of open pedagogy and OER is particularly attuned to the problem of research methods instruction in social work . Students approach research methods with a sense of anxiety and dread  (Earley, 2014) . They feel it is unrelated to social work practice, as they will not engage in social science research after graduation.  Research methods is a requirement, not an invitation to authentic or engaging inquiry.  Anthony and Venable’s (2019) AER was effective at providing a more streamlined approach to content delivery that was valued by students, indicating that textbook  cost  and format  can influence  engagement. Indeed, affective engagement ( Dewan, Murshed, & Lin, 2019 ) is of particular importance for students, as students start research instruction with significant stress.  Cuttler (2019) investigated the use and perceptions of  OER   in undergraduate students in across online and traditional  psychology  classroom s, including research methods. Students  in this study  perceived OER to be of higher quality than students using commercial textbooks, and as a result, they used them more often.  OER allows faculty  to deliver content in a more streamlined and approachable way, driving student engagement with a traditionally daunting topic."
"27" "Using the cost, outcomes, use, and perceptions (COUP) model developed by Hilton and colleagues (2016), researchers  investigated  on how open textbooks impact ed  (a) final grades and test scores, (b)  access to the textbook, (c)  use of the textbook, ( d ) perceptions of textbook quality, ( e ) research attitudes, and  ( f)   how these impacts varied  for  hybrid or in-person course delivery.  Researchers hypothesized that an open textbook  would improve upon the commercial textbook in each  previously identified  aspect  except for final grades and test scores , which researchers  hypothesized would be equivalent .  Few previous studies of OER show significant differences  in outcomes  between open and commercial textbooks, and small sample studies are less likely to show the more subtle differences between grade s earned  (Grimaldi et al., 2019 , Hilton, 2019 )."
"28" "Methods"
"29" "Participants"
"30" "Participants  (n =64)  for this study were drawn from students in  an introductory MSW  research methods courses at Radford University, a CSWE-accredited mid-size regional public university in a rural area. Radford has two MSW programs, one is a traditional in-person program serving mostly full-time students. The other is a part-time hybrid MSW program that meets on Saturdays.  Students  in both programs take the introductory research methods course in the second semester of their first year."
"31" "Procedure"
"32" "The Radford University Institutional Review Board approved the protocol for this study. Researchers reviewed informed consent and confidentiality procedures with students on the first day of class.  Consent forms were collected by  student researchers  and  withheld from instructors  until  after final grades were submitted .  Students then completed a pretest  independently via Qualtrics before the second week of class  comprised of demographic questions and  Secret and colleagues ’  (2017) social work research knowledge assessment (RKA).  During finals week, students completed the RKA posttest to assess research knowledge, and alongside final grades,  pretest and posttest scores  were recorded for students  who  consented to participate in the study."
"33" "Students taking MSW research methods in the first  year of the study  received instruction using the previously used  commercial  textbook in the class, Rubin & Babbie’s  Essential research methods in social work . The following year, students used   DeCarlo’s  open textbook,   Scientific inquiry in social work .  Professors who participated in this study include two associate professors with decades of research methods instruction experience and one assistant professor, who authored the  open  textbook. Instructors  were told to teach their courses as they normally would   but using  the commercial or open  textboo k .  The RKA pretest and posttest were  each  worth a small amount of the final grade  in each clas s ."
"34" "P rofessors  also  dedicated part of their final class for focus groups facilitated by students on the research team.  The focus groups  investigated the use,  access,  perceptions, and research attitudes among students in the sample.  Student researchers  worked with the lead author to develop and conceptualize focus group  questions.  This collaboration  brought  student  perspectives  into the design and methods of the study.  A lthough  student researchers  were able to  transcribe  the focus groups  and  contribute to  a  preliminary analysis of qualitative data,  they  graduated before the end of the project, which made it difficult to  complete analysis on the full  qualitative  data set . As a result,  data analysis contained in this article was completed  by a single coder using thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006).  The  researcher  coded the data  in the open source qualitative data analysis tool Taguette  and used constant comparison to evaluate each coding unit.  Similarly, quantitative analysis was completed by a single researcher using SPSS."
"35" "Results"
"36" "There were 64 students in the sample . Over 70% of  students in  the sample were the first member of their family to attend graduate school.  The sample was 86% female, 60% white, 31% African-American, and mostly born after 1990.  Over two-thirds of the sample had previously taken a research methods course, and almost 90% had previously taken a statistics course.  Students in the hybrid class were older than those taking courses in-person and  41% had not previously taken a research methods course .  Of the 64 students who contributed quantitative  data, 50 elected to participate in the focus groups.  Focus groups contained between  two  and  eigh t  students, with most groups having  eight  students."
"37" "OER and student learning outcomes"
"38" "Analysis 1 .  A two-way ANOVA was performed with the type of delivery (standard or hybrid) and type of textbook (traditional or OER) as the between-subjects factors and the final grade in the course as the dependent variable. Two outliers were detected, as defined as being more than 1.5 box-lengths from the edge of the box on a boxplot of residuals, and deleted from the dataset."
"39" "Data for each cell of the design were normally distributed, as determined by Shapiro-Wilk’s test (p<.05). The assumption of homogeneity of variances was violated, as assessed by Levene's test for equality of variances (p=.031). We decided to run the two-way ANOVA without transformation of the dependent variable because if the sample sizes for each cell are approximately equal and the ratio of the smallest cell variance to the largest cell variance is less than 3, the two-way ANOVA is somewhat robust to violations of the homogeneity exception (Jaccard, 1998)."
"40" "T here was a significant interaction of the two main effects (type of  course and   type of textbook ), so the main effects are not interpretable. A plot of the estimated marginal means is provided below, showing that the switch to OER from a traditional textbook resulted in a small (non-significant) decrease in final grades on the hybrid campus and a large (significant) increase in final grades on the traditional campus. The interaction effect may be explained by the fact that there was an instructor substitution on the traditional-delivery campus , a confound addressed in further detail in a subsequent section ."
"41" "[Table 1 about here]"
"42" "Analysis 2 .  A three-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed with type of delivery (standard or hybrid), type of textbook (traditional or OER) as between-subject factors and time (pretest or posttest) as the within-subjects factor, with score on the RKA as the dependent variable. The means of each cell are shown in Table 2. There was a violation of the assumption of equal variances on the posttest according to Levene’s test for equality of variances (p=.007) but the assumption of equal variances was met for the pretest measure (p=.341). We did not perform transformations of either the pretest or the posttest because as long as sample sizes are approximately equal, the analysis is robust to violations of the assumption of equal variances (Laerd, 2015). None of the cells (see Table 2) violated normality assumptions according to the Shapiro-Wilks test (p<.05). There were  two  outliers but no extreme values in any cell. The outliers were retained in the analysis."
"43" "[Table 2 about here]"
"44" "The three-way interaction (time*campus*textbook) was not statistically significant, and neither of the two-way interactions (time*textbook, time*campus) were statistically significant. That leaves only the main effect of time, which was statistically significant (F=7.183, df=1, p<.009). Scores on the RKA increased from a grand mean of 21.52 at pretest to a grand mean of 24.31 at posttest, for a 12.97% increase in RKA scores from pretest to posttest."
"45" "Analysis 3 .  In order to examine the effects of covariates, we calculated a change score (posttest minus pretest) for each student and used this as the dependent variable in a multiple regression. Fully one-third of the students scored the same or worse on the posttest when compared to the pretest. The change scores ranged from -13 to 14, with a mean of 2.797 and a standard deviation of 5.947. The distribution was normal according to the Shapiro-Wilks test and there were no outliers on change score."
"46" "[Table 3 about here]"
"47" "Confounds .  During the experiment, researchers  became aware of a number of threats to the internal validity. Foremost, the professor teaching in-person classes took unplanned leave during the experimental condition, forcing researchers to bring on another professor to teach that section. This pr ofessor allowed students to create their own final exam and is regarded as an easier grader  by students on the research team , in contrast to the previous professor  who is among the  most stringent .  For this reason,  in-person   groups may be less  comparable .  In focus groups, students also reported that  the control group using the commercial textbook did not cover one-third of the content on the post-test , making that group less comparable on the RKA to the students in the  hybrid  class .  As a result of these issues, researchers decided to test for any significant effects in the hybrid condition only , where they were less prevalent ."
"48" "Analysis  4 .  An independent-samples t-test was performed  on data from students in the hybrid program  with the type of textbook (traditional or  open ) as the independent variable and the final grade in the course as the dependent variable. The dependent variable did not violate normality tests (according to the Shapiro-Wilk test) and there were no outliers present. There was not a significant difference in the mean final grades (t=1.306, df=32, two-tailed p=.201). Thus, we conclude  across all  analyses  that the OER textbook  produced similar learning outcomes  to the  commercial  textbook ."
"49" "[Table 4 about here]"
"50" "Textbook accessibility and cost"
"51" "The remainder of the analyses were conducted using  data from students  who participated in focus group s facilitated by a student research team member on the final day of class  (n= 50 ,   78% of the sample ).  Figures 1 and 2 indicate how  these  students   accessed  the commercial and open  textbook , respectively ."
"52" "[Figure 1 about here]"
"53" "Across hybrid and in-person classes, most students elected to purchase a new or used copy of the current edition of the commercial textbook. The textbook cost $198 to purchase new from the bookstore or Amazon, though used editions were available at lower cost. Only one student did not pay for the textbook  because  she borrowed it from a friend."
"54" "[Figure 2 about here]"
"55" "Because most students reported accessing the open textbook in multiple formats,  Figure 2  indicate s  all formats used by students , so its count is greater than the number of people in the  associated  focus groups .  As one student said, “I use it on my Kindle, I use it on my phone. I have it just on my computer.”  This “multiple modal availability” underscores a key theme related to cost: the open textbook was more accessible to students. Accessing the  open  textbook via the learning management system (LMS) “was the simplest…[be]cause the PDF was on our  [LMS]  and so you could just click it and there it is.” Mobile  access , in particular, was a benefit for  working students, as one  student  reported she could:"
"56" "“take like a chapter out and read it while I am waiting for a client to get in the car and then let me go home and read it on my laptop. I mean like I was able to use different modes to access the book that worked wherever I was.”"
"57" "While the  accessibility of multiple digital formats  was helpful for some students, others had difficulty  downloading or search ing for words  in  the  digital textbook . The  hybrid online group  was the only one that  preferred the paper copy to “make notes and highlight.”  Students linked  multiple  format s  with both engagement—”I’d be more prone to read it if it’s on my  phone…or on Kindle”—and learning outcomes—“when my midterm came around…I decided I may need to try a different approach by purchasing the book so I can highlight . ”  In addition to highlighting and note -taking , s ome students  in the hybrid group  also reported having difficulty searching for vocabulary  words  as well as  downloading and navigating the  PDF and  web   textbook formats .  While some students were able to use the  digital  textbook   with no instruction  and were satisfied that it allowed them to “copy/paste” content into another document to take notes , o thers wanted “a 1 5- to - 20 - minute session of how to use this textbook like here’s to search in it” as it was their “first time using an e-textbook .”"
"58" "S tudents described the open textbook as more accessible because it was available  for free  in electronic formats or in a low-cost print format . Most students  using the open textbook  preferred no-cost options, such as using the computer and PDF editions.  In the commercial textbook groups, students said  they “looked at the price of the 9 th  edition and…choked.” T he textbook was “very expensive , ”  “about 200 dollars,”   “hard to budget for,”  and  “ by far the most expensive book we’ve bought in three semesters . ”   However, the textbook would be used in a future course,  splitting the cost,  so some students “didn’t mind to buy it.”  One student described that because she “paid less for” the textbook, her “feelings about it are not as intense as everyone else’s are .”  This underscores that textbook costs were “very important” to all students in the study , “given how much we spend on tuition ” the cost of textbooks is   “ a little ridiculous.” Students were frustrated by  spending  “ a couple hundred on textbooks [but] half the books we don’t even touch ”  or “use two times in the semester.”  Whereas, “textbooks that you use literally every single day… I don’t mind buying.”  Frustration and stress were  commonly reported about  textbook costs, as students had to balance them  with “other  200- and 300-dollar  fees [and] our internship this summer ”  which  was tough because “we are also social workers so [professors]  know we don’t make that much.”  Students expressed gratitude  and excitement  for a free textbook, thinking it was “really thoughtful and I wish more professors would implement things like that.”"
"59" "Textbook use"
"60" "The most striking theme related to textbook use was the interplay between how professor s  and students use the textbook. As one student put it while critiquing the internal validity of the study:"
"61" "“It’s going to probably be obvious that there’s some other type of … spurious relationship occurring between the people the people that have not studied that versus like whether they used the book or the teacher.”"
"62" "Students’  choice between using “ the  book or  the  teacher” was structured by the centrality of the textbook to the professor’s course design  and implementation .  According to students,  the three professors in this study  used  the textbook and other learning materials  differently.  The  professor teaching the commercial textbook  in-person   created class lectures using the textbook ,  and  students  reported  using  mostly the lectures with the  textbook  as   “ context , ”   when needed.  The professor teaching the open textbook to  in-person  students   created class lectures  and  handouts  independently of the textbook,  and students reported little use of the textbook as a result .  However, the professor teaching the online class  used  both the commercial and open textbook , which he authored,  to a greater extent as the core  instructional resource in  the course.   Although  most  hybrid students used the textbook  throughout the semester , some adopted  a similar strategy  to in-person students  of relying on video and in-person presentations  that were  duplicative of the textbook  and forgoing unnecessary reading.  While this was partially attributed to  each  professor ’s course  design,  the hybrid  class format also played a pivotal rol e, as one student said,  b ecause “we see somebody’s face every two weeks, you know, all I have to rely on is what I’ve been given which is the textbook.”  Whereas, students taking classes in-person could rely more on class lectures and discussions to cover content, leading them to use the textbook less often."
"63" "Thus,  the predominant use pattern across both hybrid and in-person formats  the open and commercial text book s  w ere   to use them  more “as a supplement…if I didn’t understand a concept or I couldn’t find it in a PowerPoint or in my notes and I was trying to complete an assignment.”  In addition to the repetition in lectures, students also used exams  to  make decisions about  use .  Many students  stopped reading after the midterm because they determined  they could do well without  completing the weekly reading.  Instead, students  used the textbook to study for exams by se arching for key terms in the e-book and  using  the glossary and index  in the  print text book s .  In this way, the textbook was “vitally important…for the exams…because it gave the context that [the professor] lacked in every slide.”  Students sometimes had difficulty integrating the textbook and professor resources, as “the labels [in the textbook] didn’t always match up with the labels in the class…that you sometimes had a difficult time merging the two together.” Professors also assigned chapters out of order, which was “frustrating” and confusing."
"64" "Textbook use for exams was different from textbook use for  assignments , as students using the open textbook in the hybrid condition reported using the book  “at least more than once week… for like every assignment , ”  though some did not  complete  weekly reading  during this process .  Because this professor also wrote the open textbook, the assignments were better integrated with it , according to students ."
"65" "“Doing the exercises…I had to flip back…and look at examples …and in the same breath he was able to tell us…where it was [in the book]; whereas, my experience here thus far has been that we don’t even use the textbooks in the other class es . So, I appreciate that,  having a tangible way to look at things that we’re doing whereas, I haven’t experienced that with other professors.”"
"66" "By contrast , students using the commercial textbook “couldn’t rely on the textbook” to see “how concepts were applicable to my paper ,” so they had to use outside resources they found through Google and YouTube.   The use of outside resources  to complete assignments  was related to the comprehensibility of the commercial textbook, which is addressed in the next section.  Hybrid students using the open textbook were the only ones who reported making extensive use of the textbook. These students also reported that the open textbook “was the only book that I actually read the entire book rather than just try to skim and see what you can get the most of.”  On the other hand,  in-person  students using the open textbook “didn’t really have an assignment  that  required the book”  so they “didn’t look at it” or “looked at it like twice.”"
"67" "Student perceptions of quality"
"68" "P erceptions of  quality also varied by campus and textbook type; moreover, they were impacted by  how professors used the book .  For the commercial textbook, students   in the in-person class used  the professor’s in-class lectures and handouts  as their primary source to  understand the  content, rather than the textbook .  For these students, “the lectures were exactly pulled from the chapters, so I think they might be one in the same.”  Thus, their   perceptions  of the book  were largely shaped by  professor presentations as well as  skimming and using the glossary  to prepare for exams and the  rese arch  proposal  assignment .  While this worked well for in-person students, students in the hybrid class had fewer opportunities for in-class instruction and lecture to supplement  and  guide  independent reading .  As a result,  they  found the  commercial  textbook to be  more  difficult to understand . T hough video and in-person lectures helped them understand the content , t hey reported using outside resources to “fill voids” in knowledge.  Across hybrid and in- person formats, the use of outside resources was required to break down concepts  in the commercial textbook  “in an easier to understand format.”"
"69" "Across hybrid and in-person classes, students noted the poor quality of the physical textbook, as many students (and the professor) reported pages falling out of the binding “on the first day” of use even though they “bought a new book,” making it not “worth the money you paid.”   Although they emphasized that the textbook was “comprehensive” and “covered a lot,”  many students pointed out  it  was  overly “dense”  and “wordy,”  making it hard to comprehend  and without re-reading .   This issue was commonly noted in reference to the examples provided for concepts, as the author gave “ a lot of examples for the same thing ”  which were  “overly complicated like sometimes it would take three pages to explain what the example what about [but] the actual thing it’s trying to explain was like a half paragraph.”  Many students in both hybrid and in-person classes noted that the commercial textbook was  “unnecessary”  for class , which drove previously discussed usage patterns ."
"70" "Students in the hybrid class, uniquely, described the  commercial textbook  as  “difficult,” “complex,” and  too advanced,  relying upon  a  level  of  research  knowledge that  students did not have . These students, instead, requested  that professors replace the book with  “research methods for dummies,” an   introductory or  “basic overview” textbook.   For these students,  the length of a textbook did not matter, “ I just need to be able to understand it…the quality matters a lot more to me.”  Students noted that professors would probably like the  commercial  textbook “because it really does give you all the information…but in like readability and comprehension…there could be  improvements ” from a student perspective."
"71" "These  quality indicators were described more favorably among  in-person and hybrid  students using the open textbook.  It should be noted that most in-person students reported  little  use of the textbook during  the semester , so these perceptions are most ly  informed by hybrid students’ conceptualizations.  Students often described the textbook as “straightforward” and “easy to understand.”  Examples were again key in driving student responses , as they involved “real - life stories related to social work.”  Majority and minority opinions  emerged in relation to whether the commercial or open textbook was  easy  to read.  In contrast  to the “dense” commercial textbook, students  were in consensus that  the open textbook  had “no fluff in it” and  “wasn’t so short that you [didn’t] really understand the topic…but it didn’t get so detailed that you were fe e ling bogged down.”  Contrastingly, students had mixed perceptions on the overall length of the chapters, with some reporting they were not overly long and others reporting they were long, but appropriately so for a research textbook."
"72" "Similar majority and minority opinions emerged in whether the commercial or open textbook was more engaging to read.   T hough there was not  unanimous  consensus, students  across both hybrid focus groups  using the open textbook  reported  the textbook was engaging to read.  A representative  statement  from one student offered that the open textbook was  “the most interesting one I think I’ve read…especially [for] a research textbook.”  Students linked this with the “humor ,” “personable” language, and  a  “ human approach.” It helped students in the hybrid condition that “they know the person that wrote the book  and so in a lot of ways when reading it I was like hearing his voice in my head.”  The informal  language  and tone of the open textbook did not match all students’ expectations , however , as one student would have preferred “the voice of a 20-30-year career researcher who wrote this pinnacle textbook [in a] professorial tonality.”   A  more commonly reported  language  issue  was  grammar errors in the open textbook, which took students “out of rhythm” while reading  and were unprofessional .   Despite these  issues, all  but one  hybrid  student reported that they liked the open textbook better than those they had previously used in other classes."
"73" "Student attitudes towards research"
"74" "The  majority of students  described negative attitudes and expectations about research. Students discussed   feeling  anxiety and stress  and conceptualizing  research  as  time-consuming, work-intensive,  painful,  and boring.  These attitudes persisted across the semester  for the majority of the sam pl e, as demonstrated in their  mostly negative  one-word descriptions of research methods . But for  those students who found the textbook more engaging to read, and therefore  used it more  often, attitudes towards research shifted in a positive direction.  This improvement was complex .  The positive change in attitudes uncovered deeper negative attitudes,  as demonstrated in this exchange:"
"75" "Facilitator: how would you compare this to textbooks in other classes?"
"76" "S1: Way better ."
"77" "A: Good ."
"78" "R: My favorite ."
"79" "S: it’s my favorite textbook ."
"80" "A: Yeah, it’s my favorite. It’s the best one so far."
"81" "S: Which is like so sad because this one’s for research ."
"82" "S1: That is sad ."
"83" "S: Honestly . …"
"84" "S:  R esearch alone is a headache, but this class made it somewhat, and I hate to say it out loud, but I honestly really enjoyed research and I’ve never enjoyed it."
"85" "T: I didn’t hate it. …"
"86" "Facilitator: Thinking back to how you felt at the beginning of your research methods course ,  how do you feel about it now?"
"87" "S1: Totally different than I thought"
"88" "S: I could actually do it again ."
"89" "T: Or would want  to  do it again"
"90" "S1: Don’t get crazy"
"91" "S: Yeah, but it’s not …"
"92" "S1: I wouldn’t mind taking it again if it was  ran  like this"
"93" "S: Because I learned a lot. It wasn’t a headache banging your head against the wall kind of thing."
"94" "This exchange was from a focus group of hybrid students using the open textbook .  From what was said, it is clear that engagement can drive changes more positive opinions about research courses. However, the disappointment expressed  by students  that their most engaging book was about research and not another social work topic  indicated  deeper , persistent  negative beliefs about research as  a topic .  For hybrid students in the  second  open textbook  focus group,  research anxiety was  not helped by the textbook. Instead,  they did not “feel confident [that ]  they learned the concepts [or] know what I’m doing.” This was very stressful for students, as the research proposal  for each student  is developed further in a second research course and forms the foundation of their integrative seminar paper before graduation.  For  these  students, the anxiety and negative expectations about research methods they carried into the class were exacerbated by the high-stakes nature of the coursework.  They felt “pressure” and “like you’re going to go to jail if you get it wrong.”  The  “structured” way it is presented in the program which required “read[ing] nth to the nth articles” while simultaneously figuring out their proposed methods for research proposals “was daunting…and I didn’t feel like I had enough time to process what I was learning.”  These intensive requirements that follow students through multiple semesters crowded out the fun and excitement for some students who “actually really like looking up articles and reading them.”"
"95" "Particularly for hybrid students who  were older and  had  previous  social work practice experience,  students found once “we get to a certain point in the clas s [I know]  I’m never gonna need it again.” Evidence-based practice, a  core  rationale for social work research  education , was more related to information literacy than conducting independent social science research  for students .  As one student said, “I’m never going to…use SPSS on my off day. It’s just not going  to happen. You know?”  Because the commercial textbook “was as expensive as it [was] for something that the majority of us are never [going to use] I just wanted to burn mine  [but]  I got an email that said keep it because you’re going to use it again ” in the next research class."
"96" "Di s cussion"
"97" "This is the first  efficacy  study of open textbooks with graduate students .  Our results indicate that graduate students using open textbooks achieve similar educational outcomes to those using commercial textbooks   at a much lower cost.  This is mirrored in the undergraduate OER efficacy literature, with equivalent outcomes  between open and commercial textbook  demonstrated in the  two most recent meta-analyses (Clinton & Khan, 2019; Hilton, 2019).  Even within the hybrid-only analysis, which had the fewest confounding factors, no significant impact was found on learning outcomes.  This is similar to the equivalent outcomes demonstrated for undergraduate  social work  students using  an open  textbook (DeCarlo et al., 2019) .  The results of this study  also  underscore the critiques of  the  OER  literature   that studies of OER often do not adequately control for threats to internal validity   (Clinton & Khan, 2019)   and are insufficiently powered  to produce generalizable results  (Grimaldi et al.,  2018 ) ."
"98" "While these issues were present, the pilot study nevertheless displays ecological validity with professors  using the textbook in their customary teaching style .  The variety in teaching styles influenced student use patterns .  Drawing conclusions across diverse faculty implementations is common in the OER literature (e.g., Cuttler, 2019; Jhangiani & Jhangiani, 2017) , even when encouragement to use the textbook varies across professors.  Students ’  disuse of the textbook  was associated with the  overlap   between the   PowerPoint  lecture  and textbook  content , a common  overlap in textbook use studies   (Jhangiani & Jhangiani, 2017) .  Our study highlights the role that online  course delivery  plays in these patterns, as students in the hybrid  online condition reported relying more on the textbook in place of classroom lectures, which were necessary to understand the commercial textbook.  This was partially due to the time spent in a physical classroom, but was also related to how the professor used the textbook."
"99" "Students in the hybrid class were the only ones who reported extensively using either textbook to complete assignments on a weekly basis, though not all students did so. Furthermore, the open textbook was reported to be integrated with class assignments and instruction. Because the professor in that condition wrote the open textbook and its accompanying assignments, it demonstrates the potential pedagogical benefits—straightforwardness, ease of use, cohesion—of textbook customization and remix ( Cooney, 2017;  DeCarlo et al., 2019).  At the same time, it demonstrates that open resources created for one professor’s class can be relevant and useful to students in other sections,  as it was in the in-person and open textbook condition,  even if the professor does not integrate them into the lectures or other class content.  Previous studies of open textbooks have demonstrated that they can support more interaction with course materials, though  ours  is the first to do with graduate students (Petrides et al, 2011)."
"100" "It is worth considering that without  the open textbook  pilot, students in the in-person class would have spent $200 on a commercial textbook which most students the previous year using sparingly, mostly for the glossary, index, and as a quick reference guide—similar to patterns noted in Lindshield and Adhikari (2013) .   Unlike previous studies (e.g., Colvard, Wilson, & Park, 2018), cost was not a barrier for students to access the commercial textbook , even though it was considered expensive . Most students bought the most current edition. A previous study of social work students in Virginia found that graduate  students’  textbook costs are higher than undergraduate students, with less exposure to free or low-cost materials (DeCarlo & Vandergrift, 2019). Similarly, the theme of “wasted money” on unused and expensive  commercial textbook is also present in studies of social work students and student in the general population (National Association of College Stores  [NACS] , 2019).  Unlike these studies, few students waited until after the first few weeks to purchase the required textbook. Instead, most students purchased the book and discontinued weekly reading after the midterm."
"101" "For students in the part-time hybrid MSW program, almost all are employed full-time in addition to childcare and internship responsibilities , the impact of textbook costs was universally derided  and similar comments were made by most in-person students.   They  emphasized how textbook costs impacted their financial health, and the $200 price tag for the commercial textbook was perceived as extreme. Previous estimates of MSW textbook spending are about $400-$500 per academic year, making this textbook close to half of what students would, on average, pay in about a year (DeCarlo & Vandergrift, 2019; NACS, 2019). By contrast, students perceived the optional $30 print edition of the open textbook as reasonably priced, higher than in previous studies (Anthony & Venable, 2019) . Purcha s ing a print edition allowed  students to use traditional study methods like highlighting and writing margin notes   and was of better print quality than the commercial textbook. It should be noted that as a non-commercial work (CC-BY-NC-SA), the print edition was printed at cost by a printing company and the  textbook  author received no money from the sale."
"102" "Within the sample, it was clear that open textbooks accommodated the variety of preferences for textbooks in the sample.  Professors who used the book extensively could build assignments and lectures tightly integrated with the text. On the other hand, professors who did not use the textbook extensively did not require their students to purchase an infrequently used  and  expensive   commercial   textbook. Similarly, students who felt they did not need to read the textbook could download a digital edition that was hyperlinked and searchable  to study for  exams.  These digital editions also met needs for students who wanted to read in detail but had to accommodate reading within a full-time work schedule that  necessitated  mobile access  to the textbook .  Students taking courses online were the only ones who preferred print, which may be due to their greater engagement with the resource or because they were older and had less facility with  studying from  a digital textbook.  Print was desired for similar reasons as previous studies  of OER with undergraduates  (e.g., Cooney, 2017 ) .   While a sizeable portion of students across studies always prefer print, adoption patterns are difficult to predict, and best practice should be to provide students with  an array of  options."
"103" "The  majority of students  in our sample  perceive d  open textbooks to be equivalent or superior to commercial textbooks.  As in Anthony and Venable’s (2019) implementation study of a low-cost alternative resource, students found it to be more straightforward, eas y to navigate, and understandable.  However, a minority of students  in our study and other OER studies  perceive open textbooks to be of lower quality  (Hilton, 2019 ; Jhangiani & Jhangiani, 2017 ) .  P erceived shortcomings  of  the open textbook  in this sample  including grammar errors and informality have been  found  in previous studies of open textbooks (Affordable Learning Georgia, 2015).  As open textbook authors often take on the role of editor, designer, and other paid positions at a traditional publisher , self-published open  textbooks  may not have the same polish that students are used to in a commercial textbook.  Within the sample ,  this was a small issue as most  students  preferred the open textbook to commercial textbooks in other courses."
"104" "Conclusion"
"105" "In our study, the  open textbook was  viewed as  more accessible, straightforward, and likely to be used extensively when integrated into the course design, according to students.   Consequently ,  we  echo  Anthony and Venable’s (2019) laudable call  to action for  social work  educators to  make  their original resources  publicly available  at low  cost or for free.  They contextualize this with the challenges that faculty face in creating their own resources, including the lack of skills, lack of available funding, and lack of time (Delimont et al., 2016;  Subramony, 2018;  Young, 2016).  The solution to these issues is to incorporate  open educational practices — which are predicated on open licensing as a structural intervention in resource creation and sharing — into social work education ."
"106" "Open educational practices are an emerging extension of the broader open education movement  (Cronin, 2017) , focusing on the routine behaviors faculty engage in to make their work more  or less accessible .  The publication of  original  workbooks , as advised by Anthony and Venable, is an open educational practice, self-archiving, in which faculty make their  instructional materials  freely available to others.  Most faculty do not share the resources they create for their classes , at most  doing so  informally with colleagues .  However, the process of sharing  resources  like slideshows, activities, workbooks, and  so forth  under an open license , another important practice,   would allow faculty to learn from one another, bundle compatible resources together, and  remix and reuse content  freely .  An open textbook sits at the nexus of this  community of  practice , providing a common base of core content from which faculty can teach the basic components of their course as well as build and share derivative and ancillary works."
"107" "Open textbooks   themselves  can emerge from the practice of collaboration.  Members of the research team and   collaborators from other institutions   are  adapting the open textbook used in this study  to  teach  the specific task of completing a graduate research project   in social work.  Neither the commercial textbook  or open textbook  provided information students on how to conduct a  student  research project—i.e.  create  a feasible  design , engage with stakeholders and gatekeepers, work within very tight budget and time constraints , and  disseminate to appropriate  audiences  for students.   Concurrently, a  second  group of authors is adapting the textbook  to learning objectives  on information literacy, which according to the results of this study, will better meet student expectations in preparation for evidence-based practice.  These projects exemplify the diverse opportunities for collaboration in open educational practices."
"108" "Open pedagogy is inherently critical because it transcends the traditional  boundaries  associated with higher education.  Educational resources  can be placed in a closed LMS platform, to be  implemented and  updated by isolated professors, or it can be placed in an open platform like Pressbooks where it can be accessed by students  and faculty  everywhere.  Sharing resources created by faculty and students—like new book chapters, video case studies, or interactive examples—on open platforms  reduces duplicative work  and resource dependency by  spread ing the workload across the  educational system . Open education practices call into question why most faculty will  rarely  share their work outside of their classroom.  For many, the reliance on commercial textbooks as source material inhibits open sharing  due to limits on fair use , but  with the adoption of open educational practices — including self-arc hiving,  publishing on open platforms,  open licensing , and multi-institutional collaboration — faculty can center access, ownership, and transformational engagement in their teaching practice."
"109" "References"
"110" "Affordable Learning Georgia. (2015).  Textbook transformation grants round one: Spring semester 2015 final report summary . Retrieved from  http://affordablelearninggeorgia.org/documents/ALG_R1_Final_Report.pdf"
"111" "Allen, N. (2018).  $1 billion in savings through open educational resources . S cholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition . Retrieved from:  https://sparcopen.org/news/2018/1-billion-in-savings-through-open-educational-resources/"
"112" "Anthony, B. & Venable, V. M. (2019).  The impact of nontraditional and sustainable textbook options on student learning in a social work skills course .  Journal of technology in human services, 37 (2-3), 226-240."
"113" "Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology.  Qualitative research in psychology , 3(2), 77-101."
"114" "Cengage (2018).  Today’s learner: Student views 2018 . Retrieved from:  https://news.cengage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/CengageMC-Affordability-Survey-letter.pdf"
"115" "Clinton, V., & Khan, S. (2019). Efficacy of open textbook adoption on learning performance and course withdrawal rates: a meta-analysis.  AERA Open ,  5 (3), 2332858419872212."
"116" "Colvard, N. B., Watson, C. E., & Park, H. (2018). The impact of open educational resources on various student success metrics.  International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education ,  30 (2), 262-276."
"117" "Cooney, C. (2017). What Impacts do OER have on students? Students share their experiences with a health psychology OER at New York City College of Technology.  The International Review of Research  in  Open  and  Distributed Learning ,  18 (4)."
"118" "Cronin, C. (2017). Openness and praxis: Exploring the use of open educational practices in higher education.  The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning ,  18 (5)."
"119" "Cuttler, C. (2019). Students’ use and perceptions of the relevance and quality of open textbooks compared to traditional textbooks in online and traditional classroom environments.  Psychology Learning & Teaching ,  18 (1), 65–83.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1475725718811300"
"120" "DeCarlo, M. P., Crenshaw, C., Fominaya, A., Parsons, A., Secret, M. C., & Stewart, M. (2019, December 9). Open textbooks and student learning in social work research methods: Results from a mixed-methods and student-engaged pilot project.  https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/vjf5p"
"121" "DeCarlo, M. P., & Vandergrift, K. F. (2019, December 29). Textbook cost burden and social work students.  https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/5q239"
"122" "Delimont, N., Turtle, E. C., Bennett, A., Adhikari, K., & Lindshield, B. L. (2016). University   students and faculty have positive perceptions of open/alternative resources and their utilization   in a textbook replacement initiative.  Research in Learning Technology, 24 , 1 - 13."
"123" "Dewan, M. A. A., Murshed, M., & Lin, F. (2019). Engagement detection in online learning: a review.  Smart Learning Environments ,  6 (1), 1.   https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-018-0080-z"
"124" "Earley, M. A. (2014). A synthesis of the literature on research methods education.  Teaching in Higher Education, 19 (3), 242-253."
"125" "Ghanbari Baghestan, A., Khaniki, H., Kalantari, A., Akhtari-Zavare, M.,  Farahmand , E.,  Tamam , E., …  Danaee , M. (2019). A  c risis in “ o pen  a ccess”: Should  c ommunication  s cholarly  o utputs  t ake 77  y ears to  b ecome  o pen  a ccess?  SAGE Open ,  9 (3), 2158244019871044.  https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244019871044"
"126" "Grimaldi, P. J., Mallick, D. B., Waters, A. E., &  Baraniuk , R. G. (2019). Do open educational resources improve student learning? Implications of the access hypothesis.  PloS  one ,  14 (3), e0212508."
"127" "Hare, S., & Evanson, C. (2018). Information privilege outreach for undergraduate students.  College & Research Libraries ,  79 (6), 726."
"128" "Hilton, J. (2016). Open educational resources and college textbook choices: A review of research on efficacy and perceptions.  Educational Technology Research and Development,   64 (4), 573–590."
"129" "Hilton, J. (2019). Open educational resources, student efficacy, and user perceptions: a synthesis of research published between 2015 and 2018.  Educational Technology Research and Development , 1-24."
"130" "Hilton, J., Wiley, D., Fischer, L., & Nyland, R. (2016).  Guidebook to research on open educational resources adoption . Open Textbook Network. Retrieved from:  http://research.cehd.umn.edu/otn/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/OER-Research-Guidebook.pdf"
"131" "Jaccard (1998).  Interaction effects in factorial analysis of variance . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications."
"132" "Kelly, R. (2019, September 11). More than half of all U.S. colleges and universities using OpenStax textbooks.  Campus technology . Retrieved from  https://campustechnology.com/articles/2019/09/11/more-than-half-of-all-us-colleges-and-universities-using-openstax-textbooks.aspx"
"133" "Laerd Statistics (2015). Two-way repeated measures ANOVA using SPSS Statistics.  Statistical tutorials and software guides . Retrieved from  https://statistics.laerd.com/"
"134" "Lindshield, B. L., & Adhikari, K. (2013). Online and campus college students like using an open educational resource instead of a traditional textbook.  Journal of Online Learning and Teaching ,  9 (1), 26-38."
"135" "National Association of College Stores (2019).  Student watch: Attitudes and behaviors toward course materials ,  2018-2019.  Oberlin, OH."
"136" "Petrides, L.,  Jimes , C., Middleton‐Detzner, C., Walling, J., & Weiss, S. (2011). Open textbook adoption and use: Implications for teachers and learners.  Open Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and e-Learning, 26 (1), 39-49."
"137" "Seaman, J. E. & Seaman, J. (2018).  Freeing the textbook: Educational resources in higher education, 2018 . Babson Survey Research Group. Retrieved from  https://www.onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/freeingthetextbook2018.pdf"
"138" "Secret, M., Abell, M. L., Ward, C. J., Charles, J. L., & Perkins, N. H. (2017). Research knowledge assessment: A study of MSW students’ acquisition and retention of research knowledge.  Journal of Social Work Education ,  53 (3), 480-494."
"139" "Subramony, D. P. (2018). Instructors’ perceptions and experiences  re:creating  and implementing   customized e-texts in education courses.  Education Considerations, 44 (1), 1–12."
"140" "UNESCO (201 9 ).   Guidelines on the development of open educational resources policies . Retrieved from :  https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371129"
"141" "Wiley, D., & Hilton III, J. L. (2018). Defining OER-enabled pedagogy.  International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning , 19(4).   https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v19i4.3601"
"142" "Willinsky, J. (2006).  The access principle: The case for open access to research and scholarship . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press."
"143" "Young, B. (2016). Assessing faculty perceptions of free educational resources: One institution’s   experience.  Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship, 28 (3), 150–158 ."
"144" "Table 1: Tests of Between-Subjects Effects"
"145" "Dependent Variable:   Final grade in 621"
"146" "Source"
"147" "Type III Sum of Squares"
"148" "df"
"149" "Mean Square"
"150" "F"
"151" "Sig."
"152" "Partial Eta Squared"
"153" "Corrected Model"
"154" "624.049 a"
"155" "3"
"156" "208.016"
"157" "5.698"
"158" ".002"
"159" ".228"
"160" "Intercept"
"161" "449236.441"
"162" "1"
"163" "449236.441"
"164" "12305.207"
"165" ".000"
"166" ".995"
"167" "Campus"
"168" "419.253"
"169" "1"
"170" "419.253"
"171" "11.484"
"172" ".001"
"173" ".165"
"174" "Textbook"
"175" "62.327"
"176" "1"
"177" "62.327"
"178" "1.707"
"179" ".197"
"180" ".029"
"181" "Campus * Textbook"
"182" "299.764"
"183" "1"
"184" "299.764"
"185" "8.211"
"186" ".006"
"187" ".124"
"188" "Error"
"189" "2117.454"
"190" "58"
"191" "36.508"
"192" "Total"
"193" "485720.700"
"194" "62"
"195" "Corrected Total"
"196" "2741.503"
"197" "61"
"198" "a. R Squared = .228 (Adjusted R Squared = .188)"
"199" "Table 2.  Pretest and Posttest results"
"200" "Traditional Delivery"
"201" "Hybrid Delivery"
"202" "Traditional Text"
"203" "OER Text"
"204" "Traditional Text"
"205" "OER Text"
"206" "Pretest"
"207" "N=20"
"208" "Mean=20.55"
"209" "SD=5.72"
"210" "N=10"
"211" "Mean=23.30"
"212" "SD=3.68"
"213" "N=15"
"214" "Mean=21.87"
"215" "SD=4.70"
"216" "N=19"
"217" "Mean=21.32"
"218" "SD=5.32"
"219" "Posttest"
"220" "N=20"
"221" "Mean=23.1"
"222" "SD=8.73"
"223" "N=10"
"224" "Mean=23.90"
"225" "SD=9.32"
"226" "N=15"
"227" "Mean=27.07"
"228" "SD=4.04"
"229" "N=19"
"230" "Mean=23.63"
"231" "SD=5.33"
"232" "Table 3: Tests of Within-Subjects Contrasts"
"233" "Measure:   RKA"
"234" "Source"
"235" "time"
"236" "Type III Sum of Squares"
"237" "df"
"238" "Mean Square"
"239" "F"
"240" "Sig."
"241" "Partial Eta Squared"
"242" "time"
"243" "Linear"
"244" "211.214"
"245" "1"
"246" "211.214"
"247" "12.140"
"248" ".001"
"249" ".168"
"250" "time * Campus"
"251" "Linear"
"252" "35.388"
"253" "1"
"254" "35.388"
"255" "2.034"
"256" ".159"
"257" ".033"
"258" "time * Textbook"
"259" "Linear"
"260" "43.390"
"261" "1"
"262" "43.390"
"263" "2.494"
"264" ".120"
"265" ".040"
"266" "time * Campus  *  Textbook"
"267" "Linear"
"268" "1.620"
"269" "1"
"270" "1.620"
"271" ".093"
"272" ".761"
"273" ".002"
"274" "Error(time)"
"275" "Linear"
"276" "1043.928"
"277" "60"
"278" "17.399"
"279" "Table 4: Regression  coefficients a"
"280" "Model"
"281" "Unstan dardized  Coeff icients"
"282" "Standardized Coefficients"
"283" "t"
"284" "Sig."
"285" "B"
"286" "Std. Error"
"287" "Beta"
"288" "G"
"289" "(Constant)"
"290" "-253.314"
"291" "205.631"
"292" "-1.232"
"293" ".223"
"294" "OER or commercial textbook"
"295" "-2.290"
"296" "1.666"
"297" "-.191"
"298" "-1.374"
"299" ".175"
"300" "Traditional or hybrid course"
"301" "3.471"
"302" "1.899"
"303" ".291"
"304" "1.827"
"305" ".073"
"306" "Age"
"307" ".126"
"308" ".103"
"309" ".191"
"310" "1.221"
"311" ".228"
"312" "First-generation"
"313" "2.754"
"314" "1.842"
"315" ".209"
"316" "1.495"
"317" ".141"
"318" "Gender"
"319" "-.255"
"320" "2.386"
"321" "-.015"
"322" "-.107"
"323" ".915"
"324" "Race"
"325" ".095"
"326" ".723"
"327" ".019"
"328" ".131"
"329" ".896"
"330" "Previous research course"
"331" "-.848"
"332" "1.523"
"333" "-.076"
"334" "-.557"
"335" ".580"
"336" "Previous statistics course"
"337" ".864"
"338" "2.163"
"339" ".057"
"340" ".400"
"341" ".691"
"342" "a. Dependent Variable: CHANGE"
