"x"
"1" "Inclusive Masculinity Theory:"
"2" "Overview ,  Reflection and Refinement"
"3" "In 2010, this journal  published an early exposition o f inclusive masculinity theory  (Anderson and McGuire, 2010) . Since then, the theory has been widely adopted within both the sport  and masculinities literature .  Furthermore , a large number of other scholars not using the theory have also  documented and labelled  new masculinity types. There has also been refinement of Inclusive Masculinity Theory,  alongside theoretical critiques.  In this  article  we provide  an overvi ew of the genesis of the theory and   its refinement,  before considering and  respond ing  to published and unpublished critiques  of the theory .  We then suggest future directions for research."
"4" "Introduction"
"5" "Research on men and masculinities in the 20 th  century was characterized by a focus on the  social  problems of masculinity,  both in terms of the privilege gained by men through their gender ( Lorber 1994 )  and  the  social  costs ;   not  least related to the oppression,  subordination  and exclusion  of gay men (Connell 1995; Kimmel 1994 ; Plummer 1999 ).  A key theory to understand the social processes associated with these issues was hegemonic masculinity (Connell 1995; Connell and Messerschdmit, 2005).  However, following several  studies  documenting increasing inclusion of gay men in young men’s peer groups  (Anderson 2002, 2005, 2008 ),   Anderson  (2009)  proposed  Inclusive Masculinity Theory (IMT)  as a way  to understand  the  changing  relationship between adolescent males and their masculinities  in these cultures , including an article explicating the theory in this journal (Anderson and McGuire 2010)."
"6" "The theory  was developed to explain sport and fraternity settings where  the social dynamics were not predicated on homophobia, stoicism or a rejection of the feminine.  Finding that hegemonic masculinity could not account for the social dynamics of  these  male peer groups, Anderson  examined the  central ity of homophobia  to the construction and regulation  of masculinities – also examining the impact  to men and masculinities of cultures in which homophobia had decreased.  He argued that in the absence of homophobia, men’s gender came to be  founded upon emotional openness, increased   peer  tactility , softening gender codes,  and close  friendship  based on emotional disclosure ."
"7" "I MT is an inductive theory, developed through a combination of engagement with the prior literature and grounded analysis of the data from multiple qualitative studies , and it has been refined over the past  seven  years .  For example,  McCormack  (2012) expanded the theory by conceptualizing the dynamics of friendship and popularity in inclusive  educational  settings, as well as the changing nature of what he calls homosexually themed language.  Anderson’s (2014)  monograph  argues that the jock of the 21 st  century  has become emblematic of this inclusion in a similar way  to how  the jock of the 20 th  cent ury was recognized as homophobic , macho and aggressive."
"8" "Simultaneous to this theory development, a number of scholars started to use theory as a way to explain their data ( e.g. Adams 2011;  Channon & Matthews 2015;  Dashper 2012; Gottzen & Kremer-Sedlik 2012 ), while critiques of the theory  have  also  been published  ( e.g. de Boise 2015 ; Ingram and Waller 2014; O’Neill 2014 ).  However, there is less discussion of how the theory  relates to  other theorizing of  masculini ties ,  or  its success in explaining  a range of  social contexts. The purpose of this article is thus to  consider   the current standing of  IMT ; to explor e its strengths; to engage with  published and private critiques; and to highlight important questions for future research."
"9" "An Overview  of IMT"
"10" "IMT  is a theory that emerged  from   research finding  more inclusive behaviors of heterosexual men and the changing dynamics of male peer group cultures  in  the US and UK . This  body of  research has shown that many  young  straight men : reject homophobia; include gay peers in friendship networks; are more emotionally intimate with friends; are physically tactile with other  men;  recognize bisexuality as a legitimate sexual orientation;   embrace activities and artefacts  once  coded feminine;  and eschew violence and bullying (see McCormack and Anderson 2014 a  for a  summary  of these findings)."
"11" "Given the sustained  decline   in  homophobic attitudes in  the  US,  UK  and other western  countries  (Clements and Field 2014;  Smith 2011 ; Twenge , Sherman and Wells 2016 ), it is tempting to argue that the  change in  gendered behaviors  is  explained by  decreasing homophobia. While initially persuasive,  it is not sufficient because  similar  tactile and open  expressions of  masculinities  exist  in other cultures where  homophobia  is present . In order to  account for this,  and historically and geographically situate  IMT ,   Anderson (2009) introduced the concept  homohysteria ."
"12" "Homohysteria is defined as the fear of being socially perceived as gay.  A culture is homohysteric if it meets three  conditions: i ) the culture maintains antipathy toward gay men;  ii ) there is mass awareness that gay people exist in significan t numbers in that culture; and iii ) the belief that gender and sexuality are conflated.  When these conditions are met, homophobia is used as a tool to police gender ,  as people fear the stigma of being  socially  perceived  as  gay .  A Feminist Forum debate in  Sex Roles   evaluated  the concept,  also providing  a substantive review of the changing nature of masculinities (McCormack and Anderson 2014a, 2014b ;  Negy 2014;  Parent, Batura and Crooks 2014; Plummer 2014; Worthen 2014 )."
"13" "Homohysteria is  central  to understanding IMT because  it is the concept  that enables an explanation of  social change.  I t  describes  the social conditions  in which  homophobia polices men’s behaviors :   homophobia only  regulates  men’s behaviors in settings that are homohysteric.   The theory  contends that  in homohysteric cultures,  men ’s  behaviors  are  severely  restri cted , and archetypes of masculinity  are  stratified ,  hierarchically ,  with one  hegemonic  form of masculinity being culturally exalted —just as Connell (1995) described happening in the 1980s and early 1990s  (see also Floyd 2000; Plummer 1999) .   As such,  IMT  values  Connell’s theorizing  regarding the multiplicity  of masculinities  and   their  social organization  in  homohysteric cultures  (see also  Epstein 1997; Ki mmel 1994; Mac an Ghaill 1994)."
"14" "The  contribution  of IMT is that  it  connects men’s gendered behaviors with the social trend of decreasing homophobia, explaining variance between cultures  and generations . The theory contends that a profound change in masculinities will occur when homohysteria decreases. It argues  that the stratifications of men become less hierarchical ,  and  that  more  diverse forms of mascul inity become more evenly esteemed (Anderson 2009). In this context, f emininity  in men becomes  less stigmatized, and the narrow set of behaviors and activities that are valued by men expand.  N on-conforming masculinities  also experience  less  regulation ."
"15" "These changes have seen heterosexuality expand as well (Anderson 2014; McCormack, in press). Kinsey et al.’s (1956) recognition of sexuality as a continuum is now being adopted by young people, with increasing numbers recognizing they are not exclusively straight  or exclusively gay  (Savin-Williams  and Vrangalova  2013; Savin-Williams, in press).   Using Geneal Social Survey data ,  Twenge, Sherman and Wells  (2016 ) show  that the  number   of   U.S. adults   who had at least one same-sex partner since age 18 doubled   between the early 1990s and early 2010s (from3.6 to 8.7%   for   women and from 4.5 to 8.2% for men) .   Qualitative and quantitative  studies  of heterosexual male undergraduates show an  increased openness to broader sexual practices, including  their own anal stimulation  (Branfman, Stiritz  and  Anderson in press )  and increased openness to exploring same-sex desire  (Scoats, Joseph and Anderson in press).  Scholars using IMT have also examined friendship dynamics and the social construction of popularity in inclusive settings ( McCormack 2011;  Ripley in press ; Scoats 2015), more inclusive fatherhood practices (Gottzen and Kremer-Sadlik 2012),  and  changing attitudes to education and work (Roberts 2013) ."
"16" "IMT contends that the driver for decreasing homohysteria is improving attitudes toward homosexuality in broader society. However, while the new dynamics and behaviors are founded upon the condemnation and rejection of overt forms of homophobia, this is not just the result of changing attitudes: Structural changes that include shifts in the law and greater access and prominence for sexual minorities in a range of social institutions are important (Weeks 2007), as well as social shifts in the organization of society from away  from industrial economies, the growth of the internet, and processes of individualization where social institutions have less influence on moral va lues ( Beck 2002;  Giddens 1992 ).  These broader changes appear to support decreasing homophobia, as same-sex desire and sex are framed as forms of love that individuals have a right to engage in (Twenge 2014) ."
"17" "These shifts in gendered behavior have occurred primarily among young men. Much of the scholarship adopting IMT has focused on the millennial cohort, and has recognized the importance of  generation  in attitudes and behaviors (see also Loftus 2001). Anderson and McCormack ( 2016 ) used a generational cohort analysis to demonstrate the importance of age and the period of one’s adolescence for bisexual men—the younger men whose adolescence was in the more inclusive 2000s had markedly improved experiences of being bisexual, which was attributed to the decline in homohysteria during that period."
"18" "While issues such as class, location, ethnicity, religion and other factors influence the dynamics of masculinities , central to IMT is the notion that the changes evident in men’s gendered behaviors are not superficial or fleeting, but represent a fundamental shift in the practices of masculinities.  The changing nature of masculinities   has  been documented across many studies in different geographical regions of the US and the UK, as well as other Western countries. As such, we contend that these specific, local cultures are influenced by a larger phenomenon—decreasing homohysteria that is the result of improving attitudes toward LGB people  alongside other legal, social  and cultural changes  (e.g.  Cleland 2016;  Twenge 2014) .  In addition to having staying power , these new masculinities are posited as a central challenge to the past systems of inequality of sexuality from which they emerged."
"19" "However, while the behaviors of men are more open and less damaging—more inclusive—this does not mean these contexts are inclusive of all forms of social difference.   The inclusivity refers primarily to inclusivity of gay men and same-sex sexual desire more broadly. Recognizing this, it is important to note that it is the reduction of  overt  homophobia  that is important in  changing masculinities documented through IMT .  Even so, and importantly , IMT also recognizes that covert homophobia and heteronormativity persist, with continued negative effects (see McCormack and Anderson 2010). In this sense, IMT recognizes both that homophobia has significantly decreased with positive effects  and  that the privileging of heterosexuality, both socially and structurally, continue to be serious social issues. Scholarship on IMT thus far has focused more on the benefits of eroding overt homophobia than the problems of continued heteronormativity, and  the negative effects of these  social issues remain ripe  for further  study ."
"20" "Refining Inclusive Masculinity Theory"
"21" "Anderson   (2009)  emphasized the inductive nature of IMT  in his original formulation, describing it as an open theory and inviting others to refine it. Much of the development of IMT has been through productive engagement with critiques encountered at conferences, through peer review, and in published forums. As such, p art of the theory advancement of IMT has been through the standard a cademic practice of proposition, debate and refinement."
"22" "One example of this is the development of a class analysis. Early IMT research focused on middle-class youth with little consideration given to the impact of class  (se e Ingram and Waller 2014; McCormack and Anderson 2010). Since then, a class analysis has developed. For example,  Roberts (2013 )  shifted attention to working class heterosexual men  in the service industry and found a softer  version of masculinity  being  performed.  He argued this  was the key driver for profoundly changed attitudes toward  employment,  deemed by earlier  research  as  too feminine  and incongruent with manliness, as well as changed idealizations in respect o f the division of domestic labo r."
"23" "McCormack (2014) used  Bourdieu’s conceptualization of a symbolic economy of class to  examine the dynamics of a working class high school in the south of England. He  demonstrated how  class acts as a dampening   but not prohibitive factor on the emergence of  inclusive masculinities, arguing that parameters of privilege impeded some working class youth from engaging in particular inclusive behaviors.  Blanchard, McCormack and Peterson  ( 2015 ) found support for this model in their ethnography of a working class high school in the north east of England .   The issue  of how inclusive attitudes  are  circu mscribed in particular settings has  also been  examined  in elite soccer clubs, where competition intersects with friendship in  regulated environments that result in distinct forms of inclusive masculinities  (Magrath, Anderson and Roberts,  201 5; Nagle 2015)."
"24" "In addition to the theory being used to explain empirical results , published critiques of the theory  have drawn attention to key areas of concern .  While we have used this academic debate to influence our thinking and research directions, we  use this opportunity to engage with these debates."
"25" "Is homophobia d eclining ?"
"26" "One question  raised  by  some  scholars   is   the extent to which  homophobia is declining, or whether this attitudinal trend masks the continued presence of virulent homophobia.  de   Boise (201 5 )  argues  that homophobia has not declined, stating that “homophobia is still prevalent” (p. 331) and that claims otherwise are “actively dangerous” (p. 334).  This is a central issue for IMT ,  as decreasing  overt  homophobia , in attitudes, behaviors and laws,   has been  the mechanism  by which homohysteria  has decreased in the   W est ,  and  thus the process by which  the lessening of  the regulation of masculinities  occurs."
"27" "In order to address this, we first  turn to quantitati ve data from the United States that  use the same measure across decades .  Here, there is strong evidence for decreasing  attitudinal  homophobia.  Statistical analysis of  General Social Survey (GSS)  data shows that  the proportion of the population condemning homosexuality has steadily declined since 1987   (Twenge et al. 2015 , 2016 ) . In  another analysis of that  data, Keleher and Smith (2012: 1232) contend that “willingness to accept gays and lesbians has grown enormously since 1990.”  High-quality opinion polls also support this trend.  For example, when Gallup asked   in 1986 ,  “ Do you think gay and lesbian relations between consenting adults should or should not be legal? ” ,  57 percent  indicated it should not. In 2015, that number  had reduced to 28 percent .  Gallup (2015)  also  found 60 percent  of Americans support gay marriage, whi le Pew  (2013) research found 70 percent  of Americans born after 1980 su pport same-sex marriage, and 74 percent  think that “homosexuality should be accepted by society.”"
"28" "These   changes are more advanced in other Western countries. Quantitative analysis of similar surveys  in the  UK  show  similar improvement, but from a more progressive starting point  (Clement s  and Field 201 4 ), and   Pew  (2013) show s  Spain, Germany, France, Canada, Australia and the Czech Republic have  more progressive  social attitudes than the  US .  Furthermore, t here is no large-scale quantitative data that shows homophobic attitudes increasing in  the  US or UK .  Indeed,  Smith (2011) highlights that while trends in homophobia occur in both directions, the global trend is “towards greater approval of homosexual behavior with 87% of countries moving in that direction and with the gains in approval also being larger than the declines.”"
"29" "I mportantly, it  is not just attitudinal data that evidences progressive change. Significant legal change has occurred over the past 30 years with no anti-gay discrimination  remaining  in  UK  law, although trans issues remain a serious concern. Furthermore, q ualitative research into the lives of  sexual minorities  in the W est  finds improved experiences in a number of ways  (e.g. Coleman-Fountain, 2014; McCormack, Anderson and Adams 2014; Savin-Williams, 200 5).  Weeks  (2007, 3) ,  a  social historian of sexuality,  described the change for sexual mino rities as  part of  “the world we have won ,” and  called  it an “unfinished but profound revolution that has transformed the possibilities of living our sexual diversity  and creating intimate lives . ”   Savin-Williams (2005)  discussed the “new gay teenager” , where sexual identity was less a marker of difference than found in prior research  and sexual minority youth had positive social experiences ."
"30" "In addition to this, a  new body of research now takes  the contention that homophobia has declined as its  starting point. In Ghaziani’s (2014: 9)  book  on t he changing nature of gay  social   spaces, he uses the concept “post-gay”  to highlight “a new gay paradigm…   characterized by a dramatic acceptance of homosexuality and a corresponding assimilation of gays and lesbians into the mainstream.” Similarly,  in  his  examination  on the social construction of heterosexual identities,  Dean  (2014: 2)  comments that the increasing visibility and inclusivity of gays and lesbians is found in “everyday life and across the nation’s major social institutions.”  Our  multi-city  qualitative  research  with 90 bisexual men  also  took decreasing homophobia as an established trend in order to examine for generational differences in life experiences, and we found increased inclusivity and acceptance among the youngest cohort ( Anderson and McCormack, 2016 ) ."
"31" "This is not to say that homophobia  no longer exists , nor that it has decreased evenly in all  contexts . Anderson (2009)  argue d  that  decreasing homophobia is an  uneven  social process , but that it is the expression of overt homophobia that is most effective in gender policing—a central tenet of important research on men and masculinities from the 1990s (e.g.  Connell 1995 ; Nayak and Kehily 1996; Plummer 1999) . It is this contextual specificity   that makes homohysteria a n   important  concept—recognizing that levels of homophobia can differ between countries, institutions , organizations and peer groups ."
"32" "R ecent research examining heterosexuals’ attitudes toward legal equality  demonstrates that overt homophobia can decrease at the same time as heteronormativity and heterosexism persist. 1   Exemplifying this, i n their national survey of just over 1000 people ,  Doan, Loehr and Miller (2014)  reported that almost 100%  of heterosexual s  supported legal  equality for gays and lesbians . However, they also found  that only 55% supported same-sex marriage and 55% approved of gay couples kis sing in public. Ghaziani (2014:   252) calls this “performative progressiveness” as some heterosexuals proclaim values of equality without practicing them in their lives. It is an important corrective to any argument that no inequality exists for gays and lesbians, but it is also evidence of the profound change—a clear majority support gay marriage  and  public displays of affection."
"33" "In summary,  we  maintain  that  the  contention  that homophobia has decreased in the US and UK is strongly supported by  a wide range of  empirical evidence , and that this has profoundly a ffected the expression of gender among males .  Still, d e creasing homophobia is neither homogenous nor universal ,  and  heterosexism and heteronormativity   remain significant social issues . There is important scholarship to be undertaken that examines the damaging consequences of  them ,  but   it will best do this when it recognizes the changing social context. It is our contention that  this  enhance s   our  understanding of  the broader trend of  decreasing homophobia — recognizing both the improvement related to decreasing homophobia and the continued  problems associated with  heterosexism and heteronormativity ."
"34" "Are  h eterosexism  and heteronormativity  as bad as homophobia ?"
"35" "A  related  critique of IMT is that the erosion of homophobia is  not  significant because heterosexism and  heteronormativity  are equally damaging (de   Boise 2015; Simpson 2014) .  We agree that the negative effects of heterosexism are multiple, complex , institutionalized  and frequently hidden, yet they are different to those of overt homophobia.  Plummer (2014: 128 ) articulates this powerfully, writing: “reference to a homophobic murder seems disturbingly meaningful, whereas I am yet to hear anybody describe a murder as heterosexist.”"
"36" "R esearch on men and masculinities in the 1980s and 1990s  argued  that it was  homophobia  that policed men’s behaviors , not heterosexism  (Floyd 2000; Mac an Ghaill 1994; Plummer 1999).  The rationale for focusing on homophobia is thus not related to a dismissal of the problems of heterosexism and heteronormativity, but because they have  traditionally had  less relevance to the social dynamics of men and their gendered behaviors   (Kimmel 1994) . It  was  the fear of being socially perceived as g ay – homohysteria – that resulted  in the damaging masculinities discussed by Connell (1995), Epstein (1997), Plummer (1999) and others, not the structural and implicit privileging of heterosexuality.  This is the category error of de Boise’s (2015)  contention  that homohysteria fails because it does not account for the structural or institutionalization of heterosexual privilege—they are different concepts that examine different aspects of the social world."
"37" "We do not  argue against the problem  and existence  of heteronormativity  (e.g. Epstein and Johnson 1998) . Understanding the privileging of heterosexuality   is important sociological work ,  including  among pro-gay straight men  (Ripley  et al.  2012) ,  and we called for  scholars to shift the lens of analysis from homophobia to heteronormativity  in 2010  (McCormack and Anderson 2010 a ).  But heterosexism and heteronormativity can be studied more clearly if an evidence-based approach is taken regarding attitudinal change more generally.  Recognizing social progress does not prevent challenging continued inequality—our  contention  is that such recognition enhances the ability to challenge the inequalities that persist.  As such, we support further research on heterosexism and heteronormativity related to inclusive masculinities."
"38" "W hat a bout  language like  ‘that’s so g ay’ ?"
"39" "Another  critique relates to  the prevalence of homophobic language, particularly around  phrases like “that’s so gay ”  ( Bridges and Pascoe 2014 ).  Research in the 1980s and 1990s  documented the centrality of homophobic language in the regulation of masculinities, and “that’s so gay” was undoubtedly homophobi c in this context (Plummer 1999 ; Thorne and Luria  1986 ). Yet as attitudinal homophobia decreased, and young straight men increasingly espoused beliefs that were supportive of gay people, an interesting paradox occurred:  many  young straight men had gay friends and supported gay rights, yet they would say phrases that  can  be  interpret ed   as homophobic."
"40" "One  response is to argue that these  men  were homophobic   by virtue of their language use .  Here, it is argued  t heir speech acts belie  their true beliefs; and their proclaimed attitudes  are   statements  to guard against  accusations of  homophobia —that “intention  is a specious argument which obfuscates the myriad causes of gender inequalities and which perpetrators can often hide behind, even when confronted by the imp lications of their actions” (de  Boise 2015: 332).   W hile  it is important to critically evaluate the implications and effects of such language,  this critique is not an accurate representation of our arguments, and  engaging with the narratives of participants is important in order to attain the most nuanced ar guments."
"41" "In early ethnographic research with male student  elite  athletes  (McCormack and Anderson 2010b) , we  found that they  had positive attitudes toward gay people, but  their  language  use had not  change d  as quickly as their attitudes  (Rasmussen 2004), theorizing this through cultural lag. However, we did not focus in this article on how language was evolving, and how young people increasingly have two distinct meanings for the word gay,  and they do not  understand  them as connected  (McCormack 2012) .  This is supported by l inguistic research from Australia that demonstrate d markedly different understandings of language between generations (Lalor and Rendle-Short  2007) . Here,  young people  in their study were  able to differentiate meanings in usage of the word gay  based  on intent  and  context  in a way that older people could not do (see also Michael 2013; Rasmussen 2004) ."
"42" "T his argument  has been developed  in  recent  empirical studies on young straight men ( e.g.  Anderson 2014;  Blanchard, McCormack and Peterson 2015 ; Sexton  2016 ). Importantly, McCormack, Wignall and Morris ( 2016 ) interviewed 35 young gay men about  their perceptions of  this language.  T he major ity did not find such phrases like “that’s so gay” homophobic,  and some participants used the phrases themselves . McCormack et al.  conceptualize d  an intent-context-effect matrix  because  the terms were used interchangeably by participants   to explain  how they interpreted phrases like “that’s so gay.”  Vital to this matrix  is  the presence of shared norms, with participants arguing that they judged the phrases as acceptable because they knew  the person  who  was  saying them."
"43" "Of course, a qualitative study of 35 gay youth from across the UK does not  dis prove  the presence of  homophobic language  in other contexts, n or does it  preclude the possibility  that the polysemy of the word  gay  can have negative effects.  Kimmel (2008) makes this point when he highlights  that objects d escribed as “gay” in US high schools tend to be  ones  that are coded feminine,  and as such is  a subtle form of gender policing. Yet recognizing both options as possibilities means that  the phrase cannot be used as  prima facie   evidence of homophobic bullying, and socially liberal people can use the phrase within friendship groups without perpetuating homophobia.  So when Bridges and Pascoe (2014: 254) contend that “ McCormack argues that homophobic   jokes – when not directed at gay boys – have been stripped of their discriminatory   meanings ,” they assume what they seek to prove—to define the “jokes” as homophobic is to apply a  particular   framework of homophobia  without paying attention to the dynamics and social context in which the language is used, as well as the straight and gay young people’s understandings of what this language means."
"44" "It  is clear that languag e changes  quickly; that there are generational perspectives of such language use; and  scholars engaging in this debate ne ed to do so with  an appreciation of the changing ways in which young people discuss sex and sexuality more generally .   As  contemporary  research shows, not only is it possible for some straight men to use phrases like “that’s so gay” while genuinely supporting gay rights  (Sexton 2016) , some gay youth agree with their perspective (McCormack et al. in press)."
"45" "Is IMT  g eneralizable?"
"46" "An issue for qualitative research in general is that of generalizability. As such, an important focus has been whether  the  empirical findings  of IMT  are over-generalized (e.g. Ingram and Waller 2014; Simpson 2014).  This argument maintains  that because IMT is based on qualitative research,  it  cannot speak to broader social trends.  As with  all  emerging social trends, these  concerns are valid as  not all change  will  consolidate into sustained trends  ( Leege 1992) .  Yet there is  virtually no quantitative research on masculinities  for comparison , and  a significant  and growing  body of research using the theory , in a rang e of institutions and locations, and  using a diversity of methods.  The question, then, is not whether IMT is generalizable, but the extent to which changing masculinities in a range of contexts are explained by IMT."
"47" "One way to evaluate this is to consider the amount of research that uses the theory. First , our own research extends beyond a few qualitative studies. Anderson has published articles on straight men’s peer  group cultures  that draw on over forty  distinct research sites. Similarly, while McCormack’s original research was based on three high schools, two of these were strategically selected because high levels of homophobia could be expected there , according to old models . He has also collected data in other settings  ( e.g.  Blanchard, McCormack and Peterson 2015 ; McCormack and Anderson 2010 b ; McCormack, Wignall and Morris  2016 ). We have also, together and separately, undertaken interview research on a diverse range of participants—including 90 bisexual men (Anderson and McCormack in  press),  35  men with non-exclusive sexual orientations (McCormack and Wignall  2016 ), and 24 openly gay athletes (Anderson 2011)."
"48" "The  adoption  of IMT in other internati onal research by other scholars  is also indicative of its broader applicability (e.g.  Channon and Matthews 2015;  Dashper 2012; Haltom and Worthen 2014). This includes  work based  on large  on-line surveys, discussion boards, and  analysis of print media  ( Cashmore and Cleland 2012; Cleland 2013; Kian  and Anderson   2009; Kian, Anderson and Shipka 2015 ).  We do not detail them all here, and  instead  refer to our review of homohysteria which  c ites a significant number of these studies (McCormack and Anderson 2014a)."
"49" "Studies using IMT have also improved generalizability by including elements of quantitative methods , such  as selecting respondents at random  for small , in-depth interview projects  (see  Small  2009) .  In their work on rates of  heterosexual men  kissing  each other , for example, Anderson’s research team s in the US , UK, and Australia  approached every third male student to emerge from a common area within the  13  universities studied ( Anderson, 2014;  Anderson, Adams and Rivers 2012;  Drummond  et al.  2015 ) .  W hile  still limited in scope , these  studies on prevalence of kissing extend  IMT  beyond the limitations of generalizability faced by purely qualitative studies.  Thus, while broad claims about “all men” or similar cannot be made, IMT has been evidenced in a range of settings and international contexts."
"50" "What about i ntersectionality?"
"51" "I ntersectionality brings to the fore the vital importance of local context and specific cultural dynamics,  and is a welcome addition to the men and masculinities literature.  Yet i ntersectionality with other social variables has also been used to argue against the broader trend of more inclusive masculinities. Here ,  studies that find damaging masculinities for one  group are then used to discount the broader trend, be it related to location, age, religion, race or other factors  (e.g. Ingram and Waller 2014) .  The  problem we have encountered is that  the empirical examples  sometimes  remain in  this local context. They are not related back to broader sociological debates that recognize legal change, decreasing attitudinal homophobia,  individualization,  the rise of the internet, and greater v isibility of sexual minorities . In other words, f i nding orthodox aspects of masculinity among one group of people does n ot   disprove the theory  (see Magrath 2015) . Demonstrating that  inclusive masculinities  do not  exist in  particular  group s   is important, necessary work  and further work that examines the limitations of homohysteria as a heurism would remain valuable . But if  particular examples of homophobia, homohysteria or machismo  are used to  argue against   the existence of a  broader trend, the more interesting sociological work of how these two phenomena can co-exist  remains  under-developed."
"52" "How does IMT relate to w omen and the reproduction of patriarchy?"
"53" "IMT has also been critiqued for not accounting for the position of women in society (O’Neill 2014). We concur  with O’Neill  and value  this critique . Our own research has not taken the relationship between men and women as a focal point, although several of our studies have highlighted  the absence of  overt misogyny  in  the male peer group cultures studied (e.g. Anderson 2008a; Blanchard, McCormack and Peterson 2015). The focus on the relations between men and women is an important area of future study, and this should include issues related to attitudes about women, cross-gender friendships, sexual relationships and the reproduction of gender inequality, among other areas  of gender scholarship ."
"54" "However, the absence of theoretical claims related to the experiences of women should not discredit the changes that have occurred among men  (see  Borkowska  2016) . Such an argument is predicated on the notion that gender is always relational—that the dynamics  of men’s behaviors are  necessarily  closely related to the dynamics of women’s behaviors. Connell (1995) privileged the relational nature of gender in her theorizing. She wrote that gender relationality comprises “ …one of the major structures of all documented societies ” (p. 72).  However, we doubt that gender is necessarily relational, not least because it relies on a binary categorization that does not pay due regard to the historical specificity of gender norms and the ways in which non-binary gender relations exist in some cultures ( Fausto-Sterling 2000 ; Haywood and Mac an Ghaill 2012 )."
"55" "More significantly, the necessity of gender relationality does not account for the different ways men and women hav e related historically in the U S. Cancian (1987) documented the separation and integration of gendered spheres in different periods of time; particularly in reference to the gendering of emotions. She argues there was overlap between men’s and  women’s emotional expressionism  until the second industrial revolution, at which time gender bifurcated and became relational.  T he gendered behaviors of men and women are not necessarily oppositional, and the s eparation of gendered spheres,  whil e still apparent in many areas,  can overlap."
"56" "Furthermore,  De ustch (2007) convincingly argued  that gender scholarship can someti mes present inequality as fixed,  underplay ing  the potential for positive social change, and the necessity of gender as relational would seem to be one of these ways.  We  thus  suspect that gender is  predominantly  relational during homohysteric periods  when orthodox masculinities are dominant ,  but  that  expressions of  gender need not be relational  in other times .  It may be that m asculinity as a concept becomes less significant in  more inclusive  times  (Haywood and Mac an Ghaill 2012) ."
"57" "A related critique is that IMT does not contribute to understanding how patriarchy is reproduced ( Bridges and Pascoe 2014; O’Neill 2014 ). This is accurate, but  we contend that  this is  not  a failing of the theory  because patriarchy is more complex than the social ordering  of masculinity . In order to explain this, it is necessary to first recognize that m uch  academic study of  masculinities is driven by a pro-feminist desire to understand  and contest  patriarchy.  We support such an endeavor and seek the eradication of gender inequality in all its forms. Masculinities scholarship has had a positive impact on society in this regard ( Connell 1995;  Kimmel 2008), and it has also likely helped promote  more  inclusive forms of masculinity (e.g. Salisbury and Jackson 1996)."
"58" "However, we are not convinced by Connell’s (1995) central claim that dynamics of masculinity are the process by which patriarchy is reproduced.  Connell’s  argument is centered on  the presence of  a discursive framework  in which  the language of gender is systematically unequal, and that hierarchies of masculinities are predicated on homophobic language that is simultaneously sexist because of the conflation of femininity and male homosexuality. Masculinity capital is  then  attributed through closeness  to  ideal types of masculinity, and these notions ar e all predicated upon an  unequal relationship between men and women. This argument  is a serious one , but we are not convinced that it has been substantiated empirically. As such, we  consider Connell’s contention that hegemonic masculinity is the  “gender practice which embodies the currently accepted answer to the problem of the legitimacy of patriarchy” (p. 77)  to be more an aspiration than an empirically validated theory."
"59" "T he link between the hierarchies of masculinity developed by Connell and the reproduction of patriarchy  still requires empirical validation (Messerschmidt 2013) . Given the complexity of patriarchy ( Tutchell  and   Edmonds  2015 ;  Walby 1990), we are skeptical that it is so easily explained by the social organization of men and masculinities (see New 2000). For example, patriarchy   includes economic inequality  related to the devaluing of part-time work and work in the ca ring industries (Deustch 2007 ; Walby 1990 ). There are serious arguments that patriarchy is reproduced through capitalism ( Hearn 1992) , religion ( Hunte r  1992)  and the structural organization of sport  ( McDonagh and Pappano  2007 ) .  Thus, the notion that the theory that captured the male hierarchies of the homohysteric 1980s  also  explains inter-gender inequalities of the present day seems too neat a solution to what is a vastly complex social problem.   Our concern is that this claim obscures social change related to sexuality and the damaging behaviors between men."
"60" "As such, IMT does not claim to connect the social dynamics of men with the  reproduction of  inequality between men and women  at a cultural level .  While gender inequality is clearly consolidated and supported by men in particular contexts, not least related to domestic and sexual violence (Westmarland 2015), the hierarchical stratifications of masculinity are not dependent upon the unequal social positions of men and women. Thus, while gender inequality will be linked to hierarchies of masculinity in particular areas,  these hierarchies are not synonymous with patriarchy ."
"61" "In this  context , O’Neill (2014) usefully explores how  IMT  may be a  post-feminist theory of masculinities.  She argues that  it represents a radical shift away from the foundational scholars of the sociol ogy of masculinities —a trend of contemporary masculinities research ( Haywood and Mac an Ghaill 2012;  Hearn et al. 2012) . She is right to the extent that the focus is not on patriarchy , but this also obscures the similar focus on male peer group dynamics shared by Kimmel, Connell and others . It may even be  possible that decreasing homophobia is not particularly a feminist trend,  if  feminism is understood as a politics to contest patriarchy. O’Neill  also  highlights the need for research to examine how homohysteria intersects with sexism, and how heterosexual women’s lives have changed with inclusive masculinities. We support this call. We suspect such empirical research would highlight more positive trends than speculated in O’Neill’s (2014) article  (see Bullingham and Anderson 2013; Worthen 2014) , but value the call for work that critically  interrogates this area."
"62" "Contemporary Theorizing of Masculinity  and Future Directions"
"63" "The large and growing group of scholars using IMT is only part of a broader expansion in the ways in which masculinities are theorized in the new millennium (Haywood and Mac an Ghaill 2012). Emerging from the more uniform take up of hegemonic masculinity theory in the 1980s and 1990s, Hearn et al. (2012) frame this new diversification as a “third phase” of research on men and masculinities, that they state is characterized by “diversity and critique, which includes work by a new generation of scholars not embedded in the frameworks of the 1980s” (p. 37)."
"64" "Part of this diversity includes those continuing to use hegemonic masculinity (e.g. Du ncanson 2015). Duncanson (2015:  244) seeks to rehabilitate the connection between male hierarchies and patriarchy, arguing that by examining how the “softer” man reproduces patriarchy, it is possible to “expose its contradictions and to push for those relations of equality.” Similarly, Messerschmidt (2012) calls for scholars to focus on the reproduction of patriarchy, disentangling the men that contest gender inequality from those that support its reproduction. In doing so, both draw on Schippers’ (2007) call for a recognition of the role women play in gender inequality and their adoption of damaging masculine behaviors."
"65" "As part of this development of hegemonic masculinity, Demetriou (2001) introduced the notion of hybridity. He argued that it was necessary to take account of the ways in which marginalized and subordinated masculinities are appropriated by dominant ones; arguing that men’s practices form a “hybrid bloc that unites practices from diverse masculinities in order to ensure the reproduction of patriarchy” (p. 337). In response, Connell and Messerschmidt (2005) argued that a hegemonic form of masculinity survives through “incorporation of such [marginalized] masculinities into a functioning gender order rather than by active oppression in the form of discredit or violence” (p. 848)."
"66" "Some scholars have also adopted the term “hybrid masculinities” ostensibly to develop hegemonic masculinity by more explicitly recognizing the changing nature of masculinities (e.g. Arxer 2011). Bridges (2014: 80) argues that straight men have started to embrace “gay aesthetics,” but contends they do so “without challenging the systems of ine quality from which they emerge.” This is contested by  Hall  ( 2014 )  who argues , contrastingly,  that metrosexuality is eviden ce of significant social change ."
"67" "The notion of hybridity can be attractive because it so openly recognizes both some change and resistance —seemingly a “middle-ground” that incorporates both perspectives . However, we find it problematic because the change it recognizes is still deemed to be merely “stylistic” (Bridges and Pascoe 2014, 256) and that the recent changes in masculinities “not only reproduce contemporary systems of gendered, raced, and sexual inequalities but also obscure this process as it is happening” (p. 247); arguing as well that inclusive masculinities are, in fact, a form of hybrid masculinity."
"68" "We have several concerns with this framing. First, claims that inclusive masculinities are not part of broader transformations that challenge inequalities deny the real social change that has occurred. This includes changes in laws related to LGB people (equal marriage, the removal of anti-sodomy laws, increased worker protection in many  U.S.  States); the increased visibility of straight allies; the improving experiences of sexual minorities; the growing condemnation of overt homophobia; the increased acceptance of gay athletes; and many other social changes—all of which are supported by empirical evidence.  It also seems to ignore how individualization is closely associated with decreasing homophobia (Twenge 2014; Twenge et al. 2016).  As such, we do not consider inclusive masculinities to be a form of hybrid masculinity."
"69" "We see value for the concept in explaining particular contexts where the changes in masculinities are evidently shallow—for example, to understand the processes by which  evangelical Christians reconcile their abstinence pledges with problematic views of human sexuality (Diefendorf 2015). This is important scholarship ,  of a particular context and specific religious group. It does not speak to broader social changes, and to claim that changes in masculinities in other, more progressive contexts have not challenged “the systems of inequality from which they emerge” erases homophobia as a system of inequality. For this reason, we do not find hybrid masculinities to be a useful tool in understanding changes in contemporary masculinities beyond specific local contexts, such as evangelical Christianity."
"70" "In addition to hybrid masculinities, a number of other concepts have been used to describe these new types of men empirically examined in the new millennia: personalized masculinities (Swain 2006); soft-boiled masculinities (Heath 2003); cool masculinities (Jackson and Dempster 2009);  caring masculinities (Elliot 2016);  flexible masculinities (Batnitzky et al. 2009); chameleon masculinities (M. Ward 2015); and saturated masculinities (Mercer forthcoming). These are useful concepts that undoubtedly speak to the diversification and multiplication of forms of masculinities, and support Hearn et al.’s (2012) claim that we are in a third phase of masculinities research. Some clearly fit with IMT, and serve as further archetypes that can be used to understand the expanded range of culturally legitimized masculinities in contemporary society."
"71" "Dean (2014) explores the social construction of heterosexual identities in “post-closet culture,” where he argues the societal presumption of heterosexuality has withered. Conceptualizing a range of identity management techniques, he places these practices on a continuum of levels of contact with  and social distance from sexual minorities. Dean  categorizes these as ‘strongly aversive boundaries’ (including behaviors such as homophobic language and the stigmatization of gender non-conformity), ‘weak boundaries’ (including discussion of opposite-sex partners as ways of recuperating heterosexuality) and ‘blurred  boundaries’ (including disavowal of straight privilege and recognition of components of bisexuality). As such, he usefully advances understanding of the diverse ways in which heterosexuals engage with sexual minorities in inclusive cultures.  More research that investigates the strategic self-presentation of heterosexuals, potentially with a focus on heteronormativity, will be important work (see Ripley in press)."
"72" "Other scholars have turned to poststructural frameworks in order to understand changing masculinities in a more fluid and diverse manner (Haywood and Mac an Ghaill 2012). We are supportive of their aim to “disengage the ‘artificial polarities’ that regulate gender” (p. 585). Haywood and Mac an Ghaill’s call to adopt a “post-masculinity” approach that “severs masculinity as the primary interpretive frame through which to explain gendered subjectivities” (p. 585) is an interesting, radical idea moving forward. Similarly, Beasley (2015) calls for the use of “heterodoxy” to develop a queer reading of heteromasculinities that enables an understanding of the heterogeneity of contemporary masculinities."
"73" "We have been critical of poststructural theorizing more generally for its exclusionary writing style, and while Haywood and Mac an Ghaill write in an accessible way, we would be concerned with the adoption of poststructural theorizing for this reason. That being said, their ideas   grapple with how to understand masculinity in a context where masculinity and femininity are increasingly blurred. The notion of post-masculinity may be useful in the way post-gay has been adopted related to contemporary sexualities (e.g. Ghaziani 2014), and accessible scholarship that explores these issues in the future should be welcomed."
"74" "We also highlight that the centrality of the internet is still under-theorized in much masculinities research, as are the effects of deindustrialization and shifting patterns of work and leisure. Research that examines the softening of masculinity and how this intersects with women’s attitudes about men, men’s attitudes about women, sexual relationships, domestic violence, and other gender-related issues will be important for the field."
"75" "Finally , it is important to recognize that there are significant social problems and many inequalities that persist alongside the progressive changes related to sexuality.  Ward (2015) has highlighted the isolation that many young men feel in a post-industrial village in the South Wales valleys.  There are profound shifts that result from  technolo gical and societal changes, not sufficiently addressed  by contemporary politics. Research that seeks to understand the combination of these changes would be much valued. We expect individualization will likely play a key role in theorizing this (see Twenge, 2014), but empirical research is needed to examine this hypothesis."
"76" "Conclusion"
"77" "This article has  provided an overview of Inclusive Masculinity Theory , highlighted additions to the theory, discussed competing and complementary theories, and engaged in  some of t he  formal and informal  critiques  of the theory . We hope this article will prove a spur for further engagement and understanding of organization of masculinities in society, and that as our understanding of the positive trends we document continues, our knowledge on how to contest continued inequalities is enhanced.   In order to promote the field of masculinities, we encourage scholars concerned with the intersection of masculinity with health, criminology, sport, education, religion , sexualities , business  and other  relevant  disciplines  to examine for continuity and change in the relationship both among men and their masculinities and between men a nd women."
"78" "Endnotes"
"79" "1.  We define heterosexism as the structural and implicit privileging of heterosexuality, and heteronormativity as relating to the social norms that govern acceptable forms of heterosexual practice."
"80" "References"
"81" "Adams, A.  2011. “Josh wears pink cleats”: Inclusive masculinity on the soccer field.  Journal of Homosexuality ,  58 (5), 579-596."
"82" "Anderson, E., 2002. Openly gay athletes contesting hegemonic masculinity in a homophobic environment.  Gender & society ,  16 (6), 860-877."
"83" "Anderson, E., 2005. Orthodox and inclusive masculinity: Competing masculinities among heterosexual men in a feminized terrain.  Sociological Perspectives ,  48 (3),  337-355."
"84" "Anderson, E.  2008. ‘Being masculine is not about who you sleep with...’: Heterosexual athletes contesting masculinity and the one-time rule of homosexuality.  Sex Roles , 58, 104-15."
"85" "Anderson, E. 2009.  Inclusive masculinity: The changing nature of masculinities . London: Routledge."
"86" "Anderson, E., Adams, A.,  and  Rivers, I. 2012. “I kiss them because I love them”: The emergence of heterosexual men kissing in British institutes of education.   Archives of S exual  B ehavior ,  41 (2), 421-430."
"87" "Arxer, S. L. 2011 . Hybrid masculine power: Reconceptualizing the relationship between homosociality and hegemonic masculinity.  Humanity & Society ,  35 (4), 390-422."
"88" "Batnitzky , A., McDowell, L., & Dyer, S. 2009 . Flexible and strategic masculinities: the working lives and gendered identities of male migrants in London.  Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies ,  35 (8), 1275-1293."
"89" "Beasley, C. 2015 . Introduction to Special Issue of Men and Masculinities: Heterodox Hetero-masculinities.  Men and Masculinities , 18(2), 135-139."
"90" "Beck, U. (2002).  Individualization: Institutionalized individualism and its social and political consequences   London:  Sage."
"91" "Borkowska , K. (2016). Joining the conversation on inclusive masculinity theory: A response to Rachel O’neill’s ‘Whither critical masculinity studies?’  Men and Masculinities , Advance online publication."
"92" "Bridges, T., 2014. A very “gay” straight? Hybrid masculinities, sexual aesthetics, and the changing relationship between masculinity and homophobia.  Gender & Society ,  28 (1),  58-82."
"93" "Bridges, T. and Pascoe, C.J., 2014. Hybrid masculinities: New  directions in sociology  men and masculinities.  Sociology Compass ,  8 (3),  246-258."
"94" "Cashmore, E.  and  Cleland, J. 2012. Fans, homophobia and masculinities in association football.  British Journal of Sociology , 63(2), 370-387."
"95" "Channon, A., & Matthews, C. R. 2015 . “It Is What It Is”: Masculinity, Homosexuality, and Inclusive Discourse in Mixed Martial Arts.  Journal of H omosexuality , 62(7), 936-956."
"96" "Cleland, J. (2016). Sexuality, masculinity and homophobia in association football: An empirical overview of a changing cultural context.  International Review of the Sociology of Sport . Advance online publication."
"97" "Clements, B. and Field, C.D., 2014. Public opinion toward homosexuality and gay rights in Great Britain.  Public Opinion Quarterly ,  78 (2),  523-547."
"98" "Connell, R. 1995.  Masculinities . London: Polity."
"99" "Connell, R.W. and Messerschmidt, J.W., 2005. Hegemonic masculinity rethinking the concept.  Gender & S ociety ,  19 (6), 829-859."
"100" "Dashper , K. 2012. ‘Dressage is full of queens!’ Masculinity, sexuality and Equestrian sport.  Sociology ,  46 (6), 1109-1124."
"101" "Dean, J.J .  2014.  Straights: Heterosexuality in post-closeted culture . NYU Press ."
"102" "de Boise, S.  2015. I’m Not Homophobic,“I’ve Got Gay Friends” Evaluating the Validity of Inclusive Masculinity.  Men and Masculinities ,  18 (3), 318-339."
"103" "Demetriou, D.Z., 2001. Connell’s concept of hegemonic masculinity: A critique.  Theory and society ,  30 (3),  337-361."
"104" "Deutsch, F. 2007. Undoing gender.  Gender & Society , 21(1), 106-127."
"105" "Diefendorf, S. 2015 . After the Wedding Night Sexual Abstinence and Masculinities over the Life Course.  Gender & Society ,  29(5), 647-669."
"106" "Doan, L., Loehr, A. and Miller, L.R., 2014. Formal Rights and Informal Privileges for Same-Sex Couples Evidence from a National Survey Experiment.  American Sociological Review ,  79 (6), 1172-1195."
"107" "Drummond, M. , Filiault, S, Anderson, E.  &  Jeffries, D.  ( 2015 ).  Homosocial Intimacy among Australian Undergraduate Men.   Journal of Sociology.   Online first."
"108" "Duncanson, C. 2015 . Hegemonic  m asculinity and the  p ossibility of  c hange in  g ender  r elations.  Men and Masculinities ,  18(2), 231-248."
"109" "Elliott, K., 2016 . Caring Masculinities Theorizing an Emerging Concept.  Men and masculinities , 19(3), 240-259."
"110" "Epstein, D.  1997. Boyz' Own Stories: Masculinities and sexualities in schools [1].  Gender and education ,  9 (1), 105-116."
"111" "Epstein, D. and Johnson, R., 1998.  Schooling sexualities . McGraw-Hill Education ."
"112" "Fausto-Sterling, A., 2000.  Sexing the body: Gender politics and the construction of sexuality . Basic Books."
"113" "Floyd, K., 2000. Affectionate same-sex touch: The influence of homophobia on observers' perceptions.  The Journal of  S ocial  P sychology ,  140 (6),  774-788."
"114" "Giddens, A. (1992).  The transformation of intimacy: sexuality, love and intimacy in modern societies .  Cambridge: Polity ."
"115" "Goldberg, S., 1977.  The inevitability of patriarchy . London: Temple Smith."
"116" "Ghaziani, A. (2014).  There goes the gayborhood?  Princeton University Press."
"117" "Go ttzén, L., & Kremer-Sadlik, T.  2012. Fatherhood and Youth Sports A Balancing Act between Care and Expectations.  Gender & Society ,  26 (4), 639-664."
"118" "Hall , M. 2014 .  Metrosexual masculinities . Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan."
"119" "Haywood, Chris and Mairtin Mac an Ghaill. 2012. ‘What's next for masculinity?’ Reflexive directions for theory and research on masculinity and education.   Gender and Education ,  24 (6), 577-592."
"120" "Hearn, J., 1992.  Men in the public eye: The construction and deconstruction of public men and public patriarchies .  New York:  Taylor & Francis."
"121" "Hearn, J., Nordberg, M., Andersson, K., Balkmar, D., Gottzén, L., Klinth, R., Pringle, K. and Sandberg, L., 2012. Hegemonic masculinity and beyond: 40 years of research in Sweden.  Men and  M asculinities  15(1), 31-55."
"122" "Heath, M. 2003 . Soft-Boiled Masculinity Renegotiating Gender and Racial Ideologies in the Promise Keepers Movement.  Gender & Society ,  17 (3), 423-444."
"123" "Hunter, D.G., 1992. The Paradise of Patriarchy: Ambrosiaster on Woman as (Not) God's Image.  The Journal of Theological Studies ,  43 (2),  447-469."
"124" "Ingram, N. and Waller, R., 2014. Degrees of Masculinity: Working and Middle-Class Undergraduate Students’ Constructions of Masculine Identities. In  Debating Modern Masculinities: Change, Continuity, Crisis?  (pp. 35-51). Palgrave Macmillan UK."
"125" "Jackson, C.  & Dempster, S. 2009 . ‘I sat back on my computer… with a bottle of whisky next to me’.  Journal of Gender Studies , 18 (4), 341-356."
"126" "Keleher K., and S mith ,  E .R.  2012. Growing support for Gay and Lesbian equality since 1990.  Journal of Homosexuality ,  59 (9), 1307-1326."
"127" "Kimmel, M.S.  1994. Masculinity as homophobia. In H. Brod & M. Kaufman (eds)  Theorising masculinities . London: Sage."
"128" "Kimmel, M.S. 2008.  Guyland . Harper Collins."
"129" "Leege, D.C. 1992. Coalitions, cues, strategic politics, and the staying power of the religious right, or why political scientists ought to pay attention to cultural politics.  PS: Political Science & Politics ,  25 (02),  198-204."
"130" "Mac an Ghaill, M. 1994.  The making of men . Buckingham: Open University Press."
"131" "Magrath, R., Anderson, E. and Roberts, S. 2013.  On the door-step of equality: Attitudes toward gay athletes  among academy-level  footballers .  International Review of the Sociology of Sport . Online First."
"132" "McCormack, M.  2011 . Hierarchy without hegemony: Locating boys in an inclusive school setting.  Sociological Perspectives , 54(1), 83-101."
"133" "McCormack, M.  2012.  The declining significance of homophobia: How teenage boys are redefining masculinity and homophobia . New York: Oxford University Press."
"134" "McCormack, M. 2014. The intersection of youth masculinities, decreasing homophobia and class: An ethnography.  British Journal of Sociology . 65(1)."
"135" "McCormack, M.   in press. Mostly straights and the study of sexualities: An introduction to the special issue.  Sexualities ."
"136" "McCormack, M.   & Anderson, E. 2010a. ‘It’s just not acceptable any more’: The erosion of homophobia and the softening of masculinity at an English sixth form . Sociology , 44(5), 843-859"
"137" "McCormack, M.  & Anderson, E. 2010b. The re/production of homosexually-themed discourse in educationally-based organised sport.  Culture, Health & Sexuality , 12(8), 913-927."
"138" "McCormack, M.  & Anderson, E.  2014 a . The influence of declining homophobia on men’s gender in the United States: An argument for the study of homohysteria.  Sex Roles ,  71 (3-4), 109-120."
"139" "McCorm ack, M.  & Anderson, E.  2014 b . Homohysteria: Definitions, context and intersectionality.  Sex Roles ,  71 (3-4), 152-158."
"140" "McCormack, M.,  Anderson, E. & Adams, A. Cohort effect on the coming out experiences of bisexual men.  Sociology , 48(6), 1207-1223."
"141" "McCormack, M., Wignall, L. & Morris, M.  2016 . Gay guys using gay discourse:  Friendship, shared values and the intent-context-effect matrix.  British Journal of Sociology .  Advance online publication, 1-14."
"142" "McCormack, M.  & Wignall, L .  2016 .  Enjoyment,  e xploration and  e ducation: The  consumption  of  p orn ography   a mong  y oung  m en  with non-exclusive sexual orientations.  Sociology .  Advance online publication, 1-17."
"143" "McDonagh, E. and Pappano, L., 2007.  Playing with the boys: Why separate is not equal in sports . Oxford University Press."
"144" "McNair, B. 2013.  Porno? Chic!  London: Routledge."
"145" "Mercer , J.  forthcoming .  Gay Pornography: Representations of Sexuality and Masculinity . IBTaurus."
"146" "Messerschmidt, J.W., 2012. Engendering gendered knowledge: Assessing the academic appropriation of hegemonic masculinity.  Men and Masculinities , 15(1), 56-76."
"147" "Michael, B. 2013. ‘Just don’t hit on me and I’m fine’: Mapping high school wrestlers’ relationship to inclusive masculinity and heterosexual recuperation.  International Review for the Sociology of Sport , Advance online publication. doi: 10.1177/1012690213501168"
"148" "Nagle , J. 2015. ‘It’s just a  bit of Banter…’: Exploring the s ignificance of  h omophobia, ‘ b anter’ and  h omosexually- t hemed  l an g uage in the  w orking  l ives of  p rofessional  f ootballers. MA thesis, University of Durham."
"149" "Negy, C. 2014 . Homohysteria: Useful Construct? Or an Unnecessary Splitting of Hairs?.  Sex Roles ,  71 (3-4), 137-140."
"150" "New, C. 2001 . Oppressed and oppressors? The systematic mistreatment of men.  Sociology , 35, 729-748."
"151" "Parent, M . C., Batura, A., & Crooks, K. 2014 . Homohysteria: A commentary and critique.  Sex Roles ,  71 (3-4), 121-125."
"152" "Plummer, D.  1999.  One of the boys: Masculinity, homophobia and modern manhood . New York: Harrington Park Press."
"153" "Plummer, D. 2014 . The ebb and flow of homophobia: A gender taboo theory.   Sex Roles ,  71 (3-4), 126-136."
"154" "Ripley, M.  in press . The integration of British undergraduate men’s p ublic  and private m asculinities .  Journal of Gender Studies ."
"155" "Rob erts, S. 2013 . Boys  w ill  b e  boys…w on’t  t hey? Change and  c ontinuities in  c ontemporary  y oung  w orking-class  m asculinities.  Sociology .  47(4), 671-86."
"156" "Salisbury, J., and Jackson, D.  1996.  Challenging  m acho  v alues: Practical  w ays of  w orking with  b oys in  s econdary  s chools .  London:  Psychology Press."
"157" "Savin-Williams, R.C. 2005.  The New Gay Teenager . Harvard University Press."
"158" "Savin-Williams, R.C. in press. An e xploratory  s tudy of  e xclusively  h eterosexual,  p rimarily  h eterosexual,  a nd  m ostly  h eterosexual  y oung  m en .  Sexualities ."
"159" "Savin-Williams, R.C. and Vrangalova, Z. 2013. Mostly heterosexual as a distinct sexual orientation group: A systematic review of the empirical evidence.  Developmental Review , 33, 58-88."
"160" "Schippers, M. 2007 . Recovering the feminine other: Masculinity, femininity, and gender hegemony.  Theory and S ociety ,  36 (1), 85-102."
"161" "Scoats, R., Joseph, L. & Anderson, E  (in press).  “I don’t mind watching him cum”: Heterosexual Men, Male-Male-Female Threesomes, and the Erosion of the One-Time Rule of Homosexuality.   Sexualities."
"162" "Sexton, S.S., 2016. The intersection of self and school: how friendship circles influence heterosexual and self-identified queer teenage rs .  Gender and Education ,  online first,  1-14."
"163" "Simpson, P., 2014. Oppression, Acceptance or Civil Indifference? Middle-Aged Gay Men’s Accounts of ‘Heterospaces’. In  Debating Modern Masculinities: Change, Continuity, Crisis?  (p p. 70-87). Palgrave Macmillan ."
"164" "Small, M .L. 2009 . ‘How many cases do I need?’ On science and the logic of case selection in field-based research.  Eth nography , 10(1): 5-38."
"165" "Smith, T.W. 2011 .  Attitudes towards same-gender, sexual behavior across time and across countries . Chicago, IL: NORC."
"166" "Swain, J. 2006 . Reflections on patterns of masculinity in school settings.  Men and masculinities ,  8 (3), 331-349"
"167" "Thorne, B. and Luria, Z., 1986. Sexuality and gender in children's daily worlds.  Social Problems ,  33(3),  176-190."
"168" "Tutchell, E. & Edmonds, J. 2015 .  Man-made: Why so few women are in positions of power . Dorchester, England:  Ashgate . "
"169" "Twenge, J.M. 2014.  Generation me . New York: Atria."
"170" "Twenge, J. M.,  Sherman, R. A., & Wells, B. E. 2015 . Changes in American Adults’ Sexual Behavior and Attitudes, 1972–2012.  Archives of S exual  B ehavior ,   44 (8), pp.2273-2285."
"171" "Twenge, J.M., Sherma n, R.A. and Wells, B.E.  2016. Changes in American Adults’ Reported Same-Sex Sexual Experiences and Attitudes, 1973–2014.   Archives of sexual behavior , pp.1-18."
"172" "Ward, M.R. M. 2015 . The c hameleonisation of  m asculinity: Jimmy’s  m ultiple  p erformances of a  w orking- c lass  s elf.  Masculinities & Social Change ,  4 (3), 215-240."
"173" "Weeks, J. 2007.  The world we have won . London: Routledge."
"174" "Westmarland, N., 2015.  Violence Against Women: Crimi nological Perspectives on Men’s  Violences . Routledge."
"175" "Worthen, M. G. 2014 . The cultural significance of homophobia on heterosexual women’s gendered experiences in the United States: A commentary.  Sex Roles ,  71 (3-4), 141-151."
