"x"
"1" "Why Do States Develop Multi- T ier Emigrant Policies? Evidence from Egyp t"
"2" "Dr Gerasimos Tsourapas –  g.tsourapas@bham.ac.uk"
"3" "Department of Political Science & International Studies"
"4" "University of Birmingham – Birmingham, UK"
"5" "ABSTRACT    Why do states vary their policies towards their citizens abroad, and why are some emigrant groups treated preferentially to others? The literature on the politics of international migration has yet to explore this as a separate field of inquiry, assuming that states adopt a single policy that encourages, sustains or prevents emigration abroad. Yet, in the case of Egypt, the state developed a multi-tiered policy that distinctly favoured specific communities abroad over others. I hypothesise that policy differentiation is based upon the perceived utility of the emigrant group remaining abroad versus the utility of its return. This utility is determined by two factors: the sending state’s domestic political economy priorities and its foreign policy objectives."
"6" "This the Author Accepted (‘Post-Print’) version of this article. To access the published version, please use the link below:"
"7" "https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1369183X.2015.1049940"
"8" "To cite this article:"
"9" "Gerasimos Tsourapas (2015) ,   “ Why Do States Develop Multi- T ier Emigrant Policies? Evidence from Egypt .”   Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies , 41  ( 13 ),  2192-2214 .  DOI: 10.1080/1369183X.2015.1049940"
"10" "INTRODUCTION"
"11" "What accounts for variation in a state’s policies towards its citizens abroad, and why are some groups treated preferentially to others? The emerging academic literature on the politics of international migration has yet to explore this phenomenon as a separate field of inquiry, and generally assumes that states adopt a single policy that encourages, sustains, or prevents emigration abroad. Yet, in the case of Egypt, the state developed a multi-tiered policy that distinctly favoured specific emigrant communities over others. This goes against existing theorization of how states relate to their emigrant populations abroad in two ways: first, many scholars suggest that states develop homogenous, one-tier policies aiming to encourage or to prevent emigration abroad. However, through the Egyptian case, I demonstrate that states do not assume that all citizens who migrate are equally important, so why should we expect them to develop a single, all-encompassing policy? Second, the limited research on the rationale behind differential state policies towards emigrants has yet to properly theorize the importance of emigrants’ potential return to the homeland as a factor in determining state engagement policy. Yet, the reasons behind state encouragement of citizens’ emigration cannot be disassociated from the reasons behind state discouragement of their potential return to the homeland, and  vice versa ."
"12" "In this article, I explore state policy variation empirically in the case of Egypt to shed light on states’ motivations in connecting to their emigrant populations residing in different countries. I argue that states frequently develop multi-tiered policies that favour specific emigrant communities over others, depending on these communities’ perceived utility abroad versus back home. I combine emigration and return migration policies into the term ‘emigrant policies,’ and argue that sending states differentiate their emigrant policies towards emigrant communities based upon the perceived utility of a community remaining abroad versus the utility of its potential return. If the perceived utility of a population group abroad is positive,  the sending state is more likely to minimize its policy towards the group so as to avoid antagonizing the host state, to discourage return migration, and to maximize the time its emigrant group spends abroad. In contrast, if a group’s perceived utility abroad is negative, the sending state creates a policy that actively aims to foster ties with the group, to encourage its return, and to minimize its time abroad. This utility is determined by two factors: first, the sending state’s domestic political economy priorities and, second, its foreign policy objectives."
"13" "This article focuses on the case of Egypt for two reasons: first, Egypt constitutes the largest supplier of emigrant labour to the Middle East, and boasts one of the largest emigrant populations in the world, estimated at 3.7 million in 2010 (not including emigrants’ descendants) .  Second, Egyptian emigrant populations are widely dispersed across the world and, importantly, Egypt exhibits wide variation in its treatment of emigrant groups depending on their host country. This allows for a more accurate analysis of within-state variation in policies towards emigrant groups located in different host countries. While other sending states enjoy larger numbers of emigrant po p ulations (such as Morocco, for instance, or Mexico), they often lack the geographical dispersal that occurs in the Egyptian example (Moroccan emigrants are predominantly found in Europe, mainly France; Mexicans abroad are located predominantly in North America), and, thus, they also lack any substantial degree of engagement policy differentiation according to emigrants’ host country."
"14" "Specifically, within the 1970-2011 period, two sets of policies evolved towards Egyptian communities abroad.  On the one hand, state policy towards Egyptians in Europe, North America, and Australia was marked by diverse, institutionalized linkages with emigrant communities, and was particularly inclusive. A variety of legal provisions, annual conferences, complimentary trips to Egypt, and a multitude of targeted material issued by the Egyptian  Ministry of Foreign Affairs aimed to strengthen these emigrant groups’ ties to the homeland. On the other hand, state policy towards Egyptians in the Arab world was minimal and reactive. State mechanisms aiming to address various issues tended to arise after the fact, if at all; emigrants’ human rights were not adequately protected, while  ad hoc  institutions arose out of the informal sector to fill the void left by government neglect of the intra-Arab emigration process."
"15" "I employ the single-case study of Egypt for two reasons: first, a single-case study constitutes the best tool in providing a challenge to existing theoretical paradigms. In this case I argue that states develop multi-tier, rather than one-tier, policies towards their emigrant groups abroad that take into consideration both the utility of a group abroad and the utility of its potential return to the homeland. The case of Egypt also poses a challenge conventional wisdom by indicating a counterintuitive phenomenon: if an emigrant group is useful for a state abroad, the sending state is less likely to invest in an extensive policy towards that group. Contrary to the majority of relevant research, which argues that states engage diaspora and emigrant groups abroad aiming to extract specific benefits from them, I argue that it is only when an emigrant group stops serving state interests abroad that the sending state is more likely to develop an extensive engagement policy. For instance, the Egyptian state courted emigrants in North America and Europe despite their political opposition to the ruling regime, rather than treating them as state ‘traitors’ as the literature would have us expect."
"16" "Second, the single-case study format allows the introduction of obscure knowledge about the Egyptian case: in detailing how domestic political economy considerations and foreign policy objectives shaped the Egyptian engagement regime, I seek to provide a fresh outlook into how Egypt’s position and perceived role in the broader Middle East region is intrinsically tied to its ability to produce vas t quantities of emigrant labour. T hus, I aim to provide a more accurate account of the power relations that shape intra-state relations across the Arab world. At the  same time, I show how Egypt’s post-1970 re-orientation towards the West created novel, distinct tensions within the ruling Egyptian regime and drew criticism for the loss of skilled labour towards Europe, Australia, and North America. Beyond the importance of the Egyptian case, I aim to make a broader argument that is of relevance comparative politics scholars of migration, detailing how states are able to control population movements in pursue domestic political economy and foreign policy goals."
"17" "I employ process-tracing methodology, where qualitative and quantitative data are examined sequentially to draw descriptive inference and to disconfirm rival explanations (George and Bennett, 2005). I draw upon diverse primary and secondary material in Arabic, French, and English for the purpose of hypothesis formation through induction. Primary materials are comprised of semi-structured expert and elite interviews conducted in Cairo (n=31), including current and former Ministers, former Prime Minister Abdel Aziz Hegazy, and high-ranking government officials. I also draw upon emigration-related articles published in the three major, semi-governmental daily newspapers in Egypt ( al-Ahram ,  al-Akhbar ,  al-Jumhuriya ) in the 1970-2011 period. Finally, I rely on archival material in Cairo (drawn from the Ministry of Education, and the Ministry of Manpower and Migration) and London (drawn from the National Archives). Material examined included a variety of pamphlets, statistical reports, diplomatic documents, memoirs, and biographies of key personalities in post-1970 Egypt."
"18" "STUDYING STATES’ EMIGRANT POLICIES"
"19" "The literature on the political importance of emigrant and diaspora groups has undergone two broad phases, yet research has yet to examine why a state would choose to differentiate its policy towards its emigrant populations. The literature’s first phase suffered from a tendency  to marginalize the role of the sending state altogether. During the 1990s, early academic work on diaspora communities provided a flexible framework through which scholars in sociology, political geography, and international relations studies debated post-national belonging (Koslowski, 2002; cf. Ragazzi, 2014). This literature’s aim of exploring processes of emancipation from the nation-state implied that the latter, now ‘deterritorialized’ (Basch, 1994), would take a secondary role in such analyses: researchers focused on transnational communities (Schiller et al., 1995), public spheres (Bauböck, 1994), and novel processes of mobilization (Ong, 1996) which were perceived to ‘unbind’ the nation-state from territory. Thus, this early literature paid little attention to the state. Weiner’s work (1992), which argued for a focus on the role of governments in migration through a ‘security/stability framework’ is a notable exception, even though his attention centered on host states rather than sending ones. At the same time, Weiner was consistent with a broad academic focus on movements solely in North America and Europe, while the nature of the state in non-Western countries remained misunderstood (Strange, 1996). Overall, however, this period perceived of emigration as challenging the state’s primacy."
"20" "By the early 2000s, it had become clear that the nation-state and ethnic politics continued to be present in the strategies of many emigrant and diaspora groups, as groups abroad were correctly acknowledged to serving as a ‘counterweight to the transnational perspective of migration,’ for they offered a ‘greater focus on the role of the state as an agent’ (Lafleur, 2013). This second wave of research began to challenge the view that such population movements implied the retreat of the state, mainly highlighting the developmental impact of such movements for the sending state. Discrediting ‘brain drain’ criticisms of the 1960s and 1970s (exemplified in the research of Bhagwati and others), such research was buttressed by growing governmental and NGO attempts at incorporating emigrants into broader developmental policies. A sizeable international political economy literature has since indicated the importance of economic  remittances for the sending state (indicatively: De Haas, 2005), while a smaller research agenda highlights the foreign policy importance of emigrant and diaspora groups  (Délano, 2011; Ayata, 2011). Two limitations of the second phase on state-diaspora relations literature are pertinent here: first, the question of how and why states target different external populations has not been sufficiently problematized. Schmitter Heisler’s work on sending state policies, for instance, acknowledges that states differentiate between ‘long-term-temporary,’ ‘short-term-temporary,’ and ‘permanent’ migration, but employs this to argue that a state ‘benefits [from migration] only if emigrants remain abroad for an extended period without settling permanently’ (Heisler, 1985, p.475). Levitt and de la Dehesa (2003) provide an extensive analysis of sending states’ various engagement policies, but do not account for within-state variation, an argument that can be made with regard to Collyer’s edited volume on the subject (2013). Koinova’s recent work on diaspora ‘positionality’ is a notable exception, but her focus remains on the agency of different diaspora groups, rather than on sending state policies (2012). Finally, for scholars of economic remittances, states arguably have more incentives to reach out to wealthier emigrant communities who can act as ‘agents of development’ (Eckstein, 2013, p.17), but such an argument would overstate states’ economic calculations at the expense of political ones in promoting population movements (on this, see Greenhill, 2011), while also understating the importance of South-South migration."
"21" "Second, this research has yet to effectively disaggregate the different types of emigrants that state policies target. Within the emerging literature in political science, in particular, the term diaspora suffers from a significant degree of conflation – often encompassing not merely a state’s citizens who emigrated abroad, but also these emigrants’ descendants, as well as other co-ethnics who may never have lived (or have any ties to) the homeland (cf. Brubaker, 2005). Such approaches prevent the proper classification and theorization of state rationale behind engagement policies, particularly when states target different groups in a different manner.  Gamlen’s study of the ‘emigration state,’ for instance, equates diasporas with ‘extra-territorial populations,’ including"
"22" "temporary or transnational migrants who spread their time between their sending state and elsewhere and fall more or less arbitrarily into one or other policy category of the origin state. They also include longer-term but still first-generation emigrants settled in another country, and descendants of emigrants who - in certain places at certain times - identify as diasporic or even as members of a fully fledged diaspora ‘community’ (Gamlen, 2008, pp. 842-3)."
"23" "Over the past few years, a growing literature successfully eschews such problems of conflation by explicitly centering on state’s emigration, rather than diaspora, policies. By avoiding discussion of state co-ethnics, this literature focuses exclusively on state policies towards those who have emigrated with the intention of living abroad, and the reasons behind state engagement with emigrants corresponds to the findings of the state-diaspora relations literature, traditionally viewing ‘emigrants as a resource that can be mobilized in support of the political or economic interests of the sending state’ (Collyer, 2013, p. 5; Ostegaard-Nielsen, 2003). However, while differentiating between state’s emigration and diaspora policies, this strand of literature does not take into account the importance of emigrants’ potential return as a shaping factor of state policy. As states frequently develop new institutional mechanisms that target emigrant populations (Brand, 2006), they build ties not solely with emigrants abroad, but also with prospective emigrants (Rodriguez, 2013) as well as return migrants (Tsuda, 2009). This points to an important, albeit un-problematized, aspect of states’ policies towards its emigrants, namely the interconnectedness of emigration and return. ‘Return movements across time and space have largely been ignored in anthropology and migration research’ Stefansson argued (2004, p.3). While sociologists and historians have amended this gap (Levitt, 1998; Khater, 2001), Stefansson’s argument remains true within political science. While the literature on diaspora traditionally acknowledges that diaspora policies often aim to attract groups of co-ethnics back to the homeland, the literature on emigration policy has not taken  that into account. Put differently, a state’s policy of encouraging or discouraging its citizens’ emigration is connected to its discouragement, or encouragement, of its citizens’ return migration."
"24" "I sum, I draw upon existing literature in two ways: first, I rely upon state-diaspora relations research to explain how states connect to their populations abroad in a broadly instrumental fashion, aiming to attain distinct political economy and foreign policy goals. Yet, I differentiate between state policies towards diaspora groups in general, and policies towards emigrant groups, on which I focus on in this article. Second, I rely upon the growing literature on states’ emigration policy but I aim to combine both emigration and return migration policy into a state’s ‘emigrant policy,’ utilizing research in sociology and history that sees the interconnectedness between migration and return. Thus, in my theorization, a state’s emigrant policy encompasses both its emigration and return migration policy, but is altogether different from its diaspora policy in that it does not target all co-ethnics but rather state citizens who have emigrated abroad, aiming at distinct domestic political economy and foreign policy goals."
"25" "I hypothesize that the degree of a state’s engagement with an emigrant community depends primarily upon the perceived utility of the community remaining abroad versus the utility of a potential return. In other words, if the perceived utility of a population group abroad is positive (i.e. greater abroad than back home), the sending state is more likely to minimize its policies. In contrast, if a group’s perceived utility abroad is negative (i.e. greater back home than abroad), the sending state would create a policy that actively aims to foster ties and encourage the group’s return. This utility is determined by two broad factors: first, the sending state’s domestic political economy priorities and, second, its foreign policy objectives."
"26" "EGYPT’S DIFFERENTIATED EMIGRANT POLICIES"
"27" "In this section, I identify the two sets of emigrant policies developed by the Egyptian state, I evaluate the two existing hypotheses that have been put forth to account for this policy differentiation, and propose an alternative one. Already in its first attempt at institutionalizing such a policy, in 1971, the Egyptian state made the legal distinction between ‘permanent’ and ‘temporary’ emigration. Article 52 of the 1971 Permanent Constitution listed ‘permanent’ and ‘temporary’ emigration as an Egyptian citizen’s right. Law 111/1983, still valid today, explains the difference between the two: a permanent emigrant is one who ‘stays abroad permanently by obtaining the nationality of a foreign country and/or a permanent residence permit; stays abroad for a period of at least ten years; or obtains an immigration permit from one of the countries of destination.’ A temporary emigrant, on the other hand, is ‘someone (not a student or seconded worker) who works abroad for twelve consecutive months’ (Roman, 2006)."
"28" "[Figures 1 & 2 here]"
"29" "However, in practice, this differentiation has been based upon country of destination: Egyptians living in Arab countries are invariably considered temporary emigrants, even when they have lived there for decades. All those emigrating elsewhere, on the other hand, are considered permanent emigrants, even if they just arrived in their host countries (Zohry, 2003). The literature has accounted for this citing foreign workers’ inability to settle permanently in the countries of the Arab Gulf (Fargues, 2013), and the relative ease of doing so in the West. Yet, this is not entirely accurate. Not all regional emigration is  de facto  temporary: Syria, Jordan, and Libya, which constitute traditional destinations of Egyptian migrants in the Arab world, have, at times, granted citizenship to emigrants, particularly to Arabs (Dib, 1979). But even in the countries of the Arab Gulf, it is not unusual for Egyptian migrants to remain there for over two or three decades or, even, to stay abroad until their death (Sabagh, 1990). Thus, given that the ‘transformation of temporary immigrants into settlers cannot be ruled out’ in the Gulf (Kapiszewski, 2001, p. 193), the Egyptian state’s decision to bifurcate its engagement policy  merits deeper analysis."
"30" "[Table 1 here]"
"31" "The Egyptian state’s differentiation between ‘permanent’ and ‘temporary’ emigrants resulted in a two-tiered emigrant policy. The former were courted by the state: a large number of them would frequently be invited back to Cairo and Alexandria, where they would be entertained by the President and the First Lady under both the administrations of both Presidents Sadat (see, for instance,  al-Jumhuriya , 04/081976) and Mubarak (for instance,  al-Ahram , 02/08/2010). In the aftermath of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, about 1,500 emigrants from North America would receive annual tours of the Suez war front hosted by various cabinet ministers ( al-Ahram , 17/06/1974;  al-Jumhuriya , 27/08/1976). ‘Permanent’ emigrants enjoyed heightened attention of the executive and state agencies abroad: those studying in Europe and North America would receive financial support from the Egyptian President on an  ad hoc  basis (a grant of $50,000 was given to the Union of Egyptian students in North America, for instance;  al-Ahram , 09/08/1976), while any problems were to be dealt with immediately, regardless of cost. At one point, Sadat even had the Presidential airplane transport home Egyptians who had been unable to find employment in France ( al-Jumhuriya , 12/071975)."
"32" "In sharp contrast, the Egyptian state was less active in cementing the relationship between ‘temporary’ Egyptian emigrants to the Arab world and their homeland (Lesch, 1985). The state’s initial involvement in regulating the outflow of Egyptian labor towards the Arab world (by coordinating requests from Arab and, to a lesser extent,  African states) during the 1970s gradually diminished: by the 1990s, the unregulated  makātib al-tawẓīf  (non-governmental recruitment agencies) would court Arab employers w ho had travelled to Egypt to secure contracts for Egyptian workers. The agencies then sold these contracts at exorbitant prices to Egyptians: currently, a work permit for Saudi Arabia is priced at 20,000 EGP (approximately $2,800), while a permit for Kuwait goes for 30,000 EGP (approximately $4,200).  A multitude  of bilateral and multilateral treaties signed with Arab states that aimed to regulate the outflow of Egyptian labor were never observed, and the stipulated migration quotas never enforced."
"33" "Two main hypotheses have been put forth to account for this divergence in Egypt’s emigration policy. According to the first hypothesis, the Egyptian state lacks the administrative and financial capacity to cater to the needs of its extensive diaspora in the Arab world (e.g. Lesch, 1985), and prefers to leave matters to ‘private initiative’ (Choucri, 1977). Interviewed state policy-makers and elites have apologetically argued that it was not possible to extend the same policies to the millions of Egyptians working in the Arab world as to the smaller and more manageable Egyptian emigrant population in the West. However, this argument is unconvincing: despite its alleged financial and infrastructural limitations, the Egyptian state still chose to cater to a specific group of Egyptians abroad over another. Furthermore, in the pre-1973 period, Egyptian emigrants to the West outnumbered ‘temporary’ emigrants to the Arab world, yet state policy targeted ‘permanent’ migrants since 1971. Which factors determined the deliberate targeting ‘permanent’ emigrants at the expense of ‘temporary’ ones?"
"34" "The second hypothesis points to the cyclical nature of Egyptians’ regional migration as an explanatory factor for variation in government policy: regional migration tends to be temporary, and therefore state investment in such emigrant groups is less important than catering to emigrants residing in the ‘West.’ The current Minister of Migration and Manpower Nahed Ashri told me in an interview: ‘Egyptians in the Arab world are not migrants. They are temporary workers, who will return home.’ Former Minister of Health and president of Cairo University Ismail Gamil Badran informed me that the Egyptian state’s emigration policy ‘targeted the sons of Egypt abroad, not Egyptians in the Gulf.’ Put bluntly, why would the state expend resources in fostering ties with emigrant groups who will, overall, eventually return to the homeland on their own? This hypothesis, implicit in much of the early literature on Middle Eastern migratory movements (Birks, 1979), points to a more accurate understanding of state  policy, yet remains under-theorized. Is there a ranking in terms of the emigrant groups targeted by the Egyptian state and, if so, what determines this hierarchy? According to the hypothesis put forth in the previous section, an explanation of Egypt’s development of differentiated emigrant policies can be explained below."
"35" "EGYPTIAN EMIGRANT POLICIES & DOMESTIC POLITICAL ECONOMY CONSIDERATIONS"
"36" "‘I am not opposed to migration, as we are a nation of 45 million people.’"
"37" "Interview of President Hosni Mubarak to  Al-Siyasa , 26/02/1983"
"38" "This section will examine evidence for the hypothesis that domestic political economy considerations have influenced the development of Egypt’s policy with regard to both ‘permanent’ and ‘temporary’ emigration. The state’s proactive policy towards Egyptians residing in Europe and North America can be understood through the domestic political economy priorities of President Sadat (1970–1981) and Mubarak (1981–2010). One of Sadat’s first policy decisions was the expulsion of Soviet experts from Egypt as he attempted to liberalize the Egyptian economy, and place it within the Western sphere of influence (Beattie, 2000). His well-documented belief that the solution to Egypt’s economic woes lies in liberalization, Western knowledge transfer, and a re-alignment with the United States was reflected in the state’s emigration policy, and the systematic courting of Egyptians in Europe and North America. The faith Sadat placed in these emigrants is apparent by the fact that, just before the massive 1977 ‘Bread Riots,’ he ‘asked Egyptian scientists abroad to participate in solving Egypt’s food and housing crisis’ ( al-Ahram , 05/01/1977), much as he had asked for their expertise when presenting his plans to liberalize the Egyptian economy ( al-Ahram , 21/04/1974). This extended to public pleas for these emigrants to ‘contribute materially’ to the homeland’s development ( al-Ahram , 28/02/1977). The belief that ‘permanent’ emigrants will  aid in the country’s development is further documented in the themes of the bi-annual, state-sponsored conferences organized through the ‘Friends of Egypt’ organization (Table 2). The target of these events were Egyptians residing in Western countries, according to organizer Dr. Badran, and the professed aim was to ‘bring successful Egyptians back to the homeland.’"
"39" "[Table 2 here]"
"40" "Thus, as the perceived domestic political economy utility of this population group abroad was negative for the Egyptian state, the latter subsequently developed an extensive emigrant policy (as mentioned above) aiming to ensure Egyptians’ return to the homeland. A central aim of the policies and broader discourse that the state developed was the return of these emigrants: as the President stated, ‘a considerable number of Egyptian scientists work abroad. Some have attained extremely high levels of education, and there is no objection to have them come back to contribute to the country’s scientific development. With their experience acquired abroad, those scientists could offer much’ ( al-Akhbar , 11/10/1971)."
"41" "This extended beyond mere financial incentives (for instance, beneficial access to housing), or the  ad hoc  creation of ‘Visiting Professor’ posts in Egyptian universities to be occupied by Egyptian scientists from abroad ( al-Ahram , 21 Apr. 1974). The extent to which the Egyptian state wanted their return was evident from the decision to grant legal amnesty to ‘permanent’ emigrants for past offences: under President Nasser, many middle-class families had sent their sons to Europe and North America to avoid mandatory military conscription, both before and after the 1967 War. By the early 1970s, these emigrants were unable to return to Egypt, where they would face persecution. As former Minister of Youth (1999–2004) Ali E. Hillal Dessouki recalled, President Sadat decided to grant a general amnesty to all Egyptians who had escaped conscription, and dispatched military attachés abroad to invite the emigrants back to Egypt."
"42" "The perceived utility of such ‘permanent’ emigrants, and the desire to bring them back home, was evident in their descriptions by the mainstream Egyptian media. Indicatively:"
"43" "…Egypt’s youthful skills have stolen the limelight and come to be  the country's staple crop. Some of them get higher salaries than Dr. Henry Kissinger while still in their forties. Some lead the same lavish life as Hollywood stars. They own villas with fragrant gardens and as many as three cars each. One of them travels by private helicopter from his country home to his place of work inside New York! But our country will not lose the brains we export to the outside world. For a successful Egyptian must be back home one day to drink again from the Nile and to live with the generous people. An Egyptian travels but does not go for good, for he always returns ( al-Akhbar , 30/06/1975)."
"44" "Why was this proactive policy not extended to the ‘temporary’ Egyptian emigrants across the Arab world? As per my hypothesis, these emigrants’ perceived domestic political economy utility abroad was positive for two reasons: first, their emigration was a solution to Egypt’s chronic problems of unemployment and overpopulation and, second, they provided extensive financial support to Egypt through remittances. In terms of the former, my interviewees invariably pointed out that regional emigrants have historically been mostly low- and medium-skilled workers. Temporary emigration was considered the ‘safety valve’ that would relieve the two major burdens of Egypt’s domestic economy, overpopulation and unemployment: former Prime Minister Abdel Azis Hegazy (1974–1975) informed me that Nasser had entrusted him, already in 1968, with introducing policies that would allow Egypt to ‘export’ its excess labor to neighboring countries. By 1975, Prime Minister Mamdouh Salem declared that emigration was the official target of the nation ( al-Akhbar , 15/08/1975). Thus, prospective emigrants to the Arab world were not regarded as an asset by the state: ‘We should view the millions of Egyptians remaining in the country as a burden,’ writes journalist and writer Anis Mansour, ‘which we should reduce by having them emigrate or exported’ ( al-Akhbar , 9 Apr. 1975). ‘At least a partial solution, a way of easing the pressure,’ Foreign Minister Boutros-Ghali confessed to an interview for the Washington Post in 1982, is ‘for Egypt to “export” Egyptians to other Arab nations’ ( Washington Post , 27 Jan. 1982)."
"45" "Additionally, regional emigrants’ remittances further underlined the positive utility of this group abroad for the Egyptian state. Regional emigrants’ remittances have always vastly  exceeded those by Egyptians in Europe and North America, given the vast demand for labor by the oil-producing countries of the Middle East in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis. By 1977, the Egyptian government put forth its 5-year economic plan predicting as much as LE 350 million in net returns from incomes abroad. According to data from the Egyptian Central Bank, in the early 1990s migrants’ remittances accounted for over 14% of its GDP. These remittances originate chiefly from Egyptians employed in the Arab world: according to the most recent available data, remittances from workers in Saudi Arabia accounted for 42.7% of net private transfers to Egypt in 2012, followed by Kuwait (21.3%) and the United Arab Emirates (12.2%)."
"46" "[Figures 3 & 4 here]"
"47" "I hypothesize that, given their perception as an asset to Egypt’s domestic political economy abroad, the state chose to discourage regional emigrants’ return to the homeland by minimizing its emigrant policy towards them, and favoring ‘permanent’ emigrants instead. In sharp contrast to the state’s wish for the return of emigrants from North America and Europe, a mass return of Egyptians working in the Arab countries would constitute a tremendous socio-economic problem for the Egyptian state. When Libya’s Colonel Gadhafi expelled thousands of Egyptians in 1977, the state scrambled to provide accommodation and nourishments for the returnees, let alone new employment opportunities ( al-Akhbar , 10/05/1977). I frequently encountered the fear in Egyptian policy-making circles that a potential return of regional migrants would disturb the flow remittances to the state. In the early 1990s, one frequently cited success of the Egyptian regime’s support of Kuwait in the Iraq War was the fact that Saudi Arabia ‘rewarded’ Mubarak for his stance by not deporting the thousands of Egyptians working in the Kingdom who continued to send back much-needed remittances (Van Hear, 1998)."
"48" "The counterintuitive nature of my hypothesis (that a state does not expand capital towards its most ‘valuable’ emigrant group abroad) might suggest that this was a policy miscalculation on  behalf of the Egyptian state. In other words, to the question why did the state not develop a proactive policy towards its regional emigrants, one answer to this puzzle is path dependence: by the time the Egyptian state realized that ‘temporary’ emigrants to the Arab world were able to send an unprecedented level of remittances back to the homeland, Egypt’s policy had been established to provide for ‘permanent’ emigrants rather than ‘temporary’ ones. Thus, Law 111/1983, which ensconced this policy differentiation, should be seen as a case of policy entrenchment: the cost of switching to a novel policy would have been extremely high, despite regional migrants’ high domestic political utility."
"49" "Despite its appeal, this explanation is unconvincing: firstly, there is no evidence of any serious debate on such a policy shift. Very little, if at all, has been written in this period towards amending Law 111/1983, nor did my interviewees question the ‘permanent’/’temporary’ migrant divide and the policy differentiation that ensued. Secondly, within a state governed by a non-democratic regime, such as Egypt’s, the executive is much more free to shape state policy to its demands; the opportunity cost of switching emigrant policy (a ‘low-policy,’ by most accounts) would not have been exorbitant. The validity of this paper’s hypothesis will become clearer in the following section, which explains how it is not merely domestic political economy objectives, but also foreign policy objectives that determine the utility of an emigrant group."
"50" "EGYPTIAN EMIGRANT POLICIES & FOREIGN POLICY IMPERATIVES"
"51" "I do not oppose emigration to highly developed countries for the purposes of becoming acquainted with the latest technological advances […] As for Egyptian emigration to Arab and African states Egypt will continue to meet the manpower requirements of these countries."
"52" "Anwar Sadat, 05/01/1977"
"53" "This section will examine how Egypt’s differentiated policy served the state’s foreign policy directives under the Sadat and Mubarak regimes. On the one hand, the utility of ‘permanent’  emigrants in terms of Egypt’s foreign policy was perceived as negative: not only did they represent the country’s ‘brain drain,’ they frequently criticized the Egyptian regime through the media and various protests, tarnishing the regime’s ‘democratizing’ image abroad and its  rapprochement  with the United States. I hypothesize that, given that ‘permanent’ emigrants were not seen as useful abroad for the state’s foreign policy, Egypt fostered their return. On the other hand, regional emigration maintained Egypt’s regional relevance after the Six Day War of 1967, and mitigated the effects of Egypt’s isolation following the 1979 Peace Treaty with Israel. Therefore, as the utility of ‘temporary’ emigrants abroad was perceived as positive, policy towards them was minimal. The state was unwilling to risk this steady outflow by pressuring for better human rights protection or improved working rights for these emigrants; it merely maintained an outflow of labor to the region, and discouraged emigrants’ return."
"54" "Until the late 1960s, modern Egypt’s foreign relations had been marked by Nasser’s emphasis on the ‘positive neutrality’ doctrine of non-alignment, on a cautious relationship with the Soviet Union, and on antagonism towards the oil-rich countries of the Arab world, namely Saudi Arabia (Kerr, 1971). The state’s foreign policy underwent a radical shift as the center of Arab power shifted away from Egypt towards the oil-rich countries of the Gulf in the aftermath of the Six Day War and, even more heavily, following the 1973 War (Korany, 2008). The distrust that Nasser exhibited towards both the United States and Egypt’s regional Arab neighbors was reversed under Sadat, despite his signing of the 1979 peace treaty with Israel, which was ill received by the Arab world. The Egyptian state’s pro-American and pro-Saudi orientation was further solidified under Mubarak (Brownlee, 2012). Overall, emigrant policy complemented Egypt’s new foreign policy strategies of rapprochement towards both the oil-rich countries of the Arab world, and the United States."
"55" "I hypothesize that the perceived foreign policy utility of ‘permanent’ emigrants abroad was negative for two reasons: first, Egyptian emigrants to the ‘West’ were traditionally perceived  as the core of the state’s ‘brain drain’ issue ( al-Akhbar , 27/10/1978). Statistical data comparing the level of ‘brain drain’ to the Arab world versus Western countries is not available, but the dominant perception in Egypt remains that ‘as far as permanent migration to more developed countries is concerned, this has always mainly interested more educated workers’ (Talani, 2009, p.184); while skilled Egyptian labor did emigrate across the region, the literature agrees that ‘brain drain’ occurred mainly to the West and, particularly, towards the United States and Canada (Zohry & Harrell-Bond, p.47-48). Not only did they detract to Egypt’s image of a stable country (an image that Presidents Sadat and Mubarak were eager to present to the outside world), they were perceived as smearing it, by pinpointing Egypt’s inability to provide employment opportunities for its educated citizens. Many government officials I interviewed considered such emigration a ‘taboo’ that should not be discussed, lest it somehow revealed a version of Egypt that was far from perfect. Interestingly, Egyptians residing in the West have been perceived as more susceptible to Israeli influence – the media frequently published stories of Israel attempting to recruit Egyptian youth abroad: in one case of an Egyptian abroad, ‘the Israeli intelligence who is always watching for [Egyptians] to recruit for work, was ready for him and flooded him with money, women, and red nights’  (Al-Jumhuriya , 30/11/1975). While such reports are frequently exaggerated, they nonetheless reveal the state’s loss of control over ‘permanent’ emigrants."
"56" "Secondly, the perceived utility of Egyptians in the ‘West’ was also affected by emigrants’ public protests, media campaigns, or other attempts at drawing attention to the authoritarian nature of the Egyptian ruling regime. I do not argue that all Egyptians were politically active, nor that pro-regime activism was unheard of. In fact, Sadat frequently employed the support of ‘permanent’ emigrants for his regime, for instance by producing telegrams that expatriates in Europe and North America had sent to Sadat or Mubarak, expressing their enthusiasm for the regime’s political program, and publishing them in the press. On 21 April 1974, for instance,  al-Akhbar  details how, in their cable, ‘expatriates thanked the President for meeting them and speaking to them as well as for his obvious care for them. They also greeted the President and pledged allegiance to their great people.’ Through such acts, he hoped to gain both domestic and international points, mainly from Washington. One example was the August 1977 Conference of Egyptian students in North America, for which seventy Egyptian students were flown to Cairo on President Sadat’s private plane for the two-week event. Reported on all three major newspapers was a cable the students sent to Sadat:"
"57" "Addressing President Sadat as a father, the cable said that, on approaching the air strip of their dear fatherland, they would like to express sincere thanks and gratitude for honoring them by providing them with the opportunity to visit their dear Egypt and mother country aboard the President’s private plane. The cable said that the President has always been acting like that                                                (09/08/1977)."
"58" "Yet, anti-Sadat and anti-Mubarak protests quickly overshadowed such pro-regime actions. Once Egyptians in Europe and North America began voicing their dissatisfaction with Presidents Sadat and Mubarak, the ruling regime was no longer able to argue that it enjoyed expatriates’ support, in domestic or international politics. Such protests tarnished the image of Egypt abroad even more than the ‘brain drain’ issue, given the emphasis that both Sadat and Mubarak placed on their perception in the West: one of the most prominent protests was staged during Sadat’s final visit to Washington in 1981, after which the President jailed about 1,500 perceived political opponents in Egypt."
"59" "Given the negative net utility of ‘permanent’ emigrants to the foreign policy directives of the Egyptian state, emigrant policy was shaped in such a way as to co-opt them: for Egyptians studying in Britain, for instance, Sadat offered ‘eleven pilgrimage tickets, an Islamic library of 2,000 volumes and a large number of recorded recitations of the Qur’an.’ ( al-Jumhuriya , 12/05/1974). On the occasion of the aforementioned visit of North American Egyptian students to Cairo Sadat had the Ministry of Information ‘offer LE 6,000 to consolidate the budget of the Egyptian Student Union in the United States and Canada’ ( al-Jumhuriya , 12/08/1977). Such  symbolic efforts were utilised to put forth an image of Egypt that corresponded to foreign policy demands of the time – a politically liberal state that cared for its citizens in the West."
"60" "On the other hand, the utility of ‘temporary’ emigrants abroad in Egypt’s foreign policy was perceived as extremely positive. This is attributed to two factors: first, regional emigration allowed Egypt to maintain its regional relevance in the aftermath of the Six Day War; secondly, it mitigated the effects of Egypt’s isolation following the 1979 Peace Treaty with Israel. In terms of the former, President Sadat employed Egypt’s potential as a provider of labor to the Arab world heavily in his foreign policy. As early as 1973, he highlighted the continuing importance of Egypt as the region’s most populous country in terms of its contribution to the wars against Israel: Egyptian officials argued that it was not merely the oil embargo that played an integral part in the 1973 War, but also Egypt’s ‘enormous’ sacrifices in manpower. ‘Egypt,’ prominent journalist Musa Sabry wrote in  al-Akhbar , ‘is the Arabs’ fortress; she has sacrificed 100,000 martyrs over 4 wars.’ Once hostilities ended, and oil-rich Arab countries began to employ the vast profits of the oil price rises for their modernization and industrialization programs, Sadat signaled that Egypt’s abundant manpower was now ready to be deployed to the needs of Arab neighbors. By the end of the decade, Egypt’s role as a regional supplier of labor had ‘become a tradition’ (Birks, 1978)."
"61" "In terms of Egypt’s foreign policy, it enabled a gradual rapprochement between Sadat’s regime and the oil-rich countries, enshrined in the numerous, frequently overlapping agreements signed between Egypt and other Arab states (see Table 3), where development projects were heavily reliant upon large numbers of foreign workers. As mentioned above, these intra-state agreements’ stipulations were rarely followed. In fact, in an interview, former Minister of Manpower & Migration (2006 – 2011) Aisha Abdel-Hady admitted she was unaware of many of these treaties’ content (which is typically not made public) or, even, their existence. This is not surprising, given that Egyptian state officials have often admitted that regional migration  processes are so complex that cannot be effectively regulated in intra-state accords. Thus, one can only surmise that the multiple, overlapping agreements signed with host states were aimed more at solidifying Egypt’s position within the Arab world, rather than at regulating regional emigration."
"62" "[Table 3 here]"
"63" "At the same time, the country’s newfound comparative advantage as a source of migrant labor allowed Egypt to employ it against its post-1979 foreign policy regional isolation. The aftermath of the 1979 Peace Treaty with Israel, one of the most controversial decisions of Egyptian foreign policy, saw Egypt regionally isolated. Despite the economic embargo imposed on Egypt by Arab states and the freezing of the country’s membership in the League of Arab States, Egyptian emigrants remained across the region, thus softening the blow to the Egyptian economy. Following Sadat’s death, Mubarak continued to support Egyptians’ emigration across the Arab world and further signed a number of additional bilateral agreements on the issue (as seen in Table 3), as part of his policy of restoring Egypt’s regional position."
"64" "Therefore, it was at the Egyptian state’s best interest to continue sending emigrants across the region. The state’s emigrant policy was shaped accordingly: the emphasis on the ‘temporary’ aspect of such migration aimed to mollify Arab countries’ misapprehensions about opening their borders to millions of Egyptian immigrants. In the 1950s and 1960s, reports of Egyptians abroad spreading Nasserite ideology and disseminating propaganda material in their host states were frequent across the Arab world, from Libya and Algeria to Syria and Yemen, and even more so in the Gulf states. Arab states’ distrust of Nasser’s propaganda machine and the disturbing political effects of Egyptian immigration are well documented (Chalcraft, 2010). Sadat was able to overcome host states’ objections by discursively presenting post-1970 emigration as de-politicized, driven by economic rather than ideological reasons, and, above all, ‘temporary.’"
"65" "Sadat asserted that the Egyptian state abroad would no longer support Egyptian migrants’ interference in the political scene of other Arab states. According to Anis Mansour:"
"66" "[A]n Egyptian was looked upon as the man with the ‘ugly face’ throughout the Arab world. For twenty years, every Egyptian had seemed to turn into a spy or saboteur. Every Egyptian teacher was thought to have come to overthrow the standing rule and to distribute subversive literature. Every Egyptian doctor was considered a spy acting for Egyptian Intelligence Service to set one class against another. [...] Now he is not interested in other peoples' own affairs. ‘Give and take’ is his motto ( al-Akhbar , 13/03/1974)."
"67" "Emigrants’ de-politicization was combined with the ‘temporary’ nature of their stay, in order to further appease the host states’ concerns, and ensure a continuing demand for Egyptian labour. The state’s position that these Egyptians were by no means’ emigrants but temporary workers who would return in a few years (as stated above) should be seen in this light. As Ali Amin wrote, in  al-Ahram , ‘Egypt will never think of interfering with the internal affairs of any Arab state. Neither will it impose an opinion, a certain person, policy, or form of government on them, be it Beirut, Amman, Damascus, Tripoli, Kuwait, or the Arabian Gulf. Every Arab people has come of political age [...] Sadat believes Arab nationalism does not mean the imposition by Egypt of its own views but rather that it should bow to every Arab people’s own choice’ ( al-Ahram , 07/04/1974). As a result of their professed political neutrality, Egyptian workers were commonly preferred over Palestinians or Yemenis, who were considered agitators."
"68" "While it initially appears counterintuitive that an emigrant group with high foreign policy utility enjoyed only minimal support from the sending state, such a policy ensured that host states would continue to demand, and employ, Egyptian labour. It is only through an absence of sending state involvement in its emigrants’ affairs abroad (even at instances of human rights violations) that Egyptians would continue to be at a hiring advantage. When Libya, for instance, in early August 1977, expelled thousands of Egyptian engineers, lawyers, and workers, the Egyptian state responded in a lacklustre manner. The extent of Egyptians’ plight  in Libya was consistently underplayed: newspapers reported that over twelve thousand of them had to travel to the Egyptian border village of Sallum on foot ( Al-Ahram , 08/08/1977); Egyptian teachers would refuse to return to Libya, due to abuse and proselytization by the Gadhafi regime ( Al-Akhbar , 07/08/1977), but no details were provided. Any potential attempt at protesting against human rights’ abuses, or pressuring for better working conditions for Egyptians in the Arab world were out of the question, if Egypt wanted to maintain a steady a outflow of emigrant workers."
"69" "Overall, foreign policy concerns play a major role in the determinants of a state’s policy towards its emigrants. In the case of Egypt, the expansive emigrant policy towards Egyptians in the ‘West’ can be comprehended in light of their negative utility abroad: state officials’ dislike of emigrants presence abroad or, more often, their criticism of the Egyptian regime, was mirrored in concerted efforts that would strengthen emigrants’ ties to the sending state. In the case of regional migration, Egypt’s minimal policy further reflected the power asymmetries within the Middle East, and between host and sending states in general."
"70" "By identifying the domestic political economy and foreign policy determinants of Egypt’s emigrant policy, I outlined a case of distinct policy bifurcation that is unique from other states that typically receive scholarly attention, rendering the Egyptian example internationally relevant. How does this theorization travel beyond the Egyptian case? South Korean policy, for instance, differentiates between those Koreans in China, called the  joseonjok , and those in North America. Korean Americans were perceived negatively both in terms of domestic political economy and foreign policy utility abroad, which has led to the South Korean state’s extensive engagement with that group. Chinese objections to Korean engagement with the  joseonjok , on the other hand, implied that the latter actually had a positive foreign policy utility abroad (Seol, 2009). In the Korean case, therefore, the positive foreign policy utility of the  joseonjok  remaining abroad resulted predictably in a minimal engagement policy. In Japan, the  negative utility of emigrants and their descendants in Latin America during the late 1980s (perceived as offering little to the state from abroad, both in terms of political economy and foreign policy-wise at times of massive Japanese manpower needs) led to a pro-active emigrant policy that attracted thousands of  nikkeijin  back to Japan (Yamanaka, 1996). Once the recent financial slowdown in Japan highlighted the potential positive utility of these groups abroad (particularly in order to reduce domestic unemployment), the Japanese state not only did away with this pro-active emigrant policy, but is offering ¥300,000 to those willing to emigrate back to Latin America. In the Western European context in the aftermath of the Cold War, the Greek state developed a minimal emigrant policy towards those Greeks residing in neighboring Albania, who enjoyed a positive foreign policy utility abroad, where they were perceived as an asset, and an extensive emigrant policy towards those Greeks in the former USSR who were not perceived as a comparable asset (Mylonas, 2013). Thus, the patterns identified in this article can be further tested in future research."
"71" "CONCLUSION"
"72" "States do not assume that all citizens who emigrate are equally important. Why should one assume that their emigration and diaspora policies are homogenous? Empirically, multi-tier emigration policies exhibit variation on account of age, sex, educational level, and occupation status. The tentative data from Egypt presented here indicate that there is within-state variation in policy according to emigrants’ host country. My hypothesis is that a state is more likely to develop an emigrant policy (i.e. a policy of emigration and return migration) towards a population group abroad when that group’s perceived utility is negative, and  vice versa . This utility is based upon the sending state’s domestic political economy and foreign policy goals. In the Egyptian case, an emigrant policy did not develop towards those Egyptians in the Arab  world, but did develop for those Egyptians in the West."
"73" "Beyond a theorization of sending states’ differentiated engagement policies, this paper offers a novel account of the tensions that emigration created for the Egyptian state in the four decades of President Sadat and Mubarak’s rule. I attempted to bypass the standard academic and policy-circles’ perception of post-1970 Egypt as a typical ‘emigration state’ by highlighting two unexplored aspects that help us better understand its relationship with the West and with the Arab world: first, that the Egyptian regime’s shift towards a pro-Western orientation created novel tensions within state elites both with respect to ‘brain drain’ concerns, as well as with emigrants’ political activism in the West. Understanding them allows us to explore how these tensions were manifested in the post-Mubarak period – particularly in recent domestic political developments, such as the 2011 introduction of out-of-country voting and the debates on Egyptian diaspora’s engagement in the ‘Arab Spring’. Second, I underline the extent to which Egyptian ‘temporary’ emigration has been implicated in solidifying Egypt’s regional role. The regional interplay between migration and foreign policy can help in better understanding current regional debates – such as the processes of substituting Arab labor for Asian labor or, more recently, the move towards nationalizing the private sector labor force in the Gulf states."
"74" "Ultimately, this article aims to sketch an evolving research agenda regarding the rationale behind sending states’ selective engagement with emigrant population groups abroad. At the same time, while the Egyptian case is perfectly correlated, enabling fairly obvious conclusions regarding the utility of specific population groups over others, other cases might prove more complicated – when, for instance, a population group is perceived as a foreign policy asset but a political economy burden abroad, or  vice versa . Thus, having established through this single-case study that states do develop two-tier emigrant policy aiming to foster both their economic development and foreign policy agendas, this article paves the way for future research across multiple cases."
"75" "References"
"76" "Basch, L. G., N. G. Schiller, and C. S. Blanc (1994),  Nations Unbound: Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments, and Deterritorialized Nation-states.  Gordon and Breach."
"77" "Beattie, K. J. (2000),  Egypt during the Sadat Years.  Palgrave: New York."
"78" "Birks, J. S., and C. A. Sinclair. (1979), \"Egypt: A Frustrated Labor Exporter?\"  Middle East Journal,  33 (3): 288-303."
"79" "Brand, L. A. (2006),  Citizens Abroad: Emigration and the State in the Middle East and North Africa.  Cambridge University Press: Cambridge."
"80" "Brownlee, J. (2012),  Democracy Prevention: The Politics of the U.S.-Egyptian Alliance.  Cambridge University Press: Cambridge."
"81" "Brubaker, R. (2005), \"The ‘Diaspora’ Diaspora.\"  Ethnic & Racial Studies,  28 (1): 1-19."
"82" "Chalcraft, J. T. (2010), \"Monarchy, Migration and Hegemony in the Arabian Peninsula.\" LSE: London."
"83" "Collyer, M. (2013), \"Emigration Nations: Policies and Ideologies of Emigrant Engagement\" In Emigration Nations: Policies and Ideologies of Emigrant Engagement. Palgrave Macmillan."
"84" "Cooley, J. K. (1982),  Libyan Sandstorm.  Holt, Rinehart, and Winston: New York."
"85" "Dawisha, A. I. (1976),  Egypt in the Arab World: The Elements of Foreign Policy.  Wiley New York."
"86" "De Haas, H. (2005), \"International Migration, Remittances and Development: Myths and Facts.\"  Third World Quarterly,  26 (8): 1269-1284."
"87" "Délano, A. (2011),  Mexico and its Diaspora in the United States: Policies of Emigration Since 1848.  Cambridge University Press: Cambridge."
"88" "Eckstein, S., and A. Najam (2013),  How Immigrants Impact Their Homelands.  Duke University Press."
"89" "Fargues, P. (2013), \"International Migration and the Nation State in Arab Countries.\""
"90" "Gamlen, A. (2008), \"The Emigration State and the Modern Geopolitical Imagination.\"  Political Geography,  27 (8): 840-856."
"91" "Greenhill, K. M. (2011),  Weapons of Mass Migration: Forced Displacement, Coercion, and Foreign Policy.  Cornell University Press."
"92" "Heisler, B. S.  ( 1985 ),  \"Sending Countries and the Politics of Emigration and Destination.\"  International Migration Review,  19 (3): 469-484."
"93" "Kapiszewski, A. (2001),  Nationals and Expatriates: Population and Labour Dilemmas of the Gulf Cooperation Council States.  Ithaca Press."
"94" "Kerr, M. H. (1971),  The Arab Cold War: Gamal ‘Abd al-Nasir and His Rivals, 1958-1970.  Oxford University Press: London."
"95" "Khater, A. F. (2001),  Inventing Home: Emigration, Gender, and the Middle Class in Lebanon, 1870-1920.  University of California Press: Berkeley."
"96" "Korany, B., and A.E.H. Dessouki (2008),  The Foreign Policies of Arab States: The Challenge of Globalization ."
"97" "Koslowski, R. (2002), \"Human Migration and the Conceptualization of Pre–Modern World Politics.\"  International Studies Quarterly,  46 (3): 375-399."
"98" "Lafleur, J.-M. (2013),  Transnational Politics and the State: the External Voting Rights of Diasporas.  Routledge: New York."
"99" "Levitt, P., and R. De La Dehesa (2003), \"Transnational Migration and the Redefinition of the State: Variations and Explanations.\"  Ethnic & Racial Studies,  26 (4): 587-611."
"100" "Ong, A. (1996), \"Cultural Citizenship as Subject-Making: Immigrants Negotiate Racial and Cultural Boundaries in the United States.\"  Current Anthropology,  37 (5): 737-762."
"101" "Østergaard-Nielsen, E. (2003),  International Migration and Sending Countries: Perceptions, Policies and Transnational Relations.  Palgrave Macmillan."
"102" "Ragazzi, F. (2014), \"A Comparative Analysis of Diaspora Policies.\"  Political Geography."
"103" "Roman, H. (2006), \"Emigration Policy in Egypt.\"  Analytical and Synthetic Notes,  12."
"104" "Schiller, N. G., L. Basch, and C. S. Blanc. (1995), \"From Immigrant to Transmigrant: Theorizing Transnational Migration.\"  Anthropological Quarterly,  68 (1): 48-63."
"105" "Seol, D.-H., and J. D. Skrentny (2009), \"Ethnic Return Migration and Hierarchical Nationhood: Korean Chinese foreign workers in South Korea.\"  Ethnicities,  9 (2): 147-174."
"106" "Stefansson, A. H. (2004), \"Homecomings to the Future\" In Homecomings: Unsettling Paths of Return. Ed. F. Markowitz and A. H. Stefansson. Lexington Books."
"107" "Strange, S. (1996),  The Retreat of the State: The Diffusion of Power in the World Economy.  Cambridge University Press: Cambridge."
"108" "Talani, L. S. (2009),  From Egypt to Europe: Globalisation and Migration Across the Mediterranean.  I.B. Tauris: London."
"109" "Tsuda, T. (2009),  Diasporic Homecomings: Ethnic Return Migration.  Stanford University Press: Stanford."
"110" "Weiner, M. (1992), \"Security, Stability, and International Migration.\"  International Security,  17 (3): 91-126."
"111" "Yamanaka, K. (1996), \"Return Migration of Japanese-Brazilians to Japan: the Nikkeijin as Ethnic Minority and Political Construct.\"  Diaspora: A Journal of Transnational Studies,  5 (1): 65-97."
"112" "Zohry, A., and B. Harrell-Bond (2003), \"Contemporary Egyptian Migration: An Overview of Voluntary and Forced Migration.\""
