Delegation of Governmental Authority in Historical
Perspective: Lordships, State Capacity and Development

Daniel Oto-Peralías
Universidad Pablo de Olavide
August 2019
DRAFT - Comments welcome!
Abstract
This paper investigates the long-term consequences of delegation of governmental
authority through the study of a pivotal local political institution in historical Europe:
the lordship. I collect data on seigneurial jurisdictions for ancien-regime Spain and
document a negative relationship between having been a seigneurial town in the 18th
century and current economic development. To shed light on the causal effect, I focus on
the distribution of lordships in the former Kingdom of Granada after its conquest by the
Catholic Monarchs, which can be considered as conditionally random. The results
confirm the negative effect of lordship found for the whole country: towns that shortly
after the conquest were granted to nobles are relatively poorer today. In addition, I
explore the mechanisms of persistence, with the results pointing to lower state capacity
as a main explanatory factor. This finding is consistent with an interpretation of
seigneurial jurisdictions as a privatization of the local government, which has historically
hindered the application of central government policies and lowered the state’s
infrastructural capacity in former manorial towns.
Keywords: Lordships,
development.

Local

political

institutions,

State

capacity,

Economic

JEL Classification: C21, N43, O10.
-----------------------------------------------------------------Daniel Oto-Peralías. Departamento de Economía, Métodos Cuantitativos e Historia
Económica. Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville, Spain. E-mail: dotoper@upo.es.
Acknowledgements: Ivan Dondukov and Nuria Adell Raventos provided excellent
research assistance. Financial support by the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of
Scotland through grant 70433 and the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and
Universities

through

grant

ECO2017-86780-R

acknowledged.

0

(AEI/FEDER,

UE)

is

gratefully

1

Introduction

This paper investigates the economic consequences of lordships, a key political institution in
historical Europe by which monarchs used to delegate their governmental authority at the
local level to private agents and entities (Fourquin, 1976; Dewald, 1996). The French aphorism
‘no land without a lord’ (‘nulle terre sans seigneur’) illustrates well the historical importance
of the seigneurial regime, which largely determined the daily life of local communities until the
end of the Ancien Regime.1 Lordship is a clear example of delegation or privatization of public
functions, which has been a recurrent phenomenon in history. Focusing on old-regime Spain, I
first document a negative relationship between 18th-century seigneurial jurisdictions and
current economic development at the municipality level for the whole country. To make
progress towards causality, I study the distribution of lordships in the former Kingdom of
Granada after its conquest by the Catholic Monarchs in 1492. Taking advantage that the
initial distribution of seigneurial jurisdictions was conditionally random, I show that the
negative effect of lordships can be interpreted as causal. The analysis of the mechanisms
behind this effect points to state capacity as a key intervening variable. This is consistent with
an interpretation of seigneurial jurisdictions as a privatization of the local government, giving
rise to a parallel administrative apparatus that undermined the state’s infrastructural power in
the municipality.
This article contributes to the study of the political economy of lordships, a pivotal
institution in medieval and modern Europe that has not received proper attention despite its
importance.2 Monarchs throughout Europe used to delegate public powers and functions to
lords who were in charge of governing large parts of the territory. Lords exercised extensive
public powers within the realm of their manors, including the administration of civil and
criminal justice, the control of the town council, and monopolistic rights in certain economic
activities such as mills and ovens (Dewald, 1996). The improvement of our understanding
about the role of lordships in economic development is not only important from the point of
view of European and, more generally, Western history. Similar institutions to lordship -as
delegation of governmental authority to private actors- are very common throughout history
and across countries. For instance, in medieval India land grants gave rise to landlords who
collected rents and labor services and exercised fiscal, judicial and military functions, and in
early modern Japan the daimyo lords had considerable governing and fiscal autonomy (Ravina,
1999; Sharma, 2003).
The phenomenon of governing through private agents or entities is also related to the
practice of indirect rule as a form of government in the context of European colonialism.
Feasibility or simply convenience led Metropolitan powers to favor an indirect form of rule
through native chiefs, rather than establishing direct political control (Lange, 2009; Iyer, 2010;
1

This aphorism pointed to the fact that most of the land in medieval Europe was in the lords’ hands.
It was also a legal principle by which all the land belonged to some lord and, ultimately, to the King.
For instance, according to the English medieval law, “there was no land without a lord and […] the
normal landholding was the manor, held directly or indirectly of the Crown” (Shannon 2012: 169).
2 My analysis focuses on the attribution of jurisdictional rights to secular lords. Throughout the text
the expressions lordship, manor, seigneurial jurisdiction and noble jurisdiction are used interchangeably.

1

Acemoglu et al. 2014; Oto-Peralías and Romero-Ávila, 2014). In addition, another clear
manifestation of delegation of governmental authority was the practice of public office-selling,
common in diverse settings such as England, France, China and the Ottoman empire, which
has been found to have a negative effect on development in the context of the Spanish empire
(Guardado, 2017).
I use Spain as a case study to analyze the economic effects of lordships. Spain is a
convenient historical setting for several reasons. First, there are rich data on the institutional
and economic features of all municipalities of the country during the Ancien Regime. Second,
the territory was well balanced between lordship and royal towns, so a meaningful comparison
is feasible. Third, serfdom was weak and did not exist after the Middle Ages, which makes it
easier to analyze (isolate) the institutional particularities of lordship as an instance of
privatization of the local government. Finally, and importantly for the empirical strategy, the
Spanish history provides sources of exogeneous variation. During the Reconquista, the
Christian kingdoms imposed their institutions on the new lands conquered from Muslim states
(Oto-Peralías and Romero-Ávila, 2016, 2017). Monarchs granted lordships in some places but
not in others, with the overall institutional and cultural environment being the same. This
allows exploiting variation in institutions at the local level while holding constant a wide array
of factors.
Whether the delegation of public powers represented by lordships had positive or negative
consequences for economic development is an empirical question. On the one hand, the
traditional view associated with seigneurial jurisdictions is negative, since vassals supposedly
bore higher taxes and were under the (arbitrary) authority of the lord. On the other, lords had
incentives to manage in an efficient way their manors in order to attract vassals, maximize
their vassals’ income and, consequently, their seigneurial rents. Relatedly, lordships could be
seen by vassals not only as an extractive institution but also as an institution providing
protection against the intervention of the King.
The first part of the analysis investigates the relationship between seigneurial jurisdiction
and economic development for the whole country. I collect data on the jurisdictional status of
8,000+ Spanish municipalities in the Ancien Regime from the Census of Floridablanca of 1787
(INE, 1987-1991). There were four types of jurisdiction depending on whether the
jurisdictional authority was the Crown (royal jurisdiction or realengo), nobles, military orders,
or the Church. I compare, in a regression framework, municipalities under royal and noble
jurisdiction, controlling for a wide array of variables and region fixed effects. The results reveal
that municipalities that were lay lordship in the old regime are relatively less developed today
than former royal municipalities. Moreover, I conduct an adjacent-municipality analysis to
compare each lordship with royal towns located within a distance of 50 kilometers from it. The
results are consistent with the standard regression analysis showing a negative effect of having
been a noble town.
The negative effect associated with seigneurial jurisdiction is in line with the traditional
view on it but there may be endogeneity problems making its causal interpretation tricky.
Seigneurial jurisdictions were first created in Spain right after the Reconquest but they evolved.
Some places originally under royal jurisdiction became lordships because they were granted to
nobles or sold to raise money. Conversely, there were also places that gained the royal status

2

after making a payment to buy their ‘freedom’ (Moxó, 1964; Domínguez Ortiz, 1964). While
the initial distribution of lordships can be considered (under some conditions) approximately
random, the subsequent evolution is likely to be endogenous to local economic and political
factors. To make progress towards causality, the second part of the analysis focuses on the
former Nasrid Kingdom of Granada, the last Muslim state incorporated into Castile, which
constitutes an ideal setting to analyze the effect of local political institutions. Castile
transplanted its political institutions into the conquered territory as it had done in previous
stages of the Reconquista. This ‘transplantation process’ can be considered as a ‘treatment
assignment’ in which the ‘treatment’ (the type of jurisdiction) was externally imposed upon
the existing towns and was unrelated to their characteristics. Another advantage of Granada is
that, as the last Muslim territory conquered, it is easier to trace the evolution of its local
political institutions, and indeed its lordships have been well studied by historians (Soria Mesa,
1997; Pérez Boyero, 1997).
The initial distribution of lordships in Granada can be taken as conditionally random. The
Crown kept under royal jurisdiction the main cities, but there was no systematic criterion for
the distribution of lordships in the rest of the territory. The Crown had little knowledge, right
after the conquest, about the economic potential of each place, and it was precisely within a
short period after the conquest when most of the lordships were created. Consistent with this
view on the distribution of lordships in Granada, a balancedness analysis shows that lordships
are not systematically different than royal places with the exception of distance to capital
cities. I find that places initially granted as lordships are today less developed in terms of
average income, light emission at night and education, and have experienced less population
growth in the 20th century. The results are robust to a large battery of robustness checks. In
particular, to address the concern that distance to the capital city may be driving the results, I
add a cubic polynomial in distance to the capital, restrict the sample to municipalities with a
very similar distribution in this variable, and include very granular distance fixed effects. The
negative effect of lordship also holds in an adjacent-municipality analysis.
The last part of the paper analyzes the mechanisms of persistence. I consider several
potential channels such as the extractive character of lordships, land inequality, state capacity,
and the Church. The results point to state capacity as a main intervening factor. There was
less presence of central state infrastructure in lordships by the end of the 18th century -as
reflected by a lower percentage of royal employees. This correlates, in turn, with a much lower
probability of having a post office in the 19th century, which was an important public service
provided by the central government, and with lower provision of public goods today. My
interpretation of the results is that lordship, by weakening the link with the central
government, historically reduced the state’s infrastructural capacity in the municipality, which
became a persistent institutional feature. In addition, the data show that lordship towns were
not poorer than royal ones in the 18th century, which suggests an evolving role of state
capacity over time. In pre-industrial economies, the state was often seen as an extractor of
resources and its absence was not necessarily negative for the population’s living conditions.
However, in industrial and post-industrial societies, the state plays a central role promoting
economic development through the provision of a wide array of public goods, and
municipalities with less state presence are at a disadvantage.

3

Finally, besides shedding new light on the subject of delegation of governmental authority
in general and lordships in particular, this paper contributes to the literature on state capacity
and development (Gennaioli and Rainer, 2007; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013;
Acemoglu et al., 2015, 2016; Dell et al., 2017). The analysis of the mechanisms of persistence
reveals that lordship undermined the state’s infrastructural power in the municipality, which is
an institutional trait that persists over time. Moreover, this study relates to the literature on
the causes and consequences of serfdom to the extent that lordships were the institutional
framework enforcing feudal duties -although, as mentioned in Section 2, the seigneurial regime
does not require the existence of serfdom (Acemoglu and Wolitzky, 2011; Ogilvie and Carus,
2014; Ashraf et al., 2017; Klein and Ogilvie, 2017; Markevich and Zhuravskaya, 2018). More
generally, this article contributes to the vibrant literature on the role played by political
institutions in development, “the central issue of economic history and of economic
development” (North, 1991: 98), adding new evidence based on within country variation in
institutions (Dell, 2010; Bruhn and Gallego, 2012; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013;
Angelucci et al., 2017).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief historical
background about the origin and evolution of lordships in Spain. Section 3 discusses the data
used in the analysis while Section 4 reports the empirical results for the whole country. Section
5 focuses on the distribution of jurisdictional rights in the former Kingdom of Granada to shed
light on the causal effect. Section 6 analyzes the mechanisms of persistence. Finally, Section 6
concludes.

Historical background3

2

2.1 Lordship in Europe
Lordship was a pivotal political institution that marked the history of European local
communities for a very long stretch of time covering the Middle Ages and the Modern Era. Its
remote origins are in the great domain and the villa in Carolingian times and survived until
the end of the Ancien Regime (Fourquin, 1976). There were several types of lordships. They
could include property rights over land, with the lord being a powerful landowner and the
vassals his tenants, or they could just stand for the exercise of public functions (justice and
government) over a territory. Although lordships did not challenge the monarch authority,
they functioned like a state apparatus at the local level. Fourquin (1976), describing the great
fiefs in 14th-century France, writes “organized as veritable States, they possessed all the
administrative machinery and all the great corps of officers who, in the nature of things, vied
with those of the Crown” (p. 231). Besides the village, lordships “formed one of the
fundamental local units out of which European society was constituted” (Dewald, 1996: 67).
Thus, the manorial regime had a great influence on the daily life of local communities and
lords were powerful figures: “Together with his wealth, his power to intervene in tenants’
affairs assured the lord a dominant place in local life, and made his household a center of local
politics” (Dewald, 1996: 67).
3

A much more detailed historical background is provided in Supplementary Material I.

4

Although lordships were widespread across Europe, its strength was different from place to
place. In the 15th century, northern France and western Germany, where feudal institutions
originated, had the strongest manifestation of the seigneurial regime. In regions like Italy and
southern France, much land was not under the manorial system because Roman models of
property survived. In most of Spain and Eastern Europe lordships were also relatively weak as
the need to attract settlers during the Middle Ages led to more freedoms and there was no
serfdom or labor services (Dewald, 1996). This picture, however, changed over time. In Center
and Eastern Europe lordships became stronger. Lords got new rights and increased their
previous ones: labor services, prohibition of leaving the estate, full control of justice and local
administration. This strengthening of seigneurial powers mainly reflected the weakness of
monarchs and central governments unable to compete with the nobility. “By 1700, lordships in
eastern Germany, Poland, Denmark, and Bohemia had grown enormously powerful […] Spain
too witnessed the expansion of seigneurial power during early modern period. Deeply in debt,
16th and 17th-century kings used grants of seigneurial rights as means of raising money and
rewarding great nobles […] The crown’s weakness gave to lords monopolies, extensive
regulatory powers, and the right to levy rents and taxes over peasant subjects” (Dewald, 1996:
69-70).4

2.2 The seigneurial regime in Spain
This section provides a brief background of the origin and evolution of the seigneurial regime
in Spain. First, it is important to define the concept of lordship used in the analysis. According
to the Spanish historiography, lordship is the transfer –by the Crown to a private person or
entity– of jurisdictional functions (administration of justice and government) over a specific
territory and its inhabitants (Soria Mesa, 1997). In other words, lordship stands for “a set of
prerogatives of public law which, over the settlers of a territory, the Crown transfers to who
exerts them for his own benefit” (Guilarte, 1987: 28, my translation). This transfer of public
powers allows the noble to maintain “troops and fortresses, to judge in an instance above the
municipality courts, to appoint the holder of many council posts, and to receive rights and
rents” (Laredo Quesada, 1989: 149, quoted in Pérez Boyero, 1997: 17, my translation). Lords
were also commonly landowners within their manors, so their vassals were also their tenants,
but this was not necessarily the case.
Depending on the holder of the seigneurial jurisdiction, there were noble, ecclesiastical
4

It is worth noting that feudalism and lordship refer to different phenomena. A central feature of
feudalism is the splitting up of public powers that in ordinary are exercised by the State, implying the
fragmentation of sovereignty. Two key elements of feudalism were the existence of personal bonds and
the impact of these bonds on the state. Bonds of vassalage made up the political structure of society.
(Fourquin, 1976). In contrast, the lordship system did not challenge the power of the state: “Whether or
not the great landowners possessed the right of administering justice had nothing to do with the
disintegration of the State” (Fourquin, 1976: 12). In this sense, monarchical absolutism did not eradicate
the seigneurial system. Rather, it integrated the latter into the monarchical structure, placing the
manorial system in a clear subordinate position (González Alonso, 1983). Relatedly, the seigneurial
system does not require the existence of serfdom, a feudal institution. Lordship is fully compatible with
free peasants.

5

(including monastic) and military order lordships. Places that were not subject to the
seigneurial regime depended directly on the royal administration and therefore had royal
jurisdiction (realengo towns). Figure 1 depicts the geographic distribution of the different
types of jurisdiction in Spain in 1787. I focus on royal and noble jurisdictions, which were by
far the most common types.
Lordships initially had a clear instrumental purpose during the Reconquest and subsequent
repopulation of former Muslim lands in Spain. Nader (1990) mentions that the “development of
municipalities was the foundation of the seigneurial regime in Castile” (p. 47). The interest of
lords in developing settlements and promoting agriculture and population growth matched well
with the objective of the Crown of repopulating and defending the conquered territory. Factors
such as the southward expansion of the frontier in the Christian kingdoms and the feudal
influence from Europe accelerated the creation of lordships in the 12th and 13th centuries.
During all this first period, lordships had the goal of promoting the repopulation of the
territory and defending the frontier. The link of lordships to land (hence, the rights of lords
over land) is stronger in this period due to this colonizing function (Moxó, 1964).
The Trastamara dynasty that started in the mid-14th century constituted the most
important source of lordships in Castile. The new monarchs granted lordships as a reward for
support during the dynastic war and to compensate the reduction in lords’ rents due to
negative shocks such as plague and war. Despite this expansion of the seigneurial regime, royal
jurisdiction (realengo) remained predominant in the main cities (Cabrera, 2004). Monarchs
transferred extensive jurisdictional and property rights to lords. However, as time passes, the
new lordships are granted in lands already populated, which implied a reduction in the rights
of the new lord, particularly with respect to land ownership. According to the Ordenamiento
de Alcalá (1348), the rights of preexisting settlers over land had to be respected.5
The growth of the manorial system went down during the reign of the Catholic Monarchs
as they tried to preserve the existing realengo places and moderate the power of lords. For
instance, they approved the Pragmática de Medina del Campo (1480), which established the
freedom of movement of vassals (Moxó, 1964). In the same vein, Catholic King Ferdinand
freed the Catalonian remença serfs through the arbitral ruling of Guadalupe in 1486.
Spain entered the Modern Era inheriting a very large number of lordships from the Middle
Ages. The French aphorism “no land without a lord” was to a considerable extent true in the
second half of the 15th century (Valdeón, 1997). After 1500, the financial needs of the Crown
are the main driver of the creation of lordships. Two stages can be differentiated. In the first
one, the lordships created by Emperor Charles V and his son Phillip II have a similar
character to the previous ones. They sold a significant proportion of ecclesiastical and military
orders lordships, thereby creating many new lay manors. In the second stage, during the 17th
century, there were many sales of royal villages and towns, but buyers just received
5

It is interesting to note that, except for the military orders, the territorial extension of individual
lordships was not very large as they were geographically fragmented (that is, the same noble lineage
owned several lordships scattered across the territory rather than concentrated on a specific area). This
prevented that lords could challenge the sovereign of the King. Rather, lordships played a major role at
the local level, becoming “a relevant institution within the sphere of the local administration” (Moxó,
1964: 189, my translation).

6

jurisdictional rights. Thus, these late sales, when lordships had completely lost their colonizing
mission, only consisted of public functions, that is, the jurisdiction in strict sense. The
economic value of that (i.e., the rents that could be earned) was very limited. The reasons to
buy a jurisdiction had basically to do with social prestige, the desire to enter the nobility
(Domínguez Ortiz, 1964).6
The advent of the Bourbon dynasty put an end to the expansion of the seigneurial regime
in Spain. Regarding the situation of the manorial system in this period (i.e., the 18th cent.), it
is difficult to generalize. Nevertheless, a few remarks are worth making. First, the economic
value of seigneurial exactions was generally low, although some privileges such as the lord’s
monopolies generated many complaints; second, the hardship of the vassal’s situation
depended on whether the lord also owned the land; third, there was heterogeneity across the
main regions of Spain, and even within regions; and fourth, lords preserved their control of the
local justice and capacity to intervene in the local government. Although less pervasive than in
the past, this jurisdictional power gave lords legal superiority over their vassals and a
guarantee that their rights would prevail. Concerning the lord’s control of the town council,
his power and capacity to intervene varied from one place to another but was in general very
effective and went together with the right to issue ordinances (Domínguez Ortiz, 1955).
The seigneurial regime was abolished by a number of legal reforms that started at the
Cortes de Cadiz in 1810. At that time, the manorial regime had lost much of its economic
significance in the sense that the seigneurial rents collected were low, although continued to be
a relevant local political institution. Where lords were also landowners, which was common,
they had lost interest in jurisdictional rights and become rentiers. This change, observed also
throughout Europe, in the nature of lordships at the end of the Ancien Regime helps explain
the outcome of the measures at the Cortes de Cadiz: jurisdictional rights were eliminated but
lords maintained and consolidated their property rights in their old lordships, namely, those
coming from the Middle Ages and the first century of the Modern Era (Moxó, 1964).

2.3 Seigneurial vs royal jurisdiction
Were royal towns seen as preferable to lordships? In order words, were the living conditions
better in royal places than in seigneurial ones? The most intuitive and widespread view is that
people were better off under royal jurisdiction, that is, depending directly on the King and
thus avoiding the abuses of power and arbitrariness of lords. The historiography on this
subject has a more mixed view though, arguing that noble jurisdiction was not necessarily
worse than the royal one.
On the one hand, there is evidence suggesting that people preferred to live in royal places.
For instance, when the Crown decided to sell the jurisdiction of a royal town, there were often
desperate attempts by the population of the affected towns with the purpose of avoiding such
a yoke (Soria Mesa, 1997). There were also many instances of anti-seigneurial movement in
which the population, often led by the urban oligarchy, tried by violent means to oppose the

6 An economic factor largely responsible for the reduction in value of seigneurial rents was the high
inflation of the early modern period (Dewald, 1996).

7

rule of the lord.7 In addition, some references indicate that the control of the territory by the
nobility was an obstacle for its repopulation because lords imposed restrictions on activities
such as hunting, woodcutting or pasturing, and levied higher taxes (Vassberg, 1984).8
On the other hand, there is also some evidence indicating that lordships were not worse
than royal towns. For instance, for the case of Granada from 1570 to 1750, there was more
immigration to lordships than to royal towns, which suggests that living conditions in
lordships were not worse than in royal places. Historical references indicate that lords were
able to provide protection to their vassals against taxes levied by the King and against royal
commands and repressive institutions such as the Inquisition. Relatedly, lords sometimes
offered tax exemptions to attract new vassals. The purpose of lords was not altruistic but the
maximization of income as their rents depended on the number of vassals. There are examples
of lords trying to promote economic development in their lordships, as this would increase
their rents (Soria Mesa, 1997).
The sale of lordships in the 17th century is a good setting to study how the population
reacted to a change from royal to noble jurisdiction. In relation to the massive sale of
jurisdictions during the reign of Phillip IV, which affected 230,000 inhabitants, Domínguez
Ortiz (1964) argues that, overall, the attitude of towns was heterogeneous. There are certainly
testimonies of reaction against becoming vassal of a lord, and in general jurisdictional changes
of status did not generate enthusiasm, but violent responses were rare. Thus, changes were
generally accepted with resignation, “as a lesser evil” (Domínguez Ortiz, 1964: 182).9 Whether
the change to noble jurisdiction was beneficial or detrimental to the population is an
unanswered question. In some cases, the change led to the migration of important families that
did not want to be under the authority of a lord, but in towns without such a middle-upper
class, the change was not necessarily detrimental. In words of Domínguez Ortiz (1964), “the
lord was interested in increasing the value of his new possession; he often offered privileges,
attracted settlers, established pious foundations and defended the villagers from the excesses of
collectors and executors” (p. 182, my translation). Similarly, Vassberg (1984) states that “many
lords established fairs and freemarkets to invigorate the economy of their towns […] More
importantly, the lords, in their own interest, tried to preserve their vassals from the worst
7

During the low Middle Ages, the most common causes of grievances and complaints by vassals were
abusive taxes, usurpation of common lands, acquisition of lands by fraudulent means, usurpation of
jurisdictional rights, excessive control of the appointments for local council’s posts, abuses in the
obligation of providing lodging to the lord’s servants, and even abusive intromission in their vassals’
marriages (Cabrera, 2004).
8 Contemporaries did not often have a good opinion of lordships. The geographer Tomás López,
during the second half of the 18th century, interviewed priests for his historical survey of the kingdom. It
appears that they generally had a negative view of the manorial administration (Domínguez-Ortiz, 1955).
For instance, the priest of a town in Cáceres said “the government is exercised by two mayors who are
elected each year by the owner of the jurisdiction without participation of the council or any other
person; the lord’s administrator is the only in charge of these appointments; if he, as usually happens,
governs following private interests, the less worthy people are appointed and the government subverts”
(Domínguez Ortiz, 1955: 325, my translation). Moreover, frequent perpetual conflicts between some
towns and their lords often resulted in very lengthy lawsuits of more than 100 years duration.
9 This was particularly the case in small towns that were under the control of a city, and this
category of towns was the most affected group by the sales in quantitative terms.

8

effects of billeting or tax collection” (p. 97-98). The safeguard or benefit for the community
was greater when the seigneur was powerful and influential.
Overall, although negative references are more common than positive ones, historians are
generally reluctant to state that lordships were worse than realengos. Rather, it is argued that
the jurisdictional status is not very informative to explain the living conditions of the
population. In this sense, Ruiz (1998) argues that whether they lived in royal or seigneurial
jurisdiction “really provides little indication of how much money (rent) individual peasants
paid, how much land they held, and under what conditions. In principle, peasants living in
royal lands owed less dues than those under seigneurial jurisdiction, but local conditions, more
often than not, determined the types of payments and tenure” (p. 52-53). Finally, Vassberg
(1984) provides a well-balanced summary of the question. He concludes that the vast majority
seemed to prefer royal jurisdiction, 10 although one would be wrong to infer that royal
jurisdiction was always preferable to lordship -particularly, if the lord was benevolent, life
under lordship could be easier.

2.4 Concluding remarks
The seigneurial regime was heterogeneous across and within countries. For the case of Spain,
the rights of lords and the situation of vassals largely depended on the local circumstances of
each place, being difficult to generalize. What all lordships did have in common was the
transfer of jurisdictional functions to private agents, representing a form of privatization of the
local government. In addition, it was a general fact that seigneurial rents (those associated
with jurisdictional rights) lost economic significance over time. At the end of the Old Regime,
lords’ rents from landownership were much more important than seigneurial rents. This was
true everywhere in Europe and in Spain itself. Moreover, it seems that the population
generally preferred the royal status, but life in lordships was not necessarily worse than in
realengo towns.
One may wonder whether the seigneurial regime had an impact on the development path of
towns and regions. Even though the historiography maintains that the situation of vassals was
not necessary worse than that of royal towns’ residents, there is no systematic empirical study
of this question. More interestingly, it is possible that vassals were not worse off, but perhaps
the institutional legacy of lordships has been detrimental to the subsequent development of
seigneurial towns. One possible hypothesis is that the seigneurial administrative apparatus
reduced the presence of the state in the municipality and –thus– its capacity to implement
policies. The protection provided by the lord against the royal administration (preventing or
hindering the intervention of royal officials to collect taxes, host troops, etc.) could be
beneficial in the short-term, but could create negative institutional and cultural dynamics.

3

Data

I collect data on the jurisdictional status, total population and job occupation structure of all
10 The preference for royal towns “is reflected in several Castilian proverbs [such as] En lugar de
señorío no hagas tu nido (Don’t build your nest in a seigneurial town)” (Vassberg, 1984: 98).

9

the villages, towns and cities of Spain in the 18th century from the Census of Floridablanca
(INE, 1987-1991). This population census is a milestone in the history of demographic
statistics. No other major western country has a population census with a comparable quality
(Pérez Moreda, 2010). Both the original census and the modern publication are monumental
works. The former consists of more than 50,000 manuscript pages and the latter of more than
6,000 pages. The census contains, for each one of the more than 20,000 population entities or
settlements existing in the country in 1787, data on its political and administrative
characteristics, total population, religious communities, and the population classified by age
group, civil status, sex, and job occupation. For the construction of the dataset, I have focused
on the political and administrative features, total population, and the classification of the
population by job occupation.
These census data are used to create a dataset for modern-day municipalities. I use the list
of municipalities corresponding to the year 2013 (about 8,100), provided by the National
Geographic Office (Instituto Geográfico Nacional, 2013). All the details about the collection of
census data and the creation of the dataset at the municipality level can be found in
Supplementary Material II: “18th-century Spain: A dataset of political institutions and socioeconomic variables at the local level”, available on the author’s website. Table 1 summarizes
the distribution of municipalities, population and surface area by type of jurisdiction. Noble
jurisdiction was the most common jurisdiction among the population entities of the Ancien
Regime, which also applied when considering modern-day municipalities. The second most
frequent category was royal jurisdiction. These two categories together account for about 80%
of all population entities. A much lower percentage of places were under the jurisdiction of the
Church and the military orders. In terms of population, royal jurisdiction was the most
important, particularly when considering current population data, while in surface area both
noble and royal jurisdictions occupied the same percentage of the territory. All in all, not all
the land nor the population was in the hands of lords, but lordships were clearly a very
important local political institution until the 19th century.
I also collect data on the initial distribution of lordships in the former Nasrid Kingdom of
Granada. As mentioned above, this territory was the last Muslim state incorporated into
Castile and it is easier to trace the origin and evolution of the jurisdictional status of each
village and town. I collect data on the date and method of acquisition of each lordship from
Soria Mesa (1997), which is complemented -if necessary- with other sources including Pérez
Boyero (1997), Garzón Pareja (1977), and Segura Graiño (1982). More information about the
construction of the dataset of Granadian lordships is provided in Section 5. Finally, I also
gather data on a wide array of geographic and climatic variables, preexisting conditions, as
well as current outcomes. To save space, the descriptions and sources of all the variables used
in the analysis are provided in Table A1, while the descriptive statistics are available in Table
A2, both in Supplementary Material III: “Variables’ descriptions and robustness checks”.

4

Lordships and economic development in Spanish municipalities

This section analyzes the relationship between lordships in 1787 and current economic
outcomes. I focus on the comparison between royal and noble jurisdiction, by far the two most

10

common types. Observations with the other types of jurisdiction are omitted. First, it is useful
to take a look at the correlation of lordships with geographic, climatic and pre-existing
historical conditions. This helps assess the extent to which the assignation of the seigneurial
status to towns was exogenous to their economic potential. Table 2 reports the coefficient on
lordship controlling for region fixed effects (i.e., dummy variables capturing Spain’s seventeen
self-governing regions). There are no differences in altitude, ruggedness, soil quality,
temperature, rainfall, aridity, distance to the coast, distance to a major river, distance to
Madrid, distance to Roman roads, and distance to pre-medieval settlements. There is only a
statistically significant difference in distance to the provincial capital city, being the coefficient
positive. The latter is expected since most of the important cities where kept under the direct
control of the Crown (i.e., royal jurisdiction). Therefore, this indicates that distance to the
capital city is an important control variable.

4.1 Standard regression analysis
To study the relationship between noble jurisdiction and economic development, I estimate the
following equation using ordinary least squares and clustering standard errors at the region
level:
Yi,r = ϒ·Lordshipi,r + β·Xi,r +ηr +εi,r

Eq (1)

where Yi,r represents a current outcome variable for municipality i in region r, Lordshipi,r
is a dummy variable measuring whether the municipality was under noble jurisdiction in 1787,
Xi,r represents a vector of control variables related to the geographic, climatic and pre-existing
historical features of the municipality, ηr is a set of 17 region dummies, and εi,r is the error
term. Regarding the vector of control variables, I include altitude, ruggedness, temperature,
rainfall, a coast dummy, distance to the coast, a capital city dummy, distance to the capital
city, and the quadratic polynomial in latitude and longitude. By including a wide array of
variables related to the geographic location of municipalities I try to prevent the spatial
dimension of the local data from influencing my results.
With respect to the current outcome variables, the closest available indicator at the local
level to measure income per capita comes from tax returns and measures the average gross
income, calculated as total gross personal income divided by the number of taxpayers in each
municipality. This indicator has the shortcoming that is only available for municipalities larger
than 1,000 inhabitants, which represents less than 40% of Spanish municipalities. In terms of
population, however, municipalities larger than 1,000 inhabitants account for 90% of the
overall Spanish population. In terms of surface area, they account for almost 60% of the total.
Therefore, this measure of income actually covers most of the territory and almost all the
population. I also collect data on other proxies for economic development at the local level
with a wider geographic coverage. These include light density at night, average number of
vehicles per household, educational attainment, and average socioeconomic condition. I also
use annual population growth during the 20th century as a basic measure of the economic
success of municipalities.
Column 1 of Table 3 reports a negative and statistically significant relationship between

11

noble jurisdiction and income. Municipalities under noble jurisdiction in 1787 have today 4%
less gross average income than municipalities under royal jurisdiction. Columns 2 shows, for
the whole sample, that former seigneurial towns have 12% less light density at night. The rest
of columns include average number of vehicles per household, education attainment, average
socioeconomic condition and long-term population growth. The variable lordship always carries
a negative and statistically significant coefficient, expect in column 5. I have checked that the
negative effect associated with noble jurisdiction is robust to using province fixed effects rather
than region fixed effects. I have also checked that the results are broadly robust to restricting
the sample to municipalities with tax income data (i.e., larger than 1,000 inhabitants in 2013).
One may be concerned about the possibility that distance to the capital city is somehow
driving the negative effect of lordship. Although the previous set of regressions controls for
distance to the capital city, it is still possible that the relationship of this variable with current
outcomes is nonlinear, which would imply that the model is misspecified. I address this
concern through two avenues: first, I include a flexible (cubic) polynomial in distance to the
capital city and, second, I introduce very granular distance fixed effects consisting of 1-km bins.
Reassuringly, the results are largely robust although the coefficient on lordship becomes
slightly smaller.11

4.2 Adjacent-municipality analysis
As an alternative approach, I conduct a local analysis in which each municipality with noble
jurisdiction is compared to a group of adjacent municipalities with royal jurisdiction.12 The
purpose of this exercise is to create, for each municipality with noble jurisdiction, a comparison
(control) group of neighbors with royal jurisdiction. In this way, I compare municipalities that
are very similar in geographic, climatic and locational characteristics. More specifically, I
execute the following algorithm for each municipality with noble jurisdiction: i) find its 10
nearest neighbors with royal jurisdiction, ii) delete neighbors more than 50 km away of the
municipality, iii) take averages, for each variable used in the analysis, for the resulting group
of neighbors in step ‘ii’, and iv) calculate the difference, for every variable, between the
municipality and its comparison group of royal neighbors. This renders, for each variable and
for each lordship municipality, the difference between the municipality’s value and its
neighbors’ average value.
Table 4 reports the results. Odd columns only include an intercept, which reflects the
unconditional mean difference in the dependent variable. The coefficients reveal that lordships
are associated with less income, light emission, education, average socioeconomic condition and
population growth. The differences are statistically significant with the exception of column 9.
Control variables capturing differences in geographic and climatic factors are added in even
columns. The variable of interest is again the intercept, which reflects the average difference
between lordships and royal municipalities when differences in the observables are zero. The
results are very similar when introducing these controls. Moreover, it is worth noting that the
11

All these unreported results are available in Supplementary Material III.

12

This analysis is similar in spirit to the one by Michalopoulos (2012), who focuses on pairs of
contiguous regions.

12

difference between lordship and royal jurisdiction in this analysis of adjacent municipalities is
similar to that found in the previous standard regression analysis.
To sum up, the evidence reported in this section indicates that municipalities that had
noble jurisdiction in the Ancien Regime are relatively poorer today. This result holds both in a
standard regression framework with region fixed effects and in a systematic comparison of
adjacent municipalities. However, there may still be some caveats regarding whether this
negative relationship can be interpreted as causal. The geographic distribution of lordships in
1787 is partially endogenous. Since the initial distribution of lordships that took place after the
Reconquest, there has been a long evolution in the jurisdictional status of settlements, and
some unobserved relevant factors could have affected this evolution.13 To shed more light on
the causal effect of lordships, I focus in the next section on the territory of the former Nasrid
Kingdom of Granada, which provides a better setting to tackle this question.

5

Lordships and economic development: The case of Granada

5.1 The seigneurial regime in Granada.
5.1.1 Initial distribution of lordships.
The Nasrid Kingdom of Granada was the last Muslim state conquered by Castile (c. 14821492). As a conquered land, its institutional framework was created from scratch. The Catholic
Monarchs transplanted the Castilian institutions into the new territory as their predecessors
had done in the past. An advantage of focusing on Granada is that its more recent conquest
makes it easier to study and collect data about the initial distribution of lordships and its
evolution. For this purpose, there are excellent studies by medieval and modern historians
(Soria-Mesa, 1997; Pérez-Boyero, 1997). Importantly for my empirical strategy, most of the
Granadian lordships were created right after the conquest. Granada passed into Christian
hands in January 1492 and most of the lordships were granted five months later, in June. The
Catholic Monarchs granted them in compensation for military help, palace services and
financial loans. The main beneficiaries of these grants of seigneurial jurisdictions were members
of the nobility who already had lordships in other regions of the country. The Granada
Kingdom was thus used as an economic reserve to reward the conquerors and, as Queen
Isabella ordered in her will, to pay personal and political debts (Soria Mesa, 1997; Peinado,
2011).
The Crown’s policy was initially to repopulate the main cities with Christian settlers from
other parts of the kingdom, while maintaining a Mudejar majority in the countryside.14 The
main cities and the surrounding areas were kept as royal jurisdiction, following the example of
13

The most common change in status was from royal to noble jurisdiction. It is unclear the direction
of the potential biases arising from this process. For instance, powerful royal towns could have lobbied to
avoid becoming a lordship, introducing a downward bias in my estimates. Acting in the opposite
direction, beneficiaries and buyers of jurisdictions could have been interested only in attractive places,
creating an upward bias.
14 Mudejars refer to the Muslim population of al-Andalus that remained in Spain after the Christian
conquest. Moriscos refer to Mudejars forcibly converted into Christianity.

13

the repopulation of the Guadalquivir Valley, whereas the rest of the territory was partially
granted to nobles. Importantly, beyond the main cities, there was no clear criterion for the
initial distribution of lordships. 15 Soria-Mesa (1997) states that “in the distribution [of
lordships] it dominated the ignorance of the Granadian geography and the logical confusion
produced by foreign toponyms” (p. 57, my translation). Because of this confusion and lack of
knowledge, the royal chancery made some mistakes when identifying certain places (Pérez
Boyero, 1997).16 In addition, it is worth noting that the Catholic Monarchs did not grant any
lordship to the Church and military orders, as they did not want to increase their already huge
power (Pérez Boyero, 1997). Laredo Quesada (1968) points out that “along with the control by
the Crown, the second feature of the repopulation was that of being conducted according to
the circumstances of each conquest and each capitulation” (p. 492, my translation). This also
introduces an element of randomness since these were contingent factors of that time. In this
regard, Almería and Málaga are the provinces where more lordships were granted arguably
because they were conquered first and monarchs needed to materialize soon the rewards to
nobles for their military help (Birriel Salcedo and Soria Mesa, 1993). Defense needs also had
some relevance but its importance was circumscribed to specific areas such as the coast.17
The size of the lordships created in Granada was not as large as in some parts of Castile,
but they were not small nor unimportant (Soria Mesa, 1997). One of the reasons for the
relatively small size of lordships was that the Catholic Monarchs aimed to maintain the
balance of power among the noble families, which influenced their policy regarding the
distribution of lordships. To maintain that balance, they did not grant very large lordships
(Pérez Boyero, 1997). Regarding a potential selection bias, in Soria Mesa (1997)’s view, the
Crown did not choose the worst places (or least profitable) to create lordships. For instance,
the western part of Almeria is a mountainous area with difficult communications. From this
broad area, the only places that were granted as lordships were the least steep ones, with
better communication and availability of water: “For this reason is why the manors are given,
15 An exception to this was that some lords with possessions on the former Granadian frontier
received places near to their estates (Soria-Mesa, 1997).
16

An example of the poor knowledge of the Crown about the Granadian territory was the agreement
dated in April of 1495 to grant several lordships to the count Luis de Beaumont, constable of Navarre.
“As circumstances forced to act quickly, the Monarchs decided to grant to the constable of Navarre the
jurisdiction of Huéscar, Castilléjar […] The decision was made without having enough information about
the number of inhabitants and the value of the rents of these towns” (Pérez Boyero, 1997: 36, my
translation; italics are mine). This suggests that as late as in 1495, three years after the capitulation of
Granada, the Crown did not have systematic information about the basic characteristics of Granadian
towns. Furthermore, there was also lack of knowledge from the point of view of the beneficiaries of
lordships, suggesting that the monarchs’ decisions were not based on specific nobles’ demands. For
instance, Catholic King Ferdinand II granted Almayater in 1508 to the count of Tendilla to pay his
services as ambassador in Rome and with the purpose of repopulating the Granadian coast. Shortly after,
the count of Tendilla organized a visit to the place as he “wanted to get his first look at Almayater, ‘this
gift that the king gave me’”, getting a very bad impression of the conditions in which he found the place
(Nader, 1990: 48).
17 For instance, Segura Graíño (1982) points out that Adra, in Almeria, was realengo because of its
fortification and good location for the defense of the coast. Indeed, in that province, the Crown was
concerned about a potential landing of Muslim forces and kept most of the coast under royal jurisdiction.
The inclusion of a coast dummy variable in the regressions controls for the bias that may arise from this.

14

in the places where there is water in greater abundance” (Segura Graiño, 1982: 610, my
translation). The empirical analysis conducted below shows that there are no statistically
significant differences in geographic and climatic factors between lordships and royal towns.
The only significant difference is that lordships tended to be located further from capital cities.
To sum up, there was no systematic policy for the distribution of lordships, except for the
fact that the main cities remained realengo. According to López de Coca (1993), “it is
legitimate to ask whether there existed any criterion in the distribution of lordships” (p. 141,
my translation). All this discussion suggests that the geographic distribution of lordships was
conditionally random. That is, taking into account the fact that the main cities remained royal,
for the rest of the territory there was apparently no criterion. This implies that the initial
distribution of lordships was (conditionally) exogenous to the economic characteristics and
economic potential of the territory.

5.1.2 Evolution of the seigneurial regime in Granada and lords’ prerogatives.
The distribution of seigneurial jurisdictions in Granada did not remain static. Sales of
lordships started in the 1550s driven by the financial needs of the Crown and stimulated by a
pre-existent demand (Pérez Boyero, 1997). There was demand for lordships in places in which
interested buyers had properties. Thus, seigneurial jurisdictions were generally sold in places
with large estates, which suggests that the randomness of the subsequent distribution of
lordships was lower than that of the initial distribution. Buyers were generally urban upper
classes, owners of large estates in the affected territory, being almost always the city councilors
(regidores) –hence arising a clear conflict of interest (Soria Mesa, 1997). The sale of lordships
accelerated during the first two decades of the 17th century under the reigns of Phillip III and
Phillip IV. It is worth noting that not all sales of jurisdictions became effective. About half of
the times the local community or the city council were successful opposing to become a
lordship (Soria Mesa, 1997). This fact can also introduce a bias in the type of towns making
up these late lordships.
Finally, regarding the rights and prerogatives of Granadian lords, it is important to
differentiate two stages. The first one spans from the time of the conquest until 1568 and is
characterized by high rents from the exploitation of the Morisco population. Moriscos paid
heavy tributes. After the conquest, Castilian lords maintained (and when possible increased)
the previous high tax burden, which included labor services. Despite this highly extractive
institutional framework, Moriscos preferred lordships because lords were much more
permissible regarding their culture and customs. The second stage started after the Morisco
uprising in 1568 and their subsequent expulsion from Granada. Their expulsion had a very
negative impact on lords’ rents. Not only had they seen a reduction in the number of vassals,
but also in the type of vassals. The new (‘old Christian’) vassals had more rights and paid
much less. The whole repopulation process after the expulsion of Moriscos was controlled and
organized by the King (Muñoz Buendía, 1992; Soria Mesa, 1997). For this second period,
which covers almost all the Modern Era until the 19th century, the main source of income of
Granadian lords were the tercias, which amounted to one third of the tithe. Additional sources
of income were the alcabalas (a sales tax) and rents from properties that lords had in their

15

lordships. Other sources of income with much lower importance were the seigneurial rents
related to the administration of justice, local monopolies and appointments of local officials.
Regarding the jurisdictional power of lords, it was similar to the rest of Castile as it basically
consisted of the administration of justice and the appointments of town councilors (Soria Mesa,
1997).

5.2 Empirical analysis
This section analyzes the effect of lordships granted shortly after the conquest on current
economic outcomes. I refer to ‘old lordships’ as those created before 1515, all of them the result
of royal grants. Table 5 shows that old lordships are very similar to the rest of municipalities
in terms of geographic and climatic conditions as well as in pre-medieval variables. There is a
minor and marginally significant difference in temperature: lordship towns are 0.5 degree
Celsius colder. Lordship municipalities are closer on average to a major river (the
Guadalquivir), which is a positive characteristic favoring the economic development of
seigneurial places. The positive and significant coefficient with respect to distance to the
capital city is more worrisome as this factor may exert a negative impact on development
outcomes. Distance to the capital city is therefore again a very important geographic control in
the regressions. The results of Table 5 are consistent with the previous historical discussion:
the only criterion for the distribution of lordships was to keep the largest cities under royal
jurisdiction. Beyond the main urban centers, the Crown was largely indifferent. Therefore, the
initial distribution of lordships in Granada can be considered conditionally random: controlling
for distance to the capital city and including capital city dummies, it is possible to identify the
effect of lordship on local economic development. The exogeneity of lordship is also favored by
the fact that Granada was a conquered land and its institutional and economic orders were
fully reset in less than a hundred years. Particularly with the expulsion of Moriscos after the
revolt in 1568, the Castilian Granada had very little to do with the former Muslim country
(Ladero Quesada, 1979).
I estimate the following equation to analyze the effect of the initial distribution of lordships
on long-term economic development:
Yi,r = ϒ·Old Lordhips + β·Xi,r +εi,r

Eq (2)

where all the variables are the same as in Eq (1) except the main independent variable
which is a dummy variable capturing whether the municipality was a lordship early in the 16th
century. I report Conley (1999)’s standard errors robust to spatial correlation of unknown
form.18 Table 6 presents the baseline results. The coefficient on the variable of interest is
always negative and statistically significant. Its magnitude is larger than in the analysis using
the whole Spanish sample. Lordship towns have today 7.5% less income, 48% less night light
density, 0.46 standard deviation less vehicles per household, 4.1% less people with secondary
and higher education, and 0.33 standard deviation less socioeconomic condition. They also had
0.52% lower annual population growth in the 20th century.
This negative effect is not driven by distance to the capital city as this variable is included
18

I employ cutoffs of 1 decimal degree, beyond which spatial correlation is assumed to be zero.

16

in the control set. In addition, the quadratic polynomial in latitude and longitude controls, in a
more general way, for the potential confounding effect that the municipality’s location may
have. I take in Table 7 three additional approaches to provide further evidence on that
distance to the capital is not behind the lordship effect. First, Panel A introduces a flexible
(cubic) polynomial in distance to the capital city. The size of the coefficient slightly declines
but remains negative and almost always statistically significant. Second, I use a subsample of
municipalities in which distance to the capital city lies between 22 and 74 kilometers. For this
subsample, the distribution of this variable is very similar in old lordship towns and the rest.
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test renders a highly insignificant p-value of 0.895, indicating that
the two distributions are very similar. Likewise, the mean difference in distance to the capital
city is also highly insignificant for this subsample. Figure 2 compares the distribution for the
full sample with that for the restricted sample, while Panel B (Table 7) reports the results.
Reassuringly, the effect of lordship remains fairly robust.19 Third, Panel C includes very
granular fixed effects in distance to the capital city (a set of 1-km-size bin dummies). This
additional robustness check does not overturn the results.
Table 8 presents an adjacent-municipality analysis as the one conducted for the whole
Spanish sample in Section 4.2. Odd columns report the unconditional differences between old
lordships and the rest of municipalities, while even columns test these differences when
differences in the observables are equal to zero (which is what the intercept captures). The
results provide again support to the previous findings, being all the coefficients negative and
most of the times statistically significant -although the lower number of observations decreases
the statistical power.
To further exploit variation within small geographic areas, Table A7-Panel A (in
Supplementary Material III) includes a set of 3 province dummies in Eq (2). The coefficient on
lordship is slightly smaller in size but remains fairly robust. Panel B in the same table restricts
the sample to municipalities with tax income data, which are those with more than 1,000
inhabitants in 2013, while Panel C deletes observations corresponding to newer lordships
(those created after the first half of the 16th century). The latter tries to address a potential
concern with respect to the comparison group used in the regressions. So far in this section, old
lordships are compared to the rest of municipalities, which include some towns that became
lordships after the initial distribution of them. This is the right approach in my view, but for
the sake of completeness I also report what happens when these late lordships are removed
from the comparison group. The coefficient on lordship remains stable and always significant.
Finally, a potential confounding factor very difficult to measure is the presence of Morisco
population. Moriscos could have left a deeper cultural legacy in old lordships, although this
possibility is highly unlikely since they were massively expelled after the revolt in 1568. Yet, it
is possible that their (extractive) institutions persisted. Chaney and Hornbeck (2016) argue
that Morisco lordships in Valencia were more extractive than Christian lordships, and there
was persistence in the institutional framework after their expulsion in 1609. The case of
19 The range 22-74 kilometers is selected based on a simple algorithm which finds, among all possible
ranges of kilometers in distance to the capital city, the one with the highest p-value in the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test of equality of distributions, provided that the resulting sample is at least half the size of
the whole sample.

17

Granada is however different in this regard. After their expulsion in the second half of the 16th
century, there was a second repopulation carefully monitored by the Crown. King Phillip II
issued a specific regulation to organize the new resettlement of Granada (Muñoz Buendía,
1992). The newcomers did not suffer the bad conditions of Morisco times. The arrival of new
settlers and the intervention of the King largely reduced the “feudal” rights of lords. “Both
lords and settlers had to reach a high level of compromise, the former lowering their privileges
regarding the Moorish period, and the latter adapting to the demands of the Lord” (Muñoz
Buendía, 1992: 278, my translation). The repopulation of the last quarter of the 16th century
was thus a structural break in the seigneurial regime of Granada. “The pressure of the settlers,
old Christians, supported by the Philippine administration, led to an important softening of
the feudal subjection to which the Moorish vassals were subjected”; moreover, against the
manorial abuses “there was always a powerful weapon left to the vassal, his legal right to leave,
which would ruin seigneurial rents” (Muñoz Buendía, 1992: 279, my translation).20

6

Mechanisms of persistence

6.1 Potential mechanisms
This section discusses and investigates the channels by which lordships have negatively
affected long-run development. There are several potential candidates. First, lordships can be
considered an extractive institution imposing exactions and exerting monopolistic rights, which
may distort economic incentives and the functioning of the local economy, with negative
implications for the population’s living conditions and long-run growth. This hypothesis is
plausible although the Spanish historiography casts some doubts on its relevance. During the
last century and a half of existence of the seigneurial regime, its extractive character became
softer. Although there was heterogeneity across Spain, the fact is that seigneurial rents were a
minor source of lords’ income (Domínguez Ortiz, 1955). Nonetheless, it can be argued that the
rights and prerogatives of lords could harm the development of the local economy, particularly
when considering the distortions arising from monopolistic rights. Privileges rendering low
income could be highly inefficient for society, producing a large reduction in welfare. In
addition, the fact that the extractive character of the seigneurial regime in older times was
higher could have long-term implications if it caused an early damage to the local economy,
which can persist through a variety of factors (for instance, creating a bad reputation for a
place, migration of skilled workers, etc.).
Second, lordships may have generated economic inequality, which is (increasingly)
considered detrimental for economic growth (Galor et al., 2009; Oto-Peralías and RomeroÁvila, 2016). Although being the holder of jurisdictional rights did not imply landownership, it
was common that lords were important landowners in their own lordships, particularly those of
20

The resettlement of the end of the 16th century also introduced in rural communities the Castilian
council, an important local government institution with a democratic character. “It is a model of council
that clashes head-on against the old councils of towns and cities, dominated by an urban oligarchy […]
The creation of the council institution in all the repopulated places was rejected by cities and lords,
because they saw in it a possible reduction in their jurisdictional powers” (Muñoz Buendía, 1992: 288-289,
my translation).

18

remote origins. The control of the local justice and the influence on the town council could also
favor the accumulation of resources in the lords’ hands. In this regard, it was not uncommon
the usurpation of communal lands and acquisition of properties by fraudulent means. In
addition, lords had incentives to expand their properties within their lordships, since their
property rights would be better protected by the control of the local justice. It is worth noting,
though, that the urban oligarchy increasingly became a decisive player at the local level and
an important buyer of large estates (Soria Mesa, 1997).
Third, lordships, as a form of privatization of the local government, could have undermined
state capacity in the municipality. In towns under noble jurisdiction the presence of the central
government structure was arguably lower, and, compared to realengo towns, the effective
control of the royal administration was also lower. Lords tried to avoid the application of
central measures that were directly detrimental to them, or indirectly by affecting their vassals’
fiscal capacity. For instance, lords were particularly against the collection of taxes in their
lordships that did not provide any benefit to them. Relatedly, one “fiscal benefit” highly
appreciated by vassals were not having to host royal troops in their homes. The law
established that all towns were obliged to host troops but lords used their influence and
connections with senior army officers to avoid it (Pérez Boyero, 1997). This protection by the
lord undermined the capacity of the state to effectively impose its policies and regulations and
was detrimental for neighboring towns. One of the representatives in the Cortes of 1625 argued
that he was against the sale of jurisdictions “not because of the damage to them [the vassals]
but to the others”, since “it is known that conditions are softer in towns with noble jurisdiction
than in royal places, where none stops the abuses of troops and none tries to reduce taxes as it
happens in noble towns, where nobles use their influence to reduce the burden of villagers”
(Domínguez Ortiz, 1964: 183, my translation). It is thus plausible that the privatization of the
local government represented by lordship negatively affected state capacity, generating
institutional traits that persisted over time. These traits could have undermined the capacity
of the state to implement policies and its willingness to provide public goods in the
municipality as well as the ability of the municipality to attract resources from the central
government.
Finally, it is also possible, although slightly less plausible, that lordships affected
development through a crowding-out effect of the Church. One reason may be competition for
power and authority within the municipality. In municipalities under noble jurisdiction, the
authority and influence of Catholic institutions to govern the local community could be lower.
If religious institutions played a positive role in economic development, as found by some
authors (Valencia Caicedo, 2015), a lower presence (or power) in a municipality could be
detrimental for its long-run development. Another more prosaic reason has to do with money.
Lay lords usually enjoyed some participation in the Church tithes (they owned approximately
one fifth of them), which aimed to compensate lords for the duty of building and maintaining
churches. Lords, however, were generally negligent observing this duty, with obvious negative
implications for the provision of religious services and other religious activities (Domínguez
Ortiz, 1955).

19

6.2 Empirical analysis
What can be learned from the data about the relative importance of each channel? Regarding
the extractive character of lordships, it is very difficult to measure, but I can take some
indirect approaches to test it. Arguably, if the long-run negative effect of lordships is due to its
extractive character, then the negative effect on the living conditions and local economy should
be visible at the end of the Ancien Regime. With respect to the second channel (inequality), it
can be measured through the percentage of daily workers over the active agricultural
population in 1787 and through a more recent measure of land concentration. The state
capacity channel can be accounted for through the percentage of state-related job occupations
and a dummy variable capturing the presence of royal officials. I also use a dummy variable
capturing whether there was a post office in the municipality in 1878 as an additional measure
of state capacity. Finally, the presence of Catholic institutions can be measured through the
percentage of secular and regular clergy over the total population. This analysis focuses on the
Granadian sample for which I have a more exogenous variable of lordships.
Columns 1 to 4 in Table 9 use as dependent variables measures related to the level of
economic development of the municipality at the end of the 18th century, namely, (log) total
population, (log) population density, percentage of labor force in agriculture, and percentage of
labor force in occupations with low qualification. The coefficient on lordship is highly
insignificant, suggesting that living conditions in lordships were not significantly worse than in
realengo towns.21 Columns 5 and 6 use indicators of land inequality corresponding to the 18th
and the 20th centuries. It seems that lordship is not associated with land inequality, indicating
that inequality is not the channel that explains the current lower outcomes of former lordship
towns. Column 7 and 8 employ two variables related to the presence of state-level employees
in the municipality. Arguably, the state’s infrastructural capacity is captured by these
indicators, which are similar to others used in the literature (Acemoglu et al., 2015).
Interestingly, the coefficient on lordship is negative and statistically significant, reducing the
percentage of state-related job occupations in 0.24 standard deviations, and reducing the
probability of having at least one royal official in 12 percentage points (which is a large effect
given an average value of 0.55). Column 9 uses a post office dummy in 1878 as an alternative
measure of historical state capacity. The coefficient is negative and highly statistically
significant. Finally, the last two columns include indicators measuring the presence of secular
and regular clergy. The coefficient on lordship is never negative and significant, indicating that
its long-term negative effect is not mediated by a negative impact on religious institutions.

6.3 Lordships and state capacity
The evidence from Table 9 indicates that state capacity appears to be a relevant channel to
21 The lack of a statistically significant relationship between lordship and population in 1787 rules out
the concern about the possibility that lordships were initially minor towns and its negative relationship
with current outcomes would simply reflect their lower size relative to (supposedly bigger) royal towns.
Hence, these insignificant coefficients strongly suggest that the negative effect of lordship is not driven
by initial differences in population size with respect to royal towns.

20

explain the negative effect of lordship on current outcomes. Its plausibility as a relevant
channel would be more convincing if there also exists a significant relationship between the
presence of state officials in the 18th century and current economic outcomes. Table A8 in
Supplementary Material III shows that this is the case: both the percentage of state-related job
occupations and the royal employee dummy are positive and significantly correlated with
income, light emission at night and the other current outcome variables. Therefore, historical
state capacity seems to be a relevant predictor of local economic development, which is in line
with the extant literature (Acemoglu et al., 2015, 2016; Dell et al., 2017). It is worth stressing
that I am considering the capacity of the central state in the municipality, while other works
focus more on local state capacity (Acemoglu et al., 2015; Dell et al., 2017)
A further important question to ask is why and how historical state capacity matters. My
hypothesis is that lordship, by undermining the presence of the state as well as the application
of government policies in the municipality, has historically weakened: i) the capacity of the
state to implement policies in the municipality, ii) the willingness of the state to build public
infrastructure and provide other public goods, and iii) the ability of the municipality to attract
resources from the central government.22
The lack of a negative impact of lordship on 18th-century outcomes suggests that the
intervening role of state capacity has taken place afterwards, which is consistent with my
hypothesis. The weak link of lordships with the royal administration in the Ancien Regime
could have advantages then when the central government was seen as an extractor of resources,
but since the 19th and particularly the 20th century, the central government has increasingly
played an active role promoting economic development through investments in infrastructure
and human capital. In addition, state capacity to build infrastructure and create a
homogeneous institutional framework becomes particularly important when economies transit
to the industrial and service sectors, that is, with the arrival of new productive systems and
technologies. The weak historical link of lordships with the central state, reflected by a lower
presence of royal employees, could have persisted over time with negative implications for the
development of public infrastructures and other public goods.
The previous result about the lower probability of a post office in old lordships (column 9,
Table 9) illustrates well the mechanism of persistence. The post service is an early public
service that reflects well the presence of the state’s infrastructural capacity and had important
effects on economic activity (Acemoglu et al. 2016). The post service (Correos) was a royal
service since the beginning of the 18th century. The evidence indicates that the Crown
preferred royal towns to establish post offices. Thus, early in the 19th century, there were two
main and ten secondary post office administrations in the former Kingdom of Granada and,
among all of them, only one secondary administration was located in a lordship (data from de
Cabanes, 1830). In the mid-19th century, right after the abolition of the seigneurial regime in
22

In addition, another plausible hypothesis is that lordship, by undermining historical state capacity,
could have favored the creation of a culture of lack of trust, confidence and cooperation with state-level
institutions. This could have affected, in turn, the application of national policies and the provision of
public goods. However, lack of survey data at the municipality level makes it very difficult to test this
hypothesis. Using data on voter turnout I find no evidence of a negative effect of lordships on
participation in local, regional or general elections.

21

Spain, there were 67 post offices (including smaller offices, carterías) in the region. The
percentage of former royal towns with post offices was almost twice as large as that of former
lordships (21.6 vs 12.26%). In 1878 the number of post offices increased to 82 but the
difference between former royal and lordship towns persisted (26.4 vs 15.09%). The
unconditional difference of 11.31 (i.e., 26.4-15.09) is actually smaller than the difference when
controlling for the baseline set of geographic and locational controls (13.5). This indicates that
half a century after the dismantlement of the old regime, there was a clear persistence in the
presence of the central state in municipalities.23
Finally, Table 10 provides further evidence consistent with my hypothesis by analyzing the
relationship of lordship with the provision of public goods today and the presence of the
regional government in the municipality. Old lordships are associated with a lower provision of
public goods (kindergartens, roads in good conditions and broadband infrastructure) and with
less presence of Andalusian government’s employees. Table A9 shows that there is also a
strong relationship, in this case positive, between the indicators of state capacity in 1787 and
the proxies for modern-day state capacity.
To sum up, the evidence provided in this section points to state capacity as an important
channel through which lordship has negatively affected long-run development. Other factors
such as the extractive character of lordships, economic inequality and the Church do not
appear to be relevant channels, although measurement errors and lack of data availability
prevent any attempt to completely rule out any of these (or other) potential mechanisms.

7

Conclusions

This paper investigates the long-term consequences of delegation of governmental authority
through the study of a pivotal local political institution in historical Europe: the lordship. I
collect data on seigneurial rights for ancien-regime Spain and document a negative relationship
between 18th-century seigneurial jurisdictions and current economic development at the
municipality level for the whole country. To shed light on the causal effect, I study the
distribution of lordships in the former Kingdom of Granada after its conquest by the Catholic
Monarchs, which can be taken as conditionally random. The results confirm the negative effect
of lordship found for the whole country: towns that shortly after the conquest were granted to
nobles are relatively poorer today. The negative effect of lordship is robust both in a standard
regression framework with region fixed effects and when comparing adjacent municipalities.
To explore how the effect has taken place, I analyze factors that may have played an
intermediating role, with the results pointing to lower state capacity as a main factor
explaining the long-term negative effect of lordship on development. This finding is consistent
with an interpretation of seigneurial jurisdictions as a privatization of the local government,
which has historically weakened the link with the central administration and hindered the
application of central government policies and the ability of municipalities to attract
23 Relatedly, the central state presence in 1787 is a very strong predictor of the existence of post
offices a century later. Having royal employees in 1787 increases the probability of having a post office
by 26 percentage points (or 21 percentage points more when including the set of control variables).
Results available upon request.

22

government investments. The analysis also shows that lordship had not negatively affected
economic development by the end of the Ancien Regime but there was already evidence of
lower state’s infrastructural capacity at that time. This suggests an evolving role of state
capacity. Before industrialization, when the main economic sector is agriculture, the central
government was seen as an extractor of resources and the public goods it provided -such as
national defense- only had an indirect effect on the local economy. In such a context, weak
state capacity in a municipality was not necessarily negative for local economic development.
On the contrary, it could even have some positive effects by lowering the state’s tax burden
and protecting the population from repressive institutions such as the Inquisition and from
army conscription. However, with the expansion of the secondary and tertiary sectors, central
governments started to play a more active role promoting economic development through
investments in infrastructure, education and the provision of other public goods and services
highly complementary to the new economic activities. This made state capacity a valuable
asset for economic development in sharp contrast to the previous situation.
This paper thus contributes to the vibrant literature on the effect of local political
institutions on economic development and the role played by state capacity (Iyer, 2010;
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013; Acemoglu et al., 2015, 2016; Dell et al., 2017). This is
to my knowledge the first attempt to empirically study the economic consequences of lordships,
an institution not only important for medieval and modern Europe but also for other parts of
the world and historical periods. An analysis of lordships, as an instance of privatization of
local governmental functions, can inform research on other recurrent phenomena in which the
central state delegates functions and powers to private agents. In addition, this paper sheds
new light on channels of persistence. The presence of the state’s infrastructural power is an
institutional feature that persists over time. It is a mechanism independent of the cultural one,
which has been highlighted in the recent literature (Guiso et al., 2016; Dell et al., 2017).
Finally, the article also provides evidence suggesting an evolving role of state capacity over
time, which becomes more decisive for development after the industrial revolution.

23

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Alexander Wolitzky. 2011. “The Economics of Labor Coercion.”
Econometrica 79.2 (2011): 555-600.
Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed, and James A. Robinson. 2014. “Chiefs: Economic development and
elite control of civil society in Sierra Leone.” Journal of Political Economy 122.2: 319-368.
Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo García-Jimeno, and James A. Robinson. 2015. “State Capacity and
Economic Development: A Network Approach.” American Economic Review, 105(8): 2364-2409.
Acemoglu, Daron, Jacob Moscona, and James A. Robinson. 2016. “State capacity and American
technology: evidence from the nineteenth century.” American Economic Review 106.5: 61-67.
Angelucci, Charles, Simone Meraglia, and Nico Voigtländer. 2017. “The Medieval Roots of Inclusive
Institutions: From the Norman Conquest of England to the Great Reform Act.” National
Bureau of Economic Research, No. w23606.
Ashraf, Quamrul H., Francesco Cinnirella, Oded Galor, Boris Gershman, and Erik Hornung. 2017.
“Capital-skill complementarity and the emergence of labor emancipation.” Working paper.
Birriel Salcedo, Margarita and Enrique Soria Mesa. 1993. “Notas sobre los señoríos del reino de
Granada: siglos XV-XVIII”, In (eds. Eliseo Serrano and Esteban Sarasa) Señorío y Feudalismo
en la Península Ibérica (siglos XII-XIX), Zaragoza: Institución Fernando el Católico, p. 129-173.
Bruhn, Miriam, and Francisco A. Gallego. 2012. “Good, bad, and ugly colonial activities: do they
matter for economic development?” Review of Economics and Statistics 94.2: 433-461.
Cabrera Muñoz, Emilio. 2004. “Conflictos en el mundo rural: señores y vasallos”. Conflictos sociales,
políticos e intelectuales en la España de los siglos XIV y XV : XIV Semana de Estudios
Medievales , p. 49-80. Logroño: Instituto de Estudios Riojanos.
Chaney, Eric, and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. “Economic dynamics in the Malthusian era: evidence
from the 1609 Spanish expulsion of the Moriscos.” The Economic Journal 126 (594): 1404-1440.
Conley, Timothy. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of
Econometrics 92: 1–45.
de Cabanes, Francisco Xavier. 1830. Guía General de Correos, Postas y Caminos del Reino de
España. Madrid: Imprenta de D. Miguel de Burgos.
Dell, Melissa. 2010. “The persistent effects of Peru's mining mita.” Econometrica 78.6: 1863-1903.
Dell, Melissa, Nathaniel Lane, and Pablo Querubin. 2017. “The historical state, local collective
action, and economic development in Vietnam.” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Dewald, Jonathan. 1996. The European Nobility, 1400-1800. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Domínguez Ortiz, Antonio. 1955. La Sociedad Española del Siglo XVIII. Madrid: CISC.
Domínguez Ortiz, Antonio. 1964. “Ventas y exenciones de lugares durante el reinado de Felipe IV.”
Anuario de historia del derecho español 34: 163-208.
Fourquin, Guy. 1976. Lordship and Feudalism in the Middle Ages. London: Allen and Unwin.

24

Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath. 2009. “Inequality in landownership, the emergence
of human-capital promoting institutions, and the great divergence.” The Review of Economic
Studies 76.1: 143-179.
Garzón Pareja, Manuel. 1977. “Señoríos del reino de Granada.” Boletín de la Real Academia de la
Historia, T. CLXXIV: 571-636.
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Ilia Rainer. 2007. “The modern impact of precolonial centralization in Africa.”
Journal of Economic Growth 12.3, 185-234.
González Alonso, Benjamín. 1983, “Notas sobre las relaciones del estado en la administración
señorial en la Castilla moderna”, Anuario de Historia del Derecho Español 53: 366-395.
Guardado, Jenny. 2017. “Office-Selling. Corruption and Long-Term Development in Peru.” Working
Paper.
Guilarte, Alfonso M. 1987. El Régimen Señorial en el Siglo XVI. Valladolid: Universidad de
Valladolid.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2016. “Long-term persistence.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 14.6: 1401-1436.
Instituto Geográfico Nacional. 2013. Archivos de Polígonos de Municipios de Líneas Límite del Área
del Registro Central de Cartografía. http://www.ign.es
Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE). 1987-1991. Censo de 1787 “Floridablanca”. Vols I to VI.
Madrid: Instituto Nacional de Estadística.
Iyer, Lakshmi. 2010. “Direct versus indirect colonial rule in India: Long-term consequences.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 92.4: 693-713.
Klein, Alexander and Ogilvie, Sheilagh. 2017. “Was Domar Right? Serfdom and Factor
Endowments in Bohemia”. London, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Lange, Matthew. 2009. Lineages of Despotism and Development: British Colonialism and State
Power. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ladero Quesada, Miguel A. 1979. Granada : historia de un paıs islámico, (1232-1571). Madrid:
Gredos.
Ladero Quesada, Miguel A. 1968. “La Repoblación del Reino de Granada anterior al año 1500.”
Hispania, 28: 110.
Laredo Quesada, Miguel A. 1989. Los Reyes Católicos: La Corona y la Unidad de España. Valencia:
Asociación Francisco López de Gomara, DL.
López de Coca, José Enrique. 1993. “Los señoríos del reino de Granada (1490-1568). Introducción a
su estudio.” In (eds. Eliseo Serrano and Esteban Sarasa) Señorío y Feudalismo en la Península
Ibérica (siglos XII-XIX). Zaragoza: Institución Fernando el Católico, p. 129-173.
Markevich, Andrei, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2018. “The Economic Effects of the Abolition of
Serfdom: Evidence from the Russian Empire.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Michalopoulos, Stelios. 2012. “The origins of ethnolinguistic diversity.” The American Economic
Review 102 (4): 1508-1539.

25

Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. 2013. “Pre-colonial ethnic institutions and
contemporary African development.” Econometrica 81.1: 113-152.
Moxó, Salvador de. 1964. “Los señoríos. En torno a una problemática para el estudio del régimen
señorial.” Hispania 24.94: 185.
Muñoz Buendía, Antonio. 1992. “La Repoblación del Reino de Granada a Finales del Quinientos:
Las Instrucciones Particulares de 1595. I. Estudio” Chronica Nova, 20: 253-297.
Nader, Helen. 1990. Liberty in Absolutist Spain: The Habsburg Sale of Towns, 1516-1700.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
North, Douglass С. 1991. “Institutions” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 5.1: 97-112.
Ogilvie, Sheilagh, and André W. Carus. 2014. “Institutions and economic growth in historical
perspective.” Handbook of economic growth. Vol. 2. Elsevier. 403-513.
Oto-Peralías, Daniel, and Romero-Ávila, Diego. 2014. “The distribution of legal traditions around
the world: a contribution to the legal-origins theory.” The Journal of Law and Economics, 57(3),
561-628.
Oto-Peralías, Daniel, and Diego Romero-Ávila. 2016. “The Economic Consequences of the Spanish
Reconquest: The Long-term Effects of Medieval Conquest and Colonization.” Journal of
Economic Growth 21: 409–464.
Oto-Peralías, Daniel, and Diego Romero-Ávila. 2017. “Historical Frontiers and the Rise of
Inequality: The Case of the Frontier of Granada,” Journal of the European Economic
Association 15 (1): 54-98.
Pérez Boyero, Enrique. 1997. Moriscos y cristianos en los señoríos del Reino de Granada (14901568). Granada: Universidad de Granada.
Pérez Moreda, Vicente. 2010. “La estadística demográfica en el gobierno de la España ilustrada:
recuerdo y elogio del Censo de Floridablanca.” Indice: Revista de estadística y sociedad, 43: 8-17.
Peinado, Rafael G. 2011. “El reino de Granada tras la conquista castellana.” XXXVIII Semana de
Estudios Medievales. Separata, p. 27-94.
Ravina, Mark. 1999. Land and Lordship in Early Modern Japan. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Ruiz, Teofilo. 1998. “The Peasantries of Iberia.” In (Scott, Tom, ed.) The peasantries of Europe:
from the fourteenth to the eighteenth centuries. Longman Publishing Group, p. 49-74.
Segura Graiño, Cristina. 1982. “Realengo y Señorío en la tierra de Almería en el siglo XV.” En la
España Medieval, 3: 595-595.
Shannon, William D. 2012. “The Survival of True Intercommoning in Lancashire in the EarlyModern Period,” Agricultural History 86(4): 169-191.
Sharma, Ram Sharan. 2003. Early Medieval Indian Society: A Study in Feudalisation. Hyderabad :
Orient Blackswan.
Soria Mesa, Enrique. 1997. Señores y oligarcas: los señoríos del Reino de Granada en la Edad
Moderna. Granada: Universidad de Granada.

26

Valencia Caicedo, Felipe. 2015. “The mission: Human capital transmission, economic persistence
and culture in South America.” Working Paper.
Valdeón Baruque, Julio. 1997. “Señoríos y nobleza en la Baja Edad Media (El ejemplo de la Corona
de Castilla)” Revista d'historia medieval, 8: 15-24.
Vassberg, David E. 1984. Land and Society in Golden Age Castile. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

27

Figures and tables

28

Kernel density estimate

0

0

.005

.01

Density

Density
.01

.02

.015

.03

.02

Kernel density estimate

0

50
100
Distance to the capital city
Old lordships

150

20

Rest

40
60
Distance to the capital city
Old lordships

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 7.8609

80
Rest

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 4.8789

B. Subsample with a similar distribution:
between 22 and 74 km from the capital city

A. Full sample

Figure 2. Subsample of municipalities with a similar distribution in
distance to the capital city

29

Table 1. Distribution of settlements and municipalities by jurisdictional status in 1787
Population
entities in 1787

Current
municipalities

Population in
1787

Population in
2001

Surface area

Noble

43%

44%

34%

22%

39%

Royal

36%

37%

46%

63%

39%

Church

13%

8%

10%

7%

7%

Military orders

3%

6%

7%

4%

11%

Lordship (mixed)

2%

2%

2%

2%

2%

Royal and lordship (mixed)

1%

1%

1%

1%

0%

Missing data

2%

3%

1%

2%

2%

20,197

8,115

10,413,198

40,703,749

504,465

Total

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1.

Table 2. Balancedness analysis of lordships
Altitude

Ruggedness

Soil quality

Temperature

Precipitation

Aridity

(1)
-0.563
(0.429)

(2)
-0.057
(0.075)

(3)
-0.022
(0.102)

(4)
0.238
(0.214)

(5)
-0.027
(0.109)

(6)
-105.581
(169.05)

Region fixedeffects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.34
6,566

0.19
6,566

0.19
6,569

0.56
6,567

0.66
6,567

0.64
6,507

Distance to the
coast

Distance to a
major river

Distance to
Madrid

Distance to the
capital city

Pre-medieval
settlements

Distance to
Roman roads

(7)
1.283
(5.314)

(8)
-4.416
(3.658)

(9)
5.516
(5.961)

(10)
5.692
(2.874)

(11)
0.20
(0.714)

(12)
-1.082
(1.515)

Yes
0.71
6,570

Yes
0.93
6,570

Yes
0.92
6,570

Yes
0.14
6,570

Yes
0.36
6,570

Yes
0.97
6,570

Lordship

Lordship
Region fixedeffects
R-squared
Observations

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. Regressions include a constant term which is omitted for space
considerations. Standard errors clustered at the region level are in parentheses.

30

Table 3. Lordships and modern-day economic development
Income

Light density

Vehicles per
household

Education

Socioeconomic
condition

Long-term population
growth (1900-2001)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Lordship

-0.041
(0.008)

-0.128
(0.032)

-0.031
(0.01)

-0.931
(0.529)

0.085
(0.454)

-0.158
(0.046)

Altitude

-0.006
(0.01)
0.011
(0.006)
0.001
(0.019)
0.007
(0.008)
0.067
(0.014)
0.000
(0.00)
0.21
(0.027)
-0.002
(0)

-0.024
(0.065)
0.218
(0.11)
0.471
(0.141)
0.079
(0.074)
0.023
(0.205)
0.005
(0.001)
0.598
(0.209)
-0.016
(0.003)

-0.009
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.012
(0.017)
0.02
(0.012)
-0.052
(0.035)
0.001
(0.00)
-0.158
(0.036)
-0.003
(0.001)

0.245
(0.445)
0.497
(0.389)
1.489
(0.97)
1.007
(0.49)
4.081
(1.015)
0.042
(0.009)
14.232
(1.762)
-0.142
(0.028)

0.707
(0.834)
0.485
(0.626)
0.504
(1.329)
0.642
(0.581)
0.957
(1.036)
-0.001
(0.022)
3.838
(1.069)
-0.096
(0.022)

-0.016
(0.032)
0.069
(0.055)
0.236
(0.046)
0.101
(0.038)
0.25
(0.117)
0.002
(0.001)
1.117
(0.269)
-0.009
(0.001)

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Region fixed-effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.58
2,286

0.48
6,558

0.49
6,556

0.38
6,556

0.53
6,556

0.49
6,560

Ruggedness
Temperature
Precipitation
Coast dummy
Distance to the coast
Capital city dummy
Distance to capital city

R-squared
Observations

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. Regressions include a constant term which is omitted for space considerations.
Standard errors clustered at the region level are in parentheses.

31

Table 4. Adjacent municipalities analysis
Income

Difference between lordship
and royal jurisdiction
Differences in control
variables included
R-squared
Observations

Light density

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.037
(0.009)

-0.033
(0.006)

-0.148
(0.037)

-0.122
(0.03)

0.000
(0.011)

0.001
(0.01)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.00
703

0.09
703

0.00
2,385

0.09
2,385

0.00
2,388

0.02
2,387

Education

Difference between lordship
and royal jurisdiction
Differences in control
variables included
R-squared
Observations

Vehicles per household

Socioeconomic condition

Long-term population
growth (1900-2001)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

-1.079
(0.389)

-0.762
(0.406)

-0.392
(0.367)

-0.270
(0.384)

-0.120
(0.031)

-0.101
(0.034)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.00
2,388

0.02
2,387

0.00
2,388

0.01
2,387

0.00
2,388

0.09
2,387

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. The table reports the coefficient on the constant
term from regressions in which the dependent variables measure the difference between each lordship
municipality and a comparison group of neighboring royal towns. Standard errors clustered at the region
level are in parentheses.

32

Table 5. Balancedness analysis of Granadian lordships
Altitude

Ruggedness

Soil quality

Temperature

Precipitation

Aridity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.897
(0.683)

0.234
(0.199)

-0.248
(0.151)

-0.577
(0.331)

0.018
(0.338)

115.364
(320.053)

R-squared

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

Observations

356

356

356

356

356

356

Distance to the
coast

Distance to a
major river

Distance to
Madrid

Distance to the
capital city

Distance to
Roman roads

Pre-medieval
settlements

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

6.095
(5.261)

-11.464
(4.835)

-2.549
(10.583)

17.303
(6.075)

-3.706
(4.289)

0.068
(0.887)

0.01

0.04

0.00

0.13

0.02

0.00

Old lordship

Old lordship
R-squared

Observations
356
356
356
356
356
356
Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. Regressions include a constant term which is omitted for space
considerations. Standard errors corrected for spatial dependence are in parentheses.

Table 6. Lordships and modern-day economic development: Former Kingdom of Granada

Income

Light density

Vehicles per
household

Education

Socioeconomic
condition

Long-term population
growth (1900-2001)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.078
(0.027)

-0.655
(0.142)

-0.085
(0.027)

-4.148
(1.969)

-3.383
(1.163)

-0.518
(0.105)

Geographic and climatic
controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.40

0.57

0.41

0.29

0.41

0.45

Observations

217

356

356

356

356

356

Old lordship

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. The geographic and climatic controls include altitude, ruggedness, temperature,
precipitation, coast dummy, distance to the coast, capital city dummy, and distance to the capital city. Regressions include a constant
term which is omitted for space considerations. Standard errors corrected for spatial dependence are in parentheses.

33

Table 7. Lordships and modern-day economic development: Former Kingdom of Granada: Robustness
checks
Income

Light density

Vehicles per
household

Education

Socioeconomic
condition

Long-term population
growth (1900-2001)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A) Cubic polynomial in distance to the capital city
Old lordship

-0.068
(0.028)

-0.499
(0.101)

-0.054
(0.019)

-2.381
(1.662)

-2.226
(1.043)

-0.408
(0.082)

Geographic and climatic
controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.48
217

0.63
356

0.50
356

0.37
356

0.45
356

0.49
356

Panel B) Subsample with a similar distribution in distance to the capital city
Old lordship

-0.056
(0.024)

-0.582
(0.118)

-0.051
(0.021)

-2.875
(1.712)

-2.928
(1.139)

-0.429
(0.079)

Geographic and climatic
controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.50
134

0.52
251

0.44
251

0.28
251

0.52
251

0.44
251

Panel C) Very granular 1-km distance fixed effects
Old lordship

-0.064
(0.029)

-0.509
(0.09)

-0.065
(0.022)

-2.230
(1.556)

-2.978
(0.638)

-0.345
(0.109)

Geographic and climatic
controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.70
217

0.72
356

0.65
356

0.54
356

0.64
356

0.62
356

Notes: Variables descriptions are provided in Table A1. The geographic and climatic controls include altitude, ruggedness, temperature,
precipitation, coast dummy, distance to the coast, capital city dummy, and distance to the capital city. Regressions include a constant
term which is omitted for space considerations. Standard errors corrected for spatial dependence are in parentheses.

34

Table 8. Adjacent municipalities analysis: Granada
Income

Light density

Vehicles per household

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Difference between old
lorcships and the rest

-0.028
(0.021)

-0.052
(0.021)

-0.512
(0.166)

-0.463
(0.123)

-0.039
(0.02)

-0.043
(0.015)

Differences in control
variables included

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.00
37

0.47
37

0.00
98

0.38
98

0.00
98

0.29
98

R-squared
Observations

Education

Socioeconomic condition

Long-term population
growth (1900-2001)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Difference between old
lorcships and the rest

-0.427
(1.45)

-0.655
(1.041)

-2.25
(1.112)

-1.582
(1.043)

-0.234
(0.076)

-0.177
(0.056)

Differences in control
variables included

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.00
98

0.33
98

0.00
98

0.27
98

0.00
98

0.27
98

R-squared
Observations

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. The table reports the coefficient on the constant
term from regressions in which the dependent variables measure the difference between each lordship
municipality and a comparison group of neighboring royal towns. Standard errors corrected for spatial
dependence are in parentheses.

35

Table 9. Looking at the mechanisms
Labor
Labor
force in
force in
low
agricul- qualificature 1787 tion jobs
1787

Log
population 1787

Log
population
density
1787

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

-0.073
(0.091)

0.090
(0.105)

-0.898
(2.899)

0.692
(1.961)

-0.78
(2.707)

-1.643
(1.306)

-0.39
(0.163)

-0.116
(0.071)

-0.131
(0.044)

0.252
(0.156)

-0.077
(0.054)

Geographic and climatic
controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.34

0.37

0.10

0.09

0.15

0.19

0.23

0.143

0.14

0.14

0.13

Observations

349

349

348

348

345

350

348

348

356

348

349

Old lordship

Landless
Land
workers concentra1787
tion 1980

Staterelated
job
occupations

Secular Secular and
Royal
Post office clergly
regular
employees
in 1878 over labor clergy over
dummy
force
population

Notes: Variables' descriptions are provided in Table A1. Regressions include a constant term which is omitted for space considerations. Standard errors
corrected for spatial dependence are in parentheses.

Table 10. Lordship and current state capacity
Broadband
Street in bad Roads in bad
access
conditions
conditions (ADSL lines
(%)
(%)
over
population)

Kindergartens
(places over
total
population)

Children
under 3
attending
school (%)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-3.844
(1.64)

-9.031
(4.292)

3.362
(1.239)

Geographic and climatic
controls

Yes

Yes

Quadratic polynomial in
lattitude and longitude

Yes

R-squared
Observations

Old lordship

Broadband
dummy

Regional
government
employees

(5)

(6)

(7)

2.988
(1.27)

-22.562
(5.414)

-0.275
(0.072)

-0.248
(0.085)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.07

0.07

0.11

0.10

0.38

0.23

0.14

238

351

344

344

356

356

355

Notes: Variables descriptions are provided in Table A1. Regressions include a constant term which is omitted for space
considerations. Standard errors corrected for spatial dependence are in parentheses.

36

