Gender-oriented statistical discrimination: Aggregate fertility, economic sector, and
earnings among young Chinese workers

Jia Wang
Department of Sociology,
Center for Demography and Ecology
University of Wisconsin, Madison
and
Raymond Sin-Kwok Wong
Department of Sociology
University of California, Santa Barbara

Keywords: Aggregate fertility; Economic sector; Gender earnings inequality; Statistical
discrimination; Urban China

Direct all correspondence to Jia Wang (email: jia.wang@wisc.edu), Room 3317, 8128 William
H. Sewell Social Sciences Building, 1180 Observatory Drive, Madison, WI 53706-1393, or
Raymond Sin-Kwok Wong (email: wong@soc.ucsb.edu), Department of Sociology, Social
Sciences & Media Studies Building, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9430.
An earlier draft of the paper was presented at the 2015 Research Committee on Social
Stratification and Mobility (RC28) summer meeting in Philadelphia. We thank useful comments
and suggestions from session participants. The ideas expressed herein are those of the authors.

1

Gender-oriented statistical discrimination: Aggregate fertility, economic sector, and
earnings among young Chinese workers

Abstract
Previous studies usually attribute residual gender pay gap net of human capital, job characteristics,
and family responsibilities to discrimination against women, without directly exploring the
underlying discriminatory mechanisms that generate gender inequalities in the labor market. By
applying and extending a previously developed statistical discrimination model to post-socialist
urban China, we examine the association between period age-specific fertility rate (ASFR), as a
proxy for the likelihood of women taking maternity leave, and the earnings of young working
women and men, as well as its variation across economic sectors. Using data compiled from a
random sample of the 2005 one-percent mini-census of the People’s Republic of China, our
analyses reveal gender-asymmetric associations between ASFR and earnings among young
workers before their prime fertility age, where ASFR on average was negatively related to the
earnings among young women, but not among young men. Moreover, such negative association
was limited primarily to female workers in the private sector, negligible in state-owned and
collective enterprises, and even reversed to positive among those working in government agencies
and public institutions. Our findings suggest that employers in the private sector may use aggregate
fertility to “evaluate” potential training and replacement costs and the productivity of female
employees associated with maternity leave, thereby reinforcing and perpetuating stereotypes and
discrimination against women in the workplace.
Keywords: Aggregate fertility; Economic sector; Gender earnings inequality; Statistical
discrimination; Urban China

2

1. Introduction
Although women have achieved enormous improvements in their education, labor force
participation, and occupational status over time (DiPrete and Buchmann 2013; Goldin 2006; Van
Bavel et al. 2018), they still earn less on average than men with similar characteristics (Blau and
Kahn 2017; Charles 2011; England 2010). Such gender pay gap is quite persistent, having lessened
only very slightly, if at all, over time. The median monthly gender pay gap for full-time employees
is 14.3 percent across OECD countries in 2015, a figure that has barely changed since 2010 and is
only about 1 percent lower than a decade earlier (OECD 2017). 1 Previous studies generally
explain the persistent gender pay gap under three theoretical frameworks: human capital (Becker
1985; Mincer and Polachek 1974; Tam 1997), occupational segregation (Bielby 1991; England et
al. 1988), and labor market discrimination (Arrow 1971; Becker 1957; Phelps 1972; Reskin
2000).2 The last, in particular, argues that women earn less because they are being discriminated
against owing to either personal preferences/prejudices (taste-based discrimination) or unfavorable
gender stereotypes (information-based discrimination or statistical discrimination) held by their
employers and/or coworkers. Empirical support for such gender discrimination is generally
established through the residual approach, that is, by attributing unexplained gender differences
after statistical control to discrimination, without pinpointing or examining any specific
discriminatory mechanisms contributing to gender inequalities in the labor market. 3 Our
understanding about how women are discriminated against and how such discrimination leads to

1

The gender pay gap would be even larger when part-time employees are included, as more

women are working part-time with fewer working hours than their male counterparts.
2

This study only examines the process of within-job wage discrimination (Petersen and

Morgan 1995) and ignores allocative discrimination—the segregation process of men and
women into different occupations/jobs and valuative discrimination—the phenomenon that
occupations held primarily by women are paid lower wages than those held primarily by men.
3

This residual approach is related to the traditional definition of discrimination: labor

market discrimination exists when there are wage or occupational differences between men and
women that are not accounted for by productivity differences (Becker [1957] 1971). It reflects a
failure to identify some characteristics of workers that would affect only female workers but
have no effect whatsoever on their male counterparts.
3

women’s lower earnings in the labor market thus remains limited.
In an attempt to directly investigate a specific mechanism of discrimination, Yip and Wong
(2014) have quantified one kind of statistical discrimination that potentially contributes to the
female-male wage gap in the labor market. Utilizing period age-specific fertility rate (ASFR) as a
proxy of young working women’s likelihoods to become pregnant and take maternity leave, they
found that ASFR had a significant negative impact on female wages, but not on male wages, in the
labor market of Hong Kong, a pattern robust against different lagged measures of ASFR. Their
findings suggest that Hong Kong employers discriminate against women based on aggregate
information such as ASFR, not individual characteristics, to evaluate the productivity of young
working women as lower than comparable male workers. 4 Their model and results are also
consistent with the predictions of social cognitive theory and lend support to the hypothesis of a
stereotyping mechanism and evaluation biases as proximate causes of gender inequality in the
labor market (Reskin 2000). Despite these insights, their study does not explore the potential
variation in the negative impact of period ASFR across workplace and organizations. In fact, the
discriminating mechanism involving aggregate fertility and/or other factors is likely to be contextspecific depending on concrete organizational and institutional settings, and investigating such
variation has important implications for better understanding gender and labor market inequality
under differential structural environment.
To fill this gap, we apply Yip and Wong’s gender statistical discrimination model to postsocialist urban China, paying particular attention to the variation in the negative association
between period ASFR and young workers’ wage across economic sectors. With phenomenal
economic growth since the 1990s, post-reform China affords an interesting setting to study this
topic because of a surge in gender earnings gap, the formal retreat of some women from the labor
force into the domestic sphere, and the continuing salience of economic sector in determining
individuals’ life chances (Ji et al. 2017; Wu 2013, 2019; Wu and Zhou 2015). Previous studies
have found that marketization is a driving force in increasing gender earnings inequality in reformera urban China (He and Wu 2017, 2018; Li C. and Li S. 2008; Wu 2019; Zhang 2004; Zhang J.
et al. 2008). As suggested by both academic research and social media, discrimination against

4

In Hong Kong, pregnant female workers are paid during maternity leave whereas fathers

have no paid paternity leave until recently (Yip and Wong 2014).
4

women may play a more prominent role in increasing the gender gap since more and more women
have higher educational attainment, especially at the tertiary level (He and Wu 2017; Wu 2019).5
However, it is still debatable whether discrimination against women increases or decreases under
China’s market transition. While some argue that the role of discrimination in gender earnings
inequality would become more salient with increasing marketization (Zhang 2004), others claim
that the exact opposite would be observed (Liu et al 2000). Unfortunately, all of these studies took
the residual approach by attributing unexplained gender earnings gap to discrimination against
women, without exploring any specific discriminatory pathways and how such discriminating
practice may differ across economic sectors with differential organizational/institutional settings.
Against this backdrop, the current study attempts to answer the following two questions:
(1) whether and how period ASFR would be differentially associated with monthly earnings among
young men and women in urban China; and (2) whether the (negative) relationship between period
ASFR and young workers’ earnings would differ across economic sector. Our study sheds new
light on gender stratification and inequality research in post-reform urban China and also advances
understanding about how labor market discrimination is operating under differential organizational
and structural circumstances.
2. Discrimination and gender employment inequality: Theoretical issues
Employment discrimination exists when workers with essentially identical productivity experience
different outcomes in hiring, wages, career promotion, and other outcomes in the labor market. In
general, there are two types of discrimination: taste-based discrimination and statistical
(information-based) discrimination. The former occurs when certain workers, such as women and
racial minorities, receive lower wages and/or other unequal treatments in the labor market due to
the dislikes/prejudices of their employers, co-workers, and customers (Becker [1957] 1971). The
latter, on the other hand, is based on informational asymmetries (Aigner and Cain 1977; Arrow
1971, 1972; McCall 1972; Phelps 1972). In real labor markets, when information about the
productivity and ability of workers are limited or costly to ascertain, risk-avoiding employers

5

Also see “A Prosperous China Says ‘Men Preferred,’ and Women Lose.” The New York

Times, July 16th, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/16/world/asia/china-womendiscrimination.html?action=click&module=Top%20Stories&pgtype=Homepage.
5

usually make employment decisions based on certain group characteristics of workers—such as
race and gender—that are believed to correlate to the expected productivity of workers. Statistical
discrimination against a particular group reflects employers’ perception of reality rather than
individual tastes (Arrow 1971) and persists even when employers are not personally prejudiced.
Past empirical studies have demonstrated that statistical discrimination is prevalent and plays a
vital role in various labor market inequalities between men and women (Bielby and Baron 1986;
Blau and Kahn 2017), among different racial groups (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004), as well as
between immigrants and native-born residents (Rissing and Castilla 2014).
Some sociological studies attempt to explain discrimination against women from the intergroup conflict perspective as an outcome of conflict-based behaviors (e.g., Blumer 1958; Tilly
1998). Given unequal power structure at workplaces, they argue that the dominant group, including
employers and/or male coworkers, intentionally discriminates against, excludes, and exploits
women as a minority and subordinate group to maintain their own benefits and privileges. While
inter-group conflict may well explain some discrimination against women, it is by no means the
only or dominant factor. With the passage of anti-discrimination laws in many advanced industrial
societies that require “equal pay for equal work” and ban intentional differential treatments by sex,
discrimination due to inter-group conflicts is curbed and hence less likely to account for pervasive
gender discrimination at the workplace.
In this regard, social cognitive theory offers an alternative understanding. Focusing on
proximate causes of discrimination, it postulates that statistical discrimination occurs when
employers invoke group stereotypes based on status characteristics like sex and race (Reskin 2000,
2002). For lack of thorough information about individual workers, such stereotyping informs and
distorts employers’ perceptions, evaluations, and treatment of workers. Relative to men, women
are commonly viewed by employers to be less career-oriented, less committed to work, and less
productive because of childbirth, childcare, and family responsibilities. These gender stereotypes
could occur at any stage during a woman’s career that is subject to employers’ decisions: At the
initial hiring stage, gender stereotypes could lead to women’s lower chances of being called back
after submitting applications and getting an offer after job interviews; Upon being hired, women
are likely to receive lower starting wage, work in highly sex segregated positions (Bielby and
Baron 1986; Padavic and Reskin 2002), and have less chance and wait longer time in promotion
and wage raise at later stage. The stereotyping process is quite tenacious because of its cognitive

6

efficiency (Fiske 1998; Reskin 2002). It operates largely unconscious in most circumstances,
which better explains the prevalence and persistence of discriminatory practices at workplaces
(Reskin 2000).
According to social cognitive theory, employers’ evaluations, perceptions, and stereotypes
of female workers are more likely to be activated by their discernable characteristics, such as
marital status, pregnancy status, and the number and age of their children. The motherhood penalty
literature has well documented the negative impact of having children on a woman’s job
application, wages, and career promotion (Budig and England 2001; Budig and Hodges 2010;
Correll et al. 2007; Petersen et al. 2014). However, employers’ stereotypes and discrimination
against women may also be well activated and strengthened by social policy and relevant factors
in the broader social milieu. For instance, cross-country evidence has shown that extension of paid
maternity leave has paradoxical negative impact on employment, wages, and career training for
young female workers, including women who take maternity leave as well as those who do not
(Balfe 2014; Lai and Masters 2005; Puhani and Sonderhof 2008). In particular, Balfe (2014)
examines how a policy reform in the United Kingdom to increase paid maternity leave from 26
weeks to a maximum of 39 weeks in 2007 affects relative female-male labor market outcomes.
Results from her quasi-experimental design reveal that such an increase in maternity leave
generosity leads to a deterioration in female relative wages and in increase in relative female
redundancies. These universal negative impacts of paid maternity leave on labor market outcomes
of young women suggest that employer may discriminate women not only according to their
realized behaviors of taking maternity leave, but also based on their unrealized likelihood of taking
similar action. In terms of the latter, aggregate fertility may serve as a convenient and important
source of information for employers to assess female workers’ likelihood of taking maternity leave
and contribution to the firm, which may lead to discrimination at the workplace. Prior findings by
Yip and Wong (2014) about negative effect of aggregate fertility on young women’s wage has lend
credible empirical support for this possible mechanism.
Gender stereotyping and discrimination do not exist in a structural vacuum, but they are
rather to be embedded in specific organizational and institutional context (Baron 1984; Granovetter
1985). Recent research on motherhood penalty has demonstrated that the wage reduction
associated with number of children is smaller in occupational settings with greater autonomy,
lower teamwork requirements, and less competitive pressure, lending modest support to the

7

changing employer discrimination across workplace (Yu and Kuo 2017). Other studies examining
discrimination toward women have also reported that the unexplained gender pay gaps are
considerably larger in the private than in the public sector (Hoffnar and Greene 1996; Mandel and
Semyonov 2014).6 These findings point to the importance of structural characteristics such as
work conditions and employment sector in either amplifying or mitigating gender discrimination
and inequality in the labor market. In this vein, one would logically surmise that gender
discrimination associated with aggregate fertility is likely to vary under different structural
conditions: it may be less visible at workplace with better implemented equal opportunities and
antidiscrimination policy such as the public sector, while more salient in settings emphasizing
efficiency and profit-maximizing such as the private sector.
Guided by these theoretical perspectives, this study examines the direct (negative)
influences of aggregate fertility on young workers’ earnings as well as variation across different
economic sectors in post-socialist urban China. In the next section, we introduce the relevant
Chinese context and propose our research hypotheses.
3. The Chinese context
3.1 Marketization and widened gender earnings gap
Post-socialist urban China offers a particularly interesting case to explore the mechanism of
statistical discrimination in gender employment inequality. The Chinese constitution formally
guarantees women equal rights with men in all spheres of life and assures them of equal pay for
equal work (Ji et al. 2017; Maurer-Fazio and Hughes 2002). During the pre-reform period and
under state collectivism, women fared relatively well under the government’s promotion of social
egalitarianism and gender equality. Women were compelled to participate in the workforce under
the slogan of “women holding up half the sky” and paid almost equally to male workers regardless
of efforts and performance. For example, Kidd and Meng (2001) reported that the male-female
difference in monthly wage was only 14% during the early 1980s, a relatively small gap compared
to other advanced industrial societies during the same period.
The introduction of market reform in the 1980s saw the emergence of a vibrant private

6

Still other studies, however, find little variation in discrimination across sector (Byron

2010; Leasher and Miller 2012).
8

sector. When recruiting and rewarding employees, profit-driven private firms are likely to
prioritize economic efficiency over social equality, even as government agencies and state
enterprises hang onto the latter. This potentially gave rise to discrimination. Although Chinese
official statistics rarely make detailed comparisons of men’s and women’s wages (Maurer-Fazio et
al. 1999; Rawski 2003), statistics compiled from survey data generally suggest that the gender
earnings gap in urban China has widened considerably over the past two decades along with rapid
marketization (He and Wu 2017, 2018; Li C. and Li S. 2008; Maurer-Fazio et al. 1999; Wang and
Cai 2008; Zhang 2004; Zhang J. et al. 2008).7 Figure 1 shows the unadjusted female-male earnings
ratio for employees in urban labor markets and the degree of marketization (measured by
employment shares of the private sector) in urban China from 1988 to 2011. During the period, the
degree of marketization skyrocketed, with the private sector employment shares growing from
almost 0% in 1988 to 52.7% in 2011. At the same time, gender earnings equality declined, with
the gender wage ratio dropping from 86.3% in 1988 to 77.4% in 2011.8 While women in the
government/public institution continue to fare relatively well, their counterparts in the private
sector have lost out with lower wages (He and Wu 2017).
[Figure 1 Here]
3.2 Discrimination and variation across economic sector
Does the widened gender earnings gap in urban China signify increased discrimination against
women, particularly in the more marketized private sector? Empirical evidence so far remains
mixed due to the difficulty of measuring and quantifying elusive forms of discrimination. Through
decomposing the gender wage gaps of employees in private and public sectors in Shanghai and
Jinan, Liu et al. (2000) found that the ratio of unexplained gender wage gap to the total wage gap
was smaller in private firms than those in the state sector.9 They concluded that the relative share

7

Shu and Bian (2003) differ. Based on datasets from China Household Income Project in

1988 and 1995 and city-level data for 1995, the authors detected neither longitudinal change nor
city-level variation in the gender gap in earnings.
8

A similar decreasing trend of gender earnings equality has been reported by the Global

Gender Gap Report (World Economic Forum 2006-2014), in which estimates of the female-tomale ratio of earned income (PPP US$) are even lower than 70%.
9

However, the authors acknowledged that the absolute size of the unexplained gender wage
9

of discrimination in the gender wage differential declined substantially across ownership types
from the state to the private sector. In contrast, other studies reported that the majority of gender
earnings differentials could be attributable to sex discrimination, especially during recent years (Li
C. and Li S. 2008; Maurer-Fazio and Hughes 2002; Wang and Cai 2008; Wang et al. 2008; Zhang
2004; Zhao et al. 2019). For instance, using a more detailed measure of market liberalization
(enterprise-ownership type, enterprise age, and workers’ methods of finding employment),
Maurer-Fazio and Hughes (2002) found that both the absolute size of the wage gap and the
proportion of unexplained gap (after accounting for various observed characteristics) were largest
in the most liberalized joint-venture sector, but smallest in the least liberalized state sector.
In view of such discrepancy, it is arguably more illuminating to investigate the mechanisms
of discrimination in a more direct way than simply attributing unexplained wage gaps to
discrimination. To this end, our first research goal is to proxy period ASFR as the unrealized
likelihood of women taking maternity leave that could be utilized by employers to discriminate
against women, and explore whether ASFR would be differentially related to young men’s and
women’s earnings in urban China. Moreover, previous studies on China have well established that
economic sector remains a salient structural factor that profoundly shapes individuals’ life chances
including both economic and subjective well-being (He and Wu 2017; Wang and Xie 2015; Wu
2002, 2013; Wu and Song 2014; Xie and Wu 2008; Zhang and Wu 2017). Regarding the enlarged
gender pay gap across sectors, one possible culprit might be that employers in the private sector
impose more penalty associated with aggregate fertility on women’s earnings. Our second research
goal is therefore to examine whether and how the statistical discrimination based on period ASFR
would vary by sector, thus offering additional insight in understanding the sectoral differences in
gender earnings inequality in urban China.
3.3 China’s maternity leave policy and research expectations
Since its founding in 1949, the socialist Chinese government has passed a series of laws,
regulations, and policies to protect the rights of female workers at the workplace. In June 1988,
the Chinese government issued “Regulation Concerning the Labor Protection of Female Staff and
Workers,” stipulating that female workers’ basic salaries cannot be reduced and their labor

gap was larger in the private sector than in the state sector.
10

contracts cannot be cancelled during pregnancy, maternity leave, and the nursing period. The law
is applicable to female workers in all state agencies, mass organizations, enterprises, and other
work units. In April 2012, the Chinese government issued another regulation, “The Special Rules
On the Labor Protection of Female Employees,” to increase maternity leave from 90 days to 98
days and implement detailed regulations on maternity leave in situations of dystocia, multiple
births, and miscarriage. There has not been any legal regulation supporting paternity leave until
recently.10 With such promises, some scholars argue that employers, especially those in the private
sector, would have a stronger motivation to act on their perceptions that childbirth and family
responsibilities render female workers less productive, less committed to work, and that maternity
leave and its associated benefits make women too costly to employ (Zhang Y. et al. 2008).
Translated into the terms of our study, this means that period aggregate fertility rates,
representing the likelihood of women to take maternity leave, will probably play an important role
when employers reward female workers, but not male workers. Despite the enforcement of the
one-child policy from the 1970s to its formal end in 2016, resulting in a drastic drop in fertility in
urban areas, we believe that two demographic processes would reinforce the significance of period
ASFR on women’s earnings, namely, almost universal marriage for women and most births tend
to occur within the first few years of marriage (Raymo et al. 2015). We therefore expect an overall
negative association between period ASFR and earnings among young women of prime fertility
age, but not among young men, in post-reform urban China.
Furthermore, we postulate differential links between period ASFR and women’s earnings
across economic sectors. As young women at prime fertility age are likely to get married, become
pregnant, take maternity leave, give births, and bear family responsibilities, profit-driven private
sector employers are likely to evaluate the productivity of female employees to be lower, and thus
offer lower wages to them relative to male employees with comparable characteristics. By contrast,
the socialist ideology for gender equality, stronger state protection, and different budget and cost
constraints would render this gender-oriented statistical discrimination based on aggregate fertility
less effective in the state sector. We therefore expect the negative association between period ASFR

10

Local governments may set regional policies regarding paternity leave and its length, but

they tend to vary widely across regions. Moreover, very few, especially private, enterprises are
likely to adopt these policies.
11

and women’s earnings to be much stronger in the private sector, but relatively weak or even
negligible in the state sector.
4. Method
4.1 Data and sample
Our data is an extracted random sample (N = 344,826) from the one-percent intercensal population
sample survey of China in 2005 (also known as “mini-census”), conducted by the National Bureau
of Statistics of China. The mini-census adopts a multi-stage stratified clustering probability
sampling technique and collects social and demographic information on the national population,
covering approximately 17 million people in all 31 provinces, municipalities, and autonomous
regions. It includes rich and detailed information on respondents’ monthly income, work unit sector,
working hours, labor contract and fringe benefits, in addition to employment status, occupation (2digit code), hukou status, place of hukou registration, current place of residence, education, and
other demographic characteristics (Wu 2014).
We restrict the sample in the following ways. Since we study the labor market in urban
China, respondents living in cities and towns at the survey point were kept in the sample (N =
163,616). We then restrict the sample to those who worked non-zero hours last week (N = 107,485)
and were not enrolled in school (dropping 17, 565 respondents). Because our focus is earnings of
employees, we exclude people who reported to be employers, self-employed, and family workers,
and focus on employees working at enterprises (N = 49,064). According to Proposition 2 in Yip
and Wong’s model (2014) that the gender wage gap will rise with age until prime fertility age, we
follow their practice to model earnings among workers up to their prime fertility age. This will
also avoid contaminations from other discriminatory factors or processes that affect earnings after
prime fertility age. Based on compilations from the 2005 mini-census, the prime age with the
highest fertility rate was 26.11 Given that urban women rarely give births under age 20, we thus
restrict the sample to employees aged between 20 and 26 years old (N = 8,901). After excluding
cases with missing data on earnings and other covariates, the final size of our analytical sample is

11

In the data, 77% of women were from urban cities where the prime fertility age was 26,

while the prime fertility age was 25 in small towns. Our results remain the same even if we use
25 as the prime fertility age (see robustness check later).
12

8,619 with 4,449 women and 4,170 men.
4.2 Measures
The dependent variable is logged monthly earnings, by taking the logarithmic values of
respondents’ self-reported income in the last month (October 2005). Because we focus on
employees, their monthly income should closely match their actual earnings including wages,
salary, and bonuses from jobs (He and Wu 2017).
Our key independent variable is 1Fx, the period age-specific fertility rate (ASFR) by single
age, a measure directly compiled from the 2005 mini-census data. Its numerator is the number of
new births (1Bx) born to women living in cities and towns between ages x and x + 1 during
November 1, 2004 to October 31, 2005, and its denominator is the period person-years lived (PPYL)
by women living in cities and towns between ages x and x + 1 in the same period. The PPYL is
usually estimated using the mid-period population times the period length. In our study, the period
is pretty short with only one-year length, and we assume the number of women at a particular age
on October 31, 2005 is the same as the corresponding number at the middle of this one-year period.
The period ASFR could therefore be calculated using the following equation:
1Fx =1Bx /

PPYL,

(1)

Note that the period ASFR represents the age-specific fertility rates of a “synthetic cohort”
rather than a real cohort, based on the fertility information of women at different ages in the study
period (Wachter 2014). Although the period ASFR assumes today’s fertility rates continue
unchanged into the future, we believe it is a more pertinent measure than real cohort fertility rates
because complete cohort fertility data are often one or two generations ago and thus not very
relevant to describe today’s childbearing in rapidly changing China; period fertility information is
readily accessible from mass media and official publications and comprehensible for laymen in
taking social action. Using 2005 mini-census data, we obtain a continuous measure of period ASFR
in Chinese cities and towns ranging from 21.43‰ to 100.53‰ for women aged 20 to 26. This
measure may induce some potential endogeneity problem to the extent that childbirths of women
in our sample may be influenced by their income, benefits, and/or other job characteristics. For
robustness check, we also construct alternative measures of period ASFR in Chinese cities and
towns during 2002 to 2005 using external sources of fertility data at the national-level from the
China Population Statistics Yearbook (National Bureau of Statistics 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006).
These period ASFR measures are based on all live births regardless of parity. For comparison

13

purpose, Figure 2 depicts all period ASFR measures calculated for women during 15 to 40 years
old,12 with the y-axis representing new births per 1,000 women and the x-axis indicating age.
Although the period ASFR measure calculated from the 2005 mini-census data is slightly lower
than that on national-level based on the official statistics in the same year, these two measures are
highly correlated (r = 0.97). Regardless of data sources, the total fertility rate in 2005 is lower than
those in previous years, indicating China’s continuing transition into a low fertility regime.
[Figure 2 Here]
Consistent with prior studies (He and Wu 2017), economic sector is a three-category
variable distinguished by work unit ownership: government agency/public institution, state-owned
and collective enterprises, and the private sector (individual or private enterprises and others). We
expect state protection for women to decrease as the distance from the administrative/redistributive
center increases from government agency/public institution to the private sector.
We also control for other individual characteristics that are important in determining
workers’ wage: years of schooling, potential work experience, occupation, sex segregation by
occupation, work hours last week, work contract, marital status, number of children, hukou status,
and ethnicity. Respondents’ level of education is converted into years of schooling: illiterate = 0;
primary school = 6; junior high school = 9; senior high school = 12; specialized college = 15;
university = 16; and graduate school = 19. Potential work experience is calculated by subtracting
years of schooling and six years from actual age. In so doing, workers’ age, years of schooling,
and potential work experience are dependent on each other, and work experience is automatically
omitted when including all three variables in the same model. We therefore only include years of
schooling and potential work experience (and its squared term) that could better represent workers’
human capital in the analyses.13
Occupation is coded into five broad categories: 0 = managerial; 1 = professional; 2 =
clerical; 3 = sales/service; and 4 = manual. We use a simple measure of sex composition by
occupation, the percent of female workers in the total number of workers within the same

12

This captures fertility rates among the majority of reproductive age groups. Figures

presenting the period ASFR between age 15-49 are available upon request.
13

Regressions using age instead of work experience yield the same findings.
14

occupation (% Female) calculated from the urban sample in the 2005 mini-census.14 Work hours
last week is respondents’ self-reported total work hours during the past week before being
interviewed. Work contract, marital status, hukou status, and ethnicity are all dummy variables (1
for married, no work contract, rural hukou and non-han, and 0 otherwise). Number of children is
a continuous measure also calculated from the 2005 mini-census. Specifically, for female workers,
we use their self-reported number of children ever born to them; For married male workers, we
first match their spouses’ information based on household relationships in the household roster,
and then obtain the corresponding number of children.15 A value of 0 is assigned for unmarried
male workers. Finally, industry and province dummies are included to account for potential
industrial and regional heterogeneities in workers’ earnings.16

14

There are 73 occupations (2-digit code) in total in the 2005 mini-census. We are unable to

replicate significant interaction between occupational sex segregation and ASFR found in the
original analyses by Yip and Wong (2014). This may be due to a relatively low level of sex
segregation among young Chinese workers relative to their counterparts in Hong Kong. Since
our central concern is whether the effect of ASFR may vary across economic sectors, we decide
not to pursue further in our current investigation.
15

Question R2 asks individuals about their relationships with the household head, with

answers ranging from 0-9: 0 = head; 1 = spouse; 2 = children; 3 = parents; 4 = In-laws parents; 5
= grandparent; 6 = son/daughter-in-law; 7 = grandchild; 8 = siblings; and 9 = other. For a
married man who reports “household head” or “spouse”, we compute the number of children
based on information of his spouse if he is married. For a married man who reports “children” or
“son/daughter-in-law” in a household, we match this person with his spouse who answers “6”
with exact year and month of marriage, and then obtain their corresponding number of children.
For a married man with other responses, if we are able to locate another woman within the
household with identical year and month of marriage, then the number of children could be
ascertained from their spouses’ records. If the male respondent has more than one marriage or we
are unable to locate his spouse’s information, we treat the number of children as missing. After
matching, the number of children of male workers in our sample ranges from 0 to 3, with only
5.65% of cases have missing values.
16

The 2005 mini-census records 92 detailed industries (2-digit code), and we collapse them
15

4.3 Analytical strategy
We use ordinary least square (OLS) regression to model logged monthly earnings of women and
men as a function of period ASFR, economic sector, and other covariates. Specifically speaking,
we estimate two models separately for women and men: Model 1 is the baseline model that
investigates the main effect of period ASFR net of economic sector and all other covariates; Model
2 adds interactions between period ASFR and economic sector to investigate the sectoral variation
in the association between period ASFR and monthly earnings. Earlier version of results based on
robust regression yield similar findings (available upon request). However, as robust regression is
more appropriate to use when there are outliers that may distort OLS estimates (Treiman 2009;
Verardi and Croux 2009), which is not the case in our data, we choose to present OLS regression
results.
5. Results
5.1 Descriptive results
Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1, where variables that differ significantly by gender
are indicated using bold font. The monthly earning of women was 928 yuan in October, 2005, 89%
of the earnings of their male counterparts. The average value of period ASFR is 76.59‰. Compared
to male employees, female employees had higher representation in the civil service sector, lower
in state-owned and collective enterprises, and equal representation in the private sector. There was
not much gender difference in years of schooling, but women had less work experience than men.
Women had a higher representation in professional and sales/service positions, whereas men were
over-represented in manual positions. The average percent of female employees by occupation
was 51% among women, but only 37% among men. Women also worked less hours last week and
were less likely to be working in nonstandard jobs without work contracts than men. A higher

into 15 broader industries: 0 = agriculture; 1 = mining; 2 = manufacture; 3 = electricity, steam,
water production and supply; 4 = construction; 5 = geological exploration and water
management; 6 = transportation; 7 = sales, retail, and commercial brokerage; 8 = lodging and
catering; 9 = finance; 10 = real estate; 11 = service; 12 = public health and sports; 13 = culture
and education; 14 = state, social, and other organizations.
16

proportion of women were married and had more children. A larger percentage of men had rural
hukou, probably reflecting a larger proportion of rural-to-urban migrants among young men. On
the other hand, there was not much difference in ethnicity between men and women.
[Table 1 Here]
Figure 3 displays the average monthly earnings by gender and the female-to-male earnings
ratio between age 20 and 35. Not only did male workers consistently earn more than their female
counterparts across the entire range, but the gender earnings gap tended to increase after a
relatively small gap at the early career stage (at or before age 24). While the earnings gap was
much larger after age 26, our current focus is to explore whether statistical discrimination
associated with period ASFR could differentially impact men’s and women’s earnings in the years
up to prime fertility age. To account for the substantial gender gap beyond the prime fertility age,
other important social and economic factors should be explored together with statistical
discrimination (Yip and Wong 2014).
[Figure 3 Here]
5.2 Multivariate results
Table 2 presents estimates from OLS regression models, with Models 1a and 2a pertaining to
female workers and Models 1b and 2b to male workers. To save space, we only discuss results of
our key research interest and omit those of covariates. First, as shown in Model 1a, the coefficient
of ASFR was strongly negative among female workers (β = −0.002, p < 0.05). Net of other
covariates, an increase of 10 births per 1,000 women would result in around 2% decrease in
women’s monthly earnings (10*0.002=0.02). In our analytical sample, the average value of period
ASFR is 76.59‰, which is associated with about 15% decrease in women’s monthly earnings
(76.59*0.002=0.15). This negative influence of ASFR was substantial and could offset the positive
influence of human capital on monthly earnings. For example, one year increase in schooling was
associated with about 0.10 increase in young women’s logged monthly earnings and this benefit
could be mitigated or offset completely by the negative coefficient of ASFR.
[Table 2 Here]
Model 2a reveals a sharp contrast in the interaction between ASFR and economic sector.
The main coefficient of ASFR is nearly zero and insignificant, indicating that female workers’
monthly earnings in state-owned and collective enterprises (the reference category) were not much
affected by aggregate fertility. The interaction term between ASFR and government agency/public

17

institution is significantly positive (β = 0.002, p < 0.05), whereas that between ASFR and the
private sector is significantly negative (β = -0.002, p < 0.05). The significantly negative influence
of ASFR detected in Model 1a primarily reflects that among the private sector, where a 10-unit
increase in ASFR would lead to around 2% decrease in women’s monthly earnings. In the
government agency/public institutions, however, a 10-unit increase in ASFR would be associated
with 2% increase in women’s monthly earnings.
The above results are consistent with our expectation that young female workers in the
private sector experienced earnings penalty associated with aggregate fertility, probably reflecting
statistical discrimination from their employers (either consciously or unconsciously). The finding
that young female workers in the state sector not only did not suffer from such penalty, but actually
enjoyed an earnings premium is somewhat surprising. This might be due to the fact that workers
in government agencies or public institutions rarely get fired and have access to generous fringe
benefits, enjoying an “iron rice bowl” (Wang and Xie 2015). Work interruptions due to pregnancy
and childbirths are thus not frowned on and have little impact on their accumulated working
experiences. At the same time, however, the positive association between ASFR and women’s
earnings might actually reflect rewards to strong motivations and work commitment shown by
women early in their government career, factors that cannot be fully captured in our analyses.
Does aggregate fertility influence earnings of young male workers? As expected, results in
Model 1b reveal little relationship between period ASFR and monthly earnings on average among
young men, indicating that men’s earnings were generally not linked to the aggregate fertility.
There is some evidence that relative to young men working in SOEs or collective enterprises, those
in government agencies/public institutions received significantly lower earnings. In model 2b, the
main coefficient of ASFR and its interactions with economic sectors are all insignificant, indicating
little variation in the effect of ASFR across economic sectors. In fact, the association between
period ASFR and men’s monthly earnings is significant in none of the three sectors. Taken together,
these results are consistent with our earlier expectation that aggregate fertility was significantly
related to lower earnings among women, but had little influence on men’s earnings.
5.3 Sensitivity check
Robustness to ASFR at the national level

Since the ASFR we construct from the mini-census may

not correspond exactly to national figures and employers may refer to previous years’ aggregate

18

fertility when making decisions, we re-estimate our models using national-level period ASFR
collected from official statistics from 2002 to 2005. Table A1 reveals consistent patterns with
earlier conclusions: (1) aggregate fertility was not related to men’s monthly earnings but had
moderately negative influences on women’s earnings; and (2) female workers in private firms
faced increasing penalties all the way to the prime fertility age. Interestingly, influences of period
ASFR on women’s monthly earnings tend to be the strongest in 2005, suggesting that employers
probably utilize recent fertility information to assess productivity and set wages.
Robustness to different age ranges

In reality, employers may know little about the exact prime

fertility age, but rather have a vague idea about the range of prime fertility age. We thus vary
workers’ age by 1 to 2 years from the real prime fertility age at both directions (24, 25, 27, and 28
years old), and conduct the same set of analyses as those in Table 2 among employees aged 20-24,
20-25, 20-27, and 20-28 years old. Table A2 show substantively similar results in terms of the
gender-asymmetric associations between period ASFR and monthly earnings among young women
and men.
Robustness to occupation fixed effects

The negative influences from ASFR on women’s

earnings might reflect penalties for women from other sources such as compensating differentials
and flexibility within occupations (Goldin 2014). To reduce potential confounding factors, we reestimate previous models with occupation fixed effects by including 72 occupational dummies (we
drop the variable % Female while controlling for occupation fixed effects). Consistent with prior
findings, results in Table A3 still show an average negative influence from ASFR on women’s
earnings, primarily reflecting the negative influence of period ASFR in the private sector. For men,
ASFR on average was not related to their earnings.
Robustness to migration selection

We also check whether and to what extent our main results

would be affected by rural-to-urban migrants. OLS results from the same models in Table 2 after
excluding inter-province rural-to-urban migrants and all rural-to-urban migrants (both inter- and
intra-province) show that, among young women, the patterns of the ASFR effect and its variation
across sectors are basically the same as those in the main analyses; on the other hand, period ASFR
still did not matter for young men’s earnings (results available upon request).
5.4 Supplemental analyses
Perceptions associated with fertility of employers, particularly those in the private sector, may

19

differ by characteristics of workers and jobs. We therefore explore the influence of period ASFR
and its sectoral variation by re-estimating Model 1b in Table 2 among subgroups of women
stratified by their work experience, motherhood status, and occupation. First, conceptually
speaking, ASFR could affect the initial wage of new workers who just started a job in a specific
year, and/or affect the earnings of senior workers already in the job in a specific year. Our previous
estimations are a combined “average” reflecting these two processes. As shown in Columns 1-3 of
Table 3, negative effects of period ASFR on average and those in the private sector are largest for
women with least work experience (3 years and less) and tend to decrease as their work experiences
increase. Among young women work less than 4 years, an increase in 10 births per 1,000 women
is associated with 6% decrease in their monthly earnings in the private sector, while the
corresponding impacts from ASFR are about 5% for women with experiences of 4-5 years, and
only 2% for women with experiences of 6 years and more. These patterns indicate that the
discriminating process associated with aggregate fertility is operating for all women, but women
who recently start their jobs are particularly vulnerable to such negative influences from aggregate
fertility.
Second, we examine whether the discrimination associated with aggregate fertility would
differ by motherhood status between childless women and mothers. As shown in Columns 4-5 of
Table 3, previous findings about negative influence of ASFR and its sectoral variation are primarily
driven by those among childless women, while not observed among mothers. To the extent that
childless women are more likely to give births at their current jobs than mothers (under China’s
one-child policy), such heterogeneity is consistent with our theoretical argument that the
unrealized, rather than realized likelihood, of taking maternity leave matters for the statistical
discrimination associated with period ASFR.
Third, as employers’ perceptions based on aggregate fertility may vary across occupations,
we also re-estimate models in three broad occupational groups: managerial and professional;
clerical, sales, and services; and manual occupations. As shown in Columns 6-8 of Table 3, young
women working in clerical, sales and services occupations are negatively affected by ASFR,
whereas the negative influences of ASFR are invisible in the other two occupations. The
insignificant coefficients of ASFR on women in managerial and professional positions are not
consistent with the model prediction by Yip and Wong (2014) that the more productive the female
worker is, the greater will be the impact of fertility rate on wage. We suspect that young women in

20

managerial and professional occupations in general may enjoy more flexible and generous work
conditions and benefits to partly mitigate the negative impact associated with aggregate fertility.
Future research may be needed in order to understand better whether this particular finding is
applicable in all or only some specific societies.
[Table 3 here]
Finally, all of our prior findings only consider aggregate fertility on the national level,
while employers’ perceptions might be shaped by fertility information at the local level. We
collect official statistics of period ASFR from statistical yearbooks released by 23 provinces in
2005 (fertility data are unavailable in eight provinces: Tianjin, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Jilin,
Hubei, Hunan, Yunnan, and Tibet). The mean value of period ASFR among these 23 provinces in
2005 is 69.49‰, lower than that in our analytical sample. Supplementary analyses in this
reduced sample reveal that among all women aged 20-26, the influence of province-level ASFR
is negative but insignificant, and no significant sectoral variation exists in such influence; among
childless women, the negative effect of province-level ASFR is marginally significant (p = 0.07)
in the private sector, and its magnitude reduces to half compared to that using national-level
ASFR; province-level ASFR is still not related to men’s earnings. The reduced sample size and
potential underreporting in province-level fertility may lead to weaker evidence using provincelevel period ASFR. It is, however, still plausible that employers may also utilize fertility
information at the local level (at either the province- or prefecture-level) to assess female
workers’ productivity.
6. Discussion
In this study, we explored one specific statistical discrimination mechanism based on aggregate
fertility, a practice might be adopted by employers to discriminate against young women in
offering them earnings. Relying on data from post-reform urban China, our analyses show genderasymmetric associations between period ASFR and monthly earnings among Chinese young
women and men at and before the prime fertility age. Period ASFR was, on average, negatively
related to earnings among women, but not among men. This negative influence of ASFR was
largely restricted to women working in the private sector, while diminished in the SOEs and
collective enterprises, and even became positive among those in government agency/public
institutions. By contrast, young men’s earnings were generally not negatively influenced by

21

aggregate fertility.
An overall negative influence of period ASFR on women’s earnings suggest that Chinese
employers are likely to use aggregate fertility information to discriminate against female workers
beyond individual characteristics like marital status and the number of children. Indeed, China’s
widening gender pay gap since the early 1990s is, at least partly, attributable to increasing
discriminatory practices against women after the loosening of state control and the penetration of
market forces into the economy. Anecdotal evidence of workplace discrimination in China reveals
that employers, especially those in private enterprises, often consider female workers during
pregnancy, maternal leave, and the lactation period to be less productive, disrupting the normal
operation and increasing the operating cost of their firms (Human Rights Watch 2018). Because of
such perception and stereotyping of women, many employers adopt unfair clauses and regulations
to restrict application from women during the recruitment and hiring process (Kuhn and Shen
2013), and even arbitrarily deprive their employment rights and promotion opportunities when
they get pregnant or need to take care of children and family (Li and Zhang 2010). Our empirical
results corroborate prior studies of increasing statistical discrimination against women under
market reforms.
Juxtaposed to the discrepant previous findings on whether and how discrimination against
women increased with increasing privatization and marketization in post-reform China, our study
illustrates different patterns of discriminatory practices across economic sectors, where the genderoriented statistical discrimination based on ASFR was more prominent in the increasingly
marketized private sector, but paradoxically negative in the state sector. The negative influence
from ASFR on women’s earnings reflect the widespread discrimination toward women in the
private firms, regardless of their sizes (Human Rights Watch 2018). On the other hand, the socialist
legacy of generous benefits and relatively stable and continuous career trajectories for state
employees may account for women’s earnings premium in the state sector. However, we remain
cautious as the positive association may be transitional and the so-called premium may disappear
in the future, when there is a streamlining in public expenditure and cutback in government payroll.
Future research investigating the exact relationship between fertility (aggregate and individual)
and women’s earnings in the state sector over time may further illuminate such development.
Among young men, however, we did not find evidence of a negative relationship between
ASFR and their earnings, indicating that men are usually not subject to discrimination related to

22

aggregate fertility information. To a large extent, this gendered influence of ASFR on earnings of
young women and men reflect the fact that Chinese employers usually hold distinctive preferences
when hiring and rewarding men and women. Recent studies have demonstrated that in China,
employers explicitly state their gender preferences when posting job advertisements (Human
Rights Watch 2018; Kuhn and Shen 2013; Woodhams et al. 2009). Some employers may even
blatantly ask female applicants about their personal situation, such as marital status, fertility
intention, and number of children.17 Such entrenched gender stereotypes held by employers help
maintain and perpetuate highly segregated expectations of men and women’s roles at work,
hindering women’s progress in the labor market (Woodhams et al. 2009). In addition, our
multivariate analyses reveal that a group-based discrimination toward women associated with
aggregate fertility may also be operating and exert independent influence on women’s earnings
beyond discrimination based on women’s individual characteristics. Unlike explicit discrimination
expressed by employers, such statistical discrimination may work in an implicit way, when
employers’ perceptions and evaluations of the average productivity of women are linked to the
macro-level fertility information, a pattern consistent with predictions of social cognitive theory
(Reskin 2000, 2002). Taken together, it is not uncommon for many women to feel upset and
frustrated when they look for jobs and work in an increasingly women-unfriendly labor market.
We acknowledge several limitations in our study that point to possible directions for future
research. First, the gender earnings inequality examined pertains only to workers’ beginning career.
While statistical discrimination is important at this early stage, other social processes are probably
more significant at a later stage past the prime fertility age. A further study of effects of fertility
behaviors and occupational sex segregation on the earnings of women beyond the prime fertility
age in urban China would be illuminating, as occupational sex segregation has been documented
to be an important factor contributing to the gender pay gap in China (He and Wu 2017; Shu 2005;
Wu. Y and Wu. X 2008, 2009). Second, potential underreporting in new births in China may lead
to measurement error in aggregate fertility that attenuates our estimations using either the nationalor province-level period ASFR. Results in this study may thus represent the conservative side of

17

“Stop Asking Women About Childbearing Status, China Tells Employers.” The New York

Times, February 21st, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/21/world/china-genderdiscrimination-workplace.html
23

the true effect of ASFR. That being said, aggregate fertility being the first and only indicator of
statistical discrimination examined so far, much remains to be done. To be properly identified, any
measure of statistical discrimination must pertain to women’s aggregate characteristics that are
readily quantifiable.
Third, we have no data to examine employers’ actual evaluations (and cognitive biases) of
female workers. Employers’ perception may not only come from direct interactions with
employees, but could be influenced by the mass media. Chinese mainstream media are increasingly
suggesting women’s return to traditional roles in the domestic sphere and emphasizing women’s
private rather than public life during the market transition (Sun and Chen 2015). To the extent that
this media rhetoric may influence employers’ perceptions and help reinforce gender stereotypes of
women as inferior workers, the negative effect of period ASFR on young women’s earnings in the
private sector may be conflated by the mass media effect. To better elicit employers’
preferences/expectations of workers’ productivities, qualitative studies probing the minds of
employers about their evaluation, hiring, promotion, and layoff decisions would greatly enrich and
supplement our understanding of gender discrimination in the labor market. Future research may
also rely on novel methods such as survey experiment as utilized by recent studies (Mari and
Luijkx 2020).
Lastly, the cross-sectional design of our study only produces associations between
aggregate fertility and workers’ earnings. Although the main findings are robust to alternative
measures of period ASFR in previous years, our results should not be interpreted as causal. Besides,
cross-sectional data and analyses within workers during prime fertility age also prevent us from
clearly distinguishing between age, cohort, and period effects. More appropriate datasets with rich
information, such as longitudinal and firm-level data, may allow a more thorough investigation
about how women and men are differentially treated in terms of earnings and other labor market
outcomes.
Despite these limitations, our study has important contribution and policy implication. We
have extended the gender-oriented statistical discrimination model proposed by Yip and Wong
(2014) from Hong Kong’s labor market to China’s transitional economy, showing its
generalizability to wider contexts. The variation in associations between ASFR and women’s
earnings across economic sectors in China highlights the importance of considering how structural
factors may moderate such gender-oriented statistical discrimination. These structural factors may

24

be context-specific, which include not only economic sector, but also other factors at the firm and
organizational level. Together with those from Yip and Wong (2014), our study complements prior
research about discrimination based on individual characteristics, and highlights another implicit,
but important discriminatory practice that is related to macro-level fertility information. The
existence and magnitude of such discrimination are likely to depend on the generosity of maternity
leave policy and public support for childcare in a certain society. In societies with generous
maternity leave and social support for childrearing such as Nordic welfare countries, firms may be
less incentivized to discriminate against women based on aggregate fertility. In contrast, in liberal
countries with minimal or limited public childcare support like the United States and the United
Kingdom, young women are likely to be discriminated more seriously by employers based on
fertility rate (the magnitude may vary by paid and unpaid leave). More comparative research is
needed to examine the variation in the effect of ASFR by welfare regime and childcare policy.

25

References
Aigner, D. J., & Cain, G. G. (1977). Statistical theories of discrimination in labor markets.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30(2), 175-187.
Arrow, K. J. (1971). The theory of discrimination. In O. Ashenfelter, & A., Rees (Eds.),
Discrimination in labor markets (pp. 3-33). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press.
Arrow, K. J. (1972). Models of job discrimination. In A. H. Pascal (Eds.), Lexington, Racial
discrimination in economic life (pp. 83-102). MA: D.C. Health.
Balfe, C. (2014). Maternity leave duration and female-male relative labour market outcomes.
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/0a6c/d8561eb13735da26af8c4389103b574aa7f3.pdf.
Baron, J. N. (1984). Organizational perspectives on stratification. Annual Review of Sociology, 10:
37-69.
Becker, G. S. (1957). The economics of discrimination. Reprint, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1971.
Becker, G. S. (1985). Human capital, effort, and the sexual division of labor. Journal of Labor
Economics, 3(1), S33-S58.
Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and
Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. American Economic Review, 94(4),
991-1013.
Bielby, W. T. (1991). The structure and process of sex segregation. In R. R. Cornwall, & P. V.
Wunnava (Eds.), New approaches to economic and social analysis of discrimination (pp. 97112). New York, NY: Praeger Publishers.
Bielby, W. T., & Baron, J. N. (1986). Men and women at work: Sex segregation and statistical
discrimination. American Journal of Sociology, 91(4), 759-799.
Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (2017). The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations. Journal
of Economic Literature, 55(3), 789-865.
Blumer, H. (1958). Race prejudice as a sense of group position. Pacific Sociological Review, 1, 37.
Budig, M. J., & England, P. (2001). The wage penalty for motherhood. American Sociological
Review, 66(2), 204-225.
Budig, M. J., & Hodges, M. J. (2010). Differences in disadvantage: Variation in the motherhood

26

penalty across white women’s earnings distribution. American Sociological Review, 75(5),
705-728.
Byron, R. A. (2010). Discrimination, complexity, and the public/private sector question. Work and
Occupations, 37(4), 435-475.
Charles, M. (2011). A world of difference: International trends in women’s economic status.
Annual Review of Sociology, 37, 355-371.
Correll, S. J., Benard, S., & Paik, I. (2007). Getting a job: Is there a motherhood penalty? American
Journal of Sociology, 112(5), 1297-1338.
DiPrete, T. A., & Buchmann, C. (2013). The rise of women: The growing gender gap in education
and what it means for American schools. New York: The Russell Sage Foundation.
England, P. (2010). The gender revolution: Uneven and stalled. Gender & Society, 24(2), 149-166.
England, P., Farkas, G., Kilbourne, B. S., & Dou, T. (1988). Explaining occupational sex
segregation and wages: Findings from a model with fixed effects. American Sociological
Review, 53(4), 544-558.
Fiske, S. T. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), The Handbook of social psychology (pp. 357-411). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Goldin, C. (2006). The quiet revolution that transformed women’s employment, education, and
family. American Economic Review, 96(2), 1-21.
Goldin, C. (2014). A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic Review,
104(4), 1091-1119.
Granovetter, Mark. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91(3), 481-510.
He, G., & Wu, X. (2017). Marketization, occupational segregation, and gender earnings inequality
in urban China. Social Science Research, 65, 96-111.
He, G., & Wu, X. (2018). Dynamics of the gender earnings inequality in reform-era Urban China.
Work, Employment and Society, 32(4), 726-746.
Hoffnar, E., & Greene, M. (1996). Gender discrimination in the public and private sectors: A
sample selectivity approach. Journal of Socio-Economics, 25(1), 105-114.
Human Rights Watch. (2018). “Only men need apply”: Gender discrimination in job
advertisements in China.
Ji, Y., Wu, X., Sun, S., & He, G. (2017). Unequal care, unequal work: Toward a more

27

comprehensive understanding of gender inequality in post-reform urban China. Sex Roles,
77(11-12): 765-778.
Kidd, M. P., & Meng, X. (2001). The Chinese state enterprise sector: Labour market reform and
the impact on male-female wage structure. Asian Economic Journal, 15(4), 405-423.
Kuhn, P., & Shen, K. (2013). Gender discrimination in job ads: Evidence from China. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 287-336.
Lai, Y.-C., & Masters, S. (2005). The effects of mandatory maternity and pregnancy benefits on
women’s wages and employment in Taiwan, 1984-1996. Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 58(2), 274-281.
Leasher, M. K., & Miller, C. E. (2012). Discrimination across the sectors: A comparison of
discrimination trends in private and public organizations. Public Personnel Management,
41(2), 281-326.
Li, C., & Li, S. (2008). Rising gender income gap and its dynamics in China: Market competition
or sex discrimination? Sociological Studies, 2, 94-117 (In Chinese).
Li, Y., & Zhang, S. (eds). (2010). A Study of Gender Discrimination in the Workplace in China.
Beijing: China Social Sciences Press (In Chinese).
Liu, P., Meng, X., & Zhang, J. (2000). Sectoral gender wage differentials and discrimination in the
transitional Chinese economy. Journal of Population Economics, 13(2), 331-352.
Mandel, H., & Semyonov, M. (2014). Gender pay gap and employment sector: Sources of earnings
disparities in the United States, 1970-2010. Demography, 51(5), 1597-1618.
Mari, G., & Luijkx, R. 2020. Gender, parenthood, and hiring intentions in sex-typical jobs: Insights
from a survey experiment. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 65, 100464.
Maurer-Fazio, M., & Hughes, J. (2002). The effects of market liberalization on the relative
earnings of Chinese women. Journal of Comparative Economics, 30(4), 709-731.
Maurer-Fazio, M., Rawski, T. G., & Zhang, W. (1999). Inequality in the rewards for holding up
half the sky: Gender wage gaps in China’s urban labour market, 1988-1994. The China
Journal, 41, 55-88.
McCall, J. J. (1972). The simple mathematics of information, job search, and prejudice. In A. H.
Pascal (Eds.), Racial discrimination in economic life (pp. 205-224). Lexington, MA: D.C.
Health.
Mincer, J., & Polachek, S. (1974). Family investments in human capital: Earnings of women.

28

Journal of Political Economy, 82(2), S76-S108.
National Bureau of Statistics. (2003). China Population Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: China
Statistics Press (in Chinese).
National Bureau of Statistics. (2004). China Population Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: China
Statistics Press (in Chinese).
National Bureau of Statistics. (2005). China Population Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: China
Statistics Press (in Chinese).
National Bureau of Statistics. (2006). China Population Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: China
Statistics Press (in Chinese).
National Bureau of Statistics. (2011). China Statistical Yearbook. Beijing: China Statistical Press
(in Chinese).
OECD. (2017). The Pursuit of Gender Equality: An Uphill Battle. Paris: OECD Publishing.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264281318-en.
Padavic, I., & Reskin, B. F. (2002). Women and Men in Work. Second Edition. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Pine Forge Press.
Petersen, T., & Morgan, L. A. (1995). Separate and unequal: Occupation-establishment sex
segregation and the gender wage gap. American Journal of Sociology, 101(2), 329-365.
Petersen, T, Penner, A. M., & Hogsnes, G. (2014). From motherhood penalties to husband premia:
The new challenge for gender equality and family policy, lessons from Norway. American
Journal of Sociology, 119(5), 1434-1472.
Phelps, E. S. (1972). The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism. American Economic Review,
62(4), 659-661.
Puhani, P. A., & Sonderhof, K. (2008). The effects of maternity leave extension on training for
young women. IZA discussion papers, No. 3820, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.
Rawski, T. G. (2003). Recent Developments in China’s Labor Economy. Working Paper. Pittsburgh,
PA: University of Pittsburgh, Department of Economics.
Raymo, J. M., Park, H., Xie, Y., & Yeung, W. J. (2015). Marriage and family in East Asia:
Continuity and change. Annual Review of Sociology, 41, 471-492.
Reskin, B. F. (2000). The proximate causes of employment discrimination. Contemporary
Sociology, 29(2), 319-328.
Reskin, B. F. (2002). Rethinking employment discrimination and its remedies. In M. F. Guillen, R.

29

Collins, P. England, & M. Meyer (Eds.), The new economic sociology: Developing in an
emerging field (pp. 218-244). New York, NY: The Russell Sage Foundation.
Rissing, B. A., & Castilla, E., J. (2014). House of green cards: Statistical or preference-based
inequality in the employment of foreign nationals. American Sociological Review, 79(6),
1226-1255.
Shu, X., & Bian, Y. (2003). Market transition and gender gap in earnings in urban China. Social
Forces, 81(4), 1107-1145.
Shu, X. (2005). Market transition and gender segregation in urban China. Social Science Quarterly,
86(s1), 1299-1323.
Tam, T. (1997). Sex segregation and occupational gender inequality in the United States:
Devaluation of specialized training? American Journal of Sociology, 102(6), 1652-1692.
Treiman, D. J. (2009). Quantitative data analysis: Doing social research to test ideas. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Tilly, C. (1998). Durable Inequality. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Van Bavel, J, Schwartz, C. R., & Esteve, A. (2018). The reversal of the gender gap in education
and its consequences for family life. Annual Review of Sociology, 44, 341-360.
Verardi, V., & Croux, C. (2009). Robust regression in Stata. The Stata Journal, 9(3), 439-453.
Wachter, K. W. (2014). Essential Demographic Methods. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Wang, M., & Cai, F. (2008). Gender earnings differential in urban China. Review of Development
Economics, 12(2), 442-454.
Wang, T., Lai, Y., & Li, B. (2008). Gender income gap under redistribution and its evolution: 19952003. Sociological Studies, 2, 23-53 (in Chinese).
Wang, J., & Xie, Y. (2015). Feeling good about the iron rice bowl: Economic sector and happiness
in post-reform urban China. Social Science Research, 53, 203-217.
Woodhams, C., Lupton, B., & Xian, H. (2009). The persistence of gender discrimination in China
– Evidence from recruitment advertisements. The International Journal of Human Resource
Management, 20(10), 2084-2109.
World Economic Forum. (2006). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2007). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2008). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.

30

World Economic Forum. (2009). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2010). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2011). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2012). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2013). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Economic Forum. (2014). The Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland.
Wu, X. (2002). Work units and income inequality: The effect of market transition in urban China.
Social Forces, 80(3): 1069-1099.
Wu, X. (2013). Redrawing the boundaries: Work units and social stratification in urban China.
Chinese Sociological Review, 45(4), 6-28.
Wu, X. (2014). Census undertakings in China: 1953-2010. Report 14-833. Ann Arbor: Population
Studies Center, University of Michigan.
Wu, X. (2019). Inequality and social stratification in postsocialist China. Annual Review of
Sociology, 45, 363-382.
Wu, X., & Song, X. (2014). Ethnic stratification amid China’s economic transition: Evidence from
the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. Social Science Research, 44: 158-172.
Wu, Y., & Wu, X. (2008). A study on the sex segregation in non-agricultural occupations in China
in 1982-2000. Society, 5, 128-152 (in Chinese).
Wu, Y., & Wu, X. (2009). Occupational gender segregation and gender wage gap in urban China.
Sociological Studies, 4, 88-111 (in Chinese).
Wu, Y., & Zhou, D. (2015). Women’s labor force participation in urban China, 1990-2010. Chinese
Sociological Review, 47(4), 314-342.
Xie, Y., & Wu, X. (2008). Danwei profitability and earnings inequality in three Chinese cities. The
China Quarterly, 195: 558-581.
Yip, C. M., & Wong, R. S. K. (2014). Gender-oriented statistical discrimination theory: Empirical
evidence from the Hong Kong labor market. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility,
37, 43-59.
Yu, W., & Kuo, J. C. (2017). The motherhood wage penalty by work conditions: How do
occupational characteristics hinder or empower mothers? American Sociological Review,
82(4), 744-769.
Zhang, D. (2004). Marketization and gender wage differentials. Chinese Journal of Population

31

Science, 1, 32-41 (in Chinese).
Zhang, J., Han, J., Liu, P., & Zhao, Y. (2008). Trends in the gender earnings differential in urban
China, 1988-2004. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 61(2), 224-243.
Zhang, Y., Hannum E., & Wang, M. (2008). Gender-based employment and income differences in
urban China: Considering the contributions of marriage and parenthood. Social Forces, 86(4),
1529-1560.
Zhang, Z., & Wu, X. (2017). Occupational segregation and earnings inequality: Rural migrants
and local workers in urban China. Social Science Research, 61, 57-74.
Zhao, X., Zhao, Y., Chou, L., & Leivang, B. H. (2019). Changes in gender wage differentials in
China: a regression and decomposition based on the data of CHIPS 1995–2013. Economic
Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja, 32(1), 3162-3182.

32

Figure 1: General trends in female-to-male earnings ratio and marketization in urban China, 1988 to 2009.
Notes: The first series of data between 1988 to 2004 come from the Urban Household Surveys (UHS). Annual
wage of employees aged 16-60 with urban hukou in Beijing, Guangdong, Zhejiang, Liaoning, Shannxi and
Sichuan were used to calculate the gender earnings ratio (Zhang et al. 2008). The second series of data come
from the Chinese General Social Survey (CGSS) 2003-2012. Hourly wage of employees aged 20-60 in urban
labor market (including migrants) in mainland China (except Ningxia, Qinghai, Hainan, Tibet) were used to
calculate the gender earnings ratio.

33

150
100
50
0

Births per 1,000 women

15

20
2002 Official
2005 Official

25

Age

30

2003 Official
2005 Mini-census

35

40
2004 Official

Figure 2: Period age-specific fertility rates in Chinese cities and towns, 2002-2005.
Notes: The official statistics about fertility rates in 2002 to 2005 come from the China Population Statistics Yearbook
2002 to 2005.

34

Figure 3: Average monthly earnings for male and female workers and gender earnings ratio in Urban
China, 2005.

35

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of employees aged 20-26 in urban China, 2005.
Female
927.98
(627.56)
76.59
(28.04)

Monthly earnings (yuan)
Age-specific fertility rate (ASFR, ‰)
Economic sector (%)
Government agency/public institution
State-owned/collective enterprises
Private sector
Years of schooling

15.37
16.52
68.12
11.39
(2.86)
5.72
(3.01)

Potential work experience (year)
Occupation (%)
Managerial
Professional
Clerical
Sales/service
Manual
Sex composition in occupation (%Female)

Male
1038.91
(716.55)
76.59
(28.04)
11.25
19.82
68.93
11.22
(2.73)
6.02
(2.95)

0.79
1.21
22.36
12.86
9.53
11.22
33.45
24.69
33.88
50.01
0.51
0.37
(0.13)
(0.20)
Working hours last week
49.54
50.54
(11.86)
(11.70)
Having no work contract (%)
52.68
56.31
Married (%)
32.35
22.62
Number of children
0.17
0.12
(0.39)
(0.34)
Rural hukou (%)
50.77
54.35
Non-han (%)
6.06
5.35
N
4449
4170
Notes: Data are weighted. Percentages are reported for categorical variables and means are reported for
continuous variables. Standard deviations of continuous variables are in parentheses. Variables with significant
gender differences are indicated using bold font.

36

Table 2: OLS regression results of logged monthly earnings on ASFR, economic sector
and other covariates, urban China, 2005.

ASFR (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/public institution
Private sector

Female
Model 1a
Model 2a
-0.002*
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)

-0.060
(0.039)
0.046
(0.024)

-0.157**
(0.050)
0.014
(0.025)

0.100***
(0.011)
0.027*
(0.012)
0.001
(0.001)

-0.268**
(0.098)
0.189**
(0.059)
0.002*
(0.001)
-0.002*
(0.001)
0.095***
(0.011)
0.015
(0.012)
0.002**
(0.001)

0.095***
(0.012)
0.015
(0.015)
0.002*
(0.001)

-0.387*
(0.168)
0.025
(0.070)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.093***
(0.012)
0.010
(0.015)
0.002*
(0.001)

-0.021
(0.161)
-0.110
(0.158)
-0.149
(0.158)
-0.206
(0.157)
-0.033
(0.060)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.182***
(0.015)
-0.021
(0.021)
-0.040
(0.022)
0.014
(0.020)
0.021
(0.031)
Yes
Yes
5.923***

-0.029
(0.162)
-0.121
(0.160)
-0.157
(0.159)
-0.217
(0.158)
-0.030
(0.060)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.180***
(0.015)
-0.021
(0.021)
-0.042
(0.022)
0.014
(0.020)
0.023
(0.031)
Yes
Yes
5.890***

-0.211*
(0.100)
-0.325**
(0.100)
-0.340***
(0.100)
-0.348***
(0.098)
-0.213***
(0.051)
0.002*
(0.001)
-0.172***
(0.023)
0.072*
(0.028)
-0.073*
(0.033)
0.031
(0.025)
-0.048
(0.033)
Yes
Yes
6.087***

-0.211*
(0.100)
-0.327**
(0.100)
-0.340***
(0.100)
-0.348***
(0.098)
-0.215***
(0.052)
0.002*
(0.001)
-0.172***
(0.023)
0.071*
(0.028)
-0.073*
(0.033)
0.031
(0.025)
-0.047
(0.033)
Yes
Yes
6.126***

ASFR x Government agency/public
institution
ASFR x Private sector
Years of schooling
Potential work experience
Potential work experience squared
Occupation (ref: Managerial)
Professional
Clerical
Sales/service
Manual
%Female
Work hours last week
Having no work contract
Married
Number of children
Rural hukou
Non-han
Industry dummies
Province dummies
Constant

Male
Model 1b
Model 2b
0.000
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)

37

(0.239)
(0.245)
R2
0.408
0.411
N
4449
4449
Notes: Data are weighted. Standard errors are in parentheses.

*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 (two-tailed tests).

38

(0.220)
0.294
4170

(0.222)
0.294
4170

Table 3: Coefficients of period ASFR on average and in each economic sector among subgroups of female workers
Work experience

Motherhood status

6 years
<=3
ASFR on average (‰)
ASFR in Government agency/public Institution (‰)
ASFR in SOE/collective enterprise (‰)
ASFR in the private sector (‰)
N

4-5

and

Childless

Occupation
Managerial

Clerk,

and

sales,

professional

service

Manual

years

years

more

women

Mothers

-0.005*

-0.004**

-0.002*

-0.002**

0.002

0.001

-0.002*

-0.000

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

-0.001

-0.008

-0.001

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.004

0.003

(0.002)

(0.005)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.004)

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.004)

-0.003

-0.004

-0.002

-0.000

0.005

0.002

-0.001

0.000

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.004)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.002)

-0.006**

-0.005**

-0.002*

-0.002**

0.001

-0.001

-0.002*

-0.000

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

1120

1044

2285

1946

1534

Notes: Data are weighted. Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 (two-tailed tests).

39

3732

717

969

Table A1: OLS regression results of logged monthly earnings using alternative measures
of period ASFR (official statistics at the national level).
Model 1a
Panel A
ASFR2005 (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

Female
Model 2a

Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.061
(0.039)
0.047*
(0.024)

-0.285
(0.148)
0.213*
(0.085)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.002*
(0.001)

-0.156**
(0.050)
0.014
(0.025)

-0.212
(0.258)
0.049
(0.098)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)

-0.002*
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.060
(0.039)
0.048*
(0.024)

-0.206*
(0.104)
0.172**
(0.061)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001*
(0.001)

-0.156**
(0.050)
0.014
(0.025)

-0.340*
(0.147)
0.014
(0.069)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.001)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.061
(0.039)
0.047*
(0.024)

-0.220*
(0.107)
0.171**
(0.062)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001*
(0.001)

-0.156**
(0.050)
0.014
(0.025)

-0.268
(0.165)
0.028
(0.071)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.001)

-0.001*
(0.001)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.060
(0.039)
0.048*
(0.024)

-0.186*
(0.091)
0.153**
(0.053)

-0.156**
(0.050)
0.014
(0.025)

-0.302*
(0.130)
0.016
(0.060)

ASFR2004 × government agency/
public institution
ASFR2004 × private sector
Panel C
ASFR2003 (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector
ASFR2003 × government agency/
public institution
ASFR2003 × private sector
Panel D
ASFR2002 (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

Male
Model 2b

-0.002**
(0.001)

ASFR2005 × government agency/
public institution
ASFR2005 × private sector
Panel B
ASFR2004 (‰)

Model 1b

40

ASFR2002 × government agency/
public institution
ASFR2002 × private sector

0.001
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
-0.001*
-0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
N
4449
4449
4170
4170
Notes: Data are weighted. Coefficients of other covariates (same as those in Table 2) are omitted. Standard
errors are in parentheses.
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 (two-tailed tests).

41

Table A2: OLS regression results of logged monthly earnings using different age ranges.
Model 1a
20-24
ASFR (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.040
(0.045)
0.044
(0.026)

-0.176*
(0.076)
-0.031
(0.029)

3110

-0.320**
(0.108)
0.174**
(0.063)
0.004*
(0.001)
-0.002*
(0.001)
3110

2837

-0.338
(0.186)
0.045
(0.076)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
2837

-0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.046
(0.044)
0.041
(0.025)

-0.255*
(0.102)
0.198**
(0.061)
0.002*
(0.001)
-0.002**
(0.001)
3751

-0.175**
(0.058)
0.002
(0.027)

3487

-0.329*
(0.168)
0.015
(0.072)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.001)
3487

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.047
(0.036)
0.051*
(0.022)

-0.159**
(0.046)
0.040
(0.023)

5160

-0.246*
(0.097)
0.195**
(0.060)
0.002*
(0.001)
-0.002*
(0.001)
5160

4836

-0.382*
(0.166)
0.029
(0.071)
0.003
(0.002)
0.000
(0.001)
4836

-0.001*
(0.000)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.000)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.026
(0.033)
0.055**

-0.196*
(0.097)
0.207**

-0.157***
(0.041)
0.026

-0.364*
(0.156)
0.020

3751

ASFR × government agency/
public institution
ASFR × private sector
N
20-28
ASFR (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/ public institution
Private sector

Male
Model 2b

0.000
(0.001)

ASFR × government agency/
public institution
ASFR × private sector
N
20-27
ASFR (‰)

Model 1b

-0.001
(0.001)

ASFR × government agency/
public institution
ASFR × private sector
N
20-25
ASFR (‰)

Female
Model 2a

42

(0.021)

(0.060)
(0.022)
(0.070)
0.002
0.002
(0.001)
(0.002)
-0.002*
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
N
5790
5790
5478
5478
Notes: Data are weighted. Coefficients of other covariates (same as those in Table 2) are omitted. Standard errors
are in parentheses.
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 (two-tailed tests).
ASFR × government agency/
public institution
ASFR × private sector

43

Gender Statistical Discrimination in urban China

Table A3: OLS regression results of logged monthly earnings on ASFR, economic sector, and
other covariates net of occupation fixed effects.
ASFR (‰)
Economic sector
(ref: SOE/collective enterprise)
Government agency/public institution

Model 1a
-0.002**
(0.001)
-0.028
(0.041)
0.037
(0.023)

Female
Model 2a
-0.000
(0.001)

Male
Model 1b
Model 2b
0.000
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)

-0.294**
-0.110*
(0.102)
(0.050)
Private sector
0.164**
0.010
(0.059)
(0.025)
ASFR × Government agency/public institution
0.003**
(0.001)
ASFR × Private sector
-0.002*
(0.001)
Other covariates
YES
YES
YES
Occupation fixed effects
YES
YES
YES
Industry dummies
YES
YES
YES
Province dummies
YES
YES
YES
Constant
5.694***
5.668***
6.146***
(0.183)
(0.190)
(0.287)
R2
0.431
0.435
0.329
N
4449
4449
4170
Notes: Data are weighted. Standard errors are in parentheses. %Female is not included as we
occupation fixed effects in the regression models. Other covariates are the same as those in Table 2.
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 (two-tailed tests).

44

-0.376*
(0.169)
0.011
(0.073)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.001)
YES
YES
YES
YES
6.198***
(0.290)
0.330
4170
control for

