Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Pp.335- 346

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.28

Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject: A
Case Study

Abrar Basabrin
English Language Institute
King Abdulaziz University
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia

Abstract:
This paper investigates the myth of children’s monolingual brain by conducting a case study of a
two-year-old Saudi-American girl, who is in the two-word stage of vocalization, by focusing on
a certain speech act, viz., “greeting” and demonstrating how it is heavily code-switched into
Arabic/English language(s) with regard to the context of the speech and the greeter/receiver of
the greeting identity. The subject has been raised in an English-speaking country milieu (United
States of America), while she has been used to speaking Arabic at home. In this regard, the paper
highlights the aim of the encoded usage of code-switching utterances in term of addressing the
monolingual brain hypothesis. This qualitative study is based on open observations of two
continues months of a toddler as the participant of this study aiming at exploring whether
children’s greeting differ from those of adults and whether this greeting differs between two
languages with regard to monolingual brain hypotheses. So far, the study concluded that greeting
has never been mixed upon context, though utterances are code-switched. Moreover, the greeting
process is comprehended and acquired within the language context as a pragmatic speech act
regarding greeter’s identity, context, and gender. Findings of this study significantly support the
cognitive approach in term of greeting via using a high frequent greeting word among the
American culture. As would cognitive linguists suggest, greeting speech act response varies
regarding how greeters of each community greet the subject, but not how they greet each other’s
in a community. Therefore, surprisingly the two-year-old subject perceptually recognizes the fact
of receiving two different languages regardless to the monolingual hypothesis.
Keywords: Bilingual, case study, code-switched greeting, monolingual brain hypothesis
Cite as: Basabrin, A. (2019). Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject: A
Case Study. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1) 335 - 346
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.28

335

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

1. Introduction
Along with the investigation of mixed sentences/utterances, a theoretical claim of “limited
capacity theory” appears in the field of linguistics to explain children’s bilingual code-switching,
as an evidence of their inability to distinguish between their two languages (Genesee, 2015). Yet,
believers in a monolingual brain rely on Genesee (1989) hypothesis of “unitary language system”
that considers the input of both languages as a single language. Another concern relating to code
switching that has numerous claims regarding the fluency of the coded language in order to be
mixed within utterances (Bouchard, 2015). Through various identifications of the term code
switching that address language fluency, this study aims at exploring whether complete mastery
of language/s is needed in order to be code switched, as long as the subject has not mastered any
of the languages, though Arabic is the matrix one. From observations conducted in public places
over three extended months, findings show a significant role of greeter/receiver identity, gender,
and speech context. Also, perceptually, the subject is able to distinguish between the two
languages and initiate greetings with regard to that fact. Monolingual brain has been studied and
investigated in the process of bilingual language acquisition- mostly under two main parts of the
language, viz., lexicon and grammar- but has not been investigated yet under the frame of
pragmatic speech acts. There are many recent books that support “the unitary system hypothesis”
(Bhatia, 2018; Snape & Kupisch, 2016) and the ‘limited capacity theory’ (Hervais-Adelman,
Pefkou, & Golestani, 2014) under the bilingual language acquisition section, though these streams
have been refuted in other works such as (Genesee, 2015). This paper attempts to fill the gap by
proposing a work that combines early childhood bilingual greeting in regard to the monolingual
belief of Genesee (2006), and Paradis, Nicoladis, Crago, and Genesee (2011). Additionally, it
investigates the bilingual language aspect, not under the frame of language acquisition, but under
the pragmatic feature of speech act.
Furthermore, studying the nature of childhood greeting speech act will be beneficial in
understanding childhood language acquisition and language developmental processes. Thus, this
paper aims to investigate more on how children acquire the pragmatic speech act (such as
greeting). And it also tries to establish a clear concept about childhood greeting.
2. Literature Review
2.1 Monolingual Brain that Results in Code-Switching
Numerous definitions have been offered for the term code-switching (CS) over the 90s until
recently. Generally, the use of two languages or more within certain discourse (written, or spoken)
through applying linguistics aspects of languages basically describes the concept of (CS) (Brice
& Anderson, 1999). It has been believed that code switched utterances are the main evidence that
supports the monolingual brain hypothesis, while the other evidence stands as the dilation of
bilinguals’ language acquisition (Genesee, 2015). Basically, monolingual brain relies on the
“limited capacity theory” which assumes that the bilingual child will be confused and cannot
distinguish between languages if parents are using both languages at home (Paradis et al., 2011).
Also, it depends on the “unitary language hypothesis” as has been dubbed by Genesee (2006).
This hypothesis predicts that bilinguals’ brain puts both languages systems together and that
results in code mixing. The believers of the monolingual brain aver that one grammatical aspect
and lexicons of both languages will be associated together under one language in the bilingual
brain. There are many works in support of these claims such as W. Francis and Gutiérrez (2012)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

336

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

who argue that the child’s language acquisition is the use of both languages under one constraint
in child’s mind. However, there are some studies that find this wrong. For instance, Maneva and
Genesee (2002) studied an infant whose parents were speaking in different languages to the
infant. The mother spoke French, while the father spoke English. By counting the amount, type,
and duration of babbling, it was found that the infant was babbling differently regarding the
language. That led the researchers to conclude that from that age, bilingual infants do not just
perceptually distinguish between languages, but also differentiate grammar (Pearson, Fernandez,
Lewedeg, & Oller, 1997).
2.2 The Cognitive Approach of Linguistics
Basically, the cognitive approach relies heavily on the cognitive processes and social exposure of
a context (Rose, Feldman, & Jankowski, 2009; Sternberg & Sternberg, 2016). Early language
acquisition begins with a genetic willingness for participating and engaging with complex
patterns of a developed human speech (Lieberman, 1968). Furthermore, as the cognitive
linguistical knowledge of a child develops in early childhood, Piaget’s cognitive development is
achieved when a child shifts from a feeling to another (Lewis, 1977). In other words, the linguistic
shifts imply adjustment and modulation in language usage. Francis (1972) indicates that in early
language development these shifts contain shifts from syntagmatic responses to paradigmatic
responses. Certainly, rearing practices and social development affects and shapes the child
language (Lewis, 1977; Ringler, Kennell, Jarvella, Navojosky, & Klaus, 1975). In particular,
Ringler et al. (1975) also concluded that the amount and type of the mother’s linguistic speech
pattern influence child’s (of two years) language usage as they tested out the mother-child
linguistic contact. The experiment depends on language exposure of two groups, in which one of
the groups received more time and linguistical contact with the mother. The experimental group,
the group who received more maternal contact, shows significant linguistic varieties. Another
study that examined five-year-old twins showed that children develop “idioglossia” in which they
have received little stimulation to adults’ contact. Remarkably, the twins resulted in unclear
disclosing of certain usages. However, when they got separated and put within a different context,
they were forced to engage, and they resulted in a notable language increase (Luria & Yudovich,
1971). It is important to specify that the role of stimulation is indicated multiply not just within
linguistics cognitive studies but also in the generative approach as Chomsky evidently encourages
its significance even in language acquisition, in which Universal Grammar is carried out within
the context (Chomsky, 1981). Moreover, research that examines ‘physical deprivation’ of early
language acquisition suffers from ambiguity when methodologies are difficult to be employed
(Lewis, 1977).
2.3 Greeting Speech Act
Greeting is a cross-cultural pragmatic speech act, which initiates or closes an interaction in a
certain discourse (Pinto, 2008). Greeting also serves a great deal in acknowledging another
person’s presence through a linguistic/verbal form of exchange (Rasmussen, Kristiansen, &
Andersen, 2019). Thus, greeting contains certain rules and boundaries of engagement in human
interaction, which shape the notion of greeting, though it differs among different cultures (Knuf,
1989). Human greeting may include facial expressions, gestures, verbal movement, and certain
utterances- with regard to cultural norms and traditions (Trovato et al., 2015). Holmes and Wilson
(2017) state: "Greeting formulas universally serve an affective function of establishing nonArab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

337

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

threatening contact and rapport but their precise content is clearly culture specific" (p. 308) in
which all these formulas extendedly lead to various complications.
There are few studies devoted toward greeting speech act among children, as Lokken
(2006) noted in a study of greetings among Norwegian toddler peers. As well as supporting the
linguistical cognitive approach, Lokken (2006) study found that greetings and welcomes among
children of nine to thirty months were affected by other peers in the day-care. Also, the study
shows that greeting act is affected by the cultural aspect as indicated in studies of adults’
greetings. Unsurprisingly, he found that the knowledge of greeting is expanded as noted that the
one and two-year children were more active and attentive greeters than other subjects. On the
other hand, Brenner and Mueller (1982), Lokken (2006) and Stambak and Verba (1986) confirm
that the act of playing, somehow, avoid toddlers of being engaged in certain interactions. Thus,
some research studies specify the difficulty of human greeting due to its engagement differences
vis-a-vis cultures (Rababah & Malkawi, 2012; Trovato et al., 2015). Though a universal and
unified form of greeting was proposed to ease this complication, it has not emerged yet (Trovato
et al., 2015). Rababah and Malkawi (2012) believe that the greeting act is even harder for
foreigners to maintain; their study finds that different greeting utterances are used by Jordanian
people according to the setting, age, sex, and relationship. A study of Muslim and Hindu greetings
reveals that Muslim kids sometimes misinterpret Hindus non-verbal greetings, though they are
living together (Baseer, Alvi, & Zafran, 2012).
2.3. Research questions
This study is an attempt to investigate the subject’s ability to differentiate greeting speech act
upon two different contexts and cutlers (Saudi and American cultures) as long as the greeting
context shapes the act of greeting. Thus, the study considers greeting differentiations of both
cultures. As it is indicated in the introduction, this study aims to establish a clear concept about
childhood greeting through answers to the following three research questions:
1. Does children’s greeting differ from those of adults?
2. Does greeting differ between two languages with regard to monolingual brain hypotheses?
3. Do bilingual children perceptually differentiate between the two languages?
4. Methodology
This study followed a qualitative research approach by adopting a case study research method
utilizing participant observation as the data collection tool. Guest, Namey, and Mitchell (2012)
state that:
Participant observation is in some ways both the most natural and the most challenging of
qualitative data collection methods. It connects the researcher to the most basic of human
experiences, discovering through immersion and participation the hows and whys of
human behavior in a particular context (p. 75).
4.1 Participant of the Study
The data of this study is derived from the conduct of a two-year-old girl (who is the researcher’s
daughter). The girl was born and has lived in Terre Haute, Indiana, United States of America.
The girl has been raised in two different communities; the Saudi community (Arabic speaking
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

338

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

community) to which she belongs, and American community (English-speaking community) in
which she was born. In other words, she is acquiring a minority language (Arabic) at home but is
being educated in a majority language (English) in the day-care. It is important to specify that
though the girl used to go to the day-care, from the beginning of this study, the girl has not been
attending day-care until the last half of the second month of this observation this is addressed as
one of the limitations of this paper in the conclusion section). To this end, the subject’s matrix
language is Arabic, as long as she used to be more exposed to her parents than to the outer world.
4.2 Data Collecting
Basically, the data collection method utilized in this study is an open observation conducted for
two months. This type of study was chosen as it allows the researcher to encounter and select data
in greater depth, than observing one case for just a limited time. Besides the open observation, in
order to study the greeting speech act more carefully, Barns and Nobel bookstore was chosen as
a place for observation. The subject was seated right beside the front door in order to enhance the
chance of receiving and initiating the speech act of greeting. This part of the data collection was
done twice a week for two hours a day. However, other places too have been used for the open
observation, such as hotel room, restaurants, and hospitals.
5. Data Analysis
The data of this open observation is analyzed on regard to greeter’s acquaintedness (relationship
to the subject), gender, and community (wither the American or Saudi). On other words, the
analysis of this paper is based on how the subject is familiar to the greater, e.g., the greater might
be a friend of the mother or could be known by the subject from the subject’s day-care. The
greeter’s gender is one of the study’s variables. By that, the greeter’s reaction toward greeting
speech act is considered upon greeter’s gender. Therefore, three parameters were measured during
greeting act analysis, which are:
a) the greeting act of unfamiliar females of both communities: Saudi and American
b) the greeting act of familiar females of both communities: Saudi and American
c) Initiating Greeting and Responding to Familiar and Unfamiliar Males of both cultures:
Saudis and Americans.
It is important to specify that the subject’s gestures associated to greeting speech act, such as
waving a hand, nodding head or smiling are counted down as initiating greeting or responding
to it.
5.1 Initiating Greeting and Responding to Unfamiliar Females of both communities (Saudi and
American)
5.1.1 Initiating Greeting and Responding to Unfamiliar American Females
During gathering the open observational data, when unacquainted American female encounters
the subject, the subject welcomes receiving a greeting from her. Even though the subject has no
prior knowledge to or relation with the greeter. The subject might respond to the greeting act by
waving her hand or by replying “Hi” and smiling.
Out of thirty-two greetings, the two-year subject has initiated the greeting twelve times
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

339

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

and responded to them sixteen times. Sometimes, the subject initiates the greeting by just waving
her hand; which is one of the surprising findings, indicating that she is able to imbibe the
American greeting concept in her mind. Notably, the subject responds to the use of the English
language but not the greeter’s appearance. In some cases, the subject refers to people speaking
the English language as being “Hi” community. For instance, she says “Mama, mamma, ya hi”
which means “mother, mother those are hi”. Significantly, she sometimes acknowledges the
speakers without even seeing them- but throughout hearing them speaking English of course- and
informs her mother that the speakers are “Hi”. Obviously, she refers to the speaking community
via hearing them speaking English not necessarily upon their look or physical appearance each
time.
5.1.2 Initiating Greeting and Responding to Unfamiliar Arabic Females
On the other hand, when an unfamiliar Arabic Saudi female steps by, the subject doesn’t show
any interest in initiating the greeting or accepting the same. In all the cases, unknown Arabic
Saudi females don’t initiate greeting with the subject, but with the subject’s mother instead. Thus,
the subject receives zero greeting and because of that, initiates zero greeting as well. Unknown
Saudi females greet the mother of the subject with “Alsalamo Alaikum” or raising the hand highas a companion gesture of the greeting act.
5.2 Initiating Greeting and Responding to known/ familiar Females of both communities (Saudi
and American)
5.2.1 Initiating Greeting and Responding to familiar American Females
Moving to the part of the greeters acquainted to the subject, and especially the known American
females, the same case is happening with the unfamiliar American greeters to the subject
(previous section: 5.1.1). The subject is flexible to initiate and respond by waving her hand or by
saying “Hi”. Throughout the time of the observation, the subject never greets with any other
word rather than “hi”, though the known female (who works in her daycare) usually says
“Hello”. As has been specified in the methodology section, the subject has joined the day-care
lately. Thus, the occasions of receiving and initiating the greeting with known American females
are limited, because the subject doesn’t engage with known adult females except during her time
at day-care. Out of twenty greetings offered in the day-care, the subject initiates two and responds
to seven. Day-care is representing a new environment for the subject (without the parents), it
might be challenging for her to initiate or respond to greetings. Particularly, the subject dose
initiates greetings with familiar and unfamiliar American females upon two things: a) the physical
appearance and social dressing code as Americans, e.g., not wearing a headscarf. b) in term of
hearing them speaking the English language before seeing them (in this case, she often informs
the mother that there are some English greeters).
5.2.2 Initiating Greeting and Responding to Familiar Arabic Females
However, when an acquainted Saudi Arabian female visits the subject’s family, the subject gets
excited and pronounces the visitor’s name repeatedly but does not resort to the Arabic way of
greeting (which is kissing the cheeks and shaking hands). Moreover, the subject never extends
the American way of greeting to the known and even unknown Saudis. For example, when Brooj,
a friend of the subject’s mother, enters, the subject repeatedly says: “Booz. Booz. Booz”. This
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

340

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

does not happen with all of her mother’s friends, but only with those, the subject loves most.
Otherwise, she ignores the known visitors by not greeting them at all. On the contrary, adult Saudi
female greeters do not usually initiate greeting with the subject. Instead they greet the mother.
However, they occasionally ask the subject “How you doing?” or “How are you?” right after
they greet the mother with the Arabic greeting style. Remarkably, she never greets an Arabicspeaking woman with the American greeting, e.g., by saying “Hi”.
5.2 Initiating Greeting and Responding to Familiar and Unfamiliar Males of both cultures:
Saudis and Americans
More surprisingly, the subject never initiates or responds to any greeter of the male genderwhether the male greeter is Saudi or American. It is important to specify that just one male
initiated greeting, but the subject fails even to reply or to show some interest in initiating the
greeting. For instance, when a woman entered Barnes and Noble, the subject initiated the greeting
saying: “Hi”, to which the women responded “Oh, hi”; a man saw what happened and tried to
greet the subject by saying: “Oh, hi here”. The subject turned her face away and refused to reply.
Significantly, it was the only man who ever initiated greeting during the two months of the openobservation. The only case of her initiating the greeting to a male was when she was in the drive
thru’ and heard a voice speaking in English; this was at the end of the second month of the
observation and mentioned as a limitation of this study in regard to the expansion of the subject’s
knowledge of greeting act. It is also possible that she did not recognize the gender’s sound via
the speaker of the drive-through. Table: 1 displays the findings relating to greetings
initiated/responded to by the subject, classified as to community, gender, and identity of the
greeter. On the other hand, acquainted Saudi males a few times ask the subject some pragmatic
discourse questions to open a conversation instead of a greeting, as well as familiar female
greeters, do.
Table 1. Frequency of subject’s initiations and responses of greeting/ speech act.
Subject’s
Reaction
toward
greeting
Speech act

Unknown
American
Females

Known
American
Females

Unknown
Arabic
Females

Initiates
greeting
(even by
waving her
hand)
Responds
to greeting

12 times

2 times

0 time

16 times

7 times

0 time

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Known
Arabic
females
(who are
friends of
the
mother)
Initiate by
names 6
times

Known
and
unknown/
American
Males

Known and
unknown/
American
Males

1 (in the
drive thru)

0 time

3 times

0 time

0 time

341

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

6. Findings with observational examples
There are several examples that clarify the subject’s understanding of greeting upon the context.
For instance, in the hospital, when she listens to the nurses speaking English, she says: “Mama,
mamma, ya hi” which means “mother, mother those are hi”. By that, when she hears the English
language, she indicates that those are the people who say hi. This gives clear evidence that the
subject perceptually distinguishes between both communities and language; in that regard, she
uses the certain ways of greeting to each greeter with regard to her/his community, according to
the finding of Rababah and Malkawi (2012) as well as Baseer et al. (2012) who explain that
greeting speech act is with regard to the greeter’s context, identity, and age. As previously
mentioned in analysis section (5.2) earlier, the subject perceives greeter’s sex in which she
unlikely tend not to respond to men as it shown during the open observation that they don’t prefer
greeting a two-year-girl.
Initiating greeting act with unacquainted American Females can be analysed in regard to
the realization of speaker’s race and physical characteristics as specifically indicated in early
language acquisition that children from an early stage acknowledge physical diversification
(Follari, 2014); however this is not always the case here, because, in the hotel room, the room
service lady knocked on the door and said: “ room service”, to which the subject responded by
saying, “ Mama, mama ya hi” which means “ mother, mother, it’s a hi”. It is thus clear that the
subject distinguishes between the two communities through the use of language and recognizes
each language as having an entity different from the other. In that regard, she initiates and
responds to greeters within the right pragmatic speech act (Riches, Tomasello, & Conti-Ramsden,
2005). For instance, she never mixes up by greeting an Arabic female with “Hi”. Clearly, this is
not what monolingual believers would expect, as long as they believe that the person possesses
one language system and inserts different lexicons into that system ( Francis & Gutiérrez, 2012).
This finding supports (Genesee, 2015; Maneva & Genesee, 2002) in which infants are
found to have different responses varying with the speaker’s language.
The most notable point is aligned to cognitivists’ beliefs toward the necessity of linguistics
and social stimulation in regard to language acquisition (Lewis, 1977; Riches et al., 2005; Ringler
et al., 1975) More specifically, the receptive aspect of what the children have received regarding
the quantity and quality of exposure in the findings of Ringler and his colleagues’ study.
Similarly, this study also investigated that the subject greets people depending on how she is used
to being greeted by them, and not on how they [adults] greet themselves, or how they greet her
mother. For instance, the subject never imitates how the unacquainted Arabic females greet her
mother; instead, she never greets them because they basically ignore her. On the other hand, lots
of unacquainted American females pay attention to her and greet her without having any
reservation with her. That leads to what Riches et al. (2005) specify in his book as children’s
acquisition of language, in which at this stage, child’s language is not an adult language, though
language input is somehow taken from adults.
Further explanation, this study shows that the subject perceived and comprehended
greeting parameters of both contexts from adults’ social communications, however she applies
what engages her socially with others in greeting act. Also, this agrees with the contention of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

342

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

Trovato et al. (2015) and Pinto (2008) in specifying the nature of the greeting act- as it is
culturally comprehended and implemented within its act. Thus, the subject also ignores males, as
long as she receives not much attention or greeting from them, and until now conceptually she
might be believing that she doesn’t have to greet them.
Finally, the greeting process is comprehended and acquired in the language context as a
pragmatic speech act: as the subject involves herself and sees, she imitates the way of producing
the speech act. This is what cognitivists, such as Riches et al. (2005) and Bybee (2010), predict.
Also, the high frequency of the word uses, as Bybee (2010) explained in her work, affects words
usage. For instance, the subject uses “Hi” in greeting all the time over any other English greeting
word due to its high-usage frequency in spoken English language, according to the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (see Table: 2)
Table 2. A Summary of the Study’s Findings in regard to Previous Studies
The Study Findings

Agrees with Previous
Studies/Linguistical
Approaches


Greeting process is comprehended and
acquired within language context as a
pragmatic speech act.

Cognitivists.
Specifically, in (H.
Francis, 1972; Lewis,
1977; Riches et al.,
2005; Ringler et al.,
1975).


Though she code-mixes utterances, she
never mixes greetings upon the context.

(Rababah & Malkawi,
2012)

Disagrees with
Previous
Studies/Linguistical
Approaches

Monolinguals


Greeting speech act depends on the
greeter’s identity, context, and gender
(Riches et al., 2005)

Notable point, she never greets as
adults, but she greets as when adults greet her.


As she involves and sees, she imitates

Cognitivists (H.
Francis, 1972; Lewis,
1977; Riches et al.,
2005; Ringler et al.,
1975)
and Generativists

7. Conclusion
At the end of this work, this paper answers the first question of this study: that children’s greeting
does not differ from that of adults when it is copied from an adult’s input; however, children’s
greeting reflects what adults greet children with (not on how adults greet each other). Thereafter,
the knowledge of greeting will be expanded as the child grows into an adult. Thus, for future
studies, greater attention to this type of research will have more value, considering that this study
took just two months and knowledge of greeting. The researcher realizes that overgeneralization
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

343

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

might happen in this case, in which the early childhood acquisition goes back and forth all the
time until it gets adequate to the adult’s language level. However, future studies might also
investigate more about child-to-child greeting speech act in the frame of bilingual and
monolingual children in term of previous literature that adheres the fact of child’s knowledge of
welcoming and greeting beyond peers’ communications (Lokken, 2006).
With regard to investigating monolingualism, the second question of this research, this
study shows that though children code-mix utterances by using one systematic grammar and
combining languages lexicon (as in this case, the subject uses the Arabic grammar because it is
the matrix language and code-switched with some English words), the subject never mixes up
greetings with regard to the speaker of a particular community, and by that one would expect that
if the subject had acquired both languages simultaneously from birth, the subject wouldn’t rely
more on the language aspect as in this study. Genesee (2015) specified in his study that learning
two languages simultaneously from birth wouldn’t ravel the acquisition of both languages. In that
regard, this can be considered the second limitation of this study, which requires to be considered
in future work.
The answer to the last research question is that the subject perceptually demonstrates two
different entities, allowing her to distinguish between the two languages and uses the correct form
of greeting with each member of the two communities (Saudis and Americans). Hence, this
finding disagrees with the monolingual hypothesis in a way that monolinguals assume one
language pattern in the human brain for both entities, by that, the speaker mixes utterances in
regard to grammatical and structural word usage of both systems.
A bout the Author:
Abrar Basabrin is an EFL instructor at the English Language Institute at King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Her Master of Arts from the Department of Arts and
Humanities was granted with the major of Languages, Literature, and Linguistics along with
TESL, from Indiana State University, the United States of America. Ms. Basabrin’s over five
years of teaching experience to adult language learners in an EFL context.
ORCiD https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8630-2004

References
Baseer, A., Alvi, S. D., & Zafran, F. (2012). Culture Bound Differences in Mode of
Greetings in Hindus and Muslims-----A Case in Intercultural Communication.
Culture, 3(10).
Bhatia, T. K. (2018). Bilingualism and Multilingualism. In The Palgrave Handbook of
Applied Linguistics Research Methodology (pp. 681-701): Springer.
Bouchard, J. (2015). A conversation analysis-based investigation of code-switching in the
English language classroom in Quebec: Texas A&M University-Commerce.
Brenner, J., & Mueller, E. (1982). Shared meaning in boy toddlers' peer relations. Child
development, 380-391.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

344

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

Brice, A., & Anderson, R. (1999). Code mixing in a young bilingual child. Communication
Disorders Quarterly, 21(1), 17-22.
Bybee, J. (2010). Language, usage and cognition: Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1981). A Note on Non-control PRO. Journal of Linguistic Research, 1(4), 111.
Follari, L. (2014). Valuing Diversity in Early Childhood Education: Pearson.
Francis, H. (1972). Toward an explanation of the syntagmatic-paradigmatic shift. Child
development, 949-958.
Francis, W., & Gutiérrez, M. (2012). Bilingual recognition memory: Stronger performance
but weaker levels-of-processing effects in the less fluent language. Memory &
cognition, 40(3), 496-503.
Genesee, F. (1989). Early bilingual development: One language or two? Journal of Child
Language, 16(1), 161-179.
Genesee, F. (2006). Bilingual first language acquisition in perspective. Childhood
bilingualism: Research on infancy through school age, 45-67.
Genesee, F. (2015). Myths about early childhood bilingualism. Canadian
Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 56(1), 6.
Guest, G., Namey, E. E., & Mitchell, M. L. (2012). Collecting qualitative data: A field
manual for applied research: Sage.
Hervais-Adelman, A., Pefkou, M., & Golestani, N. (2014). Bilingual speech-in-noise:
Neural bases of semantic context use in the native language. Brain and language,
132, 1-6.
Holmes, J., & Wilson, N. (2017). An introduction to sociolinguistics: Routledge.
Knuf, J. (1989). Where cultures meet: Ritual code and organizational boundary
management. Research on Language & Social Interaction, 23(1-4), 109-138.
Lewis, M. (1977). Language, cognitive development, and personality: A synthesis. Journal
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 16(4), 646-661.
Lieberman, P. (1968). Primate vocalizations and human linguistic ability. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 44(6), 1574-1584.
Lokken, G. (2006, 2006). The toddler as a social construct in early childhood education
pedagogy.
Luria, A. R., & Yudovich, F. I. (1971). Speech and the Development of Mental Processes in
the Child.
Maneva, B., & Genesee, F. (2002, 2002). Bilingual babbling: Evidence for language
differentiation in dual language acquisition.
Paradis, J., Nicoladis, E., Crago, M., & Genesee, F. (2011). Bilingual children's acquisition
of the past tense: A usage-based approach. Journal of Child Language, 38(3), 554578.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C., Lewedeg, V., & Oller, D. K. (1997). The relation of input
factors to lexical learning by bilingual infants. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18(1), 4158.
Pinto, D. (2008). Passing greetings and interactional style: A cross-cultural study of
American English and Peninsular Spanish. Multilingua-Journal of Cross-Cultural
and Interlanguage Communication, 27(4), 371-388.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

345

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Code-switched Greeting by Bilingual Saudi-American Subject

Basabrin

Rababah, M. A., & Malkawi, N. A. A. (2012). The linguistic etiquette of greeting and leavetaking in Jordanian Arabic. European Scientific Journal, ESJ, 8(18).
Rasmussen, G., Kristiansen, E. D., & Andersen, E. M. (2019). Working out Availability,
Unavailability, and Awayness in Social Face-to-Face Encounters-the Case of
Dementia. Discourse Studies, 21(3).
Riches, N. G., Tomasello, M., & Conti-Ramsden, G. (2005). Verb learning in children with
SLI: Frequency and spacing effects. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 48(6), 1397-1411.
Ringler, N. M., Kennell, J. H., Jarvella, R., Navojosky, B. J., & Klaus, M. H. (1975).
Mother-to-child speech at 2 years—effects of early postnatal contact. The Journal of
pediatrics, 86(1), 141-144.
Rose, S. A., Feldman, J. F., & Jankowski, J. J. (2009). A cognitive approach to the
development of early language. Child development, 80(1), 134-150.
Snape, N., & Kupisch, T. (2016). Second Language Acquisition: Second Language Systems:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Stambak, M., & Verba, M. (1986). Organization of social play among toddlers: An
ecological approach. Process and outcome in peer relationships, 229-247.
Sternberg, R. J., & Sternberg, K. (2016). Cognitive psychology: Nelson Education.
Trovato, G., Zecca, M., Do, M., Terlemez, Ö., Kuramochi, M., Waibel, A., . . . Takanishi,
A. (2015). A novel greeting selection system for a culture-adaptive humanoid robot.
International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 12(4), 34.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

346

