Arab World English Journal (January 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.226

Theses ID 226

Pp. 1-90

A Teacher-Based Evaluation of the English Language Textbook (Get Ready1&2)
for Saudi Fourth Grade Primary
Abdullah Deyap Arar Alenezi
Ministry of Education, Arar city, Saudi Arabia

Author: Abdullah Deyap Arar Alenezi
Thesis Title: Title: A Teacher-Based Evaluation of the English Language Textbook (Get
Ready1&2) for Saudi Fourth Grade Primary
Subject/major: TESOL
Institution: School of Humanities, Languages and Social Sciences University of Salford
Degree: MA in TESOL& Applied Linguistics
Year of award: 2014
Supervisor: Sue Bromby
Keywords: ELT, primary school, mixed method study, Textbook evaluation, Teachers`
perspective
Abstract:
This study aimed at evaluating the EFL textbook ` Get Ready 1&2` used in the fourth grade of
primary school from the perspectives of male and female teachers in Arar city in Saudi Arabia.
The textbook was published by Macmillan, and it was specially developed for use within Saudi
Arabia’s cultural environment and for both boys’ and girls’ schools. The Ministry of Education
has started using this textbook in schools in the current academic year 2013/2014. This study will
focus on teachers’ perspectives, and it will be a macro evaluation. The researcher designed a
mixed method study by gathering both quantitative and qualitative data. The researcher
distributed a close-ended questionnaire consisted of 55 items and nine categories for 30 teachers
to gather quantitative data and carried out an interview with five male teachers to gather
qualitative data. The study evaluated the textbook in terms of the layout and design, objectives,
skills, supplementary materials, topics and content, cultural values, structure and vocabulary,
activities and tasks, and teachers’ manual. In general, the findings of the study revealed that
teachers were satisfied about the textbook in all of the nine categories with some demerits. The
cultural values category got the highest mean score of 4.54 out of 5.00 whereas the skills
category got the lowest mean score of 3.47 out of 5.00. In the light of these findings, the
researcher reports some recommendations to address the drawbacks of the textbook and other
problems that have an impact on properly delivering the textbook.
Cite as: Alenezi, A. D. A. (2014). A Teacher-Based Evaluation of the English Language Textbook
(Get Ready1&2). School of Humanities, Languages and Social Sciences University of Salford.
(Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab World English Journal (ID Number: 226. January 2019, 190. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.226
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

A Teacher-Based Evaluation of the English
Language Textbook (Get Ready1&2) for Saudi
Fourth Grade Primary
Abdullah Deyap Arar Alenezi

MA in TESOL and Applied Linguistics

School of Humanities, Languages and Social Sciences
University of Salford

Supervised by

Sue Bromby

January 2014

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Abstract
This study aimed at evaluating the EFL textbook ` Get Ready 1&2` used in the fourth
grade of primary school from the perspectives of male and female teachers in Arar city
in Saudi Arabia. The textbook was published by Macmillan and it was specially
developed for use within Saudi Arabia’s cultural environment and for both boys’ and
girls’ schools. The Ministry of Education has started using this textbook in schools in the
current academic year 2013/2014. This study will focus on teachers’ perspectives and it
will be a macro evaluation. The researcher designed a mixed method study by gathering
both quantitative and qualitative data. The researcher distributed a close-ended
questionnaire consisted of 55 items and 9 categories for 30 teachers to gather
quantitative data and carried out an interview with 5 male teachers to gather
qualitative data. The study evaluated the textbook in terms of the layout and design,
objectives, skills, supplementary materials, topics and content, cultural values, structure
and vocabulary, activities and tasks, and teachers’ manual. In general, the findings of the
study revealed that teachers were satisfied about the textbook in all of the nine
categories with some demerits. The cultural values category got the highest mean score
4.54 out of 5.00 whereas the skills category got the lowest mean score 3.47 out of 5.00.
In the light of these findings, the researcher reports some recommendations to address
the drawbacks of the textbook and other problems that have an impact on delivering
the textbook in an appropriate way.
Key words: Textbook evaluation, Teachers` perspectives, ELT, primary school.

I

I

II

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Table of contents
Abstract
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Introduction:
1.2 Significance of the Study:
1.3 The Structure of the Study:
1.5 Current Policy toward EFL in Saudi State Education:
1.6 Purpose of the Study:
Chapter 2 : Literature Review
2.1 Theoretical Studies:
2.1.1 The role of ELT materials in the classroom:
2.1.2 Why Do We Need Textbook Evaluation?
2.1.3 Approaches to evaluation:
2.1.4 Evaluation criteria:
2.1.5 Using a checklist as an evaluation tool:
2.2 Empirical Studies:
2.2.1 International studies:
2.2.2 Saudi context studies:
2.2.3 Comments on the empirical studies in Saudi context:
Chapter 3: Methodology
3.1 Design of the study:
3.2 Participants:
3.3 Instruments:
3.3.1 First phase: Questionnaires
3.3.1.1 Questionnaire`s Validity and Reliability:
3.3.2 Second phase: Interviews
3.3.2.1 Interview’s Validity and Reliability:
3.4 Pilot study:
3.5 Data analysis:
3.6 Ethical considerations:
Chapter 4: Results and Discussions
4.1 Introduction:
4.2 Data Analysis:
4.3 Research questions` answers:
4.4 Conclusion:
Chapter 5: Conclusion and Recommendations
5.1 Conclusion:
5.2 Recommendations:
5.3 Limitations of the study:
5.4 Suggestions for future research:
Bibliography
II

I
1
2
4
6
9
11
11
15
18
21
26
27
28
31
33
35
36
38
38
40
41
42
42
43
43
46
46
46
57
58
59
60
61
63

III

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 1
Appendix 2
Appendix 3
Appendix 4
Appendix 5
Appendix 6
Appendix 7

68
70
71
73
74
75
84
List of Tables

Table (3-1) the distribution of the sample according to gender.

Page 37

Table (3-2) sample distribution according to qualification.

Page 37

Table (3-3) sample distribution according to teaching experience.

Page 37

Table (4-1): teachers` perception on (Layout and Design) of the textbook.

Page 48

Table (4-2): teachers` perception on (Objectives) of the textbook.

Page 49

Table (4-3): teachers` perception on (Skills) of the textbook.

Page 50

Table (4-4): teachers` perceptions on (Supplementary Materials) of the textbook.

Page 51

Table (4-5): teachers` perceptions on (Topics and Contents) of the textbook.

Page 52

Table (4-6): teachers` perceptions on (Culture Values) of the textbook.

Page 53

Table (4-7): teachers` perceptions on (Structure and Vocabulary) of the textbook.

Page 54

Table (4-8): teachers` perceptions on (Activities and Tasks) of the textbook.

Page 55

Table (4-9): teachers` perceptions on (Teacher’s Manual) of the textbook.

Page 56

Table (4-10) Mean score and SD for all categories.

Page 58

III

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

In the Name of Allah, the Most Graceful, the Most Merciful
I thank Allah the Almighty for giving me the blessings and the strength to do this work.
Also, I would like to express my grateful thanks to my supervisor Sue Bromby for her
effort, advice and guidance. I will be always in debt to her for her unlimited care and
overwhelming kindness. My deepest respect and gratitude also to my father, mother,
sisters and brothers for their prayers and care. My deepest thanks and love go to my
lovely wife Reem and my son Yousef for their support and patience throughout my master’s
study. My deepest respect and gratitude also go to my friends Faisel Alenezi, Mohammed
Alrwaili, Nawy Alenezi and Hamad Alenezi who extended their hands for help throughout
my master’s study. I also wish to express my appreciation to all teachers who participated in
the study.

IV

IV

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Chapter1:

Introduction

1.1 Introduction:
A key principle behind the Saudi educational system is the responsibility of each
individual to achieve learning, supported by the state’s responsibility to offer access to
education. Another pillar of the system is the principle of using Arabic as a medium for
all learning, although there is acknowledgement of the requirement for preparing its
citizens for the international arena and thus the need for citizens to acquire English as a
second language. A further aim of the government is to encourage a high level of English
skills in order to allow the development and exchange of expertise in areas of the arts,
science and technology, and to promote the Islamic faith as well as a general
contribution to human society (Al-Hajailan, 2003).
The primary purpose for the current study however is to investigate the connection
between the English language textbook and the learning achieved by students, and to
contribute to evaluating the textbooks selected for use in English teaching in the Saudi
Arabian context. It is important that school children’s learning needs are taken into
consideration and applied to a careful evaluation of the textbook selected. This is
especially significant as the selection of a textbook for the teaching of children will have
a major impact upon Saudi adults of the future, who need to develop a good level of
English skills in order to compete in an increasingly global business environment and to
be provided with the relevant skills for this. An important element in such an education
is a textbook which addresses these needs.
It was decided to conduct an evaluation of the textbook used for primary children
in their fourth year in the Saudi education system in the city of Arar. This choice was

1

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

made due to the fact that fourth year schoolchildren in Arar are currently using a
comparatively new book. Therefore, this evaluation is necessary in order to identify
whether the textbook is suitable for the needs of this group of learners in terms of aims,
values, subjects and content, lexis and structure, skills focus and activities, as well as in
the supplementary materials, layout and design and teachers’ guidance. This evaluative
project may offer a basis for revising and enhancing the above-mentioned aspects of the
textbook. It is particularly important that this textbook, since it forms a basis for these
learners’ initial experience of learning English.
The textbook which is evaluated in this study is `Get Ready 1&2` written by Harper,
Tennant, and Arnold(2013) and published by Macmillan, which is a textbook aimed at
fourth year primary schoolchildren aged 10 years. The textbook will be subjected to
macro evaluation which is teacher-based and utilising multiple methods for the
collection of data based on both quantitative and qualitative approaches. Ellis (1997)
describes macro evaluation as an approach which seeks to establish in general terms
whether or not a full set of resources has been effective.
1.2 Significance of the Study:
Materials evaluation for the English language classroom is a process which is viewed
from different perspectives. According to Hutchinson and Waters (1987), materials
evaluation is a process of analysis which seeks to fit possible solutions to the needs of
the sponsor as identified through needs analysis. However, this definition does not
include other stakeholders, such as, importantly, teachers and learners (ibid, p. 97). It is
essential that materials utilised for education are analysed in order that justification can
be given for resources selected, and so that these resources can be adapted and
improved if necessary. Further, both learning and teaching are impacted by choice of

2

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

materials, which according to Nunan (1988) are a key part of the curriculum and should
offer an example of good practice in the classroom, model the curriculum and ideally
assist the teacher with their professional development. .
According to Weir and Roberts (1994), materials evaluation takes place firstly to
create a body of evidence to support academic discussion and development of theories
of language teaching and teacher training, and secondly to test the appropriateness and
effectiveness of methods and approaches in a specific context or environment.
As previously mentioned, the selected textbook is currently in use in the fourth year
of primary education, which is the first year where English is taught. Therefore, in this
initial phase of English learning it is vital that students are engaged and inspired to
learn English as well as provided with a comprehensive grounding in the basics of the
language, and in a manner which is suitable for the age group.

Thus, textbook

evaluation is an essential task here as according to Palmer (1922), effective initial
language teaching allows the student to progress with ease at later stages.
The introduction of English as a compulsory subject for fourth year primary students
is a recent development, and the latest textbook to be used, ‘Get Ready 1&2’, has been
introduced for the school year 2013-14 across primary schools for both boys and girls.
Any newly-introduced course of study requires validation through a thorough
evaluation from the perspective of both learners and educators. This study does not
aim to conduct this full-scale evaluation, but rather to address one aspect of this, in
evaluating the textbook chosen for the course. The current study is significant in both
its practical and theoretical contributions. In terms of theory, the study will form part of
the body of evidence concerning what are the key features in creating effective
materials for teaching, and specifically for the teaching of the English language. This

3

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

area is highly important because of the significance of English in global business, and
the need for Saudi Arabia to involve itself in this as effectively as possible, particularly in
light of its oil resources. Therefore, the evaluation conducted for this study might be of
benefit to the Saudi Education Ministry in creating a model for materials evaluations
conducted in the future. Moreover, this study also seeks to contribute by investigating
through survey the ways in which teaching professionals can most effectively evaluate
the selected textbook, and make recommendations on which sections of the textbook
may be effective in fulfilling their aims and which section might usefully be
supplemented with additional resources. In practical terms, as well as benefiting
teachers and learners, the study may be useful to creators and publishers of textbooks
in offering feedback for improvement, as well as to those with responsibility for taking
decisions regarding textbooks.

1.3 The Structure of the Study:
The first chapter of the study provides an introduction to and background
information for the study, as well as outlining policies of the Saudi government on
education and a background to English language teaching in Saudi Arabia. A review of
the relevant literature is given in Chapter Two, concerning previous research of both a
practical and theoretical nature on the evaluation of textbooks. Chapter Three discusses
the choice of methodology for the study, and presents a justification of this choice. In
addition the instruments used for the study are discussed in detail, and ethical
considerations are addressed. Chapter Four presents the results and analysis based on
the data gathered for the study, as well as providing answers for the research questions
set, with the inclusion of recommendations made by participants in the study. Chapter

4

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

five, which is the final chapter of the study, contains a summary and conclusion to the
study along with key recommendations arising from the findings.
1.4 Overview of the English Language in the Saudi Educational System:
English language was first included in Saudi education in 1927, under the newlycreated General Direction of Education, and at this time English tuition was provided in
both primary and secondary schools (Al-Hajailan, 2003). The key reasons for the
introduction of English language teaching during that period included the influx of
international investment following the uncovering of Saudi Arabia’s oil resources. In
addition, Saudi Arabia received enormous numbers of pilgrims to such Islamic sites as
Mecca and Medina, and there was therefore a requirement to allow communication with
those pilgrims who did not speak Arabic, and English was selected as a powerful global
language, and in addition, one which could be used as a channel for spreading the
message of Islam to non-Muslims.
In recent times, Saudi Arabia has shown extremely fast economic and industrial
development, and this phenomenon has altered the way of life in the country and
increased the average income. This development has also increased the influence of
English, which is now used in many areas of life, due to the influx of non-Arabic
speaking workers, and English is now commonly used in shops, restaurants and
hospitals for example. In addition to this, many university departments, including
medical, engineering, pharmaceutical and computing departments, require a certain
level of English proficiency for applicants. In light of the above, The Ministry of
Education has introduced compulsory teaching of English language across all state
schools (Al-Motairi, 2005). The aims of including English language on the curriculum as
set out in the curriculum document of 2001. (Aims are listed in appendix1).

5

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

The Saudi education system is based upon three stages of schooling. The first of these
is primary education, which contains six years’ of education and involves children of
between 6 and 12 years of age. After primary education there is intermediate education,
which applies to children of between 12 and 15 years of age. Finally, secondary
education is given in three grades to students from 16 to 18 years of age. At
intermediate and secondary stages, English Language forms a core part of the National
Curriculum. English tuition is provided in four weekly lessons of 45 minutes. English
language was made compulsory in year six of primary education in 2004, with two
classes per week. This was introduced in response to issues with achievement in
English language across all levels of tuition. In addition, it is observed that private
schools in Saudi Arabia frequently introduce English much earlier, and sometimes from
the first year of primary education, when students are 6 years of age.
1.5 Current Policy toward EFL in Saudi State Education:
The policy of Saudi Arabia on English language education was altered in 2011, when
the teaching of English language for fourth year primary students was sanctioned by
The Saudi Council of Ministers (see appendix 1 for the objectives of teaching English in
the 4th grade primary). This policy followed evidence demonstrating that children of
this age could effectively learn English. The policy states that:
1- English should be taught from fourth year of primary education and this applies to
both male and female education. English tuition will form part of the core modules of
the curriculum from the 2011-12 academic year. Teachers of English must hold an
appropriate qualification and be approved by the relevant committee of the Education
Ministry.

6

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

2- Further, the Ministry of Education is required to prepare recommendations for the
Council of Ministers concerning the possibility of English being taught before year four
of primary school, in order that the relevant plans can be made (Altayar, 2012).
The introduction of English tuition in fourth year followed on from the introduction
of English from Sixth year onwards which occurred in 2008-9 under the English
Language Development Project (ELDP). The ELDP has as its objective the provision of
“overall solutions which ensure mastery of the English language in public education
through the creation of partnerships with reputable international organizations in
order to deliver educational outcomes that meet the requirements of higher education
and the job market” (ELDP, 2013). ELDP’s main aims are as follows:
1- To thoroughly improve curricula and textbooks and other materials utilised in the
teaching of English language;
2- To expand the educational criteria provided for English language teaching, with the
aim of enhancing learning;
3- To utilise the expertise of organisations with in-depth knowledge of education in
order to improve the educational experience offered;
4- To adopt novel approaches to evaluating and assessment, and create examinations
which can more accurately reflect the English skills which learners have developed;
5- To develop the language skills and levels demanded by universities and business
organisations; and
6- To develop teachers of English language in terms of professionalism (ELDP, 2013).

7

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

The work of the ELDP has meant that English language textbooks published under
the Education Ministry which were previously used have been dropped in favour of new
ones in all schools. Concerning the new textbooks adopted, these are from international
publishers with long experience in education, including Pearson Education, Oxford, MM
Publications and Macmillan. For 2013-14, the textbooks used are:
1- For primary schools:
•

Get Ready series, MacMillan (these textbooks are the ones used in Arar, the
location of the study); and

•

Smart Class series, MM Publications.

2- For intermediate schools:
•

Full Blast series, MM Publications.

•

Wonderful World, Pearson Education.

3- For secondary schools:
•

Traveller series, MM Publications.

•

Flying High series, MacMillan.

All of the above-mentioned textbooks have been specially developed for use within
Saudi Arabia’s cultural environment and for both boys’ and girls’ education. An
introduction to the textbooks, CDs, teacher’s book, workbook and supporting website,
as well as guidance on their use, was provided to teachers through a series of
workshops nationwide provided by the publishers. There are six textbooks in
MacMillan’s 2013 Get Ready series: Get Ready 1 and 2 are for use with fourth year
students, Get Ready 3 and 4 are for year five, and Get Ready 5 and 6 are supplied for
year six. This series is used in primary schools across Arar; both for males and females,
and the English teachers using them are qualified to bachelor degree level, with some

8

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

holding and Education diploma with a specialism in English. All teachers are approved
by the Ministry of Education.
1.6 Purpose of the Study:
The main aim of the research is the teacher-based evaluation of Get Ready 1&2 by
Macmillan in its role as the official textbook for English language tuition of all children
in the fourth year of state primary school, as set out by the Saudi Arabian Ministry of
Education. . This textbook was selected for the study based upon a number of factors:
1- There is a need to investigate the extent to which the new textbook fulfils its role as
the basis of the fourth year English language programme and more generally within
the objectives of English language education in Saudi Arabia.
2- In educational terms, there is a need for evaluation of this newly-introduced
textbook through a survey gathering data on the perceptions and attitudes of
teaching professionals regarding the book.
3- There is a need to create a detailed evaluation of the textbook including such
aspects as
(objectives, design and layout, cultural values, language skills, accompanying
materials, topics and content, teachers` manual, structure and vocabulary and
activities and tasks).
4- The findings from the study may enable educators to utilise the textbook more
successfully by advising on what adaptation of the textbook material is required and
how far other resources should be included alongside the textbook. Evaluation of
the textbook is conducted according to nine aspects, which are objectives, design
and layout, cultural values, language skills, accompanying materials, topics and

9

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

content, teachers` manual, structure and vocabulary and activities and tasks. In
particular, the research seeks to address the research questions presented below:
1- How effective is the textbook in terms of design and the layout?
2- How effective is the textbook in terms of fulfilling the objectives for English teaching
for the relevant level in Saudi Arabia?
3- How effective is the textbook in terms of skills development?
4- How effective is the textbook in terms of its supplementary materials?
5- How effective is the textbook in terms of content and topics?
6- How effective is the textbook in terms of reflecting Saudi cultural values?
7- How effective is the textbook in terms of vocabulary and structure?
8- How effective is the textbook in terms of tasks and activities?
9- How effective is the textbook in terms of teachers` manual?

10

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Chapter 2: Literature Review
2.1 Theoretical Studies:
2.1.1 The role of ELT materials in the classroom:
The materials used in the English language classroom are central to the teaching
which takes place. Ur (1996) states that for language teaching, ‘coursebook’ is used to
refer to “a textbook of which the teacher and, usually, each student has a copy, and
which is in principle to be followed systematically as the basis for a language course”
(p.183). Woodward (2001, p.146) suggests that textbooks are helpful in encouraging
learner independence, allowing learners to refer back to the material covered as well as
moving on to see what will be covered in future classes. According to Haycroft (1998,
p.87), another benefit of reliance on a textbook is that it enables the student to gain a
clear idea of how they have progressed. Richards (2001) states that textbooks act as a
key component in most language programmes.
Textbooks can also serve as a tool to motivate and stimulate language learning
(Allwright, 1981). In a learning environment in which learners are motivated and
positive about their learning environment, the speed of language acquisition can be
greatly enhanced, making language learning more effective (Tomlinson, 2008). One of
the major motivations in using textbooks in the ELT environment is that textbooks can
serve as a good monitor for measuring the progress of teaching and learning. Textbooks
can have a similar function to a map; showing teaching progress (McGrath, 2002; O’Neil,
1982; Ur, 1996) and can provide direction and ideas in how lessons can be delivered
(Tomlinson, 2008).
They are effective tools in terms of allowing for carefully planned and systematic
presentation of the syllabus of an ELT programme (Ur, 1996). They provide the

11

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

necessary input that the learners receive and the language practice that occurs in the
class. Textbooks are very useful in providing support and security for new,
inexperienced teachers or teachers who have relatively low confidence to deliver ELT
lessons in a communicative way (Tomlinson, 2008; Ur, 1996). A good textbook can be
an extremely valuable ELT device: especially in situations where interesting and
motivating authentic materials are difficult to compile in an organized manner
(McDonough & Shaw, 1993).
Students can also benefit from using textbooks in many different ways. In a Similar
way to the case of teachers, textbooks can act as a reference point for students’ learning
process and keep track of their development (O’Neil, 1982). Students can use the
textbook as a tool for revision of previously taught items, and at the same time,
familiarize themselves with the new items that will be taught soon. Textbooks are also
one of the more economic and convenient forms of access to carefully structured
packaged learning materials (O’Neil, 1982; Ur 1996). According to Cunningsworth
(1995), textbooks provide additional benefits to students as they are an efficient
collection of materials for self-accessed learning and for knowledge consolidation.
Textbooks can also potentially save learners from teachers’ incompetence and
deficiencies (O’Neil, 1982).
Hutchinson and Torres (1994, p.232) identify four ways in which textbooks can help
in times of educational change: first as a vehicle for teacher and learner training; second
because they provide support and relief from the burden of looking for materials; third
by providing as complete a picture as possible of what the change will look like; and
fourth through the psychological support they give to teachers. In recent years, some
educational changes have occurred in Saudi Arabia, and especially in curriculum

12

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

development. As a result, most textbooks in all subjects have undergone changes and
others have been replaced by completely new textbooks, such as with the English
language textbook. New English language series published by reputable international
companies such as MacMillan and Pearson Education have been introduced at all levels
(primary/ intermediate/ secondary).
Richards (2001) states that without textbooks, a programme may have no path, and
therefore textbooks can provide a structure and syllabus. Besides this, the use of a
textbook in a programme can guarantee that students in different classes will receive
similar content and can therefore be evaluated in the same way. Also, textbooks are
efficient in that they allow time for the teacher to focus on teaching rather than material
production. Despite the impact of new technologies, textbooks will doubtless continue
to play an important role in language teaching and provide a useful resource for both
teachers and learners. What is more, they have significant impact on the learners
meeting their language learning objectives.
Along with the many advantages that textbooks may offer as an essential tool in ELT,
some experts (e.g. Ur, 1996; Graves, 2000; Allwright, 1981; and Williams, 1983) have
described some disadvantages of the using of the textbook. Allwright (1981) claims that
the textbook, in some situation, may affect learners’ involvement in the language
learning process. Moreover, teachers may even be led into believing that the activities
and tasks of the textbooks are always superior to their own ideas (McGrath, 2002).
Teachers may become more reliant on the textbook and hence become less creative in
their teaching (Tomlinson, 2008) and uncritical of the content and values portrayed by
the textbook (McGrath, 2002). Although a textbook can function as a framework for the
learning and teaching process for both learners and teachers (O'Neill, 1982), no one

13

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

textbook can effectively address individual learning style, the differences of learners or
the requirements of every classroom setting (Ur, 1996; Williams, 1983) and sometimes
the topics and the content may be irrelevant or inappropriate for the intended context
(Graves, 2000; Ur, 1996).
At worst, teachers may become totally reliant on the textbook (Ur, 1996) and not
spend time preparing their lessons. This would ultimately lead to an adverse situation
in which the teacher “teaches the book” rather than teaching the language itself
(McGrath, 2002). Also, in ELT contexts which constitute a strong exam-oriented culture,
such as Saudi Arabia, textbooks are often regarded as exam practice sessions rather
than a facilitations tool for successful language acquisition (Tomlinson, 2008). The
structure of the textbook may inhibit a teacher's initiative and creativity during the
teaching and learning process (Ur, 1996). Also, learners may dislike the topics covered
by the textbook and this may lead to association with boredom in English lessons (Ur,
1996).
After all, language learning should be interactive and not limited to the structure
imposed by the textbook (Tomlinson, 2010). No matter how pedagogically sound the
textbook is, learners will quickly lose interest if they find the materials dull and not
interesting (Cunningsworth, 1995). Tomlinson (2010) points out that a major potential
disadvantage of using a textbook is that only a minority of textbook writers have
actually applied language acquisition principles when writing the materials. Many of
them instead rely on their intuition as to what they perceive is best for language
learning (Tomlinson, 2008).

14

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

2.1.2 Why Do We Need Textbook Evaluation?
The number of publications available on the market for ELT materials is increasing
day by day, which makes selecting the appropriate textbook highly challenging, and one
needs to be able to make informed and appropriate choices when selecting a textbook
(Cunningsworth, 1995, p.1). In that sense, the quality of a textbook might be so
important that it can determine the success or the failure of an ELT course (Mukundan,
2007). However, textbooks are often purchased without careful analysis. Textbook
selection is not always based on its intrinsic pedagogical value, but on the perceived
prestige of the author or the publisher, or due to skilful marketing by the publisher
(McGrath, 2002). Preference is given to textbooks printed in attractive colours, and in
addition teachers may blindly use the best-selling textbooks which are used in many
other places (ibid).
A number of studies have shown that most current global and local ELT textbooks are
developed for commercial purposes but are not based on principles of language
acquisition and development recommended by scholars and educators (Tomlinson,
2008). Financial success has become the main goal of textbook publishing (Sheldon,
1988). Tomlinson (2008) argues that “many ELT materials (especially global
coursebooks) currently make a significant contribution to the failure of many learners
of English as a second, foreign or other language to even acquire basic competence in
English and to the failure of most of them to develop the ability to use it successfully”(
p.3). According to Tomlinson (ibid) the reason for this is that most ELT materials focus
on the teaching of linguistic items rather than on the provision of opportunities for
acquisition and development, and they do so because that is what teachers are expected
and required to do by administrators, by parents, by publishers, and also by learners

15

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

(p.3). Another reason for that failure is that instead of focusing on how learners could
actually benefit from using a textbook, most material developers are driven by their
intuition about what is likely to work rather than by their beliefs about what facilitates
language acquisition (Tomlinson,2008, p.7).
Some previous studies in Saudi Arabia have shown that the textbook taught in
schools did not meet all of the objectives of teaching English (Alenezi, 2009), while
another study states that students showed a negative attitude toward the textbook
(Alshehri, 2011). Moreover, some studies claim that the main reason for the low
achievement of students in English is the textbooks taught in schools (Al-Zuhairi, 2008;
Khinkar, 2000). In recent years, new English language series have been introduced at all
levels. So, these new series need to be evaluated to ensure that they effectively meet the
objectives of teaching English in Saudi Arabia.
One of the merits of materials evaluation is that it helps greatly in the selection
process, which helps in the decision-making process. Sheldon (1988, p.237) claims that
“the selection of a textbook signals an executive educational decision in which there is
considerable professional, financial and even political investment. This high profile
means that the definition and application of systematic criteria for assessing course
books are vital”. The ability to evaluate a textbook effectively is an extremely important
professional activity for all ELT teachers. There are different contexts for carrying out
an evaluation of a textbook. McDonough and Shaw (1993, pp.63-64) distinguish
between two teaching situations. The first is where the teachers have the responsibility
for choosing materials and have a great deal of choice. The second is where the teachers
have no role in choosing materials because it is the responsibility of the Ministry of

16

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Education (MoE), which in turn provides the materials for teachers to use in their
classrooms: this is the context of the current study.
Cunningsworth (1995, p.14) states that the evaluation of materials may occur for
more than one reason. Most often, materials are evaluated when it is necessary to select
a new book to use as a textbook. Also, the current textbook may need to be evaluated to
identify which parts are suitable for teaching and which areas require adaptation,
supplementation or improvements when delivering teaching. Further, materials
evaluation is useful in providing defined and objective criteria when comparing
potential textbooks. Lastly, the process allows teachers to become more familiar with
available materials and assists in their professional development. In Saudi context, the
MoE introduced a new series of English language textbooks in primary school, so there
is an educational need to evaluate this in order to identify which parts are suitable and
which parts need improvements. Textbook analysis and evaluation not only helps
teachers to develop themselves but also helps them to gain good and useful insights into
the nature of the material.
According to Hutchinson (1987) the process of evaluation involves “judging the
fitness of something for a particular purpose” (p.41).

Further, Hutchinson (1987)

states that evaluating materials both allows informed selection of teaching materials
and contributes to teacher development through prompting consideration of individual
assumptions concerning language and language acquisition, as well as emphasising the
central role of materials in teaching and learning. In fact, evaluation of materials is
emphasised in the literature as increasing knowledge regarding specific teaching and
learning contexts, which in turn assists the teacher in understanding the materials
which are used in that situation. In light of the above, it is very important to conduct

17

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

ELT textbook evaluation so as to ensure that ELT textbooks can effectively facilitate the
attainment of teaching objectives. Wrong choices of textbooks would be likely to
negatively affect both teaching and learning processes and financial resources would
also be wasted (Mukundan, 2007; Sheldon, 1988).
2.1.3 Approaches to evaluation:
There are many approaches suggested in the literature for the evaluation of language
teaching materials. Ellis (1997, p.37) distinguishes between two types of empirical
evaluations, namely macro-evaluation and micro-evaluation. According to Ellis (ibid) a
macro-evaluation “calls for an overall assessment of whether an entire set of materials
has worked” and this type of evaluation will be carried out in the current study. In a
micro-evaluation, “the teacher selects one particular teaching task in which he or she
has a special interest, and submits this to a detailed empirical evaluation”.
Cunningsworth (1995) proposes two kinds of evaluation, the first being an
impressionistic overview which helps to form a general impression about the textbook
and its possible strengths and weaknesses by looking at the external features of the
textbook such as the layout, the quality of the visuals and the whole course package.
This stage is followed by an in-depth evaluation which provides sufficient detail about
the textbook to ensure a good match between what it contains and the different needs
and requirements of the learning and teaching context (pp.1-2).
McDonough and Shaw (1993) propose three stages to create a comprehensive
evaluation of a textbook: external evaluation, internal evaluation and overall evaluation.
The first stage is an external evaluation which provides a brief overview of the material
and includes criteria that assess the organization of the material as stated explicitly by
the author/publisher, and this can be done by looking at the cover, the introduction and
the table of contents (ibid, p.67). The next stage is to perform an in-depth investigation

18

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

of the materials. The important task at this stage is "to analyse the extent to which the
factors in the external evaluation stage actually match up with the internal consistency
and organization of the material as stated by the author/ publisher” (ibid. p.75).
The third stage consists of “an overall assessment ...as to the suitability of the
materials by considering the parameters, namely the usability factor, generalizability
factor, adaptability factor and flexibility factor” (p.75). McDonough and Shaw’s (1993)
model is clearly intended for materials evaluation taking place before these materials
are introduced, whether in the selection process or with the aim of adapting material
where necessary. Despite this, the model can be linked to materials evaluation of
textbooks currently being used through its focus upon use in the classroom in the
evaluation, as well as the distinction between macro- and micro- stages (Yumuk, 1998).
An alternative model is provided by Grant (1987).This also comprises three
evaluation stages; initial, detailed and in-use. The first stage involves forming a general
overview, while the second stage involves examination of the book in detail to
determine its suitability for the syllabus, learners and teachers. This stage is facilitated
by the use of questionnaire. Following adaptation of the textbook, the third stage is to
continuously evaluate the material during its use, using methods such as class
observation, questionnaire and teacher meetings focused on evaluation of the material
(Grant, 1987).
Researchers and educators express different views regarding when a textbook
evaluation should take place. According to Ellis (1997), there are two stages where an
evaluation can be made. The first is a predictive evaluation, which helps in decisions
about which materials are best suited to the context: this may done by relying on
evaluations carried out by expert reviewers, or teachers can make their own predictive
evaluation. The second stage is a retrospective evaluation, which helps in assessing

19

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

materials that have been used. This type of evaluation helps teachers to recognize the
strengths and weaknesses of the materials used and can serve to examine the validity of
a predictive evaluation, so that it can be improved on in the future (pp.36-7).
Tomlinson (2003) differentiates between three types of evaluation and argues that it
is possible to apply the basic principles of materials evaluation to all types of evaluation,
but that it is not possible to make generalizations about procedures which apply to all
types. This is because evaluations differ for example in purpose, in formality, in timing,
and in personnel (p.23). The three types of evaluation are; pre-use, whilst-use and postuse. In the first stage, the materials are assessed for their possible value to those who
will be using them. The evaluation may be conducted to be context-dependent, contextinfluenced or context-free context dependent. The pre-use evaluation may take the form
of an impressionistic or initial view taken by an organisation or individual teacher,
meaning that errors of judgment may become apparent as the material is in use. To
minimise this problem, criterion-referenced evaluation can be used, as this will increase
the reliability, rigour and logical basis (Tomlinson, 2003).
The second type of evaluation, whilst-use, means “measuring the value of materials
whilst using them or whilst observing them as being used" (p.24). Whilst-use evaluation
thus does not depend on predictions, but rather on actual measurements, which may
therefore give greater reliability However, measurement in this case is limited to
current activity and short term memory rather than applying to more lasting learning
(ibid). Whilst-use evaluation has been chosen for use in the current study, as the
selected textbook is in use as of 2013.
Evaluating a material post-use is considered the most effective form of evaluation as
both the short- and long-term impact of a material on those who use it can be assessed.
Short-term factors measured include impact, motivation, achievability and immediate

20

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

learning, while long term factors examined include more lasting application and
learning. According to Tomlinson (2003), post-use evaluation can be used to evaluate
concrete results of the use of the materials, which can inform later decisions about
continuing with the materials, adapting them or selecting alternative materials. The
main drawback of this type of evaluation is that it takes time and expertise to measure
post-use effects reliably (ibid).
Cunningsworth (1995, p.14) claims that evaluation can be done in three stages; preuse, in-use, and post-use evaluation. Pre-use evaluation is the most difficult kind since
there is no actual experience of using the textbook. In-use evaluation is a kind of
evaluation which takes place whilst the material is in use. Post-use evaluation provides
a retrospective assessment of a textbook’s suitability by identifying those strengths and
the weaknesses of the textbook which emerge after it is used over a period of time and
this kind of evaluation helps in making decisions about using the same textbook in the
future. The current study will be based upon in-use evaluation.
2.1.4 Evaluation criteria:
Researchers have proposed many checklists and guidelines for evaluating ELT
materials and there is no global checklist which can be applied for all ELT materials
because of the different variables in real life which have a great impact on the teaching
and learning process. Sheldon (1988) states that a “global list of criteria can never really
apply in most local environments, without considerable modification” (p.242). The
selection of evaluation criteria may be subjective because there is no set of criteria
suitable and applicable to all language teaching contexts. Sheldon (1988, p.241) states
that “no-one is really certain what criteria and constraints are actually operative in ELT
contexts worldwide, and textbook criteria are emphatically local”. Therefore, once the

21

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

criteria are decided upon to carry out an evaluation, the needs and the interests of
particular learners in a particular teaching context should be taken into consideration.
There are many evaluation criteria proposed in the literature. Ur (1996) states that
there are two kinds of evaluation criteria: general and specific. General evaluation
criteria may be applicable to any language teaching textbook, while specific criteria
relate to the appropriateness of the book for a certain course or learner population. “An
example of a general criterion might be: 'clear layout and print', or 'provides periodic
review or test sections'; whereas a specific one might be: 'attractive and colourful
illustrations'(if it is meant for younger learners), or `vocabulary and texts relevant to
topic' (if it is for students of science or technology)” (p.184).
According to Williams (1983), it is not possible for any single textbook to be an ideal
material for any context. Therefore, Williams (ibid) proposes an approach for teachers
in the English language classroom to use when developing criteria for materials
evaluation. The basis of any such evaluation must be a structured set of assumptions
related to teaching a second language, and this should then be linked to technical,
pedagogical and linguistic criteria. Williams’ (ibid)approach includes an assumption of
evaluation of the textbook with reference to current methodologies for language
teaching along with the linguistic and psychological theories underpinning these.
Williams (ibid) also stipulates that guidance should be given for second language
speakers which clarify all the activities and approaches which use of the textbook
entails. A further assumption relates to the needs of students of the second language,
while the final assumption is that of connection with social and cultural conditions.
Thus, learners may face challenges in lexis or other areas due to cultural divides
between the contexts of the first and second languages. Williams (ibid) also provides a

22

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

checklist for criteria development including learner needs, methodology, teacher needs,
community needs, the publishing and editing standards, access to supplementary
materials, price and durability, writing style and language content authenticity.
Skierso’s (1991) approach to materials evaluation, with the first step being to gather
data regarding the teaching institution, teaching staff, learners and syllabus as a basic
requirement for evaluating the materials. In addition, Skierso (ibid) provides a checklist
with which teachers, and in particular new teachers, can analyse a textbook. This
checklist involves publishing details,, objectives and aims, topics, lexis, linguistic
structures, tasks, activities, physical form and organisation of material. With reference
to the teacher’s book, the checklist includes examination of overall characteristics,
additional learner tasks related to the different aspects of language learning, teacher
information regarding language points, and advice or information on methodology and
teaching.
Grant (1987) proposes three stages of evaluation, namely initial evaluation, detailed
evaluation and in-use evaluation. In the first stage, he suggests that looking briefly at the
material to be evaluated to decide whether to go on to a detailed evaluation or not. In
order to be able to take that decision, Grant (1987) suggests that we apply the
CATALYST test (p. 119). The eight letters in the word CATALYST refer to the eight
criteria by which it can be decided whether the textbook is appropriate for use in the
classroom, and they are as follows: C (Communicative), A (Aims), T (Teachable), A
(Availability), L ( Level), Y (Your impression), S (Student interest) and T (Tried and
tested).
Grant (ibid) proposes a questionnaire format for detailed materials evaluation. The
first part of the survey contains 10 questions to assess the fit of the textbook to the

23

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

students, asking about difficulty of content, interest, visual appeal, length, and
authenticity of content and activities. . The first part of the questionnaire also addresses
the ability of the textbook to meet needs in terms of linguistic input, integrated skills
and communication practice, as well as investigating the fit of the textbook to students’
culture, interests and needs.. The next section contains questions to evaluate the fit of
the textbook with the teachers, considering content and organisation, whether the
teacher’s book is accessible, clear and practical, how much preparation is needed, how
easily content and activities can be adapted, possibilities for review of content and
testing, and access to supporting material including sound and visual recordings and
workbooks. The final section of the survey concerns the match between the textbook
and the course syllabus and exam in terms of linguistic content, arrangement and
sequencing of content and tasks and fit between the methodology used and
requirements for exam preparation.
Evaluating the textbook whilst it is being used is termed in-use evaluation. Grant
(1987) highlights the importance of continuous evaluation of the textbook while it is in
use so as to assess its actual effectiveness in the classroom setting. Meanwhile, Sheldon
(1988) proposes a list of criteria for materials evaluation based on their frequency of
use across different groups including students, teachers and administrators. The list
includes consideration of availability, rationale, user definition, visual elements and
layout, accessibility in terms of units and tasks, flow, gradation/selection, physical form,
authenticity, suitability, adequacy in tasks and activities, cultural elements, educational
validity, provision of practice and review, flexibility, guidance and price.
Another checklist is provided by Zenger (1982) with the aim of facilitating decisions
regarding the suitability of a textbook for a particular context. The list again includes

24

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

frequently used criteria such as author’s intention and experience, aims, visual appeal,
and date of publication, accessible writing style, price, physical features, pictures and
figures, philosophical underpinning, linkage and sequential organisation, accuracy in
content, interest, individual variation, content and skills focus, and ancillary
supplementary materials. The questionnaire for Zenger’s checklist is based on a sixpoint scale comprising “excellent, good acceptable, poor, not included and not
applicable” (Zenger, 1982, p.148-59).
Mukundan et al. (2011, p.22) divide the evaluation criteria into two categories
including “general attributes and learning-teaching content‟. The first category is
divided into five sub-categories including “relation to syllabus and curriculum,
methodology, suitability to learners, physical and utilitarian attributes, and
supplementary materials‟. The second category was divided into nine sub-categories
including “general (i.e., task quality, cultural sensitivity, as well as linguistic and
situational realism), listening, speaking, reading, writing, vocabulary, grammar,
pronunciation, and exercises‟.

Classification of textbook evaluation criteria (Mukundan et al., 2001, p.23).

25

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Tomlinson and Masuhara (2004, p.7) propose the following questions for evaluating
criteria:
a) Is each question an evaluation question?
b) Does each question only ask one question?
c) Is each question answerable?
d) Is each question free of dogma?
e) Is each question reliable in the sense that other evaluators would interpret it in the
same way?
Tomlinson (2012, p.147) states that “very few of the lists of criteria proposed in the
literature satisfy these conditions, and most of them are not generalizable or
transferable”.
From the above discussion, it is clear that a systematic approach to creating and
applying criteria is an essential basis for any evaluation. In addition, it is important to
recognise the specific nature of the teaching and learning context for which a textbook
is to be evaluated and the requirements of that context, and select the criteria used
accordingly. The many criteria proposed in the literature reviewed above can be
narrowed to emphasise the suitability of the textbook in reflecting learner aims,
interests and needs as well as varied learning styles, organisation and selection of
content, skills focus, authenticity of materials and physical form.
2.1.5 Using a checklist as an evaluation tool:
Mukundan et al. (2011) describe the checklist as allowing English language teachers
to effectively approach evaluation of textbooks and other materials. The checklist
facilitated a systematic and detailed evaluation based on criteria which can be
generalised. It is possible to select a qualitative checklist which gather subjective data
via open-ended questions (e.g. Richards, 2001), or a quantitative checklist involving

26

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

ratings on a scale (e.g. Skierso, 1991).

Qualitative approaches produce depth of

information, while quantitative approaches give greater accuracy and are more easily
used: particularly when more than one practitioner is conducting the evaluation
(Mukundan et al., 2011). Mukundan and Ahour (2010) review 48 evaluation checklists
from 1970 to 2008 and criticise many of them for being too demanding of time and
expertise to be useful to teachers, too vague to be answerable, too context bound to be
generalizable, too confusing to be useable and too lacking in validity to be useful.
According to Cunningsworth (1995), one of the main advantages of using the
checklist approach is that it can provide a highly economical and systematic way to
ensure all relevant items are considered for evaluation. A well-designed checklist
should contain evaluation criteria that are clear and concise. Evaluation items can also
be customized according to one`s need so as to provide flexibility during the evaluation
process (Mukundan and Ahour, 2010). The checklist is a useful channel to make the
different opinions of evaluators explicit. When opinions are explicitly shown on the
checklist, this can allow for easy comparison between different sets of textbook
materials, and thereby facilitate decision making (McGrath, 2002, p.27).
To sum up, using a checklist for textbook evaluation is an economical approach. It can
also provide a systematic method of ensuring that all relevant items are considered
(Cunningsworth, 1995). Moreover, it is a convenient and flexible evaluation tool as the
evaluators have the freedom to add or omit different evaluation items according to
individual and situational needs (McGrath, 2002).
2.2 Empirical Studies:
There is a vast literature on empirical studies of textbook evaluation in different
contexts. This section will briefly review selected empirical studies on textbook

27

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

evaluation carried out in an international or Saudi context, with greater emphasis on
those studies conducted in the Saudi context. This section will also review three
different types of textbook evaluation: pre-use, such as that proposed by Tomlinson et
al. (2001); whilst-use such as Al-Amri (2008), and post-use, such as Litz (2005). Some of
these studies evaluate global textbooks (e.g. Tomlinson et al., 2001, 2008, and 2013)
while all of the studies conducted in Saudi context evaluate textbooks locally published
by the MoE. In the current study, the researcher will carry out a whilst-use evaluation
on a textbook published by an international company for use within Saudi Arabia’s
cultural environment.
2.2.1 International studies:
Tomlinson et al. (2001, 2008, and 2013), along with a team of experts, conducted
three pre-use evaluations of 22 textbooks published by leading UK publishers. These
studies provide an overall evaluation for each course independently after collecting and
averaging all scores. Also, they provide a list of positive and negative trends concerning
the courses.
Tomlinson et al. (2001) evaluated eight adult textbooks published by four leading UK
publishers, as follows:

Language in Use and True to Life by Cambridge University

Press; Cutting Edge and Wavelength by Pearson Longman; Inside Out and Reward by
Macmillan Heinemann Press; and Clockwise and Landmark by Oxford University Press.
These textbooks were evaluated by a team of evaluators consisting of Brian Tomlinson
from England, Bao Dat from Vietnam, Rani Rubdy from India and Hitomi Masuhara from
Japan. The team agreed on a list of 133 evaluation criteria, and after this, each evaluator
evaluated the eight courses independently.

28

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Tomlinson et al. (2008) went on to evaluate eight adult textbooks published by eight
leading UK publishers, as follows: Quick Smart English by Brookemead; face2face by
Cambridge University Press; Straightforward by Macmillan; Just Right by Marshall
Cavendish; Total English by Pearson Longman; Innovations by Thomson ELT; New
English File by Oxford University Press; and Framework by Richmond Publishing. This
study focused only on the intermediate level of each course in order to ensure feasibility
and quality of comparison. The study was conducted by a team of evaluators including
Dr Hitomi Masuhara from Japan, Naeema Hann from Pakistan, Yong Yi from China and
Professor Brian Tomlinson from England. The team agreed on 104 evaluation criteria
for this review, focusing mainly on the student’s book and teacher’s book. Each
evaluator then evaluated the eight courses independently, with each one focusing on a
different unit.
Tomlinson and Masuhara (2013) evaluated the following textbooks: The Big Picture
by Richmond; Global by Macmillan Education; English Unlimited by Cambridge
University Press; New Headway (fourth edition) by Oxford University Press; Speakout
by Pearson Education; and Outcomes by Heinle Cengage Learning. They agreed on 15
criteria to be used in this study, focusing on the student’s book. They focused very much
on the likely effectiveness of the courses in relation to what they believe facilitates longterm acquisition of L2.
As a post-use study, Litz (2005) conducted a study to evaluate a university level
textbook used for a language course in South Korea. The aim of this post-use evaluation
was to uncover how the textbook could meet students` and teachers` needs. The
researcher prepared questionnaires for both teachers and students to survey their post-

29

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

use experience on the perceived pedagogical value of the content of the textbook, as
well as practical considerations such as layout and design.
Another post-use evaluation was conducted by Lawrence (2011), and aimed to
propose a framework for evaluating the fitness of the textbook`s content with the new
senior secondary curriculum in Hong Kong. The researcher proposed a theoretical
framework for how the fitness of the curriculum can be evaluated. This framework was
then empirically tested by carrying out a post-use evaluation with local teachers. In
order to fulfil this aim, the researcher carried out mixed methods research, gathering
quantitative data by using self-constructed checklist and qualitative data by conducting
an interview with teachers. The results of the study show that teachers found the
proposed evaluation framework an effective tool in determining fitness with the new
curriculum.
Soleimani and Dabbaghi (2012) conducted a study to evaluate the efficiency of the
New Interchange textbooks in terms of providing sufficient and comprehensible
pragmatic input for Iranian learners of English to fulfil their basic communicative needs
based on the content of the books. The study was also intended to evaluate the ability of
Iranian learners of English in dealing with different speech situations. An oral discourse
completion test developed by the researcher was administered to 50 students at upper
intermediate level. Descriptive statistical analyses revealed a high index of standard
deviation which indicated a large disparity in pragmatic knowledge of students at the
above mentioned level of proficiency. Also, the results showed that the books provided
sufficient pragmatic input for language learners to deal with their basic communicative
needs.

30

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

In Turkey, two studies were conducted to evaluate the textbooks used in the fourth
grade of primary school. Özdemir (2007) conducted an evaluation study on the fourth
grade English language textbook Time for English 4 in state schools in Turkey from
teachers` and students` perspectives. The aim of the study was to find out how teachers
and students in state schools evaluate the fourth grade English language textbook `Time
for English 4` based on various aspects. To fulfil this aim, a teacher questionnaire,
student questionnaire and teacher interview were prepared by the researcher. The
results of the study revealed that both teachers and students were satisfied with the
textbook but with some identified problems. The researcher concludes with some
suggestions for the solutions for these problems to the relevant parties.
Kirkgoz (2009) conducted an evaluation study of the three English textbooks
prescribed for use in grade 4 classes in state primary schools. The researcher prepared
a questionnaire and interview for both teachers and students to elicit their perceptions
concerning various aspects of the textbooks. The findings revealed the extent of
appropriateness of the three textbooks used by young learners of English. Suggestions
are offered for the future revision and/or designing the textbooks for young learners of
English.
2.2.2 Saudi context studies:
Khafaji (2004) conducted an evaluative study of English language teaching materials
in state secondary education in Saudi Arabia. For this evaluation, three checklists were
utilised. A general evaluation was conducted according to the checklist proposed by
Cunningsworth (1995)., while a more detailed evaluation of a single unit and the
teacher’s guidance for it was conducted based upon Littlejohn’s (1998) framework.
Finally, the two previous approaches together were used to focus on the skill of reading.
Khafaji (2004) concluded that it would be beneficial to re-examine the context for

31

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

learning and teaching within Saudi state education with a view to selecting different
materials which could reflect the needs of students, teachers and society.
A study conducted by Al-Yousef (2007) was an evaluation of the newly-introduced
English language textbook for the Saudi third grade Intermediate English course. The
evaluation employed a mixed-methods, retrospective approach. This consisted firstly of
quantitative research using the Textbook Evaluation Tool (TET) with 184 learners,
teachers and supervisors. The findings show that all groups rated the textbook as only
moderately adequate, with a mean composite ranking was more than 2 out of 4. In
addition, quantitative and qualitative findings both revealed visual appeal and content
as strengths of the textbook, with recycling, gradation and supplementary materials
being ranked as weak.
A study conducted by Al-Amri (2008) conducted an evaluation of the textbook used
to teach English to male Saudi pupils in the sixth grade within the Riyadh Educational
Zone. This evaluation was carried out while the textbook was in use. The study included
a 12-category, 64-item questionnaire to gain the views of eleven supervisors and 93
teachers in the area. The results overall give a positive view of the textbook, although
teaching methods were not viewed positively. The only significant variation identified
between the views of supervisors and teachers were concerning the flexibility of the
book.
Alenezi (2009) conducted a study to evaluate the English language programme of the
primary schools in Arar city, Saudi Arabia. The aims of this study were to investigate to
what extent teachers agreed with the introduction of English at primary stage and
whether the objectives of the programme were achieved or not. A questionnaire and
interview for male teachers and a test for students were prepared to fulfil these aims.

32

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

The textbook was evaluated by the researcher to explore whether the objectives of the
programme could be met using the prescribed textbook. The study revealed that the
majority of teachers agree with the introduction of English at primary school but that
the textbook cannot meet all of the programme objectives.
A study of the textbook used in the first year of intermediate grade to teach English
language was conducted by Alswat (2012). The context of the study was Taif in Saudi
Arabia, and the views of both female and male teachers were sought in a 79-item
questionnaire. The research included a focus on variation in teachers’ answers by
gender, experience and the link between the two factors. . Findings revealed that the
textbook used was rated positively on three of the criteria used, while scoring
negatively on six criteria. In addition, Alswat (2012) reports statistically significant
variation in responses by gender but not by experience or when viewing experience in
combination with gender.
2.2.3 Comments on the empirical studies in Saudi context:
There are a myriad of studies conducted in the Saudi context about textbook evaluation,
but none, to the best of the researcher’s knowledge,, have been carried out for the fourth
grade primary textbook Get Ready 1and 2 since it was only recently introduced in the
fourth grade. Moreover, all of the aforementioned Saudi studies have evaluated textbooks
which were published locally, whereas the textbook in the current study was published by
an international company (MacMillan) for use within Saudi Arabia’s cultural environment.
Al-Amri (2008) and Alenezi (2009) conducted their studies on the sixth grade of primary
school, whereas the current study is based on the fourth grade English course, which at the
time of the previous studies had not yet been introduced. Al-Yousef (2007) and Alswat
(2012) conducted their studies on intermediate schools, whereas Khafaji`s (2004) study

33

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

was conducted at secondary school level. Alenezi (2009) carried out a mixed-method
research design in Arar city, which is the same context as the current study, but with male
teachers only and with a different textbook. Al-Yousef (2007) conducted a post-use
evaluation, whereas the current study carries out a whilst-use evaluation. The current
study differs from Al-Amri’s study (2008) and Alenezi’s study (2009) in the sense that they
investigated the opinions of male teachers whereas the current study and Alswat’s study
(2012) investigate the opinions of both male and female teachers. The researcher has
benefited from previous studies in building the tools for the current study.

34

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Chapter 3

Methodology

3.1 Design of the study:
This study will carry out a mixed methods approach by gathering quantitative and
qualitative data to evaluate a textbook from teachers' perspectives. According to
Johnson et al. (2007), “mixed methods research is the type of research in which a
researcher or team of researchers combines elements of qualitative and quantitative
research approaches (e.g. use of qualitative and quantitative viewpoints, data collection,
analysis, inference techniques) for the broad purposes of breadth and depth of
understanding and corroboration” (p.123). Researchers have now become more aware
of the value of using mixed methods to collect data. Lodicoe et al. (2006) argue that
“educational researchers are increasingly recognizing the value of collecting both
quantitative and qualitative data” (p.282).
One of the merits of conducting mixed methods research is that it offers the strengths
of both quantitative and qualitative approaches, which lets the researcher take an indepth look at the context, process and interaction, and also the exact measurement of
attitudes and outcomes (Lodicoe et al., 2006). Also, using mixed methods in a study
offers the strengths but mitigates the weaknesses of each method (Dörnyei, 2007).
Dörnyei (2007) also states that “mixed method research has a unique potential to
produce evidence for the validity of the research outcomes through convergence and
corroboration of the findings, and it can increase the generalizability – external validity
– of the results” (pp. 45-6).
Creswell (2009) states that there are six general categories for carrying out research
based on a mixed methods approach. In this study, a sequential explanatory design will

35

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

be used, which is described by Creswell (ibid.) as being ”characterized by the collection
and analysis of quantitative data in the first phase of research followed by the collection
and analysis of qualitative data in a second phase that builds on the results of the initial
quantitative results” (p.211). The primary merit of this method is that “it is [a]
straightforward design that is easy to implement and analyse, yet which enrich the final
findings considerably” (Dörnyei, 2007, p.171). By using a sequential explanatory design,
“the quantitative data are often emphasized and the qualitative data are used to
illustrate or further explain the quantitative findings” (Lodico et al., 2006, p.284).
In this study, the main focus will be on quantitative data, and qualitative data will be
used to help explain and interpret the results of the quantitative data. In the first phase
of this study, the researcher will gather quantitative and numeric data by distributing a
questionnaire to 30 teachers, both male and female, in primary schools in Arar city. In
the second phase, qualitative data will be gathered by conducting interviews with five
male teachers only, since the researcher does not have access to female schools to
gather data from female teachers: this is for cultural reasons and also the educational
policy in Saudi Arabia which segregates boys` and girls` education. The rationale for
using mixed methods in this study is to obtain a full and comprehensive understanding
of teachers' perspectives, which might be difficult to obtain using only one method.
Qualitative data offer a general view of teachers' perspectives and qualitative data elicit
an in-depth view.
3.2 Participants:
The participants in this study comprise 30 (male and female) teachers who teach the
fourth grade in primary schools in Arar city and they will be selected randomly. The
sample will be 15 male teachers and 15 female teachers. In interview, five male teachers

36

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

will be chosen. Some of the teachers hold BAs in English education and others hold a
diploma in teaching English in the primary stage.
Table (3-1) the distribution of the sample according to gender.

Sex

Frequency Percent

Male

15

50.00

Female

15

50.00

Total

30

100%

Table (3-2) sample distribution according to qualifications.

Qualification Frequency Percent
Diploma

6

20

B.A

24

80

Total

30

100%

Table (3-3) sample distribution according to teaching experience.
English Teaching Experience

Frequency

Percent

Less than one year

3

10.00

1-4 years

1

3.30

5-10 years

2

6.70

More than 10 years

24

80.00

Total

30

100%

37

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

3.3 Instruments:
3.3.1 First phase: Questionnaires
As stated before, the researcher will use a questionnaire for teachers (see appendix
3) to gather quantitative data, and it will be available in English. A questionnaire is
considered to be one of the most common methods for collecting data in second
language research. According to Brown (2001, p. 6), questionnaires are “any written
instruments that present respondents with a series of questions or statements to which
they are to react either by writing out their answers or selecting from among existing
answers". According to Dörnyei (2003, p.8), a questionnaire can measure three types of
data about respondents via: (1) factual questions, (2) behavioural questions and (3)
attitudinal questions. All of these kinds of questions will be used in the questionnaire of
the current study.
1- Factual questions are used to request demographic data about the
participants, such as age, nationality, qualifications.
2- Behavioural questions “are used to find out what the respondents are doing
or have done in the past. They typically ask about people's actions, life-styles,
habits, and personal history” (ibid.). Such questions will be used to find out
how many years students have been studying English and how many years of
experience teachers have and if they have completed training courses.
3- Attitudinal questions “are used to find out what people think. This is a broad
category that concerns attitudes, opinions, beliefs, interests, and values”
(ibid.). Such questions will be used to ask how participants evaluate the
textbook in different aspects.

38

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

The questionnaire is adapted from Al-Sowat (2012), since he carried out his study in
Saudi Arabian context, but this study is different in the sample, the textbook, and the
region. The questionnaire consists of 55 items and is divided into nine categories; layout
and design, objectives, language skills, accompanying materials, cultural values, topics
and content, structure and vocabulary, activities and tasks, and teachers` manual. The
questionnaire will be a closed-ended design. The main advantage of using closed-ended
items is that their coding and tabulation are straightforward and this helps to increase
the objectivity (Dörnyei, 2003, p.35). Closed-ended items can greatly increase the
reliability of a questionnaire because of the uniformity of measurement (Mackey and
Gass, 2005, p.93). Since the aim of this study is to investigate teachers' attitudes, the
most suitable rating scale will be a Likert scale.
Oppenheim (1992, pp.188-9) points out that “if we wish to study attitude patterning
or to explore theories of attitudes, then probably the Likert procedure will be the most
relevant”. It is considered the most commonly used scaling technique in survey research
(Dörnyei, 2003; Lodico et al., 2006). According to Vanderstoep and Johnston (2009,
p.54) a Likert scale is “a type of response alternative in which participants indicate their
degree of agreement with a stated attitude or judgement”. It is also called an agreement
scale since the participants are asked whether they agree or disagree with the
statement(s) presented (Lodico et al., 2006, p.108). The number of responses each scale
contains differs from one study to another according to the purpose of the study. Some
researchers use five responses, others use six, whereas the original Likert scale had five
(Dörnyei, 2003, p.37). In this study, the responses for each item on the questionnaire
will be five (strongly agree/ agree/ neutral/ disagree/ strongly disagree). These five
responses will be given simple weightings of 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 for scoring purposes.

39

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

A Likert scale has some advantages that make it used widely in survey research.
Nunan and Bailey (2009, p.134) point to one advantage of using a Likert scale, which is
that it provides the researcher with more fine-grained data about attitudes in numerical
data form. Oppenheim (1992, p.200) claims that Likert scales help the researcher to
obtain more precise information about the respondent's degree of agreement or
disagreement.
3.3.1.1 Questionnaire`s Validity and Reliability:
It is very important to ensure the validity and reliability of the instruments and
results in every study. Cohen et al. (2007, p.133) state that in order to improve the
validity of quantitative data, care should be taken in sampling, along with using
appropriate instruments and employing appropriate statistical treatments on the data.
The researcher has ensured content validity, which refers to “whether or not the
content of the manifest variables (e.g. items of a test or questions of a questionnaire) is
right to measure the latent concept (self-esteem, achievement, attitudes,…) that we are
trying to measure”( Muijs, 2004, p.66). In order to achieve this, the researcher did the
following (ibid):
1- Conducted an extensive search of the literature about textbook evaluation
from teachers' perspectives.
2- Asked the participants whether the questionnaire was valid for them or
not: this is called “establishing face validity”.
3- Asked a jury of experts and considered their comments to ensure the
questionnaires have content validity.
The researcher visited 18 boys’ primary schools to distribute questionnaires to male
teachers. English teachers were not available in three schools. For female teachers,

40

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

questionnaires were sent out to 20 girls’ primary schools and only 17 questionnaires
returned, two of which were excluded as they were not complete. The results from this
phase were used as a guide in the next phase, which will be a qualitative approach. The
researcher chose the participants intentionally, based on their results in the first phase,
in order to clarify certain points and achieve an in-depth understanding.
3.3.2 Second phase: Interviews
The researcher gathered qualitative data by carrying out interviews (see Appendix 4)
with five teachers in order to clarify some areas needing more detail. This technique can
enrich the findings by combining quantitative and qualitative data, and this may remedy
the weaknesses of quantitative data, which may be superficial and not deep enough, by
“adding flesh to the bones” (Dörnyei, 2007, p.171). The researcher conducted semistructured interviews, which offer a compromise between two extremes: “although
there is a set of prepared guiding questions, the format is open-ended and the
participants are encouraged to give more explanation” (Dörnyei, 2007, p.136).
According to Mackey and Gass (2005), a semi-structured interview is when “the
researcher uses a written list of questions as a guide, while still having the freedom to
digress and probe for more information” (p.173).
The researcher had prepared questions and topics to discuss with the teachers, while
at the same time they were given the freedom to discuss any new topics they wanted,
and of course these new topics will help in generating further questions. The
participants were chosen intentionally, according to their results in the quantitative
data, so that the researcher could obtain a good spread of the respondents'
characteristics (Oppenheim, 1992, p.68). The interview was planned to be conducted in
English, but since all of the teachers refused to participate in English, the interview

41

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

questions were translated into Arabic. The interviews were held in the meeting room in
teachers` schools during their free hours. They were tape-recorded with participants’
permission and each one took approximately 15 minutes.
3.3.2.1 Interviews’ Validity and Reliability:
The validity and reliability of interviews should be ensured and the criteria used to
achieve those are different from the criteria used for quantitative data. The validity of
interviews is too often decided on the basis of face validity, which is “whether the
questions asked look as if they are measuring what they claim to measure” (Cohen et al.,
2007, p.150). Bias is one reason for invalidity, which is defined as “a systematic or
persistent tendency to make errors in the same direction, that is, to overstate or
understate the ‘‘true value’’ of an attribute” (Lansing et al., 1961, cited in Cohen et al.,
2007, p.150). The researcher carried out member checks by showing each participant in
the interview how the researcher had interpreted the results, and stating that if there
were any misinterpretation, that this would be corrected in the final report. Moreover,
the researcher used peer debriefing, which is defined by Cohen et al. (2007, p.188) as a
process in which “a peer is asked to review the data to suggest if the researcher is being
too selective, e.g. of individuals, of data, of inference to ensure the validity”. The
researcher sent the data to two colleagues to examine the transcripts and the final
report of the data to ensure the validity.
3.4 Pilot study:
Dörnyei (2003, p.63) points out that ‘field testing’ is an important part of
questionnaire: that is, piloting the questionnaire at different phases of its development
on a sample of people who are correspondent to the target sample the instrument has
been planned for. This will help to test the validity and decrease the errors possibility
that might affect the results. After constructing the questionnaire, it was piloted in two

42

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

stages, first: it was sent to two experts from North Border University and the General
Directorate of Education in Arar to request their comments and feedback in order to
increase the validity of the instruments. Second, it was piloted on five English language
teachers who teach the fourth grade primary in Arar city. This was done to obtain their
feedback about how the instruments work and whether they do the job they have been
designed for, so that the researcher can make any necessary modifications before the
final version of the questionnaire is sent out. Also, the interview was piloted on two
teachers who teach the textbook to obtain their feedback about the interview. The pilot
study did not reveal any problems in terms of ambiguity and timing and they stated that
the questions were understandable and logically organized.
3.5 Data analysis:
This study gathered booth quantitative and qualitative data via questionnaires and
interviews.

The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) was used to give

descriptive statistics. Frequencies, standard deviations, means and percentages were
calculated for each item. Data collected through interviews was transcribed, contentanalysed and grouped according to the nine criteria used in this study. The results were
presented in tables.
3.6 Ethical considerations:
Carrying out educational research involves human beings, and this requires some
ethical considerations to be considered. Dörnyei (2007, p.67) states that “the primary
principle of research ethics is that no mental or physical harm should come to the
respondents as a result of their participation in the investigation”. Another important
issue is that the researcher should obtain a signed consent form (see Appendix 2) from
all participants. Obtaining a written consent form from participants is the first step that

43

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

must be taken, especially if there are regulations governing ethical practice in a country
(Dörnyei, 2007, p.69). Mackey and Gass (2005) state that the purpose of the consent
form is to ensure that participants are supplied with enough information to make
informed voluntary decisions about participating. This can be done by including
information about:
• The procedures and purposes of the research.
• The potential risks and benefits of the research.
• The methods by which participants will be assigned to groups and what those group
assignments might entail in terms of treatment.
• Whom to contact with questions regarding the study or their rights as participants.
• The specific steps that will be taken to ensure confidentiality and anonymity" (p.29).
Participants should be assured that the data collected will be kept confidential and
will only be used for the research purpose, and that their identity will be protected.
Mackey and Gass (2005, p.29) state that “researchers are advised to make it clear from
the beginning that all information will remain confidential and anonymous wherever
possible, and to explain the various steps that will be taken to protect the learners'
anonymity (e.g. using numbers instead of names to refer to participants, not revealing
identifying information, discussing the location of records and who will have access to
them)”. Since the study will contain recorded or transcribed data from carrying out
interviews, the researcher “must make sure the respondents are not traceable or
identifiable” (Dörnyei, 2007, p.68). Also, the participants should know that they have
the right to refuse to answer any question or to withdraw from the study at any time
without giving any justification. In the study, participation is voluntary and participants
have the right to withdraw from the study at any time without giving any explanation

44

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

(Dörnyei, 2007, p.68). In addition, there is another important issue about research
ethics which concerns the honesty and integrity of the researcher, not only the legalistic
issues of the research. Another important issue that should be taken into account in the
Saudi context is that of the need to avoid conducting a face to face interview with female
teachers. This is for cultural reasons and also the educational policy in Saudi Arabia,
which segregates boys` and girls` education.
Dörnyei (ibid.) cites several points that describe the general responsibilities of the
researcher in the educational field, and which are taken from the Ethical Standards of
the American Educational Research Association (AERA 2002), and which include the
following:
1- An educational researcher “must not fabricate, falsify or misrepresent
authorship, evidence, data, findings or conclusions”.
2- An educational researcher “must not knowingly or negligently use their
profession role for fraudulent purposes”.
3- An educational researcher should “attempt to report their findings to all relevant
stakeholders, and should refrain from keeping secret or selectively
communicating their findings” (pp.66-7).
Because of these concerns, the researcher carried out member checks by showing
each interview participant how the researcher has interpreted the results, and any
misinterpretations are corrected in the final report. Moreover, the researcher provided
a copy of the final results and report to all participants. Permission to carry out a survey
in schools was obtained from the General Directorate of Education in the North Border
Zone.

45

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Chapter 4: Results and Discussion
4.1 Introduction:
In this chapter, the results of the study will be presented and the findings will be
discussed. The results of the questionnaires will be presented in tables. The findings of
the interviews will be used to verify the findings of the questionnaire and to give deeper
insight into teachers’ opinions. Also, a discussion of these findings will be provided.
4.2 Data Analysis:
After collecting data from the questionnaire, data was encoded and entered into the
computer, and then processed using statistical analysis software. The researcher used
the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software to analyse the data. Following
this, a set of statistical methods to extract the results were calculated. The researcher
used Cronbach's Alpha, Pearson correlation coefficient, frequencies, percentages,
means, and standard deviations (for more details about the results of these, see Appendix
3). For the purpose of interpreting the findings of the study, the following ratings are
referred to:
Mean Value
From
To
1
1.79
1.80
2.59
2.60
3.39
3.40
4.19
4.20
5

Interpretation
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly agree

46

47

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

4.3 Research questions` answers:
Answer to Question (1): How effective is the textbook in terms of design and the layout?

Table (4-1): teachers` perception on the Layout and Design of the textbook.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Statement
The visual design and the layout of the book are attractive.
The book has a complete and detailed table of contents.
The units are well organized and offer easy progression.
The pictures and graphics of the textbook motivate students to
participate.
Illustrations, tables, figures, graphs, etc. are relevant and functional.
An adequate vocabulary list or glossary is included.
OVERALL

Mean
4.60
4.47
4.33

SD
0.675
0.776
0.884

4.30

0.702

4.40
4.43
4.40

0.724
0.817
0.573

As Table (4-1) indicates, item (1) received the highest mean score (4.60) which
shows that teachers strongly agreed that the visual design and the layout of the book
are attractive. Also, it is clear that all other items had a mean score of more than 4.20
which means that teachers strongly agreed with all of the statements. The overall mean
score of this part (layout and design) is 4.40, and this means that the teachers strongly
agreed with the statements in this section.
Interviews with five teachers also supported the findings of the questionnaire. The
teachers were asked to give some advantages of the textbook. All of them stated that the
design and the layout of the textbook was one of its best features. They all agreed that
the textbook was attractive: especially for young learners, and that it encouraged and
motivated students for learning. Also, they stated that pictures and drawings had
functional purposes, not merely cosmetic purposes.
These findings revealed that teachers are very satisfied with the textbook in terms of
layout and design.

48

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Answer to Question (2): How effective is the textbook in terms of fulfilling the
objectives for English teaching for the relevant level in Saudi Arabia?
Table (4-2): Teachers` perceptions on the Objectives of the textbook.
No. Statement
1
The textbook fulfils the objectives of teaching English in the fourth grade
primary.
2
The objectives of the materials correspond to the needs of the learners.
3
The objectives recognize individual differences.
4
The objectives of the materials suit the level of the learners.
5
The objectives can be covered within the time allocated for the textbook.
6
The objectives are realistic.
OVERALL

Mean SD
4.27 0.907
4.37
4.40
4.13
4.27
4.37
4.33

0.890
0.724
0.973
0.868
1.159
0.684

Table (4-2) shows that item (3), which stated that the objectives recognize individual
differences, received the highest mean score 4.40, whereas item (4), which stated that
the objectives of the materials suit the level of the learners, got the lowest mean score of
4.13. All other items obtained a mean score of more than 4.20, which means that
teachers strongly agreed with them. Generally, the mean score of all statements in this
section (objectives) were 4.33, and this means that the responses of teachers in this
section were in strong agreement with the statements.
The interview results supported the findings of the questionnaire. Teachers were
asked: `Do you think the objectives of teaching English in the fourth grade primary can
be achieved by using this textbook?`. All of the participants stated that the textbook was
effective in achieving the objectives for teaching English at this stage. Also, they believed
that the textbook meets the needs of the learners and it takes into consideration the
individual differences between students. However, two of the teachers stated that the
textbook cannot achieve the objectives related to speaking skills because of the lack of
communicative exercises.

49

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

These findings indicate that there is a consensus between teachers that the objectives
of the textbook are appropriate and meet the needs of the learners, and also that it can
achieve the general objectives of teaching English in the 4th grade of primary school in
Saudi Arabia.
Answer to Question (3): How effective is the textbook in terms of skills development?
Table (1-3): Teachers` perception of Skills in the textbook.
No
.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Statement
The material provides the four language skills.
Writing activities are suitable in terms of length, degree of accuracy, and
amount of guidance.
The materials for listening are accompanied by activities which help
comprehension.
The materials for spoken English (dialogues, role play, communication
activities etc. are designed to equip learners for real life interaction.
The reading passages are associated with pre/while/post reading
activities.
Relevant skills are catered for in the textbook such as critical thinking,
problem solving.
OVERALL

Mea
n
4.47
4.53

SD
0.937
0.629

4.07

1.015

3.97

0.765

3.70

0.837

2.50

1.253

3.47

0.538

As Table (4-3) indicates, item (2) gained the highest mean score of 4.53, which means
that teachers strongly agreed with it, while item (6) received the lowest mean score of
2.50, which indicates that teachers disagreed with it. Item (1) gained a mean score of
4.47, which means that teachers strongly agreed, while items 3, 4 and 5 gained mean
scores of 4.07, 3.97 and 3.70 respectively, which means that teachers agreed with them.
Generally, the mean score of all statements in this section (skills) was 3.47, and this
means that the teachers generally agreed with statements in this section.
The findings from the interviews revealed that teachers stated that the textbook was
not optimally designed to equally satisfy all the required skills, but that it did,

50

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

nevertheless, generally satisfy the requirements of English language skills development.
The four skills are, according to the teachers, satisfactorily covered in the textbook.
They are not, however, given equal weight. Focus tends to be significantly more on
writing and reading, than on listening and conversation skills. Teachers also stated that
there was a shortage of communicative exercises to enable students to use the language
in real life interactions. As a result, this may have an effect on the achievement of the
objectives related to speaking skills. These findings reveal overall however that teachers
are satisfied with the textbook in terms of skills.
Answer to Question (4): How effective is the textbook in terms of its supplementary
materials?
Table (4-4): teachers` perceptions on the Supplementary Materials of the textbook.
No. Statement
1
The posters and flash cards accompanying the book are attractive and
suitable.
2
The CD-ROM that accompanies the book is suitable.
3
The CD-ROM that accompanies the book is available to every student.
4
The textbook`s web site provide the learners with more exercises.
5
The textbook`s web site provide the teachers with teaching resources.
OVERALL
The above table (4-4) shows that item (4) gained the highest mean score

Mean SD
2.07 1.172
3.03 1.351
4.47 1.008
4.60 0.724
3.70 1.055
3.93 0.602
4.60 while

item (1) gained the lowest mean score 2.07 which means that teachers disagreed that
the posters and flash cards accompanying the textbook were attractive and suitable.
Teachers were neutral on item (2), with a mean score of 3.03. Teachers strongly agreed
with item (3) and agreed with item (5), with mean scores for these items of 4.47 and
3.70 respectively. The overall mean score for this section (Supplementary Materials)
is 3.93, which means that the responses of teachers about this part were generally in
agreement with the statements.

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

51

The findings of the interviews explained why item (1) gained the lowest mean score:
this was because the posters and flashcards were not available in the teachers’ schools.
Moreover, they stated that the CD accompanying the textbook was effective in providing
students with more exercises to do at home. However, they could not use the CD at
school since classrooms were not prepared with devices such as headphones or
computers to make full use of the CD. Teachers also stated that they suffer from this
especially when they want to teach students listening skills. In general, these findings
revealed that teachers are satisfied with the textbook in terms of supplementary
materials.
Answer to Question (5): How effective is the textbook in terms of topics and content?
Table (4-5): teachers` perceptions on the Topics and Contents of the textbook.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Statement
Mean SD
The topics of the book are varied and interesting.
3.87 1.106
The topics are familiar to the learners.
4.73 0.521
The topics are suitable to the age of the learners.
4.47 0.681
The topics are suitable to the grade level of the learners.
4.53 0.629
The textbook covers most language skills.
4.37 0.809
The content does not conflict with students' social beliefs.
4.23 0.817
OVERALL
4.48 0.512
Based on Table (4-5), item (2), which stated that the topics are suitable to the age of the
learners, gained the highest mean score of 4.73. The lowest mean score was with item
(1) at 3.87 which indicates that teachers agreed with it. The other items, 3, 4, 5 and 6,
gained high mean scores, which indicates that teachers strongly agreed with them since
they gained 4.47, 4.53, 4.37 and 4.23 respectively. Generally, the mean score of all items
in this section (Topics and Contents) was 4.48, which means that the responses of
teachers were generally in strong agreement.
The findings of the interview supported the results of the questionnaire. Teachers were
asked: ` What do you think about the topics of the textbook? Are they suitable for young

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

52

learners? Are they interesting?`. All of the teachers claim that the topics of the textbook
are suitable for young learners and motivates them for participating. Also, they stated
that the topics were varied and very interesting for young learners since the textbook
covers topics such as ‘my classroom’, ‘my family’, and ‘animals’. In general, these
findings reveal that teachers are very satisfied with the textbook in terms of topics and
content.
Answer to Question (6): How effective is the textbook in terms of reflecting Saudi
cultural values?
Table (4-6): teachers` perceptions on the Culture Values of the textbook.
No. Statement
Mean SD
1
The content suits the learners' current knowledge and culture.
4.53 0.629
2
The teaching of the target culture motivates the learners to explore their
4.67 0.606
own culture.
3
The content serves as a window into learning about the target language
4.53 0.681
culture.
OVERALL
4.54 0.622
Regarding the cultural values of the textbook, Table (4-6) shows that teachers strongly
agreed with all items that the cultural values of this textbook were suitable for the Saudi
culture. Item (2) gained the highest score of 4.67, whereas items 1 and 3 gained the
same score, at 4.53. Generally, the mean score of all items in this section Culture Values
was 4.54, which means that the responses of teachers were generally in strong
agreement with the statements.
In the interviews, all teachers confirmed the findings of the questionnaire by saying that
one of the best features of the textbook is that it does not conflict with the cultural
values of the Saudi environment, even though it was published by global company. They
stated that all of the components of the textbook such as pictures, topics, and contents
are appropriate and do not contradict the religion and the culture of the Saudi context.

53

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

In general, these findings reveal that teachers are very satisfied with the textbook in
terms of cultural values.
Answer to Question (7): How effective is the textbook in terms of structure and
vocabulary?
Table (4-7): teachers` perceptions on the Structure and Vocabulary of the textbook.
No. Statement
1
The grammatical rules are presented in a logical manner and in increasing
order of difficulty.
2
The new structure is integrated in varying contexts and situations.
3
The grammatical points are presented with brief and easy examples and
explanations
4
The vocabulary load seems to be reasonable for the level of the learners.
5
There is sufficient written practice of the grammatical concepts that lead
to communicative use of the language.
6
The progression of vocabulary items is appropriate.
7
The vocabulary is functional, thematic, authentic, and practical.
8
There is sufficient oral practice of the grammatical concepts that leads to
communicative use of the language.
OVERALL

Mean SD
4.43 0.817
4.30
4.27

1.022
0.691

4.00
4.23

0.983
0.568

3.93
4.43
4.43

0.944
0.568
0.679

4.13

0.512

Table (4-7) deals with the structure and the vocabulary of the textbook. It is clear that
items 1.7 and 8 gained the highest mean score of 4.43, which means that teachers
strongly agreed with these items. Item (6) gained the lowest mean score, at 3.93, which
means that teachers agreed with this item. Teachers strongly agreed with items 2, 3,
and 5 since the mean scores for them 4.30, 4.27, and 4.23 respectively. Item (4) gained
the second lowest mean score 4.00 which means teachers agreed with it. The overall
mean score for this section (Structure and Vocabulary) is 4.13, which means that
teachers agreed that the textbook was effective in terms of structure and vocabulary.
In the interviews, teachers were asked `What do you think about the presentation of
vocabulary and language items? How effective are they in motivating and teaching the

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

54

students?`. The interviews revealed that teachers think that the method of presenting
new vocabulary and grammar is very effective in motivating students to learn and
understand new language items. They also stated that the means of linking the new
vocabularies with pictures is very helpful for the students to understand the meanings
of the new vocabulary. In general, these findings revealed that teachers were satisfied
with the textbook in terms of structure and vocabulary.
Answer to Question (8): How effective is the textbook in terms of activities and tasks?
Table (4-8): teachers` perceptions on the Activities and Tasks of the textbook.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Statement
Mean SD
There are a variety of activities in the textbook.
3.47 0.819
The instructions in the material are sufficient.
4.57 0.774
There are instructions to explain how the exercise should be done.
4.43 0.935
The instructions in the material are clear.
4.43 0.971
The number of activities is suitable.
4.57 0.728
There are interactive activities that require students to use new
4.53 0.730
vocabulary to communicate.
7
The activities facilitate students’ use of grammatical rules by creating
4.07 0.980
situations in which these rules are needed.
8
The textbook provides communicative exercises that enable learners to
3.77 0.971
carry out their communicative tasks in real-life situations.
9
An adequate set of evaluation quizzes or testing suggestions is included.
3.40 0.894
OVERALL
4.17 0.563
As shown in Table (4-8), teachers strongly agreed with items 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, since all of
them gained mean scores of over 4.20. Also, teachers agreed with items 1, 7, 8, and 9,
since the mean score they gained were 3.47, 4.07, 3.77 and 3.40 respectively. Generally,
teachers agreed that the textbook was effective in terms of tasks and activities, since the
total mean score of this section is 4.17.
From the interviews, teachers pointed out some shortcomings of the exercises in the
textbook, as they stated that the exercises do not take into consideration the individual
differences between students. Also, two of the teachers stated that the same exercises

55

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

are repeated in every unit, so there is not enough diversity in the exercises. Moreover,
the teachers stated that the exercises do not help the students to be autonomous
learners. In general however, these findings revealed that teachers are satisfied with
the textbook in terms of activities and tasks.
Answer to Question (9): How effective is the textbook in terms of the teachers`
manual?
Table (4-9): teachers` perceptions on the Teacher’s Manual of the textbook.
No. Statement
1
The teacher's manual is informative.
2
The teacher's manual suggests an appropriate, concise method for
teaching each lesson.
3
The teacher's manual helps the teachers understand the objectives of the
textbook.
4
The manual gives instructions on how to incorporate audio-visual
materials produced for the textbook.
5
The manual provides additional exercises for reinforcing various language
skills in the textbook.
6
The teacher’s manual is available for every teacher.
OVERALL
Table (4-9) summarized teachers' perceptions on six statements about

Mean SD
3.83 0.913
4.57 0.679
4.47

0.900

4.60

0.675

4.50

0.572

4.03 0.964
4.32 0.689
teachers`

manual of the textbook. Teachers strongly agreed with 4 items 2, 3, 4, and 5 since they
gained 4.57, 4.47, 4.60, and 4.50 respectively. Also, teachers agreed with item 1, which
gained a 3.83 mean score, and item 6, which gained 4.03. The teachers’ manual was not
available to all teachers, as the results indicated. The overall mean score of teachers`
opinions about the teachers` manual indicates that they strongly agreed, at 4.32. These
findings reveal that teachers are very satisfied with the textbook in terms of the
teachers’ manual.
There are other findings from the interviews with the 5 teachers, which are not related
to the nine categories of the questionnaire. Teachers were asked, `how effective do you

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

think the textbook is as a foundation for young learners? `. Teachers agreed that the
textbook is very effective as a foundation for young learners, since it covers the basics of
the English language and starts with the most important features that the students
should learn when they first have contact with the language, such as letters, numbers,
and simple words that they use in their daily life. Also, teachers were asked, `do you
think that two classes per week are enough to teach all the components of the textbook?
Why?`. All of the teachers thought that two classes per week were enough to deliver all
the components of the textbook since the textbook is not too long. However, teachers
stated that if they want to bring in external materials for more practice or if they wish to
plan more revision to check students` understanding, two classes are not enough.
Moreover, they added that it would be difficult for them to finish all the components of
the textbook if they did not receive the textbook at the beginning of the term, as
happened in the first term of this year when they received the books three weeks after
the beginning of the term. Also, teachers were asked, `can you tell us some advantages
and disadvantages of the textbook if there are any? `. They gave several advantages,
such as:
1- The textbook focuses on the basics of the English language.
2- The language used in the examples and instructions are simple and clear.
3- The design and the layout of the textbook are attractive and interesting for young
learners.
4- The method of introducing new words by linking them with pictures.
5- The topics are varied and interesting and suitable to Saudi culture.
They also pointed out some disadvantages of the textbook such as:

56

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

1-The exercises do not take into consideration the individual differences between
students and also the same types of exercises are repeated in every unit.
2- Some of the skills that students expected to acquire at the end of the year are difficult
to achieve especially those related to writing skill.
3- The flash cards and the poster of the textbook are not available.
4.4 Conclusion:
The findings of the current study revealed that the teachers in general are satisfied
about the textbook in all of the categories. The cultural values category gained the
highest mean score, with 4.54 out of 5.00, whereas the skills category gained the lowest
mean score, with 3.47 out of 5.00. The mean score for all of the statements indicate that
teachers strongly agreed with 5 categories; layout and design, objectives, topics and
content, cultural values, and teacher’s manual. Further, they agreed with 4 categories;
skills, supplementary materials, structure and vocabulary, and activities and tasks. In
general, the textbook seems to be highly appropriate, according to the teachers’
perspectives.

Table (4-10) Mean score and SD for all categories
NO.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Category
Layout and design
Objectives
Skills
Supplementary materials
Topics and content
Cultural values
Structure and vocabulary
Activities and tasks
Teacher’s manual

Mean
4.40
4.33
3.47
3.93
4.48
4.54
4.13
4.17
4.32

SD
0.573
0.684
0.538
0.602
0.512
0.622
0.512
0.563
0.689

57

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Chapter5: Conclusion,
Recommendations & Limitations
5.1 Conclusion:
This study has attempted to evaluate the effectiveness of the English language
textbook of the fourth grade primary in Arar city, Saudi Arabia, from teachers’
perspectives. The study evaluated the textbook in terms of design and layout, objectives,
language skills, cultural values, accompanying materials, topics and content, structure
and vocabulary and activities and tasks, teachers` manual. It is very important to
conduct ELT textbook evaluation so as to ensure that ELT textbooks can effectively
facilitate the attainment of our teaching objectives. Wrong choices of textbooks would
be likely to negatively affect both teaching and learning processes and financial
resources would also be wasted (Mukundan, 2007; Sheldon, 1988). The significance of
such a process is to discover the merits and demerits of the textbook which might act as
a springboard for encouraging further improvement or raising awareness of modern
English teaching methods. Based on the findings of the questionnaires and the
interviews, the following conclusions are drawn:
1. In general, teachers felt that they are very satisfied with the textbook in terms of
layout and design, objectives, topics and content, cultural values, and teacher’s
manual, whereas they were satisfied in terms of skills, supplementary materials,
structure and vocabulary, and activities and tasks.
2. Teachers felt that the textbook did not give equal weight to all language skills.
3. Teachers reported that the textbook failed to provide relevant skills such as critical
thinking and problem solving.

58

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

4. Teachers reported that the flash cards and posters of the textbook were not
available at schools.
5. Most of the teachers reported that they did not use the CD in teaching as the classes
were not prepared with the equipment to help in integrating the CD in the teaching
process.
6. Teachers felt that the exercises were not varied enough and also that they do not
take into account the individual differences between students.
7. Teachers reported that there is a shortage of communicative exercises to enable the
students to use the language in their real life.
5.2 Recommendations:
1- Based on the findings of the study, which revealed that teachers were satisfied with
the textbook, it is recommended to keep on using the textbook with some
supplementary materials, since it is difficult to find a textbook which satisfies teachers.
2- The textbook should be supplemented with additional materials for speaking and
listening skills.
3- The textbook should be supplemented with more varied exercises which take into
account the individual differences between students.
4- The flash cards, posters and teachers’ manual should be made available at all schools.
5- The textbook should be provided to the students and teachers at the beginning of the
term.
6- The textbook should be supplemented with additional materials which provide
relevant skills, such as critical thinking and problem solving.

59

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

7- Classes should have access to the necessary equipment to exploit all of the
supplementary materials of the package.
8- The textbook should be supplemented with more communicative exercises in order
to help the students to use the language items that they have learned.
9-Workshops about how to deliver the new textbook and ways in which it can be
supplemented should be held for teachers at the beginning of the academic year, as well
as regular meetings with the supervisors throughout the year to discuss any emerging
problems.
5.3 Limitations of the study:
The primary limitation of this study is the time constraint, since this study was
carried out in two phases; it would have required too much time if it had been
completed in one phase. The time constraint affected other aspects, such as the sample
of the study and the amount of data. It would have been beneficial to carry out a second
interview with the participants to identify whether the results from the first study
would converge with the second. This would strengthen the validity of the study, but
this is not possible because of time constraints. Another limitation is that the study took
place in Arar city and all the participants were from the same city, while the purpose of
the study is to evaluate a textbook used in the fourth grade of primary schools.
Therefore, the result may not be generalizable to include other samples, other textbooks
or other cities. Also, the number of participants in the study is limited, and this may
affect the results of the study. If the sample size were bigger, the results would be more
representative of the target population.

60

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

5.4 Suggestions for future research:
1. In this study, a macro evaluation of a textbook was conducted. This could be
complemented by a micro evaluation study. The micro-evaluation study, which is at the
task level, could be implemented for this textbook. Furthermore, a combination of both
macro and micro evaluation studies would provide extensive feedback and help to
identify both weaknesses and strengths of the materials concerned.
2. A further study could be conducted to evaluate the other textbooks in the same series
(Get Ready 3, 4, 5 and 6), which are designed for other levels, in order to observe
cohesiveness.
3. Since the current study is the first study conducted to evaluate the textbook entitled
“Get Ready 1 & 2”, the results need to be verified with a larger group of teachers from
different regions of Saudi Arabia.
4. A further study could be conducted to evaluate the textbook from students’
perspectives.
5. A further study might be conducted to investigate the whole programme for teaching
English as a foreign language in Saudi Arabia.
6. Since the current study was conducted on a whilst-use basis, another study could be
conducted after the textbook has been used (post-use evaluation).

61

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Bibliography
Al-Amri, A. (2008). An Evaluation of the Sixth Grade English language Textbook for Saudi
Boys' Schools. (Unpublished MA dissertation), King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
Alenezi, S. (2009). An Evaluation of the English Language Programme in the Elementary
Stage in Arar city, Saudi Arabia. (Unpublished MA dissertation), University of Essex, UK.
Al-Hajailan, T. (2003) Teaching English in Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: Aldar Alsawlatiah.
Allwright, R. L. (1981). What do we want teaching materials for? ELT Journal 36(1), pp.
5–18.
Al-Motairi, A. (2005). Improving the Teaching of English Language in The Saudi Arabia
Context: A case study of five boys’ secondary school. (Unpublished PhD thesis), University
of East Anglia, UK.
Alshehri, Z. (2011). An Evaluation of Saudi Arabian Secondary School English Textbooks.
(Unpublished MA dissertation), Manchester Metropolitan University, UK.
Al-Sowat, H. (2012). An Evaluation of English Language Textbook "Say It in English" For
First Year Intermediate Grade in Saudi Arabia. Journal of Studies in Curriculum and
Supervision, 3(2), pp.332-413.
Altayar, S. M. (2012). A Study of the Attitudes of Parents and Teachers to the Introduction
of EFL in Saudi Primary Schools in Riyadh in Saudi Arabia. (Unpublished MA
dissertation), University of East Anglia, UK.
Al-Yousef, H. (2007). An Evaluation of the New Third Grade Intermediate English
Coursebook in Saudi Arabia. (Unpublished Master Thesis), King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
Al-Zuhairi, R. (2008). Reasons of the Low-level Achievement of Intermediate School Students
in Learning English from the Viewpoint of Academics, Teachers and Supervisors in Makkah
and Taif. (Unpublished Master Thesis), Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah.
Brown, J. D. (2001). Using Survey in Language Programs. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research Methods in Education (6th ed). New
York: Routledge.
Creswell, J. (2009). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
Approaches (3rd ed).Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.
Cunningsworth, A. (1995). Choosing your Coursebook. Oxford: Heinemann.
Dörnyei, Z. (2003). Questionnaires in Second Language Research: Construction,
Administration, and Processing. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

62

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Dörnyei, Z. (2007). Research Method In Applied Linguistic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R. (1997). The Empirical Evaluation of Language Teaching Materials. ELT Journal.
51(1), pp.36-42.
English Language Development Project (ELDP), (2013). Retrieved 20 November 2013
from: http://eldp.gov.sa/pageDetails.aspx?Page_ID=11
Harper, K., Tennant, A. & Arnold, W. (2013). Get Ready 1Elementary Stage, Fourth
Elementary Grade, First Semester. Oxford: Macmillan Education.
Harper, K., Tennant, A. & Arnold, W. (2013). Get Ready 2Elementary Stage, Fourth
Elementary Grade, Second Semester. Oxford: Macmillan Education.
Grant, N. (1987). Making the Most of your Textbook. London: Longman.
Graves, K. (2000). Designing Language Courses: A Guide for Teachers. Boston: Heinle &
Heinle.
Hutchinson, T. (1987). What is Underneath? An Interactive View of the Materials
Evaluation. In L. E. Sheldon (Ed.), ELT Textbooks and Materials: Problems in Evaluation
and Development, (pp. 37-44), Oxford: Modern English Publications.
Hutchinson, T. & Torres E. (1994). The Textbook as Agent of Change. ELT Journal, 48(4),
pp. 315 –328.
Hutchinson, T. and A. Waters. 1987. English for Specific Purposes: A Learning-Centred
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hycroft, J. (1998). An Introduction to English Language Teaching. London: Longman.
Johnson, R. B., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Turner, L. A. (2007). Toward a Definition of Mixed
Methods Research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2), pp. 112-133.
Khafaji, A. (2004). An Evaluation of the Materials Used for Teaching English to the Second
Secondary Level in Male Public High School in Saudi Arabia. (Unpublished MA
dissertation), University of Exeter, UK.
Khinkar, W. (2000). Identifying the Most Important Problems of English Language Curriculum
for the First Grade Secondary from the Viewpoint of the Female Teachers in Taif.
(Unpublished Master Thesis), Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah.
Kirkgöz, Y. (2009). Evaluating the English Textbooks for Young Learners of English at
Turkish Primary Education. Procedia-Social and Behavioural Sciences, 1(1), pp. 79-83.
Lawrence, W. P. W. (2011). Textbook Evaluation: a Framework for Evaluating the Fitness
of the Hong Kong New Secondary School (NSS) Curriculum. (Unpublished Doctoral
dissertation), City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

63

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Littlejohn, A. (1998). The Analysis of Language Teaching Materials: Inside the Trojan
horse. In Tomlinson, B. (Ed.) Materials Development in Language Teaching. (pp. 190216) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Litz, D. R. (2005). Textbook Evaluation and ELT Management: A South Korean Case
Study. Asian EFL journal, 6(4).
Lodico, M. G., Spaulding, D. T. & Voegtle, K. H. (2006). Methods in Educational Research:
from Theory to Practice. San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Mackey, A. and Gass, S.M. (2005). Second Language Research: Methodology and Design.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
McDonough, J. and Shaw, C. (1993). Materials and Method in ELT. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers Ltd.
McGrath, I. (2002). Materials Evaluation and Design for Language Teaching. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Muijs, D. (2004). Doing Quantitative Research in Education with SPSS. London: SAGE
Publications Ltd.
Mukandan,J. (2007). Evaluation of English Language Textbooks: some important issues
for consideration. Journal of NELTA. 12(1), pp. 80-84.
Mukundan, J. & Ahour, T. (2010). A Review of Textbook Evaluation Checklists across
Four Decades (1970–2008). In B. Tomlinson & H. Masuhara (Eds.). Research for
Materials Development in Language Learning: Evidence for Best Practice. (pp. 336–352).
London: Continuum.
Mukundan, J., Hajimohammadi, R., & Nimehchisalem, V. (2011). Developing an English
Language Textbook Evaluation Checklist. Contemporary Issues in Education Research
(CIER), 4(6), pp.21-28.
Nunan, D. (1988). Syllabus design. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Neill, R. (1982). Why Use Textbooks? ELT Journal, 36(2), pp. 104-111.
Oppenheim, A. N. (1992). Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement.
New York: Continuum.
Özdemir, F. E. (2007). An Evaluation of Time for English 4, the 4th Grade English
Coursebook for Public Schools. (Unpublished Master Thesis), Middle East Technical
University Graduate School of Social Sciences, Ankara.
Palmer, H. (1922). The Principles of Language Study. London: Oxford University Press.

64

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Richards, J. C. (2001). Curriculum Development in Language Teaching. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as Qualitative Research: A Guide for Researchers in
Education and the Social Sciences. (3rd ed). New York: Teachers College Press.
Sheldon, L. (1988). Evaluating ELT Textbooks and Materials. ELT Journal, 42(4), pp. 237246.
Skierso, A. (1991). Textbook selection and evaluation. In M. C. Murcia (Ed.), Teaching
English as a Second or Foreign Language (pp. 432-453). (2nd ed.). Boston: Heinle and
Heinle Publishers.
Soleimani, H., & Dabbaghi, A. (2012). Textbook evaluation: A Reflection on the New
Interchange Series. International Journal of Research Studies in Language Learning, 1(2),
pp. 19-32.
Tomlinson, B. (Ed.) (2003). Developing Materials for Language Teaching. London:
Continuum.
Tomlinson, B. (Ed.) (2008). English Language Teaching Materials: A Critical Review.
London: Continuum.
Tomlinson, B. (2010). Principles of Effective Materials Development. In N, Harwood
(Ed.). English Language Teaching Materials: Theory and Practice (pp. 81-108). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Tomlinson, B. (2012). Materials Development for Language Learning and Teaching.
Language Teaching, 45(02), pp. 143-179.
Tomlinson, B. & H. Masuhara (2004). Developing Language Course Materials. Singapore:
RELC Portfolio Series.
Tomlinson, B., & Masuhara, H. (2013). Adult Coursebooks. ELT journal, 67(2), pp, 233249.
Tomlinson, B., Masuhara, H., Dat, B., & Rubdy, R. (2001). EFL Courses for Adults. ELT
journal, 55(1), pp. 80-101.
Tomlinson, B., Masuhara, H., Hann, N. & Yi, Y. (2008). Adult EFL Courses. ELT
journal, 62(3), pp. 294-312.
UR, P. (1996). A Course in Language Teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
VanderStoep, S. W., & Johnson, D. D. (2009). Research Methods for Everyday Life:
Blending Qualitative and Quantitative approaches. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Weir, C. J. and Roberts, J. (1994). Evaluation in ELT. Oxford: Blackwell.

65

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Williams, D. (1983). Developing Criteria for Textbooks Evaluation. ELT Journal 37.3, pp.
251-255.
Woodward, T. (2001). Planning Lessons and Courses: Designing sequences of work for the
Language Classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yumuk, A. (1998). A Case Study on Evaluating the Effectiveness of English Language
Support 201 Course Materials for Bureau Management and Secretarial Studies at Bilkent
University. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), METU, Ankara, Turkey
Zenger, W. F. (1982). Textbook evaluation: A Guide and Checklist. Sonataga, California:
Rae Publishers.

66

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 1
Aims of teaching English in Saudi Arabia:
1. Improve social, professional and intellectual capabilities.
2. Attain the language skills required for communication with other speakers of English.
3. Attain competences in English language which will be required in a range of real-life
contexts.
4. Achieve the level of language ability needed for a range of professional roles.
5. Become aware of the role of English in global communication.
6. View the process of learning English in a positive light.
7. Achieve linguistic development to allow awareness of Saudi Arabia’s social economic
and cultural concerns and allow them to help address these concerns.
8. Achieve sufficient language skills to inform and educate regarding the concepts of
Islam and to promote Islam.
9. Achieve sufficient language skills to inform and educate regarding Arab culture and
civilization.
10. Gain knowledge from other, English-speaking societies, in the interests of global
respect, understanding and co-operation.
11. Achieve the necessary skills in English to allow the country to benefit from newlyemerging technology and scientific knowledge across the globe
12. Possess the linguistic ability to discuss Islamic concepts and concerns and to
contribute in promoting (Al-Hajailan, 2005).

67

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

* Amis of teaching English in the 4th grade primary (Altayar, 2012):
1. Learn the basics of the English language that would form the foundation of its
mastery in the future.
2. Use the basic structures of English sentences.
3. Learn the core vocabulary assigned for this stage.
4. Listen to and understand simple English language.
5. Express themselves orally using simple English language
6. Read and understand simple written English language materials.
7. Write simple guided sentences in English language.

68

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 2: Consent Form to Participate in Research
Project Name: A Teacher-Based Evaluation of the English Language Textbook (Get Ready1&2) for
Saudi fourth grade primary
Introduction
You are invited to consider participating in this research study. I will evaluate the effectiveness of the
English language textbook (Get Ready1&2) for the fourth grade primary in Saudi Arabia; Arar city.
This form will describe the purpose and nature of the study and your rights as a participant in the
study. The decision to participate or not is yours, if you decide to participate, please sign and date
the last line of this form.
Explanation of the study
In this study, I will carry out a macro evaluation for the English language textbook (Get Ready1&2)
for the fourth grade primary school. The study will be from teachers’ perspectives in terms of: layout
and design, objectives, activities and tasks, skills, topics and content, supplementary materials,
teachers` manual, culture values, and structure and vocabulary. A questionnaire will be distributed
to 30 teachers. An interview will be conducted with 5 teachers and it will be recorded with their
permission.
Confidentiality
All of the information collected will be confidential and will only be used for research purposes. This
means that your identity will be anonymous, in other words, no one besides the researcher will
know your name. Whenever data from this study are published, your name will not be used. The
data will be stored in a computer, and only the researcher will have access to it.
Your participation
Participating in this study is strictly voluntary. That means you do not have to be a part of the study.
If at any point you change your mind and no longer want to participate, you can withdraw your
participation at any stage of the study.
Investigator's statement: I have fully explained this study to the participants. I have discussed the
activities and have answered all of the questions that the participants asked. If necessary, I have
translated key terms and concepts in this form and explained them orally.
Signature of investigator

Date

Participant`s consent: I have read the information provided in this Informed Consent Form. All my
questions were answered to my satisfaction. I voluntarily agree to participate in this study.
Your signature

Date

Thank you for your help.
For further queries: E-mail: boldman111@hotmail.com

mobile phone:

69

70

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 3: Questionnaire
A Teacher-Based Evaluation of the English Language Textbook (Get Ready 1&2) for Saudi Fourth
Grade Primary
Name: (optional)………………………………………………..
School: (optional)………………………………………………
Nationality:
􀀀 Saudi
􀀀 Non-Saudi
Sex: 􀀀 male 􀀀female
Qualification: 􀀀 Diploma 􀀀 B.A 􀀀 M.A
English Teaching Experience:
􀀀 Less than one year 􀀀 1-4 years 􀀀 5-10 years 􀀀 More than 10 years
Would you like to receive an electronic copy of the study results? 􀀀 Yes 􀀀 No
If yes, your e-mail address………………………………………………..
Would you like to be interviewed? 􀀀 Yes 􀀀 No
If yes, your mobile phone…………………..…
INSTRUCTION:
To respond to this questionnaire, please check (✓) in the appropriate choice as follows:
12345-

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Strongly disagree.
Disagree
Neutral.
Agree.
Strongly agree.

Layout and Design
The visual design and the layout of the book are attractive.
The book has a complete and detailed table of contents.
The units are well organized and offer easy progression.
The pictures and graphics of the textbook motivate students to participate.
Illustrations, tables, figures, graphs, etc. are relevant and functional.
An adequate vocabulary list or glossary is included.
Objectives
The textbook fulfils the objectives of teaching English in the fourth grade primary.
The objectives of the materials correspond to the needs of the learners.
The objectives recognize individual differences.
The objectives of the materials suit the level of the learners.
The objectives can be covered within the time allocated for the textbook.
The objectives are realistic.
Skills
The material provides the four language skills.
Writing activities are suitable in terms of length, degree of accuracy, and amount of guidance.
The materials for listening are accompanied by activities which help comprehension.
The materials for spoken English (dialogues, role play, communication activities etc. are
designed to equip learners for real life interaction.
The reading passages are associated with pre/while/post reading activities.
Relevant skills are catered for in the textbook such as critical thinking, problem solving.
Supplementary Materials
The posters and flash cards accompanying the book are attractive and suitable.
The CD-ROM that accompanies the book is suitable.
The CD-ROM that accompanies the book is available to every student.

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55

The textbook`s web site provide the learners with more exercises.
The textbook`s web site provide the teachers with teaching resources.
Topics and Contents
The topics of the book are varied and interesting.
The topics are familiar to the learners.
The topics are suitable to the age of the learners.
The topics are suitable to the grade level of the learners.
The textbook covers most language skills.
The content does not conflict with students' social beliefs.
Culture Values
The content suits the learners' current knowledge and culture.
The teaching of the target culture motivates the learners to explore their own culture.
The content serves as a window into learning about the target language culture.
Structure and Vocabulary
The grammatical rules are presented in a logical manner and in increasing order of difficulty.
The new structure is integrated in varying contexts and situations.
The grammatical points are presented with brief and easy examples and explanations
The vocabulary load seems to be reasonable for the level of the learners.
There is sufficient written practice of the grammatical concepts that lead to communicative
use of the language.
The progression of vocabulary items is appropriate.
The vocabulary is functional, thematic, authentic, and practical.
There is sufficient oral practice of the grammatical concepts that leads to communicative use
of the language.
Activities and Tasks
There are a variety of activities in the textbook.
The instructions in the material are sufficient.
There are instructions to explain how the exercise should be done.
The instructions in the material are clear.
The number of activities is suitable.
There are interactive activities that require students to use new vocabulary to communicate.
The activities facilitate students’ use of grammatical rules by creating situations in which these
rules are needed.
The textbook provides communicative exercises that enable learners to carry out their
communicative tasks in real-life situations.
An adequate set of evaluation quizzes or testing suggestions is included.
Teacher's Manual
The teacher's manual is informative.
The teacher's manual suggests an appropriate, concise method for teaching each lesson.
The teacher's manual helps the teachers understand the objectives of the textbook.
The manual gives instructions on how to incorporate audio-visual materials produced for the
textbook.
The manual provides additional exercises for reinforcing various language skills in the
textbook.
The teacher’s manual is available for every teacher.
Thank you f or your participation.

71

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 4: Interview Questions
1. Do you think the objectives of teaching English in the fourth grade primary can be
achieved by using this textbook?
2- How effective do you think the textbook is as a foundation for young learners?
3. What do you think about the presentation of vocabulary and language items? How
effective are they in motivating and teaching the students?
4- What do you think about the topics of the textbook? Are they suitable for young
learners? Are they interesting?
5- How effective do you think the supporting materials in providing the students with
extra practice?
6- Do you think that two classes per week are enough to teach all the components of the
textbook? Why?
7- Can you tell us some advantages and disadvantages of the textbook if there are any?
8- Do you have any suggestions for improving the textbook or improving the English
language teaching in the fourth grade primary in general?

72

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 5: Ethical Approval

73

74

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 6: Results of the study
Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about the layout
and design of the textbook.

Statement

Strongly
agree neutral disagree
agree

Strongly
disagree
Mean SD

F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

1-The visual design and the
layout of the book are
attractive.

20

1

0

9

0

66.7

3.3

00.0

30.0

0

2-The book has a complete and
detailed table of contents.

18

1

2

9

0

60.0

3.3

6.7

30.0

0

15

0

2

12

1

50.0

0.0

6.7

40.0

3.3

4-The pictures and graphics of
the textbook motivate students
to participate.

13

0

4

13

0

43.3

0.0

13.3

43.3

0

5- Illustrations, tables, figures,
graphs, etc. are relevant and
functional.

16

0

4

10

0

53.3

0.0

13.3

33.3

0.0

6- An adequate vocabulary list
or glossary is included.

18

1

3

8

0

60.0

3.3

10.0

26.7

0.0

3-The units are well organized
and offer easy progression.

4.400

4.60

0.675

4.47

0.776

4.33

0.884

4.30

0.702

4.40

0.724

4.43

0.817

0.573

75

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).
Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about the objectives
of the textbook.

Statement

Strongly Agree neutral disagree Strongly Mean SD
disagree
agree
F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The textbook fulfils the
objectives of teaching English
in the fourth grade primary.

15

2

3

10

0

50.0

6.7

10.0

33.3

0.0

The objectives of the materials
correspond to the needs of the
learners.

17

2

2

9

0

56.7

6.7

6.7

30.0

0.0

The objectives recognize
individual differences.

15

1

1

13

0

50.0

3.3

3.3

43.3

0.0

The objectives of the materials
suit the level of the learners.

12

1

3

13

1

40.0

3.3

10.0

12.9

3.3

The objectives can be covered
within the time allocated for the
textbook.

14

2

2

12

0

46.7

6.7

6.7

40.0

0.0

The objectives are realistic.

20

1

1

6

2

66.7

3.3

3.3

20.0

6.7

4.27

0.907

4.37

0.890

4.40

0.724

4.13

0.973

4.27

0.868

4.37

1.159

4.33

0.684

76

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).
Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about the skills of
the textbook.

Strongly

agree

neutral

disagree Strongly Mean
disagree

F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The material provides the four
language skills.

21

2

3

4

0

70.0

6.7

10.0

13.3

0

Writing activities are suitable in terms
of length, degree of accuracy, and
amount of guidance.

18

0

2

10

0

60.0

0.0

6.7

33.3

0.0

The materials for listening are
accompanied by activities which help
comprehension.

13

3

5

9

0

43.3

10.0

16.7

30.0

0.0

The materials for spoken English
(dialogues, role play, communication
activities etc. are designed to equip
learners for real life interaction.

7

1

6

16

0

23.3

3.3

20.0

53.3

0

The reading passages are associated
with pre/while/post reading activities.

4

3

7

16

0

13.3

10.0

23.3

53.3

0.0

Relevant skills are catered for in the
textbook such as critical thinking,
problem solving.

4

15

4

2

5

6.7

50.0

6.7

6.7

16.7

Statement

agree

SD

4.47

0.937

4.53

0.629

4.07

1.015

3.97

0.765

3.70

0.837

2.50

1.253

0.538
3.472

77

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).
Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about the
supplementary materials of the textbook

agre
e

neutra
l

Disagre
e

Strong
ly
disagr
ee

F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The posters and flash cards accompanying the
book are attractive and suitable.

2

12

3

2

11

6.7

40.0

10.0

6.7

36.7

The CD-ROM that accompanies the book is
suitable.

7

13

4

4

2

23.3

43.3

13.3

13.3

6.7

The CD-ROM that accompanies the book is
available to every student.

21

1

2

5

1

70.0

3.3

6.7

16.7

3.3

The textbook`s web site provide the learners
with more exercises.

21

1

1

7

0

70.0

3.3

3.3

23.3

0

The textbook`s web site provide the teachers
with teaching resources.

10

0

8

10

2

33.3

0.0

26.7

33.3

6.7

Statement

Strong
ly
agree

3.93

Mea
n

SD

2.07

1.17
2

3.03

1.35
1

4.47

1.00
8

4.60

0.72
4

3.70

1.05
5
0.60
2

78

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).
Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about the topics and
content of the textbook

Statement

Strongly agree neutral disagree Strongly Mean Sd
disagree
agree
F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The topics of the book are varied
and interesting.

10

0

8

10

2

33.3

0.0

26.7

33.3

6.7

The topics are familiar to the
learners.

23

0

1

6

0

76.7

0.0

3.3

20.0

0.0

The topics are suitable to the age
of the learners.

17

0

3

10

0

56.7

0.0

10.0

33.3

0.0

The topics are suitable to the
grade level of the learners.

18

0

2

10

0

60.0

0.0

6.7

33.3

0

The textbook covers most
language skills.

16

1

3

10

0

53.3

3.3

10.0

33.3

0.0

The content does not conflict
with students' social beliefs.

13

1

4

12

0

43.3

3.3

13.3

40.0

0.0

3.87

1.106

4.73

0.521

4.47

0.681

4.53

0.629

4.37

0.809

4.23

0.817

0.512
4.48

79

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about
the cultural values of the textbook.

Statement

Strongly agree neutral disagree Strongly Mean SD
disagree
agree
F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The content suits the learners'
current knowledge and culture.

18

0

2

10

0

60.0

0.0

6.7

33.3

0

The teaching of the target
culture motivates the learners to
explore their own culture.

22

0

2

6

0

73.3

0.0

6.7

20.0

0.0

The content serves as a window
into learning about the target
language culture.

19

0

3

8

0

63.3

0.0

10.0

26.7

0.0

4.53

0.629

4.67

0.606

4.53

0.681

0.622
4.54

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).
Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about the structure
and the vocabulary of the textbook.

Statement

Strongly agree neutral disagree Strongly Mean SD
disagree
agree
F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The grammatical rules are
presented in a logical manner
and in increasing order of
difficulty.

18

1

3

8

0

60.0

3.3

10.0

26.7

0.0

The new structure is integrated
in varying contexts and
situations.

16

2

0

11

1

53.3

6.7

0.0

36.7

3.3

The grammatical points are
presented with brief and easy
examples and explanations.

12

0

4

14

0

40.0

0.0

13.3

46.7

0.0

The vocabulary load seems to be
reasonable for the level of the
learners.

10

4

2

14

0

33.3

13.3

6.7

46.7

0.0

There is sufficient written
practice of the grammatical
concepts that lead to
communicative use of the
language.

9

0

2

19

0

30.0

0.0

6.7

63.3

0.0

The progression of vocabulary
items is appropriate.

9

3

5

13

0

30.0

10.0

16.7

43.3

0.0

The vocabulary is functional,
thematic, authentic, and
practical.

14

0

1

15

0

46.7

0.0

3.3

50.0

0

There is sufficient oral practice of
the grammatical concepts that
leads to communicative use of
the language.

16

0

3

11

0

53.3

0.0

10.0

36.7

0.0

4.43

0.817

4.30

1.022

4.27

0.691

4.00

0.983

4.23

0.568

3.93

0.944

4.43

0.568

4.43

0.679

0.512
4.13

80

Mean,
standard
deviation,OF
percentage
and
frequencies
of teachers’
perceptions about the
TEACHERS`
PERSPECTIVES
THE ENGLISH
LANGUAGE
TEXTBOOK
(GET READY1&2).
activities and tasks of the textbook.

Statement

Strongly agree neutral disagree Strongly
disagree
agree
F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

There are a variety of activities in the
textbook.

4

2

16

8

0

13.3

6.7

53.3

26.7

0.0

The instructions in the material are
sufficient.

21

1

2

6

0

70.0

3.3

6.7

20.0

0.0

There are instructions to explain how
the exercise should be done.

21

1

6

2

0

70.0

3.3

20.0

6.7

0.0

The instructions in the material are
clear.

19

1

1

8

1

63.3

3.3

3.3

26.7

3.3

The number of activities is suitable.

20

1

1

8

0

66.7

3.3

3.3

26.7

0.0

There are interactive activities that
require students to use new
vocabulary to communicate.

19

1

1

9

0

63.3

3.3

3.3

30.0

0.0

The activities facilitate students’ use
of grammatical rules by creating
situations in which these rules are
needed.

12

3

4

11

0

40.0

10.0

13.3

36.7

0.0

The textbook provides
communicative exercises that enable
learners to carry out their
communicative tasks in real-life
situations.

8

3

9

10

0

26.7

10.0

30.0

33.3

0.0

An adequate set of evaluation quizzes
or testing suggestions is included.

2

6

8

14

0

6.7

20.0

26.7

46.7

0.0

81

Mean SD

3.47

0.819

4.57

0.774

4.43

0.935

4.43

0.971

4.57

0.728

4.53

0.730

4.07

0.980

3.77

0.971

3.40

0.894

0.563
4.178

82

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Mean, standard deviation, percentage and frequencies of teachers’ perceptions about
the teacher’s manual of the textbook

Statement

Strongly agree neutral disagree Strongly Mean SD
disagree
agree
F

F

F

F

F

%

%

%

%

%

The teacher's manual is
informative.

7

3

6

14

0

23.3

10.0

20.0

46.7

0

The teacher's manual suggests
an appropriate, concise method
for teaching each lesson.

20

0

3

7

0

66.7

0.0

10.0

23.3

0.0

The teacher's manual helps the
teachers understand the
objectives of the textbook.

20

2

2

6

0

66.7

6.7

6.7

20.0

0.0

The manual gives instructions on
how to incorporate audio-visual
materials produced for the
textbook.

21

0

3

6

0

70.0

0.0

10.0

20.0

0

The manual provides additional
exercises for reinforcing various
language skills in the textbook.

16

0

1

13

0

53.3

0.0

3.3

43.3

0.0

The teacher’s manual is available
for every teacher.

10

4

1

15

0

33.3

13.3

3.3

50.0

0.0

3.83

0.913

4.57

0.679

4.47

0.900

4.60

0.675

4.50

0.572

4.03

0.964

0.689
4.32

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

Appendix 7: sample of the textbook

83

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

84

TEACHERS` PERSPECTIVES OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEXTBOOK (GET READY1&2).

85

