AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.9

Pp.91-113

Using the SCAMPER Model to DevelopTranslation Skills for Major Students in the
Faculty of Education, Majmaah University, Saudi Arabia
Fatma Farid Fakhry Tharwa
Department of Curriculum and Teaching Methods
Faculty of Education, the New Valley University, Egypt
&
Faculty of Education, Majmaah University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
This paper aims at identifying the effectiveness of using the SCAMPER model in developing
translation and raising the attitudes towards adaptation among major students in the faculty of
education, Majmaah University, Saudi Arabia. It tries to answer the following questions: To
what extent would using the SCAMPER model raise translation skills among major students
in the faculty of education – Majmaah University .the the second question is To what extent
would using SCAMPER model raise the attitudes towards translation among major students.To
accomplish the purpose of the study, the researcher showed the experimental group with a
sample involved (40) students for the SCAMPER Model in the first term of the school year
2018-2019. The researcher used (pre -post & delayed) translation test, a scale of students'
attitudes towards translation to collect data. The study's results suggested that there were
statistically important differences at (α ≤ 0.05) in the whole mean grade in the pre post
translation test to the group in favor of posttest. Also, there were statistically important
differences at (α ≤ 0.05) in the whole mean grade in the pre-post scale of students attitudes
towards translation to the group in favor of post implication. Also, the researcher recognized
these differences in using the SCAMPER Model in teaching English language translation. In
light of these outcomes, the study suggested the necessity of applying the SCAMPER Model
in teaching the English language to get better results in students’ translation learning and
retention in English as a foreign language. Similarly, the SCAMPER Model would be used
with other English skills and sub-skills.
Keywords: Model, SCAMPER, skills, translation
Cites as: Tharwa, F. F.F. (2019). Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills for
Major Students in the Faculty of Education, Majmaah University, Saudi Arabia. Arab World English
Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (2).91-113
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.9

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

91

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

1.Introduction and background:
SCAMPER is a mnemonic acronym that provides a structured way to assist students and
teachers with understanding creative problem solving and developing extension building activities
based on prior ideas and processes (Serrat (2009). SCAMPER is a very powerful idea generation
and creativity technique. It is an especially useful technique to generate ideas if you intend to
improve a service or product. This program is based on the premise that innovation really stems
from the order and the addition of new ideas Moreno, Hernández, Yang & Wood (2014).
Michalko, (2010), defines the SCAMPER Model as an acronym that provides a structured
way of assisting students to think out of the box and enhance their knowledge. It is thought to
protect students' creativity as they mature. Majid, Tan & Soh., (2003) define it as "one of the
Educational strategies based on six key elements: switching or replacement, assembly, adaptation,
Modification, other uses, deletion and reordering "(p96). "It defines as an activity-based thinking
the process that can be performed by Cooperative learning. Here the teacher assists the students in
choosing a particular topic and helps them to develop it through a structured process. After
choosing an idea, the students are given a tale where they perform the activity in steps
corresponding to the letters in the name the full form of the individual letters is given below: S –
Substitute, C – Combine, A – Adapt, M – Modify, P – Put to another use, E – Eliminate, R –
Reverse.
In the current world, the distance between different countries is getting shorter, and cultures
have more and more contact with each other. Getting a deeper insight into foreign cultures is
derived from translating literature; therefore, intercultural communication comes out of knowledge
and understanding of others’ cultural features and peculiar customs. So, translation has
contributed, largely, to the national and international revolution of knowledge; and such a
contribution maximized the necessity of systematic teaching of translation and integrating its
courses into university levels. According to Leonardo (2010) Translation plays a vital role in an
increasingly globalized world and in increasingly multilingual Europe where it is used daily (p17).
Translation has always been the core of the controversies on whether it can be a valid and effective
tool in foreign language learning. Until recently, translation was out of favor with the language
teaching community. Translation as a language learning activity was considered as being
unsuitable within the context of foreign language learning (Brown, 2002). It is still ignored as a
useful language learning tool because of being not a communicative activity that is not suited to
the general needs of the language learner. Translation is considered as time-consuming, boring,
and irrelevant. Translation courses are also used as assessment techniques to check students’
linguistic and communicative abilities.
Oxford (1992) defines translation as the communication of the meaning of a sourcelanguage text using an equivalent target-language text. N-Eldin (2010), says that translation
consists of reproducing in the receptor language the closest natural equivalent of the source
language message. The translation is an art, and, like all other arts, it is difficult to master, for it
seeks to convey the exact meaning of what is expressed in one language into another. So the whole
art of translation lies in expressing exactly and precisely without either omitting thought from the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

92

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

original passage or adding any unnecessary or superfluous idea to it, the sense and meaning of the
Vernacular passage in simple, idiomatic English. The translation is a success if It is a faithful
translation of the original into English., It conveys exactly the sense and meaning of the original,
It reproduces all the details, omitting nothing, It is a translation as a whole. And Its total impression
is the same as that of the original.
1.1 Problem statement
Accordingly, translation courses represent a basic component in most English undergraduate
programs in Saudi' Faculties of Arts and Education. Thus, it is necessary to use new approaches
and methods of teaching English as a foreign language in designing and teaching translation
courses. So, this research suggested the SCAMPER model teach translation.
Teaching English is considered an important means to help students to lead their life. The
translation was a significant part of English language teaching for a long time, and then a
significant missing part for a long time also. With the arrival and then total dominance of
communicative methodologies, translation was quickly consigned to the past, along with other
‘traditional' tools such as dictation, reading aloud and drills. However, it and these other abandoned
activities are now a feature of many communicative classrooms and successful aids to learning,
although the approach to using them has changed. As Duff (1989) says, teachers and students now
use translation to learn, rather than learning the translation. Modern translation activities usually
move from the first language to the second language, (although the opposite direction can also be
seen in lessons with more specific aims), have clear communicative aims and real cognitive depth,
show high motivation levels and can produce impressive communicative results. From the real life
we live development in Saudi Arabia, Teaching English in universities is one of development. To
be acquainted with the current situation of teaching English at the faculty of education, in Majmaah
university. A pilot study was conducted to provide data about teaching English there. It involved
the teachers and the students. The researcher noted the following:
1. Translation is the least skill in which students shows real desire and willingness to carry
out. This may be due to the prevailing traditional method of teaching writing in which teachers
concentrate on the final product, i.e., correct grammar and spelling. In addition, they know nothing
about the new trends and methods of teaching translation. They do not know how to translate a
good sentence following a systematic procedure.
2. Teachers complained about students' inability to organize their ideas logically, lack of
suitable information to cover the assigned topics, poor vocabulary, structure and spelling mistakes
when they translate any topics.
3. Most of the teachers do not give their students enough choice. They still impose certain
topics on their students to translate on regardless of their various interests and needs. They rarely
offer their students two or at most three topics to select from.
4. Some teachers are preoccupied with teaching students lists of new vocabulary and sets
of grammatical rules.
Also, the researcher conducted a translation exam to the students in the faculty of education
in Majmaah university to measure their actual level. Analyzing students results in exam revealed
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

93

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

remarkable weaknesses in translation skills. Their translation showed lack of sentence organization
skills. Most of them start their translation by using the wrong words and using a dictionary in the
wrong way. They seldom use any coherence markers or present a clear, logical well - developed
content - .So, the problem of the research could be summarized in the following statement:-The
students in the English department at the faculty of education in Majmaah university suffer from
a low level of translation skills.This might be due to the methods used in teaching translation at
this stage and other factors.Therefore, the current research attempted to use scamper model in
developing translation skills to major students in the faculty of education.
1.2 Objectives of the research:
The present research amid at:
1- Identifying the effectiveness of using the SCAMPER model in developing translation
skills among major students in the faculty of education – Majmaah University.
2- Raising the attitudes towards translation among major students in the faculty of
education – Majmaah University.
1.3 Questions of the research:This research attempted to answer the following questions:
1- To what extent would the use the SCAMPER model raises translation skills among
major students in the faculty of education – Majmaah University.
3- To what extent would the use the SCAMPER model raise the attitudes towards
translation among major students in the faculty of education – Majmaah University.
1.4 Significance of the research:
The importance of the current research can be summed up in the following points:
1It may help in developing English translation skills for major students in the
faculty of education.
2It is an attempt to draw teachers' attention to their real roles as facilitators
and supervisors for their students.
3It offers EFL teachers a manual for using the SCAMPER model in teaching
translation.
4Benefits of those responsible for the strategies of teaching the English
language in the Ministry of Education in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
1.5 Review of related studies :
A- studies about the effectiveness of using the SCAMPER model
• Elbadarin (2006)
The study aimed to identify the effectiveness of the strategy of generating ideas (SCAMPER)
to teach thinking in a sample of the students and its impact of the program on their creativity and
self-concept. The study consisted of 97 male and female students divided into two groups. The
researcher used the semi-empirical approach as a method of study and adopted a Skamper's model
to generate ideas. The study reached several results, the most important of it is the impact of using
the strategy of generating ideas ( Scamper model ) . Also raising of the score in measuring creative
abilities and subtotals of different dimensions. Also, raising the score of the self-concept for the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

94

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

sample of the study by using the SCAMPER model. There is no trace of the sex variable on the
total score of the self-concept scale.
•

Buser, Buser, Gladding & Wilkerson, ( 2011):
This study explores and examines the experiences of extension students in learning and
applying the SCAMPER model for creative thinking and innovation. The sample of the study
consisted of (54) male and female students who were selected of the universities located in the
north-east and south-eastern regions, in the United States of America. The researcher used the
experimental approach based on the Scamper model. This study has reached several results; the
most important of it is the statistical relation significant correlation between the Scamper and the
main aspects of thinking and creativity thinking among students. It also has contributed to the
improvement of continuous modeling in Improve and facilitates the training of students over time.
Also, the results indicated that Scamper approach is one of the ways to stimulate thinking patterns
among students in counseling, It was also supported both concentrated and broad thinking patterns,
which students associate with their ability to generate new Ideas.
•

Masoudi ,(2012):
This study identifies the effectiveness of a training program based on the Scamper program in
the development of the cognitive survey for talented kindergarten children in Tabouk City, Saudi
Arabia. The study consisted of (43) kindergarten children divided into two groups. The researcher
used the semi-experimental method and Cognitive Imagery Survey' scale as a tool of the study.
The study has reached many results, the most important of it is differences in statistical significance
(0.05) between the two groups of study and comparison for the benefit of the study group,
indicating the effectiveness of the program Training in the development of cognitive curiosity
among talented kindergarten children in all dimensions.
• Malvira, (2012):
This study describes the nature of reading as an educational process, and clarifying the
strategies that can be Used by the teacher in teaching reading, and clarifying the role of Scamper
in teaching students. The researcher used the documentation method based on the presentation of
the Scamper program in the educational process Reading the analytical texts. The results showed
that reading is an activity process used to read some texts, and to understand what the text is about.
Through reading, students can obtain . Many strategies have emerged used by the teacher in the
teaching reading, but the researcher uses an effective strategy which is Scamper to develop the
thinking and creativity of students.
•

Sabri and Ruwais (2013):
The study aimed to examine the effectiveness of Scamper's science education program in
developing thinking skills and Innovation of students in the Primary School of Madinah. The study
sample consisted of (54) talented students. The study used innovation thinking scale as a tool for
study, and adopted the semi-experimental approach as a method of study. The study has reached
many results, differences of statistical significance between average scores of each group and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

95

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

comparative about the acquisition of thinking skills in scale' application dimension for the study
group. Also, the impact of scamper' scale on skills is much greater than that of the ETA square.
Studies about investigating translation:
Gabr (2002) surveyed to investigate the actual practices of teaching and learning translation
in some Egyptian universities. The study results showed that both learning and teaching
translation need a systematic change on the part of the teacher and the student. His investigation
revealed that the scene of translation teaching in Egypt is very peculiar; what is actually offered
is quite arbitrary and depends almost entirely on personal initiatives on the part of teachers.
Safwat (2002) has drawn attention by his investigative study to the low level of New
Valley faculty of education's English majors in translation. He identified the main features of the
problem in the poor practices of teaching translation courses, a system of testing and evaluation,
and consequently, the under-average performance of students.
2. Methodology :
2.1 Participants:The participants in this study consisted of 40 students enrolled in the English
department at Majmaah University, identified as intermediate proficiency level students of EFL.
The native language of all participants was Arabic.
2.2 Design of research: Due to the nature of the research, one group pre-posttest design was
utilized in the present study. A translation test was designed and administered on the students
before and after the experiment.
2.3 Procedures of the research:
The following procedures were followed to conduct the research:
1.
Reviewing related literature.
2.
Designing the materials and tools of the study.
3.
Validating the materials and tools by a group of jury members.
4.
Selecting the sample of the research from students in level six in the English
department in the faculty of education in Majmaah University.
5.
Pre testing the sample using the translation test and a scale of assessing
students ' attitudes towards translation.
6.
Implementing the experiment based on the SCAMPER model.
7.
Post testing the sample using the translation test and a scale of assessing
students ' attitudes towards translation.
8.
Analyzing students’ scores on the exams statistically using a T-test.
9.
Reporting and discussing results.
10.
Presenting recommendations and suggestions for further studies.
2.4 Data Collection:
In order to collect the data the research included the number of tools:
2.4.1. Pre - Post Test in Translation.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

96

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Stating the Aims of the Test :- the test aims to assess the English majors' use of translation ,
and assess the degree of development in the participants’ proficiency of translation.
Preparing the Instructions of the Test :- Instructions were written in a clear simple English
language and they were discussed by the examiner before starting the test. They include all
information needed by students to complete the test; items of the test, scoring points, time
allowed and how to give answers.
Constructing the Test: Before constructing the test, a table of specifications was developed to
specify the content and number of items to guarantee that all the learning intended outcomes
were measured, and assured that the numbers of items were suitable for assessing all the
objectives. (Refer to table “1” for table of specification)
The test was designed and implemented to tap into developed translation skills of the
students, commensurate with the syllabus and the objectives of the course. The test was made up
of five questions. Criteria of assessment included accuracy in reaching the intended meaning in
the translation language and choice of words (semantic accuracy), contextual appropriateness of
whole text meaning (pragmatic competency), grammatical and syntactic accuracy, and stylistic
appropriateness of the translation language.
Scoring the Test: The total test score is 60 points. They are assigned as follows:
→ The first question as true or false was assigned ten marks with ten points , the second
question was choosing the type and it was assigned ten marks with five points .The
third question was correction of the errors and matching and it was assigned fifteen
marks with 15 points . The fourth question was translating three passages into English
and it was assigned fifteen marks each passage was five marks and scoring according
to the rubric (1). The fifth question was translating passages into Arabic and it was
assigned fifteen marks each part was five marks and scoring according to the rubric
(2).
Piloting the Test: One month before the experiment, a group of (25) students was selected
randomly for piloting the test. Piloting the test helped to determine the following:
(a) Test' Clarity:
The test was found to be very clear and learners answered the questions without finding
any ambiguity.
(b) Test' Validity:
Face validity: According to Heaton (1988) "if a test item looks right to other testers, teachers, and
moderators, it can be described as having at least face validity". A jury of EFL teachers,
supervisors, and EFL experts has approved the test to be valid and consistent with the objectives
aimed to be measured. (P.153)
-

The internal consistency:-to expense the internal consistency, the researcher used (SPSS)
program by the correlation coefficient between each question and total score for the test.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

97

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Table (1) shows, the value of the correlation coefficient between each question and the total
score for the test and its statistical significance.
Table 1
The correlation coefficient between each question and total score for the test
Question
1
2
3
4
5
Correlation coefficient
.45
.63
.44
.71
.58
( C )Test Reliability:
Cronbach’s alpha was used through an SPSS programm to compute the correlation between
the scores obtained by the students on each question of the test. The reliability coefficient was
(.799). According to Heaton (1988), Allam (2000), it was suitable.
Table 2
Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for each question and total score for the test
Question
1
2
3
4
5
Total
Cronbach’s alpha
0.72
0.71 .0.76
0.85
0.82
0.76
(d) Preparing the Final Form of the Test
In the light of TEFL experts’ modifications and the results of piloting the test, the test was built
in its final form to be used students in the basic experiment. (Refer to Appendix “1”)
2.4.2. A scale of assessing ' attitudes towards translation.
In this research the researcher implemented the scale was made up of a 25-item, 3-point
Likert scale. The purpose of developing this scale was to reveal the attitudes of students
towards translation . The attitude scale first draws background information and nature of
translation in the first dimension, and then it elicits the participants' reactions to using
Translation in the second dimension (See Appendix(2)). The researcher judged the scale
with A jury of EFL teachers, and EFL experts were consulted to judge the content, form
and validity of the scale. The scale was piloted twenty students with two weeks as a
breaking time - professors of Translation, TEFL, and Applied Linguistics from five
universities in Saudi Arabia- . Using a test-retest method, reliability was assessed using
Cronbach's alpha coefficients and intra-class correlation coefficients. The item-to-scale
correlation was assessed using Spearman's rank correlations (ρ) between scale scores and
their constituent items. The reliability coefficient of the scale using Cronbach Alpha was
(α = 0.94) which is an appropriate value.
The procedures of implication:Teaching translation during the implication of this research following the SCAMPER
model because ,learning English translation isn’t easy task, it requires using effective
strategies to help students understand the nature of translation and how to employ them in
different contexts whether in English classrooms or in situations occurred in daily life
taking into account the importance of forming grammatically corrected sentences. Among
the different learning strategies proved to be effective and efficient in the teaching and
learning processes is the use of the SCAMPER model. Taking into account that the current
teaching strategies used in teaching the English language aren’t so efficient in achieving
the educational objectives. The researcher seeks to make full use of this model in the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

98

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

process of teaching English rules and translation for major students in the faculty of
education. Also using the SCAMPER model in order to improve the English translation of
major students in the English department in the faculty of education – Majmaah University
.Under the main objective of the experment, there are many sub- objectives that can be
shown as follows:
Improving major students’ capacity to use English translation .
Promoting major students’ capacity of expressing the meaning using the appropriate English
translation .
Improving major students’ capacity for communicating with their peers in the classroom.
Developing major school students’ capacity for using grammatically correct sentences based
on the words and rules they have studied.
The researcher implicated this experiment in 6 session to the major students to teach translation
based on the SCAMPER model . The steps of each session as following:- The researcher gave
students the passage , then divided them into groups , ask them to generate ideas for new
products and services by encouraging them to ask different types of questions, which will help
them understand , translate and produce good production .the researcher explain each step of the
SCAMPER model to use it in translate the passages as the following :
Step 1: “S” for Substitute
Take away a part of the selected thing, concept or situation and replace it with something else.
Anything can be an item for substitution. The possibilities include steps in a process, product
parts, the people or the place. Substitution is a technique of trial and error, of replacing one
object with another till you are able to determine the correct idea.
For example , there is a lot of rice in the pot. ‫يوجد كثير من االرز في الوعاء‬
There is plenty of rice in the pot . ‫يوجد أرز وفير في الوعاء‬
-Here we make substitution (plenty word instead of a lot of ) the translation is not change .
Step 2: “C” for Combine
The next step is to contemplate combining elements of the situation or problem you’re facing so
as think up something new. This is in line with the view of many creativity experts
that creativity has to do with combining already existing things in a fresh way.
So join, force together or affiliate two or more elements pertaining to your subject matter and
contemplate routes by which such a combination could possibly take you to a solution.
For example :- Dairy protects give us calcium which makes our bones and teeth strong .
‫منتجات االلبان تعطينا الكالسيوم الذي يجعل عظامنا واسنانا قوية‬
Dairy protects give us calcium which makes our body strong .
‫منتجات االلبان تعطينا الكالسيوم الذي يجعل أجسامنا قوية‬
Here we use step 2 (combine ) the words bones and teeth combine together and write body.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

99

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Step 3: “A” for Adapt
Think if there’s a solution for another problem that you may mold to suit your situation.
For example , he is 1.98 cm . he is tall ‫انه متر وثمانيه وتسعون سم و انه طويل‬
He is 2.00 m , he is very tall ‫ متر اذن انه طويل جدا‬2 ‫انه‬
So , here we put very to make the meaning strong and to adapt .
Step 4: “M” for Modify/Magnify
Pose a question to yourself about which ideas you can produce if you magnify or modify your
situation or problem. Magnifying parts of or the whole of your idea may enhance its perceived
worth or furnish fresh insight pertaining to which components are most significant.
For example, Ali : I watched the film . it was good
‫لقد شاهدت الفيلم ولقد كان جيدا‬
Karim :- i watched it , it was fantastic
‫لقد شاهدته وكان رائعا‬
So, here we change the word fantastic instead of good to implicate modifying in the sentence.
Step 5: “P” for Put to another use
Contemplate how you can put your current idea to different uses or what could be reused from
elsewhere so as to fix your own problem. Frequently, an idea only turns out to be great when
applied in a different manner than first imagined. Modify the goal of subject. Contemplate why it
exists, its purpose of use and what it is assumed to do. Confront all of these suppositions and
propose new and strange purposes.
For example, they played football yesterday. ‫لعبوا الكرة باألمس‬
Bassim played the piano . ‫باسم عزف علي البيانو‬
We went to the theater to watch a play ‫ذهبنا المسرح لمشاهدة المسرحية‬
Here we use the word ( play ) in three sentences with different uses
Another example, using the word focus in many uses
Kate's newest poem will be the focus of today's discussion. ‫ستكون قصيدة كيت الجديدة محور النقاش اليوم‬
The tennis player never lost his focus through the match. ‫لم يفقد العب التنس تركيزه أبدا ً خالل المباراة‬
Jams will focus on writing gold at the Olympic games rather breaking the 400 m world record .
‫في األلعاب االوليمبية سيضع جيمس الميدالية الذهبية نصب عينية بدالٌ من تحطيم الرقم القياسي في سباق األربعة مائه‬
He adjusted the slide projector to focus on the image. ‫عدل جهاز عرض الشرائح لكي يركز على الصورة‬
He started asking me for money his true intentions came into focus . ‫بسؤاله عن المال إتضحت نواياه‬
She focused all day after taking a new medicine . ‫فقدت التركيز بسبب الدواء الجديد‬
Step 6: “E” for Eliminate (or Minify)
Contemplate what would happen if you eliminated components or elements of your idea or if
you minimized, reduced or simplified aspects of it. By way of repeated elimination or trimming
of ideas, processes and objects, it is possible to steadily constrict your challenge to that function
or part of the most significance.
For example :- the shirt is too big to wear. )‫القميص كبير جدا ٌ لدرجة انه ال يمكن ارتدائه ( غير مناسب‬
The shirt is too big . ‫القميص كبير جدا‬
Here we use (eliminate step ) the same meaning when translate after deleting the word to wear
Example :Apply cream liberally into clean and dry skin ‫ضعي الكريم علي المنطقة الجافة والنظيفة من‬
‫البشرة‬
Here , deleting liberally to clear the meaning
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

100

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Another example , ‫االستاذ الدكتور علي المحترم‬
The translation of this sentence ( the respected doctor Ali )
Here deleting the word ( ‫ االستاذ‬because there is no this word in English (dr professor)
Step 7: “R” for Rearrange or Reverse
Rearrange – Contemplate whether you can do some kind of rearranging whether
hanging the sequence, pattern or layout; interchanging components; changing schedule; changing
pace; or interchanging cause and effect. Contemplate changing the order of processes or other
hierarchy involved. Reverse the orientation or direction. Turn it inside-out, upside-down, or
backwards – just make it go against the direction it was meant to be used or to proceed.
For example ,it was a beautiful cold day . ‫كان يوما باردا جميال‬
It was a beautiful cold day . ‫لقد كان يوما جميال وبادرا‬
Here we rearrange the sentence to be correct .
Another example , the boy ate the apple ‫اكل الولد التفاحة‬
3. Results :The Finding and results of the current research showed after using the SCAMPER model for one
semester, the participants were use it in translation in an eight-week treatment and submit them
to the researcher in order to obtain feedback and rewrite based on the feedback. The sample of
the study (n=40) do translation exercises and were checked by the researcher . The group was
post-tested using translation test. At the experimental design of the study depended on comparing
students' scores in the test before and after using the SCAMPER model. Therefore, it was
concluded that the resulting differences regarding the dependent variables were due to the
experimental treatment and accordingly to the independent variable. “T” test formula was used to
analyze the differences between means of scores of the study subjects in the Pre and the Postmeasurements. To answer the first question (To what extent would using SCAMPER model
raise translation skills among major students in the faculty of education – Majmaah university
).Table (2) shows the results for the pre-post testing of the sample’s translation skills.
Table 3
"T" test and the level of significance of the differences between the pre and post translation
test of group as well as the effect size (the value of (² η)) and the strength of influence (d) (n =
40)
Variable
Post test
Pre test
T
²η
d
Value
Test
Means Standard Means Standard
62.82
0.45
1.8
Deviation
Deviation
41.12
3.19
6.68
1.03
*it dedicated in 0.05 and 0.01.
It is clear from table (3) that there were statistically significant differences between the pre
and posttests mean scores favoring the posttest application, and it indicted that the objective of
the experiment are achieved in raising the level of the students .
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

101

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Also, It is clear from table (3 ) that the size of the impact in translation test before and after
the experiment by the value of double ETA ((0.45)), and the strength of impact (d) is (1.8), and
these values indicate a very significant effect for the translation development through using
SCAMPER model, according to Fouad Abu Hatab and Amaal Sadiq (1996.443), and Reda Aser
(2003.672): If the value of double Eta is = 0.15, this indicates a large value (0.15) .The variance
in the dependent variable can be due to the impact of the independent variable).If the value of Eta
is = 0.20, this indicates a very significant impact (0.20 ).The variance in the dependent variable
can be traced to the impact of the independent variable).
To answer the second question (To what extent would using SCAMPER model raise the
attitudes towards translation among major students in the faculty of education – Majmaah
university ) , Table (4) shows the results for the pre-post testing of the students’ attitudes towards
translation scale .
Table 4
"t" test and the level of significance of the differences between the pre and post application of
the group in the students’ attitudes towards translation scale as well as the effect size (the
value of (² η)) and the strength of influence (d) (n = 40)
Dimension

Application

²η

Means

Standard
Deviation

t value

D

First
Pre
dimension(nature
of translations)
Post

13.53

2.223

4.378-a

0.45

1.9

22.52

4.611

Second
Pre
dimension (using
translation)
Post

4.80

1.080

4.293-a

0.45

1.9

71.80

12.169

Total

Pre

14.28

2.407

4.374-a

0.45

1.9

Post

39.52

6.029

it dedicated in 0.05 and 0.01
It is clear from table (4) that there were statistically significant differences between the pre
and post application mean scores favoring the post application, and it indicted that the objective
of the experiment are achieved in raising the level of the group.
Also, It is clear from table (4) that the size of the impact in the students’ attitudes
towards translation scale before and after the experiment for the group of the study by the value of
double ETA ((0.45), the strength of impact (d) of (1.9), and these values indicate a very significant
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

102

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

impact for the development of students’ attitudes towards translation through using SCAMPER
model.
4. Discussion :
Upon reviewing the data and analyzing the results, the following points were concluded:
1. Students appeared more motivated which was sustained over using SCAMPER model in
learning translation. Students appeared more enjoyed, and engaged in many activities than
previously. Even students who had previously been fairly passive in the class became more
involved. Also, the researcher was impressed by the persistence of the group to ensure that
each member of the group had achieved a thorough understanding of whatever was being
discussed.
2. Using SCAMPER model help students to provide information and repeat it as their
desires, and deal with their abilities appropriately, and provide immediate feedback to
determine position and to achieve their goals more admirably.
3. Scamper model is characterized by its integration of content and mind-raising elements
suitable to the students' abilities.
4. Using SCAMPER model helped to establish a positive relationship between learning
translation ant positive attitudes towards it. This conclusion can be elaborated as follows:
A. Since a positive attitude change occurred due to the introduction and implementation of
using SCAMPER model in this research, it is important to realize that teaching translation by using
SCAMPER encouraged students to become translators. Students learned by being active
participants rather than by passively absorbing information. Using SCAMPER model encouraged
students to become participants in their learning.
B. Through making Translation purposeful, students became better translators because they
had a sense of audience.
5. Using SCAMPER model provided the kind of climate conducive to the growth of
translation sub skills and meeting the individual needs of the students.
6. The change in the EFL teacher's role from the traditional role which has been evaluating
the learner's first draft as if it were the final product, and assuming the role of a consultant,
facilitating the learner's step-by-step creation of the piece of translation, is crucial in helping
students translate better.
7- Evaluation sheets developed by the researcher and filled by students after each session
provided another new evidence of how much effectiveness was there as a result of using the
SCAMPER model in training students on develop their translation skills. Students’ responses to
the items of the sheet offered valuable feedback of how students advance and feel toward the
course. Students also reported their opinions of the degree of achieving session’s goals,
materials, teacher’s performance, activities, procedures of teaching, group work and time of
sessions besides the additional free comments.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

103

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

5. Conclusion:
The current research may include an important implication based on the improvement in
one of the important language proficiencies. That is to say improvement in translation may lead
to the improvement of the other language abilities and arts. This is due to the general nature of
the language learning process and the nature of translation as a proficiency that depicts many
other analytical, receptive and productive language abilities.
Finally, results of the current study may draw the attention of researchers, teachers and
educators to the real need for developing systematic and humanistic training courses of
translation in particular and English language courses in general in faculties of educations. Thus,
these results may be of some profit to those who are currently dissatisfied with the predominant
practices and models of teaching translation in faculties of education and who are seeking an
alternative approach that may function as a solid foundation for effective and successful
institutional teaching approaches to teacher education. The results also may be of great
importance for educationalists who are responsible for putting the criteria and qualifications of
prospective English teachers and the kind of teacher training that should be provided to them to
ensure that the educational system is founded on a solid pedagogical framework. It can be said
that if these courses are pursued with enthusiasm, comprehensibility and interests of graduates, it
can then help radically improving the efficacy of English language teaching program and the
quality of the graduate teachers.
To conclude, the afore-mentioned discussion indicates that there were many incorporated
aspects and many elements and practices that paved the way for the success of the current study.
The achieved level of effectiveness cannot be attributed to any other factor but using wellstructured and highly judged materials, practicing integrative activities and drills, following
systematically sequenced steps of a highly interactive method of teaching (the SCAMPER model)
and using well-adapted and accurately developed tools of assessment.
6. Recommendations :In the light of the results of the research the following recommendations are made:
• pre-service, as well as in-service English teachers should be trained on conducting the
SCAMPER model as a leading trend in both teaching and learning foreign languages.
• There must be a real shift from individual to collaborative learning as a means for
building up learners’ knowledge and providing learners with varied opportunities for
interaction and negotiation of meaning.
• The role of the teacher, in translation classes should be changed from a lecturer to a
co-learner to promote and facilitate a student-centered approach to learning in which
students become responsible for their own learning.
• Utilizing a variety of instructional aids in order to teach translation .
• In successful translation classes students need to be reminded of the purpose for their
translation: publishing and communicating. Teachers are expected to help students
make connections between translation in the classroom and in the world at large.
• Students-translators should choose their own topics or situations that are of interest to
them and their lives.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

104

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

•
•

teachers should give students translation activities related to their thinking.
Teachers need to encourage their students, guide and support their hesitant steps,
reassure them it is acceptable to make mistakes on first drafts and remind them the
purpose of the initial translation is to communicate ideas.
• Students should have the chance of self-evaluation by providing them with guidelines
and basics of evaluation process to maximize the role of the learners in the process of
learning and minimize the effort that the teacher may do.
• Translation courses should integrate both translation theories with translation
practices.
•
Translation assessment should be objective and formative in a process of providing
clear and reliable criteria.
7. Suggestions for Further Research:
The following points are suggested for further research:
• Examining the effectiveness of using the SCAMPER model in teaching other courses
of EFL to English majors.
• Examining the effectiveness of using other variations of the SCAMPER model in
teaching English courses for beginners.
• Examining the effectiveness of the SCAMPER model of assessment with different
levels of language proficiency.
• Conducting a comparative study of the SCAMPER model and other teaching
approaches to investigate the most effective in developing social and communicative
abilities of EFL students.
• Conducting a study to analyze the relation between translation proficiency and other
language skills.
About the Author:
Fatma Farid Fakhry Tharwa is a faculty member at the Department of Curriculum and
Teaching Methods, College of Education in the New Valley, The New valley University, Egypt.
She earned his PhD in TEFL from Assiut University, Egypt in 2012. She worked as assistant
professor in Majmaah university , Saudi Arabia . Her major areas of research are teaching
English , translation skills,, SCAMPER model .
ORCID ID:- https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1210-1805
References:
Brown, D. (1980) . Principles of Language Learning and Teaching.ELT journal, vol.42,n.(3).
Buser, K &Buser, J& Gladding, T & Wilkerson, Joseph. (2011). The Creative Counselor: Using
the SCAMPER Model in Counselor Training. journal of Creativity in Mental Health, 6
(4), 256-273.
Duff, A (1990) Bringing translation back into the language class (Practical English Teaching
10/3)
Deller, S & Rinvolucri, M (2002), Using the Mother Tongue: making the most of the learner's
language, Delta Publishing.
El -Badarin,Shade,(2006), the effectiveness of generating thoughts strategy (SCAMPER) in
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

105

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

developing the ability to creative and self-concept among a sample of Jourdan students ,
journal of education studies , vol. 11 . N.(5) ,Alolia university , Aman ,
Gabr, M. (2000). Reassessing Translation Programs in Egyptian National Universities:
Towards a Model Translation Program. Master's thesis, Washington International
University, Pennsylvania, USA.
Gluckman, Peter. (2010). Improving the transition: reducing social and psychological morbidity
during adolescence. Interim report. Office Of The Prime Minister’s Science Advisory
Committee, New Zealand.
Majid, D , Tan, A &Soh, K. (2003). Enhancing Children’s Creativity: An Exploratory Study on
Using the Internet and Scamper as Creative Writing Tools. The Korean Journal Of
Thinking & Problem Solving, 13 (2), 67-81 .
Masoudi ,Y, (2012). The effectiveness og training program based on SCAMPER to develop
knowledge for kindergarden in Tabu Sudi Arabia ,un published MA ,Highly studies
faculty Albalkaa university , Amaan.Jourdan .
Melvira, Y. (2012). Teaching reading of analytical exposition text by using scamper Strategy
for senior high school students grade xi. e-JurnalMahasiswa Prodi Pend Bahasa Inggris, 1
(4),1-6 .
Michalko, Michael (1 December 2010). Thinkertoys: A Handbook of Creative-Thinking
Techniques. Potter/TenSpeed/Harmony. ISBN 978-0-307-75790-6.
Moreno, D. P., Hernández, A. A., Yang, M. C. & Wood, K. L. (2014). Creativity in
transactional design problems: non-intuitive findings of an expert study using scamper.
International design conference - design, Dubrovnik - Croatia, May 19 - 22,
Murphy, B (1988), Teaching translation and teaching through translation (MET 15/4)
Tudor, I (1987), Using translation in ESP (ELT Journal 41/4)
Nasr El-Din, A.M. (2010). A Proposed Program for Developing Translation Strategies and Skills
of English Department Students in Faculties of Education. PhD, Faculty of Education,
Mansoura University, Damietta Branch.
Oxford, R.L. (1999) Language Learning Strategies In The Context Of Autonomy, Synthesis Of
Findings From The International Invitational Conference On Learning Strategy
Research, Teacher College, Columbia University, New York, NY.
Serrat, O. (2009). The Scamper Technique. Key International Publications, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York.
Yagci, Esed (2012). A study on parent's opinions' on directed brain storming technique:
Scamper. H.U. Journal of Education, 1 (43), 485-494.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

106

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Appendix (1) Translation Test

Dear student :- this exam for the research please answer the questions and you have 120
minutes :-

Student' name :-

Question 1 :- Decide if the statements are TRUE ( T ) or FALSE ( F ). ( one point each)

1. In translation, we translate meaning (

)

2. English and Arabic languages belong to the same families (

)

3. Translation means transferring the text from the SL to TL (
4. Interpretation is a written form of translation (

)

)

5. Machine translation is also known as human translation (

)

6. One common problem in translation is the lexical problem (

)

7. To be a good translator you must have the ability to write well in the TL (
8. TL means the text language (

)

)

9. Free translation also known as idiomatic translation (

)

10. It is only the human translator who is able of interpreting certain cultural components( )

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

107

‫‪Tharwa‬‬

‫__‬

‫‪AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019‬‬
‫‪Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills‬‬

‫‪6. Let us turn a new page‬‬
‫دعنا نؤلف كتاب جديد‬

‫__‬

‫دعنا نفتح صفحة جديدة‬

‫__‬

‫دعنا نقلب الصفحات‬

‫( ‪Question 2:_ Choose the correct translation:‬‬
‫‪one point each‬‬
‫‪1. Birds of feather flock together‬‬
‫__الغايب عذره معه‬
‫__ الطيور على اشكالها تقع‬

‫‪7. It is a donkey work to write a book.‬‬
‫أنه عمل حمار أن تؤلف كتابا ___‬

‫__ اعمل خيرا والقي به في البحر‬
‫‪2. Every cloud has a silver lining‬‬
‫هذا الشبل من ذاك االسد‬
‫__‬

‫إنه عمل شاق أن تؤلف كتابا ___‬

‫االقربون اولى بالمعروف __‬

‫كتابة كتاب مهمة سهلة___‬

‫رب ضرة نافعة __‬
‫‪3. A flash in the pan‬‬

‫‪8. A friend in need is a friend indeed‬‬

‫__ال خاب من استشار‬

‫الصديق وقت الضيق___‬

‫__ رمية من غير رامي‬

‫الصديق وقت الحاجة___‬

‫__ من شب على شيء شاب عليه‬

‫وقت الحاجة ال يوجد صديق ___‬

‫‪4. Do as you would be done‬‬
‫__عامل الناس كما تحب ان يعاملوك‬

‫‪9. He killed him in cold blood.‬‬
‫قتله بسكين بارد ___‬
‫قتله بدم بارد ___‬
‫قتله في الشتاء ___‬

‫__ الطيور على اشكالها تقع‬
‫__الغايب عذره معه‬
‫‪5. There is a black sheep in every family.‬‬
‫__ هناك خروف اسود في كل عائلة‬
‫__ هناك حيوان في كل عائلة‬

‫‪10. A creaking gate hangs long‬‬
‫الباب ذو الصرير يعيش طويلا ___‬

‫__هناك ولد عاق في كل عائلة‬

‫باب النجار مخلوع ___‬
‫الصلح سيد االحكام___‬

‫‪108‬‬

‫‪Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies‬‬
‫‪ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org‬‬

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

Question 3:- Correct the errors in the Arabic translation ( one point each)
The errors

The corrections

1. I will do my best -> ‫فعلت مابوسعي‬
2. She didn’t eat much -> ‫هي لن تأكل كثيرا‬
3. He doesn’t like coffee -> ‫هي لن تحب‬
‫القهوة‬
4. Where have you been? -> ‫أين كنت كائنا؟‬
5. He is eating an apple -> ‫قد أكل التفاحة‬
6. You can do it. -> ‫قد تستطيع فعلها‬
7. No children allowed -> ‫ال لالطفال‬
8. Never say this again -> ‫ابدا قل هذا ثانية‬
9. Do you play tennis? -> ‫هل لعبت التنس؟‬
10. We must talk -> ‫يمكننا التحدث‬

A. Match the sentence with accurate translation: ( one point each)

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

The boy broke the car
You can take a break
Some people break the law
Children sleep a sound sleep
It is a sound basis

___ ‫إنه أساس صلب‬
___ ‫كسر الولد السيارة‬
___ ‫ينام األطفال نوما عميقا‬
___ ‫تستطيع أخذ استراحة‬
___ ‫يخالف بعض الناس القانون‬

Question 4 :_Translate the following from English to Arabic 10 marks
1. Eid al-Fitr is a very important Islamic celebration. It’s my favorite time of year. It happens
at the end of Ramadan. People dress in their best clothes and put lights and decorations on
their homes. Many streets have fairs with music, dancing, fireworks and kids’ games.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

109

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills

Tharwa

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------2. 2- Fruits such as mango, banana, strawberry, apple, watermelon, pear and others are rich in
various essential nutrients like folate, iron, calcium, fibre, vitamin A, vitamin B, Vitamin
C etc, which are very important for your kid's health.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------3. Anxiety is a feeling of unease, such as worry or fear, that can be mild or severe. Everyone
has feelings of anxiety at some point in their life – for example, you may feel worried and
anxious about sitting an exam, or having a medical test or a job interview.
)‫( )عدم االرتياح‬unease= ‫نوبة قلق‬Words list: ( Anxiety=
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Translation Rubrics

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

Clarity of meaning

Similarity
to SL

Format
and style

Choice of words

Accuracy
of TL

Total

2

3

Question 5:_Translate the following from Arabic to English 10 marks
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

110

‫‪AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019‬‬
‫‪Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills‬‬

‫‪Tharwa‬‬

‫‪ -1 .1‬الترجمة عملية نقل من لغة (اللغة المصدر) إلى لغة مختلفة (اللغة الهدف)‪ .‬فعلى سبيل المثال‪ ،‬في ترجمة نص من‬
‫اإلنجليزية إلى العربية‪ ،‬يكون النص اإلنجليزي هو النص المصدر في حين أن النص الهدف باللغة العربية‪ .‬وعندما يتسلم‬
‫المترجم أحد أعمال الترجمة‪ ،‬يجب أن يقرأ أوالً النص األصلي كله‪ .‬وهذا ضروري لتحديد أسلوب النص‪ ،‬والعقبات الممكنة‬
‫التي قد يواجهها خالل عمل الترجمة وتنظيم استراتيجيات الترجمة المناسبة‪ .‬واستنادًا لهذه األمور‪ ،‬يمكن للمترجم بعدها أن‬
‫يقرر قبول أو رفض عمل الترجمة‪.‬‬
‫‪---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------‬‬‫‪---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------‬‬‫‪---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------‬‬‫‪-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------‬‬‫‪ .1‬أنا ال أحب المطر‬
‫‪ .2‬الطالب الجيد من يذاكر‬
‫يوميا‬
‫‪ .3‬القراءة مفيدة جدا لتعلم‬
‫اللغة اإلنجليزية‬

‫‪5‬‬

‫‪ .4‬فاتني القطار باألمس‬
‫‪ .5‬كانت الرحلة ممتعة جدا‬

‫‪2‬‬

‫‪2‬‬

‫‪1‬‬

‫‪2‬‬

‫‪1‬‬

‫‪Translation‬‬
‫‪Rubrics‬‬

‫‪1‬‬

‫‪Format and‬‬
‫‪style‬‬

‫‪Similarity‬‬
‫‪to SL‬‬

‫‪Clarity of meaning‬‬

‫‪Total‬‬

‫‪Accuracy‬‬
‫‪of TL‬‬

‫‪Choice of words‬‬

‫)‪Appendix (2‬‬
‫‪A scale of assessing ' attitudes towards translation.‬‬

‫‪111‬‬

‫‪Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies‬‬
‫‪ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org‬‬

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills
N

Statement

1-

When I learn any course , I want to look up a word I do not know.

2-

I spend many times on translate tasks

3-

I like translation course in the faculty

4-

I practice translation in all English courses .

5-

I think I have no difficulty translation activities .

6-

I feel comfortable when learn translation

7-

Translation tasks was enjoyable and interesting.

8-

I think the translation as a course of English department is a waste
of time.

9-

It is fast and convenient to update information on translation

10-

I like translation from Arabic to English

11-

I like translation from English to Arabic

11-

I get constant, handy feedback on my translation tasks more easily

12-

Searching for the right meaning, using the facilities of the Dictionary
is a useful experience for language learning, especially the
Translator facility.

13-

I feel that translation activities have prepared me for the Level C1
language competence exam

14-

I think you could make faster progress in the foreign language
learning through other means

15-

translation as a means of learning English is useful

16-

Translation helped me improve reading skills

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

Agree

Tharwa
disagree

No
openio
n

112

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Using the SCAMPER Model to Develop Translation Skills
17-

Translation helped me improve writing skills

18-

Translation activities can use in other courses in the classroom

19-

I like making comments on my classmates’ translations

20-

The use of the dictionary is helpful for learning the usage of
vocabulary.

21-

I feel that learning translation is a useful for me to share ideas with
others .

22-

The use of the translation strategies is helpful for learning the
grammar of English .

23-

I have some difficulty in translation .

24-

As I have learned more about translation, I have come to like it more

25-

I think learn translation help me in work in the future.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

Tharwa

113

