Understanding Culture with a Transnational Population:
A Value-Sensitive Approach
Tag Alsheri
Open Lab
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
T.Alshehri2@newcastle.ac.uk

Norah Abokhodair
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
USA
noraha@uw.edu

ABSTRACT

Patrick Olivier
Action Lab
Monash University
Melbourne, Australia
patrick.olivier@monash.edu

oriented cultural models [69,71]. To address this problem,
Sun [70] suggests there is a need to develop a rhetorical
approach to guide the design process based on thorough
context analysis; an approach with a richer and more
dynamic view of culture [69]. Likewise, Amant [20]
attributes the complexity of culture to two concepts:
information and approaches. Thus, he suggests designers
have to focus on gaining more knowledge about cultural
context, and to adopt a strategic approach to learn about the
multifaced concept of culture beyond a simple literature
review of cultural studies.

It is widely acknowledged in design that culture is embodied
in many aspects of an individual’s identity. Many design
methods operationalize this understanding through the use of
cultural markers or predefined cultural dimensions. Here, we
take a first step to distil the culturally specific values of the
Saudi culture. We adopt a bottom-up approach that allows
for values to emerge from the data by reflecting on two
studies of a transnational population: a form of identity
where the choice of cultural values is conscious and
deliberate. Despite their different goals, the two studies yield
common overarching core cultural values. Using a valuesensitive approach, we propose a process for designers to
identify culturally specific values, illustrating this in our
context of interest: Saudi culture

While top-down methods use predefined values or
dimensions for cross cultural comparison, in this paper we
tackle the specificity of culture by allowing cultural
dimensions (values) to emerge from field data [78]. By doing
so, we encourage designers to adopt such an approach for
culturally specific investigations. We demonstrate how this
was made possible by the virtue of two features in our
method: (i) working with a transnational population
(culturally fluent population that can more readily articulate
national/transnational values); and (ii) conducting a joint
secondary analysis of two independently conducted studies
to provide validation and rigor to the identified cultural
values. In contrast to Hofstede’s deterministic use of
dimensions whereby specific scores for each dimension are
used to describe a specific country, we characterize culture
in terms of core influential values with unspecified intensity
or direction [39]. We leave testing their intensity and
direction for designers to explore for each new Saudi context
they are designing for. That is, we propose cultural values,
but acknowledge nuances, and encourage investigation of
their impact on the design context. Thus, they are intended
to guide the scope and learning process about a given Saudi
context and are not to be taken as absolute values. We finally
illustrate the operationalization of these values in the form of
a framework consisting of five questions intended to guide
designers in the exploration of the intensity and direction of
these values, and to help them ask better and more relevant
questions while seeking a culturally sensitive understanding
of their users. Although the questions are specific to Saudi
contexts, the mechanism by which this framework is
developed is intended to be applicable across cultures.

INTRODUCTION

With the global increase in Internet and smartphone use,
there has been a growing interest in the study of cultures
within the design of technology, namely cross-cultural
design [53][62]. The requirement to localize digital products
and services, to adapt them to meet the cultural expectations
of different target groups [53], has highlighted the need for
processes by which designers can gain awareness of culturespecific values [20,70,73]. However, culture remains a
complex and vague concept [44]. The difficulty of studying
culture comes both from its abstract, complex and
multidimensional nature [53,62] and the problem that
cultural information is not readily accessible [35].
In response, a series of models have been developed to
reduces the abstractness and complexity of culture [53][62]
including Hofstede’s [69] widely adopted approach. While
these models have proved to be helpful for high-level
analysis [69], to make possible comparisons across cultures,
they are not sufficient for understanding the specificity of
cultures (or indigenous cultures). In this respect they have
been criticized for their overly simplistic and static view of
culture [69,70]. As a result, localizing the design of
technology for different cultures remains a significant
challenge, in large part due to the lack of methods for
operationalizing the implications of abstract cultural theories
as concrete design decisions [53]. Such a challenge can be
observed in much of the work in cross cultural design which
has adopted these cultural models, and thus focused on either
visual level issues [20] (e.g. colors, languages, images and
cultural markers) or predefined cultural dimensions in value1

BACKGROUND

Facebook in the Arab world. Their study revealed a major
influence of Arab values (e.g. cultural traditions, religion) on
Arab Facebook users and their motivations to be members of
social media. In this line of enquiry, many researchers treat
the “Arab world” as a single monolithic unit of analysis,
which is a misrepresentative generalization. Critiquing Al
Omoush et al.’s study, Ur and Wang [76] state that “[the
authors] used snowball sampling to gather survey responses
from 749 Arab users of Facebook, where the exact meaning
of Arab is left ambiguous”. Similarly, a study by Alsheikh
et. al. [19] explored how Arab individuals conceptualize and
employ technologies in their romantic relationships. The
participants came from six Arab countries and had different
religious backgrounds. While Alsheikh et. al.’s study
provided high-level insights into the values and beliefs of the
region; it demonstrated a very limited understanding of the
actual diversity of the participants. Another study [51] found
that Jordanian users preferred locally designed websites over
other Arab websites, suggesting that Hofstede’s model for
Arab countries lacks sufficient specificity. Taking a broader
view, other works have explored the notion of Eastern values
versus Western values (e.g. [34] and [61]) and a number of
studies have explored cultural values in specific countries in
the Arab world, such as Kuwait [36], Morocco [73] and
Qatar ([1,64,75]).

The Concept of Culture

Scholars have provided many different definitions of culture
[23,44,52]. We adopt Hofstede’s definition [39] - widely
used in design- which explicitly captures two key elements:
of culture, collectiveness and distinctiveness: “the collective
programming of the human mind that distinguishes the
members of one human group from those of another”.
Implied in this definition is that culture has two facets: (i)
collectiveness which refers to the shared meanings, norms,
values, and practices in a cultural group [53,69]; and (ii)
distinctiveness is what separates one culture from others.
These concept of culture has been the topic of much debates
and critique [23,27,39], including being argued to impose
homogeneity, rigidness, superiority [23,27,44], stereotyping
[25] and cultural essentialism [39]. However, we adopt the
view that these are negative connotations and fallouts of
certain usages and misapplications of the term ‘culture’,
rather than being inherent traits of the concept itself [27].
Moreover, denying the concept of culture implies denying
the social nature of humans. Culture and individuals’
behavior are inseparable and, thus, all human behavior is
cultural with respect to some context [23]. The collective
nature of culture is above and beyond the individual person
[23] and is more than the sum of its parts [55]. Therefore, we
view culture as the collective identity of a group that is ever
changing; however, culture is not a monolithic entity, rather
has nuances and subcultures within it [20]. While it is
important to acknowledge the nuances of culture, we also
recognize that understanding the higher-level granularity of
a culture is still a valuable endeavor for designers.

With respect to Saudi Arabia, Hofstede’s model has mostly
been utilized to explore cultural values in the context of
business, government and organizational e-services (e.g.
[10,17,18,43]). Based on Hofstede’s dimensions, Saudi
Arabia, is characterized by high power distance, uncertainty
avoidance, masculinity, indulgence, short term orientation
and collectivism [45]. However, as discussed earlier,
Hofstede’s model was originally devised for cross cultural
comparison and not for unpacking the specificity and
nuances within a given culture. This is particularly relevant
in the Saudi context, where there is a distinctive mix of
cultural features such as religious nationalism, tribalism,
Bedouin culture and the absence of anti-colonial struggle or
secular movements [15]. A number of qualitative studies
have placed sought to elaborate specific cultural aspects,
such as the importance of religion in Saudi Arabia and the
influence of Islamic values and cultural traditions on
perceptions of privacy [4], and cultural factors influencing
perceptions and use of matchmaking technologies [9].
However, each such study has had a specific focus (e.g.
privacy, matchmaking, etc.) and are not designed to capture
core cultural values – the goal of our work here. This was
made possible by our work with a transnational population,
the members of which are uniquely placed to identify core
cultural values related to both their origin and host cultures.
As such they provide a retrospective lens on cultural values.

Cultural Design in Saudi Arabia

The accommodation of users’ cultural backgrounds in the
design process has been widely considered in the field of
HCI [19,51]; many approaches have been adopted to account
for users’ values and contexts [32,37,47,63]. In general, Arab
countries have received little attention in cross-cultural
design studies [59]. To date, few studies of the region have
been configured as theoretically grounded [41]
investigations [40] of specificity and nuances of Arab
cultures. Studies to date have primarily undertaken content
analysis of media, without significant involvement of target
users to understand their values or needs [51]. Yet, since the
recent Arab upheaval, many different platforms have been
utilized as mediums to express opinion and to call for equal
rights [6]. For instance, it has been found that Facebook
enhanced the ability of activists and protesters to coordinate
peaceful protests, while allowing larger segments of the
public to share witness accounts, images and videos [50].
Yet little research has been undertaken into users’ daily
interactions and experiences with these technologies and
services, or the opportunities and challenges they bring in
terms of managing personal identity, privacy and safety. Al
Omoush et al. [59] introduced a model for the relationship
between cultural values, motivations, and usage patterns on

Transnationalism

Population migration is widely recognized phenomenon
which has increased significantly in the past decade [8,74].
A particular important aspect here is the acculturation
process in the new environment is dealt with by adopting a
2

number of different strategies [21]. This is evident where
individuals come from contexts that differ significantly from
the culture of the host country [8]. These distinctions
between individuals’ origins and their acquired identity have
been characterized as a new form of identification referred to
as transnationalism [28]. In Vertovec’s definition [74],
transnationalism is the dual identifications, ties and
interactions connecting people across the borders of nations.

means more citizens were sent abroad as companions to
female students [80]. Although there is not much work done
to rigorously capture socioeconomic backgrounds of Saudi
students abroad, it can be estimated that they reflect different
socioeconomical classes. The majority of them, almost 83%
are funded by the Saudi scholarship program (KASP) [7,56],
and the rest are self-funded. [72]. In (KASP), the merits are
based on academic qualifications, not socioeconomical
status (not the elites) [80].

Transnationals undergo the acculturation process at different
levels maintaining several identities simultaneously [8,74]. It
is most typical though for transnationals to develop a dual
identity rather than a conflicting one [28]. In the construction
of this dualism, different facets of culture are often selfconsciously selected and secreted from more than one
cultural heritage [74]. This is a process by which individuals
make conscious decisions about what values to change (or
not). These decisions involve the loss of the familiar,
including language, attitudes, values and social structures
[24]. Bhugra and Becker [24] summarized this process as
“understanding of the similarities and differences between
their home cultures and the new culture, so that they have
clearer ideas about what they like and dislike in each …
mov[ing] in the direction of becoming ‘bicultural’”

Overall, the social and cultural impact of this movement is
evident among residents in Saudi Arabia [7]. Although there
is some published work looking at the benefits of studying
abroad in general [80], the gains and socio-economic impacts
from this program are hard to track [72]. Some expect no to
minor changes to be made and cited the strong conservative
nature of the Saudi society and the lack of seriousness of
many students abroad as some of the main reasons [56]. On
the other hand, there are concerns about the students abroad
upon their return what political and social attitudes will they
have and whether they will fold back to their conformist
conservative society or they will sow seed of cultural,
economic and political change [57]. Thus, it is uncertain how
Saudi students abroad will have cultural impacts upon their
return [56]. For this, with their acculturation process and dual
identity, they represent a remarkable opportunity for
researchers to investigate a timely phenomenon.

However, “people’s core values are harder to change than
their habits and artifacts” [13]. When transnationals make a
deliberate choice of which values to maintain, this involves
a conscious identification of their core cultural values. In
acquiring this ability to make cultural change themselves,
transnationals are also considered to be agents of cultural
changes within their origin communities when they return
home [28]. As such, transnational migrants are believed to
have a central role in effecting cultural change in their
families, societies, populations, surrounding transnational
networks and post-migration generations [28,74].

STUDY DESIGN
Background

Our contribution derives from a joint reanalysis of data of
two independent studies ‘transnational Saudis’:
Study 1: Cultural Perceptions of Women’s Achievements and
their Visibility in Digital Media. The first author’s research
(focus groups) was a qualitative exploration of perceptions
and attitudes of transnational Saudis towards the concept
of women’s achievements and the visibility of women in
digital media. Through reflection on the overarching
themes she observed significant cultural traits shared
among participants that suggested a need for further
analysis. Indeed, one of the main advantages of employing
qualitative methods for data collection and analysis lays in
its capacity to benefit from aspects of serendipity at
different stages of the research process [30].

In summary, transnationals can be characterized in terms of
(i) the dualism which results from a self-conscious decision,
and (ii) ability to influence cultural change. The former refers
to how they learn to distinguish between core values to retain
and other values to reshape or abandon; the latter to how they
are an influential factor in the cultural change process. As
such, transnationals are a distinctive and potentially highly
valuable source of insight for cross-cultural designers.
Transnational Saudis

Study 2: Transnational Saudi Arabian Youth and Social
Media: Enacting Privacy and Identity. The second author’s
research (interviews) was a qualitative exploration of
transnational Saudi youth’s experience of social media and
their understandings and practices in relation to privacy
and identity. Despite the fact she was investigating a
different phenomenon (to Study 1), nonetheless, her
reflections on her own work revealed commonalities
between the two studies that were readily apparent, that is,
overarching themes related to cultural values and
transnational identity.

Perhaps the biggest factor creating transnational Saudis is
King Abdullah Scholarship program (KASP), for which the
government invests over $2 billion annually [7]. KASP was
created to bring about higher levels of academics and
professionals to drive the ‘moderation’ movement [56,80]. It
also aims at pursuing cultural exchange with other countries
[80]; and opening the minds of young Saudis by exposing
them to other cultures [56]. KASP initially aimed to send
50,000 students [7] but the number has jumped to almost
200,000 students in the academic year of 2012-2013 [7,72].
Additionally, until recently (August 2019) Saudi women
were required to have an relative male companion, which
3

Recognizing that “courting serendipity involves planned
insight married to unplanned events” [30], the authors
consequential discussions focused on the commonalities
between the two studies, which yielded the discovery of a set
of recurring cultural values underpinning much of our
participants’ perceptions. This motivated our decision to
conduct a secondary analysis of our separate studies to
synthesize unified themes from our data. The differences in
the original goals of each study lends significant weight to
the validity of our unified findings, especially in the cases
where we were able to trace participant recognition of
distinctions in cultural values to similar trigger events [60].
Furthermore, the differences in configuration of the two
studies, both in participant recruitment and method (focus
groups and interviews), furnished us with a three-level
inquiry: a mixed-gender focus group (study 1), two genderspecific focus groups (one exclusively female, and one
exclusively male) (study 1), and (34) in-depth face-to-face
interviews (study 2). This triangulation was a key element of
the rigor and validation of our analysis.

problem. The overall goal of the study was to explore the
design space of the cultural perceptions of women and the
role of designing technology that support better societal
perception of women. To understand how participants
conceptualize women’s achievements, semi- structured
focus groups [31] were conducted to allow individuals to
express their thoughts the way they usually do among their
peers in the same cultural context.
The study was conducted with three focus groups with 21
Saudi Arabian participants who were in the UK mostly for
education purposes. The participants were recruited mainly
through word of mouth and a Twitter advertisement. They
ranged in age from 21 to 40, and education levels from
bachelor’s degree students (or holders) to PhD students. We
initially aimed to conduct mixed gender workshops to reflect
the shared understanding between men and women in
addition to other different groups within the Saudi society.
The following workshops were gender segregated, one with
five females and the other with eight males. Each session
lasted for approximately two hours. The sessions were
conducted between March and May 2016.

Population and Sampling

Our participants were transnational Saudis; that is, Saudi
nationals who had experienced life in Saudi and abroad (in
our case, either in the US or the UK). They were abroad
primarily for educational purposes and were undertaking a
range of undergraduate and graduate courses. Participants
varied in both their ages (18 to 40 years), and in the time they
had spent abroad (1 month to 11 years). The total number of
participants in the two studies was 55 (29 females, 26 males).
Most participants were sponsored by the national scholarship
program KASP, and through we did not collect socioeconomic data, our impression was of a group of people from
diverse social backgrounds, rather than an “elite”. As
discussed, transnationals have the ability to articulate both
their national and transnational values. As a result of living
in two different cultures, this they are culturally fluent, and
this enables them to articulate essential and core cultural
values they have acquired from their home culture.

Study 2: Interviews (Transnational Saudi Arabian Youth
and Social Media: Enacting Privacy & Identity)

The second author’s study [2] examined the use of social
media, by 34 (M=15, F=19) transnational Saudi Arabian
young adults (ages 18-35;). The study demonstrates how
privacy is required and experienced by a Muslim population
going through the transnational journey of privacy across
two cultural contexts vis-à-vis social media. The crosssectional aspect of her study required to recruit balanced
gender samples in two field sites, Saudi Arabia and in the
USA using snowballing and purposeful sampling techniques.
To gain an in-depth understanding of the participants’ use of
social media, ethnographically informed semi-structured
interviews were employed [58] . The interviews lasted for
1.5 hours each and were conducted between August 2014
and February 2016. Interviews were conducted in Arabic and
English. During the interviews, participants were asked
about their general use of social media, any incidents that led
to private information being exposed, moments of surprise,
negative and positive experiences. They were also asked to
share scenarios and accounts of discomfort or challenge they
faced when posting certain content and when using the same
platform in two extremely different contexts (i.e. Saudi
Arabia and the US). The researcher transcribed the
interviews in Arabic and used open and axial coding,
following the protocol described in Seidman [67].

This allows researchers to gain access to an understanding of
core cultural (national) values that individuals often would
adhere to (or account for) even after being exposed to other
cultures [13]. As theories of transnationalism [42] describe,
despite their experience abroad and being subject to western
influence, they are more likely to “forge and sustain multistranded social relations that link together their societies of
origin and settlement”. This is not necessarily by holding or
believing in these values, as we will demonstrate in the
findings, but being affected by them and having social ties
with milieus who still hold these values. This is the reason
we use ‘adherence to’ and ‘accounting for’ to capture the
nuances in participants attitudes towards core cultural values.

Unified Analysis

We adopted a Value-Sensitive approach to conduct a
conceptual investigation that draws on the joint empirical
findings of two studies which both fall under the purview of
cross-cultural design. The unified goal in this secondary
analysis is to define core cultural values shared among
participants. Before the unified analysis, all sessions of both
studies had been audio recorded, transcribed and analyzed

Study 1: Focus Groups (Cultural Perceptions of
Women’s Achievements & Visibility in Digital Media)

This study aimed at engaging participants in the early stages
of the design process to establish empathy with users,
understand their cultural contexts and formulate the research
4

thematically [26] for their primary purposes (study 1:
perceptions of women and visibility in digital media; study
2: online privacy and identity practices).

manner. With our participants, we found that the revealing
their autonomous-selves was challenging in three respects, in
that it can be: (i) difficult to express, (ii) perceived as
immoral, or (iii) considered risky (socially or politically).

After deciding to conduct the unified analysis, each study
was re-analyzed separately with the unified focus of
identifying dominant shared cultural values. Common
overarching themes were identified to guide a collaborative
iterative process: the autonomous self, the collective self and
the others. These generated more specific themes and
subthemes of dominant values and stakeholders. Following
an iterative process, the final themes were formulated as a set
of values and stakeholders (in the findings section).

Difficult to Express

The data revealed that participants found it hard to access
their deeper level of the self. For instance, when participants
were asked to express their perceptions of ‘achievements’,
participant [AB-M3] jokingly said: “give me something like
math, I would understand, but this, philosophy, I don’t”
For this participant, accessing a deeper part of his identity is,
in his opinion, a philosophical practice and deemed more
difficult than doing math. This issue is illustrated in making
judgments as in [AB-F2]’s case when asked to evaluate
women’s achievements she explicitly expressed difficulties
in achieving a full autonomous-self: “now we reached a
point where I separate myself from my culture and religion
and then evaluate her [a Saudi model], if I evaluate her like
that, being separate and neutral, I’d say she has achieved
something, but I can’t”. The participant’s difficulty to be
fully neutral and separate herself from her background
indicates difficulty in accessing her deeper self.

Positionality

Both researchers identify as female, Saudi nationals, HCI
researchers and currently embarking on their own journeys
as transnationals. During the period of conducting the
research, they both exhibited less than typical conformity to
some Saudi norms such as cultural attire and attitudes (e.g.
neither researcher dressed in Saudi/Islamic female attire). At
the same time, by being cultural insiders, not ‘westerners/
outsiders’, both researchers represented a more neutral
stance to the participants which we believe played a major
role in facilitating participants open expressions and
reducing social desirability [68].

Immoral Acts

We found that the Islamic religion (faith) is an ultimate value
in and of itself. For example, when discussing
“achievements”, despite being an academic, a PhD student in
a STEM area and a mother, [AF-F4] expressed how she feels
like a low achiever compared to those who are “Quran
memorizers”, saying: “I feel that no matter how much I do in
science, I would never reach their level … they only
completed college and some of them are still jobless, but I
would still wish to be like them”.

Working from a value-sensitive stance, we took it upon us to
allow the data to “speak” without any preconceived notions
of how this population should interact with, or perceive,
values. Instead, our responsibility is to offer a window into
the practice as it is articulated and experienced by a lesserstudied population of users—in this case, transnational
Saudis with the goal of creating meaningful change. De La
Bellacasa’s work [18] on the “situated character of
knowledge” offered us the bases to present our conclusions
as intersubjectively-created “layers of meaning” derived
from the empirical-based data analysis. We produced
rigorous research that, we hope, enabled our participants to
voice and communicate their values, which we have
translated into meaningful contributions for system design.

More interestingly, religion provides as a scale by which
morality of all acts are measured. For example, when
participants were asked about the criteria for evaluating
women’s achievements, the following responses came up:
[AB-F3] answered: “my criteria are my society and
religion’s criteria”
[AB-F2] responded: “religion is the most important thing”.

Since we are both advocates of value sensitive, this is also
reflected in our personal philosophies on social change
which are driven by understanding people and compassion to
their values and culture rather than fighting their realities.
Thus, we believe there is a value in unpacking these cultural
values, whether or not we conform to them, as they provide
invaluable insights for social change and successful designs.

Likewise, commenting on a female Saudi scientist, [AMM3] said: “To me, I would’ve been even more proud of her
if she was wearing the Hijab”.
In this excerpt, [AM-M3] is looking at the whole picture: for
him the scientist’s achievement is incomplete because she
did not adhere to the Islamic modest appearance. Therefore,
this can create a barrier to express one’s autonomous self.
Although in many cases is it an autonomous decision to abide
by religions’ morality, nonetheless this can be in conflict
with one’s deepest values. An example from our participants
is [PF16] who expressed despite enjoying sharing photos
online, she is afraid of accumulating sins from every users
watching her photos, and thus puts religion first before her
own choices: “Recently, I deleted most of my photos from
Instagram. Mostly because I was afraid of God. I am

FINDINGS

Overall, in both studies, participants’ accounts of their
perceptions and attitudes towards expressing their values
revealed a juggling process between their own selves, their
in-group and out-group [66]. Below we illustrate the value
associated with each of these facets.
Concealing the Autonomous Self (Me)

The autonomous-self [3] refers to the facet of individuals
whereby they think for themselves in an independent
5

exposing so much of myself, my face and parts of my body to
men that are not related to me and I started thinking what If
I died and these photos stayed”.

deleted a lot of people when I went to Canada because I don’t
like this sense of paranoia…I don’t like to create lists or
multiple accounts”. We can infer that accessing, expressing
and exhibiting the autonomous-self has limitations which
gave rise to ‘concealing’ the autonomous self as highly
valued protection mechanism. These limitations are imposed
by other entities, we unpack these under the concept of the
collective self.

This seems to be more accentuated when it comes to women.
For instance, Samira, attributed her privacy practices as
woman to be mostly in adherence to Islam: “It is mostly
Islamic views and traditions here in Saudi Arabia and my
town… Especially that I am from [a small town], for girls it
is not common to post our pictures”.

Embracing the Collective-Self (Us)

The collective-self [3] refers to the facet of an individual
where they think as a member or a part of a larger collective
rather than an independent manner. With our participants,
collective-self overpowers the autonomous-self and it is
shapes it by two powerful entities: State and Society. These
are not easily separated from one another and have many
interconnections, but we discuss each separately below.

Interestingly, considering morality extends to one’s interest
to contribute to creating a more moral society. In the
following quote, it is illustrated that even when one can
access and express their autonomous-self case, such an act
can be associated with being selfish or mindless towards
others. [AB-M1] expressed a sense of social responsibility
he has to exhibit when making judgements: “if I consider
what she [a Saudi model] is doing as an achievement, it’s
like I’m cultivating a bad culture for the country, and this is
a responsibility. So, in my opinion, I don’t see what she’s
doing as a pride for the country, it’s the opposite”.

State: Fear and Revere

Because the Saudi legal system is based on Sharia Law, state
and religion are broadly inseparable. Hence, religion,
together with other values (e.g. safety and state image), has
contributed greatly to the participants’ sense of duty towards
the state (i.e. the government). [AB-F2] explicitly expressed
this in a discussion about activist women who drove their
cars in 2012 (before the lifting of the ban in 2018): “The
place where you do your ‘achievements’, you should follow
its rules. It would be a jungle otherwise. As Muslims, we’ll
always belong to the place where we are from, we express
our identity with our morals no matter how much we don’t
like these rules ... There is a way to changing the laws within
the rules … like through the Shura Council”.

[AB-M1] considers that his evaluation of others’
achievements is not solely representing his opinion, but
rather a representation of the whole society: “cultivating a
bad culture for the country”. Therefore, to maintain a moral
society one has to avoid evaluating things based on an
autonomous view. Social and political risks are highly likely
to arise when individuals expresses their views in an
autonomous manner. These are associated with different
entities we unpack under the ‘collective self’.
Concealing is the Answer

Here, she touched upon another value in addition to religion:
national safety. In using the metaphor of the “jungle”, she
referred to “anarchy” as a dangerous state. Likewise, in the
interviews, [PF9] echoed this: “I’m against the
Women2Drive campaign. I don't support the way the
movement was established and tried to push change by force,
but I am supportive of the goal”.

For the reasons listed above (and more next) our participant
value “concealing” of their autonomous self. This was
explicitly stated by [PF8]: “Here in Saudi privacy is forced
on you. You have to be private…it is not a choice to be
secluded…it is society telling you as a woman to be
private…because of religion, culture, society”.
In fact, participants’ sense of seclusion positively correlates
with proximity to their collective: namely, in the presence of
others from the same culture. For instance, [AF-F3] a female
participant, stated she cannot be herself when interacting
with male colleagues abroad who are coming from her
country: “I don’t feel comfortable around Saudi guys”. This
sentiment was echoed by another female participant, [PF1]:
“I have 2 [Saudi]colleagues on SnapChat and that for me
was like ‘arugh’ pushing my comfort zone”
Similarly, a male participant, [PM9] explicitly stated he
hides ‘this side’, referring to his autonomous self, from his
family: “I have a special account for the US that excludes
my family. It is only for my US audience, because I’m having
the best time here and I take photos of everything and I share
them. I’m not conservative at all but I have a conservative
family. I don’t want them to see this side of me”.
Whereas, [PF4], finds this strategy of creating multiple
accounts a form of ‘paranoia’, nevertheless, she also secludes
her autonomous self yet through a different strategy: “I

To maintain national safety, participants expressed another
correlated value: the promotion of the positive image of the
state. For instance, [PM5] explained his sharing behavior on
social media: “I share shocking news like gun shootings in
[the US]. But I don’t share any negative news about Saudi
on Facebook. I only share good news”. Sharing such content
can cause harm to the state’s reputation as described by [AMM8] who compared an activist to another, preferring the one
causing less damage to the image of Saudi Arabia: “Loujain
is nothing like Manal…Loujain in the West has tarnished the
reputation of Saudi Arabia but Manal didn’t”.
Alongside these concerns about the state image and safety,
there is also a sense of fear of authority which forces people
to self-censor their behaviors as expressed by [PF6]: “the
reason why my Facebook Wall is kept to my friends only is
because I don’t have trust … I don’t trust the government …
I have to always censor my opinion on stuff”. This was also

6

stated by [PM8]: “Do you know that if you post about being
at a club you could risk your opportunity to get a job in
Saudi? One of my friends told me that and I am not very
careful. I have another friend that also lost a job offer
because of a political post. After that, I went to my account
and I deleted two posts from my Facebook that involved
Saudi political figures. I try to move away from political
news and posts because Facebook, and social media in
general, is heavily monitored in Saudi”.

is the opposite, even if she works as a teacher, they would
say oh she leaves the house and doesn’t cook for you … he
fights and his wife fights too”.
Whereas, in cases where one is adhering to the cultural
norms, they would still take them in considerations regularly
to pay respect to their social circles as stated by Salam:
“Whenever I am taking photos for a public sphere I am
wearing [a] hijab…because I want to pay respect to my
cultural traditions”.

Thus, our participants tend to avoid indulging in political
discussions, even while living abroad, as they are trained
coming from Saudi Arabia, where the internet is censored by
an extremely centralized internet infrastructure. This was
experienced by [PM11] who stated: “I am not keen on
visiting home because of the nature of the content I post
online. The last time I had to visit I left my name with a
Human’s Right Watch lawyer to help me in case I am
captured”.

For Salam, despite the fact she does not cover her hair
abroad, she would still make sure that she is wearing a hijab
in the photos shared with her circle just to pay respect.
Furthermore, in other cases where one is not adhering to the
norms, they would still take them in considerations to protect
those adhering to the norms as in Mona’s example, as she
does not wear hijab yet she protects the photos of her friends
who wear hijab by not showing them to her public or male
audience: “On Snapchat, I block some people from my story.
For example, my male family members … I hide my feed from
them because of my other female friends who wear the hijab”

Therefore, we learnt from these examples that considering
the state as an influential entity does not only stem from fear
of political repercussions but also from a desire to protect the
national safety and the country’s image against external
threats, discussed in ‘The Others’ section.

For women, particularly, there are ongoing concern for
protecting their personal reputation, social status and that of
their families. These concerns do not only arise from being
involved in controversial behavior, but as [AF-F1]
explained, everything is prone to criticism and negative
judgement in her society: “the society would always have
some people who are actually against the whole idea of you
going to study abroad, so you can’t really satisfy everyone”.

Society: Mutual Support

Participants expressed a strong sense of social ties with other
societal groups. We found that in many cases, familial ties
constitute the first and foremost social duty. For instance,
[PF2] expressed her conception of ‘what’s right and what’s
wrong’ as something mainly learned from what her family
‘permits’: “Families clarify this from childhood. We are
raised with an understanding of what’s right and what’s
wrong. It might not be explicitly about not posting pictures,
but with growing up what is permitted and what is not”.

This emphasizes the importance of considering the social
norms whether or not one is adhering to them, to maintain
respectful social ties. The price for having these social ties,
as we illustrated was to adhere the societal values or to be
prone to negative judgements and exclusion, which could
make them perceived as members of ‘the others’ group,
discussed next.

Furthermore, family provides the primal support even in
cases where one’s actions are against societal rules, as
expressed by [AF-F4]: “what matters to me is who are those
who are not accepting what I want to do. If they were my
family I would not proceed … otherwise if my family my mom
and dad are proud of it, honestly I don’t care about the rest
of the society”.

Withstanding the Others

Participants revealed a clear predilection for social harmony
and “oneness” through the articulation of “others”. The use
of “othering” was not only limited to hostile classification of
those perceived as enemies (e.g. activists and the West who
seek to discredit Islam and the laws and culture in Saudi
Arabia); it also encompasses a more innocent classification
of those who do not identify with the traditional values of
Saudi culture. For example, when discussing the scientist’s
achievements, [AB-F4] questioned: “I don’t know to what
extent? As a Saudi woman who left Saudi, if your
achievements are done outside, how much should we
consider you one of us?”
Additionally, when discussing a Saudi actress—for many
Saudis, acting is a highly stigmatized profession—[AF-F3]
asked: “is she a Saudi Saudi?” (meaning, is she originally
Saudi?). To this, [AF-F4] replied: “surely she has some other
origins”. Interestingly, it is expected that those who deviate
from the norm should “other” themselves. When discussing

Interestingly, the expected (future) family is equally
important, as stated by [AF-F3]: “my sister has always
dreamt of being a doctor then he [dad] told her: later, you’ll
get married and have kids, you’ll either be [dedicated] for
home and children or to your job”. Whereas Majed, referred
to the overall culture as an influential factor: “The culture
you live in has an influence on what you post and what you
don’t. For me, living here I can’t post everything, even
though I would like to, but because of the people and the
culture you are restricted”.
In other cases, the extended family and tribe are also of a
significant value. [AM-M1] pointed to tribal support: “some
societies [tribes] support when they know your wife is
studying and you are staying with the kids … and then there
7

the activist Manal Alsherif, who gave a TED talk on
women’s rights, [AF-F4] said: “she talked on our behalf and
used ‘we’ when she should’ve said ‘I’ and talked about
herself. Those who do not like it here should just leave for
another nationality, go abroad and live the free life that you
wish. But do not represent Saudi Arabia and say I am a Saudi
and I ask for these rights”.
Moreover, another participant raised the point that some
people would intentionally ‘other’ themselves to avoid being
condemned by society. When discussing a Saudi model, —
[AF-F2] said: “I see her account, I don’t follow her it’s
shameful if someone sees me following her, she provokes me,
there is a clear body show, and she pretends she is abroad
so she doesn’t know this is a vice, but she does know” In her
use of ‘she pretends’, she refers to the strategy this model is
using to avoid being ashamed for violating social norms.
Such a strategy indeed confirms the proximity aspect
discussed earlier, which correlate with criticism. From this,
it becomes evident that “oneness” and social harmony are
crucial values to which individuals are expected to adhere to,
to avoid the social abandonment and exclusion that result
from being classified as the “others”.

conflict), and in terms of direction (whether or not they are
highly religious). Nevertheless, the influence of religion as a
cultural value was expressed by participants from different
religious positions. For example, one could express being
less religious yet would still take religion in consideration “to
pay respect to [their] cultural tradition” (PM?). In turn, this
demonstrates the manifestation of this value on individual’s
collective-self. Whereas on the autonomous-self level, as
demonstrated, religion drives people’s daily judgements
upon their actions. For instance, even with someone who is
less of a conformist would still express being internal
struggle such as being “afraid of god” (PF16) when not
practicing.
Positive Image of the State:
One unique aspect about Saudi Arabia is the long historical
association between the state and the religion [16]. The Saudi
monarchical system derives legitimacy mainly from religion
[54]. Hence, individuals have a sense of revere to the state
and a sense of duty to promote a positive image of it. This
means, any critique of the state can be perceived as an attack
on Saudi society and its Islamic religion. Since most of this
critique originates in Western media, the West is perceived
as the “orientalist” [65] and “Islamophobic” [29] or as we
described in our findings “the others”. However, despite the
significance of this value and strong connection with other
core cultural values, there is a lack of literature in HCI
literature exploring its impacts on user behavior. Tension can
arise here is between the state and religion since the state has
gradually been perceived as losing its Islamic identity.
Indeed, the state is increasingly eager to appear modern,
albeit rather within Islam framework, yet this modernization
movement sometimes conflicts with the public religious
perceptions [16]. Despite this potential conflict, any public
opposition to the government is decreed as strictly prohibited
by religious authorities [57]. Hence, the opening of public
dialogues regarding internal (Saudi) issues and indulging in
political discussions (i.e. political reform), not only avoided
to maintain a positive image of the state and not to “tarnish
the reputation of Saudi Arabia … in the West” (AM-M8) but
also to abide by Islamic morality (as exemplified in [AB-F2]
statement “As Muslims, we… belong to the place where we
are from, [even if] we don’t like [its] rules”). This perhaps
the reason why the majority of Saudi Arabians, identify with
their nation rather than their religion [72]. On the one hand,
the state is an essential part the entities constituting
individual’s collective self. On the other hand, the moral
resource of individual’s autonomous self, i.e. religion,
dictates expressing to reverence to the rulers.

DISCUSSION

Building on Hofstede’s classification of Saudi culture as
collectivist (the “what’) [46], and Abokhodair et al’s [3]
exposition of how that collectivist nature is played out (the
“how”) by individuals through the expression of two facets
of the self – autonomous and collective – in this work, we
tackle the specificity of culture by taking a deeper look into
the values associated with each facet of the self (“the why”)
and attempt to explain these values and relevant
stakeholders; and illustrate their implications for design in
the form of a framework of questions.
Values and Value Tensions

Islam:
Saudi Arabia is an Islamic theocracy which views its version
of Islamic law as the only legal code [79]. As such, religion
(i.e. Islam) is a fundamental component of Saudi cultural
values and is believed to be the only legitimate source of
morality as expressed by our participants (e.g. [AB-F2]:
“religion is the most important thing”). We found that
religion is not only the ultimate sacred value in and of itself:
it is also the yardstick for all other values. This is perhaps
due to the fact that religious authorities have influenced
people’s private and public lives that there is no aspect
remains outside the expertise of religious scholars [16].
Hence, HCI literature in Saudi contexts, has acknowledged
and explored the significance of this value in many aspects,
such as photo sharing [3], privacy and social media [5], and
dating and marriage [9,19]. As demonstrated in the findings,
in some cases tension can arise between one’s deepest desire
and their conception of religious moralities. Even from a
collective perspective, Islam and culture can collide at one
level and enforce each other at another [16]. These tensions
create nuances among individuals in terms of intensity (how
influential this value on their decisions dealing with

Political Safety:
The state, as part of its aggressive counter-terrorism law, has
been spreading its entities and monitoring online and offline
spaces [57,81]. Moreover, as discussed above, religion is an
influential factor on the stability of the regime in Saudi
Arabia [16,38,57]. This makes it binding for an individual to

8

self-monitor their actions and words and be concerned for
their (and their family’s) safety. As such, political values
differ from religious values in that the religious values shape
how individuals perceive the world, whereas the political
values guide how they articulate their perceptions.

Concealing the auto-self & Embracing the collective self
According to Hofstede’s model, Saudi culture is classified as
collectivist, which means individuals’´ self-image is defined
more in terms “We” rather than of “I”, and they belong to ‘in
groups’ for support in exchange for loyalty [46].
Concealing oneself from others is practiced by individuals as
a protection mechanism. In an authoritarian state and a
judgmental society, to avoid risks, individuals prefer to
overprotect their privacy by maintaining a position of
invisibility [3]. However, there is a tension here with other
values associated with embracing the self, such as social
recognition. Thus, individuals negotiate between protecting
their individuality and presenting their conformity.
Literature in HCI has explored the nature of this collectivism
and how the notion of concealing the self are manifested if
some user practices online such as privacy, self-disclosure
and participating in matchmaking services [5,9,14]. Contrary
to our finding of ‘concealing the self’, Almakrami [14], in
his comparative study on self-disclosure, stated that Saudi
participants were more open to self-disclosure online than
Australian participants. He attributed this to potential lack of
awareness of risks associated with disclosing personal
information. However, the outcome of our study does not
particularly support this view. We would argue that this
inclination to be “open” is only associated with the collective
facet of the self where users value social recognition.
Whereas in terms of autonomous self, ‘concealing’ is the
dominant value. Indeed, this is in line with Almakrami ‘s
[14] discussion on anonymity where he stated that “the
majority of Saudi Participants … assumed full anonymity on
Facebook”, which supports our finding of ‘concealing the
self’. Thus, we build on Almakrami’s study by addressing
the conflict in his findings (i.e. ‘open to self-disclosure’ and
‘anonymous’) and attributing it to the representations of two
facets of the selves we unpacked in this study.

This means even in cases where individuals do not subscribe
to the state’s views and practice, either those perceived as too
strict or too modernized, individuals would still prioritize
safety (as exemplified by [PM8] who “deleted posts [online]
involved Saudi political figures [and tries] to move away
from political news and posts”).. As such, political safety is
manifested in two levels: an individual’s safety from political
authorities and collective safety (national stability) from
potential political turmoil (which was described as “a jungle”
by [AB-F2]). It is notable that due to the risks associated with
this aspect, there is a lack of research on political safety as a
value and its impact on user behavior. Indeed, Clark [49]
suggested that the greatest challenges for qualitative
researchers in the Middle East are those related to political
concerns, as participants tend to have suspicions of
researchers as having some form of political power.
Social Harmony and uniformity
Saudi society overall is characterized by conformity
conservativeness [16,56,57]. This has created a value for
preservation of social harmony [48] in contrast to cultural
and religious diversity (i.e. pluralism) [22], and maintaining
strong social ties in contrast to being ‘othered’ [33]. By “their
societies”, we mean the groups identified in our analysis:
family (and expected family), tribe, gender groups and the
Saudi society. Social ties with these groups heavily
preserved by individuals maintaining social harmony; these
ties are prone to be broken in the state of pluralism. This is
in line with Hofstede’s classification for Saudi culture as
collectivist which indicates a high level of interdependence
among its members [46]. Moreover, cultural “oneness” or
“uniformity”, and the previously list, fall in line with the
work of the Saudi anthropologist, Al-Rasheed [16] , in which
she listed main values of the Saudi society including: piety,
purity, uniformity, conformity, racism, xenophobia,
patriarchy and exclusiveness. This means, to preserve their
social harmony, individuals are expected to conform to their
groups’ values. Indeed, many would prefer to please their
parents by following some traditions even if they no longer
fully believe in them [56]. Due to some differences between
these groups and how they are prioritized by different
individuals, tension can arise with individuals juggling
different loyalties. Many cultural values are derived from
Islam (or misinterpretations of it) and tribalism [16]. In fact,
the religious police have been established as a mechanism to
homogenize culture and moral codes [16]. Thus, religion,
overall, is seen as a homogenizing factor in Saudi Arabia
[54]. Although the young generation is more liberated than
their elders in their views of society and authority [72],
however, views are manifestations of their autonomous self,
whereas in practice, conformity is the norm as a
manifestation of their collective-self.

Stakeholders

We identified stakeholders associated with the values above.
(1) The autonomous-self is heavily shaped by the perception
of Allah (God). Allah is a critical stakeholder for our
participants in every aspect of their lives. The sense of being
monitored and living by the presence of Allah has become
represented in self-censure practices. However, because
conventionally in VSD stakeholders are people, we situated
this ‘God’ as an internal aspect of the autonomous self.
(2) The collective-self is enforced by three entities: (i) the
state, by being highly respected in Saudi society for being
intertwined with religion, and by being intolerant of counterdiscourse [12]; (ii) the religious establishment, which
predominates religious and moral discourse [12] shaping
public’s perception of Islamic values; and (iii) society in
general, and its expectation for conformity in exchange for
social ties support and inclusion.
The others are perceived as either hostile or non-hostile. For
instance, non-Saudi friends, are often treated differently by
Saudis and perceived as judgment-free. In contrast, the West
and their allies (e.g. liberal Saudis, local activists) represent
9

a hostile group whose agenda is to destroy religious, political
and cultural values. Individuals cannot trust this group; thus,
they defend their groups by conforming to the values and
behaviors of their collective-selves.

encourages users to deviate from prevailing social norms,
what are (or the perceived to be) social consequences?
Q5: Opponents: Does your design validate institutions or
groups that are perceived as opponents of Saudi Arabia? The
question is not about whether a design is associated with the
“West” (indeed, many global products and services are very
popular in Saudi Arabia). Rather, it is a question of whether
a product or service is a vehicle for the promotion of a
Western agenda that is perceived as being intended to
undermine Saudi values.
Collectively, our questions aim to support the goal of
designing safe spaces for self-expression within a culturally
sensitive approach. We do not claim that answering the five
questions offers a direct line to a “safe system”, but rather
that they are touchpoints that can assist designers who are
seeking a culturally sensitive understanding of their users.

REFLECTION: DEFINING CORE CULTURAL VALUES

We argued in the introduction that for a truly value-sensitive
approach, cultural values have to be defined in a bottom up
with people. This is in line with what Weaver [77] referred
to as ‘culturally competency’ which means working with
indigenous people requires accurate information which can
best be obtained from the people themselves. On reflection,
we found that our defined core cultural values do not only
meet a criterion of being emergent (i.e. bottom-up approach),
but also they meet two other criteria: strong connection to the
other core values and strong influence on individuals
regardless of the value’s intensity or direction (i.e. regardless
whether the individual believes in that value).
With regard to transnational population, we discussed how
their cultural fluency makes them suitable subjects for
identifying core cultural values. On reflection, we found that
another characteristic they possess is that they provide a wide
range of intensities and directions of the cultural values (i.e.
wider diversity) which makes identifying a core cultural
value as such, more rigorous.

CONCLUSION

The approach we propose to understanding culture aims to
guide designers and enhance their value sensitive processes.
Our approach can also inform the selection of methods, tools
and strategies when engaging in culturally sensitive user
research. By understanding the relevant stakeholders, and the
values identified, researchers can utilize these to guide the
empirical research regardless of the topic under
investigation. This helps us to “speak the user’s language”,
ask relevant questions and examine the effect of relevant
cultural values. Therefore, this also poses a challenge and an
opportunity for design researchers, to explore empirical
methods that are suitable for this context. While we do not
consider this framework to have provided an exhaustive
understanding of Saudi culture, it serves as a valuable guide
for the process of investigation. The ultimate measure of our
framework is its application to the design of new services and
products (a topic of future work). However, the framework
can be utilized for the evaluation and redesign of existing
systems and services. This includes the interrogation of
design decisions in the context of Saudi values by using them
to explain the nature of localizations and/or the absence of
otherwise globally popular services in Saudi Arabia, of
which there are many.

IMPLICATIONS FOR CROSS CULTURAL DESIGN

Our remaining task is to bridge the divide between our
nuanced understanding of cultural values, and the design
implications that might arise from this understanding. Thus,
we propose a reflexive approach to incorporating our
findings into the design process to help designers ask
relevant questions in any new study within this context. To
this end we have operationalized our findings in the form of
five questions for designers of digital services and platforms
that engage with Saudi cultural values.
Q1: The self. To what extent will the user present their
autonomous- or collective-self in your system design? How
a design imposes on users the requirement to disclose each
facet of the self (autonomous & collective)? For conducting
user research, how to facilitate expression of autonomous
self and mitigate cultural barriers.
Q2: Religion. How is your design situated in the dominant
religious discourse? How do different religious schools and
fatwas [16] view the primary concepts of your design? If
your design does not necessarily have to reflect religious
values, how is it formulated within a wider understanding of
these values and within Islam framework.
Q3: The State. What image of the state does your design
project? What political risks can arise from it? Does your
design promote defying the writs [57]? How does it consider
people’s aspiration to maintain and contribute to national
unity [11].
Q4: Society. Could your design be perceived as reinforcing
or undermining social harmony? What are the social norms
that your design conforms to/violate? If a design allows or

REFERENCES
g

10

1.

Norah Abokhodair, Sofiane Abbar, Sarah Vieweg, and
Yelena Mejova. 2016. Privacy and twitter in qatar:
Traditional Values in the Digital World. Proceedings of
the 8th ACM Conference on Web Science - WebSci ’16:
66–77.

2.

Norah Abdulwahab Abokhodair. 2017. Transnational
Saudi Arabian Youth and Facebook: Enacting Privacy
and Identity. 231.

3.

Norah Abokhodair, Adam Hodges, and Sarah Vieweg.
2017. Photo Sharing in the Arab Gulf: Expressing the
Collective and Autonomous Selves. ACM Press, 696–
711.

4.

Norah Abokhodair and Sarah Vieweg. 2016. Privacy &
Social Media in the Context of the Arab Gulf. DIS ’16
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems: 672–683.

5.

Norah Abokhodair and Sarah Vieweg. 2016. Privacy &
Social Media in the Context of the Arab Gulf. DIS ’16
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems: 672–683.

6.

16. Madawi Al-Rasheed. 2013. A Most Masculine State:
Gender, Politics, and Religion in Saudi Arabia.
Cambridge University Press.
17. Mohammed Alsaif. 2013. Factors Affecting Citizens ’
Adoption of e- Government Moderated by Socio and
Cultural Values in Saudi Arabia. July 2013.
18. Abdullah
Mohammed
Al-shehry.
2009.
Transformation towards e-government in The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia: technological and organisational
perspectives. August.

Nitin Agarwal, Merlyna Lim, and Rolf Wigand. 2012.
Raising and rising voices in social media: A novel
methodological approach in studying cyber-collective
movements. Business and Information Systems
Engineering 4, 3: 113–126.

7.

Manail Anis Ahmed. 2015. Outward Mobility of Saudi
Students: An Overview. International Higher
Education 83: 19.

8.

Jamil Al Wekhian. 2015. Acculturation Process of
Arab-Muslim Immigrants in the United States. Asian
Culture and History 8, 1: 89.

9.

Adel Al-Dawood, Norah Abokhodair, Houda El
mimouni, and Svetlana Yarosh. 2017. “Against
Marrying a Stranger”: Marital Matchmaking
Technologies in Saudi Arabia. Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS
’17, ACM Press, 1013–1024.

19. Tamara Alsheikh, Jennifer a. Rode, and Siân E Lindley.
2011. (Whose) value-sensitive design ? A study of
long- distance relationships in an Arabic cultural
context. Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’11):
75–84.
20. Kirk St Amant. 2015. Introduction to the special issue
Cultural Considerations for Communication Design:
Integrating Ideas of Culture, Communication, and
Context into User Experience Design. 17.
21. Andrew Molinsky. 2007. Cross-Cultural CodeSwitching: The Psychological Challenges of Adapting
Behavior in Foreign Cultural Interactions. The
Academy of Management Review 32, 2: 622–640.
22. Richard J. Bernstein. 2015. Cultural pluralism.
Philosophy & Social Criticism 41, 4–5: 347–356.

10. Majid Aldraehim, Sylvia L Sl Edwards, Jason Watson,
and Chan Taizan. 2013. Cultural impact on e-service
use in Saudi Arabia: the need for interaction with other
humans. International Journal of … 3, 3: 655–662.

23. John W. Berry, YPE H POORTINGA, MARSHALL H
SEGALL, and PIERRE R DASEN. 2002. CrossCultural Psychology: Research and Applications. 611.

11. Eman Alhussein. 2019. Saudi First: How hypernationalism is transforming Saudi Arabia. European
Councel on Foreign Relations: 19.

24. Dinesh Bhugra and Matthew A Becker. 2005.
Migration, cultural bereavement and cultural identity.
World Psychiatry: 7.

12. Eman Mohammad Alhussein. 2011. Reforming the
religious discourse in Saudi Arabia ( 2001 – 10 ). In
Routledge Handbook of Political Islam. 179–190.

25. Lawrence Blum. 2004. Stereotypes And Stereotyping:
A Moral Analysis. Philosophical Papers 33, 3: 251–
289.

13. Khalid M. Alkhazraji. 1997. Immigrants and Cultural
Adaptation in the American Workplace: A Study of
Muslim Employees. Taylor & Francis.

26. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using
thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research
in Psychology 3, 2: 77–101.

14. Hashem Abdullah Almakrami. 2015. ONLINE SELFDISCLOSURE ACROSS CULTURES: A STUDY OF
FACEBOOK USE IN SAUDI ARABIA AND
AUSTRALIA. .

27. Christoph Brumann. 1999. Writing for Culture: Why a
Successful Concept Should Not Be Discarded. Current
Anthropology 40, S1: S1–S27.

15. Madawi Al-Rasheed. 2013. A Most Masculine State:
Gender, Politics, and Religion in Saudi Arabia.
Cambridge University Press.

28. Jean Pierre Cassarino. 2004. Theorising Return
Migration: The ConceptualApproach to Return

11

Migrants Revisited. International Journal
Multicultural Societies (IJMS) 6, 2: 253–279.

on

41. Barney G Glaser and Anselm L Strauss. 1967. The
Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for
Qualitative Research. .

29. Gordon Conway. 1997. Islamophobia a challenge for
us all. The Runnymede Trust.

42. Nina; Glick Schiller, Linda Basch, and Cristina Blanc
Szanton. 1992. Towards a transnational perspective on
migration: race, class, ethnicity and nationalism
reconsidered. New York Academy of Sciences.

30. Andy Crabtree, Mark Rouncefield, and Peter Tolmie.
2012. Doing design ethnography. Springer, London ;
New York.

43. Hassan S J Al Hazmi and Sherif Mohamed. 2015.
Influence of National Culture on Staff Preferences to
Knowledge Sharing Practices : the Case of Saudi
Arabia. 11, Iccepm: 7–11.

31. John W. Creswell. 2014. Research design: qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. SAGE
Publications, Thousand Oaks.

44. Mark Hobart. 2000. After culture: anthropology as
radical metaphysical critique. Duta Wacana University
Press, Yogyakarta.

32. Janet Davisa and Lisa P. Nathan. 2013. Value Sensitive
Design: Applications, Adaptations, and Critiques. In
Handbook of Ethics, Values, and Technological
Design. 383–402.

45. Geert Hofstede. What about Saudi Arabia? Retrieved
August
26,
2017
from
https://geerthofstede.com/saudi-arabia.html.

33. Fred Dervin. 2011. Cultural Identity Representation
and Othering. In The Routledge Handbook of Language
and Intercultural Communication. Routledge.

46. Geert Hofstede. What about Saudi Arabia? .
34. Nicole Dubois and Jean Léon Beauvois. 2005.
Normativeness and individualism. European Journal of
Social Psychology 35, 1: 123–146.

47. Jeroen van den Hoven. 2015. Value Sensitive Design
and Responsible Innovation. In P. Kawa and R.P.
Weirzchoslawski, eds., Social Responsability and
Science in Innovation Economy. Learned Society of
KUL & John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin,
115–164.

35. Elke Duncker, Javed Anjum Sheikh, and Bob Fields.
2013. From Global Terminology to Local
Terminology: A Review on Cross-Cultural Interface
Design Solutions. In P.L.P. Rau, ed., Cross-Cultural
Design. Methods, Practice, and Case Studies. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 197–207.

48. George Irani and Nathan Funk. 1998. Rituals of
Reconciliation: Arab-Islamic Perspectives. Arab
studies quarterly: 34.

36. Maha Faisal and Asmaa Alsumait. 2011. Social
Network Privacy and Trust Concerns. Proc. of the 13th
International Conference on Information Integration
and Web-based Applications and Services: 416–419.

49. Janine A. Clark. 2006. Field Research Methods in the
Middle East. PS: Political Science and Politics 39, 3:
417–423.

37. Batya Friedman, Peter H Kahn, and Alan Borning.
2002. Value Sensitive Design: Theory and Methods.
UW CSE Technical Report: 8.

50. Sahar Khamis and Katherine Vaughn. 2011.
Cyberactivism in the Egyptian Revolution: How Civic
Engagement and Citizen Journalism Tilted the Balanc.
Arab Media & Society. Retrieved September 17, 2016
from http://www.arabmediasociety.com/?article=769.

38. F. Gregory Gause. 2011. Saudi Arabia in the New
Middle East. Council Special Report.

51. Nouf Khashman and Andrew Large. 2013. Arabic
Website Design: User Evaluation from a Cultural
Perspective. In P.L.P. Rau, ed., Cross-Cultural Design.
Cultural Differences in Everyday Life. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 424–431.

39. Geert Hofstede. 1981. Culture and Organizations.
International Studies of Management & Organization
10, 4,.
40. LISA M. GIVEN. 2008. The SAGE Encyclopedia of
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH METHODS. SAGE
Publications,.

52. A. L. Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn. 1952. Culture: a
critical review of concepts and definitions. Peabody
Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Cambridge, Mass.

12

53. Ping Liu and Chun Keung. 2013. Defining CrossCulture Theoretical Framework of User Interface. In
P.L.P. Rau, ed., Cross-Cultural Design. Methods,
Practice, and Case Studies. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 235–242.

65. Edward W. Said. 1979. Orientalism. Vintage Books,
New York.
66. Thomas W. Schubert and Sabine Otten. 2002. Overlap
of Self, Ingroup, and Outgroup: Pictorial Measures of
Self-Categorization. Self and Identity 1, 4: 353–376.

54. Madawi Al-Rasheed. 2007. Review Article: Saudi
Arabia Post 9/11: History, Religion and Security.
Middle Eastern Studies 43, 1: 153–160.

67. Irving Seidman. 2006. Interviewing as Qualitative
Research: A Guide for Researchers in Education and
the Social Sciences. .

55. Jerry D. Moore. 2009. Visions of culture: an
introduction to anthropological theories and theorists.
AltaMira Press, Lanham, MD.

68. Megan Stodel. 2015. But What Will People Think?:
Getting beyond Social Desirability Bias by Increasing
Cognitive Load. International Journal of Market
Research 57, 2: 313–322.

56. Carlyle Murphy. 2012. A Kingdom’s Future: Saudi
Arabia through the eyes of its twentysomethimgs.
Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington,
D.C.

69. Huatong Sun. 2012. Cross-Cultural Technology
Design Creating Culture-Sensitive Technology for
Local Users. Oxford University Press.

57. Caryle Murphy. 2012. Saudi Arabia’s Youth and the
Kingdom’s Future. Middle East Program, Occasional
Paper Series.

70. Huatong Sun. Why Cultural Contexts Are Missing: A
Rhetorical Critique of Localization Practices. 5.

58. W. Lawrence Neuman. 2002. Social Research
Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. .

71. Huatong Sun. Operationalizing culture with design
cards in cross-cultural design: Translating critical
knowledge into provocative insights. 17.

59. Khaled Saleh Al Omoush, Saad Ghaleb Yaseen, and
Mohammad Atwah Alma’Aitah. 2012. The impact of
Arab cultural values on online social networking: The
case of Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior 28,
6: 2387–2399.

72. UNDP, ed. 2016. Youth and the prospects for human
development in a changing reality. United Nations
Development Programme, Regional Bureau for Arab
States, New York, NY.

60. Joyce Osland, Allan Bird, and Allison Gundersen.
2007. Trigger events in intercultural sensemaking.
Academy of Management.

73. Natasha F. Veltri and Wafa Elgarah. 2009. The Role of
National Cultural Differences in User Adoption of
social Networking. Proceedings of the Southern
Association for Information Systems Conference 2007,
January 2007: 169–174.

61. Daphna Oyserman and Spike W S Lee. 2008. Does
culture influence what and how we think? Effects of
priming individualism and collectivism. Psychological
bulletin 134, 2: 311–42.

74. Steven Vertovec. 1999. Conceiving and researching
transnationalism. Ethnic and Racial Studies 22, 2: 447–
462.

62. Tom Plocher, Pei-Luen Patrick Rau, and Yee-Yin
Choong. 2012. Cross-Cultural Design. In G. Salvendy,
ed., Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 162–191.

75. Sarah Vieweg and Adam Hodges. 2016. Surveillance &
Modesty on Social Media: How Qataris Navigate
Modernity and Maintain Tradition. Proceedings of the
19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’16:
526–537.

63. Ibo van de Poel. 2015. Design for Values. In P.
Kawalec and R.P. WeirzChoslawski, eds., Social
Responsability and Science in Innovation Economy. .

76. Yang Wang and Blase Ur. 2013. A Cross-Cultural
Framework for Protecting User Privacy in Online
Social Media. International World Wide Web
Conference Committee (IW3C2): 1–8.

64. Pablo Rodríguez Del Pozo and Joseph J Fins. 2008.
Islam and Informed Consent: Notes from Doha.
Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 17, 3: 273–
9.

13

77. H. N. Weaver. 1998. Indigenous People in a
Multicultural Society: Unique Issues for Human
Services. Social Work 43, 3: 203–211.
78. Carla Willig. 2013. Introducing qualitative research in
psychology. Open Univ. Press, Maidenhead.
79. James Wynbrandt. 2010. A brief history of Saudi
Arabia. Facts On File, New York, NY.
80. Tamara Yakaboski, Karla Perez-Velez, and Yousef
Almutairi. 2017. Collectivists’ Decision-Making:
Saudi Arabian Graduate Students’ Study Abroad
Choices. Journal of International Students 7, 1: 94–
112.
81. Saudi Arabia: Internet Freedom Score, 2018.

14

