Forthcoming at Social Problems

White Christian Nationalism and Relative Political Tolerance for Racists
Joshua T. Davis, University of Oklahoma
Samuel L. Perry, University of Oklahoma

Abstract
Recent studies demonstrate that white Americans who adhere to “Christian nationalism”―an
ideology that idealizes and advocates a fusion of Christianity and American civic life―tend to
hold authoritarian, exclusionary, and overtly prejudicial attitudes, particularly regarding ethnoracial minorities. In light of the public resurgence of white nationalist sentiment coinciding with
the Trump presidency, the current study shifts the focus from attitudes toward a target minority
as the outcome to Christian nationalism’s association with whites’ attitudes toward “racists”
themselves. We use data from the 1996 and 2014 General Social Surveys and consider relative
political tolerance toward old-fashioned racists (i.e., persons who believe black Americans are
genetically inferior) compared to other historically stigmatized groups, including antireligionists, communists, militarists, and homosexuals. Viewing Christian identity as essential to
American civic belonging is among the strongest predictors of whites’ being politically intolerant
of all stigmatized groups, racists included. However, when we examine relative tolerance toward
racists compared to other stigmatized groups, white Christian nationalists show greater tolerance
than other whites. This effect is distinct from personal religiosity which is associated with lower
relative tolerance toward racists. Additionally, we find both survey year and gender moderate the
association between white Christian nationalism and relative tolerance toward racists. Findings
ultimately demonstrate that white Americans who adhere to Christian nationalism exhibit
authoritarian tendencies―expressing lower tolerance for all groups considered―while making
greater relative allowance for old-fashioned racists, who may be allies in the task of social
control and coercion.
Keywords: white Christian nationalism, racism, racists, political tolerance, Trump, whites

Authors contributed equally; authors are listed alphabetically by last name. We gratefully
acknowledge the editors and anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback. Direct all
correspondence to Joshua T. Davis, Department of Sociology, University of Oklahoma, 780 Van
Vleet Oval, Kaufman Hall, Norman, OK 73019; email: jdavis@ou.edu. Data for replicating this
study are freely available from NORC or The Association of Religion Data Archives
www.thearda.com, and coding specifications are available from the authors upon request.

Two prominent ideological commitments characterize the majority of white Americans who
elected Donald Trump and continue to support him today.1 The first is antipathy toward racial
and ethno-religious minorities such as black Americans, immigrants, and Muslims (Ekins 2017;
Major, Blodorn, and Blascovich 2018; Schaffner, Macwilliams, Nteta 2018; Stewart 2018). The
second is Christian nationalism, an ideology that idealizes and advocates a fusion of Christianity
and American civic life (Whitehead, Perry, and Baker 2018; see also: Gorski 2017a; Sides 2017;
Stewart 2018). The connection is not coincidental.2 Numerous studies within the past decade
have demonstrated that white Americans who adhere to Christian nationalism (measured in
various ways) are more likely to draw rigid racial boundaries around national group membership
and hold strongly prejudicial attitudes toward black Americans and other racial minorities (Perry
and Whitehead 2015a; Perry, Whitehead, and Davis 2019); Muslims (Edgell and Tranby 2010;
Merino 2010; Sherkat and Lehman 2018; Shortle and Gaddie 2015); those of other non-JudeoChristian religions (Stewart, Edgell, and Delehanty 2018); and immigrants (Davis 2019; Edgell
and Tranby 2010; McDaniel, Nooruddin, and Shortle 2011; Sherkat and Lehman 2018; Straughn
and Feld 2010).
This article considers Christian nationalism’s potential influence on a more covert
expression of racism―namely, greater tolerance toward racists themselves as compared to other
historically stigmatized groups. Despite what seems to be a resurgence of overt white racism and
ethnocentrism corresponding to the ascension of Trump and the Alt-right, racism is still more
often exercised covertly in the policies that whites are willing to support (Bonilla-Silva 2017;

1

To be sure, scholars in the past two years have also identified sexist/patriarchal values (Bock, Byrd-Craven,
Burkley 2017; Schaffner et al. 2018) as contributing to Trump support as well as economic dissatisfaction, though
the latter factor seems less influential than previously thought (Schaffner et al. 2018; Whitehead et al. 2018).
2
We do not mean to give the impression that white Christian nationalism only played a role in the 2016 election. As
Hughey and Parks (2014) have shown, white Christian nationalism characterizing much of the Tea Party Movement
mobilized opposition to Barack Obama’s reelection in 2012 and throughout his presidency.

DiTomaso 2013; Haney Lόpez 2014) and the groups toward whom whites are more inclined to
show favor.3 One recent example of this was Trump’s response to the 2017 Charlottesville riots
and the endorsement it received from his Christian nationalist supporters. In August of 2017 a
group of white nationalists, including neo-Nazis, Klansmen, and neo-confederates, held a “Unite
the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Virginia with the stated goal of protesting the removal of a
statue of Robert E. Lee from a local park. On August 12th, riots ensued as counter-protestors
confronted the white nationalists, culminating in the murder of one woman when a neo-Nazi
drove a car through a crowd. Immediately following the riots, President Trump made a public
statement suggesting an equivalency between the counter-protesters and hate groups,
condemning “this egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many sides, on many
sides.” And while he later condemned racism and hate groups following the backlash to his
comments, Trump subsequently doubled down on his earlier statements saying there was “blame
on both sides” and that there were “very fine people on both sides.” Among the most vocal
supporters of Trump’s comments were prominent white evangelical leaders such as Jerry Falwell
Jr., Franklin Graham, Robert Jeffress, and Tony Perkins. Each either explicitly endorsed
Trump’s “both sides” comments or blamed the Charlottesville victims for the riots; and all
refused to condemn the racists outright (Balmer 2017; Boston 2017). What Trump’s lukewarm
condemnation of racists implied, and his Christian nationalist supporters made more explicit, was
a privileging of the civil liberties of racist hate-groups, as compared to other less-favored groups,

3

Even white Christian nationalists at times seem reticent to espouse overtly supremacist racial views. The General
Social Survey, for example, asks respondents whether they think black Americans are worse off than white
Americans because blacks “have less in-born ability to learn.” Only 13% of white Christian nationalists affirm this
explanation. But nearly two-thirds of white Christian nationalists (64%) attribute racial inequality to black
Americans lacking the motivation to better themselves―a more colorblind racist assumption (Bonilla-Silva 2017).

such as kneeling NFL players, Muslims, protestors at Trump’s rallies, or critical journalists
(Johnson 2017).
While the connection between white Christian nationalism and overt ethno-racial
prejudice is well-established, the current study changes the focus to consider its association with
white Americans’ tolerance toward “racists” themselves. We draw on data from the 1996 and
2014 General Social Surveys and focus on whites’ relative political tolerance toward those who
believe black Americans are genetically inferior―what is traditionally called “old-fashioned
racism” (see Hughes 1997)―whom we will simply call “racists,” compared with antireligionists, communists, militarists, and homosexuals. Our analyses show that white Americans
who view being a Christian as an essential part of being an American tend to show lower levels
of political tolerance for all groups considered, racists included. This is consistent with research
suggesting Christian nationalism is associated with authoritarian tendencies (Davis 2018; Gorski
2017b; Stewart et al. 2018), in this case, suppressing the civil liberties of these groups. However,
when we look at relative political tolerance for racists compared to other historically stigmatized
groups, white Christian nationalists are more tolerant than other white Americans. Notably,
Christian nationalism works in the opposite direction of personal religious commitment, which is
associated with lower relative tolerance toward racists among white Americans. Examining
moderators, we also find that relative tolerance toward racists shows less decline over time
among Christian nationalists compared to other whites. Additionally, Christian nationalism has a
stronger association with relative tolerance toward racists among white men, but the association
shows less decline over time among white women.
Our findings thus make a vital contribution to our understanding of how the
contemporary resurgence of white Christian nationalism not only foments explicitly bigoted and

exclusionary attitudes toward minorities (McDaniel et al. 2011; Perry and Whitehead 2015a;
Perry et al., 2019; Shortle and Gaddie 2015; Stewart et al. 2018), but also leads its adherents to
be more favorable toward old-fashioned racists like many of those in Charlottesville, who seem
to be political and cultural allies in promoting President Trump’s agenda.
EMPIRICAL BACKGROUND AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Christian Nationalism, Ethno-Racial Exclusion, and Authoritarianism
Gorski (2017a) explains that, within the American context, Christian nationalism has
several essential features. Christian nationalism idealizes America’s mythic past, including its
founding fathers, documents, and ideals and pines for America’s “return” to her Christian
foundations. Unlike “American civil religion,” which traditionally prioritized national
responsibility and stewardship, Christian nationalism is more concerned with a defense of
Christian identity reflected in iconography, rituals, and policies. Also unlike civil religion, which
has often been interpreted to stress unity and inclusion as core ideals, Christian nationalism has
traditionally been linked with the expectation and defense of ethno-religious and racial exclusion
(Whitehead and Perry 2020; Bellah 1967).
Numerous studies over the past decade have affirmed that white Americans who
subscribe to Christian nationalist beliefs tend to draw rigid boundaries around national identity,
often showing a willingness to limit the civil liberties of perceived out-groups. Edgell and
Tranby (2010), for example, found that over 98 percent of those Americans they categorized as
“cultural preservationists” tended to believe that “The United States is a Christian nation and that
is a good thing,” and over two-thirds affirmed “The United States is a white nation and that is a
good thing,” resembling the ideological stance of those who could be classified as a “hate group”
(Southern Poverty Law Center 2017). Predictably, these Americans were also more likely to

view Muslims, new immigrants, and homosexuals as threats to the public good, and to oppose
their child marrying someone of a different racial, ethnic, or religious background (see also
Bonikowski and DiMaggio 2016; Ekins 2017; Perry and Whitehead 2015a).
Other studies more explicitly focus on the belief that America has been and should
always be distinctively Christian as a predictor of whites’ xenophobic, Islamophobic, or racist
attitudes. For example, studies have found that those who adhere to various Christian nationalist
beliefs are more likely to exclude Muslims from national membership (Merino 2010; Sherkat
and Lehman 2018; Shortle and Gaddie 2015). And Stewart et al. (2018) recently showed that
Americans who advocate for “public religious expression” (a construct quite similar to Christian
nationalism; see McDaniel et al. 2011; Whitehead et al. 2018) are more likely to be intolerant of
religious groups outside of the Judeo-Christian core. Also using various measures of Christian
nationalism, studies have shown that white Americans who more strongly affirmed Christian
nationalist beliefs were more likely to hold antipathy toward immigrants (McDaniel et al. 2011)
or to believe US immigration should be reduced (Davis 2019; Sherkat and Lehman 2018;
Straughn and Feld 2010). Focusing on racial boundaries more explicitly, Perry and Whitehead
(2015a, 2015b) have shown that Christian nationalism is associated with white opposition to
racial boundary-crossing through interracial marriage with Latinos, Asians, and especially blacks
or transracial adoption. Most recently, Perry et al. (2019) reported that Christian nationalism was
among the strongest predictors that Americans would be unwilling to acknowledge racial
injustice in policing and even blame blacks themselves for police violence.
Perhaps unsurprisingly given its association with ethno-religious and racial prejudice,
Christian nationalism was also among the strongest predictors of whether Americans voted for
Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential election (Whitehead et al. 2018; see also Stewart 2018).

This suggests a connection between the tendency of this ideology to promote prejudicial and
exclusionary attitudes and fostering support for Trump’s authoritarian persona and policies
(Braunstein 2017; Gorski 2017b). Previous research has shown that religious subcultures that
advocate a symbiotic relationship between church and state (e.g., Calvinistic Puritanism; Islam in
some contexts) tend to also support authoritarian hierarchies, structures, and means of ensuring
conformity (Gorski 1995; Riesebrodt 1993). Consistent with this idea, Christian nationalist
beliefs have been shown to strongly predict Americans’ support for more authoritarian means of
social control. Davis (2018) found that Americans who hold more strongly to Christian
nationalist beliefs are more likely to support the death penalty, advocate stricter punishments for
federal crime, and want the government to “crack down on troublemakers.” The language of
these outcomes also suggests that respondents may envision non-white perpetrators when asked
about authoritarian tactics. Thus, not only does Christian nationalism incline (white) Americans
to draw boundaries around national membership, often explicitly excluding ethno-religious and
racial minorities, but they are more likely to favor coercive, even violent, tactics to maintain
social control (of non-whites). This leads us to a consideration of how Christian nationalism
might be associated with some whites’ greater relative support for the civil liberties of potential
allies, namely, old-fashioned racists.
Theorizing White Christian Nationalism and Relative Political Tolerance for Racists
“Political tolerance” is the term often used to describe one’s willingness to extend civil
liberties to stigmatized groups. In research focusing on the US, this often includes ethno-racial
minorities (e.g., blacks, Jews, immigrants) as well as those on the ideological left (communists,
homosexuals, atheists or anti-religionists) or right (old-fashioned racists, fascists or militarists)
(Edgell et al. 2016; Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017, 2018). Beginning with Stouffer’s (1955)

research in this area, an enormous body of literature considers the correlates and determinants of
political tolerance, often highlighting similar themes. Among the most consistent findings are
that tolerance for historically stigmatized groups has increased over time, but tolerance toward
some groups (e.g., gays and lesbians, anti-religionists) has increased more than others (e.g.,
racists) (e.g., Mondak and Sanders 2003; Reimer and Park 2001; Schafer and Shaw 2009;
Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017, 2018); being higher socioeconomic status and younger are
among strongest predictors of tolerance toward others (Bobo and Lacari 1989; Ellison and
Musick 1993; Karpov 1999; Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017); and secondarily, people who
are from the South, rural areas, politically conservative, fundamentalist Christian (measured with
Bible beliefs, affiliation, or identity), and more religious, tend to be less politically tolerant of
culturally stigmatized groups including old-fashioned racists, homosexuals, atheists, militarists,
and communists (Bobo and Lacari 1989; Ellison and Musick 1993; Fillsinger 1976; Froese et al.
2008; Gay and Ellison 1993; Karpov 2002; Reimer and Park 2001; Rhodes 2012; Schwadel and
Garneau 2014; 2017, 2018; Shafer and Shaw 2009; Sullivan and Transue 1999; Tuntiya 2005).
Importantly, while various religious characteristics have consistently been associated
with political intolerance, Eisenstein (2006, 2009) finds that both religious commitment and
doctrinal orthodoxy are unassociated with intolerance once political and psychological
determinants such as having a “secure personality” (measured via dogmatism and self-esteem),
perceptions of threat, and political conservatism are considered. This suggests that the perceived
link between religiosity or fundamentalism and political intolerance may be due less to religion
per se and more about perceived cultural and political threats. Indeed, theories connecting the
empirical findings cited above most often explain intolerance in terms of perceptions about threat
or insecurity (Bobo and Lacari 1989; Golebiowska 1999; Hutchison and Gibler 2007; Schwadel

and Garneau 2017; Stouffer 1955; Sullivan et al. 1982; Sullivan et al. 1981). This would help us
understand why (white) Christian nationalism is so consistently associated with intolerance
toward ethno-religious and racial minorities, namely, the perception that white Christians are
losing their perceived cultural and political power (Gorski 2017b; Jones 2016; Stewart 2018).
The converse of this theory is obviously that respondents are more tolerant toward those
they believe to be less threatening or similar to themselves. Christian nationalism’s association
with ethno-religious and racial prejudice both overtly as well as support for colorblind racism
(Davis 2019) would arguably incline whites to be more politically tolerant toward racists outright
as ideological cousins who perceive out-groups in similar ways. However, we propose that
Christian nationalism’s connection with authoritarianism complicates this connection somewhat.
Authoritarian attitudes generally default to the suppression of civil liberties for all perceived
outsiders in favor of greater social control (Duckitt and Farre 1994; Karpov 1999; Sullivan et al.
1981). Thus, it would be likely that Americans who want to advocate for a stronger connection
between Christianity and American civil society would be more likely to favor limiting the civil
liberties of old-fashioned racists, just as they would militarists, homosexuals, communists, or
atheists. This idea is supported by Stewart et al.’s (2018) findings that greater preference for
“public religious expression” predicts a generalized political intolerance toward stigmatized
groups. Following from this, our first formal expectation states:
H1: White Americans who most strongly connect Christian identity with American civic
belonging will be less politically tolerant of all stigmatized groups.
However, while the authoritarian tendencies inherent within Christian nationalism would
incline white Americans to limit the civil liberties of all historically stigmatized groups,
including old-fashioned racists, we propose that the tendency for Christian nationalism to
reinforce ethno-racial boundaries and prejudice―and thus view racists as allies, or at least non-

threatening within an ostensibly “forced choice” political system―would likely lead to white
Christian nationalists showing greater relative political tolerance for racists compared to other
stigmatized groups. Specifically, because Americans often find they must choose one of two
imperfect political options, they may be more willing to align themselves with one stigmatized
group over others for political or ideological reasons. In other words, a Christian nationalist may
say, “I’d rather not allow any of these people to put their books in my library, but if I have to
choose, I am more comfortable with racist speech than with anti-religionist speech.” This
paradox is illustrated by President Trump’s inconsistent response to the 2017 Charlottesville
riots, and the subsequent endorsements of his Christian nationalist supporters. On the one hand,
Trump did eventually condemn white supremacists and racism two days after the riots (“Racism
is evil and those who cause violence in its name are criminals and thugs, including the KKK,
neo-Nazis, white supremacists, and other hate groups.”) And yet his condemnation was flanked
by two statements suggesting a moral equivalency between the white supremacists and the
counter-protestors. Trump’s Christian nationalist supporters were even less willing to denounce
the hate groups, preferring to deflect the blame to the politicians who allowed for the removal of
Robert E. Lee’s statue or affirm with Trump that “racism comes in all shapes, all sizes, and yes,
all colors” (Balmer 2017). Though perhaps being willing to restrict the civil liberties of racists as
they would with other historically stigmatized groups, we nevertheless expect:
H2: White Americans who most strongly connect Christian identity with American civic
belonging will show greater relative political tolerance toward old-fashioned racists than
for other stigmatized groups.
We also consider two important moderators in estimating Christian nationalism’s
association with whites’ relative political tolerance toward racists: gender and time. Racial
prejudice and authoritarianism are more commonly found in men (Hughes and Tuch 2003;

Napier and Jost 2008) and white Christian nationalism is more prominent among women
(Whitehead and Perry 2015; Whitehead and Scheitle 2018). Previous examinations of gender and
political tolerance have been somewhat inconsistent. Some studies find gender unrelated to the
measures of political tolerance that we include in this study (Ellison and Musick 1993; Froese et
al. 2008; Rhodes 2012), while others have found women to be slightly less tolerant than men
(Bobo and Lacari 1989; Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017), though not for all stigmatized
groups. Several studies, for example, have found men to be more tolerant than women regarding
racists or racist hate-groups (Golebiowska 1995, 1999; Tuntiya 2005). To the extent men already
tend to be more inclined toward prejudice, authoritarianism, and greater tolerance toward racists,
we expect:
H3: The association between Christian nationalism and relative political tolerance
toward old-fashioned racists will be stronger among white men compared to white
women.
Finally, numerous studies have shown that political tolerance toward all stigmatized
groups has increased over time, though tolerance toward old-fashioned racists has increased
more slowly than for groups like homosexuals or the irreligious (Mondak and Sanders 2003;
Reimer and Park 2001; Schafer and Shaw 2009; Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017, 2018).
Consequently, we would expect that political tolerance toward racists relative to tolerance of
other stigmatized groups would decline among white Americans from 1996 to 2014. However, in
accordance with previous research on the linkages between Christian nationalism and racial
intolerance (Perry and Whitehead 2015a; Perry et al. 2019) we expect that white Christian
nationalists would be less susceptible to this broader trend. In other words, while we expect
relative political tolerance toward racists to decline over time among white Americans generally,

this decline will be less pronounced among white Christian nationalists compared to other white
Americans. We also expect this to be the case across both men and women as for the full sample.
H4: The association between Christian nationalism and relative political tolerance
toward old-fashioned racists among white men and women will remain more constant
over time compared to other white Americans.
METHODS
Data
We use data from the 1996 and 2014 General Social Survey (GSS). The GSS is a
nationally representative, face-to-face survey of the non-institutionalized, English-Spanish
speaking American adult population in the United States. The GSS is funded by the National
Science Foundation and has been conducted since 1972. While earlier waves of the GSS were
administered roughly every year, since 1994 the GSS surveyed roughly 3,000 Americans in even
numbered years. We use the 1996 and 2014 GSS as these are the only two surveys containing all
the variables needed for our analysis. After accounting for missing data with listwise deletion,
we have an analytic sample of 1,010 American adults.
Measures
Dependent Variables
Our primary dependent variable is white Americans’ relative political tolerance toward
old-fashioned racists compared to other stigmatized groups. In repeated waves of the GSS,
respondents are asked to “consider a person who believes that Blacks are genetically inferior…”
along with four other historically stigmatized hypothetical persons (an anti-religionist,
communist, militarist, or homosexual). They are then asked whether they would (1) allow such a
person to give a public speech in their community; (2) allow them to teach in a college or
university; or (3) promote the removal of a book authored by such a person from the public

library. Respondents are then given binary options to either protect the person’s civil liberties
(i.e., letting them speak, letting them teach, and keeping their book in the library) or curb them.4
We first created five political tolerance scales using responses for each stigmatized
group, with values ranging from 0 = restricted civil liberties in all three areas to 3 = permitted
civil liberties in all three areas. We then create a ratio for each respondent’s relative political
tolerance for racists by first generating a mean tolerance score for the other stigmatized groups
for each respondent ranging from 1-4.5 We then divide respondents’ tolerance toward racists
(ranging 1-4) by this mean to create a ratio variable indicating respondents’ relative tolerance
toward racists, following the examples of Pampel and Hunter (2012) as well as Schwadel and
Johnson (2017). Because we wish to identify individuals who are more tolerant of racists and the
distribution of this ratio variable was non-normal, we dichotomize our relative tolerance measure
such that values greater than 1 (i.e., more politically tolerant toward racists) are coded as 1, and
values of 1 or less (i.e., equal or lower relative tolerance toward racists) are coded 0.6
Independent Variable
While there have been several indexes and measures of Christian nationalism, for this
study we operationalize adherence to Christian nationalism by white Americans’ use of Christian
identity as an essential marker of what it means to be a true American. In 1996, 2004, and 2014,

4

While scholars and laypersons alike progressed in their understanding and definition of racism in the time between
1996 and 2014 and since (Bonilla-Silva 1997, 2017; Haney López 2014; Ray 2019) which might lead to a “moving
target” phenomenon in our analyses, the specificity of the GSS question regarding blacks being “genetically
inferior” holds two important implications for our results. First, in providing a clear definition for respondents there
is little ambiguity in respondent conceptualization of racism. Second, in measuring political tolerance for those who
espouse old-fashioned racist ideology we are presenting political tolerance of an extremely conservative form of
racism.
5
Readers may notice values range from 0 to 3 for each original composite measure of political tolerance. A value of
1 was added to both the mean tolerance and racist tolerance measures to construct a measure of relative support for
racism in order to avoid problems introduced by having a value of 0 in the denominator.
6
Additional analyses (see Appendix Table 1A) were conducted using the continuous measure of relative racism
with ordinary least squares regression. Results for these analyses did not substantively change.

the GSS asked, “Some people say the following things are important for being truly American.
Others say they are not important. How important do you think each of the following is…To be a
Christian.” Responses included (1) Very important, (2) Fairly important, (3) Not very important,
or (4) Not important at all. While a multi-item measure of Christian nationalism would be ideal
(e.g., Davis 2018, 2019; McDaniel et al. 2011; Perry and Whitehead 2015a, 2015b; Whitehead
and Perry 2020), this GSS measure is very similar to measures comprising other indexes of
Christian nationalism (e.g., Delehanty et al. 2018; Stewart et al. 2018); it has been used in
numerous studies gauging Americans’ beliefs about Christianity’s connection with American
identity (e.g., Bonikowski and DiMaggio 2016; Byrne 2011; Perry and Whitehead 2019; Shelton
2010; Sherkat and Lehman 2018; Straughn and Feld 2010; Whitehead and Scheitle 2018); and it
provides the only instance of such a measure being used over this long a duration.7
Because we are interested in white Americans who most strongly view being a Christian
as essential to being “truly American,” whom we here consider white Christian nationalists, we
dichotomize respondents into those who believe being a Christian is “very important” to being
truly American (coded 1; representing 28.5 percent of the sample) compared to everyone else (=
0).8 A comparison of descriptive statistics for our Christian nationalist group and the rest of the
sample (see Table 1) supports the validity of this coding decision. Entirely consistent with
previous studies of Christian nationalist beliefs using multi-item indexes (e.g., Edgell and Tranby
2010; Delehanty et al. 2018; Whitehead and Perry 2020), we see white Americans in our

In Stewart et al.’s (2018) multi-item measure of “public religious expression” the authors include a question asking
respondents’ agreement with the statement “being Christian is important for being a good American,” which is quite
similar to the GSS measure.
8
To ensure that our findings were not dependent on our binary coding decision, as an additional sensitivity check,
we ran all of our models described below using the full 4-value measure (reverse-coded) ranging from 1 = Not at all
important to 4 = Very important, and find that the results are robust even when utilizing alternate coding strategies
(see Appendix Tables 2A and 3A). In fact, when we analyze the full measure of Christian nationalism found in the
GSS, fully standardized results indicate stronger associations with our outcome variable of interest. Thus, we are
presenting the more conservative findings.
7

Christian nationalist group are more likely to be evangelical Protestants, biblical literalists,
frequent churchgoers, politically conservative, less educated, lower income, older, Southern, and
female.9
Control Variables
We include a variety of ideological and sociodemographic controls following previous
research on the “political tolerance” construct (e.g., Ellison and Musick 1993; Froese et al. 2008;
Gay and Ellison 1993; Karpov 2002; Reimer and Park 2001; Schwadel and Garneau 2014; 2017,
2018; Shafer and Shaw 2009; Tuntiya 2005). We first utilize a number of religious control
variables. We account for religious tradition using Steensland et al.’s (2000) classification
scheme (excluding Black Protestants) using evangelical Protestants as the contrast category.
Because biblical literalism is consistently associated with political intolerance toward out-groups
(Froese et al. 2008; Schwadel and Garneau 2018), we included a binary measure of whether
Americans believe that the Bible is the literal word of God (= 1) and those who hold some other
view of the Bible (= 0). Finally, as an indicator of personal religiosity, we control for how
frequently respondents attend religious services with values ranging from 0 = “never” to 8 =
“more than once a week.”
We also include two control variables related directly to politics. The first measure asks
respondents to describe their political beliefs with responses ranging from (1) “extremely
liberal,” to (7) “extremely conservative.” We also control for political partisanship using a series
of dummy variables. Adults who said that they were either a “strong democrat,” or “not a strong

9

As an additional point of comparison, in Supplemental Table S1, we compare our white Christian nationalist group
from the GSS with those who score in the upper quartile (1 standard deviation above the mean) on the multi-item
Christian nationalism scale used by Perry et al. (2019). The two groups compare quite favorably on religious
attendance, political ideology, educational attainment, marital status, age, and southern residence. The sample for
Perry et al. (2019), however, appears slightly more conservative theologically (higher percentage of biblical
literalists and evangelicals), more likely to be Republican, and have a higher percentage of males (50/50 gender
split).

democrat” were coded as “democrat” (= 1), and those respondents who indicated that they were
“independent near democrat,” “independent,” “independent near republican,” or “other party”
were coded as “independent” (= 1) in contrast to respondents claiming to be “not a strong
republican,” or a “strong republican” coded as republican (= reference).10
Lastly, we control for a number of key sociodemographic characteristics. Age is
measured in years from 18-89+. Number of children ranged from 0 = “no children” to 8 = “eight
or more children.” Dummy variables are included for education (1 = bachelors degree or more, 0
= other), household income (1 = less than $25,000 annually, 0 = more than $25,00011), region
(Southern residence = 1, other = 0), gender (male = 1, female = 0), and survey year (1 = 2014, 0
= 1996). We also include series of dummy variables for marital status with those who are
currently married (= reference) compared to those who are either separated, divorced, or
widowed (= 1) and those have never been married (= 1).
[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Plan of Analysis
In order to examine the association between Christian nationalism and white Americans’
political tolerance of each stigmatized group individually (H1), Table 2 presents ordered logistic
regression models predicting respondents’ levels of political tolerance for racists (Model 1),
militarists (Model 2), anti-religionists (Model 3), communists (Model 4), and homosexuals

10

Adjusting the specific coding of these political categories does not change our findings either in substance or
statistical significance.
11
While previous investigations of Americans’ political tolerance have utilized a logged form of family income as a
control variable (Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017, 2018), we contend that there are important differences between
whites with lower levels of income (in our case the bottom third of the sample), and those with higher levels of
income that are overlooked as a function of substantive changes in response categories for this variable over time.
While we acknowledge that there are differences between families who earn less than $1,000 and those who earn
$24,999 annually, we argue that all respondents who fall below $25,000 annually would experience the economic
insecurity associated with racial prejudice (Hogan, Chiricos and Gertz 2005; Wilson 2001). We conducted
supplemental analyses using both the GSS’s unaltered ordinal measure of income as well as a logged measure of
respondents’ family income. These results did not substantively alter the relationship between Christian nationalism
and relative tolerance for racism and are available upon request.

(Model 5) which include the full battery of control variables described above. Table 3 then
presents binary logistic regression models predicting respondents’ relative tolerance toward
racists (H2). Model 1 focuses on Christian nationalism’s bivariate association with relative
tolerance. Models 2 and 3 introduce religious and sociodemographic controls respectively to see
whether Christian nationalism’s association with relative tolerance toward racists is potentially
mediated or rendered spurious. Models 4 and 5 introduce interaction terms for Christian
nationalism with respondents’ gender (H3) and survey year (H4) respectively. Finally, in Table 4
we split our sample by gender to investigate whether the relationship between Christian
nationalism and respondents’ relative political tolerance toward racists has significantly changed
across survey waves for both men and women.
In order to ensure that cross-model changes occurring within dependent variables are
substantive and not due to loss of cases, we restrict samples for all analyses to only those
respondents who are present in the strictest model specification. Thus, each analytical model
including both men and women utilizes a final sample of 1,010 respondents, of which 510 are
women and 500 are men. Numerous sensitivity models were also analyzed to ensure results
presented in this paper are robust beyond our coding decisions (see Appendixes).
RESULTS
Table 2 presents fully-standardized ordered logistic regression coefficients predicting
each of the five political tolerance measures using the full battery of religious and
sociodemographic controls. In the first model, we see that an increase of one standard deviation
in Christian nationalism is associated with a decrease of 0.173 standard deviation in tolerance
toward racists. Notably, we find that our Christian nationalism measure is the strongest
individual predictor of political intolerance for each group except homosexuals for which it is

third behind having at least a bachelor’s degree and survey year. This supports our first
hypothesis (H1).
In line with prior research on American’s political tolerance, Table 2 also reveals that
believing that the Bible is the literal word of God is negatively associated with political tolerance
of atheists, communists, and homosexuals. We also find that those respondents with at least
bachelor’s degree are significantly more tolerant of all stigmatized groups than are those with
lower levels of education. Table 2 also reveals that respondents who more closely identify with
the Democratic party are significantly less tolerant of racists, militarists, and anti-religionists
than are respondents who identify with the Republican party. Finally, Table 2 demonstrates that
white respondents with lower income levels are significantly less tolerant of all stigmatized
groups except racists. In separate analyses not shown we find that when Christian nationalism is
excluded from the models respondents’ income, age, and survey year are also statistically
significant predictors of intolerance towards racists, and biblical literalism predicts intolerance
toward militarists.
[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
While Christian nationalism seems highly predictive of whites’ intolerance toward all
stigmatized groups, including old-fashioned racists, to investigate our remaining hypotheses we
now turn to examining white Americans’ political tolerance toward racists relative to their
tolerance of other stigmatized groups. Table 3 presents fully standardized regression coefficients
and odds ratios from binary logistic regression analyses. Model 1 introduces the focal
relationship between white Christian nationalism and relative tolerance toward racists and
demonstrates a positive association ( = 0.212, p < .001).

In Model 2 we introduce controls for respondents’ religious affiliation, theological belief,
and practice, as well as survey year. After parsing out the influence of these measures, we find
that the association between Christian nationalism and relative political tolerance toward racists
is reduced only slightly ( = 0.207, p < .001). Interestingly, while there are few other variables
that are significantly associated with the outcome in Model 2, we see that religious service
attendance is negatively associated with whites’ relative political tolerance toward racists ( = 0.124, p < .01). This relationship stays the same throughout the remaining models, and suggests
that it is not personal religious commitment (at least in terms of worship attendance) that inclines
white Americans to be more politically tolerant of racists relative to other stigmatized groups,
nor is it their view of the Bible or religious affiliation, each of which are non-significant in full
models. Rather, it is quite explicitly those whites who view being a Christian as essential to
being an American who show greater relative tolerance toward racists.
Model 3 introduces the entire battery of political and sociodemographic control measures
described above. After including these controls, we find that the association between Christian
nationalism and relative tolerance toward racists wanes slightly ( = 0.175, p < .001), but
remains the strongest single predictor in the model, and retains its high statistical significance.
Indeed, this model reveals that the log odds for being relatively more tolerant toward racists for
white Christian nationalists were over twice that of other white Americans. Thus, we find strong
support for our second hypothesis (H2) that white Americans who more closely connect
Christian identity with American civic belonging will be relatively more tolerant of racists than
other stigmatized groups in society.
In Models 4 and 5 of Table 3 we interact our Christian nationalism measure with gender
and year respectively to formally test our final two hypotheses. The interaction term in Model 4

is positive and statistically significant indicating that Christian nationalism is more strongly
associated with men’s relative tolerance toward racists than it is for women, supporting our third
hypothesis (H3).
Similarly, the interaction term in Model 5 is also statistically significant and positive
indicating that the association between Christian nationalism and relative tolerance toward
racists was more salient for respondents in 2014 than it was for respondents in 1996. This should
not be taken to mean that relative tolerance toward racists increased among white Christian
nationalists between 1996 and 2014. On the contrary, the negative coefficient for year
throughout Models 2-5 indicates that relative tolerance toward racists has generally declined
across white Americans over time. However, the positive interaction term reveals that this
decline has been slower among white Christian nationalists. Thus, not only are white Christian
nationalists more likely to show relative tolerance toward racists compared to others, but their
tolerance has been more resistant to broader cultural trends of becoming relatively less favorable
toward racists. These findings support our fourth hypothesis (H4).
[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
To further unpack the association between Christian nationalism and relative tolerance of
racism, Table 4 presents results from split sample logistic regression analyses testing the
interaction of Christian nationalism and survey year by gender. The first model presents base
results for white women and reveals that while religious service attendance, having never
married, and income are all associated with their relative tolerance toward racists at a p < .05
level, Christian nationalist identity is only a marginally significant predictor ( = 0.129, p < .10).
However, the interaction term for Christian nationalism and survey year introduced in model 2 is
positive and significant ( = 0.314, p < .001) indicating a similar pattern to what we observed in

Table 3. The third model presented in Table 4 replicates the first but for white men. Christian
nationalism is not only the strongest social predictor of relative tolerance for racists among white
men ( = 0.201, p < .01), but apart from survey year ( = -0.224, p < .01) it is the only
significant predictor. The fourth and final model in Table 4 reveals that, unlike for white women,
the relationship between Christian nationalism and relative tolerance for racists does not
significantly change between white men surveyed in 1996 and 2014. This indicates that, while
white Christian nationalist women became more divergent from other white women over time in
their relative tolerance toward racists, white Christian nationalist men generally followed the
decline in relative tolerance toward racists seen among other white men.
[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Numerous studies have shown that white Americans who closely connect Christianity
with American civic life tend to hold exclusionary, authoritarian, and overtly prejudicial
attitudes, particularly toward ethno-religious and racial minority groups such as Muslims, blacks,
and immigrants (Merino 2010; Perry and Whitehead 2015a; Perry et al. 2019; Sherkat and
Lehman 2018; Stewart et al. 2018; Straughn and Feld 2010). Our analysis shifted the focus from
prejudicial attitudes toward a target minority group to consider how Christian nationalist views
might incline whites to view “racists” themselves. Consistent with work connecting Christian
nationalism with an authoritarian tendency to restrict civil liberties for culturally stigmatized
groups (Davis 2018; Gorski 2017b; Stewart et al. 2018), whites who viewed being a Christian as
“very important” to being “truly American” showed less political tolerance toward all
stigmatized groups asked about in the GSS, racists included. Indeed, this ideological
commitment was among the strongest predictors of political intolerance for every group.

However, when we examined relative tolerance toward racists compared to anti-religionists,
militarists, communists, and homosexuals, white Christian nationalists showed greater relative
tolerance than other white Americans. Importantly, this effect was distinct from personal
religiosity (measured by church attendance) which seemed to incline whites toward lower
relative tolerance toward racists. Considering potential moderators, we found that while relative
tolerance toward racists declined between 1996 and 2014 across the board, the decline was less
pronounced among white Christian nationalists. Looking at gender differences, the association
between Christian nationalism and relative tolerance toward racists was higher among men, but
Christian nationalist women declined less noticeably in their relative tolerance toward racists
over time.
These findings contribute to our understanding of the intersection of American religion,
politics, and race relations in four important ways. While not the primary theoretical argument of
our study, our findings underscore the centrality of Christian nationalism for understanding the
political intolerance of whites for all stigmatized groups. Previous studies of political intolerance
using the GSS have highlighted the importance of education, age, region, and religious factors
like affiliations or biblical literalism in predicting Americans’ willingness to extend civil liberties
to certain groups (Ellison and Musick 1993; Gay and Ellison 1993; Karpov 2002; Reimer and
Park 2001; Schwadel and Garneau 2014, 2017, 2018). We have shown that, for white
Americans, equating American cultural membership with being a Christian was the strongest
predictor of intolerance toward anti-religionists, militarists, communists, and racists. Importantly,
connecting Christian identity with American civic belonging was a stronger predictor of political
intolerance than factors that were previously stressed such as age, lower-educational attainment,
and biblical literalism. In addition, our analysis was able to specify the groups to which this

intolerance extended. Stewart et al. (2018) recently showed that Americans who favored greater
“public religious expression”―using measures quite similar to those found in Christian
nationalism indexes elsewhere (e.g., McDaniel et al. 2011; Merino 2010; Perry et al. 2019;
Shortle and Gaddie 2015; Whitehead et al. 2018)―evidenced higher “generalized intolerance”
toward unspecified out-groups. Because the GSS allows us to specify which groups in particular
are the out-group in question (homosexuals, racists, communists, etc.), we are able to discern
which groups respondents had in mind specifically.
Second, and what we contend represents the central contribution of the study, while
Christian nationalism seemed to incline whites to be intolerant toward all stigmatized groups,
including old-fashioned racists, viewing being a Christian as “very important” to being truly
American predicted greater relative tolerance toward racists over other stigmatized groups. How
do we explain this association? Previous studies of political tolerance have stressed that persons
tend to be less tolerant toward those they perceive as threats to their power or way of life. For
white Americans, espousing Christian nationalist views is powerfully associated with feeling
one’s nation or way of life is threatened by religious, racial, or cultural outsiders (see Jones 2016;
PRRI 2017), and thus, is often the leading predictor of holding negative views toward ethnoreligious and racial minority groups including Muslim and black Americans (Perry and
Whitehead 2015a, 2015b; Perry et al. 2019; McDaniel et al. 2011) as well as homosexuals
(Whitehead and Perry 2015). Consequently, white Christian nationalists likely view oldfashioned racists as the least threatening category of stigmatized groups, even as they are
uncomfortable extending civil liberties to such racists as individuals. These findings essentially
bridge old-fashioned racist ideology and more covert, colorblind ideologies by showing how
persons who espouse the genetic inferiority of black Americans can be granted political

preference by those who would normally be more comfortable with “symbolic” or “strategic”
forms of racism. Here the latter can support the former indirectly for political gain (Gilens 1991;
Haney López 2014; Rosino and Hughey 2016). Furthermore, these findings suggest that, in as
much as Christian nationalism remains a salient political force within the United States, divisive
racial discourse will remain politically advantageous (see Whitehead and Perry 2020).
Relatedly, our finding that the association between Christian nationalism and relative
tolerance toward racists seemed to persist over time is also important in light of the current
cultural-political landscape. Relative tolerance toward racists compared to other stigmatized
groups has been declining for all Americans as racism becomes a widely demonized
characteristic. Yet between 1996 and 2014 white Americans who closely connect Christianity
and American identity were more likely to maintain their relative tolerance toward racists
compared to others, indicating that the link between Christian nationalism and willingness to
countenance racists in American civic life persists, and are diverging from other white
Americans in this regard.
Third, our finding that personal religious commitment (measured in church attendance)
inclines whites to be relatively less tolerant toward racists, and thus seemed to work in the
opposite direction of Christian nationalism, confirms the findings of recent research connecting
Christian nationalism with racism, xenophobia, and Islamophobia. For example, McDaniel et al.
(2011; see also Sherkat and Lehman 2018) found that once Christian nationalism was accounted
for, church attendance was negatively associated with animus toward immigrants. Similarly,
Perry and colleagues (Perry and Whitehead 2015a, 2015b; Perry et al. 2019) have reported that,
in models controlling for Christian nationalism, religiosity (measured with attendance, prayer
frequency, and scripture reading) is negatively associated with anti-black racism and opposition

to interracial families. And most recently, Stewart et al. (2018) found that while greater
preference for “public religious expression” was positively associated with intolerance toward
religious others and generalized intolerance, “private religiosity” (measured with attendance
along with religious salience and orthodox beliefs) predicted lower levels of intolerance. Thus,
our findings support the distinction that Stewart et al. (2018) identify between contending that
(Christian) religion should be instituted in the public square, which seems to incline Americans
toward authoritarianism, prejudice, and relative support for racists, and private religious
commitment, which may actually have a liberalizing effect, once forms of “public religious
expression” are taken into account.
Fourth, while the moderating influence of gender on the link between Christian
nationalism and relative tolerance toward racists was partly as expected, it turned up a surprise.
As hypothesized (H3), the association between Christian nationalism and relative tolerance
toward racists was stronger for men compared to women. This was unsurprising since previous
research shows that men are already more prone to authoritarianism, prejudice, and greater
tolerance toward racists and racists hate-groups (Golebiowska 1995, 1999; Tuntiya 2005). It is
also expected because media portrayals of white Christian nationalists, especially as they relate
to racism, have centered on men primarily (Perry et al. 2019). Yet when we split the sample by
gender, we were surprised that white Christian nationalist men seem to be declining in their
relative tolerance toward racists similarly to other white men. Rather it was white Christian
nationalist women whose relative tolerance toward racists showed less decline over time. While
we did not expect to identify this trend among a nationally representative sample of Americans
found within the GSS, these findings support previous analyses by researchers such as Kathleen
Blee (2002, 2005) who document growth in white women’s participation within hate groups in

the United States. Though our analyses do not control for involvement in organized racist
movements, our results may suggest that efforts by organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan,
Blood and Honor, and other white supremacy groups to package their message in a way that is
more appealing to women is bearing some fruit. Furthermore, this finding underscores the need
for greater attention of the intersection of racism, gender, and Christian nationalism among social
researchers.
Several data limitations are worth addressing. While the direction of the associations
assumed here (i.e., connecting Christian identity with American civic belonging influences
whites’ relative tolerance for racists) is more plausible than the reverse, obviously the data are
cross-sectional and thus causal direction cannot be definitively determined. Moreover, we are
unable to unpack the precise mechanisms connecting these two factors. Qualitative interviews
would help to flesh out precisely why white Americans who closely connect American and
Christian identities are more willing to extend civil liberties to racists compared to other groups.
Another limitation is the single-item measure of Christian nationalism. As previously
acknowledged, a multi-item index of Christian nationalism (e.g., Davis 2018, 2019; McDaniel et
al. 2011; Whitehead et al. 2018) would be idea to measure this construct more comprehensively.
Even so, our sample of “white Christian nationalists” compares favorably in demographic terms
to those using multi-item measures (see Supplemental Table S1), and our measure has been
fruitfully employed in numerous studies of how Americans connect their Christian and American
identities (Bonikowski and DiMaggio 2016; Byrne 2011; Shelton 2010; Straughn and Feld 2010;
Whitehead and Scheitle 2018). Thus it serves as a useful indicator of Christian nationalism here.
Finally, our analysis of relative political tolerance is limited to what we would argue is an
antiquated and pervasively unpalatable form of biologistic racism. Over the past three decades

race scholars have argued that racial stratification in the US cannot be explained solely by
individual prejudices, but rather must be discussed in terms of the structures of society which
operate under a shroud of colorblindness (Bonilla-Silva 1997, 2017; DiTomaso 2013), and more
recently organizational practices of exclusion (Ray 2019). Though we are unable to directly
observe the embedded structural or systemic consequence of Christian nationalism for the civil
liberties of racists, given the overt prejudices that have been observed among (white) Christian
nationalists toward ethno-racial minorities (McDaniel et al. 2011; Perry and Whitehead 2015a;
Perry et al. 2019; Sherkat and Lehman 2018), it is likely that our findings underestimate rather
than overestimate the connection between white Christian nationalism and tolerance for those
who hold overtly racist ideologies.
Our study’s findings help shed crucial light on Trump’s paradoxically authoritarian
stance on freedom of speech and suppressing dissenting views and his lukewarm response to
white racists―a paradox duly reflected in his outspokenly Christian-nationalist supporters. A
centerpiece of Trump’s campaign and presidency have been calls to “restore” America’s
Christian heritage and was among the chief reasons why white Americans voted for him
(Whitehead et al. 2018; see also PRRI 2017; Sides 2017). This ideological commitment is shown
to be among the strongest predictors of whites’ racist, xenophobic, and Islamophobic attitudes.
We have shown that, while white Christian nationalists are eager to restrict the civil liberties of
all stigmatized groups, they likely view racists as less of a cultural and political threat than antireligionists, communists, militarists, or homosexuals, and thus grant them relatively greater
tolerance. In other words, white Christian nationalists (Trump and many of his supporters
included) are keen to restrict the civil liberties of all out-groups; but it helps if you are a racist.

REFERENCES
Balmer, Randall. 2017. “Under Trump, Evangelicals Show Their True Racist Colors.” Los
Angeles Times. Accessed at: http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-balmerevangelical-trump-racism-20170823-story.html.
Bellah, Robert N. 1967. “Civil Religion in America.” Daedalus 96(1):1-21.
Blee, Kathleen M. 2002. Inside Organized Racism: Women in the Hate Movement. Berkley, CA:
University of California Press.
Blee, Kathleen M. 2005. “Women and Organized Racism.” Pp. 49-70 in Home-Grown Hate:
Gender and Organized Racism, edited by Abby L. Ferber. New York: Routledge.
Bobo, Lawrence and Frederick Licari. 1989. “Education and Political Tolerance: Testing the
Effects of Cognitive Sophistication and Target Group Affect.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 53:285–308.
Bonikowski, Bart, and Paul DiMaggio. 2016. “Varieties of American Popular Nationalism.”
American Sociological Review 81:949-80.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduwardo. 1997. “Rethinking Racism: Toward a Structural Interpretation.”
American Sociological Review 62(3):465-480.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2017. Racism Without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence
of Racial Inequality in America. Fifth Edition. New York: Roman & Littlefield.
Boston, Rob. 2017. “In Their Responses To Charlottesville, Trump and His Religious Right
Allies Failed a Simple Moral Test.” Americans United for Separation of Church and
State. Accessed at: https://www.au.org/blogs/wall-of-separation/in-their-responses-tocharlottesville-trump-and-his-religious-right-allies
Braunstein. Ruth. 2017. “Muslims as Outsiders, Enemies, and Others: The 2016 Presidential

Election and the Politics of Religious Exclusion.” American Journal of Cultural
Sociology 5(3):355-372
Byrne, Jennifer. 2011. “National Identity and Attitudes toward Immigrants in a ‘Multicreedal’
America.” Politics & Policy 39(4):485-414.
Davis, Joshua T. 2018. “Enforcing Christian Nationalism: Examining the Link Between Group
Identity and Punitive Attitudes in the United States.” Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion 57(2):300-317.
Davis, Joshua T. 2019. “Funding God’s Policies, Defending Whiteness: Christian Nationalism
and Whites’ Attitudes toward Racially-Coded Government Spending.” Ethnic and Racial
Studies 42(12):2123-2142.
Delehanty, Jack, Penny Edgell, and Evan Stewart. 2018. “Secularized Evangelical Discourse and
the Boundaries of National Belonging.” Social Forces. doi: 10.1093/sf/soy080
DiTomaso, Nancy. 2013. The American Non-Dilemma: Racial Inequality without Racism. New
York: Russell Sage.
Duckitt, John, and Belinda Farre. 1994. “Right-Wing Authoritarianism and Political Intolerance
among Whites in the Future Majority-Rule South Africa.” The Journal of Social
Psychology 134(6):735-741.
Edgell, Penny, and Eric Tranby. 2010. “Shared Visions? Diversity and Cultural Membership in
American Life.” Social Problems 57(2):175-204.
Edgell, Penny, Douglas Hartmann, Evan Stewart, and Joseph Gerteis. 2016. “Atheists and Other
Cultural Outsiders: Moral Boundaries and the Non-Religious in the United States.” Social
Forces 95(2):607-638.
Eisenstein, Marie A. 2006. “Rethinking the Relationship between Religion and Political

Tolerance in the U.S.” Political Behavior 28:327–48.
Eisenstein, Marie A. 2009. “Religion and Political Tolerance in the United States.” Pp. 427-450
in The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics, edited by J. L. Guth, L. A.
Kellstedt, and C. E. Smidt. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ekins, Emily. 2017. “The Five Types of Trump Voters: Who They Are and What They Believe.”
A Research Report from the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Accessed at:
file:///C:/Users/admin/Downloads/FiveTypesOfTrumpVoters_2017june19.pdf
Ellison, Christopher G., and Marc A. Musick. 1993. “Southern Intolerance: A Fundamentalist
Effect?” Social Forces 72(2):379-398.
Filsinger, Erik. 1976. “Tolerance of Non-Believers.” Review of Religious Research 17:232–40.
Froese, Paul, Christopher Bader, and Buster Smith. 2008. “Political Tolerance and God’s Wrath
in the United States.” Sociology of Religion 69(1):29-44.
Gay, David A., and Christopher G. Ellison. 1993. “Religious Subcultures and Political
Tolerance: Do Denominations Still Matter?” Review of Religious Research 34(4):311332.
Golebiowska, Ewa A. 1995. “Individual Value Priorities, Education, and Political Tolerance.”
Political Behavior 17(1):23-48.
Golebiowska, Ewa A. 1999. “Gender Gap in Political Tolerance.” Political Behavior 21(1):4366.
Gorski, Philip. 1995. “The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Bureaucracy.” American
Sociological Review 60(5):783-786.
Gorski, Philip. 2017a. American Covenant: A History of Civil Religion from the Puritans to the
Present. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gorski, Philip. 2017b. “Why Evangelicals Voted for Trump: A Critical Cultural Sociology.”
American Journal of Cultural Sociology 5(3):338-354.
Haney López, Ian F. 2014. Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented
Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hogan, Michael, Ted Chiricos, and Marc Gertz. 2005. “Economic Insecurity, Blame, and
Punitive Attitudes.” Justice Quarterly 22(3):392-412.
Hughes, Michael. 1997. “Symbolic Racism, Old-Fashioned Racism, and Whites’ Opposition to
Affirmative Action.” Pp. 45-75 in Racial Attitudes in the 1990s: Continuity and Change,
edited by Steven A. Tuch and Jack K. Martin. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Hughes, Michael, and Steven A. Tuch. 2003. “Gender Differences in Whites’ Racial Attitudes:
Are Women’s Attitudes Really More Favorable?” Social Psychology Quarterly
66(4):384-401.
Hughey, Matthew W., and Gregory S. Parks. 2014. Wrongs of the Right: Language, Race, and
the Republican Party in the Age of Obama. New York: NYU Press.
Hutchison, Marc L., and Douglas M. Gibler. 2007. “Political Tolerance and Territorial Threat: A
Cross-National Study.” The Journal of Politics 69(1):128-142.
Johnson, Jenna. 2017. “A Brief History of Donald Trump’s Mixed Messages on Freedom of
Speech.” The Washington Post. Accessed at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/abrief-history-of-donald-trumps-mixed-messages-on-freedom-ofspeech/2017/09/28/dd44160c-a3b6-11e7-ade176d061d56efa_story.html?utm_term=.761c90f2e03f.
Jones, Robert P. 2016. The End of White Christian America. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Karpov, Vyacheslav. 1999. “Political Tolerance in Poland and the United States.” Social Forces

77(4):1525-1549.
Karpov, Vyacheslav. 2002. “Religiosity and Tolerance in the United States and Poland.” Journal
for the Scientific Study of Religion 41:267–88.
Major, Brenda, Alison Blodorn, and Gregory Major Blascovich. 2018. “The Threat of Increasing
Diversity: Why Many White Americans Support Trump in the 2016 Presidential
Election.” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 21(6):931-940.
McDaniel, Eric L., Irfan Nooruddin, Allyson Faith Shortle. 2011. “Divine Boundaries: How
Religion Shapes Citizens’ Attitudes toward Immigrants.” American Politics Research
39(1):205-233.
Merino, Stephen M. 2010. “Religious Diversity in a ‘Christian Nation’: The Effects of
Theological Exclusivity and Interreligious Contact on the Acceptance of Religious
Diversity.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 49(2):231-246.
Mondak, Jeffrey J., and Mitchell S. Sanders. 2003. “Tolerance and Intolerance, 1976-1998.”
American Journal of Political Science 47(3):492-502.
Napier, Jaime L., and John T. Jost. 2008. “The ‘Antidemocratic Personality’ Revisited: A CrossNational Investigation of Working-Class Authoritarianism.” Journal of Social Issues
64(3):595-617.
Pampel, Fred C., and Lori M. Hunter. 2012. “Cohort Change, Diffusion, and Support for
Environmental Spending in the United States.” American Journal of Sociology
118(2):420-448.
Perry, Samuel L., and Andrew L. Whitehead. 2015a. “Christian Nationalism and White Racial
Boundaries: Examining Whites’ Opposition to Interracial Marriage.” Ethnic and Racial
Studies 38(10):1671-1689.

Perry, Samuel L., and Andrew L. Whitehead. 2015b. “Christian Nationalism, Racial Separatism,
and Family Formation: Attitudes toward Transracial Adoption as a Test Case.” Race and
Social Problems 7(2):123-134.
Perry, Samuel L., and Andrew L. Whitehead. 2019. “Christian America in Black and White:
Racial Identity, Religious-National Group Boundaries, and Explanations for Racial
Inequality.” Sociology of Religion 80(3):277-298.
Perry, Samuel L., Andrew L. Whitehead, and Joshua T. Davis. 2019. “God’s Country in Black
and Blue: How Christian Nationalism Shapes Americans’ Views about Police
(Mis)treatment of Blacks.” Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 5(1):130-146.
PRRI. 2017. “More Christians See America’s Days as ‘Christian Nation’ Behind Us.” Retrieved
August 8, 2017 (https://www.prri.org/spotlight/america-christian-nation-trumpinauguration/.)
Ray, Victor. 2019. “A Theory of Racialized Organizations.” American Sociological Review
84(1):26-53.
Reimer, Sam, and Jerry Z. Park. 2001. “Tolerant (In)civility? A Longitudinal Analysis of White
Conservative Protestants’ Willingness to Grant Civil Liberties.” Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion 40(4):735-745.
Rhodes, Jeremy. 2012. “The Ties That Divide: Bonding Social Capital, Religious Friendship
Networks, and Political Tolerance among Evangelicals.” Sociological Inquiry 82(2):163186.
Riesebrodt, Martin. 1993. Pious Passion: The Emergence of Modern Fundamentalism in the
United States and Iran. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Rosino, Michael L. and Matthew W. Hughey. 2016. “Who’s Invited to the (Political) Party: Race
and Party Politics in the USA.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 39(3):325-332.
Schafer, Chelsea E. and Greg M. Shaw. 2009. “Trends: Tolerance in the United
States.” Public Opinion Quarterly 73:404–31
Schaffner, Brian F., Matthew MacWilliams, and Tatishe Nteta. 2018. “Understanding White
Polarization in the 2016 Vote for President: The Sobering Role of Racism and Sexism.”
Political Science Quarterly 133(1):9-34.
Schwadel, Philip, and Christopher R. H. Garneau. 2014. “An Age-Period-Cohort Analysis of
Political Tolerance in the United States.” The Sociological Quarterly 55(2):421-452.
Schwadel, Philip, and Christopher R. H. Garneau. 2017. “The Diffusion of Tolerance: Birth
Cohort Changes in the Effects of Education and Income on Political Tolerance.”
Sociological Forum 32(4):748-769.
Schwadel, Philip, and Christopher R. H. Garneau. 2018. “Sectarian Religion and Political
Tolerance in the United States.” Sociology of Religion 80(2):168-193.
Schwadel, Philip, and Erik Johnson. 2017. “The Religious and Political Origins of Evangelical
Protestants’ Opposition to Environmental Spending.” Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion 56(1):179-198.
Shelton, Jason E. 2010. “E Pluribus Unum? How Racial, Ethnic, and Religious Group
Memberships Impact Beliefs about American National Identity.” Nationalism and Ethnic
Politics 16(1):67-91.
Sherkat, Darren E., and Derek Lehman. 2018. “Bad Samaritans: Religion and Anti-Immigrant
and Anti-Muslim Sentiment in the United States.” Social Science Quarterly 99(5):17911804.

Shortle, Allyson F., and Ronald Keith Gaddie. 2015. “Religious Nationalism and Perceptions of
Muslims and Islam.” Politics and Religion 8:435-457.
Sides, John. 2017. “Race, Religion, and Immigration in 2016: How the Debate over American
Identity Shaped the Election and What It Means for a Trump Presidency.” A Research
Report from the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Retrieved August 20, 2017.
(file:///C:/Users/admin/Downloads/RaceReligionImmigration_2017june12.pdf)
Southern Poverty Law Center. 2017. “Frequently Asked Questions about Hate Groups.” October,
4. https://www.splcenter.org/20171004/frequently-asked-questions-about-hategroups#hate%20group. Retrieved July 24, 2019.
Stewart, Evan. 2018. “Public Religion and the Vote for Donald Trump: Evidence from Panel
Data.” Paper Presented at the American Sociological Association Annual Conference in
Philadelphia, PA.
Stewart, Evan, Penny Edgell, and Jack Delehanty. 2018. “The Politics of Religious Prejudice and
Tolerance for Cultural Others.” The Sociological Quarterly 59(1):17-39.
Straughn, Jeremy Brooke, and Scott L. Feld. 2010. “America as a ‘Christian Nation’?
Understanding Religious Boundaries of National Identity in the United States.” Sociology
of Religion 71(3):280-306.
Stouffer, Samuel A. 1955. Communism, Conformity, and Civil Liberties: A Cross-Section of the
Nation Speaks its Mind. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Sullivan, John L., George E. Marcus, Stanley Feldman, and James E. Piereson. 1981. “The
Sources of Political Tolerance: A Multivariate Analysis.” American Political Science
Review 75(1):92-106.
Sullivan, John L., James Piereson, and George E. Marcus. 1982. Political Tolerance and

American Democracy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Sullivan, John L., and J. E. Transue. 1999. “The Psychological Underpinnings of Democracy: A
Selective Review of Research on Political Tolerance, Interpersonal Trust, and Social
Capital.” Annual Review of Psychology 50:625-650.
Tuntiya, Nana. 2005. “Fundamentalist Religious Affiliation and Support for Civil Liberties: A
Critical Reexamination.” Sociological Inquiry 75(2):153-176.
Whitehead, Andrew L., and Samuel L. Perry. 2015. “A More Perfect Union? Christian
Nationalism and Support for Same-Sex Unions.” Sociological Perspectives 58:422-440.
Whitehead, Andrew L., and Samuel L. Perry. 2020. Taking America Back for God: Christian
Nationalism in the United States. New York: Oxford University Press.
Whitehead, Andrew L., Samuel L. Perry, and Joseph O. Baker. 2018. “Make America Christian
Again: Christian Nationalism and Voting for Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential
Election.” Sociology of Religion 79(2):147-171.
Whitehead, Andrew L., and Christopher P. Scheitle. 2017. “We the (Christian) People:
Christianity and American Identity from 1996 to 2014.” Social Currents 5(2):157-172.
Wilson, Thomas C. 2001. “Americans’ Views on Immigration Policy: Testing the role of
Threatened Group Interests.” Sociological Perspectives 44(4):485-501.

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Christian Nationalism

Variable
Relative Tolerance
toward Racists
Evangelical
Mainline Protestant
Catholic
Jewish
Other Faith
Religiously
Unaffiliated
Biblical Literalist
Religious Service
Attendance
Political Views
Republican
Independent
Democrat
Married
No Longer Married
Never Married
Children
Bachelor's Degree
or More
Low Income

Range or Description
1= Greater Relative Tolerance
toward Racists
Contrast
1= Mainline Protestant
1= Catholic
1= Jewish
1= Other Faith
1= Religiously Unaffiliated

White Christian
Nationalista
Mean or
(SD)
%
30.90***

Other White
Americans
Mean or (SD)
%
15.79

45.14***
20.14
26.04
0.00*
2.78*
2.78***

18.84
17.59
26.18
2.08
6.09
24.24

1= Biblical Literalist
0 (Never)-8(More than once per
week)
1 (Extremely Liberal)-8(Extremely
Conservative
Contrast
1= Independent or Other Party
1= Democrat
Contrast
1= Separated, Widowed, or
Divorced
1= Never Married
0-8 (or more)
1= At least 16 years Education

35.76***
4.77***

(2.63)

10.80
2.63

(2.53)

4.59***

(1.32)

3.94

(1.43)

1= Less than $25,000 annual
Family Income
1= Southern
18-89 (or older)
1=Male
0 (1996)-1(2014)

33.68***

38.89***
34.03**
26.74
56.60*
31.94**
11.46***
2.27***
19.10***

26.18
45.01
28.39
49.03
23.96

(1.58)

26.87
1.46
42.11

(1.47)

22.44

Southern
45.14***
25.07
Age
54.60*** (16.75)
43.86
(15.69)
Male
39.93***
53.32
Year
44.79**
54.16
N
288
722
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014, n=1,010
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, $25,000 or more family income, non-southern, and
female as contrast categories.
a
White respondents who affirm that being a Christian is “very important” to being truly American.
Asterisks indicate that White Christian Nationalists are significantly different from Other White
Americans at the following levels: * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 (two-tailed tests).

Table 2: Ordered Logistic Regression Predicting Whites’ Political Tolerance toward Stigmatized Groups.
Racist Speech
Militarist Speech Atheist Speech
Communist Speech Homosexual Speech
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE





Christian Nationalism
-0.173*** (.16)
-0.245*** (.16)
-0.213*** (.16)
-0.239***
(.16)
-0.214*** (.19)
Mainline
0.030
(.18)
0.015
(.19)
0.046
(.20)
0.045
(.20)
0.078†
(.24)
Catholic
0.033
(.16)
0.003
(.18)
-0.021
(.18)
-0.040
(.18)
0.017
(.21)
Jewish
-0.020
(.50)
-0.019
(.55)
0.018
(.68)
-0.024
(.58)
-0.057
(.66)
Other Faith
0.044
(.30)
0.013
(.32)
0.085*
(.38)
0.044
(.32)
0.071
(.46)
Religiously Unaffiliated
0.064
(.21)
0.109*
(.24)
0.112*
(.26)
0.119**
(.24)
0.073
(.31)
Biblical Literalist
-0.085*
(.17)
-0.046
(.18)
-0.092**
(.18)
-0.099**
(.18)
-0.116**
(.20)
Service Attendance
-0.042
(.03)
0.015
(.03)
-0.051
(.03)
0.005
(.03)
-0.046
(.03)
Political Views
-0.019
(.05)
-0.063†
(.05)
-0.056
(.06)
-0.056
(.06)
-0.065
(.07)
Independent
0.005
(.15)
0.014
(.17)
-0.020
(.17)
0.030
(.16)
-0.047
(.20)
Democrat
-0.091*
(.18)
-0.083*
(.19)
-0.086*
(.20)
-0.012
(.19)
0.027
(.24)
No Longer Married
-0.006
(.15)
0.006
(.16)
0.048
(.17)
-0.003
(.17)
0.005
(.20)
Never Married
-0.048
(.18)
-0.001
(.20)
0.010
(.21)
0.030
(.21)
0.074
(.27)
Children
-0.064†
(.05)
-0.018
(.05)
-0.038
(.05)
-0.004
(.05)
-0.034
(.06)
Bachelor's Degree or More
0.098** (.14)
0.168*** (.15)
0.206*** (.17)
0.238***
(.16)
0.232*** (.22)
Low Income
-0.034
(.15)
-0.076*
(.16)
-0.076*
(.17)
-0.088**
(.16)
-0.130*** (.20)
Southern
-0.002
(.13)
0.012
(.14)
-0.039
(.15)
-0.003
(.15)
-0.059†
(.17)
†
Age
0.042
(.00)
-0.143*** (.00)
-0.118**
(.00)
-0.071
(.00)
-0.074†
(.01)
Male
0.025
(.12)
-0.051
(.13)
-0.007
(.14)
0.014
(.14)
-0.120**
(.17)
Year
-0.033
(.13)
0.145*** (.14)
0.120*** (.15)
0.066†
(.15)
0.226*** (.18)
Cragg & Uhler’s R2
0.11
0.25
0.28
0.28
0.31
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014, n=1,010
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, 25,000 or more family income, non-southern, and female as contrast categories.
†
p<.10; * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

Table 3. Logistic Regression Results of Whites’ Relative Tolerance toward Racists.

0.212

Model 1
OR
2.385***

Model 2
OR

0.207
2.391***
-0.074
0.694
0.003
1.012
-0.019
0.741
0.010
1.093
-0.119
0.558*
0.030
1.159
-0.124
0.918**

Model 3
OR

0.175
2.110***
-0.067
0.718
0.027
1.124
0.000
1.003
0.024
1.234
-0.098
0.614
0.007
1.036
-0.108
0.927*
0.030
1.041
-0.007
0.974
-0.038
0.850
-0.024
0.901
-0.074
0.711
-0.009
0.989
-0.081
0.722
0.098
1.540*
0.009
1.038
0.016
1.002
0.050
1.213
-0.130
0.607**

Model 4
OR

0.084
1.434
-0.063
0.730
0.028
1.130
0.003
1.051
0.018
1.170
-0.087
0.648
0.004
1.021
-0.108
0.927*
0.030
1.041
-0.009
0.965
-0.047
0.816
-0.022
0.908
-0.071
0.720
-0.009
0.989
-0.082
0.720
0.096
1.527*
0.007
1.030
0.016
1.002
-0.036
0.871
-0.129
0.608**
0.139
2.324*

Christian Nationalism
Mainline
Catholic
Jewish
Other Faith
Religiously Unaffiliated
Biblical Literalist
Service Attendance
Political Views
Independent
Democrat
No Longer Married
Never Married
Parent
Bachelor’s Degree or More
Low Income
Southern
Age
Male
Year
-0.156
0.553***
Male*Christian Nationalism
Year*Christian Nationalism
Constant
0.188***
0.370***
0.279*
0.332*
Cragg & Uhler’s R2
0.04
0.08
0.10
0.11
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014, n=1,010
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, 25,000 or more family income, non-southern, and female as contrast categories.
†
p<.10; * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

Model 5
OR

0.065
1.326
-0.070
0.703
0.021
1.100
0.005
1.083
0.023
1.223
-0.086
0.647
-0.013
0.937
-0.098
0.932*
0.039
1.055
-0.002
0.991
-0.030
0.878
-0.026
0.891
-0.073
0.711
-0.007
0.991
-0.081
0.718†
0.095
1.532*
0.007
1.029
0.018
1.002
0.050
1.217
-0.240
0.391***
0.193

3.106**
0.305*
0.11

Table 4: Logistic Regression of Whites’ Relative Tolerance toward Racists by Gender.
Female

0.129
-0.050
0.008
0.018
-0.021
-0.129
-0.061
-0.206
-0.005
-0.041
-0.159
-0.131
-0.187
-0.034
-0.072
0.173
-0.076
0.043
-0.041

Model1
OR
1.704†
0.781
1.038
1.395
0.845
0.482
0.741
0.865**
0.992
0.851
0.510†
0.573†
0.397*
0.958
0.746
2.077*
0.726
1.005
0.853

Male
Model 2
OR

-0.060
0.774
-0.067
0.711
-0.007
0.969
0.013
1.270
-0.027
0.799
-0.121
0.492
-0.089
0.636
-0.198
0.867**
0.017
1.025
-0.029
0.890
-0.142
0.536†
-0.138
0.547†
-0.197
0.366*
-0.046
0.942
-0.070
0.746
0.171
2.108*
-0.089
0.680
0.075
1.009
-0.219
0.413**
0.314
5.846***
0.681
510
0.14

Model 3
OR

0.201
2.614**
-0.097
0.596
0.015
1.068
-0.001
0.983
0.031
1.389
-0.059
0.754
0.072
1.479
-0.007
0.995
0.066
1.092
0.032
1.136
0.072
1.397
0.055
1.304
0.049
1.252
0.018
1.023
-0.065
0.762
0.056
1.323
0.068
1.344
0.003
1.000
-0.224
0.406**


0.157
-0.094
0.016
0.004
0.030
-0.050
0.059
-0.002
0.068
0.032
0.072
0.052
0.051
0.025
-0.065
0.055
0.067
-0.005
-0.268
0.084

Model 4
OR
2.130*
0.603
1.076
1.054
1.377
0.787
1.384
0.998
1.095
1.141
1.395
1.287
1.265
1.033
0.758
1.317
1.345
0.999
0.337**
1.745
0.153
500
0.17

Christian Nationalism
Mainline
Catholic
Jewish
Other Faith
Religiously Unaffiliated
Biblical Literalist
Service Attendance
Political Views
Independent
Democrat
No Longer Married
Never Married
Parent
Bachelor's Degree or More
Low Income
Southern
Age
Year
Year*Christian Nationalist
Constant
0.628
0.142
N
510
500
Cragg & Uhler's R2
0.11
0.17
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, 25,000 or more family income, non-southern, and female as contrast categories.
†
p<.10; * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

APPENDIX
Table 1A. OLS Regression of Whites' Relative Tolerance toward Racists.
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
b
SE
b
SE
b
SE



Christian Nationalism
0.092
0.029*
(.01)
0.001
0.000
(.02)
0.062
0.019
(.02)
Mainline
-0.015
-0.015
(.04)
-0.013
-0.012
(.04)
-0.016
-0.015
(.04)
Catholic
0.020
0.018
(.03)
0.022
0.019
(.03)
0.019
0.016
(.03)
Jewish
-0.014
-0.044
(.10)
-0.012
-0.038
(.10)
-0.014
-0.043
(.10)
Other Faith
-0.004
-0.007
(.06)
-0.009
-0.015
(.06)
-0.004
-0.007
(.06)
Religiously Unaffiliated
-0.001
-0.001
(.04)
0.008
0.008
(.04)
0.000
0.000
(.04)
Biblical Literalist
-0.013
-0.013
(.03)
-0.013
-0.013
(.03)
-0.018
-0.018
(.03)
Service Attendance
-0.029
-0.004
(.01)
-0.027
-0.004
(.01)
-0.028
-0.004
(.01)
Political Views
0.003
0.001
(.01)
-0.001
0.000
(.01)
0.004
0.001
(.01)
Independent
-0.028
-0.022
(.03)
-0.029
-0.022
(.03)
-0.028
-0.021
(.03)
†
†
Democrat
-0.069
-0.059
(.04)
-0.077
-0.065
(.04)
-0.068
-0.058
(.04)
No Longer Married
0.030
0.026
(.03)
0.032
0.028
(.03)
0.029
0.025
(.03)
Never Married
-0.053
-0.049
(.04)
-0.051
-0.047
(.04)
-0.053
-0.048
(.04)
Children
-0.031
-0.008
(.01)
-0.031
-0.008
(.01)
-0.031
-0.008
(.01)
Bachelor’s Degree or More
-0.034
-0.027
(.03)
-0.035
-0.028
(.03)
-0.034
-0.027
(.03)
Low Income
0.076
0.066*
(.03)
0.078
0.068*
(.03)
0.076
0.066*
(.03)
Southern
0.000
0.000
(.03)
0.000
0.000
(.03)
-0.001
-0.001
(.03)
Age
0.136
0.003*** (.00)
0.134
0.003*** (.00)
0.136
0.003*** (.00)
Male
0.091
0.069**
(.02)
-0.104
-0.079
(.05)
0.091
0.070**
(.02)
Year
-0.117
-0.089**
(.03)
-0.113
-0.086**
(.03)
-0.178
-0.136*
(.05)
Male*Christian Nationalist
0.228
0.063**
(.02)
Year*Christian Nationalist
0.070
0.020
(.02)
Constant
0.746*** (.08)
0.821*** (.08)
0.768*** (.08)
R2
0.08
0.09
0.08
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014, n=1,010
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, 25,000 or more family income, non-southern, and female as contrast categories.
†
p<.10; * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

Table 2A. Logistic Regression of Whites' Relative Tolerance toward Racists with FourValue Measure of Christian Nationalism.
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
OR
OR
OR



Christian Nationalism
0.250
1.490***
0.153
1.277*
0.132 1.240*
Mainline
-0.065
0.723
-0.062
0.731
-0.066 0.713
Catholic
0.031
1.146
0.032
1.153
0.024 1.114
Jewish
0.013
1.227
0.015
1.275
0.016 1.300
Other Faith
0.043
1.458
0.036
1.369
0.041 1.440
Religiously Unaffiliated
-0.060
0.738
-0.050
0.776
-0.053 0.761
Biblical Literalist
-0.006
0.972
-0.005
0.973
-0.025 0.878
Service Attendance
-0.117
0.921*
-0.116
0.921*
-0.109 0.924*
Political Views
0.021
1.028
0.019
1.026
0.029 1.041
Independent
0.000
0.999
-0.003
0.988
0.001 1.003
Democrat
-0.034
0.864
-0.043
0.829
-0.027 0.886
No Longer Married
-0.025
0.897
-0.022
0.906
-0.026 0.890
Never Married
-0.072
0.715
-0.068
0.727
-0.070 0.717
Children
-0.014
0.983
-0.014
0.983
-0.012 0.984
Bachelor's Degree or More
-0.060
0.783
-0.061
0.779
-0.059 0.782
Low Income
0.092
1.503*
0.092
1.505*
0.087 1.489*
Southern
-0.001
0.995
-0.002
0.993
-0.003 0.986
Age
0.010
1.001
0.009
1.001
0.008 1.001
Male
0.054
1.231
-0.174
0.507
0.055 1.242
Year
-0.121
0.625**
-0.120
0.627*
-0.430 0.181***
Male*Christian Nationalist
0.231
1.383*
Year*Christian Nationalist
0.325 1.581**
Constant
0.135***
0.212**
0.213**
Cragg & Uhler's R2
0.11
0.11
0.12
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014, n=1,010
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, 25,000 or more family income, non-southern,
and female as contrast categories.
†
p<.10; * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

Table 3A. Logistic Regression Results of Whites’ Relative Tolerance toward Racists by Gender with Four-Value Measure
of Christian Nationalism.
Female
Male
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
OR
OR
OR
OR




Christian Nationalism
0.202
1.377*
0.033
1.639
0.281
1.625***
0.212
1.451*
Mainline
-0.046
0.796
-0.052
0.494
-0.095
0.600
-0.092
0.601
Catholic
0.010
1.048
-0.001
0.924
0.023
1.113
0.021
1.101
Jewish
0.029
1.692
0.025
1.023
0.012
1.205
0.015
1.261
Other Faith
-0.003
0.976
-0.008
1.611
0.052
1.737
0.050
1.721
Religiously Unaffiliated
-0.097
0.574
-0.094
0.789
-0.015
0.931
-0.009
0.957
Biblical Literalist
-0.077
0.682
-0.103
1.420
0.062
1.404
0.045
1.288
Service Attendance
-0.215
0.859**
-0.210
0.761**
-0.020
0.985
-0.016
0.988
Political Views
-0.010
0.986
0.001
0.988
0.046
1.065
0.050
1.072
Independent
-0.029
0.892
-0.027
1.066
0.028
1.123
0.028
1.124
Democrat
-0.148
0.532†
-0.142
1.092†
0.064
1.349
0.066
1.368
No Longer Married
-0.134
0.565†
-0.132
1.321†
0.056
1.314
0.050
1.284
Never Married
-0.189
0.390*
-0.197
1.346*
0.049
1.255
0.053
1.286
Parent
-0.036
0.955
-0.044
1.261
0.012
1.015
0.019
1.026
Bachelor's Degree or More
-0.055
0.799
-0.057
1.010
-0.041
0.839
-0.039
0.843
Low Income
0.162
1.992*
0.161
0.833*
0.056
1.324
0.051
1.296
Southern
-0.088
0.690
-0.093
1.328
0.061
1.308
0.057
1.290
Age
0.036
1.004
0.048
1.330
-0.006
0.999
-0.013
0.998
Year
-0.032
0.881
-0.445
0.999**
-0.213
0.420**
-0.403
0.188**
Year*Christian Nationalist
0.451
0.418**
0.198
1.360
Constant
0.344
0.077
0.065***
0.088**
N
510
510
500
500
Cragg & Uhler's R2
0.12
0.14
0.18
0.19
Source: GSS 1996 & 2014
Evangelical, Republican, less than bachelor’s degree, 25,000 or more family income, non-southern, and female as contrast
categories.
†
p<.10; * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001

SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE FOR REVIEW
Table S1: Comparison between 1996 and 2014 General Social Survey and 2017 Baylor Religion Survey on Measures of
Christian Nationalism
Being a Christian “Very Important”
> 1 Standard Deviation above the mean
to Being Truly American
on 24-point Christian Nationalism Scale
(1996, 2014 General Social Survey)
(2017 Baylor Religion Survey)
Variable
Mean or %
Mean or %
Evangelical
45.14
63.1
Mainline Protestant
20.14
13.0
Catholic
26.04
18.0
Jewish
0.00
3.8
Other Faith
2.78
3.2
Unaffiliated
2.78
2.9
Biblical Literalist
35.76
52.0
Religious Service Attendance (higher values =
4.77 (0-8 range)
4.9 (0-7 range)
higher attendance)
Political Ideology (higher values = more
4.59 (1-8 range)
5.65 (1-7 range)
conservative)
Republican
38.89
68.01
Independent
34.03
23.01
Democrat
26.74
8.97
Married
56.60
54.92
Bachelor's Degree or More
19.10
16.71
Southern
45.14
49.0
Age
54.60 (18-89+)
56.19 (18-98)
Male
39.93
50.28

