Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.7

Pp.78- 85

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development: A Framework
Boumediène BENRABAH
Department of English
Faculty of Letters and Foreign Languages
Abou Bekr Belkaïd University
Tlemcen, Algeria

Abstract
The global aim of the present research paper is an attempt to reach a threshold level of the learning
of a foreign language (English) through the development of vocabulary. Observing the very limited
rate of use of English in the Algerian community, English as Foreign Language (EFL) students,
actually, need to progress in the mastery of that language by reading and/or listening to texts or
messages intensively. To achieve this goal, subsequent procedures should take place by giving the
foreign language a rather more appreciable position in the community such as the one held by a
second language. To be down-to-earth, a brief survey on the linguistic situation in Algeria is
exposed where neat clarification of second-foreign language status in the community is laid out to
show that the more a (foreign) language is explicitly exposed in its manifold forms, the more are
learners, in that community, likely to acquire it as a second language. However, the assumption of
presenting the receptive skills (reading and listening) as the most appropriate means for the growth
of foreign language vocabulary is supported by Krashen’s input theory where any input to be
understood, should come at EFL learners’ capacity to read/listen and decode easily the meaning.
In due course, First year EFL students have been subject to a language proficiency test-‘a pre-test
then a post-test’. This typical experimental design is an intervention study which contains two
groups: ‘the treatment or experimental’ group which receives the treatment, or which is exposed
to some special conditions of intensifying vocabulary learning through a varied, comprehensible
input; and a second group of EFL learners- the control group- whose role is to provide a baseline.
The findings showed better scores among the experimental group compared to the other group.
Actually, the results proved the adequacy of the adopted theory.
Keywords: Comprehensible input, discourse comprehension, language proficiency receptive
skills, vocabulary development
Cite as: BENRABAH, B. (2019) Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development: A
Framework. Arab World English Journal, May 2019 Chlef University International Conference
Proceedings. 78-85. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chef1.7

78

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

Introduction
The importance of vocabulary in language acquisition goes uncontested. It is evident that
vocabulary is indispensable for successful communication in any language. However, the
encroachment towards recognizing the importance of lexical competence within second and /or
foreign language learning has gained sound interest. In this research study, a distinction between
second and foreign language acquisition is made and, unmistakably, we will not go into that
particular terminology discussion. Therefore, in due occasion, the discrepancy will be displayed
to refer to the status of each term according to the target community as shown in (2.3.). Thus,
gradually, Foreign Language Acquisition (henceforth, FLA) researchers have come to attest the
central, or even, pre-conditional role of the lexical dimension for fluent language use and usage.
In the same line of thought, Ellis (1997) has exposed the idea that vocabulary knowledge is
indispensable to acquire grammar. That is to say, knowing the words in a text allows learners to
understand the discourse, which in turn allows the grammatical patterning to become more
transparent. In this sense too, Nation (2001) underlines the critical importance of developing an
adequate lexical approach since learners’ skills in using the language are heavily dependent on the
number of words they know, particularly in the early stages of learning a foreign language. He
states that a systematic, principled approach to vocabulary development results in better language
learning. It is de facto that developing lexical competence in the target language is now seen as the
crucial factor in language acquisition and there is general agreement that there is a threshold
vocabulary level below which learners are likely to struggle to decode the input they receive
(Alderson & Banerjee 2002).
Principles of the Research
Many language specialists, such as: Krashen (1993) and Nation (2001) have analyzed, almost
exclusively, productive language, where both ends of communication channels are studied as
emitters rather than as recipients. Recent research, however, recognize that the mastery of a
particular language involves mastery of a receptive as well as a productive repertoire. This trend
acknowledges the fact that the two repertoires should, therefore, be established through
respectively receptive, then productive adequate methods. Conversely, teachers’ view about
learners’ attitudes towards English learning in our (middle and secondary) schools has changed
greatly. The teachers’ view was based on the evidence of pupils’ repeated unsatisfactory results in
written and spoken form of the English language. Recently, however, EFL learners, themselves,
have had positive attitudes towards the learning of English since in their eyes English is an
important subject matter in the curriculum accentuated by many facts. Firstly, English has been
assigned a coefficient of two (2), three (3) and five (5) respectively for ‘scientific streams’,
‘literature and philosophy stream’ and ‘foreign languages stream’ in the secondary school
education. Consequently, some improvements in the ‘Baccalaureate exam’ have been noticed
showing in a way the impact of high coefficient assignment. Secondly, the new coefficient
assignment created more motivation in the learners who are, now, paying for private courses to
improve their level for better grades in the ‘baccalaureate exam’. This new impetus has, naturally,
generated more academic interest for English.
For this purpose, the motivated generation of EFL learners needs to be oriented towards
developing further sessions of reading and listening as an essential source of input. Therefore, a
structured, rich and comprehensible input from the beginning of first-year university level should
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

79

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

be directed to EFL learners so as to help them develop enough rich vocabulary to reach
comprehension of both written and oral scripts. Linguistically speaking, it is crystal clear that
difficult texts do not encourage students to listen and read and may, even, develop frustration and
demotivation. Therefore, in order to develop learners’ motivation and interest, it is essential for
the contents (topics), structure (layout) and basic vocabulary (meaning) to be at the reach of
listeners and readers. In like manner, vocabulary acquisition constitutes a key component to
successfully develop comprehension, communication and literacy skills. Nevertheless, developing
vocabulary is a top priority and an on-going challenge. Actually, once at the university setting,
students are exposed to a great amount of vocabulary in a myriad of subject areas. Yet, due to the
intense focus on content, two (2) types of vocabulary are dealt with in the different modules within
the set programme. These are, first, a general vocabulary used mainly for communicative purposes
and representing basic language skills, such as: reading and listening comprehension, oral and
written production. Second, a special vocabulary representing a linguistic jargon related to the
modules of phonetics, linguistics, literature and civilization. The interaction of EFL learners with
diverse and huge amounts of vocabulary is rendered difficult if not impossible facing new contents
with unfamiliar vocabulary. The difficulty is felt in the lack of receptive vocabulary which hinders
comprehension. Consequently, what is needed, in fact, is to develop students’ receptive vocabulary
to enable them understand when listening to oral language or when reading texts.
The experimental design of the second tool of research- the proficiency language test- is
portrayed through an original methodological idea based on comparing results of two groups of
EFL learners. One group will receive a special treatment: ‘the treatment variable’ (Johnson &
Christensen, 2004). Accordingly, this typical experimental design is an intervention study
containing two groups: ‘the treatment or experimental’ group which receives the treatment or
which is exposed to some special conditions of intensifying vocabulary learning through a varied,
comprehensible input; and a second group of EFL learners- the control group- whose role is to
provide a baseline. In due course, the two groups are seemingly comparable to each other before
the treatment is applied. The undertaken procedure is as follows:
-

-

-

First, Krashen’s Input Hypothesis (1993) is put on the check-scale to supply the main
attribute of the treatment during the treatment period. Some elements are then depicted to
provide evidence for the usefulness and validity of the adopted theory.
Second, the aim of the study is clearly showing the rationale behind such endeavour to gain
proficiency in the foreign language by acquiring sufficient vocabulary for comprehension
first. The objective is represented through a set of methodological procedures, and mainly
a triangulation use of tools of research procedure.
Then, language proficiency tests represent the major analytic measurement of
comprehension among the two groups of learners.

Aim of the Study
Having presented Krashen’s theory (1993), and, given that the English language enrolls the status
of a foreign language, the researcher wants to make clear evidence that the intended goals behind
the teaching of English at University level in Algeria may or could reach a threshold level of
proficiency only if sufficient, varied and comprehensible input is administered to our EFL learners
so as they could keep up with without frustration. In the same vein, Krashen’s Input Hypothesis
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

80

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

stipulates that it is possible to acquire a language and develop its vocabulary learning when there
is enough comprehensible and varied input available regardless to the amount of output that may
come out lately. The study is designed to achieve this purpose.
The testees (exclusively, the experimental group) received intense, varied and
comprehensible input. That special treatment is meant to make a diagnosis about whether that
procedure would lead to any progress in the EFL students’ proficiency in the foreign language
being acquired.
The established decision about the learners’ progress is set over a period of study
approximating six weeks using several criteria for decoding the message of a text, be it written or
spoken These criteria are related to vocabulary learning strategies (VLS) taught to EFL learners in
the ‘Meanwhile period’ to overcome the burden of comprehending the lexis contained in those
texts supposed to bring a degree of difficulty at the reach of first year EFL learners’ level of
comprehension. To get a more plastic picture of the situation, learners are allowed to make use of
different sources helping them analyse, decode and understand the difficult and unfamiliar lexical
items. Referencing, inferencing, using contextual clues, making use of their linguistic and world
knowledge and guessing are all criteria at the hand of learners (readers and listeners) to achieve
an overall understanding of the whole text regardless to tiny and small unrelated vocabulary that
may hinder their process of understanding. This included a set of tasks they were able to
accomplish successfully at the end of the study but that had been somehow problematic issues at
the beginning. A major factor was also their perceptions about what they could actually do using
the language and their confidence to approach new tasks with unknown lexis. Self-reports were
used and established how they understood the texts and if they felt there was any progress in their
comprehension of the works. Finally, a more objective tool was employed: comparing the scores
EFL learners achieved in the pre-test (preliminary English language Proficiency Test) and the
scores obtained, in the course of this study, in the post-test.
Research Tools (Triangulation)
A range of methods are used for collecting data in the present study. It is meant to make use of a
combination of dissimilar methods to study the same unit. The reason behind this strategy is as
follows:
The flaws of one method are often strengths of another, and by combining methods, observers
can achieve the best of each, while overcoming their unique deficiencies (Denzin, 1970, as quoted
in Merriam 1988, p. 69)
Interviews
The first instrument for gathering information was conducted with the teachers in charge of the
receptive skills teaching: reading and listening. This is intended to elicit the ways, techniques and
procedures undertaken in the process of providing input in the form of written scripts (reading) or
oral/verbal messages (listening) be it a text or a dialogue of authentic or sometimes concocted
English.
Interviews are one of the most important sources of case study information (Dorney, 2007).
Unlike surveys, interviews are guided conversations rather than structured queries (Yin, 2003, p.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

81

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

89). For the researcher, it is inescapable to both acts: following the line of enquiry and asking the
actual questions in a biased manner. What is more crucial for the tool validity is not forcing the
interviewees to adopt a particular position and most importantly maintain a friendly and nonthreatening environment. The type of questions used was mainly open-ended questions rather than
those requiring straight forward yes/no answers. The interviews have had a conversational format
and the questions were aimed at reaching both objective facts and teacher’s subjective opinions.
Primarily, the interviews were used to elicit teachers’ views and reactions to the situations
of the teaching and learning of the receptive skills. This offered subjective insights as far as their
perceptions and practices are concerned. The interviews were recorded with the assent of the
interviewees. The recording could help go back to a particular piece of information that emerged
in the interview to reconsider it for its relevance to a peculiar analysis. The recording technique
could only help to restore any piece of information needed though interviews are known to be
verbal and subject to bias and attrition. In fact, this was not a major problem since it was not the
only method used and other data were supplemented from other sources as well.
T-tests or Language Proficiency Tests
The second tool of investigation was rather more pertinent since it analyzed the teaching situation
before and after the provision of the proposed strategy. The latter provided alternatives to the usual
and habitual way of exposing input through reading texts and listening to passages. Thus, a Pretest in language proficiency and vocabulary retrieval was set to evaluate both control and
experimental groups. This preliminary language test was administered to 1st year EFL learners
which constituted a random sample of learners so as to avoid selection and biased interpretation
of the results. The test was set to reveal learners aptitudes to understand input contained in reading
and listening passages via a potential control and mastery of lexical items. The method of testing
was driven through simple texts where the main instruction versed into vocabulary retrieval to
reach comprehension. Equal and similar questions and tasks were directed to both groups in terms
of length, degree of difficulty and input diversity. Besides, the second T-test was still a language
proficiency test piloted after 6 weeks of interval. During that (interval) period, the experimental
group was, in a way, privileged, i.e., learners of that group were exposed to a multiple set of texts
representing a variety of contexts and following the proposed framework. The principle of the
treatment is stressed by the fact that language is understood only when it is comprehensible and
that we may be able to overcome language quandary about certain structures and vocabulary that
we have not acquired before only through rich contexts. Logically, contexts should be varied so as
to reach proficiency in language which can lead easily learners to move from their current level of
competence to more complicated tasks. In other terms, if the input is comprehensible, varied and
sufficient, learners will progress automatically and go beyond their initial level of understanding.
This could be reached if only they are sufficiently exposed to a variety of contexts representing
input a little bit beyond their initial level of understanding where they can use contextual clues,
linguistic knowledge, extra-linguistic and world knowledge information. To concretise the
proposed hypothesis, the experimental group was instructed, during the 6 week-period, to deal
with a great deal of comprehensible input via free voluntary, guided readings and listening. It was
purposefully conducted to provide the experimental group of learners with enough input, still in
respect to comprehensibility first. Indisputably, according to Krashen (1993), these learners will
amplify their literacy and language proficiency. They may, accordingly, reach a level beyond the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

82

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

level they attained before being sufficiently exposed to such rich, varied and comprehensible input.
Then, the Pre-test results should, convincingly, prove the attested ability of the experimental group
to deal better with text comprehension if compared to the other control group. For assertion, a
questionnaire is administered to those learners receiving more attention in that particular
experiment to certify their progress or simply negate.
Questionnaire /Self-reports
A Third tool of investigation was set at the end of the investigation to confirm or infirm the utility
of adopting Krashen’s Input Hypothesis (1993) with our EFL learners. Knowing that English
embodies the status of a foreign language in Algeria, the rationale behind implementing the
proposed hypothesis is to generate instances of exposure to the target language through a rich input
which is comprehensible or at least a little bit beyond our learners’ capacity of understanding; and
properly advised, it should be varied so as different occasions of meeting lexical items are
repeatedly given to the learners. According to Dorney (2007), a period of six weeks was acclaimed
to fulfill and adopt the proposed programme of language exposure. The questionnaire stipulated
from the experimental group of EFL learners to report their own experience with the new injected
programme they went through and to reveal possible changes in their language proficiency
compared to a 6 week- period before. The types of questions were semi-guided ones where
sometimes just a yes/no answer could suffice. Other times, respondents were given an MCQ
alternative to choose between different proposed answers. In sum, the objective behind is
methodologically significant. It serves as a measurement tool to diagnose the efficiency of the
approach carried out during the period of treatment.
The subjects were pedagogically observed on a number of occasions to be able to judge
their level of proficiency in English before and after the experiment. These self-reports were
especially important for revealing information about EFL learners’ past experience with English,
and at the end, they were asked to self-evaluate the progress they made in comprehending English
texts afterwards.
The subjects’ self-reports were friendly conducted to retrieve some retrospective accounts
of what kind of experience they had with English prior to the beginning of this study. Finally, the
achieved results in language tests were analyzed to get objective, comparable data on the progress
they made.
As for motivation to learn English, it seems that the instrumental motivation played a
prominent part as they wanted to improve their English mainly in order to be able to read academic
books related to the areas of their interest and be able to communicate orally in English once
confronted to such situations.
It is also important to include information about the subjects ‘experience with English
before they arrived to University, as it provides useful insights into their level of proficiency prior
to the study. The formal English instruction that they received as part of their education within the
state system (Middle and Secondary school education) constitute the main attribute influencing
their proficiency in English. Adding to that, contact with English outside the formal classes, though
very limited, also helps increasing interest, motivation and learning engagement through different
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

83

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

means of communication as TV shows, documentaries, movies, Radio Broadcast (BBC and the
like) and the ICT’s diverse uses, such as: facebook, twitter, YouTube and others.
Concerning formal instruction, the majority of 1st year EFL learners stated the fact of
learning English at the age of 12 years old as part of compulsory language classes in the first grade
of Middle school education. Generally, the English language classes were held three times a week
in the form of one-hour session. What was really missing, however, is training in the listening skill
beyond and within the official exams. Moreover, there was not enough variety of comprehensible
input, in the form of graded reading materials or simple listening passages. At university level, the
new students, for the first time, were exposed to a rather consistent programme, along with a focus
on more advanced aspects of grammar, linguistics, phonetics and additional elements of the
language related to literature and civilization.
Respondents’ feedback is a strategy where learners themselves are involved in commenting
on the conclusion of the study. Here, they can express their views in what is called a ‘validation
interview’ (Holliday, 2004). Therefore, if there is agreement between the researcher and the
participants, the study’s validity is indeed reinforced. Also, respondents’ validation can also
enhance generalizability.
The task of applying such a framework is not easy doing. However, time and efforts should
be deployed by teachers collaboratively to initiate their learners into an ongoing process of
readership and interest in the language in all its manifestations.
Conclusion
A battery of objective tests has been administered to first-year EFL learners so as to reach the
desired results of progress in vocabulary acquisition and understanding. Though a large number of
students have quite a limited proficiency in English, they enclose a considerable control of the
main grammatical structures of English and they know moreorless a great deal of vocabulary. But
as they embark on courses and texts designed for native speakers (original input), they are bound
to come across many words that are new to them; both the specialized terms of particular academic
fields and the enormous number of non-specialized words that characterize English academic
prose.
The results of the tests can be used to help diagnose areas of weakness, set learning goals
and plan vocabulary programme, measure vocabulary growth and assign graded reading and
listening.
The tests have tried to answer this question: Is the learners’ poor performance in reading
and listening a result of insufficient vocabulary knowledge?
Some learners have more difficulty understanding spoken English. This could be because
they do not know enough vocabulary or simply because they have, by large, learned English
mainly through reading. Likely, they have not had enough contact with the spoken language in
former stages of education, unless their teachers’ talk in the classroom. Given that the written test
itself was a real tool of measurement, it was right interesting to give the first form of the test
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

84

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Language Proficiency through Vocabulary Development

BENRABAH

through reading. If confidence is set, then the oral type of testing can be set for further
comprehension degree.
Similarly, learners who had a lot of contact with various input of the target language in and
out the language classroom, revealed to be making progress in vocabulary knowledge.
Subsequently, English word-knowledge is essential for all learners who wish to gain proficiency
in the language. It is, thus, important that teachers know what vocabulary knowledge their learners
have and aware of how they can systematically help them to increase this proficiency. Ways of
doing so include substantial graded reading, indirect vocabulary teaching and providing a
vocabulary focus in different language activities. Actually, the post-test has allowed checking how
much learners’ vocabulary has developed over the six-week- treatment period.
Indeed, careful attention should be paid in the run of developing vocabulary through the
two receptive skills since the environment does not provide spontaneous input delivery in the target
language. However, the context of getting along with the input is carried out voluntarily by
teachers and learners in direct teaching (teacher inquiry and peer-teaching), active learning (selfengagement and peer-learning), through natural, incidental learning contexts (exposure and
involvement in the language); and within planned encounters (graded reading, use of audio-video
sources and complete involvement).
About the author:
Dr. Boumediène BENRABAH is currently a senior lecturer in the department of English at the
University of Tlemcen, Algeria. His main teaching modules are related to phonetics and phonology
and language levels analysis. His field-research interests are directed to vocabulary development
and language proficiency. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1857-7196
References
Alderson, J. C. (2005). Diagnosing Foreign Language Proficiency. London: Continuum
Alderson, J.C. & Banerjee, J. (2002). Language Testing and Assessment. Lancaster: Lancaster University
Press
Dornyei, Z. (2007). Research Methodology in Applied Linguistics. Oxford: OUP.
Ellis, R. (1997). Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: O. U. P.
Ellis, R. (2008). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. (2nd ed.). Oxford: O.U.P.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1978) Language as a Social Semiotic. London: Edward Arnold.
Holliday, A. (2004). Issues of Validity in Progressive Paradigms of Qualitative Research. TESOL
Quarterly, 38, (4), p. 731-4
Johnson, K., & Christensen, H. (Ed.). (2004). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Applied Linguistics: A
Handbook for Language Teaching. New York: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Krashen, S. D. (1993). The Input Hypothesis and its Rivals, Implicit and Explicit Learning of Languages
New York: C.P.U.
Krashen, S. D. (2009). Does Intensive Decoding Instruction Contribute to Reading Comprehension? New
York: C.P.U.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A qualitative Approach. San
Francisco/London: Josscy-Bass.
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning Vocabulary in a Foreign Language. Cambridge: C.U.P.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case Study Research: Design and Methods (3rd edition). London: Thousand Oaks (Sage
Publications)

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

85

