SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT IN GLOBAL TRADE AND
INDONESIA PROBLEMS
Ade Parlaungan Nasution
Sekolah Tinggi Ilmu Ekonomi Labuhan Batu, Sumatera Utara, Indonesia

Abstract
The use of the concept of supply chain management in Indonesia based on the data presented is mainly
to collaborate with world-class manufacturers in order to participate in global trade, it is still very
lacking and not yet this is due to one sub system with another sub-system still running partially and
does not have an intact network. From the data above, Indonesia must improve its infrastructure and
human resources more in an integrated manner so that it can join in the big wave of global trade
because geographically, Indonesia is in a strategic position in the world trade route. The basic
weakness is the high cost of logistics which includes transportation costs, warehousing costs, inventory
storage costs, customer service costs and logistical administrative costs when compared to other
countries in the Asian region. Another disadvantage is that there are still various infrastructure
standards such as ports, highways and air and water transportation networks and other supporting
infrastructure. The lack of availability of funds for infrastructure programs, unclear infrastructure
development priorities, uncertain legal rules, and inadequate law enforcement make Indonesia's
ranking still inferior to other ASEAN member countries.

Keywords : Supply Chain Management, Logistics, Infrastructure, Global Trade

INTRODUCTION
With the opening of various economic blockades and various international and
regional collaborations, it has created a new trend in the flow of goods and services. What
Friedman calls a flat world is now truly realized, the production of goods and services does not
have territorial boundaries either what is called the state or region. At present a final product
can be done, both management and production involving many companies and many countries.
Production of goods flows to find the best and cheapest so that the cost of production can be
minimized with good quality that can provide customer satisfaction. Competition in modern
business has an impact on the changing focus of competition from competition among
companies independently towards competition between business networks such as the supply
chain supply chain. This condition gave rise to the era of competition between business
networks, where the role of manufacturing companies has changed from supplying domestic
companies to international markets through local companies (Rudberg and Olhager, 2003).
Management of cooperation in the supply chain requires coordination and integration both
within and between companies to achieve effective supply chain management, service quality,
and company profits (Lina Anatan, 2010). Several countries, such as China, Vietnam,
1

Bangladesh and several countries in South America are currently rising to pick up supply chain
management, we can see that many products from various world manufacturers have factories
in these countries. Indonesia also as one of the Asian countries offering in addition to cheap
labor, Indonesia also offers large social capital, namely the population as consumers and
abundant natural resources. Indeed, foreign investors still have high hopes for the Indonesian
economy driven by consumption and exploration of natural resources. But confidence fell after
the government issued a regulation banning the export of raw minerals. The policy is feared to
contaminate the investment climate in the country. The supply chain is an integrated product
and business model of multinational companies. These companies formed a network /
production chain by involving many companies spread across many countries to achieve
maximum efficiency and profit. Production activities, such as manufacturing raw materials,
manufacturing components, assembling and finishing the product, are distributed to factories
in various locations in the world which are considered the most profitable, but the production
process is still controlled by brand holders from one place (office)
As an illustration of how the global supply chain operates, we can take the example of Apple's
iPhone products based in the United States. The casing was produced by MGM Corp from
Japan, the batteries were made by companies in Thailand, SDRAM memory components and
NAND were made by companies in Batam. Furthermore, it was assembled by Foxconn in
China, and then sold in the Asian market. While the distribution is handled by a logistics
company based in Singapore. But all these processes are still coordinated or controlled by
Apple from its headquarters in California, United States.
The releases of an international contract changes the nature of trade in the direction of its
formation
"The axis of trade-investment-service" (trade-investment-service nexus), so that the notion of
trade, services and investment is now difficult to recognize. Turn-key operations, for example,
can include the delivery of equipment that is recorded as goods exports, but can also be
categorized as a service sector. Some experts term it supply chain trade.
Supply chain trade encourages corporations based in the OECD (Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development) countries, or high-income countries that accept and practice
the principle of free market economies, which are mostly European countries — moving their
production to place which is a production network and regional sources (regional sourcing and
production networks). For example, Samsung Electronic moved the production base for
household appliances from Korea to Vietnam, precisely to Saigon Hi-Tech Park, which is about
15 km from Ho Chi Minh City.
This pattern of trade explains why globalization tends to develop towards
regionalization. For the same reason, it is also understandable why the establishment of the

2

MEA is an ASEAN effort to fully integrate into the global supply chain. (Edy Burmansyah,
2014)

Indonesia's global competitiveness ranking in the 2017 IMD World Competitiveness
Center recorded an increase of six levels to position 42 from the previous year at number 48.
In this report Indonesia's competitiveness scored 71.116. However, this increase has not been
able to boost Indonesia from a protruding position from 5 countries in the Southeast Asia region
or ASEAN 5 (Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines and Indonesia).
Singapore still occupies the first position as the country with the highest competitiveness in the
ASEAN 5 with a score of 99,488. Then Malaysia was followed in second with a score of 83.53,
then Thailand in third place with a score of 80.095, and in the fourth position in the Philippines
with a score of 71.798.
The lack of availability of funds for infrastructure programs, unclear infrastructure
development priorities, uncertain legal rules, and inadequate law enforcement make Indonesia's
ranking still inferior to other ASEAN member countries. The still high practice of corruption
and collusion and the still large imbalance in wealth distribution in Indonesia ranks Indonesia's
competitiveness unable to rise further.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Supply Chain Management or called Supply Chain Management is a complete cycle
chain management starting from raw materials from suppliers, to operational activities in the
company, to distribution to consumers. The term supply chain management was first put
forward by Oliver and Weber in 1982. Supply chain is a physical network, namely companies
involved in supplying raw materials, producing goods, or sending them to end users, supply
chain management is a method, tool, or management approach. The definition of Supply Chain
Management is also given by James A. and Mona J. Fitzsimmons, who state that supply chain
management is a total approach system to deliver products to end consumers using information
technology to coordinate all supply chain elements from suppliers to retailers, then reach the
next level which is a competitive advantage that is not available in traditional logistics systems.
While the definition of Supply Chain Management according to Chase, Aquilano, Jacobs is a
system for implementing a total approach to managing the entire flow of information, materials,
and services from raw materials through factories and warehouses to end consumers. By Robert
J. Vokurka, Gail M. Zank and Carl M. Lund III supply chain management is defined as “all
the activities involved in delivering a product from raw material through the customer
including sourcing raw material and parts, manufacturing and assembly, warehousing and
inventory tracking, order entry and order management, distribution across all channels,
delivery to the customer, and the information system necessary to monitor all of the activities”

3

Stevenson defines supply chain management as a strategic coordination of the supply
chain with the aim of integrating supply and demand management. Russell and Taylor define
that supply chain management is managing the flow of information, products and services
throughout the network, both customers, companies and suppliers. Supply Chain Management
or called Supply Chain Management is a complete cycle chain management starting from raw
materials from suppliers, to operational activities in the company, to distribution to consumers.
The term supply chain management was first put forward by Oliver and Weber in 1982. Supply
chain is a physical network, namely companies involved in supplying raw materials, producing
goods, or sending them to end users, supply chain management is a method, tool, or
management approach.
Thus, based on various definitions of supply chain management
as already stated, it can be concluded that general supply chain management is all activities
related to material flow, information and money along the supply chain. Furthermore the scope
of supply chain management will include the following:
Item

Coverage of activities, among others

Product developmen

Procurement

Conduct market research, design new products, involve suppliers in
designing new products
Select suppliers, evaluate supplier performance, purchase raw materials
and components, monitor supply risk, foster and maintain relationships
with suppliers

Planning & Control

Production/ operation

Demand planning, demand forecasting, capacity planning, production
and inventory planning

Production execution, quality control

Delivery/ Distribution

Distribution network planning, shipping scheduling, looking for and
maintaining relationships with shipping service companies, monitoring
service levels in each center distribution

Source: I Nyoman Pujawan (2005)
Supply chain can be defined as a set of activities (in the form of entities / facilities)
involved in the process of transformation and distribution of goods from the earliest raw
materials from nature to the finished product at the end consumer. Listening to this definition,
a supply chain consists of companies that transport raw materials from the earth / nature,
companies that transform raw materials into semi-finished materials or components, suppliers
of product supporting materials, assembly companies, distributors, and retailers who sell goods
to the end consumer. In the supply chain there are several main players who are companies that
have the same interests, namely: (Sariyun Naja Anwar, 2011)

4

1. Supplies
2. Manufactures
3. Distribution
4. Retail Outlet
5. Customer

Problems with the Application of Supply Chain Management in Indonesia
1. Labor Wages Labor wages in Indonesia are compiled based on the cost of living or in
other words the needs of decent and last life are revised through PP 78 of 2015
concerning remuneration, the cost of living is worthy of being dissolved into the growth
rate and inflation as the basis for determining labor costs. The level of labor wages
according to this pattern is unstable and changes every year depending on the country's
economic performance. Whereas in other countries, it is called Vietnam and China, the
wages of mininal workers for 5 years are fixed and relatively unstable with
demonstrations such as in Indonesia. Quantitatively, labor wages in Indonesia are still
quite competitive when compared to other Asian countries, but economic fluctuations
that cannot be predicted make workers' wages unpredictable and coupled with excess
strikes and labor demonstrations that often occur in various cities in Indonesia
2. Logistics Costs
Indonesian Logistics Costs and Some Advanced Countries

Country

USA
Japan
South Korea
Indonesia

Percentage of Logistics Percentage of Cost
Costs to GDP
Logistics towards
Sales Costs
9,90%
10,60%

9,40%
5,90%

16,30%

12,50%

27%*

14,08%

Source: Sislognas (2012)

5

Logistics costs are formed from activities that support the logistics process, namely customer
service, transportation, warehousing, inventory storage, and logistics administration.
According to the LynnCo Supply Chain Solutions survey (2013) for companies in the United
States that the average percentage of logistics costs consists of transportation costs (39%),
warehousing costs (23%), inventory costs (27%), customer service costs ( 6%), and logistical
administration fees (5%). Furthermore the survey results also showed that the average
percentage of logistics costs to sales was 7.34%, which consisted of transportation costs
(3.24%), warehousing costs (1.84%), inventory storage costs (1.52%) , customer service costs
(0.48%), and logistics administration costs (0.38%). If this survey also includes the cost of
purchasing goods which averages 56% of the company's sales, it will be seen that the total
logistics costs are a significant major cost in the company. (Agus Purnomo)
Indonesian Logistics Performance among ASEAN Countries

Source: Sislognas (2012)

The ratio of logistics costs to Gross Added Value in the industrial sector for 24 Industrial
sectors is 61.1%. The ratio of industrial logistics costs to the output of the industrial sector is
16.3%. (Ministry of Industry, 2016)
A study conducted by LPEM UI in 2005 stated that the percentage of logistics costs for sales
in Indonesia averaged 14.08%, while Japan was 5.9%. While the percentage of Indonesia's
logistics costs to GDP is 30%, while Japan is 10.6%, and the United States is only 9.9%. This
statistic clearly shows that Indonesian logistics costs are still very expensive because of the
inefficient logistics of the company's activities, thereby reducing the competitiveness of
Indonesian companies which in turn can also reduce the country's competitiveness. (Agus
Purnomo)
In the SISLOGNAS it is stated that the main cause of the high cost of logistics in Indonesia is
the condition of existing infrastructure, both ports, airports, roads and railways are still
considered inadequate to support the smooth flow of logistical traffic. The same goes for
6

intermodal or multimodal transportation systems that have not been able to run properly,
because transportation access from production centers to ports and airports or vice versa has
not been able to run smoothly because of the port and airport infrastructure that is not optimal.
So that causes service quality to be low and service rates become expensive. More detailed
infrastructure problems can be identified as follows:
a. Ports: There Is No "Hub Port" Internationally both sea and air as a center for controlling
national, and international goods flows and the lack of integration of Port Management,
so that the management of the movement of goods and documents is still carried out
based on transactions.
b. Road Infrastructure, the decline in the level of road services in the main economic
pathways, especially in Java and Sumatra, has led to a high cost economy and reduced
competitiveness of commodity products.
c. Railway Transportation, a business concept that is applied to freight trains, especially
container cargo transportation, still applies the transport business system, but has not
used the perspective of the logistics business concept.
d. River and Crossing Transportation, the low guarantee of the safety and security of the
operation of transport of rivers, lakes and crossings due to the age of the vessels which
are mostly more than 10 years old (64%) and only a small proportion are under 10 years
old (36%).
e. Not yet having Intermodal and Multimodal Transportation regulations as well as
inadequate intermodal transportation access. For example, when goods are unloaded at
Tanjung Priok Port, the only access to transportation of goods is through land
transportation with very limited road infrastructure, which causes traffic congestion in
Tanjung Priok Port.

7

3. Some issues related to Global Supply Chain Management in Indonesia:

Commodities

there is no focus on basic and strategic commodities
inadequate infrastructure support both in quantity and
Infrastructure
quality
national logistics infrastructure (ports, airports,
stations, warehouses and others) have not been
managed in an integrated, effective and efficient way
trade facilitation is not yet optimal both domestically
and internationally
service providers and logistics service limited competitiveness of users and providers of
providers
logistics services both nationally and globally
weak national and international networks
Logistics services are still dominated by multinational
companies
Human Resources
low competence of human resources and management
lack of education and training in logistics
Information
Technologi
and inadequate infrastructure and information and
Communication
communication technology networks
the majority of businesses still use the paper based
system
there is no an integrated national policy in the field of
Regulation
logistics, regulation and policy is still partial and
sectoral and weak in law enforcement
Institutional
low inter-sectoral coordination
the absence of institutions which became the national
logistics activities integrator
Source: Sislognas (2012)

8

4. Indonesian Infrastructure Quality compared to Other ASEAN Countries :

From the data above, in terms of infrastructure, starting from the quality of ports, roads and air
transportation we are still improving and relatively lagging behind other ASEAN Member
States, only the railroad lines are better than other ASEAN countries.
CONCLUSION
The use of the concept of supply chain management in Indonesia based on the above data is
mainly to collaborate with world-class manufacturers in order to participate in global trade, it
is still very lacking because one sub-system with another sub-system is still running partially
and has no intact network
From the data above, Indonesia must improve its infrastructure and human resources more in
an integrated manner so that it can join in the big wave of global trade because geographically,
Indonesia is in a strategic position in the world trade route
The lack of availability of funds for infrastructure programs, unclear infrastructure
development priorities, uncertain legal rules, and inadequate law enforcement make Indonesia's
ranking still inferior to other ASEAN member countries

9

Bibliography

Anatan, Lina. (2010). Pengaruh Implementasi Praktik-Praktik Manajemen Rantai Pasokan terhadap
Kinerja Rantai Pasok dan Keunggulan Kompetitif. Karisma, 4(2).
Anwar, S. N. (2011). Manajemen Rantai Pasokan (Supply Chain Management): Konsep dan Hakikat.
Jurnal Dinamika Informatika, 3(2).
Burmansyah, Edy.2014. Rezim Baru ASEAN ; Memahami Rantai Pasokan dan Masyarakat Ekonomi
ASEAN. Insist Press
Purnomo, Agus. Potensi Green Supply Chain Management untuk Menurunkan Biaya Logistik
Nasional. Sekolah Tinggi Ilmu Manajemen Logistik /STIMLOG PT Pos Indonesia) dalam
https://www.google.co.id/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&ved=0ah
UKEwjm_- 6bobDUAhXJNY8KHemzC34QFghCMAM&url=http%3A%2F%2Fsupplychainindo
nesia.com%2Fnew%2Fdownload%2F126%2F&usg=AFQjCNFDwfzcutZvoyhBP9Q6 yTKNJKnKg&sig2=y7HpCB59owL6xq5vLSeMsg&cad=rja
http://supplychainindonesia.com/new/ https://sites.google.com/site/operasiproduksi/manajemenrantai-pasokan http://databoks.katadata.co.id/datapublish/2017/06/02/naik-6-level-dayasaingindonesiamasih-tertinggal

10

