Choosing Computing: How and Why Women Enter Computing Through Coding
Bootcamps

Krista Schnell
kkschnell@berkeley.edu
Department of Sociology
University of California, Berkeley

Keywords: gender, work and occupations, science and engineering, computing

Abstract: Current shortcomings of the pipeline and life course model, as well as negative tech
culture discourse, underestimate the potential and resilience of women in computing. Women
may be pushed out of computing in their youth, but they can come back—and they do. Using
data from in-depth interviews with women graduates of coding bootcamps (accelerated programs
that teach beginners digital skills), this study provides empirical data on how and why women
enter computing later in life, often after having non-technical degrees and careers. This study
finds that to successfully enter the computing workforce, women must arrive at three end states,
which are often achieved via three transitions: “I can’t code” to “I may code;” “I’m on another
path” to “I want to code;” and “I can code” to “I do code.” In addition, this study finds surprising
evidence of women choosing to enter computing for better pay and work-life balance, in contrast
to research that suggests women leave for these reasons. Rather than add to the extensive
literature on why women leave, this article highlights how and why women enter computing and
overcome the odds stacked against them.

Acknowledgements: I am grateful to Danny Schneider and Jenna Johnson-Hanks for their
excellent guidance and feedback. Many thanks to Isaac Dalke, George Kulakowski, Sigrid Luhr,
Raka Ray, and Skyler Wang for their generative comments and support. A previous version of
this paper was presented at the Gender & Sexualities Workshop at UC Berkeley, and I thank the
participants for their helpful feedback.

Schnell 1
Introduction
Recent news coverage by The Atlantic and The New York Times exposed the blatant and
subtle sexism, as well as sexual harassment, that women in the tech industry often face (e.g.
Benner 2017; Mundy 2017). They depict an overtly hostile culture, pushing women out of tech—
but common cultural scripts often discourage women and girls from tech and technical work in
the first place. An anti-diversity memo published by ex-Google employee James Damore and
comments by Harvard University president Larry Summers both suggested biological reasons for
why women are less suited for technical fields. It may come as no surprise then that women
continue to remain outnumbered in many science and engineering (S/E) fields, especially
computing. While women make up nearly half of the U.S. workforce (BLS 2018), they held only
28% of all S/E jobs in 2015 (NSF 2018, Appendices 3-26) and 25% of information technology
(IT) jobs in 2014 (Beckhusen 2016). And while women graduate with over half of all bachelor’s
degrees and about half of all S/E degrees (NSF, NCSES 2019), they make up only 20% of
engineering and 18% of computer science graduates (NSF 2019, Appendices 2-21). Despite
investments in research and programs to increase the percentage of women in S/E (Committee on
Maximizing the Potential of Women in Academic Science and Engineering and Committee on
Science, Engineering, and Public Policy 2007), representation in engineering and computing
remains low (Beckhusen 2016; NSF 2019, Appendices 2-21).1
To explain this gender gap in S/E and computing specifically, the metaphor of the “leaky
pipeline” is often invoked (e.g. Alper 1993; Berryman 1983; Camp 1997). In short, it assumes
1

According to NSF, S/E encompasses both educational and occupational fields, including: biological and
agricultural sciences; computer sciences; engineering; mathematics and statistics; physical sciences; psychology;
and social sciences. According to BLS, information technology (IT) refers to those who work in computer and
information technology occupations, includes computer programmers among other job titles. Computing refers to
computer science (CS) and CS-related education or IT occupations. I use technical degrees or technical work to refer
to educational studies or occupational work, respectively, in computing, engineering, and the physical sciences.

Schnell 2
that there are relatively few women who take an interest in computing—due to gender
socialization, for instance (Eccles 1987; Jacobs 1989; Marini and Brinton 1984; Parsons and
Bales 1955)—so few study computer science and subsequently get jobs in the field. For those
women who are in the pipeline, there are multiple exit-points along the way; they could drop out
due to experiencing a “chilly climate” in college (Crawford and MacLeod 1990; Hughes et al.
2017; Seymour and Hewitt 1997; Xie and Shauman 2003) or difficulty balancing long work
hours with family obligations (Ceci and Williams 2011; Frehill 2012; Preston 2004), to name a
few. Significantly, this pipeline metaphor assumes a single linear trajectory from interest in to
studying to working in computing, disregarding the possibility that anyone could re-enter the
pipeline later in life—and overcome the setbacks that previously pushed them out.
Scholars who advocate for a life course model, however, recognize the many phases and
changes that occur in a person’s educational and occupational life. In this way, they challenge
the pipeline model and demonstrate that, in fact, women can and do change directions
educationally and occupationally (Jacobs 1989; Rosenfeld and Spenner 1992; Xie and Shauman
2003). Unfortunately however, much of the literature on individual mobility does not consider
S/E specifically, and the vast majority of research on S/E and computing fails to consider women
post-college. Critically, these studies largely ignore those women who change course to enter
S/E later in life and the processes by which they do so. One reason for this (in addition to the
prevalence of the pipeline model) could be that in the past, a transition to computing was quite
difficult and often required some sort of technical background, along with multiple years in
college and a significant monetary investment.
While the pipeline perspective has severe limitations, the life course model lacks
empirical data on women who transition into computing post-college and how and why they do

Schnell 3
so. Recently, however, coding bootcamps—or “intensive, accelerated learning [programs that
teach] beginners digital skills” (Eggleston 2015)—have emerged to make the transition to
computing a bit easier. In 2018, a surprising 37% of all coding bootcamp graduates were women.
Since the average bootcamper is “30 years old, has 6 years of work experience, has at least a
bachelor’s degree, and has never worked as a programmer” (Eggleston 2018a), coding
bootcamps are an ideal site to identify and learn from women who transition into computing later
in life. Theoretically, the odds stacked against these women are greater—not only have they
often spent more time studying and working in non-technical fields, but they likely have also
received more subtle or overt messages that computing is not for them. So why now? How do
these women come to realize that computing is an option for them, and what are their
motivations to pursue it, especially in light of popular depictions of tech culture? Finally, what
are the means by which they attend a coding bootcamp and achieve their goal of working in tech
as a programmer?
To shed light on the processes by which women are enabled and incented to enter
computing later in life, I conducted 16 in-depth interviews with women and other femmepresenting individuals, who attended a coding bootcamp with the goal of getting a job as a
software developer in tech. 13 of 16 respondents majored in non-technical fields in college, and
the same number came from non-technical jobs or careers. All were aware of and believed the
negative depictions of tech culture. Still, they chose to pivot to computing—and for the 12 of 16
who actively sought software development jobs after graduation, all successfully obtained one
within six months or less. By gaining an in-depth understanding of these women’s educational
backgrounds and work experiences prior to attending a coding bootcamp, I was able to identify
three critical transitions to end states which needed to be achieved before these women could

Schnell 4
successfully enter tech as programmers. First, many of the women had to overcome narratives
that said coding was not for them in order to consider computing as a viable career option.
Second, women had to be in situations which caused them to look up and consider other paths, in
order to be pulled into and motivated to pursue computing. And third, they needed to have the
money and time to attend a coding bootcamp and the resources to get a job as a software
developer in tech.
I also discovered that these women sought jobs in tech, despite their knowledge of the
industry’s toxic culture. Interestingly, several respondents said they believed and then confirmed
that tech culture was in fact no worse than that of the industries from which they came—contrary
to popular notions that tech is uniquely bad to women. Importantly, however, these women
stated that working as a programmer in tech came with notably better benefits, including a higher
salary and more flexible working conditions, which led to a better overall lifestyle. These data
conflict with findings that women leave technical jobs due to work pressures and difficulties
balancing work and family (Ceci and Williams 2011; Hewlett et al. 2008; Stephan and Levin
2005) and, in part, due to dissatisfaction with pay and promotion (Hunt 2016). However, these
data support recent quantitative research which argues that a lack of mentorship and networks, as
well as discrimination, explain high exit rates of women from engineering and computing (Hunt
2016).
While the leaky pipeline model fails to leave room for women to enter computing later in
life, the life course model falls short of providing empirical evidence for how and why women
enter computing, especially post-college. The rise of coding bootcamps and their relatively high
graduation rates of women, however, provide an ideal opportunity to study those women who
enter computing, even after having had non-technical degrees and careers. As such, I take up the

Schnell 5
strategic site of coding bootcamps to provide empirical data on the processes by which women
are enabled and incented to enter computing—thus developing the life course model and filling a
current gap in the literature. Moreover, I find surprising evidence of women entering computing
for better pay and work-life balance, in spite of tech’s poor workplace culture. I argue that
current shortcomings of the pipeline and life course model and negative tech culture discourse
underestimate the potential and resilience of women in computing—they can come back, and
they do. Furthermore, greater recognition of tech benefits to women—instead of uniformly
negative coverage—could serve to recruit more women to computing, especially in a career
transition. By continuing to focus news and research on why women leave computing rather than
why they enter, we risk deterring women from computing, despite our intents to the contrary.

Explanations for Women’s Underrepresentation in Computing
Women in S/E
For decades, scholars have been interested in why there are so few women in S/E. Major
motivations behind this research have been to reduce occupational gender segregation and the
gender pay gap (Lim 2016; Michelmore and Sassler 2016; St. Rose 2010), and to improve
productivity and innovation in S/E fields (Hunt et al. 2013; Lehman, Sax, and Zimmerman 2016;
Margolis and Fisher 2003). While computing and IT fields may come with additional challenges
for women (given their unique decline in representation), the factors that dissuade women from
entering S/E also hold for computing, a subset of the broader category.
There are a variety of reasons given for why women do not pursue S/E. Drawing from
economic theory, scholars often organize these reasons into two general camps: “supply” and
“demand” (Ecklund, Lincoln, and Tansey 2012; Thébaud and Charles 2018). The supply-side

Schnell 6
refers to those who invest in the appropriate computing education to be prepared for work in S/E
(Becker 1985; Mincer and Polachek 1974). Arguments have been made that workforce patterns
are rooted in biological gender differences (Ceci and Williams 2011; Ceci, Williams, and Barnett
2009), but social scientists reject these explanations. Instead, gender-role socialization and early
educational experiences are often used to explain why girls are less likely to show an interest in
S/E subjects (Ecklund et al. 2012; Farmer, Wardrop, and Rotella 1999; Margolis and Fisher
2003; Sonnert and Holton 1995; Thébaud and Charles 2018). Due to powerful gender norms
starting in early childhood (and lasting throughout one’s life), boys and girls are socialized to
conform to their respective gender roles and pursue gender-typical careers (Eccles 1987; Jacobs
1989; Marini and Brinton 1984; Parsons and Bales 1955). Since S/E fields are considered to be
masculine domains that glorify stereotypically masculine traits (Bailyn 2003; Cooper 2000;
Faulkner 2000; Hacker 1989; McIlwee and Robinson 1992), girls may avoid these fields out of
fear of being seen as unfeminine (Kelly 1985; Matyas 1985; Tai, Sadler, and Mintzes 2006). In
addition, research has identified myths like the “brilliance narrative” (that one must have raw,
natural intelligence) and “geek” stereotype (that one must be singularly obsessed with S/E) that
have been shown to map onto the underrepresentation of women in S/E disciplines (Meyer,
Cimpian, and Leslie 2015) and to be more detrimental to women than men (Margolis and Fisher
2003). Finally, experiences in academics can push girls away from S/E, due to lower
expectations from teachers (Becker 1981), a lack of role models (Bottia et al. 2015; Marx and
Roman 2002), and a “chilly climate” (Crawford and MacLeod 1990; Hughes et al. 2017;
Seymour and Hewitt 1997; Xie and Shauman 2003).
On the other hand, demand-side explanations come from companies and employers in the
S/E labor market (Becker 1985; Ecklund et al. 2012; Thébaud and Charles 2018). Studies show

Schnell 7
that women leave S/E occupations at a higher rate than men, often to go to another field (not to
leave the labor force) (Frehill 2012; Glass et al. 2013; Preston 1994, 2004), and that that high
exit rate is driven by engineering, including computing, specifically (Hunt 2016). As women in a
male-dominated workplace, they may feel isolated as minorities (Kanter 1977; Michelmore and
Sassler 2016) or experience outright discrimination in terms of hiring, pay, or promotion (Becker
1957; Heilman 2001). Some reasons for why women leave S/E specifically include dealing with
extreme work pressure, facing a macho culture, disappointments with compensation (Hewlett et
al. 2008), long hours, and difficulties balancing work and family life (Ceci and Williams 2011;
Stephan and Levin 2005). Recent research, however, has specifically deemphasized the role of
the family in women’s exits from S/E (Frehill 2012; Glass et al. 2013; Hunt 2016). Frehill (2012)
finds that women’s “changes in career or professional interests” is more important, while Hunt
(2016) finds that disappointment with pay and promotion is the leading factor for why women
leave. Hunt (2016) argues, “The implication is that a lack of mentoring and networks, or
discrimination by managers and co-workers are the more promising of the existing explanations
for excess female exits” (p.221).
Pipeline and Life Course Models
One model that is frequently invoked to explain this gender gap is that of the “leaky
pipeline” (e.g. Alper 1993; Berryman 1983; Camp 1997). In short, a pipeline assumes that there
is a tight coupling between one’s education (“supply”) and subsequent work (“demand”) in S/E,
and leakage or attrition occurs for women all along the way. According to this model, women
either choose to study S/E early on and continue forward on the path, or they are nudged out.
Significantly, once one has left the pipeline, the model provides no entryways back. There are no
opportunities for changing majors, mid-career pivots, or delayed entrances—even though other

Schnell 8
research has shown that there is a good deal of mobility across an individual’s career (Jacobs
1989). What the leaky pipeline model gets right is that women are frequently faced with social
pressures that add up over time and push them away from computing, and the popularity of this
model has led to considerable research focused on early childhood socialization and education
through the college years, as well as significant investments to retain girls in S/E during this time
(Xie and Shauman 2003). While these are certainly important years in a girl’s life, this research
fails to consider women who may wish to enter computing for the first time later in life, even
after attaining a non-S/E degree and pursuing a non-S/E career.
As an alternative to the leaky pipeline model, Xie and Shauman (2003) suggest a life
course model that takes into consideration a much broader range of possible life events. In
support of this model, they demonstrate that a significant number of students shift from non-S/E
to S/E majors during college, and “gender differences in the prevalence of this ‘nonconventional’
path to S/E account for almost half of the gender differences in S/E attainment” (p.212).
Contrary to what the leaky pipeline model would predict, this shows that women can change
direction and enter S/E, even after high school, when their originally intended major was not S/E.
However, Xie and Shauman’s (2003) quantitative data cannot speak to individual transitions
from S/E degrees to S/E careers or individual mobility into and out of S/E careers—nor how or
why these individual changes might occur. Furthermore, computing, which other research
suggests may differ from other S/E subfields, is not investigated specifically.
Similarly, in Jacobs’s (1989) study of women’s careers and gender segregation in the
workforce, he argues against the cumulative disadvantage model—that obstacles accumulate
over time for women (implicit in the pipeline metaphor)—and advocates for a “revolving door”
model instead, which “can account for extensive sex-type mobility because it recognizes a

Schnell 9
variety of stages in the career development process, and it recognizes a host of pressures women
face” (p.52). Unlike Xie and Shauman (2003), Jacobs’s data can and do speak to individual-level
mobility between male-, women-, and neutral-typed jobs, which is found to be quite common.
Jacobs argues that lifelong mechanisms of social control are required to maintain the overall high
degree of gender segregation in the workforce. This is a particularly useful model to consider
with respect to women entering computing later in life. Still, one drawback of Jacobs’s study
(which he readily admits and calls for in future research) is that it cannot address the actual
factors that influence women to pursue male-dominated professions, and certainly not why
women change career paths to enter male-typed careers. Second, this study was conducted at a
time in which women were at their peak in terms of representation in computing—there was
nothing unusual about the field at the time. Therefore, it is worth considering the factors which
now impact women’s decisions to transition into the male-typed domain of computing.
Multiple Paths to Computing
Very few academic articles acknowledge that women can enter computing later in life,
even though alternative pathways, including those without formal education, have always
existed. Moreover, many of the studies that actively argue for a life course model stop at the
college years and do not consider post-college. That being said, a small handful of studies have
considered multiple entryways into computing. In a study of women in IT in Australia, von
Hellens et al. (2002) found that of the ten women in IT they interviewed (from the “Women in
Technology network,” as part of a larger study), the majority switched into IT early in their
careers, “when they were exposed to computing and realized that they liked it… They had come
into IT almost by chance at a point in their lives when they were dissatisfied with what they were
doing, saw the opportunities, and realised that they had the aptitude” (p.154). Interestingly, these

Schnell 10
women’s transitions seem surprisingly straightforward and easy according to the article, and they
are not discussed in depth.
In Leventman’s (2007) study on multiple pathways into the IT workforce, she creates a
typology of three main paths people take to careers in IT, based on IT professionals recruited
from four corporations and Northeastern University’s Master of Science in Information Systems
(MSIS) program. These paths are Traditional, Transitional, and Self-Directed, and a woman’s
career profile is highlighted to illustrate each. The Traditional path follows the pipeline model, in
that women decide they want to be in IT during high school or college, and then they work in IT
throughout their career. A person on the Transitional Path typically decides they want to work in
IT after receiving a non-technical degree and while working in a non-technical field, and then
they attend a graduate program (like MSIS) to make the career transition possible. Finally, the
Self-Directed path looks very much like the Transitional path, except they do not attend a
graduate program but learn on their own. While this study benefits from a large sample size (as
part of a larger Northeastern University IT Workforce Study), the women’s actual motivations
and means to make this career transition into IT are not discussed. However, outcomes are
provided, which indicate that those who transitioned into IT “doubled or tripled their preprogram
salaries, achieved high organizational positions, and expressed relatively high job satisfaction”
(p.216).
The most relevant research on women’s motivations to enter IT was conducted by Turner
et al. (2002), by surveying women on an email list for Systers, an organization for technical
women in computing. They found that “A surprising number (31%) [of 275 survey
respondents]... majored in the arts, social sciences, or humanities as undergraduates and entered
the IT field through non-traditional means, primarily as a result of on-the-job experiences” (p.7).

Schnell 11
Based on answers to the survey questions, they were able to identify high-level external
influences of people and experiences, as well as internal motivations, that influenced these
women’s decisions to enter IT. In terms of important people, they most often cited colleagues at
work, friends in IT, or mentors. Their most influential experiences were usually obtained on-thejob, gaining exposure to IT work. Finally, though they stated enjoying their work in IT, they
more often mentioned choosing the field due to “having an ability or skill” (p.14) as an internal
motivating factor. This research is both informative and insightful and should be applauded for
its ability to compare relatively large samples of women in IT from different educational
backgrounds, highlighting multiple pathways into IT. However, these women’s paths and
motivations might be quite different almost two decades later, especially given the pace of
change in the IT field. These women were surveyed in 2001, when these women who majored in
non-technical fields had been working in IT for an average of 9.7 years—meaning they would
have entered IT around 1990, just several years after the peak of women in computing and IT. In
addition, this study only considers those factors that pulled women into IT and not the situational
factors that may have pushed women out of other careers nor the means that made the transition
possible. Significantly, this study was conducted at a time in which there were far fewer
opportunities for women to make a relatively quick, intentional pivot to IT, especially coming
from non-technical backgrounds.
To summarize, the pipeline model is prevalent, but it fails to explain how individuals
change course throughout their lives, either through education or work. The life course model
provides an alternative explanation that can account for multiple pathways and non-linear career
trajectories, but it also has empirical holes. In terms of S/E and computing in particular, the vast

Schnell 12
majority of research falls short of demonstrating that women can and do enter computing postcollege, as well as how they do so.
Methods
To shed light on the processes by which women enter computing later in life, I set out to
conduct in-depth interviews with women who attended a coding bootcamp.
In comparison to graduate programs, other training programs, or professional groups,
coding bootcamps are a strategic site for research because they graduate relatively high rates of
women entering computing for the first time later in life. As mentioned previously, coding
bootcamps make it significantly easier for those with non-technical backgrounds to transition to
computing, since they are accelerated programs specifically designed to teach beginners digital
skills (often in web or mobile development) in preparation for jobs in the tech industry
(Eggleston 2015). To be more specific, the average bootcamper has a bachelor’s degree and prior
work experience, though not as a programmer (Eggleston 2018a), and the average bootcamp is
14.3 weeks long and costs $11,900 (Eggleston 2018b). So far, this model has been very
successful. Though the first coding bootcamp opened in just 2012, by 2018, there were 108
coding bootcamps across the U.S. and Canada, graduating 16,593 students (Eggeston 2018b).
Graduates start with an average salary of $64,528 (Eggleston 2018a). Perhaps even more
surprising, however, are the gender demographics. In 2018, 6,140 women graduated from coding
bootcamps—a sizeable number in comparison to the 13,654 women who graduated with
computer and information sciences bachelor’s degrees in 2017 (NCES, IPEDS 2018, Table
322.50)—making up 37% of the total (Eggleston 2018a). Given that 19% of computer science
majors in 2017 (NCES 2018) and 25% of the IT workforce in 2014 were women (Beckhusen
2016), 37% is an incredibly high number. For these reasons, coding bootcamps serve as an ideal

Schnell 13
site to identify women who enter computing for the first time later in life and to study the
processes they go through to do so.
After first obtaining IRB approval in the early summer of 2018, I began to recruit
respondents through my network in Silicon Valley, a major hub of coding bootcamps. During
that time, I also attended six in-person coding bootcamp information sessions and one online
information session to gain a better understanding of coding bootcamps’ curriculum, work space,
instructors, and how they market themselves to prospective students. These sessions were
available to the public (though they often required one’s name and email address through an
online RSVP form), and when making introductions, I identified myself as a researcher to all
attendees, including coding bootcamp instructors and prospective students alike. Typically, these
information sessions were about an hour long, concluding with a quick tour of the workspace and
time for questions at the end. I took notes on my mobile phone during the information session,
and I referenced them to write longer memos once I returned home. I found this initial
ethnographic research to be particularly valuable in informing the creation of my interview
schedule.
My first four respondents were recruited through my network of tech professionals, since
I have lived in Silicon Valley for the last ten years and worked in tech for five of them. Many of
my interviewees offered to connect me to someone they knew who had attended a coding
bootcamp, but some of the first few also offered to post my information to their coding
bootcamp’s online alumni communication channel. This led to the recruitment of 11 of the next
12 respondents, which is why so in my sample attended the same several coding bootcamps.
Given that certain types of people might self-select into specific bootcamps, this likely narrowed
the types of respondents in my sample (though it is possible I could have had a similar outcome

Schnell 14
through a more traditional method of snowball sampling). Interested participants were given a
link to my personal website, which provided a short description of the study and another link to
schedule an interview, either in-person at a location of their choice in the Bay Area (which I
indicated as my preference, if possible) or online through a Google Hangouts video chat (10
interviews were conducted in person and six online).
The interviews were semi-structured and lasted between 45 to 90 minutes. My goal was
to gain an in-depth understanding of the ways in which these women came to consider and then
were motivated to attend a coding bootcamp. I asked about their educational history, to gauge
why they might not have studied computing in the past, and their work history, if applicable, to
see how it related to their subsequent career transition. In addition, I asked about how they
financed their coding bootcamp education and any barriers or worries they had in making their
transition to software developers in tech. Finally, I asked how they felt about coding, their new
career, and working in tech. While this was the basic outline of my interview, respondents could
skip any questions or add more detail where they liked. I audio-recorded all of the interviews,
and once complete, I personally transcribed and coded them. I began the coding process by
identifying a large number of small themes, and from there, I categorized them into larger
umbrella concepts. All names used are pseudonyms, and approximate ages are given.
In July and August 2018, I interviewed 15 people who identify as women and one
genderqueer person who presents as a woman2, who previously attended a coding bootcamp. (I
also interviewed five men, but their data is not discussed in depth in this paper; still, my
interviews with them helped paint a larger picture of coding bootcamps and their attendees.)

2

Because a female identity has been very important in this genderqueer person’s life, I will include them in the term
women to refer to the group of respondents from here onward. However, when providing individual quotes, I will
specify each person’s preferred gender identity.

Schnell 15
Though successful completion was not required, all respondents graduated from their respective
coding bootcamps. As is typical of coding bootcamp demographics, my respondents were
overwhelmingly White and Asian and had at least a bachelor’s degree, but they represented a
variety of hometown locations (all but one in the U.S.) and SES backgrounds. 13 out of 16
respondents had a non-technical college degree, and the same number worked in a non-technical
field prior to attending a coding bootcamp. (See Table 1 for demographic data.) In other words,
these women would never be predicted to enter computing according to the pipeline model—and
they have been mostly ignored by life course model advocates. As such, these women are ideal
candidates to provide insight into how and why women choose to enter computing later in life.
Data and Discussion
In order for women to enter a career in computing by way of a nontraditional coding
bootcamp education, three end states must be achieved, which are typically accomplished via
three transitions (though they may and often do occur in a different, less linear order than the one
I present here). (A) As the literature would predict, many of these women did not initially see
computing as a viable option available to them. Some have bad experiences and others have
limiting narratives that tell them (A1) they can’t code, which they must first overcome to believe
that (A2) they may code. (B) Women next need to have a reason to look up from the path they
are on in order to be drawn into computing and want to code. My findings indicate that
situational factors (by chance or choice) (B1) push women from their current path and precede
the motivations that then (B2) pull women into computing. (C) Once women have the desire to
enter computing, they must also have the resources and means to attend a coding bootcamp, so
that (C1) they can code, and subsequently obtain a job in the workforce, so that (C2) they do
code.

Schnell 16

Transition A: (1) I can’t code to (2) I may code
While most people who choose to attend coding bootcamps do not have college degrees
in computing, some do—which indicates they already know that they may code. They may be
coming straight out of college and are struggling to find a job, or perhaps they have been out of
computing for some time and want to hone their skills. In fact, one woman I interviewed,
Amanda, did study computer engineering in college, but she did so in Europe many years ago (in
a class that was 50% women) and felt she needed to improve her skills to move beyond a role in
computer testing. One genderqueer individual, Taylor, did not have a college degree (or a high
school degree), so they never had the opportunity to choose a major like the other women did—
instead, they chose to work in hospitality for several years. For the most part, however, these
women did not consider computing in college—though one purposefully left her CS major.
Some had bad educational experiences in CS (bad teachers or classroom experiences, including
harassment), and others were focused on another path. But over 40% had specific narratives that
said computing was not for them. So far, these findings are consistent with the literature, which
predicts that women would not enter computing due to issues of “supply” and the leaky pipeline
model (Alper 1993; Berryman 1983; Camp 1997).
A1. I can’t code
Bad educational experiences
Several women recalled having bad educational experiences with computers or in CS
specifically, just as the research would predict (Ecklund et al. 2012; Margolis and Fisher 2003).
Heather, for example, grew up in the 1980s in the rural midwest, and she always wanted to play
on the computer in grade school. But as a young girl, she remembers being told by her teacher,

Schnell 17
“The computers aren’t for you; they’re for Greg” (Heather, 40, woman). Two others had
traumatizing experiences while in CS classes in college. For instance, Michelle was brand new to
the subject (and university, after transferring from community college) and found herself
completely overwhelmed:
“The first week of class, I think I must have legitimately spent 20 or 30 hours on
homework, and I remember like sobbing and thinking this is my first quarter at
University and I’m going to fail out and let down my entire family. And it was really
clear that everyone else there had previous experience in CS, even though this is the
introductory class. I lasted like six weeks into the quarter and then I dropped at the last
minute because I was like this is going to ruin my GPA, what am I going to do?”
(Michelle, 30, woman)
Nicole, on the other hand, had been passionate about coding for years, but she was harassed in
the CS major, as one of a small handful of women:
“So I walked in on a professor watching porn, that was one thing. Regularly, I would just
be walking to class and there would be frats all around. I’d get things thrown at my butt
on a regular basis, when I was going to class or just sitting in lecture, people just threw
things at me. Or heading from class to the dorms back home, there would be groups of
guys holding signs with numbers ranking the women from 1 to 10 as we passed by.”
(Nicole, 30, woman)
These quotes demonstrate just how “chilly” the climate can be for women in CS and what causes
them to leave Crawford and MacLeod 1990; Hughes et al. 2017; Seymour and Hewitt 1997; Xie
and Shauman 2003.
Limiting beliefs
As previous research has shown, children are often socialized to conform to their
respective gender roles (Eccles 1987; Jacobs 1989; Marini and Brinton 1984; Parsons and Bales
1955). Since computers and technology are seen as masculine domains (Faulkner 2000; Hacker
1989; McIlwee and Robinson 1992), girls may avoid S/E or computing or simply not consider
them as options to pursue (Matyas 1985; Tai et al. 2006). As the literature would predict, many

Schnell 18
of the women I interviewed never considered computing as a college major, and seven of 16
mentioned specific reasons they believed computing was not meant for them. Sarah pictured a
computer scientist as “somebody sitting in a basement in a dark room eating Cheetos and looking
at ones and zeros on a screen” (Sarah, 35, woman), and Courtney thought computer science was
“for nerdy guys who wanted to create video games” (Courtney, 40, woman). Several others
believed they were not smart enough or good enough at math to study computing; they bought
into the “brilliance narrative” and “geek” mythologies (Margolis and Fisher 2003; Meyer et al.
2015), as illustrated in the following quotes:
“I wasn’t really into math and science, but I was really into theater and traditionally
dorky things I guess. I told myself a narrative that maybe hindered me in college that I
wasn’t a science-y person… I didn’t really like math, I wasn’t that good at it, so I’m like
I’m really into singing and having good oral communication skills, and in a way, I think I
clung to that narrative for so long that I didn’t even consider doing computer science
earlier or engineering earlier.” (Ashley, 30, woman)
“I honestly thought it was kind of unattainable, or I feel like sometimes the way we talk
about software developers and software engineers is like rocket science. I think it’s put
on this pedestal, and it’s really anyone who has the patience… Like it is mentally
challenging, but it doesn’t mean that it’s for the top percentage of people with the highest
IQ in the world or whatever, and that’s how I thought about it before was that I wouldn’t
be smart enough to do that.” (Sarah, 25, woman)
“I feel like I sort of fell into that mythology that if you’re going to be a developer, if
you’re going to write code, you are building computers in your garage when you were
five and you’ve been hacking the NSA since 11. Like I just assumed even at 24 that I’m
way too old to learn this stuff, and I learned that was not true at all.” (Elizabeth, 30,
woman)
Throughout my interviews, I noticed that many women—even those who did not seem to have
prohibitive narratives in their youth—made sure to mention that they were not coding in their
spare time and that one did not have to be brilliant to code, indicating their current awareness of
and disapproval of these stereotypes.
A2. I May Code

Schnell 19
In order for these women to see computing as a viable career option, they had to
overcome their bad experiences with CS and dispel and overcome the limiting narratives they
told themselves. In order for this to occur, all respondents indicated that one or more of the
following made a difference to them: exposure to coding through their work, people who made
them believe they could code, and coding bootcamps catered specifically to women and to those
for whom identifying as female has been important in their lives, including transgender,
genderqueer, or non-binary individuals3. This is the first crack in the leaky pipeline model,
suggesting a superior life course model.
Exposure through work
About half of the respondents gained exposure to coding through work. Though by job
description they were in non-technical roles, these women found themselves taking on technical
projects, such as creating business intelligence reports or maintaining the company website. Over
time, they came to realize that they really enjoyed what they were doing and wanted to pursue it
in greater depth, as exemplified in the following quote:
“I didn’t really know about any resources and wasn’t thinking about it as a career; I just
really fell into it. And then the more SQL I learned, I became very good at SQL, and I
started expanding and thinking about other languages. My company started to not
officially but unofficially move me into business intelligence, data analyst role, but I was
like I’m not getting paid for this… SQL is just this one thing that I’ve learned as like a
byproduct of this job, but I actually am really interested in software engineering as a
whole.” (Kimberly, 30, woman)
In addition, one woman gained initial exposure through a college extension class (for work), and
several others solidified their decision to make a career change and attend a coding bootcamp by
taking courses online or through a community college.

3

This language is adapted from the all-women coding bootcamps’ websites, which define “women” in a similarly
inclusive manner.

Schnell 20
Influential people
Almost half of respondents were influenced by people around them, including partners,
friends, and mentors. With the exception of one, who had a mentor specifically advise her to
attend a coding bootcamp, these networks did not seem to push or pull these women into
computing as much as they served to demonstrate by example that it was possible. Several had
close friend groups living in Silicon Valley who enjoyed working in tech, and five women had
(male) partners who were software developers. Surprisingly, these respondents did not consider
their partners to be major motivators to attend a coding bootcamp, though their presence is
unmistakable. Instead, respondents highlighted the importance of their partners’ support—
implying an underlying (and perhaps more credible) belief in these women’s intelligence and
ability to code. Ashley’s husband even helped her reverse the narrative that she was not good at
math:
“I try to be really cautious now of how I talk about my relationship with math. Because
my mom was like I just don’t like math, I’m not very good at it. And I was like, okay,
I’m also not that good at it. And then my husband feels very strongly that we shouldn’t
talk about math that way. So I’m like, I’m just human at math. That’s fine.” (Ashley, 30,
woman)
Several others living in the Bay Area also stated the importance of meeting people, significantly
women, who had attended a coding bootcamp, secured a high-paying job after, and were
successfully working in tech. For instance, this is what Amber said of the impact of meeting
women who had gone through a coding bootcamp:
“I had met her, I had met this person, like this person was real and she quit [her previous
job], went to [a coding bootcamp], and was one of the first people to get a job outside,
like before she even finished the course. She told me her first job offer was over
$100,000 for the year. I was like she must be doing something special… she must be
ridiculously smart and I am not… Then my family friend’s daughter who’s in her midtwenties… went to [a coding bootcamp] as well, graduated, got denied from [a tech
company], went back to [the same tech company] and said give me one day...and you’re

Schnell 21
going to hire me. She did that, and she still works for them. I was like this is insane,
people are actually getting jobs, so I can do it? So I did.” (Amber, 35, woman)
Coding bootcamps for women
As mentioned previously, fourteen of the sixteen respondents in this study attended
coding bootcamps which have stated missions to improve gender diversity in tech and only admit
individuals who identify as women, including transgender, genderqueer, or gender non-binary
persons. Almost all of these respondents said that an all-women’s space was very important in
their decision to attend a coding bootcamp, and especially for Nicole who experienced
harassment in CS while in college. These programs were also known for having a better worklife balance (fewer expected working hours per week on average), being more selective, having
good outcomes, and fostering a strong community (which is likely why I gained so many
respondents from their active alumni online community)—and the benefits of a good work-life
balance and strong community were brought up most frequently in interviews. Many women,
including one who was queer and one who was pregnant, mentioned how important it was for
them to be in a safe and accepting space—which they assumed they would get in an all-women’s
program—when going through the stress of learning and switching careers. Additionally, all of
the respondents were aware of and truly believed in the missions of these coding bootcamps to
empower more women in tech; they knew these programs were for people like them. Although a
few worried that they were being oversold on this message and over-promised that they would be
more successful on the market due to their gender, they still wanted to be women in tech and part
of changing and improving the gender ratio there. As Ashley stated best:
“I think on the first day, one of our instructors, she welcomed us, and then she was like,
‘Welcome to the revolution,’ and I was like, yeah, this is so amazing! I’m going to be so
interesting when I’m 80 years old. People are going to be like, ‘Wow, you were in

Schnell 22
engineering when there weren’t that many women,’ and I’ll be like, yes, I was so
revolutionary.” (Ashley, 30, woman)
Through the impact of exposure at work, influential people, and coding bootcamps for
women, these respondents were able to overcome the bad educational experiences and limiting
beliefs that told them they could not code. In other words, those things that pushed them out of
the “pipeline” did not have to keep them out of computing any longer. The realization may have
come late, but they realized it was possible for them to code.
Transition B: (1) I’m on another path to (2) I want to code (pushes and pulls)
Existing research that considers multiple paths to computing focuses on motivations that
pull people into computing (von Hellens et al. 2000; Leventman 2007; Turner, Bernt, and Pecora
2002), but none have seriously acknowledged the importance of context or the particular
situations that arise in one’s life course that cause a person to look up from their current path and
allow themselves to be pulled into computing in the first place. Indeed, before they considered
going to a coding bootcamp, half of these women found themselves with monetary and/or
employment needs, while the other half were dissatisfied in their previous jobs and looking for a
change. In addition to these situational “pushes” off of their previous paths, all of the women
also spoke of motivations that pulled them to computing—whether due to their interest in
coding, wanting a better lifestyle through tech, or desiring a new, exciting career in computing.
Although I have chosen to emphasize the distinction between these pushes and pulls, respondents
frequently spoke of the two together as they compared and contrasted their previous careers with
their current ones. These comparisons are critical because they function to influence the way in
which these women think and feel about computing and their new careers as software developers
in tech.

Schnell 23

B1. I’m on another path (situational “pushes”)
Monetary or employment needs
Exactly half of the respondents found themselves in need of employment and/or more
money, often due to extenuating circumstances that were out of their control (and sometimes
more than one at once). For instance, two women had family members who suddenly passed
away or became very ill. Although they had planned for careers in other fields, they pivoted to
pursue a high paying career in tech to help provide support for their families. A few women
unexpectedly found themselves unemployed and saw a job in tech as a good alternative career.
Four other women found themselves underemployed and searching for a better career path. Of
these, two chose computing primarily because it was their desired field of interest, while the
other two chose it primarily to meet their monetary goals.
Career dissatisfaction
The other half of respondents did not have the same monetary or employment needs but
instead desired a career change, due to dissatisfaction in their previous careers. Interestingly,
while research has shown that women leave computing due to extreme work pressures, long
hours, difficulties balancing work and family, a “chilly climate,” changes in professional
interests, and dissatisfaction with pay and promotion (Ceci and Williams 2011; Frehill 2012;
Hewlett et al. 2008; Hunt 2016; Stephan and Levin 2005), data from several respondents indicate
that they left their previous jobs and entered computing due to the same or similar reasons. For
instance, several were bored in their previous work and wanted more of a challenge. As Melissa
stated,
“I was working in the nonprofit sector for eight years, and I really loved, it but I sort of
reached a point in my career where I didn’t feel like I was learning and growing the way I

Schnell 24
wanted to be. I had kind of plateaued in a way, so I was considering...going to grad
school for nonprofit administration, but then I thought I might end up in the same career
that I am today and be paid maybe a little bit more but still be doing the same thing and
still not really learning and growing but kind of stagnating” (Melissa, 30, woman)
Another three were burned out from their previous careers, including two former teachers and a
nurse. As one of the former teachers Amber said, “I was working 12 to 14 hour days, I didn’t
have any money to do anything or go anywhere, I missed so many weddings and bachelorette
parties with friends and birthdays and stuff because I was so broke” (Amber, 35, woman).
Another left her company of over twenty years due to its toxic culture. Of course, this is not to
say that these women cannot or will not eventually leave computing for similar reasons, but so
far, those who now have jobs in tech have seen an improvement.
B2. I want to code (motivational “pulls”)
From this data, I identified three internal motivations or drivers these women had for
entering computing. Every single woman thought that computing was interesting, challenging,
and enjoyable. A few even saw it as their passion, which previously lay dormant—either because
of negative educational experiences or because they were unaware of their interest. For some,
coding was the next, new exciting career to pursue after the conclusion of their first. But for
many, coding was equally if not more enticing due to having a good career with a great salary
and lifestyle.
Interest and enjoyment
Again, while all of the women liked and enjoyed computing, some loved it more than
others. In particular, Nicole always knew she was passionate about computers and coding; even
at a young age, she was building computers at home and started a robotics teams at school. She
entered college as a CS major but dropped out due to harassment and switched to another

Schnell 25
technical major. When her first career suddenly ended due to health issues she developed in the
workplace, she stumbled upon coding bootcamps as a “great second chance for folks who want
to give it another shot” (Nicole, 30, woman)—but this time, in an all-women’s space. A couple
other women never really knew what they wanted to study in college but “just floated from thing
to thing just trying things out” (Tiffany, 30, woman) and eventually settled on a major.
Eventually however, they found computing and quickly knew they loved it and wanted to pursue
it as a career. Five other women very much enjoyed their first careers but were looking forward
to an exciting new career in computing. As Jen summed up best, “ I really did enjoy my first
career, and I still enjoy it, and I think at that time where I was at it was the perfect fit… But
there’s something about the newness and the excitement of [coding] and learning something new
that I really enjoy” (Jen, 35, woman).
Significantly, several women also stated how much they like computing and are
interested in it by comparing it to what they have done in the past:
“I don’t know how to explain it, but I think one of the things that made me feel like this
was a good direction for me to be going in was the fact that I could just lose myself in it
for really long stretches of time and not even notice, whereas a lot of the other time when
I was doing the social media work, like oh my God, it just made me miserable. I felt like I
was watching the clock, and I just don’t usually feel that way with [coding].” (Elizabeth,
30, woman)
“It’s very interesting. Every day it’s a new task; you learn a lot. Like at previous jobs, it
would slow down, basically you would go through the same routine over and over, and
here it’s like technology is evolving so fast it’s hard to keep up sometimes, but because
you’re given at every point of time only one task, you can achieve something.” (Amanda,
35, woman)
Finally, several women were quick to say that while they really like computing, they do not love
it so much that they would do it on the weekends or in their spare time—specifically in contrast
to the “geek” stereotype, which many were familiar with (though they did not refer to it in
specific terms). As Michelle said best,

Schnell 26
“I couldn’t do [computing] if I didn’t like it, but by the same token, I think the kind of
industry ideas that I love coding at the exclusion of all other loves, I would go home and
spend all my time...no. Like no. I’m not going to write a Wiki on how to take care of my
cat, I’m not going to program some Arduino tool to like control my thermostat because
the built-in controls are not good enough, and both of those things are actual things that
coders I asked actually did, and I was like, okay, but the sun is out. Go and have a life. So
yes, I like it a lot, not to the exclusion of other things, and I think in this industry that’s
kind of unusual.” (Michelle, 30, woman)
Lifestyle benefits
Almost all of the women, including those passionate about computing, highlighted the
incredible benefits that accompany a career as a software developer in tech. Money was
mentioned most often. For Elizabeth, it let her “live in a nice place, go on a nice vacation, and
still set money aside in savings. The salary alone changed things” (Elizabeth, 30, woman).
Indeed, with the exception of one, all expected and saw an increase in their salary after attending
a coding bootcamp—sometimes multiplied by a factor of two or more. However, as big of a
difference as money made, it was just one of many benefits, as indicated by the following quote:
“I like how you can build a lifestyle around a software engineering job. So I work
remotely. It means I have a lot more flexibility, so I live with my two dogs; they’re
usually at my feet when I’m typing. My boss doesn’t care when I get my work done, as
long as I do get my work done, so if I want to leave early to go hiking and then do more
work, it’s just much more flexible. I love working from home, it means I can travel if I
need to, it means I can have friends over, it means I can co-work with people. In the
winter, it means I don’t get sick as often because I’m not around co-workers.” (Nicole,
30, woman)
Indeed, most women hoped for and received benefits that were far better than before. In other
words, yet again, many of these women discussed the advantages of their current work over
previous jobs and careers, as illustrated in the following:
“I [used] to work 10 to 12 hour days, [and] I was always really stressed and really tired,
and it was just hard and frustrating often. And now I’m working really hard but on things
that are really interesting and with realistic deadlines and a really supportive team and
manager, and I feel like that weight has lifted, and now I can think about what are the

Schnell 27
activities and things that I want to do for myself, and I do have the time and energy to
participate in them. So that’s been hugely transformational.” (Melissa, 30, woman)
“I mean, there’s definitely stressful days and stressful moments, but I work 40 hours a
week. I was working 45 to 50 for 25 grand less before. So now it’s like I have a great
work-life balance, I’m interested in the work that I’m doing, I’m super challenged, and
landed on a team that’s really supportive, learning so so much, and being in a space
where that’s a comfortable thing to do.” (Jen, 35, woman)
Respondents said the benefits of working in tech as software developers helped provide
“independence” and “freedom,” and one said that being able to spend money on things they
cared about was “liberating.” These overwhelmingly positive statements from women about their
improved lifestyles are quite surprising, given the ways in which women are said to be pushed
out of technical work. Still, just because so many women were glowing about the benefits does
not mean that they did not also expect to and have negative experiences working as programmers
in tech, as popular discourse would predict.
Downsides of tech culture
While all of these women chose to go into computing and had positive things to say about
the work, many also had negative experiences since being software developers in tech—which
all expected to have and were not particularly surprised about (they were rather grateful when
they did not have any bad experiences). Every women stated that she was aware of the popular
discourse of toxic masculinity in tech culture, and all felt there was much room for improvement.
However, their knowledge of an abrasive tech culture was surprisingly downplayed and clearly
did not hold them back from seeking a career in tech. Indeed, several of these women stated that
they faced similar or worse work cultures in their previous careers. Stephanie, who previously
consulted in a variety of different industries, said,
“I would say that that culture still exists no matter where you go. I worked in financial
services—boys’ club. I worked in energy—boy’s club. It exists everywhere. It’s just

Schnell 28
certain industries have had their pressure for so long that they can hide it better.”
(Stephanie, 40, woman)
Heather, who used to work in nursing said,
“[If] the physician doesn’t like you, [they] will withhold pain meds from your patient.
Because they thought you were uppity. Or they’re just in a bad mood. Everyone’s going
to suffer. So I didn’t think it was possible for the tech bros to have that kind of power,
and they don’t.” (Heather, 40, woman)
Coming from the legal sector, Jen said, “there’s a lot of toxic masculinity there too, like abrasive
lead attorneys who breathe at you weird and stand behind you and try to intimidate you. I had
already dealt with all of that already, and I don’t intimidate easy either” (Jen, 35, woman). As
such, while no one minimized or downplayed the reality that tech has a bad culture and has much
room for improvement, many women with previous careers indicated that a similarly poor
culture existed elsewhere, too. Tech culture was not about to keep them from entering
computing.
Transition C: (C1) I can code to (C2) I do code
Even if one knows that she may code and that she wants to code, she still must have the
ability to make that transition happen—in this case, by way of a coding bootcamp education and
then to a career in tech as a software developer. About half of the respondents attended a fulltime coding bootcamp that cost over $15,000 for 12 weeks. The other half of respondents
attended a full-time coding bootcamp that was free for six months, but they had to pay for their
own living expenses during that time. And still, upon completion of a coding bootcamp,
graduates must be prepared to be unemployed and looking for jobs for multiple months or more.
All of the respondents had the goal of working as software developers in tech after graduation,
and for the 12 respondents who had actively sought a job (by the time I spoke to them), they
were all able to secure one in six months—meaning they do code. In fact, none described a real

Schnell 29
struggle, which is quite surprising (and might also be due to self-selection into being
interviewed). For the four who do not yet have jobs, they purposely delayed their search due to
health issues, having a baby, or being in the process of moving.
C1. I can code
While the ability to afford a coding bootcamp education is in no way a trivial matter, it is
still a fraction of the time and cost of a bachelor’s degree or a master’s degree (if one could even
get into a master’s program in computing from a non-technical background). The average cost
and time of a coding bootcamp in 2018 was $11,900 for 14.3 weeks (Eggleston 2018b),
compared to 2 or more years at an average cost of $8,000 per year for (in-state) tuition and fees
for a traditional bachelor’s or master’s degree (Ma et al. 2018). Some coding bootcamps help
with special loan plans or scholarships, often for women and underrepresented minorities in tech.
But more uniquely, a few coding bootcamps are either free or have delayed payment plans,
which take a percentage of a graduate’s first year salary once they get a job (though only one
respondent from this sample had and chose that option). For some, this actually makes it possible
to attend a coding bootcamp, where it was not possible before. In fact, several women said they
were considering going back to college for a more traditional computing education but felt that
the time and money were too great. Therefore, while a coding bootcamp still requires a fair
amount of resources to attend, the time and money is considerably less than other options.
Financial supports
Six of the 16 respondents were married at the time that they attended a coding bootcamp,
and four were married to software engineers working in tech. They all received financial support
from their spouses, minimally to cover living expenses, and several mentioned receiving critical

Schnell 30
emotional support from their husbands, as well. When speaking of her spouse, Melissa said, “I
think everyone should have a person in their life who tells them that everything is going to be
okay and you’re not dumb no matter how much you think you are. I think that was such a key
factor in me being successful” (Melissa, 30, woman). No one mentioned seeking tutelage from
their spouse (in fact, a few actively avoided it), but some accepted it when needed. A few women
said they had committed partners at the time they attended a coding bootcamp, with whom they
shared living expenses. And several other women received financial support from their parents or
received help from their friends with living expenses. Only one woman mentioned taking out a
loan (another received a loan from her family), and many women also drew from their personal
savings from work.
Of the five women who grew up in lower class backgrounds, two were unmarried and
without clear financial stability at the time of attending a coding bootcamp—and only one,
Christina, said she was truly scared about the risk she was taking. This implies that while it is not
common to attend a coding bootcamp while in a precarious financial situation, it is possible
though likely much, much harder. As Michelle, who came from a middle-class background,
made sure to note,
“I think the people who did best at [the coding bootcamp], frankly you have to be middleincome, you have to have the social safety net, like you have to have some support
whether it’s a spouse, partner, your parents, something, and I hate to say that. I don’t
want that to be the case, but the program is too intense to succeed I think if you have to
be focusing on other stuff.” (Michelle, 30, woman)
Michelle also indicated that several women dropped out of the coding bootcamp because their
loans did not cover the cost of living and that one even became homeless.
C2. I do code

Schnell 31
As mentioned previously, these women had relatively little difficulty getting a jobs in
tech after graduation from a coding bootcamp. They all secured a job as a programmer in a six
months or less, which seemed to meet their expectations going into the coding bootcamps, and
all said they worked very hard in the program because they wanted a job after. Their average
starting salary was $90,000. Of course, several of them also chose their coding bootcamp in part
because it guaranteed an internship with a company as part of its formal program—and several
women were able to turn that into a full-time job. A few others used connections they made at
their coding bootcamp to get their first job, which further demonstrates the importance of these
strong communities. Still, a few mentioned how much they had to hustle on their own, outside of
the coding bootcamp, to get a job. The following quote is from Christina, who was also the least
financially secure when attending a coding bootcamp:
“It wasn’t from [the coding bootcamp] that I felt like I got a job. Like I did a bunch of
other things on my own, like I went to a bunch of hackathons, and that’s how I got a
bunch of interviews. It’s a really cool community there. I went to a bunch of education
hackathons and travel hackathons and things like that. So you had to do extra stuff.”
(Christina, 25, woman)
It may be that Christina perceived these additional activities as harder to do or felt extra pressure
to do them due to her financial situation. Again, it is likely this sample is unique in their relative
ease to secure a job after graduation (due to self-selection); however, these were some of the
ways in which these women were able to turn I can code into I do code—the final part of the
process to enter computing.
Conclusion
The leaky pipeline model argues that there is a tight link between one’s high school and
college education and subsequent work in S/E, and that attrition occurs for women all along the
way. However, this model leaves no room for women to enter S/E or computing later in life—

Schnell 32
such that the women who transition into computing through coding bootcamps cannot be
explained. In contrast, the life course model acknowledges the non-linear paths of many people’s
lives and can account for these women who change direction and enter computing, even after
first selecting a non-technical major or career. Unfortunately, the majority of research that
supports this model lacks empirical evidence demonstrating that women in fact do enter
computing post-college and, crucially, the processes they go through to actually make the
change.
To address this theoretical gap, I leveraged the strategic site of coding bootcamps to
better understand how and why women enter computing later in life—despite them not choosing
computing before and the declining rates of women in computing. Significantly, I have identified
three major transitions that women must go through. First, they must overcome limiting myths
and narratives to see coding as a viable option available to them. Second, they must be in a
situation that causes them to step off their current path and be motivated to pursue computing.
Third, they must have the means like time and money to attend a coding bootcamp and finally
secure a job in tech as a programmer. As such, this research rejects the leaky pipeline model due
to its limitations and extends the life course model to include the processes by which women
enter computing later in life.
Although these women were aware of the negative discourse surrounding tech culture,
they still chose to enter computing. They had no doubt that tech culture treated women poorly,
but several (correctly) imagined that it could not be worse than their previous work cultures.
Impressively, even those who had experienced a “chilly” climate in education were able to
overcome previous and (imagined) future bad experiences doing technical work, largely because
they enjoyed the work and had comparatively better benefits. Many of the women highlighted

Schnell 33
the ways in which a higher salary, fewer hours, and a better work-life balance improve their
lives. These data seem to be in opposition to findings that women leave computing due to
extreme work pressure or challenges balancing work and family and (Ceci and Williams 2011;
Hewlett et al. 2008; Stephan and Levin 2005), and in part, due to disappointment with pay and
promotion—though it does not rule out that they may later leave due to facing discrimination in
the workplace or having a lack of mentorship and networks (Hunt 2016). Still, these women’s
statements lie in stark contrast to many popular implications that tech is uniformly terrible to
women.
One limitation of this study was that women were selected based on their attending a
coding bootcamp to enter computing. So while three end states (often via three transitions) were
identified as being in common to all attendees, this research cannot speak to reasons that women
might choose not to attend a coding bootcamp. For instance, it may be that negative stereotypes
or bad educational experiences in youth actually deter many women from considering computing
or a coding bootcamp. And in this sense, the pipeline model would be correct—supply-side
factors do dissuade women from entering computing in the first place. Or, perhaps many women
consider computing but are turned off by narratives of the toxic tech culture; from the data, it is
hard to say. Another limitation of this study was that all of these women attended one of four
coding bootcamps, with the vast majority having attended one of two, both of which limited their
programs to women. These same two coding bootcamps are also known for being particularly
selective, which means the women they admit may very well be exceptional in certain ways—for
instance, they may be predisposed to being a good fit for the program, succeeding in it, and
getting a job in tech after. Indeed, I did not speak to any women who were not successful in
completing a coding bootcamp, and everyone who had actively looked had secured a job. Future

Schnell 34
research should consider those women who have made transitions A and B, for instance, but are
stuck at C—whether due to financial or other barriers or the inability to get hired by a tech
company.
This research could also be improved by increasing the demographic diversity of the
respondents. Ages in the sample ranged from the mid-20s to mid-40s, with an average age of
33—meaning that most of these women had at least two more decades of expected work left. For
the two women who were over 40, both were doing well financially and were not in need of
work immediately post-graduation (neither were actively looking for work when I interviewed
them, due to other circumstances). In terms of race, two identified as mixed race, while the rest
were either White or Asian. These statistics are not entirely surprising, given that coding
bootcamps are also overwhelmingly White and Asian (66% and 16% respectively) (Eggleston
2018a), but it is quite difficult for me to contribute to the research as to how and why Black and
Latinx women attend coding bootcamps, for instance. Indeed, more research should be
conducted on how intersectional qualities such as age and race affect those women who go to
coding bootcamps and enter tech as programmers in efforts to improve diversity in more
meaningful and impactful ways.
With regards to gender, this study was motivated by previous literature that focuses on
the dearth of women in tech and computing. However, my sample only included one person who
identified as genderqueer, so it is difficult to say how identifying as transgender or gender nonbinary, for instance, might affect one’s interest and ability to attend a coding bootcamp. In
addition, future research could benefit from gaining a deeper understanding of why men attend
coding bootcamps. Based on my interviews with five men, transitions B and C are both relevant
and applicable to them as well. However, none suggested that they had to go through transition

Schnell 35
A—which puts them in a very different situation and at a huge advantage. That being said, men
might face different challenges altogether that were not uncovered in the interviews I conducted.
Again, this study rejects the pipeline model for its limitations and extends the life course
model by providing empirical evidence on how and why women enter computing later in life.
Specifically, women must successfully achieve three end states, often by completing three
transitions that move all the way from “I can’t code” to “I do code”—and these transitions
depend not just on motivational factors but context as well. Furthermore, women choose to enter
computing because they enjoy it and receive far greater benefits. While they acknowledge a poor
tech culture, it does not deter them—and speaking from previous experience, several note that
the industry is no worse than others. Tech may not be so uniquely and uniformly terrible to
women, as the media might have us think. I argue that, currently, the existing literature on the
pipeline and life course model, as well as negative tech culture discourse, underestimate the
resilience of women in computing. Continuing to focus solely on why women are pushed out and
leave computing might serve to exacerbate the problem. This research highlights how and why
women come back and enter computing, despite the odds.
Finally, this study shows that if we desire to reduce the gender gap in computing and
tech, there is an opportunity to recruit women who are in the later stages of their (non-technical)
educational and occupational careers. And possibly, having a greater diversity of previous
experiences might come with advantages. In particular, these women may appreciate their
careers as programmers in tech more, due to their ability to compare their new careers with what
they had in the past—in many cases, they seem to find that they make more money and receive
better benefits in tech; plus, they enjoy a new challenge. Time will tell, but it is possible that

Schnell 36
these factors stand to actually improve women’s retention in computing and tech. The more
women who join the revolution now, the easier it may be for generations to come.

Schnell 37
References
Alper, Joe. 1993. “The Pipeline Is Leaking Women All the Way Along.” Science
260(5106):409–11.
Bailyn, Lotte. 2003. “Academic Careers and Gender Equity: Lessons Learned from MIT.”
Gender, Work & Organization 10(2):137–53.
Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Becker, Gary S. 1985. “Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor.” Journal of
Labor Economics 3(1):33–58.
Becker, Joanne Rossi. 1981. “Differential Treatment of Females and Males in Mathematics
Classes.” Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 12(1):40–53.
Beckhusen, Julia. 2016. Occupations in Information Technology. American Community Survey
Reports. ACS-35. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Benner, Katie. 2017. “Women in Tech Speak Frankly on Culture of Harassment.” The New York
Times, December 22.
Berryman, Sue E. 1983. Who Will Do Science? Trends, and Their Causes in Minority and
Female Representation among Holders of Advanced Degrees in Science and
Mathematics. A Special Report. New York, NY: Rockefeller Foundation.
Bottia, Martha Cecilia, Elizabeth Stearns, Roslyn Arlin Mickelson, Stephanie Moller, and Lauren
Valentino. 2015. “Growing the Roots of STEM Majors: Female Math and Science High
School Faculty and the Participation of Students in STEM.” Economics of Education
Review 45:14–27.
Camp, Tracy. 1997. “The Incredible Shrinking Pipeline.” Communications of the ACM, October,
103–10.

Schnell 38
Ceci, Stephen J. and Wendy M. Williams. 2011. “Understanding Current Causes of Women’s
Underrepresentation in Science.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
108(8):3157–62.
Ceci, Stephen J., Wendy M. Williams, and Susan M. Barnett. 2009. “Women’s
Underrepresentation in Science: Sociocultural and Biological Considerations.”
Psychological Bulletin 135(2):218–61.
Committee on Maximizing the Potential of Women in Academic Science and Engineering and
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy. 2007. Beyond Bias and Barriers:
Fulfilling the Potential of Women in Academic Science and Engineering. Washington,
D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Cooper, Marianne. 2000. “Being the ‘Go-To Guy’: Fatherhood, Masculinity, and the
Organization of Work in Silicon Valley.” Qualitative Sociology 23(4):379–405.
Crawford, Mary and Margo MacLeod. 1990. “Gender in the College Classroom: An Assessment
of the ‘Chilly Climate’ for Women.” Sex Roles 23(3):101–22.
Eccles, Jacquelynne S. 1987. “Gender Roles and Women’s Achievement-Related Decisions.”
Psychology of Women Quarterly 11(2):135–72.
Ecklund, Elaine Howard, Anne E. Lincoln, and Cassandra Tansey. 2012. “Gender Segregation in
Elite Academic Science.” Gender & Society 26(5):693–717.
Eggleston, Liz. 2018a. “2018 Coding Bootcamp Alumni Outcomes & Demographics Report.”
Retrieved April 15, 2019 (https://www.coursereport.com/reports/coding-bootcamp-jobplacement-2018).
Eggleston, Liz. 2018b. “2018 Coding Bootcamp Market Size Study.” Retrieved October 23,
2018 (https://www.coursereport.com/reports/2018-coding-bootcamp-market-size-

Schnell 39
research).
Farmer, Helen S., James L. Wardrop, and Susanne C. Rotella. 1999. “Antecedent Factors
Differentiating Women and Men in Science/Nonscience Careers.” Psychology of Women
Quarterly 23(4):763–80.
Faulkner, Wendy. 2000. “Dualisms, Hierarchies and Gender in Engineering.” Social Studies of
Science 30(5):759–92.
Frehill, Lisa M. 2012. “Gender and Career Outcomes of U.S. Engineers.” International Journal
of Gender, Science and Technology 4(2):148–66.
Glass, Jennifer L., Sharon Sassler, Yael Levitte, and Katherine M. Michelmore. 2013. “What’s
So Special about STEM? A Comparison of Women’s Retention in STEM and
Professional Occupations.” Social Forces 92(2):723–56.
Hacker, Sally. 1989. Pleasure, Power, and Technology: Some Tales of Gender, Engineering, and
the Cooperative Workplace. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Heilman, Madeline E. 2001. “Description and Prescription: How Gender Stereotypes Prevent
Women’s Ascent Up the Organizational Ladder.” Journal of Social Issues 57(4):657–74.
von Hellens, L. A., R. Pringle, S. H. Nielsen, and A. Greenhill. 2000. “People, Business and IT
Skills: The Perspective of Women in the IT Industry.” Pp. 152–157 in Proceedings of the
2000 ACM SIGCPR Conference on Computer Personnel Research, SIGCPR ’00. New
York, NY, USA: ACM.
Hewlett, Sylvia Ann, Carolyn Buck Luce, Lisa J. Servon, and Laura Sherbin. 2008. The Athena
Factor: Reversing the Brain Drain in Science, Engineering, and Technology. 10094.
Harvard Business Review Research Report.
Hughes, Cayce C., Kristen Schilt, Bridget K. Gorman, and Jenifer L. Bratter. 2017. “Framing the

Schnell 40
Faculty Gender Gap: A View from STEM Doctoral Students.” Gender, Work &
Organization 24(4):398–416.
Hunt, Jennifer. 2016. “Why Do Women Leave Science and Engineering?” ILR Review
69(1):199–226.
Hunt, Jennifer, Jean-Philippe Garant, Hannah Herman, and David J. Munroe. 2013. “Why Are
Women Underrepresented amongst Patentees?” Research Policy 42(4):831–43.
Jacobs, Jerry A. 1989. Revolving Doors: Sex Segregation and Women’s Careers. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. Work and Family in the United States: A Critical Review and
Agenda for Research and Policy. Russell Sage Foundation.
Kelly, Alison. 1985. “The Construction of Masculine Science.” British Journal of Sociology of
Education 6(2):133–54.
Lehman, Kathleen J., Linda J. Sax, and Hilary B. Zimmerman. 2016. “Women Planning to Major
in Computer Science: Who Are They and What Makes Them Unique?” Computer
Science Education 26(4):277–98.
Leventman, Paula G. 2007. “Multiple Pathways toward Gender Equity in the United States
Information Technology Workforce.” Pp. 211–38 in Reconfiguring the Firewall:
Recruiting Women to Information Technology across Culture and Continents, edited by
C. J. Burger, E. G. Creamer, and P. S. Meszaros. Wellesley, MA: A K Peters, Ltd.
Lim, Kyung Min. 2016. “Major Matters: Exploration of the Gender Wage Gap among STEM
Graduates.” UCLA.
Ma, Jennifer, Sandy Baum, Matea Pender, and CJ Libassi. 2018. Trends in College Pricing
2018. New York: The College Board.

Schnell 41
Margolis, Jane and Allan Fisher. 2003. Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in Computing. MIT
Press.
Marini, Margaret Mooney and Mary C. Brinton. 1984. “Sex-Typing in Occupational
Socialization.” Pp. 192–232 in Sex segregation in the workplace, edited by B. F. Reskin.
Washington, D.C: National Academy Press.
Marx, David M. and Jasmin S. Roman. 2002. “Female Role Models: Protecting Women’s Math
Test Performance.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 28(9):1183–93.
Matyas, M. L. 1985. “Obstacles and Constraints on Women in Science: Preparation and
Participation in the Scientific Community.” in Women in science: A report from the field,
edited by J. B. Khale. London: Falmer Press.
McIlwee, Judith S. and J. Gregg Robinson. 1992. Women in Engineering: Gender, Power, and
Workplace Culture. Albany: SUNY Press.
Meyer, Meredith, Andrei Cimpian, and Sarah-Jane Leslie. 2015. “Women Are Underrepresented
in Fields Where Success Is Believed to Require Brilliance.” Frontiers in Psychology 6.
Michelmore, Katherine and Sharon Sassler. 2016. “Explaining the Gender Wage Gap in STEM:
Does Field Sex Composition Matter?” RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the
Social Sciences 2(4):194–215.
Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek. 1974. “Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings
of Women.” Journal of Political Economy 82(2, Part 2):S76–108.
Mundy, Liza. 2017. “Why Is Silicon Valley So Awful to Women? - The Atlantic.” Retrieved
December 11, 2018 (https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/04/why-issilicon-valley-so-awful-to-women/517788/).
NCES, IPEDS (National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education

Schnell 42
Data System). 2018. Bachelor’s degrees conferred to females by postsecondary
institutions, by race/ethnicity and field of study: 2015-16 and 2016-17. Retrieved April
16, 2019 (https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d18/tables/dt18_322.50.asp).
NSF (National Science Foundation). 2018. Science and Engineering Indicators 2018. NSB2018-1. Alexandria, VA. Retrieved April 16, 2019
(https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report).
NSF, NCSES (National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics). 2019. Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and
Engineering: 2019. Special Report NSF 19-304. Alexandria, VA. Retrieved April 16,
2019 (https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd).
Parsons, Talcott and Robert Freed Bales. 1955. Family, Socialization and Interaction Process.
Glencoe, Illinois: Free Press.
Preston, Anne E. 1994. “Why Have All the Women Gone? A Study of Exit of Women from the
Science and Engineering Professions.” The American Economic Review 84(5):1446–62.
Preston, Anne E. 2004. Leaving Science. 1 edition. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Rosenfeld, Rachel A. and Kenneth I. Spenner. 1992. “Occupational Sex Segregation and
Women’s Early Career Job Shifts.” Work and Occupations 19(4):424–49.
Seymour, Elaine and Nancy Hewitt. 1997. Talking about Leaving: Why Undergraduates Leave
the Sciences. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Sonnert, Gerhard and Gerald Holton. 1995. Who Succeeds in Science: The Gender Dimension.
None edition. New Brunswick, N.J: Rutgers University Press.
St. Rose, Andresse. 2010. “STEM Major Choice and the Gender Pay Gap.” On Campus with
Women. Retrieved May 17, 2019

Schnell 43
(http://link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/A238751293/AONE?sid=googlescholar).
Stephan, Paula E. and Sharon G. Levin. 2005. “Leaving Careers in IT: Gender Differences in
Retention.” The Journal of Technology Transfer 30(4):383–96.
Tai, Robert H., Philip M. Sadler, and Joel J. Mintzes. 2006. “Factors Influencing College Science
Success.” Journal of College Science Teaching 36(1):52–56.
Thébaud, Sarah and Maria Charles. 2018. “Segregation, Stereotypes, and STEM.” Social
Sciences 7(7):111.
Turner, Sandra V., Phyllis W. Bernt, and Norma Pecora. 2002. “Why Women Choose
Information Technology Careers: Educational, Social, and Familial Influences.” Paper
presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
New Orleans, LA.
Xie, Yu and Kimberlee A. Shauman. 2003. Women in Science: Career Processes and Outcomes.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Table 1: Respondent Profiles

Name

Age

Gender

Race

Childhood SES

Educational
Background

Highest Degree

Previous Work

Interview Date

Christina

25

Woman

Asian

Lower

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

July 2018

Michelle

30

Woman

Mixed

Middle

Non-technical

Master’s

Technical

August 2018

Nicole

30

Woman

White

Middle

Technical

Bachelor’s

Technical

August 2018

Elizabeth

30

Woman

White

Middle

Non-technical

Master’s

Non-technical

August 2018

Tiffany

30

Woman

Asian

Upper Middle

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

August 2018

Kimberly

30

Woman

White

Upper Middle

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

August 2018

Melissa

30

Woman

White

Middle

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

July 2018

Ashley

30

Woman

Asian

Middle

Non-technical

Master’s

Non-technical

July 2018

Taylor

30

Genderqueer

White

Middle

Non-technical

Some high school

Non-technical

August 2018

Amanda

35

Woman

White

Lower

Technical

Bachelor’s

Technical

August 2018

Sarah

35

Woman

White

Middle

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

July 2018

Jen

35

Woman

White

Upper Middle

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

August 2018

Amber

35

Woman

Asian

Middle

Non-technical

Bachelor’s

Non-technical

August 2018

Courtney

40

Woman

Mixed

Lower

Non-technical

Master’s

Non-technical

July 2018

Heather

40

Woman

White

Lower

Non-technical

Master’s

Non-technical

August 2018

Stephanie

40

Woman

Asian

Lower

Non-technical

Master’s

Non-technical

July 2018

