Running head: EVALUATING MOVIES

1

How do people evaluate movies? Insights from the Associative–Propositional
Evaluation Model

This is a draft of a chapter that has been accepted for publication by Oxford University Press
in the forthcoming book The Oxford Handbook of Entertainment Theory edited by Peter
Vorderer & Christoph Klimmt due for publication in 2020.

Frank M. Schneider, University of Mannheim
Ines C. Welzenbach-Vogel, University of Koblenz-Landau
Uli Gleich, University of Koblenz-Landau
Anne Bartsch, University of Leipzig

Author Note
Correspondence concerning this paper should be addressed to Frank M. Schneider, Institute
of Media and Communication Studies, University of Mannheim, B 6, 30–32, 68159
Mannheim, Germany. E-mail: frank.schneider@uni-mannheim.de, Phone: +49 621 1813938, Fax: +49 621 181-3939.

EVALUATING MOVIES

2
Abstract

Most people have one or more favorite pieces of media entertainment (e.g., movies,
TV shows, novels, video games), and some personal candidates for the worst of them ever.
But how exactly are such evaluative judgments formed? What are the underlying
psychological processes of media entertainment evaluations? And why do we sometimes feel
that the heart and mind are in conflict about those evaluations? To cover the whole
complexity of individual media entertainment ratings, we apply the associative–propositional
evaluation (APE) model (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2011) to the case of movie
evaluation processes before, during and after exposure. After defining evaluation and
introducing the APE model, we discuss its theoretical and methodological implications for
movies and entertainment research. Moreover, we highlight similarities and differences
concerning common related concepts (e.g., enjoyment).

Keywords: entertainment; movies; evaluative responses; information processing; associative–
propositional evaluation model

EVALUATING MOVIES

3

“. . . evaluative responses play a significant role—if not the most significant role—for
understanding social behavior.”
—Bertram Gawronski (2007a, p. 579)

Evaluation is something we do at all times. We evaluate persons, political parties,
food, even abstract concepts such as liberty—the number of possible evaluation objects is
infinite. Thus, it is an almost trivial conclusion that people also evaluate media and more
specifically entertainment media content. Consequently, as entertainment researchers, we
need to understand the role of evaluation in shaping individuals’ daily media diets. Our
chapter focuses on movies as a specific entertainment medium but the theoretical rationale is
equally applicable to other entertainment media such as novels or video games. We focus on
movies as an example and as a specific object of evaluation for two reasons: First, movies are
a significant part of individuals’ media use. People invest considerable time and money to
watch films either in a theatre, on TV or DVD, or as video streams on the Internet. Second,
given the dual nature of movies as works of art and entertainment, movie evaluations reflect
the entire bandwidth of possible evaluative outcomes—from a spontaneous sense of liking or
disliking to well-founded critique. For instance, on social media, individuals may express
spontaneous positive evaluations by clicking the Like button, or they may elaborate their
evaluations in online blogs, on shopping websites (e.g., Amazon), or on movie platforms
(e.g., Rotten Tomatoes). At the same time, a growing number of audience members turn to
this information for guidance concerning their own media choices. These examples show that
evaluations can play multiple roles. But what exactly is evaluation? How can it help
expanding our knowledge about and explanation of entertainment phenomena? How do we
evaluate movies and related information?

EVALUATING MOVIES

4

To tackle such questions, we start with a brief discussion about how to define
evaluation. We then introduce the associative–propositional evaluation (APE) model
(Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2007, 2011) and apply it to address the question how
movies are evaluated. The APE model distinguishes between two mental processes: On the
one hand, associative processes (i.e., the activation of associative patterns by feature
similarity and spatio-temporal contiguity) can lead to spontaneous affective reactions that
serve as a quick, intuitive response (implicit evaluation). On the other hand, the propositional
processing of an associative pattern (i.e., the validation of activated information) can also
lead to a parallel outcome of evaluative judgment (explicit evaluation). This model of
mutually interacting associative and propositional processes provides an integrated
framework that can help explain the complexities of evaluating media content. We discuss
the APE model’s theoretical implications concerning specific phases of media use and its
relevance for entertainment research in general. As we will argue, the APE model can offer
an overarching framework to integrate several evaluation-related constructs in previous
entertainment research. We conclude by using the model to address some open questions and
provide an outlook for further research.
What Is Evaluation?
Evaluating an object means to determine how much we like that object: we judge
something as good or bad, as pleasant or unpleasant (De Houwer, 2009). Evaluative
judgments often seem to occur intuitively, but they are not as simple as it may seem at first
sight. For example, considering the question how much you liked the last movie you have
seen or the last episode of your favorite TV show may illustrate the multifaceted nature of
evaluations, ranging from spontaneous gut feelings to well-deliberated judgments. All
evaluative judgements seem to share a common objective, however, that is to inform
individuals’ decisions to approach or avoid objects and behavioral options that they encounter

EVALUATING MOVIES

5

in daily life (e.g., De Houwer, 2009; Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2011; Tesser & Martin,
1996). For instance, if individuals evaluate the beginning of a movie or a pilot of a TV show
negatively, they would probably stop watching it. At the most abstract level, evaluation can
be defined in terms of this functional distinction between good and bad or approach and
avoidance, but such a definition that focuses on the goals of evaluation remains unclear
concerning the underlying low-level processes, the conditions under which these processes
operate, or how these processes are translated into behavior (De Houwer, 2009, p. 37). It also
remains unclear what features are taken into account when an object is evaluated and how
overall evaluative judgments are formed. Depending on what features are considered and
how they are processed, evaluative outcomes may differ substantially. This becomes evident
in the case of movie or shopping platforms, where a variety of comments and ratings refer to
the same movie but are highly polarized (for examples, see Chamorro-Premuzic, Kallias, &
Hsu, 2014, p. 88, or Schneider, 2017, p. 49). Another difficulty lies in the fact that evaluation
as determining the liking of an object (i.e., evaluation as a process) is not directly observable,
whereas its outcomes—evaluative responses caused by an object (i.e., evaluation as an
effect)—can be operationalized in various ways (e.g., Facebook Likes, Amazon stars, ratings
on a Likert-scale, response latencies, or physiological indicators). As a result, defining
evaluation as responding to an object in an evaluative manner (e.g., De Houwer, 2009, p. 37;
Eagly & Chaiken, 2007, p. 583) or “as the effect of stimuli on evaluative responses” (De
Houwer, Gawronski, & Barnes-Holmes, 2013, p. 253) has the advantage of making it easy to
determine whether an object (e.g., a movie) has been evaluated. In short, we can observe the
outcome but not the process. However, we can theorize how the presence of an evaluative
response relates to the presence of a process that results in an evaluative response.
Consequently, as De Houwer (2009, p. 38) put it, “independent of whether evaluation is

EVALUATING MOVIES

6

defined as a process or an effect, the study of evaluation boils down to the study of evaluative
responding.”
Evaluative Responses and Related Concepts
Evaluative responses are a long-standing research topic in the field of entertainment
research. Conceptually related terms such as liking, preferences, enjoyment, and appreciation
have been used to describe entertainment phenomena (for an overview, see e.g., Nabi &
Krcmar, 2004). One prominent example is the enjoyment-as-attitude approach, which
conceptualizes enjoyment as “an attitude with affective, cognitive, and behavioral
antecedents and consequences” (Nabi & Krcmar, 2004, p. 305). Evaluative responses are a
core defining element of attitude as “a psychological tendency that is expressed by evaluating
a particular entity with some degree of favor or disfavor” (Eagly & Chaiken, 1993, p. 1).
Although the attitude concept can be useful as an integrative label (cf. Gawronski
& Bodenhausen, 2007), we suggest that evaluative responses to movies and underlying
processes can be described more precisely by focusing on manifest evaluative responses. As
several authors have noted (e.g., De Houwer et al., 2013; Fazio, 2007), the concept of attitude
is fraught with conceptual ambiguity. Particularly, one problem that arises with equating
manifest behavioral evaluative responses with latent mental representations like attitudes
conflates the explanandum (i.e., the evaluative responses that need to be explained) and the
explanans (i.e., the latent mental construct that should explain these responses). For instance,
using evaluative responses to a specific movie as proxies for an attitude towards this movie
and, at the same time, assuming that an attitude towards this movie causes these responses is
conceptually circular (e.g., De Houwer et al., 2013; Fazio, 2007). Moreover, such an
approach makes it conceptually difficult, if not impossible, to disentangle other factors that
influence evaluative responses from attitudinal influence. Further, other controversies
surround the questions how many attitudes a person holds, why evaluative responses to the

EVALUATING MOVIES

7

same attitude object differ, or why attitudes and behaviors are often not consistent (e.g.,
Gawronski, 2007b). Focusing on evaluative responses and their underlying processes may
resolve some of these controversies (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2007). Following
current approaches in social cognition research, we do not suggest that terms like attitude or
liking should be abandoned completely. In fact, they may serve as integrative concepts if
defined inclusively (e.g., Eagly & Chaiken, 2007) or if theoretical frameworks are applied
that specify the levels of analysis (e.g., De Houwer et al., 2013; for a recent discussion
concerning attitudinal media effects in general, see also Coenen & Van den Bulck, 2018).
However, using the attitude concept without any theoretical specifications gives little insight
into the underlying processes (i.e., how evaluative judgments are formed). We will return to
these issues in the last part of this chapter, after we have introduced the APE model, which
allows us to shed light on the related terms and processes from different angles.
The Associative–Propositional Evaluation (APE) Model
The APE model grew out of a line of theorizing in social and cognitive psychology
that was strongly influenced by domain-specific dual-process models (cf. Payne &
Gawronski, 2010). For instance, in the field of persuasive communication, one of the most
prominent examples is the elaboration likelihood model (ELM; e.g., Petty & Cacioppo, 1986;
for an overview of more domain-specific dual-process models, see Chaiken & Trope, 1999;
Gawronski & Creighton, 2013). The ELM explains how different message features impact
attitude formation and attitude change via different routes. Other domain-specific dualprocess models deal with impression formation (e.g., Fiske, Lin, & Neuberg, 1999), attitude–
behavior relations (e.g., Fazio, 1990), or, more recently in the realm of entertainment
research, with the effects of entertainment media on political outcomes (e.g., Bartsch &
Schneider, 2014; see also Schneider, Bartsch, & Leonhard, this volume). Several attempts
have been made to integrate these domain-specific approaches into generalized dual-process

EVALUATING MOVIES

8

models, which distinguish between two types of processes that serve as building blocks of
judgments and behavior (e.g., System 1 and System 2 processing, Kahneman, 2003;
associative and rule-based processing, Smith & DeCoster, 2000; reflective and impulsive
processing, Strack & Deutsch, 2004).1
One of the most influential generalized dual-process models is Gawronski and
Bodenhausen’s APE model (e.g., Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2006b, 2007, 2011,
2014a), which assumes that two distinct, but mutually interacting processes—associative and
propositional processes—lead to different behavioral outcomes, based on implicit and
explicit evaluations, respectively. Associative processes are characterized as the activation of
mental concepts in memory, leading to a first, process-specific evaluative response, namely
an implicit evaluation (or affective reaction). Implicit evaluations are neither true nor false.
For instance, in the case of a creature-feature horror movie, implicit evaluations can be
reflected in viewers’ biopsychological reactions (e.g., facial expression, skin conductance). In
addition, propositional processes can be activated, through which individuals think about
what is on their minds. For example, adult viewers are usually aware that their emotional
response is unfounded, because the horror creatures are fictitious and only exist on the screen.
If associatively activated patterns elicit propositions that are consistent with the implicit
evaluation, the propositional processing of an activated pattern directly leads to a second kind
of process-specific response, namely an explicit evaluation (or evaluative judgment). In this
case, implicit and explicit evaluations are in line with each other. If, however, associatively
activated propositions are judged as invalid, this inconsistency leads to an unpleasant feeling
of dissonance (Festinger, 1957). In our example, this would be the case if a negative affective
reaction toward the monster elicits the propositional belief “I’m afraid of the movie monster,”

1

Please note that the nomenclature is not always consistent, because the term dual-process sometimes refers to
different processes, sometimes to different mental representations, and sometimes to different processing
systems (cf. Gawronski, Sherman, & Trope, 2014).

EVALUATING MOVIES

9

but thinking about this also elicits propositions like “I dislike being afraid” and “In reality,
such monsters do not exist,” which in sum creates a temporarily inconsistent belief system.
To resolve such a dissonance, the viewer could reject one or more of the included
propositions (e.g., invalidate the belief “I’m afraid of the movie monster”) or search for
additional propositions to restore consistency (e.g., “It’s okay to be afraid of monsters in
horror movies” or “I like it if a movie really scares me”). According to the APE model, if an
affective reaction is rejected as a valid basis for propositional reasoning, explicit and implicit
evaluations are dissociated. If consistency can be restored, however, explicit and implicit
evaluations are in correspondence with each other. Ironically, if a proposition is negated (e.g.,
negating the belief that one is afraid of monsters), this can reinforce the mental association
between “monster” and “being afraid,” resulting in higher dissociation between explicit and
implicit evaluations. Conversely, seeking propositions that affirm the negative affective
reaction to the monster (e.g., “I like it if a movie really scares me”) can increase the
correspondence between implicit and explicit evaluations.
As should be clear from this example, implicit and explicit evaluations are not only
conceptually different—they also need to be measured with different methods. Implicit
evaluations that are elicited by associative processes might best be assessed by applying
indirect measures (e.g., physiological indicators, response times). Explicit evaluations that
result from propositional reasoning are usually assessed by applying direct measures (e.g.,
interviews, questionnaires). However, although conceptually different, both processes do not
work independently from each other (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a; Strack & Deutsch,
2004). Gawronski and Bodenhausen (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2011) discuss four
basic cases in which direct influences on propositional processes are unrelated to or mediated
by associative processes or vice versa. Moreover, combinations of these effects may occur. In
this chapter, we focus on two basic and two combined cases that are of particular relevance

EVALUATING MOVIES

10

with regard to the evaluation of movies. For more examples, the reader is referred to the work
of Gawronski and Bodenhausen (2006a, 2011).
In the default mode (bottom-up), propositional processes are fully mediated by
associative processes (Figure 1A). This means, activated associations are affirmed and
accepted as valid. For instance, discovering one’s favorite song in a film score while
watching a movie might elicit positive associations. If the soundtrack of a movie is an
important criterion for one’s evaluation of a movie (i.e., a salient propositional belief), such
an activated association fits into the propositional processing of the quality of the film. Thus,
implicit and explicit evaluations of the movie correspond with each other. To elicit
associative patterns, the features appearing in the movie do not need to match pre-stored
mental representations exactly; it is sufficient if stimuli are spatiotemporally contiguous to
existing representations. This can be illustrated by analogy with the power of algorithmic
recommendation systems that are based on previously watched (e.g., Netflix, YouTube) or
evaluated movies (e.g., moviepilot.de). Such a recommendation system makes use of the
similarity of previously encountered features. Although features in a previously seen and a
newly recommended movie may not be identical, similarities in classified genres, featured
actors or characters, story lines, etc. can elicit associative processes. Previously encountered
features are more likely to be positively evaluated on an implicit level if they are encountered
again. This is in line with the mere exposure effect (cf. Zajonc, 2001).
According to the APE model, changes in propositional processes can also influence
associative processes (top-down; Figure 1B). For instance, if viewers have read film critiques
(or have general background information) before actually watching a movie, such prior
knowledge might directly influence propositional processes during exposure (e.g., they might
pay special attention to the critically acclaimed status or exceptional thrill of the movie, or the
authenticity of acting of an Oscar winner). These propositional processes can activate

EVALUATING MOVIES

11

associative patterns, thereby influencing associative processes and outcomes. Again, implicit
and explicit evaluations are in line with each other, however associative activations did not
elicit propositional processes, but the other way around.
In other cases, associative activation and propositional validation can lead to different
outcomes—as illustrated by empirical findings on implicit social cognition (for more details,
see Payne & Gawronski, 2010). With regard to movies, for example, in an unambitious social
drama, erotic scenes involving attractive actors may be arousing and may elicit positive
associations, even though these scenes are not essential to the story line. An indirect
measurement of such activated associations would probably reveal positive implicit
evaluations. However, these implicit evaluations may be unrelated to explicit evaluations. If
asked to self-report their evaluations (e.g., via questionnaire), viewers would probably make
negative explicit evaluations, for example, about the routine story or the unrealistic
development of the plot in the movie. Thus, explicit and implicit evaluations are dissociated,
although the same scene had elicited both—an example for a combined effect (Figure 1C).
Concerning movies, combined direct and indirect effects of film stimuli on associative
and propositional processes may appear most frequently (Figure 1D). For example, a movie
like Dead Man Walking may directly elicit propositional processes by revealing new
arguments for and against the death penalty. In addition, it may also elicit associative
processes (e.g., if parents in the audience empathize with the victims’ parents in the movie).
Furthermore, propositional processes may activate associations (e.g., of past trials and
convictions). Finally, associative processes may elicit propositional reasoning (e.g.,
comparing scenes of the film to personal beliefs about death penalty).
—Insert Schneider-Vogel-Gleich-Bartsch_Fig_1.png here—
Implications of the APE Model for Research on Movie Entertainment

EVALUATING MOVIES

12

As explained in the last section, the APE model provides a differentiated framework
for analyzing possible direct, indirect and combined effects of associative and propositional
evaluation processes in the case of movies. However, compared to traditional experiments in
social cognition research, one challenge of applying the APE model to movie evaluations lies
in the complexity of the stimulus. Films are complex, dynamic, audiovisual stimuli with a
specific run time that can be divided into different nested units. For instance, a movie can be
divided into sequences, comprising different scenes, which consist of different shots, and
even shots can be composed of different elements. Consequently, every unit can be an object
of evaluation, and can thus elicit processes that produce evaluative outcomes (see Fahr &
Früh, this volume). Segmenting a movie into meaningful sequences requires criteria based on
film analysis. This has been rarely done in media psychology research so far (for remarkable
exceptions, see Suckfüll, 2000, 2010). To date, entertainment research has focused on
complete movies, although sometimes excerpts, trailers, or written descriptions about the
content have been used as substitutes.
To complicate matters further, a movie does not only elicit evaluative responses
related to the content, as described in the examples above. Movies as objects of evaluation
can be categorized into at least three broad dimensions: (a) film-inherent features such as
story or cinematography, (b) film-external features such as awards or film critiques, and (c)
(anticipated) effects of the film on the viewer, including emotions or cognitive effort for
example (cf. Schneider, 2017). Additionally, all three dimensions of evaluation can elicit
associative and propositional processes and resulting evaluative responses before, during, and
after movie exposure.
Although these challenges are interwoven, it is useful to distinguish between
evaluative responses before, during, and after movie exposure for two reasons. First,
evaluative responses before, during and after exposure are mostly based on different types of

EVALUATING MOVIES

13

information. For instance, movie trailers, awards, critiques, and word of mouth serve as filmexternal input stimuli, and thus can elicit associative and propositional processes already
before exposure to a movie. During exposure, movie viewers have first-hand cognitive and
affective experiences and can further consider the film-inherent features (e.g., story,
cinematography, etc.). After exposure, social and communicative activities such as talking
with others about the movie, commenting about the movie online, or seeking additional
information about the content or the actors, can build on previously formed evaluative
representations and confront them with additional film-external cues.
Second, evaluative responses can be linked to different psychological constructs,
depending on the different phases. For example, research on evaluative responses before
exposure has focused on individuals’ motivations for viewing a movie (e.g., gratifications
sought), whereas evaluative responses during and after exposure have been linked to
individuals’ experiences of a movie (e.g., gratifications obtained). Besides these
psychological constructs, additional factors that can inform evaluative responses have been
investigated from a media economics perspective (e.g., word of mouth, reviews, and
advertisements).
Evaluation Before Exposure
Evaluative responses before exposure are usually formed in the absence of knowledge
about film-inherent features (except in the case of repeated viewing, or film segments
included in trailers). However, film-external stimuli and anticipated effects of use can
activate mental representations and processes, and can stimulate evaluative responses. Given
that evaluations help to decide whether to approach or avoid the object of evaluation, it seems
important to elucidate associative and propositional processes that result in movie choices
and selective exposure as major behavioral outcomes of evaluation. Concerning film-external
sources, the movie marketing literature has extensively researched factors that can influence

EVALUATING MOVIES

14

evaluative responses to movies (for overviews, see e.g., Hadida, 2009; Simonton, 2009).
Especially, prior aggregated evaluative information about movies such as critical acclaim and
word of mouth recommendations have been found to influence individual-level responses to
movies (e.g., Burzynski & Bayer, 1977; dʼAstous & Touil, 1999; Jacobs, Heuvelman, ben
Allouch, & Peters, 2015; Wyatt & Badger, 1984, 1990). This illustrates that explicit
evaluations of movies can manifest themselves as film-external stimuli (e.g., film critiques)
that in turn can elicit associative and propositional processes and evaluative responses in
potential viewers already before exposure. Thus, the evaluative output of some viewers can
serve as evaluative input for others.
With regard to anticipated effects of use, individuals may choose movies that fit their
personal characteristics (cf. disposition–content congruency hypothesis, Valkenburg & Peter,
2013). This has been addressed in theoretical models of media choice (e.g., uses and
gratifications, gratifications sought and obtained [GSGO], and selective exposure; for
overviews, see e.g., Knobloch-Westerwick, 2015; Krcmar, 2009). These approaches share the
common assumption that trait-like individual characteristics are shaped by accumulated prior
implicit and explicit evaluative responses to media exposure, which are stored as mental
representations in memory. Most notably, movie genre preferences and subjective movie
evaluation criteria have been described as accumulations of such evaluative responses to
movies across the life span (cf. Valkenburg & Cantor, 2000; for a discussion, see Schneider,
2012). Likewise, more general entertainment preferences such as hedonic and eudaimonic
motivations (Oliver & Raney, 2011) seem to include valence components that are linked to
mental representations of prior accumulated evaluative responses. Generally speaking, most
of the models and constructs mentioned above focus on evaluative representations with either
positive valence (associated with approach motivation), or negative valence (associated with

EVALUATING MOVIES

15

avoidance motivation) based on prior accumulated evaluative responses to similar movies
(e.g., Fahr & Böcking, 2009; Palmgreen, Cook, Harvill, & Helm, 1988).
A prominent example in this context is the GSGO model. Drawing on expectancy–
value theories (e.g., Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), it combines prior beliefs that a medium (e.g., a
movie) possesses a specific attribute with evaluations of this attribute to predict gratifications
sought and media choice (e.g., Palmgreen & Rayburn, 1982). From the perspective of the
APE model, film-external information (e.g., advertisement, trailer, word of mouth) can elicit
associative and propositional processes directly, indirectly, or in combination. Goals and
intentions to seek such information make it likely that new propositional information is
encountered and propositional processes are directly influenced. In addition, to validate such
information and to arrive at an evaluative judgment, individuals may retrieve prior
information from memory. This direct influence on propositional processes is also
represented in the GSGO model (i.e., novel or stored propositional beliefs and evaluative
representations). GSGO research traditionally uses questionnaires to assess these beliefs and
evaluations, meaning that only explicit evaluations and propositional processes are
investigated. From an APE model perspective, the assumptions of two mutually interacting
processes, associative and propositional, and two corresponding evaluative responses, explicit
and implicit evaluations, would enrich theories and models that, like the GSGO model,
mainly focus on propositional processes and explicit evaluations.
Another example is the mood management theory (see Luong & KnoblochWesterwick, this volume). According to Knobloch-Westerwick (2015, pp. 214–216), mood
management shares some similarities with expectancy–value models (e.g., the anticipated
effect of choosing a movie to enhance mood as a positive goal). In contrast to the GSGO
model, however, “mood management theory does not dedicate much attention to the interplay
of beliefs and evaluations but focuses on the perceived situation with regard to mood

EVALUATING MOVIES

16

experience and its impact on media selection” (Knobloch-Westerwick, 2015, p. 214). Thus,
MMT emphasizes the affective state (in terms of the APE model: a temporarily activated
associative pattern; Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, p. 700) that serves as a basis for an
explicit evaluation or media choice. However, MMT makes no assumption that propositional
processes may also be at work (see e.g., Smith & Neumann, 2005, pp. 301–303, who discuss
Russell’s [2003] core affect theory through the lens of dual-process theories). Such
propositional processes may be necessary to validate activated associative patterns.
Moreover, MMT draws on Festinger’s (1957) notion of dissonance reduction (KnoblochWesterwick, 2015, p. 216; Zillmann, 1988). However, determining cognitive inconsistency
and dissonance reduction are exclusively related to propositional reasoning (Gawronski
& Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2011; Gawronski & Strack, 2004; Gawronski, Strack, &
Bodenhausen, 2008). Thus, the APE model can offer a novel, more fine-grained look at how
achieving hedonically pleasant states is related to propositional reasoning.
Although evaluative responses are part of the theoretical core of the GSGO model and
MMT, little is known about how these (accumulated) evaluative responses emerge.
Moreover, it seems important to better understand the interplay of associative processes (e.g.,
affective responses) and propositional processes (e.g., validating beliefs, expectations,
motivations). This may not only be helpful to explain how explicit and implicit evaluation are
formed based on external stimuli before movie exposure; associative patterns elicited by
external stimuli may still be active and exert their influence during exposure. Moreover, even
if previously learned associations (via associative or propositional learning)2 are not activated

Associative learning is defined as “as the formation of associative links between mental concepts on the basis
of observed spatiotemporal contiguities,” whereas propositional learning “as the formation of evaluative
representations on the basis of propositional information that is regarded as valid,” (Gawronski & Bodenhausen,
2014b, p. 191). The APE model assumes no separate storage system for propositions. Both associative links and
propositional information are stored in the form of associations (e.g., Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2011, p. 66).
2

EVALUATING MOVIES

17

anymore, they can easily be reactivated later and then influence explicit and implicit movie
evaluations during or after exposure.
Evaluation During Exposure
During movie exposure, several processes related to evaluative responses unfold in
mutual and continuous interaction. For example, cognitive theories of emotions assume that
appraisal processes are critically involved in eliciting emotions (e.g., Scherer, 2013), which,
in turn, can be reappraised in the form of meta-emotions (e.g., Bartsch, Vorderer, Mangold,
& Viehoff, 2008; Schramm & Wirth, 2010). Appraisal processes are conceptualized as
processes with evaluative outcomes—as evident in the definition of appraisal processes
“whose function is to evaluate the implications of stimuli for wellbeing” (Moors & Scherer,
2013, p. 136) or in the so-called stimulus evaluation checks and their outcomes (e.g., Scherer,
2013, p. 154). Through the lens of the APE model, stimulus evaluation checks can be
described as both associative and propositional processes (Scherer, 2001, p. 103). This is not
explicitly stated in the literature on the APE model so far, but several scholars elaborated on
the importance of emotions in dual-process theories (e.g., Deutsch, 2017; Smith & Neumann,
2005) and discussed the connection between affective, associative, propositional, and
appraisal processes (for a recent discussion, see e.g., Deutsch, 2017, pp. 58–61). Generally,
empirical evidence suggests (cf. Ellsworth & Scherer, 2003) that some emotions may be
predominantly driven by associative processes (e.g., disgust, fear), whereas others include
high-order knowledge and propositional processes (e.g., shame, pride). Likewise, appraisals
in general might differ along a continuum of predominantly associative vs. predominantly
propositional processing. This conclusion is subject to different interpretations, however,
depending on which theoretical perspective is preferred and how broad appraisals are
conceptualized (e.g., Dalgleish, 2003; Moors & Scherer, 2013). Emotions have been
described as both activated associative patterns (Bower, 1981) or propositions (e.g., Smith

EVALUATING MOVIES

18

& Neumann, 2005), and seem to play an important role for evaluative outcomes in both roles.
Thus, despite the ongoing controversy about the causal role of appraisals (Moors, 2010,
2013), it seems safe to conclude that—especially during movie exposure—processes that
elicit evaluative outcomes are conceptually similar, if not equivalent, to appraisal processes
and that these evaluative outcomes can include emotional responses. In addition, such
reactions can contribute to more deliberate, overall judgments after movie exposure.
Other examples of evaluative processes that occur during movie exposure include
moral judgments as articulated in affective disposition theory (e.g., Raney, 2004; Raney &
Bryant, 2002), parasocial interaction (e.g., Hartmann & Goldhoorn, 2011; Tukachinsky &
Stever, 2018; also see Brown, this volume), and identification (e.g., Igartua, 2010; Klimmt,
Hefner, & Vorderer, 2009; also see Cohen & Klimmt, this volume). These approaches share a
common theoretical focus on media figures as objects of evaluation, and a methodological
focus on self-report measures. For instance, affective dispositions towards characters are
based on moral evaluations of those characters’ motives and behaviors. However, it remains
unclear, which underlying processes lead to what kind of evaluative responses. Addressing
this research problem from the perspective of the APE model can help to clarify and extend
these previous theoretical approaches based on domain-specific dual-process perspectives
(e.g., the continuum model by Fiske et al., 1999, as applied in Sanders, 2010).
Concerning identification with media figures—“defined as a temporary alteration of
media users’ self-concept through adoption of perceived characteristics of a media person”
(Klimmt et al., 2009, p. 356, emphasis in original), Klimmt et al. (2009) suggest the use of
indirect measures to assess the temporary shift in activated associative patterns of the selfconcept. More specifically, Klimmt, Hefner, Vorderer, Roth, and Blake (2010) created an
implicit association test (cf. Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998) to measure
identification with video game characters on an associative level. Again, such an approach

EVALUATING MOVIES

19

can benefit from applying the APE model as a theoretical framework because it allows
specifying hypotheses about the interplay of underlying evaluative processes and responses.
With regard to Klimmt et al. (2010), who measured both implicit and explicit evaluative
responses to assess identification with video game characters, the APE model can help
provide testable assumptions about the underlying processes, conditions, and moderators
(e.g., why implicit and explicit evaluations were not associated).
Evaluation After Exposure
Movie evaluations have often been investigated from a media effects perspective.
Accordingly, evaluative responses to movies have been operationalized as post-hoc
judgments after exposure. As outlined above, these judgments are not only related to filminherent features (e.g., story or cinematography) but also to the (anticipated) effects of film
viewing (e.g., the viewers’ expectations or experiences). For instance, Oliver and Bartsch
(2010) explored how well specific dimensions of audience responses (e.g., fun, suspense, and
moving/thought-provoking) predicted more general movie evaluations (e.g., liking,
appreciation, and enjoyment) using self-report measures after watching a movie. Their
approach has stimulated a growing line of research (cf. Schneider, Bartsch, & Oliver, 2019,
Table A1) that focuses on propositional processes and explicit evaluations of inherent
features of the entertainment media products and of (anticipated) entertainment experiences.
From an APE model perspective, this line of research needs to integrate associative processes
and implicit evaluations. Moreover, given the nature of self-report measures after exposure
and the lack of theoretical assumptions about the mental representations and processes, we
can only speculate posthoc about how the evaluative responses emerged. Reframing concepts
like appreciation and enjoyment with the help of the APE model could provide valuable
insights. We suggest that all entertainment experiences imply propositional and associative
processes. Preliminary evidence comes from a study of Bartsch, Kalch and Oliver (2014)

EVALUATING MOVIES

20

who found that affective responses (being moved) stimulated propositional responses
(reflective thoughts), and that both predicted positive evaluations of the movie. However,
from an APE model perspective, the assessment of affective responses using self-report
measures after exposure needs to be complemented with implicit measures to cross-validate
these findings.
Some studies dealing with entertainment phenomena have applied indirect measures.
For instance, Lewis, Tamborini, and Weber (2014) used response latencies to measure
appreciation and enjoyment as evaluative responses to endings of narratives. Building on
Tamborini’s (2011; see also this volume) model of intuitive morality and exemplars, they
suggested that “enjoyment is a positive response that results from quick, intuitive processing”
and “appreciation is a positive response characterized by the type of slower, controlled
appraisals necessary for weighing the salience of conflicting needs” (Lewis et al., 2014,
p. 399). Such an approach could benefit from applying the APE model as a theoretical
framework that specifies possible patterns of how implicit evaluations can result from
underlying associative and propositional processes (e.g., direct, indirect or combined effects).
The inclusion of instruments to measure both implicit and explicit evaluations in combination
with a priori hypotheses can give insights into the underlying processes because of the
resulting pattern of evaluative responses. To address the methodological challenge of
disentangling viewers’ responses to different movie-related objects of evaluation (e.g., filminherent features and entertainment experiences), it is important to arrive at a deeper
understanding of the dynamic evaluative processes, and to move beyond post-exposure
measurement.
Discussion
Evaluative responses are pervasive and vital for daily life. All kinds of objects can
elicit evaluative responses, including entertainment media and movies in particular, as

EVALUATING MOVIES

21

illustrated in this chapter. By applying the associative–propositional evaluation (APE) model,
we propose an overarching theoretical framework that integrates different entertainment
phenomena in the context of movies before, during, and after exposure. In the remainder of
this chapter, we highlight the benefits of such an approach and address some related
questions.
Why Study Evaluation?
What is the advantage of studying the evaluative responses to entertainment content
such as movies over traditional approaches such as enjoyment (e.g., Oliver & Nabi, 2004)?
First, it is important to note that the APE model does not substitute established concepts in
entertainment research. Rather, it provides an overarching framework for analyzing the
common building blocks of entertainment phenomena and common underlying processes.
Entertainment research has a long tradition of borrowing theories and models from social
psychology, including a number of domain-specific dual-process models. In this context, the
APE model can provide an updated and generalized version of a dual process model that
allows for a more fine-grained theoretical and empirical analysis of various entertainment
phenomena before, during, or after exposure. For example, the APE model offers innovative
research perspectives on processes of entertainment media selection and purchase (Hartmann,
2009), experiential-affective dynamics during message exposure (Fahr & Früh, this volume),
motivational processes of repeated and prolonged “binge” consumption of entertainment
(Halfmann & Reinecke, this volume; Tannenbaum, 1985), and insights into the seemingly
paradoxical nature of ambivalent evaluations such as guilty pleasures (Panek, 2014;
Reinecke, Hartmann, & Eden, 2014) or appreciation of unpleasant content (Bartsch, 2012). It
can be particularly useful if the focus is on underlying processes, that is, how evaluative
responses emerge. Moreover, it may provide a framework for deriving precise hypotheses but
also developing new research questions based on theoretical assumptions about underlying

EVALUATING MOVIES

22

evaluative processes and their complex interactions. In addition to explicit evaluations, we
assume that implicit evaluations can be powerful predictors of social behavior in general
(Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a; Strack & Deutsch, 2004) and of entertainment
consumption in particular (e.g., movie choice, Yeh, 2012). The particular strengths of the
APE model apply in cases where movie viewers are undecided or have no previous
information about the movie (cf. Galdi, Arcuri, & Gawronski, 2008; Galdi, Gawronski,
Arcuri, & Friese, 2012). Given the predominant focus of entertainment research on selfreport measures, implicit evaluations have remained under-researched so far. The additional
use of indirect measures can reveal findings in which explicit and implicit evaluations
diverge due to different underlying processes. Identifying and investigating such cases can
provide important insights into entertainment experiences.
How Should Implicit Evaluations Be Measured?
Indirect methods and measures such as implicit association tests (e.g., Greenwald et
al., 1998), affect misattribution procedures (e.g., Payne, Cheng, Govorun, & Stewart, 2005),
Facial Action Coding System (e.g., Ekman, Friesen, & Ancoli, 1980), or psychophysiological
measures (e.g., Weber, 2015), are possible options to measure implicit evaluations. A number
of additional approaches have been extensively described elsewhere (e.g., Wittenbrink &
Schwarz, 2007), some of which have already been applied and tested in media psychological
studies (for an overview on indirect measures in media effects research, see Hefner,
Rothmund, Klimmt, & Gollwitzer, 2011).
What Is the Conceptual Relationship Between Evaluative Responses and Attitudes?
The APE model represents recent advances in social cognition and attitude research,
thus, we see our approach as an update and extension of Nabi and Krcmar’s (2004)
theoretical elaboration on enjoyment as an attitude. We agree with Nabi and Krcmar’s (2004)
discussion of enjoyment and related terms (i.e., liking, attraction, appreciation, preference,

EVALUATING MOVIES

23

entertainment) and their interpretation of media enjoyment as an attitude. What the APE
model can add is an updated approach to explain attitudinal phenomena based on recent
social psychological research (e.g., De Houwer, 2009; De Houwer et al., 2013). In particular,
the APE model does not equate attitudes (or their mental representations) with the evaluative
responses caused by attitudes. Rather, evaluation is defined as the effect of different stimuli
on evaluative responses. Recently, Coenen and van den Bulck (2018, pp. 42–43, Principle 3)
have put the same argument forward in the general context of attitudinal media effects. Such
a distinction allows specifying questions about the causes and moderators of evaluative
responses and the role of mental processes and representations as mediating mechanisms
without conflating explanans and explanandum. For more details on how evaluative
responses and the APE model relate to conceptualizations of attitudes, see Gawronski and
Bodenhausen (2007).
Are Associative and Propositional Processes Just Synonyms for Other Dual Processes?
Gawronski and Bodenhausen (2006a, 2006b) provide an in-depth discussion of the
relationship between the APE model and traditional domain-specific dual-process theories
that are well-known in communication science (e.g., the ELM, Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).
Two points are of particular relevance here. A first crucial difference is that associative and
propositional processes are orthogonal to the influence of central and peripheral cues,
respectively (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, pp. 710–711), that is, both central and
peripheral cues can be processed associatively or propositionally or in combination.
Secondly, central to the ELM (and also to the heuristic–systematic model, e.g., Chen &
Chaiken, 1999) is the assumption of influences of central/systematic or peripheral/heuristic
features under conditions of high or low cognitive elaboration, respectively. In contrast, the
APE model assumes that cognitive elaboration is only one of several determinants of
propositional reasoning (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a, 2011).

EVALUATING MOVIES

24

Are Associative and Propositional Processes Just Synonyms for Automatic or
Controlled Processes?
Gawronski and Bodenhausen (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2011, 2014b) extensively
discuss the distinction between operating principles and operating conditions. Operating
principles define what a particular process is doing. Associative processes are defined as the
activation of associative patterns by feature similarity and spatio-temporal contiguity.
Propositional processes are defined as the validation of activated information concerning its
consistency (e.g., Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2014b, p. 189). In contrast, operating
conditions define when such processes are operating. Following Bargh (1994), the four
operating conditions of automaticity are awareness, intentionality, efficiency, and
controllability. Associative and propositional processes can operate on all of those conditions.
For instance, going back to our example for Figure 1C above (i.e., watching an erotic scene),
viewers may or may not be aware of activated associations (i.e., their affective gut
responses).
How Is the APE Model Represented in Contemporary Entertainment Research?
Although the 2006 article (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006a) introducing the APE
model has been cited over 2,000 times in the last ten years, surprisingly little research in
communication research or media psychology has built on it. A brief glimpse at the relevant
papers in these fields shows that they only refer to the 2006 paper either to elaborate on the
implicit–explicit distinction or as an example for current dual-process theories. The notable
exceptions mainly focus on attitude change (e.g., with regard to stereotypes, smoking, or
specific products in a movie). However, these attitudinal outcomes are not directly related to
entertainment; rather, they are typical outcome variables of research addressing persuasive
media effects (for a brief overview, see e.g., Payne & Dal Cin, 2015). Thus, although the

EVALUATING MOVIES

25

APE model has been applied to media-related topics occasionally, to our knowledge, media
entertainment experiences or movie evaluations have not been among them yet.
What Should Entertainment Research Focus on When Considering Movie Evaluations?
Above, we outlined ideas about the role of movie evaluations before, during, and after
exposure of a movie. Following De Houwer et al. (2013, p. 283), two general questions can
be asked with regard to every phase: 1) “Which elements in the environment moderate
evaluation?” and 2) “What mental processes and representations mediate evaluation?”
Whereas the first question addresses the functional relations between environment and
behavior, the second refers to the cognitive or mental level of analysis.
Concerning the first question, environmental factors that moderate the stimulus–
response relation have not been systematically investigated with regard to movie evaluation
so far. For instance, if the focus is on the complete movie as an entity or on specific filminherent features, other (film-external) stimuli such as recommendations or location of
viewing can moderate evaluative responses. Additionally, individual differences in
motivations or past experiences can moderate the interplay of evaluative processes (e.g., if a
specific criterion like story innovation is important for evaluating a movie, Schneider, 2017).
With regard to the second question, given that mediational representations and
processes are hard to measure, manipulating and examining them in a series of experiments
can be a helpful alternative (cf. Bullock, Green, & Ha, 2010; Spencer, Zanna, & Fong, 2005).
Especially, cognitive research on films (e.g., Bordwell, 1985; Ohler, 1994; Schwan, 2001)
can be more strongly connected to emotion-focused entertainment research and give insights
into how film-related information is mentally represented and thus can be used to alter such
representations. Moreover, recent concepts like eudaimonic or self-transcendent
entertainment experiences (e.g., Oliver et al., 2018) heavily rely on evaluative representations
and processes. Thus, revisiting such concepts through the lens of associative and

EVALUATING MOVIES

26

propositional processes and appropriate ways of measuring implicit and explicit evaluation
could enrich theorizing about eudaimonic and self-transcendent entertainment experiences.
Alternatively, entertainment phenomena can be used to challenge and test general
dual-process theories like the APE model if entertainment theories highlight their additional
value in explaining evaluative responses above and beyond general dual-process models.
Concluding Remarks
The question at the core of this chapter was how people evaluate movies. According
to the APE model, the answer is via associative and propositional processes, which are
assumed to be the underlying processes for implicit and explicit evaluations, respectively.
These qualitatively distinct but mutually interacting processes can be directly or indirectly
influenced by the features of a movie. Based on the way they interact and the conditions
under which they operate, the same movie stimulus can produce response patterns, which
result in changes in implicit but not explicit evaluations, explicit but not implicit evaluations,
or corresponding changes in both kind of evaluations. Although we predominantly used
evaluative processes concerning movies to illustrate our reasoning, the APE model as a
generalized dual-process model can be applied to any other entertainment medium (e.g.,
video games or novels) as well. Such a perspective may open new avenues for entertainment
research by delineating the underlying processes of established constructs that have been
predominantly examined as explicit evaluations so far.

EVALUATING MOVIES

27
References

Bargh, J. A. (1994). The four horsemen of automaticity: Awareness, intention, efficiency, and
control in social cognition. In R. S. Wyer & T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of social
cognition. Vol. 1: Basic processes (2nd ed., pp. 1–40). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bartsch, A. (2012). Emotional gratification in entertainment experience. Why viewers of
movies and television series find it rewarding to experience emotions. Media
Psychology, 15, 267–302. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2012.693811
Bartsch, A., Kalch, A., & Oliver, M. B. (2014). Moved to think: The role of emotional media
experiences in stimulating reflective thoughts. Journal of Media Psychology, 26, 125–
140. https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-1105/a000118
Bartsch, A., & Schneider, F. M. (2014). Entertainment and politics revisited: How nonescapist forms of entertainment can stimulate political interest and information
seeking. Journal of Communication, 64, 369–396. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12095
Bartsch, A., Vorderer, P., Mangold, R., & Viehoff, R. (2008). Appraisal of emotions in media
use: Toward a process model of meta-emotion and emotion regulation. Media
Psychology, 11, 7–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213260701813447
Bordwell, D. (1985). Narration in the fiction film. London, UK: Methuen.
Bower, G. H. (1981). Mood and memory. American Psychologist, 36, 129–148.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.36.2.129
Bullock, J. G., Green, D. P., & Ha, S. E. (2010). Yes, but what's the mechanism? (don’t
expect an easy answer). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 550–558.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018933
Burzynski, M. H., & Bayer, D. J. (1977). The effect of positive and negative prior
information on motion picture appreciation. The Journal of Social Psychology, 101,
215–218. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224545.1977.9924009

EVALUATING MOVIES

28

Chaiken, S., & Trope, Y. (Eds.). (1999). Dual-process theories in social psychology. New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., Kallias, A., & Hsu, A. (2014). What type of movie person are you?
Understanding individual differences in film preferences and uses: A psychographic
approach. In J. C. Kaufman & D. K. Simonton (Eds.), The social science of cinema
(pp. 87–122). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chen, S., & Chaiken, S. (1999). The heuristic-systematic model in its broader context. In S.
Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 73–96).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Coenen, L., & Van den Bulck, J. (2018). The problem with our attitude: A meta-theoretical
analysis of attitudinal media effects research. Annals of the International
Communication Association, 42, 38–54.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23808985.2018.1425099
Dalgleish, T. (2003). Information processing approaches to emotion. In R. J. Davidson, K. R.
Scherer, & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of affective sciences (pp. 661–673).
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
dʼAstous, A., & Touil, N. (1999). Consumer evaluations of movies on the basis of critics'
judgment. Psychology & Marketing, 16, 677–694.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-6793(199912)16:8<677::AID-MAR4>3.0.CO;2-T
De Houwer, J. (2009). How do people evaluate objects? A brief review. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass, 3, 36–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.17519004.2008.00162.x
De Houwer, J., Gawronski, B., & Barnes-Holmes, D. (2013). A functional-cognitive
framework for attitude research. European Review of Social Psychology, 24, 252–287.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10463283.2014.892320

EVALUATING MOVIES

29

Deutsch, R. (2017). Associative and propositional processes from the perspective of the
reflective-impulsive model. In R. Deutsch, B. Gawronski, & W. Hofmann (Eds.),
Reflective and impulsive determinants of human behavior (pp. 51–68). New York,
NY: Routledge.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The psychology of attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (2007). The advantages of an inclusive definition of attitude.
Social Cognition, 25, 582–602. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.5.582
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Ancoli, S. (1980). Facial signs of emotional experience.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1125–1134.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0077722
Ellsworth, P. C., & Scherer, K. R. (2003). Appraisal processes in emotion. In R. J. Davidson,
K. R. Scherer, & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of affective sciences (pp. 572–
595). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Fahr, A., & Böcking, S. (2009). Media choice as avoidance behavior: Avoidance motivations
during television use. In T. Hartmann (Ed.), Media choice. A theoretical and
empirical overview (pp. 185–202). New York, NY: Routledge.
Fazio, R. H. (1990). Multiple processes by which attitudes guide behavior: The MODE
model as an integrative framework. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology (Vol. 23, pp. 75–109). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Fazio, R. H. (2007). Attitudes as object-evaluation associations of varying strength. Social
Cognition, 25, 603–637. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.5.603
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson, and
Company.

EVALUATING MOVIES

30

Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: An introduction to
theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fiske, S. T., Lin, M., & Neuberg, S. L. (1999). The continuum model: Ten years later. In S.
Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories in social psychology (pp. 231–
254). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Galdi, S., Arcuri, L., & Gawronski, B. (2008). Automatic mental associations predict future
choices of undecided decision-makers. Science, 321, 1100–1102.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1160769
Galdi, S., Gawronski, B., Arcuri, L., & Friese, M. (2012). Selective exposure in decided and
undecided individuals: Differential relations to automatic associations and conscious
beliefs. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 559–569.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167211435981
Gawronski, B. (2007a). Attitudes can be measured! But what is an attitude? [Editorial].
Social Cognition, 25, 573–581. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.5.573
Gawronski, B. (Ed.). (2007b). What is an attitude? [Special Issue]. Social Cognition, 25(5).
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006a). Associative and propositional processes in
evaluation: An integrative review of implicit and explicit attitude change.
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 692–731. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.132.5.692
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006b). Associative and propositional processes in
evaluation: Conceptual, empirical, and metatheoretical issues: Reply to Albarracín,
Hart, and McCulloch (2006), Kruglanski and Dechesne (2006), and Petty and Briñol
(2006). Psychological Bulletin, 132, 745–750. https://doi.org/10.1037/00332909.132.5.745

EVALUATING MOVIES

31

Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2007). Unraveling the processes underlying
evaluation: Attitudes from the perspective of the APE model. Social Cognition, 25,
687–717. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.5.687
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2011). The associative-propositional evaluation
model: Theory, evidence, and open questions. In J. M. Olson & M. P. Zanna (Eds.),
Advances in experimental social psychology, Vol. 44 (pp. 59–127). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2014a). Implicit and explicit evaluation: A brief
review of the associative-propositional evaluation model. Social and Personality
Psychology Compass, 8, 448–462. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12124
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2014b). The associative-propositional evaluation
model: Operating principles and operating conditions of evaluation. In J. S. Sherman,
B. Gawronski, & Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories of the social mind (pp. 188–
203). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Gawronski, B., & Creighton, L. A. (2013). Dual process theories. In D. E. Carlston (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of social cognition (pp. 282–312). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gawronski, B., Sherman, J. S., & Trope, Y. (2014). Two of what? A conceptual analysis of
dual-process theories. In J. S. Sherman, B. Gawronski, & Y. Trope (Eds.), Dualprocess theories of the social mind (pp. 3–19). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Gawronski, B., & Strack, F. (2004). On the propositional nature of cognitive consistency:
Dissonance changes explicit, but not implicit attitudes. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 40, 535–542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2003.10.005
Gawronski, B., Strack, F., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2008). Attitudes and cognitive
consistency: The role of associative and propositional processes. In R. E. Petty, R. H.

EVALUATING MOVIES

32

Fazio, & P. Briñol (Eds.), Attitudes. Insights from the new implicit measures (pp. 85–
117). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring individual
differences in implicit cognition: The implicit association test. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74, 1464–1480. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.74.6.1464
Hadida, A. L. (2009). Motion picture performance: A review and research agenda.
International Journal of Management Reviews, 11, 297–335.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2370.2008.00240.x
Hartmann, T. (Ed.). (2009). Media choice: A theoretical and empirical overview. New York,
NY: Routledge.
Hartmann, T., & Goldhoorn, C. (2011). Horton and Wohl revisited: Exploring viewers'
experience of parasocial interaction. Journal of Communication, 61, 1104–1121.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2011.01595.x
Hefner, D., Rothmund, T., Klimmt, C., & Gollwitzer, M. (2011). Implicit measures and
media effects research: Challenges and opportunities. Communication Methods and
Measures, 5, 181–202. https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2011.597006
Igartua, J.-J. (2010). Identification with characters and narrative persuasion through fictional
feature films. Communications, 35, 347–373.
https://doi.org/10.1515/COMM.2010.019
Jacobs, R. S., Heuvelman, A., ben Allouch, S., & Peters, O. (2015). Everyone’s a critic: The
power of expert and consumer reviews to shape readers’ post-viewing motion picture
evaluations. Poetics, 52, 91–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2015.07.002
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality.
American Psychologist, 58, 697–720. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.58.9.697

EVALUATING MOVIES

33

Klimmt, C., Hefner, D., & Vorderer, P. (2009). The video game experience as 'true'
identification: A theory of enjoyable alterations of players' self-perception.
Communication Theory, 19, 351–373. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14682885.2009.01347.x
Klimmt, C., Hefner, D., Vorderer, P., Roth, C., & Blake, C. (2010). Identification with video
game characters as automatic shift of self-perceptions. Media Psychology, 13, 323–
338. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2010.524911
Knobloch-Westerwick, S. (2015). Choice and preference in media use: Advances in selective
exposure theory and research. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Krcmar, M. (2009). Individual differences in media effects. In R. L. Nabi & M. B. Oliver
(Eds.), The Sage handbook of media processes and effects (pp. 235–250). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewis, R. J., Tamborini, R., & Weber, R. (2014). Testing a dual-process model of media
enjoyment and appreciation. Journal of Communication, 64, 397–416.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12101
Moors, A. (2010). Theories of emotion causation: A review. In J. de Houwer & D. Hermans
(Eds.), Cognition and emotion. Reviews of current research and theories (pp. 1–37).
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Moors, A. (2013). On the causal role of appraisal in emotion. Emotion Review, 5, 132–140.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1754073912463601
Moors, A., & Scherer, K. R. (2013). The role of appraisal in emotion. In M. D. Robinson, E.
Watkins, & E. Harmon-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of cognition and emotion (pp. 135–
155). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

EVALUATING MOVIES

34

Nabi, R. L., & Krcmar, M. (2004). Conceptualizing media enjoyment as attitude:
Implications for mass media effects research. Communication Theory, 14, 288–310.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2004.tb00316.x
Ohler, P. (1994). Kognitive Filmpsychologie: Verarbeitung und mentale Repräsentation
narrativer Filme [Cognitive film psychology: Information processing and mental
representation of narrative films]. Münster: MAKS.
Oliver, M. B., & Bartsch, A. (2010). Appreciation as audience response: Exploring
entertainment gratifications beyond hedonism. Human Communication Research, 36,
53–81. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2009.01368.x
Oliver, M. B., & Nabi, R. L. (Eds.). (2004). Exploring the concept of media enjoyment
[Special issue]. Communication Theory, 14(4).
Oliver, M. B., & Raney, A. A. (2011). Entertainment as pleasurable and meaningful:
Identifying hedonic and eudaimonic motivations for entertainment consumption.
Journal of Communication, 61, 984–1004. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14602466.2011.01585.x
Oliver, M. B., Raney, A. A., Slater, M. D., Appel, M., Hartmann, T., Bartsch, A., …Das, E.
(2018). Self-transcendent media experiences: Taking meaningful media to a higher
level. Journal of Communication, 68, 380–389. https://doi.org/10.1093/joc/jqx020
Palmgreen, P., Cook, P. L., Harvill, J. G., & Helm, D. M. (1988). The motivational
framework for moviegoing: Uses and avoidances of theatrical films. In B. A. Austin
(Ed.), Current research in film. Audiences, economics and law (Vol. 4, pp. 1–23).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Palmgreen, P., & Rayburn, J. D., II. (1982). Gratifications sought and media exposure: An
expectancy value model. Communication Research, 9, 561–580.
https://doi.org/10.1177/009365082009004004

EVALUATING MOVIES

35

Panek, E. (2014). Left to their own devices: College students’ “guilty pleasure” media use
and time management. Communication Research, 41, 561–577.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0093650213499657
Payne, B. K., Cheng, C. M., Govorun, O., & Stewart, B. D. (2005). An inkblot for attitudes:
Affect misattribution as implicit measurement. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 89, 277–293. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.89.3.277
Payne, B. K., & Dal Cin, S. (2015). Implicit attitudes in media psychology. Media
Psychology, 18, 292–311. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2015.1011341
Payne, B. K., & Gawronski, B. (2010). A history of implicit social cognition: Where is it
coming from? Where is it now? Where is it going? In B. Gawronski & B. K. Payne
(Eds.), Handbook of implicit social cognition: Measurement, theory, and applications
(pp. 1–15). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persuasion: Central and
peripheral routes to attitude change. New York, NY: Springer.
Raney, A. A. (2004). Expanding disposition theory: Reconsidering character liking, moral
evaluations, and enjoyment. Communication Theory, 14, 348–369.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2004.tb00319.x
Raney, A. A., & Bryant, J. (2002). Moral judgment and crime drama: An integrated theory of
enjoyment. Journal of Communication, 52, 402–415. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14602466.2002.tb02552.x
Reinecke, L., Hartmann, T., & Eden, A. (2014). The guilty couch potato: The role of ego
depletion in reducing recovery through media use. Journal of Communication, 64,
569–589. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12107
Russell, J. A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion.
Psychological Review, 110, 145–172. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.110.1.145

EVALUATING MOVIES

36

Sanders, M. S. (2010). Making a good (bad) impression: Examining the cognitive processes
of disposition theory to form a synthesized model of media character impression
formation. Communication Theory, 20, 147–168. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14682885.2010.01358.x
Scherer, K. R. (2001). Appraisal considered as a process of multilevel sequential checking. In
K. R. Scherer, A. Schorr, & T. Johnstone (Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion.
Theory, methods, research (pp. 92–120). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Scherer, K. R. (2013). The nature and dynamics of relevance and valence appraisals:
Theoretical advances and recent evidence. Emotion Review, 5, 150–162.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1754073912468166
Schneider, F. M. (2012). Measuring subjective movie evaluation criteria. Conceptual
foundation, construction, and validation of the SMEC scales (Dissertation).
Universität Koblenz-Landau. Landau. Retrieved from http://nbnresolving.de/urn:nbn:de:hbz:lan1-7813
Schneider, F. M. (2017). Measuring subjective movie evaluation criteria: Conceptual
foundation, construction, and validation of the SMEC scales. Communication
Methods and Measures, 11, 49–75. https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2016.1271115
Schneider, F. M., Bartsch, A., & Oliver, M. B. (2019). Factorial validity and measurement
invariance of the Appreciation, Fun, and Suspense scales across US-American and
German samples. Journal of Media Psychology, 31, 149–156.
https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-1105/a000236
Schramm, H., & Wirth, W. (2010). Exploring the paradox of sad-film enjoyment: The role of
multiple appraisals and meta-appraisals. Poetics, 38, 319–335.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2010.03.002

EVALUATING MOVIES

37

Schwan, S. (2001). Filmverstehen und Alltagserfahrung: Grundzüge einer kognitiven
Psychologie des Mediums Film [Film comprehension and everday experience].
Wiesbaden: DUV.
Simonton, D. K. (2009). Cinematic success criteria and their predictors: The art and business
of the film industry. Psychology & Marketing, 26, 400–420.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20280
Smith, E. R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual-process models in social and cognitive psychology:
Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 4, 108–131.
https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327957PSPR0402_01
Smith, E. R., & Neumann, R. (2005). Emotion processes considered from the perspective of
dual-process models. In L. F. Barrett, P. M. Niedenthal, & P. Winkielman (Eds.),
Emotion and consciousness (pp. 287–311). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal chain: why
experiments are often more effective than mediational analyses in examining
psychological processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 845–851.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.845
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impulsive determinants of social behavior.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 220–247.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327957pspr0803_1
Suckfüll, M. (2000). Film analysis and psychophysiology: Effects of moments of impact and
protagonists. Media Psychology, 2, 269–301.
https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532785XMEP0203_4

EVALUATING MOVIES

38

Suckfüll, M. (2010). Films that move us: Moments of narrative impact in an animated short
film. Projections: The Journal of Movies and Mind, 4, 41–63.
https://doi.org/10.3167/proj.2010.040204
Tamborini, R. (2011). Moral intuition and media entertainment. Journal of Media
Psychology, 23, 39–45. https://doi.org/10.1027/1864-1105/a000031
Tannenbaum, P. H. (1985). “Play it again, Sam”: Repeated exposure to television programs.
In D. Zillmann & J. Bryant (Eds.), Selective exposure to communication (pp. 225–
241). Mahwah, N.J: Erlbaum.
Tesser, A., & Martin, L. L. (1996). The psychology of evaluation. In A. W. Kruglanski & E.
T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology. Handbook of basic principles (pp. 400–432).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Tukachinsky, R., & Stever, G. (2018). Theorizing development of parasocial engagement.
Communication Theory. Advance online publication.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ct/qty032
Valkenburg, P. M., & Cantor, J. (2000). Children's likes and dislikes of entertainment
programs. In D. Zillmann & P. Vorderer (Eds.), Media entertainment: The psychology
of its appeal (pp. 135–152). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2013). The differential susceptibility to media effects model.
Journal of Communication, 63, 221–243. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcom.12024
Weber, R. (Ed.). (2015). Biology and brains—Methodological innovations in communication
science [Special issue]. Communication Methods and Measures, 9(1-2).
Wittenbrink, B., & Schwarz, N. (Eds.). (2007). Implicit measures of attitudes. New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Wyatt, R. O., & Badger, D. P. (1984). How reviews affect interest in and evaluation of films.
Journalism Quarterly, 61, 874–878. https://doi.org/10.1177/107769908406100421

EVALUATING MOVIES

39

Wyatt, R. O., & Badger, D. P. (1990). Effects of information and evaluation in film criticism.
Journalism Quarterly, 67, 359–368. https://doi.org/10.1177/107769909006700213
Yeh, S.-Y. (2012). Interactive effects of habitual cuing and media features on evaluation: A
dual-process model. Media Psychology, 15, 222–247.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2012.675878
Zajonc, R. B. (2001). Mere exposure: A gateway to the subliminal. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 10, 224. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.00154
Zillmann, D. (1988). Mood management through communication choices. American
Behavioral Scientist, 31, 327–340. https://doi.org/10.1177/000276488031003005

Running head: EVALUATING MOVIES

40

Figure Captions

Figure 1. Potential direct and indirect influences of a film stimulus on associative and propositional processes and their corresponding evaluative
responses (A, B) and potential combined direct and indirect influences (C, D). Adapted from Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2011; A, B see Figure
2.3, p. 80; C, D see Figure 2.5, p. 91, reprinted with permission.

