Paper Cuts: How Reporting Resources Affect Political
News Coverage
Erik Peterson
Texas A&M University
Department of Political Science
erik.peterson@tamu.edu∗
Forthcoming at the American Journal of Political Science
Abstract

Media outlets provide crucial inputs into the democratic process, yet they face increasingly severe economic challenges. I study how a newly salient manifestation
of this pressure, reduced reporting capacity, influences political coverage. Focusing on newspapers in the United States, where industry-wide employment fell
over 40% between 2007 and 2015, I use panel data to assess the relationship between reporting capacity and political coverage. Staff cuts substantially decrease
the amount of political coverage newspapers provide. Across different samples
and measurement approaches, a typical cutback to a newspaper’s reporting staff
reduces its annual political coverage by between 300 and 500 stories. These
political news declines happen against the backdrop of similar reductions in nonpolitical coverage, meaning the share of newspaper articles focused on politics
remains stable over this period. This demonstrates that economic pressure affects the political information environment by shaping the media’s capacity to
cover politics.

∗

The author thanks Lauren Davenport, Johanna Dunaway, Sharad Goel, Justin Grimmer,
Jay Hamilton, Shanto Iyengar, Jonathan Mummolo, Brian Rosenthal, Kathleen Searles,
Gabor Simonovits and Sean Westwood for helpful comments and the American Society
of Newsroom Editors and UNC’s Center for Innovation and Sustainability in Local Media
for sharing data. Stanford’s Center for Philanthropy and Civil Society provided research
support.

The news media provides crucial inputs into the democratic process. In its capacity as a
political observer, the media’s coverage helps the public make sense of developments in institutions ranging from local school boards to the White House (Graber 1988, Mondak 1995,
Jerit et al. 2006, Hayes and Lawless 2015, Rogers 2017, Peterson 2017). When operating
as a political watchdog, media scrutiny exposes government corruption and motivates policy
change (Puglisi and Snyder 2011, Boydstun 2013, Hamilton 2016).
Today the legacy media producing political coverage face severe economic pressures
(Shaker 2014, Hayes and Lawless 2015, Hopkins 2018, Darr et al. 2018, Martin and McCrain 2019, Trussler ND). These challenges have been especially pronounced for newspapers
in the United States where, due to drops in advertising revenue and the debt burdens carried
by many chains, industry-wide employment fell by over 40% between 2007 and 2015 (ASNE
2016). The implications of these changes are important to understand. Newspapers provide
crucial information to other media and local opinion leaders (Mondak 1995). Declines in
reporting capacity raise concern they will transform from “keystones” of the political information environment (Nielsen 2015, see also Mahone et al. 2019) into “useless shells” with
a limited ability to cover politics and scrutinize government (McChesney and Nichols 2011,
104; see also Abernathy 2018, Hayes and Lawless 2018, Van Aelst et al. 2017).
Here I argue that reporting resources influence the media’s ability to cover politics, with
reporting cutbacks leading to less political news. This explanation differs from others in
several ways. First, it is distinct from alternatives that explain political coverage using the
preferences of news consumers (Soroka 2014, Kernell et al. 2018), the views of ownership
(Martin and McCrain 2019, Dunaway 2008, Schaffner and Sellers 2003) or media outlet
structure (Cook 1989, Boydstun 2013). Second, other work considers how news outlets
preemptively alter their coverage to head off economic challenges (Petrova 2011, Hamilton
2004). The present account picks up after such efforts fall short, identifying a channel through
which economic pressures influence the availability of political information by shaping the
1

media’s capacity to cover politics.
To examine this resource-based account of political news coverage, I create measures of
newspaper staffing from an industry census and digitized media directories. These complementary approaches overcome measurement challenges limiting prior tests of reporting
capacity’s role in political news production.
I relate reporting capacity to news coverage by measuring the amount of national, state
and local political coverage in newspapers using keyword searches in news databases. Prior
studies demonstrate the political importance of this outcome, with the supply of political
news influencing aspects of mass behavior – such as public opinion, political knowledge and
retrospective voting (Mondak 1995, Arnold 2004, Jerit et al. 2006, Prior 2007, Hopkins and
Pettingill 2018, Rogers 2017, Peterson ND) – and elite-level politics – including candidate
entry, the effort exerted by legislators and the composition of the policy-making agenda
(Rubado and Jennings ND, Snyder and Strömberg 2010, Baumgartner and Jones 1993).
Descriptively, staff cutbacks are widespread and affect reporters in a variety of roles,
including those with a political focus. They impact newspapers similarly whether or not
they are owned by a national chain, showing declines in reporting resources are distinct from
newspaper ownership. In terms of political news, industry-wide staffing declines coincide
with substantial reductions in the volume of political coverage newspapers produce.
I use panel data to assess the within-newspaper relationship between newspaper staffing
and the amount of political news, in both absolute terms and relative to other types of
coverage, that a newspaper produces. Across multiple measurement approaches, I show staff
declines reduce the amount of political coverage a newspaper provides. In the longest panel
available for analysis, which covers 1994 to 2014, a typical decline in reporting capacity in
the data, a loss of 12 reporters, reduces a newspaper’s expected volume of political coverage
by 500 stories per year, an amount equivalent to 5% of the average annual political coverage
offered by newspapers in this sample. Among the stories newspapers still produce, the share
2

of political news coverage is not affected by staff cuts. This stability occurs because political
news declines happen against the backdrop of similar reductions in non-political coverage and
means that, even as large absolute declines in political news coverage volume have occurred,
political news has not been disproportionately affected by reporting cutbacks.
Beyond these overall effects, there is only mixed support for two additional hypotheses
about the consequences of staffing declines for different types of coverage or due to the
types of reporters they involve. There is suggestive evidence staff cuts are more impactful
for local political news and when they involve reporters specializing on political topics, but
these heterogeneous effects are imprecisely estimated and supportive evidence is not obtained
across all the newspaper samples.
This analysis provides systematic evidence for how declines in newspaper reporting capacity affect political coverage. The consequences of media decline extend beyond high-profile
newspaper shutdowns (Darr et al. 2018, Shaker 2014, Schulhofer-Wohl and Garrido 2013) or
media with owners disinclined to invest in local reporting (Dunaway 2008, Darr 2014, Martin
and McCrain 2019). Instead, reporting cutbacks occur across different ownership structures
and influence the political coverage of many newspapers that continue to operate, but with
severely reduced reporting staffs. Focusing on reporting capacity explains one source of the
political coverage declines observed in other work (e.g., Hayes and Lawless 2018, Peterson
ND). More broadly, this study highlights a theoretical perspective of growing importance
for understanding political news in an era of declining resources at legacy media across the
globe (Rubado and Jennings ND, Abernathy 2018, Van Aelst et al. 2017, Nielsen 2012).

Economic Pressure and Political News Coverage
Although economic considerations contributed to the formation of an independent press
in the United States (Petrova 2011, Hamilton 2004), news outlets now face a tension between
fulfilling the public service goals important to journalists (Weaver et al. 2007, 141-145; Gardner et al. 2001) and the pressures of a competitive marketplace (Kaniss 1991, McManus 1994,
3

Hamilton 2004). Influential accounts explain features of contemporary political coverage –
the prevalence of “soft” news, a reliance on negatively framed stories, the presence of coverage with an ideological slant – using an anticipatory framework in which media outlets
tailor their coverage to attract an audience and stave off threats to their economic viability
(Kernell et al. 2018, Soroka 2014, Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010, Patterson 2000).
In this article I argue there is a second channel through which market pressures can affect
political news. Anticipatory efforts to stave off economic decline can fall short, something
increasingly common as broader technological changes undermine established media funding
models (e.g., Seamans and Zhu 2014, Cagé ND). After these setbacks, news organizations
are forced to adapt. As labor costs represent a substantial portion of most media outlets’
variable expenditures (Kirchoff 2010), this response often takes the form of cuts to their
reporting staff (Angelucci and Cagé 2019). Through this process economic pressure shapes
a media outlet’s capacity to produce political news by reducing its reporting resources.

Reporting Capacity and Political News Coverage
Changes in reporting capacity may impact political news because the creation of political
coverage is heavily dependent on staffing. Ethnographic accounts of news production emphasize the intensive labor required to produce original political reporting (Tuchman 1978,
Fishman 1980, Kaniss 1991, McManus 1994). These case studies document journalists’ need
to balance information collection from routinized sources, such as press conferences, with
active efforts to develop contacts, follow leads and make public records requests. Consistent
with this, newspapers with low circulation or owned by national chains, two contributors to
lower reporting capacity, offer less or lower quality political coverage than their counterparts
(Darr 2016, Dunaway 2008, Meyer 2008, Arnold 2004, Schaffner and Sellers 2003).
Given the important role of reporters, industry-wide staffing declines at daily newspapers
have produced concern about the continued provision of political news (Jones 2009, Starr
2009, Hayes and Lawless 2018, Abernathy 2018). These declines stem from a combination
4

of falling advertising revenues, difficulty in monetizing online readership and growing debt
burdens at prominent newspaper chains (Zirchhoff 2010, Waldman 2011). Due to layoffs and
buyouts, the number of newspaper employees fell from 55,000 in 2007 to 33,000 in 2015 in a
census conducted by the American Society of Newsroom Editors (ASNE 2016).
Declines occurred throughout the industry with large-scale cutbacks at outlets with national profiles, such as the Los Angeles Times, and at newspapers, like the Raleigh News &
Observer, that anchor regional coverage (e.g., Jones 2009, 9-12; Hamilton 2009). Cutbacks
impacted journalists in a variety of roles, from the Chicago Sun-Times’s decision to layoff
its entire photography department (Channick 2013), to buyouts of experienced investigative
reporters at the Washington Post (Waldman 2011).
The preceding discussion suggests staff declines may reduce the amount of political coverage newspapers provide. This is important due to the relationship between political coverage
volume and political outcomes in previous work and concern that political events will go uncovered due to staff cuts (e.g., Snyder and Strömberg 2010, Hayes and Lawless 2018).
Beyond political news volume, a related question is how staffing declines impact the
composition of newspaper’s coverage. Media decline may disproportionally affect political
news, leading to a lower share of newspaper coverage addressing politics. This could occur
if newspapers preserve reporting staff and coverage in non-political domains to a greater
extent than their political coverage, perhaps in an attempt to retain reader interest (e.g.,
Jones 2009). Alternatively, the same factors suggesting decreased reporting resources will
reduce political coverage may also operate in other coverage domains. For instance, nonpolitical coverage of community events can also be labor-intensive and require journalists to
follow similar news-gathering routines to political beat reporting. To address this second
aspect of coverage, both a newspaper’s political news volume and the share of its coverage
focused on politics appear as outcomes in the analysis that follows.
So far discussion has centered on the implications of staffing for overall political coverage.
5

There are reasons to suspect reporting resources to have heterogeneous consequences for
different areas of political news coverage and based on the types of reporters involved. The
next sections consider these possibilities.

News Coverage Topic
For some areas of politics there exist pooled resources, shared across outlets, offering
coverage of a political institution. Wire services like the Associated Press allow outlets
without dedicated reporters to cover national and state politics. Newspaper chains also
combine the resources of outlets in the same region to cover state and national politics
(Edna et al. 2014). In such situations, a media outlet’s own reporting resources may have
a more modest influence on its coverage as it can either run wire copy directly or use it as
the basis for its own coverage.1

For areas where these pooled resources do not exist, an

outlet’s staffing may have a more substantial relationship with news coverage as there are
no alternatives for producing news coverage.
This creates a politically-relevant distinction as shared resources typically exist only for
political offices representing a large number of people (Strömberg 2015, 187). Accordingly,
one expectation is that the consequences of staffing declines will be larger for local political
coverage, where alternatives are unavailable, than for other coverage areas.

Reporter Specialization
The organization of newsrooms means there may be different consequences based on the
types of reporters involved in a cutback. Newspaper reporting occurs through a system of
beats focused on a particular topics, leading to steady “police patrol” coverage of political
institutions on common beats (Boydstun 2013). In contrast, reporters on non-political beats
1

Some, but not all, of the wire copy in a newspaper is available in the electronic databases

used for the analysis (Ridout et al. 2012). I discuss these issues when introducing the data
used for the analysis and further address them in Appendix A.

6

on sports or lifestyle coverage focus on those areas rather than politics. I expect the contribution of reporters with a political focus to be more pronounced than general assignment
reporters or those with a non-political focus (e.g., sports or entertainment).

Expectations
The preceding discussion generates four expectations about the consequences of staffing
declines. The first is that declines in staffing will reduce an outlet’s overall attention to
politics.
H1: Declines in newspaper staffing will reduce a newspaper’s volume of political coverage
A second expectation that staff cuts will disproportionately impact political news relative
to non-political coverage.
H2: Declines in newspaper staffing will reduce a newspaper’s share of political coverage
Due to the particularly resource-intensive nature of local political reporting, a third hypothesis is that staffing will be particularly impactful for coverage of local politics.
H3: Declines in newspaper staffing will have a stronger effect on local political coverage
relative to other coverage areas
Finally, a fourth hypothesis is that politically-focused staffing will have greater consequences for political news than reporters with no specialty or a non-political focus.
H4: Declines in politically-focused news reporters will have a stronger effect on political
coverage than other types of reporters
An assessment of these hypotheses is needed for several reasons. First, there is limited
evidence on how reporting resources affect political news. Ethnographic studies discuss
reporting resources (Fishman 1980, Kaniss 1991), but focus on a small number of newspapers
over a short window. Lacking direct measures of reporting capacity, past quantitative studies
7

rely on proxies such as an outlet’s subscriber base or ownership and make cross-sectional
comparisons between different newspapers (Darr 2016, Hayes and Lawless 2015, Dunaway
2008, Arnold 2004). This limits their ability to distinguish the contribution of reporting
resources from other variables.
Second, opposing theoretical considerations cast doubt on whether staff cuts will translate
into political coverage declines. Newspapers may respond to economic pressure by increasing,
or at least maintaining, local political coverage to differentiate themselves from other media.
In line with this, George and Waldfogel (2006) find newspapers increased attention to local
news due to the nationwide expansion of the New York Times.
Third, even as the number of reporters has declined, changes in news production may
make staffing less relevant. Computer-assisted reporting allows individual reporters to do
more work than in the past (Hamilton 2016, Ch. 8) and journalists now face increased
productivity expectations (Starkman 2010), developments that may mute the consequences
of staffing declines for political coverage volume.

Measuring Newspaper Staffing and Political Coverage
Understanding the consequences of declining reporting resources requires measuring newspaper staffing. Sources, such as journalist Erica Smith’s Paper Cuts blog, initially tracked
layoffs in 2007 based on tips and public announcements. However, such efforts cover a short
time period and it is unclear if they capture all relevant staffing changes. As a result, I
introduce more comprehensive measures of newspaper staffing.

Staffing Measure 1: ASNE Census
ASNE’s newsroom census provides a measure of staffing at newspapers across the country. This is collected through an annual survey sent to editors at every daily newspaper in
the United States. It offers a long-term perspective on newspaper staffing that has received
limited academic use (but see Meyer 2008, Rubado and Jennings ND). While industry-wide

8

staffing data is publicly available, here I use restricted data on staffing at individual newspapers. A strength of this measure is the long time period over which it is available. The
census provides newspaper-level counts of those working in newsrooms as editors, reporters,
copyeditors or visual artists from 1994 to 2014. Importantly, it is collected with the knowledge individual newspapers will remain anonymous, encouraging a truthful account of a
newspaper’s staff size.2
Against these strengths, the census does have drawbacks. It is subject to non-response
when editors fail to return the survey, meaning not all newspapers are available over this
time period if they never or rarely respond to the census. Using self-reports of staff size also
potentially introduces measurement error if editors apply different criteria for determining
job roles or newsroom size. Finally, the census combines different types of reporters into a
single category, making it too coarse to isolate only those reporters with a political beat.

Staffing Measure 2: Newspaper Directories
To supplement the census and offset its drawbacks, I create a second measure of newspaper staffing from print copies of Bacon’s Newspaper Directory, a trade publication containing
contact information for newspaper editors and reporters.3 These directories offer a comprehensive source of contact information for journalists and have been used to create a sampling
frame for industry-wide surveys (Weaver et al. 2007). This measure was produced by extracting text from high-quality scans of over 9,000 pages of newspaper staff listings covering
2005 to 2012. Processing the text, which contains a consistent table format, provides another newspaper staffing measure. As the listings detail beat assignments, they also identify
reporters focused on politics, something not possible in the census.
2

Like others (Meyer 2008, Rubado and Jennings ND), I received access to newspaper-level

data from ASNE on the condition that staffing at individual newspapers not be disclosed.
3
Print publication of the directories stopped after 2012. Archived versions of the digital
media directories are not available from Bacons/Cision.

9

The directory supplements the census by measuring staffing on different beats and providing an assessment of newsroom size that does not rely on survey self-reports. However,
it is available over a more limited window of time than the census. Because the census and
directory have their own strengths and weaknesses, the analysis that follows includes both
whenever possible to determine whether results are robust to different measures of newspaper staffing. This offers clear support for findings that are consistent across these different
approaches to measuring newspaper staffing and, given the individual drawbacks of each
measure, suggests a more cautious interpretation of findings that cannot be replicated using
both.

Outcome Measure: Newspaper Attention to Politics
I link staffing to a newspaper’s attention to politics. I operationalize media attention
as counts of the number of newspaper stories containing keywords associated with different
political offices or the names of public officials, which follows research using similar measures
to examine the amount of political information in newspapers (e.g., Snyder and Strömberg
2010, Hayes and Lawless 2015, Hopkins 2018, Ban et al. 2019).
Story count data came from two sources. The first is Newsbank. Stories were identified
with keyword searches for a set of terms related to political coverage developed by Hopkins
(2018, Ch. 6). These terms touch on national, state and local politics. I create a summary
measure of a newspaper’s overall attention to politics and a separate measure of stories on
local politics (see Appendix A for detail). The sample from this source consists of a long
panel of newspapers (n=70 newspapers) where data on coverage and staffing is available from
1994 to 2014 and a short panel (n=192 newspapers) from 2000 to 2014 that incorporates
additional newspapers with data only available over the more recent time window.
The second coverage source is the Proquest database (n=170 newspapers). Here stories
were identified using searches for terms related to four different political coverage areas, providing separate measures of attention in each domain. National news coverage was identified
10

from articles referencing the incumbent president. State news coverage was identified based
on articles with the name of the state’s incumbent governor. Two aspects of local political
coverage – local government coverage of mayors or city councils and local education coverage
of school boards – were identified using keywords associated with these offices. This provides
annual counts for each topic for 170 newspapers from 2004 to 2014.
Across the different sources, the sample includes newspapers in every state. It also
includes an influential set of outlets. In 2014, the 319 newspapers available from at least one
coverage source had a combined print circulation of over 20 million, representing 49% of the
daily newspaper circulation in the United States that year.
There are two methodological issues with this dependent variable I briefly address. First,
although using keywords to identify political coverage is common, this approach can sometimes fail to capture its intended content (King et al. 2017). I draw on original and secondary
validation of the keywords in this study to show they capture news outcomes of interest. The
summary measures of overall and local media attention used for Newsbank were previously
validated by Hopkins (2018, Ch. 6). In identifying national and state coverage with officeholder names in Proquest, I rely on research showing this captures relevant political
dynamics (e.g., political influence, Ban et al. 2019; news media attention to Congress, Snyder and Strömberg 2010). Finally, several measures of classifier performance in Appendix A
show the keywords used to identify local education and local government coverage effectively
capture the intended news compared to labels produced by human coders for a sample of
stories.
Second, Ridout et al. (2012) find that electronic newspaper databases do not include
some wire coverage that appears in print in newspapers.4

This means the databases

could exaggerate declines in political coverage if newspapers increasingly substitute wire
4

Appendix A.4 uses a similar audit of the correspondence between print newspapers and

the coverage in electronic databases to show the same concern applies in this analysis
11

service coverage for their own content over the period considered here. In Appendix A,
I use digitized scans to directly examine the number of pages with political keywords in
print newspapers and find a similar trend in political coverage to the electronic newspaper
databases, suggesting the databases do not exaggerate political coverage declines. While
this convergence is reassuring, the issue Ridout et al. (2012) raise does highlight a benefit
of using multiple keyword choices and databases to assess the robustness of results across
different approaches to measuring political news.

Describing Newspaper Staffing and Political Coverage
Before relating staffing to coverage, I begin by describing staff cuts at newspapers and
changes in political news coverage. Figure 1 describes the substantial loss of reporters that
occurred at newspapers in the sample. The left panel of Figure 1 shows the average reporting
staff at newspapers where coverage can be paired with staffing in the census from 1994 to
2014. There is a 42% decline in newspaper staffing, from an average reporting staff of 75 in
1994 to 44 in 2014.
The right panel focuses on the broader newspaper sample over the recent window in Proquest. The black line represents the census staffing measure, which declined by 26% between
2004 and 2014. The average number of reporters employed at a newspaper declined from 46
to 34 at the end of the panel. The gray line displays average staffing at the same newspapers
using the directory measure. This alternative also reveals substantial staff declines, as the
average number of reporters fell from 35 in 2005 to 22 in 2012.

12

Figure 1: Newspaper Reporters By Year
Long Panel

Short Panel

100

50

80

Average # Reporters

Average # Reporters

Census

60
40
20
0

40
30
Directory

20
10
0

1995

2000

2005

2010

2004

Year

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Year

Note: Figure displays the average staff size at newspapers where coverage data is available. The left panel
shows newspapers available from 1994 to 2014, the right panel shows newspapers for 2004 to 2014.

For newspaper-years where both are available, the two measures are similar, with a
correlation over .95. However, modest differences exist between them. For instance, average
levels of reporting are higher in the census. Given the difficulty in portraying either as the
“ground truth” for newspaper staffing, I use both when possible to ensure any result is robust
to different operationalizations of newsroom size.5

Staffing By Ownership Type
Previous studies emphasize media ownership’s role in political news coverage (Martin and
McCrain 2019, Arnold 2004). Accordingly, it is important to understand the relationship
between ownership and staffing before proceeding. One possibility is that a newspaper’s ownership largely explains staffing declines, with cuts concentrated among newspapers owned
by national chains, a group identified as making less reporting investment than others (Dunaway 2008, Schaffner and Sellers 2003). Figure 2 considers this by comparing the census
5

Appendix B shows these measures exhibit strong convergent validity and also correspond

with public reports of newspaper layoffs.
13

staffing measure at newspapers owned by national chains to other newspapers.6
Figure 2: Newspaper Reporters By Year (National Chain/Non-National Chain)

60
Non−Chain

Average # Reporters

50
40
30

National Chain

20
10
0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Year

Note: Figure displays the average staff size at newspapers where coverage data is available based on whether
or not they were a member of a national chain in 2008.

Consistent with earlier work, newspapers owned by national chains have less reporting
capacity over the entire time period. However, staff declines happen in parallel among both
types of newspapers. Among national chains, staffing fell by 27% during these years. It
fell by 24% among non-chain owned newspapers. This shows staff cuts occur throughout
the newspaper industry and are not confined to one ownership structure and emphasizes
newsroom size as a distinct explanatory variable to consider separately from ownership in
the analysis that follows.7

Reporter Composition
How does the overall decline impact different reporting beats? I use staff lists in the
directories to categorize reporters into three mutually exclusive groups: political reporters,
6
7

See Appendix C for definitions. This is based on a newspaper’s ownership in 2008.
Appendix Table C2 shows the relationship between reporters and news coverage remains

when controlling for within-newspaper variation in chain ownership.
14

entertainment reporters and a residual category of those not in either group. The political
category contains reporters focused on government institutions (e.g., city hall) or with a
geographic focus (e.g, metro reporters) likely to contribute to political coverage. This includes 45% of the reporters in the sample. The entertainment category consists of the 35%
of reporters focused on sports, culture, health/fitness or other non-political topics. Finally,
the “other” category includes the 20% of reporters without a specific listing (e.g., “news
reporter”) or beats that only occasionally touch on politics (e.g., economic reporters).8
Figure 3: Reporter Composition By Year

Percentage of Reporters in Category

100%

General
80%

Entertainment

60%

40%

Political

20%

0%
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Year

Note: Figure displays the share of reporters on different beats for newspapers where coverage data is
available for the directory measure of staffing.

Figure 3 displays the composition of reporting staff by year, which is largely stable. Even
as cutbacks occurred throughout the newspaper industry, they did not alter the share of
reporters on various beats. This pattern is inconsistent with concern that staff cuts would
disproportionately impact political reporters relative to reporters on non-political beats (e.g.,
Jones 2009). Instead it suggests the prominence of non-topical criteria, such as seniority or
salary, in staffing decisions at newspapers during this time.
8

Appendix B offers more information about reporters in each category.
15

Political News Coverage
Moving to news coverage, Figure 4 describes the amount of attention newspapers devote
to politics over this time period. The left panel displays the overall amount of political
coverage from newspapers available beginning in 1994. There is a substantial drop in both
overall political coverage, which declined 48% between 1994 and 2014, and in news focused
on local politics, which fell by 46% over the same period. The amount of political news
produced by newspapers exhibits a pronounced dip from 2007 to 2009, coinciding with the
most severe staff cuts displayed in Figure 1.
Figure 4: Political News Coverage By Year
Long Panel

Short Panel

15000

2500
Local Gov
Average # Stories

Average # Stories

All Political

10000

5000

Local Political

2000
1500

Local Ed

1000

National

500
State
0

0
1995

2000

2005

2010

2004

Year

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Year

Note: Figure displays the average staff size at newspapers where coverage data is available. The left panel
shows newspapers available from 1994 to 2014, the right panel shows newspapers for 2004 to 2014.

The right panel displays political coverage in four different topic areas between 2004
and 2014 for newspapers in Proquest. Coverage of state politics is relatively stable, while
national national coverage of the President falls over this window, except for an uptick in
2009. Drop-off occurs in both aspects of local political coverage. The average number of
articles on local government, for instance, falls from 2,200 in 2004 to 1,500 in 2014.

16

Across both outcomes the composition of political coverage, in terms of the share that
deals with local politics, exhibits limited change even as there is an overall decline in the
amount of political news. In the long panel, local political coverage comprises 49% of news
stories in 1994 and 51% of political news articles in 2014. In the shorter panel, which
uses a different set of keywords these types of political news stories, local political coverage
comprises 72% of political articles in 2004 and 75% in 2014. Despite these baseline differences
in coverage share in the two sources, both show a similar temporal pattern: attention to local
and national political topics declines at roughly similar rates over this period (see Appendix
C for more descriptives on political coverage by year).

Relating Reporting Resources to Political Coverage
Having described these patterns in newspaper staffing and political coverage, I now turn
to a more direct assessment of the relationship between them by estimating the effect of
newspaper staffing on coverage in a series of panel regressions. These models take the
following form, where p indexes newspapers and t indexes years:

Political Coveragept = β0 + β1 Reporterspt + αt + αp + γpt + pt

Political Coveragept represents a newspaper’s article count in a coverage area during a
year. Reporterspt is a newspaper’s number of reporters in the same year. αt and αp are year
and newspaper fixed effects that confine the model to variation in newspaper staffing and
coverage unexplained by fixed characteristics of a newspaper or temporal shocks common to
all newspapers in the sample. Finally, γpt contains a series of time-varying controls potentially
related to political coverage. This includes its overall circulation and demographics of its
home county.9 These variables help account for alternative explanations for a newspaper’s
9

The 2004-2014 analysis conditions on additional market features, such as a newspaper’s

share of circulation in its home county, that are unavailable over the entire 1994 to 2014
17

coverage and address confounding that might otherwise result from changes in a newspaper’s
coverage due to shifts in its audience, rather than changes in its reporting staff.10
This approach offers several advantages for understanding the contribution of newspaper
staffing to political coverage. This panel establishes a baseline of media attention prior to
staffing declines. The year fixed effects ensure that temporal changes in coverage patterns
are not misattributed to the broad shocks to staffing across the newspaper industry as a
whole or common temporal changes faced by all newspapers (e.g., the growth in online
news consumption). Finally, the use of newspaper fixed effects means this model examines
the consequences of within-paper variation in staffing on coverage, removing concerns that
stable between-outlet differences that existed prior to declines in staffing explain coverage
differences between newspapers.

Political News Coverage Volume
In this section, I assess the relationship between a newspaper’s staffing and the amount
of political coverage it produces. Table 1 reports the results of regressions using several
operationalizations of both coverage and staffing, an approach used here and in some subsequent analyses to examine the robustness of the relationship across difference samples and
measurement approaches.
The first column displays results for the 1994-2014 newspaper sample in Newsbank (n=70
newspapers) and uses the reporting measure from the ASNE census. The second column
does so for the broader sample of 192 newspapers available using these same sources of
coverage and staffing data for 2000-2014. The third column conducts this analysis, again
using the census staffing measure, but substituting the coverage data available from Proquest
for 170 newspapers from 2004 to 2014. Here an overall measure of political news coverage
time period. Results also remain the same when controlling for changes in a newspaper’s
ownership during this time period (see Appendix Table C2).
10
Appendix C contains a full list of these variables and their sources.

18

was constructed by summing the number of stories in the four individual coverage areas.
Finally, the fourth column uses the same outcome measure, but includes the directory-based
measure of newspaper staffing available for 2005 to 2012 (n=186 newspapers). In all cases,
standard errors are clustered by newspaper.
Table 1: Reporters and Overall Political News Coverage
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
∗
∗
∗
Reporters
40.15
60.38
42.68
44.87∗
(14.71)
(11.96)
(9.23)
(7.48)
N
1470
2880
1606
1449
Coverage Source
N ewsbank
N ewsbank
P roquest
P roquest
Staffing Source
Census
Census
Census
Directory
Time Period
1994 − 2014
2000 − 2014
2004 − 2014
2005 − 2012
Robust standard errors, clustered by Newspaper, in parentheses
Models include Newspaper Fixed Effects, Year Fixed Effects and News Market controls
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

The coefficient for reporters indicates the change in the number of political stories produced by a newspaper due to a one reporter shift in its staff size. This coefficient is positive
and statistically significant across the various sources of staffing and political coverage, indicating that higher levels of staffing are related to more political news.11

This relationship

supports a resource-based perspective on the production of political coverage. The similar
findings across the different measurements provide confidence this relationship does not stem
from idiosyncrasies in how news coverage or reporting resources are measured. Most importantly, Table 1 directly links the declines in newspaper staffing and political news coverage
separately described in preceding sections, showing this relationship holds within newspapers
and net of controls for a variety of other factors that shape political coverage.
The substantive implications of these estimates of the relationship between newspaper
11

Results remain similar in models that do not include the newspaper market control

variables (see Table D2). Also, see Table D3 for a table including the coefficients for these
control variables.
19

staffing and news coverage merit additional discussion, as they indicate changes in staffing
produce meaningful shifts in political news coverage. In the model 1 specification that covers
the longest time window, a one standard deviation decline in a newspaper’s reporting staff,
roughly 12 reporters, produces an expected 500 story decline in its overall political news coverage.12 This amounts to 5% of the average amount of annual political coverage offered by
the newspapers in this sample. In the model 4 specification, covering the shorter time window and using the directory staffing measure, a one standard deviation change in reporting
staff leads to an expected 318 story decline in the amount of political coverage a newspapers
produces, or 9% of the average amount of political coverage offered by newspapers in this
sample.

Robustness: Newspaper-Specific Time Trends
While the preceding analysis addresses important sources of confounding, it relies on the
assumption that newspapers would share parallel trends in their coverage absent staffing
changes. This is a strong assumption, particularly as changes in the media environment over
this time period may have impacted newspapers in the sample differently. For this reason,
it is important to consider whether similar results can be observed without it.
I now relax this assumption by estimating models that include separate linear time trends
for each newspaper, accounting for any differential trends in political news coverage that are
unique to a given newspaper. It is important to note that this more flexible alternative
is not without its own drawbacks. The use of unit trends may attenuate estimates of the
relationship between staffing because these trends are constructed, in part, based on periods
after substantial declines in staffing occur (see Meer and West 2016 for a discussion of
12

These typical changes are based on a one standard deviation shift in the residual variation

in reporting staff net of other model covariates (Mummolo and Peterson 2018). This withinunit measure reflects the variation in newspaper staffing used to estimate the model after
including fixed effects and other controls.
20

these issues). However, this comparison between the different model specifications remains
valuable as an examination of whether the relationship between newspaper staffing and
political coverage is robust to relaxing a key assumption in the preceding analysis.
Table 2: Reporters and Overall Political News Coverage (With Linear Newspaper Trends)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
∗
∗
Reporters
30.86
26.01
11.40
11.98
(13.86)
(10.97)
(8.80)
(6.53)
N
1470
2880
1606
1449
Coverage Source
N ewsbank
N ewsbank
P roquest
P roquest
Staffing Source
Census
Census
Census
Directory
Time Period
1994 − 2014
2000 − 2014
2004 − 2014
2005 − 2012
Robust standard errors, clustered by Newspaper, in parentheses
Models include Newspaper Fixed Effects, Year Fixed Effects and News Market controls
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

Table 2 displays the results from this alternative specification. Across the various samples
and measurement approaches, incorporating newspaper-specific time trends attenuates the
coefficients on reporting staff. However, in a supportive point for a resource-based perspective on the production of political news coverage, in all specifications a positive relationship
between staffing and coverage remains. For the two panels that cover the longest period
of time, the relationship between a newspaper’s reporting capacity and its political coverage remains large and statistically significant. The relationship is smaller, and no longer
statistically significant, in the short panels.
The primary contribution of Table 2 is to show that the relationship between staffing and
news coverage does not hinge on the parallel trends assumption. Even after incorporating
unit trends, a sizable relationship between newspaper staffing and political coverage remains
in the panels that cover longer windows of time, highlighting the robustness of the evidence
for the long term relationship between staffing and news coverage. However, this examination
also shows the analyses that cover a shorter time window rely on this assumption more
heavily, as unit trends reduce the size of the relationship between staffing and coverage.
21

Political News Coverage Share
Beyond the volume of political coverage newspapers produce, another consideration is the
composition of this coverage. Do staff cutbacks affect political news more than other forms
of coverage and reduce the share of politically-focused news? I consider a newspaper’s share
of political coverage by dividing the amount of political coverage a newspaper provides by
the total number of articles, of any type, that appeared in it during a given year. I collected
this overall measure of coverage for newspapers in Newsbank from 2000 to 2014 and so focus
only on this source here.
Figure 5: Overall Coverage and Political Coverage Share
Total Articles

Share Of Coverage On Politics
0.5
Average Share Political

Average # Stories

40000
30000
20000
10000
0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

2000

2004

2008

2012

2000

Year

2004

2008

2012

Year

Note: The left panel shows the total number of articles, of any type, available from newspapers. The right
panel shows the share of these articles focused on politics

Figure 5 displays the average total number of articles, of any type, in newspapers over this
period and the average share of articles focusing on politics. The left panel shows that the
overall amount of coverage in newspapers declines during this time period from an average
of 35,000 stories in 2000 to 25,000 stories in 2014, a relative decline in coverage similar to the
one that occurs when focusing only on political news. The right panel of Figure 5 reflects this

22

as the share of political coverage in these newspapers remains relatively stable, falling from
35% of articles in 2000 to 29% of articles in 2014. At the aggregate level, political coverage
and non-political coverage fall at relatively similar rates and political coverage share is only
slightly reduced reduced by these declines.13
These aggregate relationships may mask more pronounced changes among individual
newspapers after staffing declines occur. For this reason, Table 3 examines this relationship using the two-way fixed effects specification from previous sections. This considers
the within-newspaper relationship between staffing declines and the share of a newspaper’s
coverage devoted to politics.
Table 3: Reporters and Share of Coverage on Politics
Reporters
N

Newsbank/Census (1994-2014)
−0.00004
(0.00013)
1470

Robust standard errors, clustered by Newspapers, in parentheses
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

In the panel regression the coefficient on staffing is small and indistinguishable from zero.
This does not support the second hypothesis put forward earlier as the share of newspaper
coverage on politics is not reduced by staffing declines.
When combined, this section establishes that other, non-political areas of coverage (e.g.,
sports, lifestyle) suffered to a similar degree as political news during this time. As the earlier
description of reporting staff composition in Figure 3 showed, the proportional declines in
political and non-political domains also extends to the newspaper staffing decisions that
occurred over this period. On both counts, this points to the durability of the media outlet
13

Appendix Figure A3 replicates these findings about the overall decline in articles and

the stable share of coverage focused on politics by examining newspaper scans, rather than
the electronic databases used throughout this main analysis.

23

structure that earlier studies identify (e.g., Boydstun 2013, Cook 1989), in relative terms,
even as absolute levels of political news coverage and newspaper reporting capacity fall
substantially.
Evidence that newspaper coverage declines also include non-political news, and that
political news is not disproportionately impacted by this shift, is important to consider. For
one, it suggests staffing cutbacks may have repercussions for aspects of civic and social life
less directly linked to politics (see e.g., Shaker 2014). However, even given this evidence, the
reduced volume of political coverage revealed in the preceding sections is still meaningful.
The amount of politcal coverage provided by media outlets, rather than the share of a source’s
coverage focused on political topics, is a key feature of the political information environment
examined in previous studies (e.g., Hayes and Lawless 2015, Snyder and Strömberg 2010,
Jerit et al. 2006) and this lower volume of coverage, linked to reductions in reporting capacity,
means various aspects of politics receive less attention from newspapers.

Staffing Effects by Coverage Type
I now turn to examining heterogeneity in the effects of staffing on different types of
political coverage based on the expectation that a newspaper’s reporting capacity should be
more strongly related to its coverage of local politics, where information subsidies from other
media sources are less readily available, than for coverage of state and national politics. To
test this, Table 4 displays estimates from the same regression specifications used to produce
Table 1, this time separately estimating the relationship between the number of reporters at
a newspaper and its coverage of local politics or national and state politics as the outcome.

24

Table 4: Reporters and Political Coverage: By Coverage Type
(1) Census/Newsbank
1994-2014
(2) Census/Newsbank
2000-2014
(3) Census/Proquest
2004-2014
(4) Directory/Proquest
2005-2012

Local News
21.8∗
(8.2)
33.5∗
(7.7)
30.5∗
(7.7)
44.9∗
(7.5)

National/State News
18.3∗
(7.6)
26.9∗
(5.6)
12.2∗
(2.0)
10.0∗
(1.4)

Difference (Local - National/State)
3.5
(5.6)
6.6
(5.9)
18.3∗
(6.8)
34.9∗
(6.7)

Robust standard errors, clustered by Newspaper, in parentheses
Models include Newspaper Fixed Effects, Year Fixed Effects and News Market controls
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

The first column of Table 4 displays the coefficient on reporting staff with local coverage
as the outcome. The second column does the same for models with national/state political
news as the outcome. Finally, the third column tests whether reporting resources are more
impactful for local coverage by displaying the difference between these two coefficients.14
Across the different specifications this difference is positive, indicating that reporting resources have a stronger relationship with local coverage relative to national/state political
news. However, while the difference between the two coefficients is statistically significant in
the models that measure news coverage using Proquest as the outcome variable, they are not
when using the Newsbank outcome. This speaks to an inability to reject the null hypothesis
of equivalent consequences for changes in reporters across the two types of coverage.15
Overall, this inconsistent pattern across different operationalization of news exposure
does not provide strong support for the third hypothesis. While there is a relatively strong
correspondence between measures of political coverage from the two sources (e.g., for newspapers where coverage is available in both Proquest and Newsbank, the correlation between
14

I use a bootstrap, blocked by newspaper, to estimate the uncertainty of the difference

between coefficients across the two models.
15
This same pattern is observed when omitting state-level coverage and only comparing
local and national news (see Appendix D.4).
25

the counts of political stories at a newspaper is 0.75), they offer different characterizations
of the relative contribution of reporting staff to different types of political news.
The broader array of terms used in the Newsbank search (e.g., moving beyond only
searching for specific names of public officials) mutes differences in the relationship between
reporting staff for these two areas of political coverage. This indicates there is a loss in
national and state oriented political coverage linked to declines in newspaper staffing, beyond
stories that only focus on the Presidency or a state’s governor, that is similar in magnitude to
the decline in its local political coverage. This coverage is included in the Newsbank search,
but not in the narrower keywords used when examining coverage in Proquest.
Although Table 4 does not support expectations about the heterogeneous consequences of
declines in reporting capacity for different types of political coverage, it further demonstrates
the importance of reporting staff for political coverage, showing that a newspaper’s reporting
capacity has meaningful relationships with both local political coverage and national/state
political coverage across the separate models displayed in the table’s first two columns.

Staffing Effects by Reporter Roles
The previous sections pool together different types of reporters when examining the
effects of staffing on news coverage. This allows the census and directory-based measures to
be used in a similar fashion, but means the measures of reporting staffing include non-news
beats (e.g., sports reporters). Since the media directories include reporter beat assignments,
this section tests the third hypothesis that politically-focused reporters, relative to general
assignment reporters or those focused on entertainment, will have the strongest relationship
with the amount of political news coverage produced by a newspaper.
Table 5 presents the results from panel regressions that separate the staffing categories
while still employing the newspaper fixed effects, year fixed effects and the control variables
used in the prior section. The first three columns consider this relationship using the Proquest
measure of political news coverage moving from the specification combining all newspaper
26

reporters together (also displayed in Table 1, Model 4), to one that separates entertainment
reporters from those on political or general news beats, to one that examines each staffing
category individually. The last three columns of Table 5 move through these same steps
using the Newsbank measure of coverage, which is available for a slightly larger sample.
Table 5: Reporters and Political News Coverage by Reporter Role (2005-2012)
All Reporters
Political/General
Entertainment
Political
General
N

Proquest Proquest Proquest Newsbank Newsbank Newsbank
44.87∗
43.21∗
(7.48)
(19.80)
50.86∗
58.02∗
(8.70)
(25.77)
32.93∗
28.01∗
15.75
28.72
(12.80)
(13.70)
(28.06)
(27.05)
∗
69.06
24.64
(12.53)
(36.10)
24.73∗
121.99∗
(11.19)
(32.58)
1449
1449
1449
1568
1568
1568

Robust standard errors, clustered by Newspaper, in parentheses
Models include Newspaper Fixed Effects, Year Fixed Effects and News Market controls
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

There is a consistent pattern when moving from the initial regressions combining all
types of reporters to the second specification that separates reporters with non-political
beats. The coefficients on the entertainment reporters category are smaller than those for the
political/general category. However, in both cases hypothesis tests of the difference between
these coefficients fail to reject the null hypothesis that the two categories of reporters have
a similar influence on the volume of political coverage available from a newspaper (this
difference is 17.9, 95% Confidence Interval [-12.8, 48.7] for Proquest; 42.3, 95% Confidence
Interval [-33.0, 117.6] for Newsbank).
The similarities between these two samples do not continue when separately considering
each of the three staffing categories. In the Proquest sample reporters in the political category
have the most pronounced relationship with political news coverage. In contrast, reporters
27

in the general category have a stronger relationship with coverage in the Newsbank sample.
These results are not supportive of the fourth hypothesis, as the political reporting category does not have a more pronounced relationship with political news coverage than the
others. Even a more qualified comparison based on separating out entertainment reporters
from other categories fails to show that the combined set of reporters on political and general
news beats makes a stronger contribution to political news relative to those on entertainmentfocused beats. Although there is a difference in the anticipated direction between these two
categories, with the coefficient on the entertainment reporters smaller than for reporters on
general and political beats, it is imprecisely estimated.
One, admittedly tentative, explanation for the lack of differentiation stems from the
stable share of newspaper staff devoted to each of these areas displayed in Figure 3. In the
period of staffing declines at newspapers studied here, newspapers that lost political reporters
simultaneously lost reporters in other categories. This makes it difficult to distinguish the
contribution individual categories of reporters make to political news production. Future
work with larger newspaper samples, or conducted during a period in which there is a weaker
relationship between declines in reporters on different beats, will be better situated to detect
the unique contributions individual categories of reporters make to political coverage.

Discussion and Conclusion
Decades of research examine the media’s influence on mass opinion and elite behavior.
However, the large newsrooms that underlie previous findings that newspapers inform the
public and sanction public officials no longer exist. While this rapid decline in newspaper
reporters has generated alarm from observers, researchers have only recently begun to address
its political consequences (e.g., Rubado and Jennings ND, Peterson ND, Hayes and Lawless
2018). Using new data to consider newspaper staffing and coverage during this volatile
period, I show that staffing declines reduce the amount of political coverage newspapers
offer. This decline in political news occurs alongside similar reductions in non-political
28

coverage, highlighting the loss of news with less direct, but potentially still meaningful, civic
consequences for future study (e.g., Shaker 2014).
Beyond this focus on overall coverage, there is mixed evidence on the effects of these staff
cuts for particular types of coverage (i.e., local political news) and based on the types of
reporters involved in them (i.e., reporters with political beats). On both counts, estimates
are in the anticipated direction, but there are not detectable differences across the different
newspaper samples and measurement approaches used in this study, pointing to the need for
future work that examines these claims using larger samples and covering different periods of
time. The absence of heterogeneity on these points does have have two clearer implications
for understanding political news coverage. First, there is consistent indication that declines
in a newspaper’s reporting resources matter for its coverage of state and national politics,
where alternative information sources are likely available, but also for coverage of local
politics, where newspapers represent the primary source of original political reporting and
alternatives to legacy media have not emerged. Second, both politically-focused and general
assignment reporters have an important role in the production of political news.
A growing body of research considers the political consequences of newspaper shutdowns
and changes in local media ownership (Mondak 1995, Schulhofer-Wohl and Garrido 2013,
Shaker 2014, Darr et al. 2018, Martin and McCrain 2019). This study broadens the implications of this work on media decline by isolating reduced reporting resources as a factor
that shapes the provision of political news coverage for the many newspapers that continue
to operate and among newspapers with a variety of ownership structures. This helps explain
a source behind the reduced effects of the legacy media observed in several recent studies
(Hayes and Lawless 2018, Hayes and Lawless 2015, Peterson ND, see also Hopkins 2018).
It also establishes a foundation for further research on the impact of these declines on mass
and elite political behavior. Given that much of the reporting on local politics originates in
newspapers (e.g., Mondak 1995, Nielsen 2015, Mahone et al. 2019), evidence of the effects
29

of staffing declines in this coverage domain suggests the relevance of reporting cutbacks for
local political outcomes.
Finally, this evidence contributes to broader discussion about the consequences of economic pressures for political news coverage by illustrating a resource-based channel through
which changes in a newspaper’s reporting capacity affect aspects of its political coverage.
While prior research focuses on how media outlets alter their coverage in anticipation of
economic challenges, this account more fully details the consequences when these efforts fall
short. This represents an increasingly important theoretical perspective for understanding
the relationship between media and politics as many legacy news outlets around the world
face increasingly severe economic challenges (e.g., Van Aelst et al. 2017, Nielsen 2015).

30

References
Abernathy, Penolope M. 2018. The Expanding News Desert. University of North Carolina
Press.
American Society of Newsroom Editors. 2016. “ASNE releases 2016 Diversity Survey Results.” Press Release. Sep 9, 2016. http://asne.org/content.asp?contentid=447
Angelucci, Charles and Julia Cagé. 2019. “Newspapers in Times of Low Advertising Revenues.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 11(3): 319-364.
Arnold, R. Douglas. 2004. Congress, the Press, and Political Accountability. Princeton
University Press.
Ban, Pamela, Alexander Fouirnaies, Andrew B. Hall and James M. Snyder. 2019. “How
Newspapers Reveal Political Power.” Political Science Research and Methods 7(4): 661678.
Baumgartner, Frank and Bryan D. Jones. 1993. Agendas and Instability in American Politics. University of Chicago Press.
Boydstun, Amber. 2013. Making the News. University of Chicago Press.
Cagé, Julia. ND. “Media Competition, Information Provision and Political Participation:
Evidence from French local newspapers and elections, 1944-2014.” Journal of Public Economics Forthcoming.
Channick, Robert. 2013. “Chicago Sun-Times Lays Off All Photographers.” Chicago Tribune May 30, 2013. http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2013-05-30/business/
chi-chicago-sun-times-photo-20130530_1_chicago-sun-times-photo-staff-video
Cook, Timothy E. 1989. Making Laws and Making News: Media Strategies in the U.S. House
of Representatives. Brookings Institution Press.
Darr, Joshua, Matthew Hitt and Johanna Dunaway. 2018. “Newspaper Closures Polarize
Voting Behavior.” Journal of Communication 68(6): 1007-1028.

31

Darr, Joshua. 2016. “Presence to Press: How Campaigns Earn Local Media.” Political
Communication 33(3): 503-522.
Dunaway, Johanna. 2008. “Markets, Ownership, and the Quality of Campaign News Coverage.” Journal of Politics 70(4): 1193-1202.
Edna, Jodi, Katerina Eva Matsa and Jan Lauren Boyles. 2014. “America’s Shifting Statehouse Press.” Pew Research Center. July 10, 2014.
http://www.journalism.org/2014/07/10/americas-shifting-statehouse-press/
Fishman, Mark. 1980. Manufacturing the News. University of Texas Press.
Gardner, Howard, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, William Damon. 2001. Good Work: When
Excellence and Ethics Meet. Basic Books.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence
From U.S. Daily Newspapers.” Econometrica 78(1), 35-71.
George, Lisa M. and Joel Waldfogel. 2006. “The New York Times and the Market for Local
Newspapers.” American Economic Review 96(1), 435-447.
Graber, Doris. 1988. Processing the News. Longman.
Guskin, Emily. 2013. “Newspaper newsrooms suffer large staffing decreases.” Pew Research
Center: Fact Tank. June 25, 2013. http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/
06/25/newspaper-newsrooms-suffer-large-staffing-decreases/
Hamilton, James T. 2016. Democracy’s Detectives. Harvard University Press.
Hamilton, James T. 2004. All the News That’s Fit To Sell: How the Market Transforms
Information Into News. Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Danny and Jennifer L. Lawless. 2015. “As Local News Goes, So Goes Citizen
Engagement: Media, Knowledge, and Participation in US House Elections.” Journal of
Politics 77(2), 447-462.
Hayes, Danny and Jennifer L. Lawless. 2018. “The Decline of Local News and Its Effects:
New Evidence from Longitudinal Data.” Journal of Politics 80(1): 332-336.
32

Hopkins, Dan. 2018. The Increasingly United States. University of Chicago Press.
Hopkins, Dan and Lindsay M. Pettingill. 2018. “Retrospective Voting in Big-City US
Mayoral Elections.” Political Science Research and Methods 6(4): 697-714.
Jerit, Jennifer, Jason Barabas, and Toby Bolsen. 2006. “Citizens, Knowledge, and the
Information Environment.” American Journal of Political Science 50(2): 266-282.
Jones, Alex S. 2009. Losing the News: The Future of the News That Feeds Democracy.
Oxford University Press.
Kaniss, Phyllis. 1991. Making Local News. University of Chicago Press.
Kernell, Georgia, PJ Lamberson and John Zaller. 2018. “Market Demand for Civic Affairs
News.” Political Communication 35(2): 239-260.
King, Gary, Patrick Lam and Margaret E. Roberts. 2017. “Computer-Assisted Keyword and
Document Set Discovery from Unstructured Text.” American Journal of Political Science
61(4): 971-988 .
Kirchoff, Suzanne M. 2010. “The U.S. Newspaper Industry in Transition.” Congressional
Research Service Report 7-5700. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R40700.pdf
Mahone, Jessica, Qun Wang, Philip Napoli, Matthew Weber and Katie McCollough. 2019.
“Who’s Producing Local Journalism? Assessing Journalistic Output Across Different Outlet Types.” DeWitt Wallace Center for Media & Democracy Report. https://dewitt.
sanford.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Whos-Producing-Local-Journalism_
FINAL.pdf
Martin, Gregory and Josh McCrain. 2019. “Local News and National Politics.” American
Political Science Review 113(2): 372-384.
McChesney, Robert W. and John Nichols. 2011. “Down the News Hole.” in Will the Last
Reporter Please Turn out the Lights (Eds. Robert W. McChesney and Victor Pickard).
Pgs 103-113. The New Press.
McManus, John H. 1994. Market-Driven Journalism: Let the Citizen Beware? Sage Publi33

cations.
Meer, Jonathan and Jeremy West. 2016. “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment
Dynamics.” Journal of Human Resources 51(2), 500-522.
Meyer, Phillip. 2008. The Vanishing Newspaper: Saving Journalism in the Information Age.
Second Edition. University of Missouri Press.
Mondak, Jeffrey. 1995. Nothing to Read: Newspapers and Elections in a Social Experiment.
University of Michigan Press.
Mummolo, Jonathan and Erik Peterson. 2018. “Improving the Interpretation of Fixed
Effects Regression Results.” Political Science Research and Methods. 6(4): 829-835.
Nielsen, Rasmus Kleis. 2015. “Local Newspapers as Keystone Media: The Increased Importance of Diminished Newspapers for Local Political Information Environments.” in Local
Journalism: The Decline of Newspapers and the Rise of Digital Media (Ed. Rasmus Kleis
Nielsen), pgs 51-72.
Nielsen, Rasmus Kleis. 2012. Ten Years that Shook the Media World: Big Questions and
Big Trends in International Media Developments. University of Oxford: Reuters Institute
for the Study of Journalism.
Patterson, Thomas. 2000. Doing Well and Doing Good: How Soft News and Critical Journalism are Shrinking the News Audience and Weakening Democracy. Faculty Research
Working Paper Series, RWP01-001. Kennedy School of Government. Harvard University.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=257395
Petrova, Maria. 2011. “Newspapers and Parties: How Advertising Revenues Created an
Independent Press.” American Political Science Review 105(4), 790-808.
Peterson, Erik. 2017. “The Role of the Information Environment in Partisan Voting.”
Journal of Politics 79(4), 1191-1204.
Peterson, Erik. ND. “Not Dead Yet: Political Learning from Newspapers in a Changing
Media Landscape.” Political Behavior Forthcoming.
34

Pew Research Center. 2008. “The Changing Newsroom.” Pew Research Center Report.
July 21, 2008. http://www.journalism.org/2008/07/21/the-changing-newsroom-2/
Prior, Markus. 2007. Post-Broadcast Democracy. Cambridge University Press.
Puglisi, Riccardo and James M. Snyder. 2011. “Newspaper Coverage of Political Scandals.”
Journal of Politics 73(3), 931-950.
Ridout, Travis, Erika Franklin Fowler and Kathleen Searles. 2012. “Exploring the Validity of
Electronic Newspaper Databases.” International Journal of Social Research Methodology
15(6): 451-466.
Rogers, Steven. 2017. “Electoral Accountability for State Legislative Roll Calls and Ideological Representation.” American Political Science Review 111(3): 555-571.
Rubado, Meghan E. and Jay T. Jennings. ND. “Political Consequences of the Endangered
Local Watchdog.” Urban Affairs Review Forthcoming.
Schaffner, Brian F. and Patrick J. Sellers. 2003. “The Structural Determinants of Local
Congressional News Coverage.” Political Communication 20(1): 41-57.
Schulhofer-Wohl, Sam and Miguel Garrido. 2013. “Do Newspapers Matter? Short-run and
Long-run Evidence from the Closure of the Cincinnati Post.” Journal of Media Economics
26(2), 60-81.
Seamans, Robert and Feng Zhu. 2014. “Responses to Entry in Multi-Sided Markets: The
Impact of Craigslist on Local Newspapers.” Management Science 60(2), 476-493.
Shaker, Lee. 2014. “Dead Newspapers and Citizens’ Civic Engagement.” Political Communication 31(1), 131-148.
Snyder, James M. and David Strömberg. 2010. “Press Coverage and Political Accountability.” Journal of Political Economy 118(2), 355-408.
Soroka, Stuart. 2014. Negativity in Democratic Politics: Causes and Consequences. Cambridge University Press.
Starr, Paul. 2009. “Goodbye to the Age of Newspapers (Hello to a New Era of Corruption).”
35

The New Republican, March 4, 2009, 28-35.
Starkman, Dean. 2010. “The Hampster Wheel: Why running as fast as we can is getting us
nowhere.” Columbia Journalism Review. September/October.
http://www.cjr.org/cover_story/the_hamster_wheel.php?page=all
Strömberg, David. 2015. “Media and Politics.” Annual Review of Economics 7, 173-205.
Trussler, Marc. ND. “Get Information or Get in Formation: The Effects of High Information
Environments on Legislative Elections.” British Journal of Political Science Forthcoming.
Tuchman, Gaye. 1978. Making News: A Study in the Construction of Reality. Free Press.
Van Aelst, Peter, Jesper Strömbäck, Toril Aalberg, Frank Esser, Claes de Vreese, Jörg
Matthes, David Hopmann, Susana Salgado, Nicolas Hubé, Agnieszka Stepińska, Stylianos
Papathanassoupoulos, Rosa Berganza, Guido Legante, Carsten Reinemann, Tamir Sheafer
and James Stanyer. “Political Communication in a High-Choice Media Environment: A
Challenge for Democracy?” 2017. Annals of the International Communication Association
41(3): 3-27.
Waldman, Steven. 2011. “The Information Needs of Communities: The Changing Media Landscape in a Broadband Age.” Federal Communications Commission Report. July
2011. https://transition.fcc.gov/osp/inc-report/The_Information_Needs_of_Communities.
pdf
Weaver, David H., Randal A. Beam, Bonnie J. Brownlee, Paul S. Voakes and G. Cleveland Wilhoit. 2007. The American Journalist in the 21st Century. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Zirchhoff, Suzanne M. 2010. “The U.S. Newspaper Industry in Transition.” Congressional
Research Service Report 7-500. September 9, 2010.

36

Supporting Information for:
“Paper Cuts: How Reporting Resources
Affect Political News Coverage”

Contents
A Appendix A: Measuring News Coverage

1

A.1 Constructing Newspaper Counts (Newsbank Sample) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

A.2 Constructing Newspaper Counts (Proquest Sample) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

A.3 Validating Keyword-Based News Coverage Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

A.4 Syndicated Coverage in Newspaper Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

A.4.1 Availability of Syndicated Coverage in Databases . . . . . . . . . . .

6

A.4.2 Comparing Coverage Declines From Databases to Newspaper Scans .

7

B Appendix B: Measuring Newspaper Staffing

9

B.1 Validating Overall Newspaper Staffing Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

B.2 Determining Reporter Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

C Appendix C: Descriptive Statistics

12

D Appendix D: Estimating the Effect of Staffing on News Coverage Amount 14
D.1 Results Without Covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

D.2 Full Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

D.3 Incorporating Newspaper Ownership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

D.4 Heterogeneity by Coverage Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

A
A.1

Appendix A: Measuring News Coverage
Constructing Newspaper Counts (Newsbank Sample)

To create a summary measure of newspaper attention to politics, I search for keywords
that appear in newspaper articles in the Newsbank database. I use terms employed by
Hopkins (2018) to measure attention to politics: (“president” OR “Congress” OR “Senate”
OR “White House” OR “congressman” OR “Democrat” OR “Republican” OR “Governor”
OR “Lieutenant Governor” OR “Assembly ” OR “Legislature” OR “Statehouse” OR “Delegate” OR “Mayor” OR “City Manager” OR “Council” OR “Alderman” OR “Municipal”
OR “County Government” OR “City Hall” OR “commissioner” OR “councilmember” OR
“township” OR “ordinance”). I append two additional phrases (“school board” or “school
district”) to capture local education news.

For the analysis of local political coverage from these sources I search for only the following terms: (“Mayor” OR “City Manager” OR “Council” OR “Alderman” OR “Municipal”
OR “County Government” OR “City Hall” OR “commissioner” OR “councilmember” OR
“township” OR “ordinance” OR “school board” or “school district”).

A.2

Constructing Newspaper Counts (Proquest Sample)

To classify the amount of newspaper coverage available for different political institutions, I
used keyword searches of newspapers in the Proquest database. National political coverage
was determined using the number of articles mentioning the incumbent president State political coverage was determined by the number of articles mentioning a state’s incumbent
governor. Local government coverage was determined by articles containing any of the following phrases: (“Mayor” OR “City Council” OR “City Manager” OR “Town Council” OR
“Town Manager”). Finally, coverage of local education was determined using the number of
articles with the following terms: (“school board” OR “school district”).
1

A.3

Validating Keyword-Based News Coverage Measure

To validate the measures of local education and local government news coverage, I compare
the labels based on the keyword search to those assigned to the same documents by a set of
coders on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.

I drew a sample of 40 newspapers from the main analysis and collected their entire coverage
from Proquest for two weeks each year over the length of the panel. These randomly selected
weeks were the 5th (Late January/Early February) and 23rd (Early June) weeks of each year.
From this full-text coverage, I used keywords to label an article’s topic. For both “Local
Education” and “Local Government” I then sampled 250 articles assigned to a category by
their keywords and 250 articles labeled outside a category based on their keywords.

Each sampled article was rated by four coders on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. To qualify for
this task, coders needed to pass a short 3-item political knowledge quiz, have a greater than
95% approval rate on their previous HITs and have completed more than 500 total HITs.
For both the Local Education and Local Government topic areas, 500 articles received labels.

The coding scheme and instructions for this task are displayed below.

2

Figure A1: Local Education Article Coding Task

3

Figure A2: Local Government Article Coding Task

4

For local education, labels of “Education Performance”, “Education Budget”, “School Policy”, “School Personnel” or “Other - Local Education” were counted as labeling the article
as local education. Labels of “Other - National Education” or “Other - NOT Education”
were counted as labeling the article as not about local education.

For local governent, labels of “Local Government Performance”, “Local Government Budget”, “Local Government Policy”, “Local Government Personnel” or “Other - Local Government” were counted as labeling the article as local government. Labels of “Other - NOT
Local government” were counted as labeling the article as not about local government.

From these ratings I produce a final label based on the classification offered by a majority of
raters. In cases with a 2-2 split, I label the article as “in” the relevant political news category.

This produced a set of 1,000 human-generated article labels (500 Local Education and 500
Local Government) to compare to labels based on keywords. Using the human labels as
the benchmark, I consider three standard measures of classifier performance to determine
whether keywords effectively identify political news. The first is accuracy. Accuracy is the
share of documents where the keyword label agreed with the label from human coders. The
second is precision. This is the share of documents labeled as political using the keywordbased approach also labeled political by human coders. The third indicator is recall. This is
the share of documents with a political label from human coders that are labeled political
using the keyword-based approach. Accuracy captures the overall effectiveness of the keywords. Precision considers whether the keyword-based approach classifies political articles
in an overly broad manner that disagrees with human assessments. Recall considers whether
the keyword approach captures a substantial portion of the stories assessed as political by
human coders (i.e., that the keyword classifier is not too narrow).
5

Table A1: Validating Keyword-Based Article Classification
Local Education Local Government
Accuracy
0.84
0.79
Precision
0.93
0.86
Recall
0.89
0.91
Note: Performance of keyword-based article classification relative to labels produced by coders on Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk

Across these three measures, the keywords accurately capture the intended aspects of news
coverage. With respect to local education, the keyword-based approach has an accuracy of
84%. For determining whether an article focuses on education, it has a precision of 0.93
and recall of 0.89. For local government accuracy is 79%, with a recall of 0.86 and precision
of 0.91 for documents assigned to the “local government” category using keywords. This
validation shows that the keyword-based approach used to collect this information from the
newspaper archives can effectively capture the intended types of coverage.

A.4
A.4.1

Syndicated Coverage in Newspaper Databases
Availability of Syndicated Coverage in Databases

Ridout et al. (2012) compare coverage in newspaper databases to the coverage appearing in
print for the same newspapers. They identify an issue. Due to copyright restrictions, wire
service coverage (e.g., stories from the Associated Press or other syndicated news services)
in a newspaper is not always included in newspaper databases. They assess coverage from
2009 and find that 24% of wire stories in the print version of the newspapers they evaluate
appeared in Newsbank and 33% appeared in Proquest.

To assess the severity of this issue for the newspapers and broader time window considered
here, I turn to newspapers.com which has full-text scans of some newspapers. First, I consider
the frequency with which wire copy appears in Newsbank by examining the 23 newspapers

6

available over the entire 1994-2014 period in the newspaper panel that are also on newspapers.com. On a set of 5 randomly selected days over this time window (11/21/96, 6/13/00,
9/17/04, 9/18/08, 8/11/12), I examined scans of the newspapers to assess wire coverage
that appeared in them. I recorded the first five wire stories that appeared in the newspaper
and searched to see whether they appeared in that newspaper’s coverage in Newsbank. Out
of the sample of 550 wire service articles, 145 (26%) appeared in Newsbank. This number
is consistent with what Ridout et al. (2012) observe in their audit of 2009 news coverage.
This indicates the databases include some, but not all, syndicated coverage.

A.4.2

Comparing Coverage Declines From Databases to Newspaper Scans

The absence of some wire coverage raises the possibility that measured declines in newspaper
databases exaggerate real-world drops in political news because they miss wire copy included
in print editions to offset drops in native political content. For this reason, I drew a sample
of 30 newspapers in newspapers.com where the ASNE staffing data was available and, for
one randomly selected week from 2000 to 2014 (the 24th week of the year, in the second
or third week of June), used scans from newspapers.com to record 1) the total number of
daily pages that appeared in the newspaper and 2) the number of daily pages where political
keywords used elsewhere in the analysis appeared. It is important to note this page count
does not capture individual stories, only the number of pages where at least one political
keyword appeared. This is because, unlike the newspaper databases, individual stories are
not separated in newspapers.com. Still, this assessment can provide an idea of whether the
databases exaggerate declines in political news availability.

7

Figure A3: Overall Newspaper Size and Political Coverage Volume from Newspaper Scans
Average Daily Pages (Total)

Average Daily Pages (Political Content)
70

150

Page Share with Political Content
1.0

60
0.8
50

100

0.6

40
30

50

0.4

20
0.2
10

0

0
2000

2004

2008

2012

Year

0.0
2000

2004

2008

2012

Year

2000

2004

2008

2012

Year

Note: Figure displays average daily coverage by year for 30 newspapers where scans are available.

Figure A3 displays the annual trends in news coverage, showing this alternative approach to
measuring news also reveals a steep drop in the overall size of newspapers and their political
coverage over this time period, with a concentrated decline in the same window (roughly
2007 to 2009) where pronounced staffing cutbacks occurred.

This sample was selected from newspapers available in both newspapers.com and Newsbank
during this time, allowing a comparison of political coverage measures from each. At the
newspaper-year level, the correlation between the newspapers.com measure and the annual
count of political stories from Newsbank is 0.62, indicating relatively strong correspondence
between these two approaches to measuring political news. For this sample, the annual
political coverage output measured in Newsbank drops by 30% between 2000 and 2014.
Turning to newspapers.com, it drops by 59% over this period, a more pronounced decline.
Across these robustness checks, it does not appear that the database exaggerates declines
in the availability of news coverage compared to this other source, even though not all wire
service stories are available.
8

B
B.1

Appendix B: Measuring Newspaper Staffing
Validating Overall Newspaper Staffing Measures

Here I consider the validity of the newspaper staffing measures. There is high convergent
validity between the two staffing measures. For newspaper-years where both the Census and
Dictionary measures are available, the two measures have a correlation of 0.96.

Beyond the close relationship of these two measures to each other, additional tests indicate
they capture relevant dynamics in newspaper staffing. First, the aggregate staffing numbers
produced from the ASNE census align closely with the only other aggregate indicator of
newspaper employment, a measure of national employment at “Newspaper Publishers” produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The ASNE census aggregate total tracks closely
with this industry-wide measure, with the two correlating at .95 for 1990-2015.

Second, I compared publicly available media reports on newspaper layoffs to changes in a
newspaper’s staffing using the directory measure. To perform this I assembled a list of 49
public newspaper layoffs by searching in the Proquest newspaper database and hand-coding
articles discussing a specific job loss amount at a newspaper between 2006 and 2010.

The figure below displays the relationship between the layoff announcement amount and
the change in overall newspaper staffing, based on the directory measure, at the newspaper
that year. There is a positive relationship (r=.6) between the two. Newspapers with larger
reported layoffs experience larger staffing declines.

9

Figure B1: Publicly Reported Layoffs and Staffing Change

Decline in Newspaper Staff Size

Comparing Media Reported Layoffs to Directory Staffing
●

●

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●

●

0

●●

●

50

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

100

150

200

250

300

Media Reported Layoff Amount

Note: Figure displays 49 instance of publicly reported layoffs and compares the announced size of the layoff
to the change in newspaper staffing using the directory measure during that year.

For several reasons there is not a direct 1-to-1 relationship between announced layoffs and
changes in staffing in the directory. The layoff announcements often cover an entire newspaper company and, as a result, include support staff that may not be included in the media
directories, potentially attenuating this relationship. These layoffs may have also occurred
over a longer time window than a single year, delaying the effect of an announcement to
later years of a newspaper’s staffing. Finally, the directory is only printed once per year
and may not indicate departures late in the year until subsequent editions. In other cases
these papers may have also made new, less expensive hires to offset buyouts or layoffs of
more experienced reporters. Despite these countervailing factors, this measure still appears
to capture the consequences of major layoffs.

B.2

Determining Reporter Roles

Reporters were grouped into three categories – political, general and entertainment – based
on terms in the directories. The table below displays the stemmed phrases in a reporter’s job

10

title that are most commonly associated with each reporting category and the proportion
of individuals assigned to that reporting category where a given phrases appears. This
shows the group of political reporters includes those working on education, city, county and
government news. The group of general reporters includes individuals working on general
news assignments and also those focusing on business, retail and transport. Finally, the
entertainment category includes those working on sports, health, medicine and food among
the most common categories. This offers some face validity for this classification scheme.
Table B1: Phrases Associated with Reporter Roles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Political Proportion
New
0.12
Educat
0.10
Citi
0.06
Counti
0.05
Polit
0.05
Commun
0.05
Govern
0.04
Court
0.04
Polic
0.03
State
0.03
Region
0.03
Local
0.02
Higher
0.02
Metro
0.02
Crime
0.02
Hall
0.02
Project
0.01
Investig
0.01
Special
0.01
Feder
0.01

General
New
Busi
Transport
Retail
Senior
Bank
Contribut
Industri
Real
Estate
East
Middl
Financ
Economi
Environ
Consum
Energi
Europ
Small
Immigrat

Proportion
0.13
0.06
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

11

Entertainment
Sport
Health
Medicin
Contribut
Columnist
Food
Industri
School
High
Art
Healthcar
Religion
Review
Home
Senior
Basebal
Pop
Collegi
Featur
Entertain

Proportion
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

C

Appendix C: Descriptive Statistics

Table C1 describes the mean and standard deviations of the variables used in the analysis for
the sample of newspapers available from 1994-2014. This provides context for the variation
in newspaper staffing and newspaper coverage discussed in the main text.
Table C1: Descriptive Statistics: 1994-2014 Newspaper Sample
Variable
Mean Standard Deviation
Total Coverage 32834.80
19905.63
Share Political Coverage
0.20
0.04
Political Stories 10578.01
6787.15
Local Political Stories
5459.92
3866.98
Total Reporters
67.26
47.54
Circulation 150760.79
112941.95
Population (Home County) 839597.71
1218333.53
Share White (Home County)
0.73
0.14
Median Income (Home County) 55747.99
10246.78
Share Bachelors Degree (Home County)
0.28
0.08
Table C2 (the 1994-2014 sample of newspapers where coverage is available in Newsbank)
and Table C3 (the 2004-2014 sample of newspaper where coverage is available in Proquest)
focus on political news coverage and display the average levels of political coverage across
different topics over this time period.

12

Table C2: Political Coverage by Year (Newsbank)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Year Political (All) Political (Local Only) Political (Share Local)
1994.00
12971.00
6389.60
0.49
1995.00
12398.60
6126.80
0.49
1996.00
12548.70
6175.10
0.49
1997.00
12176.50
6239.80
0.51
1998.00
12485.00
6235.00
0.50
1999.00
12409.50
6426.60
0.52
2000.00
12099.40
6266.90
0.52
2001.00
11501.80
6034.00
0.52
2002.00
11489.20
6170.30
0.54
2003.00
11572.90
6133.00
0.53
2004.00
11702.60
6007.90
0.51
2005.00
11042.00
5920.80
0.54
2006.00
10870.20
5765.70
0.53
2007.00
10562.20
5729.20
0.54
2008.00
9945.30
5107.10
0.51
2009.00
8430.50
4299.00
0.51
2010.00
8430.10
4415.00
0.52
2011.00
7938.50
4175.80
0.53
2012.00
7684.20
3930.40
0.51
2013.00
7130.00
3643.60
0.51
2014.00
6749.90
3466.60
0.51

Table C3: Political Coverage by Year (Proquest)
Year Local Ed
1 2004.00
1958.60
2 2005.00
1864.10
3 2006.00
1762.70
4 2007.00
1738.80
5 2008.00
1623.20
6 2009.00
1454.00
7 2010.00
1487.20
8 2011.00
1372.40
9 2012.00
1366.60
10 2013.00
1491.60
11 2014.00
1438.90

Local Gov
2158.50
2123.30
1848.00
1850.30
1706.00
1517.70
1512.00
1442.50
1389.50
1488.20
1467.00

State National Political (Share Local)
488.90 1129.50
0.72
509.80
792.10
0.75
438.50
651.60
0.77
443.90
569.50
0.78
417.00
536.80
0.78
416.80
885.20
0.70
397.80
607.90
0.75
481.20
509.90
0.74
406.10
661.60
0.72
451.60
536.60
0.75
459.70
526.90
0.75

13

D

Appendix D: Estimating the Effect of Staffing on
News Coverage Amount

Newspaper-Market Controls
A newspaper’s home county was determined using the 2015 Editor and Publisher Databook.
The Market Share and Competition variables are only available from 2004 to 2014. They
are not included as controls in the panels that begin before this time period. I linearly
interpolate covariates for the years in between these measures.
Table D1: Control Variables
Variable Name
Market Share
Competition
Circulation
Population
% White
Median Income
% Bachelors

D.1

Description
Share of newspaper circulation in home county
Number of other papers with sales in home county
Average weekday sales
Population in home county
% white residents in home county
Median income in home county
% residents with a Bachelor’s in home county

Source
SRDS Subscription (2004, 2008), AAM Database (2014)
SRDS Subscription (2004, 2008), AAM Database (2014)
Editor and Publisher (1992, 1996, 2000, 2004, 2008, 2012, 2014)
Census (1990, 2000, 2010), Current Population Survey (2014)
Census (1990, 2000, 2010), Current Population Survey (2014)
Census (1990, 2000, 2010), Small Area Income Estimates (2014)
Census (1990, 2000, 2010), Current Population Survey (2014)

Results Without Covariates

These control variables are used to account for alternative explanations for a decline in the
amount of political news coverage that a newspaper provides. However, these controls also
potentially complicate the interpretation of the coefficient on reporting resources. For example, a decline in newspaper staffing may also shape a newspaper’s circulation, introducing
bias into estimates of the effects of newspaper staffing.

For this reason, Table D2 reproduces results from the two-way fixed effects models used
in Table 1 of the the main text, this time estimating the relationship between staffing and
overall news coverage without other covariates.

14

Table D2: Reporters and Overall Political News Coverage (No Controls)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
∗
∗
∗
Reporters
79.77
93.16
42.61
46.53∗
(14.22)
(11.66)
(7.10)
(7.11)
N
1470
2880
1606
1449
Coverage Source
N ewsbank
N ewsbank
P roquest
P roquest
Staffing Source
Census
Census
Census
Directory
Time Period
1994 − 2014
2000 − 2014
2004 − 2014
2005 − 2012
Robust standard errors in parentheses
Models include Newspaper Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

The coefficients on reporting resources are markedly larger for Models 1 and 2, which cover
the longest time period. The magnitude of the coefficient on reporting resources in Model
1 doubles when additional covariates are excluded. In Model 2 the coefficient increases by
roughly one-third compared to its initial magnitude in the model with controls. In contrast,
the two estimates over the shorter time window remain similar to the models in Table 1.

This robustness check helps to show the results reported in the main text do not hinge
on the use of these additional covariates. The implications of this analysis, that declines
in reporting resources reduce the volume of political coverage newspapers produce, remain
similar when covariates are not included.

D.2

Full Model Results

The in-text models omit the additional covariates for clarity. Here the full tables with the
additional control variables that are included are displayed.

15

Table D3: Reporters and Overall Political News Coverage
Reporters
Circulation
Population
White Share
Median Income
Bachelors Degree
Market Share
Paper Competition
N

Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
∗
∗
∗
40.15
60.38
42.68
44.87∗
(14.71)
(11.96)
(9.23)
(7.48)
0.03∗
0.02∗
−0.00
−0.00
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.00)
−0.01∗
−0.00
−0.00
−0.00
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
8029.46
949.70
606.13
7153.81
(14777.20)
(6350.09) (4077.55) (7191.54)
0.34∗
0.09
0.05
0.10
(0.16)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.06)
−31386.35 −22352.41 −6020.33
932.36
(25406.41) (12826.43) (10071.90) (11489.28)
1067.07
1026.72
(767.29) (1678.42)
52.63
24.66
(40.05)
(29.54)
1470
2880
1606
1449

Robust standard errors in parentheses
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

D.3

Incorporating Newspaper Ownership

I also examine whether these findings change when incorporating newspaper ownership into
the analysis. To do this I began with data on newspaper ownership collected by Abernathy (2018) for 2004 and 2019 and determined the owner of each newspaper in the coverage/staffing samples covering 2004 to 2014. I then incorporate within-newspaper changes in
ownership into the analysis presented in the main text. I define national chains like earlier
work (e.g., Schaffner and Sellers 2003) as large owners of multiple newspapers spread across
the country. For the newspapers in this sample, this consists of: Digital First/MediaNews,
Gannett, GateHouse, Lee Enterprises, Tribune Company and McClatchy/Knight Ridder.
The remaining newspapers were owned by small regional chains or individual owners.

The table below re-estimates the in-text models after including media ownership.
16

Table D4: Reporters/Ownership and Political Coverage
Model 1
Reporters
43.21∗
(9.49)
National Chain
−1016.16∗
(373.53)
N
1606
Coverage Source
P roquest
Staffing Source
Census
Time Period
2004 − 2014

Model 2
45.48∗
(7.57)
−749.87∗
(282.88)
1449
P roquest
Directory
2005 − 2012

Robust standard errors, clustered by newspaper, in parentheses
∗
indicates significance at p < 0.05

Consistent with previous studies, national chain ownership is related to less political coverage
from an outlet. However, the inclusion of this variable does not alter the relationship between
newspaper staffing and political coverage, which remains similar to the estimates reported
in the main text even after accounting for changes in ownership over this time period. This
points to changes in staffing and changes in ownership as distinct influences on the volume
of political news coverage that a newspaper produces during this time period.

D.4

Heterogeneity by Coverage Type

Table 4 in the main text examines differences in the effect of staffing for local political
coverage and a combination of national and state political coverage. This is done because
there are more possibilities for newspapers to draw on information from other media sources
in order to cover state and national politics. The table below reconsiders this relationship
after dropping state-level coverage. This reveals a similar pattern to the results in the main
text as, when using the Proquest measure, newspaper staffing has a stronger relationship
with local political coverage than other forms of news coverage.

17

Table D5: Reporters and Political Coverage: By Coverage Type
Local News (1)
Census/Proquest
30.49
2004-2014
(7.66)
Directory/Proquest
44.87
2005-2012
(7.48)

National News (2) Difference (1 - 2 )
8.84
21.65
(1.69)
(7.18)
6.18
38.69
(1.13)
(7.02)

18

