Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.15

Pp.211-220

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style
toward Higher Students’ Psychological Condition in Indonesia
Batmang Batmang
Arabic Education Department, Teacher Training and Education Faculty
Institut Agama Islam Negeri Kendari, Kendari, Indonesia
Fahmi Gunawan
English Education Department, Teacher Training and Education Faculty
Institut Agama Islam Negeri Kendari, Kendari, Indonesia
Iskandar Abdul Samad
English Education Department, Teacher Training and Education Faculty
Syiah Kuala University, Banda Aceh, Indonesia
Mohd Shamsuri Md Saad
Center of Languages and Human Development, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia
Melaka, Malaysia
Abstract
Human beings need to interact and communicate with each other in their lif . This interaction and
communication may appear in different language styles. This is much more influenced by a situation or
place where communication takes place. In class, for example, the language utilized by lecturers in the class
room is different from others. This research aims at exploring lecturers’ language style and its implication
to student’s psychological condition in Indonesia. The main question in this research is what kind of
language style used by the lecturer in the learning process? does the using of lecturers’ language style
influence students’ psychological condition? What are the factors that affect the presence of lecturers’
language style? This research used the grounded theory method by Keraf language style theory (2006),
perlocutionary act theory of Austin (1962), and Leech’s politeness theory (1983). This research was
conducted at Institut Agama Islam Negeri Kendari, Indonesia. Observation, in-depth interviews, and
documentation were used as data collection. The results indicated that (1) there were two kinds of lecturers’
language styles which are always delivered to students, namely language style based on sentence structures
and language style based on directness and indirectness of meaning (2) the using of that language style
has a great influence on students’ psychological condition. There are three psychological conditions of
the students, they are motivation, self-efficacy, and interpersonal relation. Each of them creates a positive
and negative condition, (3) The using of language styles were influenced by some factors, namely culture
and ethnicity.
Keywords: Higher education, Language Style, Psychological Condition, University lecturer
Cite as: Batmang, B., Gunawan, F., Abdul Samad, I., & Saad, M.S.M. (2018). The Influence of
Lecturers’ Language Style toward Higher Students’ Psychological Condition in Indonesia. Arab World
English Journal, 9 (4), 211-220.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.15

211

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

1. Introduction
A lecturer in an institute is one of the important factors that can realize the education quality.
Qualified educator determines the successfulness of education goal achievement (Akiba et all,
2007). Without the presence of competent and professional lecturers, educational purposes are not
expected to be achieved. Lecturer, in addition, served to transform, develop, and disseminate
science, technology, and the arts through education, research, and community service (Surya,
2011) as well as to create an atmosphere of learning process that can attract attention and motivate
students (Crosby & Harden, 2000; Zrekat, Abu Bakar &Latif, 2016).
To create a conducive learning environment, lecturers use a variety of language style. Each
of them has a typical style in presenting ideas and concepts, develop research, do the devotion, and
spread knowledge (Saleema, Ali, & Ab Rashid, 2018). In this case, the language style is delivered
as a way for them to express themselves (Bell, 1984; Afifi, 1995; Liliweri, 2011). In a speech
event, the style of the language as a medium of communication has a huge influence
(Puripunyavanich & Soontornwipast, 2018). It should be easily accepted and understood that the
purpose of the speech act is successfully done. The utterances produced can reflect the personal
character of the speaker. The better a person's style, the better the people vote against him—
conversely, the worse of a person's language style, the worse ratings given to him anyway.
In a speech event, language styles have some particular effects on the audience (Davison,
1983; Djajasudarma, 2012). In this regards, Austin (1968) and Searle (1992) call this with the
perlocutionary act. It is an utterance that contains or has the power of influence to those who listen
(Wijana et all., 2009). The power of these influences can intentionally or unintentionally be created
by the speakers. It is clear that the lecturer's language intentionally or unintentionally gives a
psychological impact on students as learners. The psychological impact can take the form of selfmotivation, self-efficacy, and the creation of good interpersonal relationships in vice versa.
Increasingly, some experts agree that culture, language, and social factors are being recognized as
having an impact on learning (Hainer et all., 1990). Moreover, the use of various language style
from lecturers is influencedby culture and ethnicity factors. Based on the above background, this
research is important to know and discuss (1) the form of the language style of lecturers to students
when teaching and examining students’ final project processing, (2) the psychological impact of
students due to the style of the language, and (3) the external factors which caused the language
style used.
Research on language style has been widely discussed, but limited to the question of the style
of the language itself, such as the style of language in twitter (Yunita, 2014), the language style
speech by president Suharto (Agustin, 2008), the style of the language in the novel Dreamer
(Amalia, 2010) and style language in newspaper caricatures (Firman, 2010), and the style of
language lecturers in subjects sociolinguistic (Sabila, 2015). Language style that is associated
with pragmatic or pragmastylistic also widely discussed, such speech acts of perlocution in
preaching of Ustadz Maulana (Nafianti, 2012), the perlocutionary power on cigarette
advertisement discourse (Cahyani, 2013), and perlocutionary act on language style of Mario
Teguh (Qaniah, 2016). However, the discussion of pragmastylistic related to the student's
psychological condition is still rare. There is only an article that discusses the lecturer’s language
style, but it only discuss academic emotions of the students (Gunawan & Kadir, 2017). Based on
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

212

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

those phenomena, this research was aimed at examining the influence of lecturers’ language style toward
higher students’ psychological condition in Indonesia.

2. Method
This research is a qualitative descriptive study using a grounded theory method. It was conducted
by observing the language style of lecturers to students both in teaching and examining the final
project in Indonesia, particularly at Institut Agama Islam Negeri Kendari (IAIN Kendari),
Southeast Sulawesi, Indonesia. The sample was taken by purposive sampling (Moleong, 2001;
Gunarwan, 2002) where the researchers built up the sample that is satisfactory to the researchers
need (Cohen et all., 2007). Then, 15 lecturers whose age are in around 30-60 years old were
chosen and observed. Data collection was carried by depth interviews and recording (Sudaryanto,
1993; Mahsun, 2005; Sugiyono, 2014) with lecturers in four faculties (as amount numbers of
faculties in IAIN Kendari) and 30 students (as the students of each lecturer). Interviews with
lecturers in each faculty conducted to determine the cause of language styles chosen, meanwhile
the interview and questionnaires also given to the students in order to identify the psychological
effects they received from the lecturers. To analyze this results study, researchers used the theory
of language style by Keraf (2006), perlocutionary act theory of Austin (1962), and the theory of
politeness by Leech (1983).
3. Result and Discussion
This research reveals that the lecturers’ language styles to students in teaching and examining test
of students’ thesis classified into two issues, namely, (1) language style based on sentence
structures, and (2) language style based on directness and indirectness of meaning. On the other
hand, those language styles affected students in their high or low on motivation, self-efficacy and
their interpersonal relationships. The factors that affect the appearance of the style of language
lecturers were cultural factors and ethnicity.
3.1 Lecturers’ Language Style toward their Students
The use of language styles by lecturers at IAIN Kendari when teaching and examining students’
final project were very varied. But overall, the lecturers use two kinds of style, namely the style
based on sentence structures and the style based on directness and indirectness of meaning as
formulated by Keraf (2006). Language style based on sentence structures focuses on the
importance of its word order, as climax style of language. Meanwhile, language style based
on directness and indirectness of meaning focus on explicit and implicit meaning. The former
is called by rhetorical style and the latter is called by figurative style. Here is an example of the
use of force language in an academic context.
Table 1.
Climax language style
1Context
Lecturer

A lecturer
:
utterance to ask his student fluently recite and read Qur’an.
Belajar-belajar
:
juga mengaji. Biar tidak banyak2. Yang penting baca.
Lama-lama juga Pintar.
(Study more in reciting Qur’an! Don’t be too much! At least you can
read it. Eventually, you will know and be fluent in reading Qur’an).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

213

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style
Table 2.
Oxymoron language style
Context
2
Lecturer’s
utterances

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

A lecturer
:
utterance who suddenly barged long line of friends who
wanted to pay tuition at the counter of the Faculty
:
Kau tidak
lihat antrean panjang teman-temanmu ini. Kalau saya sih, tidak
ada masalah. Tapi teman-temanmu ini. Kau ini pakai saja jilbab besar
sebagai identitas Islam yang baik, Jangan hanya sekadar JILBAB BESAR,
tetapi perbaiki juga perilakumu. Orang sholat saja antri.
(Didn’t you see long lines of your friends have? (queue). To me, it’s ok. No
problem. But what about your friends?. You're just wearing the big hijab as
a good Muslim identity, but do not just wear a big headscarf, correct your
behavior!. Even in praying, people also in the queue).

Table 3.
Sarcasm language style
Context
3
Lecturer

A lecturer
:
utterance to correct his student’s mistakes in writing
Arabic research proposals.
: anda berharap, pembimbingmu itu mengkutu-kutui dari kata per
Jangan
kata. Karena waktu yang diberikan itu sangat qasir. Ya Mustahil.
(Don’t hope your advisor look at every single word in your writing
proposal! Due to the time given that was very short and limited. It is
impossible, Indeed).

Table 4.
Simile language style
Context
4
Student

A lecturer
:
utterance to a student who wanted to sign his study planning
legalization (KRS) in the educational staff room.
: yang mau bapak tandatangani KRS saya.
Saya
(I want you to sign my KRS).

Lecturer

Bahasamu kaya direktur saja. Perbaiki bahasamu. Bicaralah yang baik.
Duduk dahulu. Tanyakan kepada para staff yang bertugas. Tidak semacam
itulah.
(Your language pretends as if you are directur. Revise your language,
speak politely!. You should sit down first and then ask the staff on duty.
Don’t be like that!

Table 1 discusses climax language style as one of the language styles based on sentence
structures. Climax style is a style which its quality, quantity, and intensity of the sentence are
progressively increasing (Keraf, 2006). The style appears in conversation a lecturer to students to
facilitate the reading of the Koran. He says that the " Study more in reciting Qur’an! Don’t be too
much! At least you can read it. Eventually, you will know and be fluent in reading Qur’an."These
utterances appeared because of the behavior of a student who wanted to test the proposal had not
been capable in reading Qur'an. In fact, one of the requirements to be able to progress and pass the
examination is by the fluency of reading Qur’an. The lecturer’s advice were done gradually as a
Arab World English Journal
214
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

series of events. He said that even though we do not know how to read the Quran, we must take
the time even only 2 or 3 paragraphs to read everyday. If it was done consistently, we would be
getting smarter and more fluent.
Table 2 discusses oxymoron as one of the language styles of rhetoric. Oxymoron is a style
which has a contradiction between its parts (Keraf, 2006). This style of language appears on the
utterance "but do not just wear a big headscarf, correct your behavior! The contradiction between
veiling its part lies in the phrase big and correct behavior. Great hijab or big headscarf is a woman's
identity who is devoting in Islam religion, law-abiding, and obeying its rules. Obedience is
demonstrated not only a religious symbol, but also the behavior of students religious attitudes in
the campus. A female Muslim by big headscarf should not perform acts that are considered poor
by many people. Not in the line up in a queue when re-registration of students took place is one of
the bad behaviors. Therefore, a female Muslim who wear hijab should improve her behavior to
follow the rules in a way to queue to show her obedience.
Language style in the table (3) is classified into sarcasm style as one of the figurative styles.
Sarcasm is a style that expressing upset and angry by using rude words (Keraf, 2006). The style
is evident in the language of the verb phrase “mengkutui-kutui” or looks at every single word.
Mengkutui derived from the ticks, which means that such small animal lice that were in the
children's heads. Mengkutui means an action for fleas or in this case look at every single word.
The act of grooming is hard to do and requires a lot of time. It is certainly impossible to do by
people who are very solid daily activities, especially before graduation. Editing student thesis
classified the act for fleas. This is because of what it takes a long time, requires precision, and
impossible for a lecturer who had a solid agenda.
Table (4) describes simile as one of the figurative styles as well. Simile language style is a
style that comparing one object with another object and always uses comparison (Keraf, 2006).
The language style was classified to be stylistic comparison since the utterance about to compare
the speech of students who signed KRS's speech to his staff a director who is a command. In fact,
this speech was delivered by a student to one of the lecturers who earn additional duties.
Inappropriately, such a speech act delivered by a student to his lecturer.
3.2. The Impact of Language Style on Students’ Psychological Condition
Austin (1962) made the emphasis on the purpose of speakers (lecturer), that it brings about of
effects on the audience by means of uttering the sentences, such effects being special to the
circumstances of utterance. He never neglected the effect of the hearer on the action being
performed by the speakers. On the contrary, he even distinguished two relevant effects that the
perlocutionary effect may cause the achievement of a perlocutionary object or the production of a
perlocutionary sequel (Qiang, 2013).
In essence, each individual has a different style with other individuals, especially in
communication. The difference would seem from the language style component containing
locutions acts, illocutionary acts and perlocution acts. As a perlocution act, lecturers’ language
style had an impact on the psychological state of their students. The psychological impact of this
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

215

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

form of high or low motivation, self-efficacy, and interpersonal relationships amonglecturers and
students. It can be seen on the table described previously.
Table (1) discusses climax style as one style of languages based on sentence structures. This
style of language which addressing lecturer advice to improve the reading Qur’an have a great
effect on the student's motivation. Interviews showed that He felt more motivated to improve his
reading al-Quran because it was considered by his lecturer.
Table (2) which discusses oxymoron style investigates the major discrepancy between the
use of headscarves and Islamic behavior which provided two psychological effects on a student's
self. According to interviews with the student explained that the criticisms from the lecturer have
a positive motivation to be able to improve her behavior to be better. She became motivated to be
patient in doing something, including to be in a long line. On the other hand, to make the pattern
of interpersonal relationships better. She previously who was not too familiar with the lecturer then
became more familiar. She formerly was rare religious and her academic consultation with the
lecturer was becoming more intense and better communicable.
In contrast to the psychological effect on the table (1-2), the table (3), which discusses the
sarcasm language style as one stylistic figurative providing psychological effects such as
disruption of a student's self-efficacy. Interviews showed that the language style of sarcasm on the
table (3) make these students felt incapable by itself as the formulation of the theory of Banduras’
work (1995) and completing a research proposal according to expectations. Since the self-efficacy
had been disrupted, the motivation to complete a research proposal became low so that it made the
student drop and take a long time to recover from himself perception. As a result, he was also rare
either lecture or consult with the supervisor and examiner to pursue in the research seminar.
However, the table (4) which discusses stylistics simile as one stylistic figurative tells about a
lecturer who uttered criticism directly made the student to use a more polite speech when
committing communication. It affected the positive impact. Based on the interview, the student
was aware to be more careful in choosing the right diction when committing communication with
anyone on any issue.
3.3 Factors Affecting TheEmergence of Lecturers’ Language Style
Among the factors behind the emergence of language style of lecturers to students, the factor which
tended to appear was ethnicity as social factors. Ethnicity refers to the meaning of a group that has
certain cultural traits that distinguish it from others. One characteristic of the culture that is the
aspect of language.The lecturers at IAIN Kendari mostly from Ethnic Muna, Makassar, Bugis,
Buton, and minority ethnic Tolaki, Java, Aceh and Padang who have different language styles.
Lecturers who are ethnic Muna (Dila, 2008), as well as lecturers ethnic Makassar (Bahfiarti, 2012),
Madura (Muhaimin, 2010) and Batak (Simatupang et all., 2015) were more likely to use speech
directly and styles that were straightforward, firm, tone of voice loud and tended to be high.
Whereas, the lecturer's language styles from some ethnics like; Bugis, Buton, Java, Padang were
more likely to use indirect speech, softly, and low tone (Martin et all., 2008; Revita, 2013; Halim
et all., 2015). The use of direct speech impressed expressive and more likely to use a style assertion
and opposition, while the speech was not immediately impressed impressive and more likely to
use the language style of satire and comparison. In addition to the factors of ethnicity, cultural
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

216

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

factors are also behind the rise of style. Culture is the mind, intellect, and customs. Thus, culture
is the product of the mind or thought. Certainly, culture lecturer Muna-Makassar different ethnic
with ethnic Bugis and Buton lecturers. If in the Muna-Makassar culture often used direct utterance,
the culture of Bugis, Buton, Java and Padang preferred to use the indirect meaning of the utterance.
The issue of language lecturers style that influenced on the psychological state of the student
still rarely performed. This is because of discussion only partially discuss one without connecting
with others. The researchers can find many articles that discuss the style of the language from a
variety of perspectives (Kameda, 2001) and perlocutionary act from various perspectives as well.
However, the researchers did not find any particular articles that discuss interdicipline style that
relates to a person's psychology. In some psychology researches, the discussion was only on the
issue of motivation (Zimmerman et all., 1992), interpersonal relationships (Frymier et all., 2000)
and self-efficacy (Lent et all., 1984; Bandura et all., 1996) without connecting with other
disciplines of science. Therefore, it can be said that the style of language discussed in the concept
of pragmatic and connected with the problem of psychological conditions is a new thing and
requires a further longer discussion.
Hence, to provide a comparison of language style with its’ influence on the psychological
state of students in Indonesia with other countries requires a long process. However, the thing to
do is to compare the style of language lecturers in Indonesia and the style of language lecturers in
other countries do. In America, people tend to use direct speech act (Wenli, 2011) because they
have faith in the principles of freedom and rights in the opinion. While in Japan and China which
has a principle of peace and order contained in Confucianism is more likely to use indirect speech
act (Wenli, 2011). They listen more and do more than talk. On the other hand, Finns tend to use
indirect speech act (Ting-Toomei, 1999) and the Indian people prefer to use direct speech act
(Cohen, 2004; Nishimura et all., 2008). To find out more about the impact of direct and indirect
speech to the psychological state of students in these countries requires further research.
4. Conclusion
This study found that the language style is important in establishing communication between
lecturers and students. With the style of language, students can be motivated to study harder,
diligently go to college and in vice versa, students can be lazy in studying, doing assignments, and
lazy to go to college. The study also concluded that the language style of lecturers to students are
classified into two, namely, language style based on sentence structures and language style based
on directness and indirectness of meaning. Because in the style of language there is a perlocution
act, then the lecturers’ language style had an impact on the psychological condition of students
that were (1) motivation, (2) self-efficacy, and (3) the pattern of interpersonal relationships.
Additionally, the advent of the use of force against students of language faculty is influenced by
cultural aspects and ethnicity. Finally, this study shows that lecturers should use proper diction
when communicating with students, not perfunctory. Lecturers should use language that has many
charges of advice, encouragement, motivation to the students, not in vice versa, because it can be
fatal to the students themselves.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

217

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

About the Authors:
Batmang is a senior lecturer at Institut Agama Islam Negeri Kendari, Southeast Sulawesi,
Indonesia. He has been teaching at the university since 2000. He completed his PhD in applied
Linguistics from Universitas Negeri Jakarta, Indonesia in 2013. ID Orcid: https://orcid.org/00000003-3901-9983
Fahmi Gunawan is a senior lecturer at Institut Agama Islam Negeri Kendari, Southeast Sulawesi,
Indonesia. He has been teaching at the university since 2008. He has published articles in some
reputable journals. His research interest is Linguistics, Language and Education, Language and
Islamic Studies. ID Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5274-0279
Iskandar Abdul Samad is a senior lecturer at Syiah Kuala University. He has been teaching at
this university since 2003. He completed his PhD in Applied Linguistics from University of New
England (UNE), Australia in 2015. Before that he completed his Master degree in Applied
Linguistics from Macquarie University (MQ), Australia in 2007. ID Orcid. https://orcid.org/00000002-2089-9418
Mohd Shamsuri Md Saad is a Head of Department at the Department of Human Development,
Centre for Languages and Human Development, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka (UTeM).
Internationally, he is a Visiting Fellow at the Universitas Muhammadiah Yogyakarta (UMY)
Indonesia. ID Orcid. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2269-5494
References
Afifi, S. A. F. (1995). Ilm al-Ijtima' al-lughowi. Cairo: Daar al-Fikri al-Arabi.
Agustin, D. N. (2008). Diksi dan gaya bahasa dalam pidato presiden soeharto. (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). UniversitasNegeri Malang, Malang.
Akiba, M., LeTendre, G. K., & Scribner, J. P. (2007). Teacher quality, opportunity gap, and
national achievement in 46 countries. Educational Researcher, 36(7), 369−387.
Amalia, N. R. (2010). Analisis gaya bahasa dan nilai-nilai pendidikan novel Sang Pemimpi karya
Andrea Hirata. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Universitas Sebelas Maret, Surakarta.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Bahfiarti, T. (2012). Komunikasi antar budaya mahasiswa Malaysia di kota Makassar. Jurnal
Penelitian Komunikasi, Informatika, dan Media Massa, 15(2).
Bandura, A. (1995). Self-efficacy in changing societies. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bandura, A., Barbararelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (1996). Multifeced impact of self
efficacy beliefs on academic functioning. Child Development, 67, 1206−1222.
Bell, A. (1984). Language style as audience design. Language in Society, 13(2), 145−204.
Cahyani, I. (2013). Daya perlokusi wacana iklan rokok di daerah Surakarta. (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta, Surakarta.
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research method in education 6th. London and
New York: Routledge.
Cohen, R. (2004). Negotiating across culture: an international communication in an independent
world. Washington DC: United State Institute of Peace Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

218

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

Crosby, Harden, RM., & Joy. (2000). AMEE guide No. 20: The good teacher is more than a
lecturer the twelve roles of the teacher. Medical Teacher, 22(4), 334−347.
Davison, W. P. (1983). The Third person effect in communication. Public Opinion Quarterly,
47(1), 1−15.
Djajasudarma, F. (2012). Wacana dan pragmatik. Bandung: Rafika Aditama.
Dila, S. (2008). Simbolisasi etnis muna di Bandung: studi identitas etnik orang Muna. Mediator,
9(2), 317−326.
Firman, A.D. (2010). Bahasa humor dalam karikatur harian Kendari Pos. Kandai: Jurnal Bahasa
dan Sastra, 6(1)
Frymier, A.B., & Marian, L.H. (2000). The Teacher-students relationship as an interpersonal
relationship. Communication Education, 49(3), 207−219.
Gunarwan, A. (2002). Pedoman Penelitian Pemakaian Bahasa. Jakarta: Pusat Bahasa.
Gunawan, F., & Kadir, A. (2017). Lecturers’ language style and higher students’ academic
emotions in Indonesia.
Hainer, E. V., Fagan B., Bratt, T., Baker, L., &Arnlod, N. (1990). Integrating learning style and
skill in ESL classroom. Washington DC: National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education.
Halim, H., Sjahruddin, K., Zainuddin, T., &Akmal, H. (2015). Politeness in Buginese language as
a social status symbol in Wajo regency. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, 6(1),
230−239.
Kameda, N. (2001). The Implication of language style in business communication: focus on
English versus Japanese. Corporate communications:An International Journal, 6(3),
144−149.
Keraf, G. (2006). Diksi dan gaya bahasa. Jakarta: PT.Gramedia Utama.
Kurniawati, T., & Ramadhiyanti, Y. (2013). Exploring indonesian college students strategies in
learning English language. Arab World English Journal, 4(3), 317—330.
Leech, G. (1983). Principle of pragmatic. Essex: Longman.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Larkin, K. C. (1984). Relation of self-efficacy expectations to
academic achievement and persistence. Journal of counseling psychology, 31(3), 356−362.
Liliweri, A. (2011). Komunikasi serba ada serba makna. Jakarta: Prenada Media Group.
Mahsun. (2005). Metode dan aneka teknik penelitian bahasa: tahapan strategi, metode, dan
tekniknya. Jakarta: PT. Grafindo Utama.
Martin, J. N., & Nakayama, T. K. (2010). Intercultural communication and dialectics revisited. The
Handbook of Critical Intercultural Communication, 59-83.
Moleong, L. J. (2001). Metode penelitian kualitatif. Bandung: PT. Remaja Rosdakarya.
Muhaimin. (2010). Konsep diri etnisitas Madura pada anak sekolah dasar (studi kualitatif pada
anak SD dalam Komunitas Blater di Kabupaten Bangkalan Bagian Utara). Seminar Nasional
Gender dan Budaya Madura III. Madura: Perempuan, Budaya dan Perubahan.
Nafianti, D. (2012). Tindak tutur perlokusi dalam dakwah ustad Maulana pada acara “Islam Itu
Indah” di Trans TV. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). UniversitasMuhammadiyah
Surakarta, Surakarta.
Nishimura, S., Nevgi, A., & Tella, S. (2008). Communication style and cultural features in
high/low context communication cultures: A case study of Finland, Japan and
India. Teoksessa A. Kallioniemi (toim.), Uudistuva ja kehittyväainedidaktiikka.
Ainedidaktinensymposiumi, 8,(2008), 783-796. Retrieved September 9, 2018 from
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

219

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Influence of Lecturers’ Language Style

Batmang, Gunawan, Abdul Samad & Saad

https://people.uwec.edu/degravjr/GEOG-ANTH%20351/Articles/NishimuraNevgiTellahighcontextlowcontext.pdf.
Puripunyavanich, M., & Soontornwipast, K. (2018). The Effects of Learning and Communication
Strategies Instruction on Economics Undergraduates’ Oral Communication Ability in
Thailand. Arab World English Journal,9(2), 218−233.
Qaniah, B. (2016). Gaya bahasa Mario Teguh dalam episode 'Jomblo Mulia' 8 Juni 2014:Kajian
Retorika. Diglossia,7(2), 12−25.
Qiang, K. A. N. G. (2013). On perlocutionary act. Studies in Literature and Language, 6(1).
60−64.
Revita, I. (2013). Pragmatic force behind the utterance of English Departement students in seminar
class discussion. Linguistika Kultura, 6(3), 37−45.
Sabila, A. (2015). Karakter berbicara dosen pada mata kuliah Sosiolinguistik. Jurnal Pesona, 1(2).
Saleem, M., Ali, M., & Ab Rashid, R. (2018). Saudi students’ perceived self-efficacy and its
relationship to their achievement in English language proficiency. Arab World English
Journal, 9(2), 397−413
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Assay in The Philosophy of Language. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Simatupang, O, Lusiana A. L, & Haris W. (2015). Gaya komunikasi dan adaptasi budaya
mahasiswa Batak di Yogyakarta. Jurnal Komunikasi ASPIKOM, 2(5), 314−329.
Sudaryanto. (1993). Metode dan aneka teknik penelitian bahasa. Yogyakarta:Duta Wacana
University Press.
Sugiyono. (2014). Metode penelitian kuantitatif, kualitatif, dan RD. Bandung: Alfabeta.
Surya, D. E. (2011). Kompetensi dosen terhadap standarisasi layanan kepada mahasiswa. Majalah
Ilmiah UNIKOM, 6(2), 157−168.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1999). Communicating across culture. New York: The Guilford Press.
Yunita, L. T. (2014). A stylistics analysis in Farhat Abbas’ twitter criticism to Ahmad Dhani on
Abdul Qodir Jaelani’s tol Jogorawi accident case. Jurnal Ilmiah Mahasiswa FIB, 7(5).
Wijana, IDP. & Rohmadi, M. (2009). Analisis Wacana Pragmatik. Surakarta: Yuma Pustaka.
Wenli, Y. (2011). Academic and cultural experiences of Chinese students at an American
university: a qualitative study. Intercultural Communication Studies, 20(1), 141−157.
Zimmerman, B. J., Bandura, A., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1992). Self-motivation for academic
attainment: the role of self-efficacy beliefs and personal goal setting. American Educational
Research Journal, 29(3), 663−676.
Zrekat, Y., Abu Bakar, N., & Latif, H. (2016). The level of anxiety among Jordanian EFL
undergraduates in oral communication performance. Arab World English Journal, 7(3),
188−202.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

220

