Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.1

Pp.3-18

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs) in EFL Teaching

Hazita Azman
Centre of Literacy and Sociocultural Transformation (CLaST)
Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia
Nurul Farhana Dollsaid
Centre of Literacy and Sociocultural Transformation (CLaST)
Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia
Abstract
This article explores the use of massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) as a type of serious
games that have English as a Foreign Language (EFL) learning potentials. It highlights evidence
from a case study which investigated the effects of role-playing in MMOGs on communication
behaviours among EFL game players. Additionally, findings from the study elucidate the learning
principles of good games that incorporate the dynamics of gaming which induce the language
learner to be active generators of information, knowledge and language. Essentially the
preliminary findings reported affirm the viability of online games as a potential tool for teaching
and learning in the 4.0 era, which endeavours to engage the digital natives of the 21st century. The
study thus claims that MMOGs in particular the massively multiplayer online role-playing games
or MMORPGs can facilitate in providing contextualized and authentic language interaction
opportunities in English between online multilingual speakers.
Keywords: Digital based learning games, EFL communication skills, EFL teaching 4.0, Language
learning games, Massively multiplayer online games
Cite as: Azman, H., & Dollsaid, N. F. (2018). Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games
(MMOGs) in EFL Teaching. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 3-18.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.1

3

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Introduction
Online gaming has grown in popularity due to the advancement of the internet and computer
technologies. The nature of online games now varies from casual single-player to multiplayer
games or massively multi-player online role-playing games in which millions of players are
involved online at once. Players can compete and play the ongoing game as well as communicate
with each other through text chat sessions during online gaming. Players can also speak to one
another using special audio hardware for voice chats. These particular games are also referred to
as serious games. Serious games are introduced with the concept of interactive technology
application that extends far beyond the traditional video games. Corti (2006) also states that serious
games are all about leveraging the power of computer games to captivate and engage end-users
for specific purposes such as to develop new knowledge and skills.
Explorations in the educational potential of computer games have led to wider and deeper
interests in the field of digital-based learning games (DBLGs). The impact of computer-based
gaming or online games on language learning have especially been significant. Studies on the use
of virtual environments and online games in language learning have found benefits ranging from
increased motivation and engagement to enhanced vocabulary gains, as well as expanded
opportunities for communicative competence (Ariffin, 2012; Berns et al., 2013; Zhang &
Kaufman, 2015; Hong et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017).
Furthermore, in recent years massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) have gained
attention among researchers in language acquisition. Researchers claim that the rich potential of
the immersive graphically 3D game space environments with role-playing features have benefited
the second language (L2) learning in providing authentic language development and offering
opportunities for contextualized interaction for learner interaction in multiple languages (Kongmee
et al., 2011; Gee, 2012; Lee & Gerber, 2013; Lee & Pass, 2014; Azman et al., 2015; Peterson,
2016). A variety of serious games such as World of Warcraft and Ragnarok Online have been
viewed as having language learning potentials (Rama et. al. 2012; Sylven & Sundqvist, 2012).
However, to adapt these serious games as DBLG in language learning contexts requires particular
pedagogical adaptations by the teachers or learning designers. There is a current dearth in the field
of DBLG of an evidence-based pedagogical framework for EFL language learning. Hence this
article attempts to address this dearth and add to the literature in the said field.
The study that is reported in this article explores the use of MMOGs, particularly with role
playing features or massively multiplayer online role playing games (MMORPGs) as a type of
serious games that have EFL language learning potentials for Malaysian classrooms. It specifically
investigated the effects of the serious game World of Warcraft (WOW) on communication
behaviors among game players who are EFL speakers. This article will highlight findings from the
study which proffers an evidence-based guide for pedagogical applications of MMOGs in
language teaching contexts as informed by the learning principles of good games (Gee, 2003, 2005,
2008). It reveals the true potential of serious games such as WOW wherein its built-in scaffolding
tools can induce language learners to be active generators of information, knowledge and language.
Essentially the study affirms the viability of online games, in particular MMORPGs, as a potential
DBLGs tool for EFL teaching and learning in the 4.0 era, which endeavors to engage the digital
natives of the 21st century.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

4

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Related Literature
Recent advances in game technology have introduced MMOGs that can support hundreds or
thousands of players at the same time globally. Bawa (2017, p. 154-155) opins that MMOGs have
the potential to develop into a useful learning tool that can sustain learner interests while promoting
skills such as “communication, evaluation of information, research, problem-solving, critical
thinking and literacy, attributable to their immersive environments, and built-in scaffolds for
technological and content knowledge”. Many studies have revealed, even though designed for
entertainment purposes, or because of it, these types of online games may offer significant
motivational incentives in learning. A study by Zhang & Kaufman (2015) and more recently by
the Entertainment Software Association or ESA (2016) found that MMOG players can indulge in
play from 4 to 6 hours a week, thus underlining its ability to engage a user.
Moreover, previous findings suggest a positive relation between uses of MMOGs in the
curriculum and performance outcomes, particularly enhanced motivation and greater critical
thinking leading to learning beyond the scope of the classroom (Schrader, 2008; Paraskeva,
Mysirlaki & Papagianni, 2010; Perrotta, Featherstone, Aston & Houghton, 2013). Interestingly,
these studies commonly find that the built-in features of role-playing in MMOGs motivate and
engage players in the games extensively. In these serious games the players control virtual
characters or avatars of different role occupations such as mage, cleric, swordsman, archer and
many more, who have specific sets of skills and abilities that define the character's role. Over the
course, the virtual characters become stronger and progress within the game while the players
advances through thousands of quests and levels, gain experiences and skills as well as valuable
knowledge towards the end game.
Recent MMORPGs are large-scale permanent virtual worlds providing access to highquality 3D graphic interfaces, characterized by a high degree of realism and immersion, which
enhance the sense of immersion experienced by players, supporting communication, social
interaction, role-play and the process of community formation between users (Peterson, 2010).
Online virtual 3D worlds offer the opportunity for users to interact in real time situations where
players’ avatars move, meet and speak with one another directly through speech or by typing into
a chat box. Peterson (2010) claims that the rich potential of the immersive graphically 3D game
space environments has benefited L2 learning in providing authentic language development and
offering an opportunity for contextualized interaction in a learner's target language. According to
Peterson, some of these MMORPGs are WOW and Ever Quest II. WOW facilitates groups of
players to work together to explore and complete multi-player missions in the game and also to be
social (Dollsaid, 2015).
Related research on the use of virtual environments and online games in language learning
has found benefits ranging from increased motivation and engagement to enhanced vocabulary
gains, as well as expanded opportunities for communicative competence (Milton et. al. 2012;
Berns et. al. 2013). Similar studies also reveal learners benefit from interactions with native
speakers and diverse interlocutors in an engaging communicative context (Johnson & Levine
2008; Rama et. al. 2012). Therefore there is great potential in integrating digital-based games with
language learning purposes as established by these previous researches.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

5

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Even so, contrary to these studies, Rankin, Gold & Gooch (2006) reveal that the MMORPG
platform does not provide the type of learning support for beginner ESL students and that benefits
are limited to intermediate and advanced level students only. Similarly, Rama et al. (2012) reiterate
that only proficient players mainly benefit from the collaborative interaction proffered by
MMORPGs as it generally requires both, certain game-expertise and confidence with the target
language. Additionally, Milton et al. (2012) conclude that there is little opportunity for lexical
growth without teacher’s control in MMORPG-based learning activities.
Other related concerns include the lack of understanding and appreciation for the potential
of these games as a learning tool by the practitioners or teachers (Ariffin, 2012). Moreover,
inadequate training and limited opportunities for professional development on games literacy for
teachers did not facilitate them to add digital-based learning in their lessons (Musa et al., 2012;
Machado & Chung, 2015). For teachers to apply DBLGs effectively in the curriculum it is crucial
for them to first understand how students can learn from these technologies and game designs. In
the absence of such knowledge, teachers run the risk of employing game-based lessons that are
not a good fit for effective teaching and learning.
Thus, there is a need for teachers who plan to introduce online games as a learning tool to
first have an insight and deeper understanding of the design of these games. This is imperative to
enable them to recognize that even though the MMOGs were not designed for education, they can
be highly useful learning tools when fused with sound curricular designs (Gee, 2012; Wu, Richards
& Saw, 2014; Henderson & Romeo, 2015). It is necessary therefore for teachers to be guided on
how to discern these elements in the games and have knowledge of how to infuse communicative
pedagogical strategies when planning to use learn-play approach. Drawing from Gee’s principles
of good games (2008) this study provides an English language practitioner’s guide for teachers
who are interested in applying MMORPGs in their teaching. This guideline is supported by
evidence from the study that is reported at two levels in this article. The first is data which reveal
the game players’ perspectives as language users in relation to the game’s potential as a learning
tool to develop communicative skills in English; and the second is evidence to support the
effectiveness of MMORPG game design that is analyzed through the principles of good games
learning framework.
The Aim of the Study
As inferred above, there are a number of concerns to take into consideration in order to realize the
full potential of games as educational tools in the Malaysian context in particular. Firstly, the
application of computer games as teaching aids has not been extensively carried out despite the
implementation of ICT in Education policy since 2010 that aims to integrate the use of ICT in
teaching and learning (Gryzelius, 2015). To date, despite the high investment pumped into ICT for
education initiatives by the Malaysian Ministry of Education (MOE), ICT usage in Malaysian
schools remains exceedingly low--less than five percent of Malaysian teachers reportedly used the
ICT facilities provided daily (Gryzelius, 2015, p. 2).
Secondly, as Pandian (2006) reveals, the continuous technological changes and new
patterns of literacy practices have caused many teachers to be trapped in situations where 'illiterates
are teaching the literates' (p. 16) when it comes to the use of ICT in the classroom. Many teachers
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

6

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

are not confident in using technology and are ill-equipped to handle students' special needs.
Thirdly, as Osman & Bakar (2012) point out, the available games in the market and their suitability
aspects should be looked into as well, as Malaysia is a multicultural and multi-ethnic country, and
students’ backgrounds as well as their previous learning experiences, which are mainly teacher
guided, need to be taken into consideration. Moreover, the learn-play approach (Plass et al., 2015)
which requires different learning behaviors may leave the Malaysian students, who are mostly
teacher dependent for English language learning especially, feeling lost and not confident of
themselves (Adris & Yamat, 2012; Musa et al., 2012). Hence, a practitioner’s guide on how to
adapt or adopt a serious game into the local EFL curriculum will facilitate in addressing these
pedagogical issues.
This notion is supported by Fortugno & Zimmerman (2005) who argue that as many games
do not include sound pedagogical principles in their design, a practitioner’s guide is necessary to
assist teachers to create learning opportunities whilst students play the games. They emphasized
that it is the teaching environment in which the game is used, that is the learning opportunities that
are designed by the teacher around the games, which stimulates learning to occur. Adapting good
online games for learning can be easily done according to Gee (2003, 2005, 2008). He recognizes
that there are already many good principles of learning built into good computer and video games.
He believes that these principles are essential for learners' engagement, learning and success. To
illustrate the inherent learning principles built into good games, Gee framed these principles into
three constructs: empowered learner, problem solving and understanding.
The study reported in this article applied Gee’s pedagogical framework to examine the
language learning elements in the design of MMORPG serious game such as WOW. Specifically,
the study endeavors to answer the following questions regarding the potentials of MMORPGs as
a DBLG tool for the development of language skills:
1.
2.
3.

To what extent is communicative competence enhanced through the MMORPG design of
the WOW game?
What language learning elements can be identified in the design of WOW based on Gee's
principles of good games?
Which good games principles are useful and relevant towards designing an effective EFL
game-based language learning experience?

Research Design
The selection of research participants for the case study is designed to elicit viewpoints at three
levels, firstly at the level of a consistent gaming player, secondly as a future learning games
developer and designers, and at the third level as an EFL language learner. Towards this end, five
EFL case studies were selected, comprising students from a game design and development
program from a tertiary institution. They were between the ages of 18-21 and are familiar with
playing online games, especially with the WOW game. The selection process was based on the
qualitative snowball sampling method where the participants recommend other individuals to be
sampled (Creswell, 2012).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

7

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

WOW was chosen for the study as it is the leading subscribed MMORPG with over 10
million subscribers worldwide. Real-time communication and interactions between player
characters (PCs) and non-playing characters (NPCs) is solely internet based. Much of the game's
advanced contents direct towards the creation of a guild, a group of players working
collaboratively together who complement, socialize and connect with each other to explore and
complete multi-player missions in the game (Dollsaid, 2015, p. 35). These players collaborate
together to overcome challenges in the game.
The study employed a qualitative case study design to provide an in-depth exploration and
understanding of language learning through online games. Detailed views from the five
participants in the form of words or images and themes were collated and analysed. Three types
of data sources were collated from questionnaire, in-game chat logs and email interviews. The
questionnaire was constructed based on Gee's 16 learning principles of good games (2008). It aims
to identify the interfaces or design of the online game WOW that incorporates language learning
features. Table 1 is a condensed list of the principles of good games categorized into respective
constructs that incorporate the learning domain (Gee, 2008, p. 3-11).
Table 1. Gee’s Learning Principles of Good Games
1. Empowered Learner
▪ Co-design Production:
Gamers help co-design
games through their
decisions and actions.
▪ Customization:
Users can play — and
succeed — at their
competency level.
▪ Identity:
Players build a sense of
identity either through
direct input or an on-screen
character they inherit.
▪ Interaction:
Communication occurs
between the player and the
game.
▪ Agency:
Players have control over
the gaming environment.
▪ Risk Taking:
Empowering players to take
risks.
▪ Manipulation of Smart
Tools & Distribution of
knowledge:
Players employ scaffolding
in-game tools that help gain

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

2. Problem Solving

3. Understanding

▪

Well-ordered Problems:
Problems are ordered from
easy to difficult, allowing
players to grow, evolve and
develop skills.
▪ Pleasantly Frustrating:
The game should frustrate
enough to challenge but be
easy enough to overcome
the problem(s) faced.
▪ Cycle of Expertise:
Games offer a problem that
challenges assumed
expertise.
▪ Information on Demand
& Just in Time:
Information is provided as
needed and not before.
▪ Explore, Think Laterally,
Rethink Goals: Games
force players to expand
situational knowledge and
consider courses of action
other than linear ones.

▪

▪

▪

▪

System Thinking:
Games make players think
in a bigger picture, helping
them see how the pieces fit
or can be fitted together.
Situated Meanings:
Students learn new
vocabulary words by
experiencing them within
game situations.
Performance before
Competence: Competency
occurs through action in the
game—act and learn.
Cross-Functional Teams:
In multiplayer
environments, players have
different skills, forcing
them to rely on each other.

8

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

confidence to share their
knowledge with others.

For the questionnaire, the participants were required to indicate their degree of agreement, based
on a Likert-scale, towards statements that describe each principle in relation to their online gaming
experience and language learning skills. Examples of statements depicting a principle for each
construct, extracted in parts from the questionnaire (Dollsaid, 2015, p. 131-134), are provided in
Table 2.
Table 2. Examples of Questionnaire items
1.
Empowered Learner
Co-design Production: "I embark on different routes and role-play from other players through a
diverse journey in my game play where each of the players has their own terrains or objectives to be
accomplished. This results in different end game for most players".
Strongly agree □
Agree □
Uncertain □
Disagree □
Strongly disagree □
2.
Problem Solving
Well-ordered problems: "As I play the game, I get better and better to face more difficult challenges
later on in my game play. The game offers graded problem solving that is set up for players to
advance to the next level".
Strongly agree □
Agree □
Uncertain □
Disagree □
Strongly disagree □
3.
Understanding
System thinking: "The game gives me a good feel of the overall game system and I develop good
intuition on what works and what does not in playing the game. I learn about how to fit in the game as
a whole by understanding the game genre that I'm playing. I properly understand the complex game
system to plan for effective action and enhance interaction in the game".
Strongly agree □
Agree □
Uncertain □
Disagree □
Strongly disagree □

A total of 10 in-game chat logs based on 10 gaming sessions, played consistently by each
of the five players, for the duration of three weeks, were recorded and analyzed. The five players
were free to play WOW at their discretion for an average of 4 hours per week with other PCs across
the globe, and not necessarily with each other. Each was identified by their virtual character name.
The chat logs recorded the use of the English language among these PCs and NPCs in their ingame virtual social interactions, regardless of the length, informal words used and topics discussed.
The chat logs exhibited patterns of participants' language ability and language use throughout the
online gaming activities.
The participants responded to five open-ended interview questions designed to elicit
comments, suggestions and explanations about their interactions and decisions made in-game. The
interview also provide insights into the participants’ perceived language needs as well as their
judgment of the language learning elements inherent in WOW’s game design. These interview
questions were posed through emails to participants who were geographically dispersed. This
method was consistent with Creswell’s (2012) recommendation for collating information from
individuals using computers and the internet.
The multiple forms of data were analyzed and evaluated using the content analysis
technique. The common and overlapping themes of the data were identified through coding of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

9

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

points or content to develop a more general sense of recurrent themes as well as segmenting the
related codes into descriptions and themes.
Findings and Discussion
In general the overall findings from the study show the potential of the MMORPG WOW game as
a DBLG platform for the Malaysian EFL classroom. The study proves that the game design of
WOW creates a conducive language learning environment by situating the context of dialogue
exchanges and interactive feedbacks in real-time with appropriate contexts. The following sections
elucidate the findings in relation to the research questions posed in the study.
Evidence of Communicative Competence in MMORPGs
With regard to the extent that communicative competence is enhanced among the 5 gamers when
playing WOW, the analysis of the chat logs found evidence that real-time interactions were
conducted in the English language and communicative competence was facilitated through
cooperative learning, discovery learning and construction of meaning exchanges between PCs and
PCs-NPCs. Most notably is the construct of the guild which supported players to teach and learn
from each other by soliciting for vocabulary support and strategic communicative skills. More
interestingly, the analysis also reveals that the NPCs which are the computer-controlled characters
in the game assisted the players by scaffolding the game navigation interactions and requests for
explorations at each level of the game. The following Tables 3 through 5 illustrate relevant excerpts
of these findings.
Table 3. Excerpt depicting Communicative Competence through Cooperative learning
[Party Leader]|Minidotz: I hafta leave in about an hour. Do more quests if u want. Explore and all
that. When i get home i can keep going with ay
Minidotz: Geeeezzzz bad typing
Minidotz: You
Galiford: ok. Thank u very much. Why are u so kind to help me?
Minidotz: Well i know this game is tuff when u first start. It was my friend who helped me get
started....or i think i might have quit.
Galiford: How many characters u have?
Minidotz: 8. The main one i play is a priest. I love priests
Galiford: What level is your priest?
Minidotz: 90
Galiford: Is that max? Do priests have dragon?
Minidotz: No i bought this mount. Costs about 20k gold
Galiford: Wow that's nice. That is really expensive pet.
Minidotz: Horse not pet. Believe me it’s easier to make gold as u level but u need to have professions
Galiford: How to make gold fastest way?
Minidotz: Ummm we call it farming. Basically u go out and collect stuff and sell it in AH

The extract illustrates a conversation between two PCs, one of the Malaysian study
participants, Galiford, with a party leader, Minidotz, from Canada. It obviously exemplifies the
collaborative interchange between a newcomer to the level and a master player, respectively. The
direct response by Minidotz, in explaining why he is helping Galiford, who had just joined the
game, clearly indicated the team spirit of gaming culture. Additionally, strategic social competence
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

10

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

skill was demonstrated when Minidotz announced that he would need to leave awhile but reassured
Galiford that he would return to the game later to help him, suggesting a continuing rapport and
support. This scenario also revealed the underpinning principle of empowering learners, identified
by Gee (2008), that motivate players to build their confidence and continuously engage in the
game.
The communicative features that can be discerned from this interchange are corrective
feedback on word use-“bad typing” in reference to “ya” when he meant to say “you”; whereas the
“horse” is pointed out to be a “mount” and not a “pet” as both connotes different roles; where the
former is purchased for utilitarian use, while the latter is tamed for guardianship. Another example
illustrated in Table 4 below demonstrates how communicative competence is enhanced through a
discovery learning episode in the game. It illustrates how safe learning (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 86) is
created for language practice with support from other players.

Table 4. Excerpt depicting communicative competence through discovery learning
Minidotz: Where are u. I don't see u on the dragon
Galiford: I'm here
Minidotz: K. Tell me when
Galiford: When what?
Minidotz: U ready to fly out
Galiford: Ok I'm ready
Minidotz: I think we can get u exp just by flying to all these areas and at level 10 we try to
see if u can get more gold
Galiford: Yeah i get much more than killing monsters. Ok I’m ready. Done
NPC Discovered Fields of Honor: 90 experience gained
NPC You have learned a new spell: Flash Heal.
Minidotz: Nice
Galiford: Yeah. I got heal. What does that mean? Is it a skill?
Minidotz: Its an addon. U install it and then u get addons to help u play a lil better
Galiford: Like a cheat?
Minidotz: Sorta but blizzard allows it
Galiford: Owh nice
In the log above the research participant Galiford is further ensconced in the safe learning
space of the game by the guild leader Minidotz. The excerpt above shows how Minidotz negotiated
the level to enable Galiford to discover about “heal” and learn how to use it. Gee’s principle of
understanding in good games is displayed here where the language user learned a new word by
experiencing them within game situations. Additionally, it is also evident that the learning
environment inherent in the design of good games induced on demand and just in time information,
where the player received information, from the PC as well as the NPC, as needed to progress.
Table 5 demonstrates how real-time interaction in the target language between PCs is
facilitated through co-construction of meaning and exchanges in the knowledge of vocabulary,
expressions and phrases (Vygotsky, 1978). The excerpt shows that individual learner can
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

11

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

undertake functions that they could not carry out independently through interactions with more
capable peers and their gaming surroundings.
Table 5. Excerpt depicting communicative competence through the construction of meaning
Galiford: How long have u been playing this game? 8 years
Galiford: U play this every day?
Minidotz: Mostly...i don’t watch much tv. This for me is relaxing
Galiford: What do you do when your level is max?
Minidotz: That’s when u do raiding and arena and BG's. To get the best gear so u can kill
players better
Galiford: What is raid and arena?
Minidotz: U get in a group with 2 or 3 ppl and u fight against other players. U get points for
the best pvp gear
Galiford: Owh and BG? What’s the difference?
Minidotz: Arena is for skilled players. U can still do them but u might loose all the time. BG's
give u points for entry level pvp gear
Galiford: So bg is fighting other player too right?
Minidotz: Ya. 10 - 20 players depends on the BG
Galiford: Owh so bg is more like a war?
Minidotz: Or claim and defend stuff
Galiford: Owh ok i get it
Minidotz: The first BG u will do is Warsong Gulch. Its getting enemy players flag and bring
it back to your base
Galiford: owh ok like capture the flag. I get it. Just like Call of Duty
Minidotz: Ya.aaa...dont be nervous...just follow the crowd and read wut they say and u soon
learn whats goin on

The negotiation of meaning exchanged above revolved around clarification and
comprehension checks. New knowledge is discernably gained by the novice player as the terms
and situated meanings for “raid”, “arena”, and “BG”, are clarified and explained by Minidotz who
is the expert in this interchange. The communication reached an understanding when Galiford
compared ‘capture the flag’ with another game called Call of Duty, of which both PCs have a
schema of. The excerpt illustrates that Galiford felt safe to make continuous on demand queries of
the words introduced as the chat proceeded. This attest to the non-threatening environment created
in the virtual space as both players are cognizant of the need for an understanding to be achieved
to ensure future successful play. Unfortunately this type of on-demand question-feedback
exchanges between teacher and student is not viable in a classroom situation.
In sum, communicative competence strategies (Canale, 1983) were evidently employed by
the PCs as they negotiate and scaffold the different scenarios and levels of the game in their quest
to overcome the challenges collaboratively. Vygotsky’s socio-cultural theory (1978) explains this
phenomenon as processes of situated meaning-making that give rise to the use of relevant,
appropriate and rich language engaged in active negotiations of meaning.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

12

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Language learning elements in MMORPG WOW design
This second research question endeavors to identify both the language learning elements inherent
in the design of the MMORPG, as well as the related pedagogical guidelines that facilitate the
application of DBLG in the EFL classrooms. The data represent the perceptions of the PCs in the
study describing the extent they think the game design facilitates language learning and how they
view it will enable teachers to develop game-based language lessons.
Generally, all the PCs found the WOW game design incorporated Gee’s principles of good
games in varying degrees. A high degree of agreement was shown for four of the seven principles
for the empowered learner construct, four of five of the problem-solving principles, and two of
four of the understanding principles. Therefore in total 10 of the 16 principles outlined by Gee for
good games (refer to Table 1) was identified by the participants to be in-built in WOW, suggesting
its high potential as a good language learning tool. Table 6 below shows these 10 principles of
good games, by its three constructs—Empowered learner, Problem-solving and Understanding,
inherent in WOW and found to be relevant to language learning.
Table 6.

Principles of good games inherent in WOW relevant to language learning
1. Empowered Learner
4

Co-design
Customization
Identity
Manipulation &…

1

3
1

1
1

2
2

1
1

3

2. Problem Solving
2

Well-ordered problems
1

Pleasantly frustrating

3
1

3
4

Cycle of expertise
Information on…

1

2

1

2

3. Understanding
4

System thinking
Situated meaning
Strongly disagree

1

Disagree

1
3

Uncertain

1
Agree

Strongly agree

The aforesaid data is supported by interview responses by the PCs where most of them
agree that the MMORPG induces usage of English language in real time and on demand as the
players are worldwide and English appears to be the language of choice among the gamers.
Although accuracy is not the target, clarity of the situated meaning directs the negotiations in the
in-game social setting, as the interactors aim to solve a problem towards a common group goal.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

13

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Kongmee et al., (2011, p. 3) refer to this as “collective exploration of goals”. Furthermore, the
respondents highlighted that player bonding that evolves is an important motivating factor that
provide them with a safe and anxiety-free learning environment fostering collaborative learning.
Hsu & Wu (2009) pointed out that this social bonding (as depicted in Table 5) between players is
a vital element in engaging players and building trust among co-players.
Even so, the respondents highlighted some issues with regards to the quality of
language used in the games. They are concerned that standards of language input is compromised
as much of the interaction that occurs are inundated with spelling errors, abbreviations, slangs or
a non-standard variety of the language, accents and fragments. Nevertheless, based on their
personal experiences, they view that the collective motivation to collaborate and cooperate usually
overcomes these issues.
Good games principles relevant for EFL game-based language learning
In relation to the third research question, the key language learning skills that the respondents
recognize can be developed using MMORPGs are vocabulary skills, functional discourse skills,
interpersonal and interactional communication skills, negotiation skills, listening skills, and to
some extent reading skills. According to Zhang et al (2017, p. 2) while many studies have argued
that MMORPGs can facilitate vocabulary learning, the teacher’s control in the learning activity
design is imperative for pedagogical effectiveness. Apart from vocabulary development, the other
identified skills as listed above concur with other studies as cited in Zhang et al (2017) that have
found positive relationships between MMORPGs and basic language development. These include
the impact on speaking abilities (Lai & Wen, 2012), listening skills (Hu and Chang, 2007), and
interactional competence (Berns et al., 2013).
Table 7 shows a sample mapping of language learning skills based on Gee’s good games principles
for vocabulary and interactional skills. This mapping acts as a practitioner’s guide for EFL teachers
who are planning to use DBLG as a teaching tool.
Table 7. A sample of proposed practitioner’s guide for a game based EFL learning & teaching
Language Skills
Vocabulary

Good Games Principles
Situated Meanings
Customization
Information on Demand & Just in
Time

Interactional and Interpersonal Identity
Communication
Well-ordered Problems
Pleasantly Frustrating

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Pedagogical technique
Vocabulary chunks
Contextual clues
Create word list for focus
learning
Familiarize with sounds,
texts, images
Identify expert-novice roles
Make available multiplesource for info on demand.
Discourse functions tasks:
Turn taking, Greetings,
clarification requests,
confirmation checks, feedback
requests, paraphrasing, selfcorrection, Wh-Questions,
Exclamations

14

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid
Cooperative and collaborative
activities
Negotiation of meaning tasks

Conclusion
This study suggests that virtual spaces in MMORPGs such as WOW provides for social network
opportunities that are automatically created once a player joins a guild of players. It creates an
open communication channel for everyone to have a dialogue as a team or in pairs. This virtual
game environment facilitates socialization and communicative language use for the EFL language
learner through authentic active interactions with native speakers and other non-native speakers of
the target language. The EFL students engage in augmented speaking practices through the roles
adopted by their avatars. This speaking opportunity occurs in a situated context with rich support
from fellow players as well as the scaffolding tools, embedded in the design of the games. Unlike
life conversations in the real world, the situation of this augmented communication context allows
for practice time, reflections on language production and even margin for errors. This space allows
them to own and control their learning process in a safe environment without anxiety, and
incognito through their avatars. Meanwhile, multiple encounters with other numerous speakers
help improve their confidence and build new knowledge as they engage in achieving a collective
goal as online players. Hence the findings of this study as discussed are consistent with those
identified in prior researches on DBLGs in earlier sections of the article.
In relation to the application of MMORPGs in Malaysian EFL classrooms, this study and
other related studies, as highlighted previously in this article, have shown evidence that it is a
conceivable way forward for teaching EFL 4.0. The use of this DBLG tool can be pedagogically
designed to be adapted and implemented in and out of the classroom and even as a self-learning
platform. However, teacher cognition and understanding how to apply the learn-play approach is
critically imperative for MMORPGs to be successfully implemented. It is hoped that this study
has promoted the potential of non-education based commercial online games and circumvented
the limiting notion that only games that are localized culturally (Osman & Bakar, 2012) and
designed for learning are feasible for EFL 4.0 teaching purposes.
Acknowledgement:
This is an original work based on a preliminary case study which is part of a larger research project
sponsored by the Ministry of Education Malaysia (FRGS/1/2017/SSI01/UKM/01/1)
About the Authors:
NURUL FARHANA DOLLSAID has a Bachelor’s degree in Human Sciences (English
Language and Literature) from the International Islamic University Malaysia and a Master’s
degree in English Language Studies from Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia.
ORCID : https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0417-9736.
HAZITA AZMAN, Ph.D is Professor of Applied Linguistics and Literacy Studies at the Centre
of Literacy and Sosiocultural Transformation (CLaST), Faculty of Social Sciences and
Humanities, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. She has researched and published in the areas of
language policy, ESL literacy practices, multimodal literacies, and literacy assessment.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

15

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3018-5336

References
Adris, N. B., & Yamat, H. (2015). Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games
(MMORPG) as Virtual Grounds for Second Language Learning: Players’ Perception.
Proceedings of the International Seminar on Language Teaching, 4-5 February 2015,
1-15. Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia: Bangi.
Ariffin, M. M. (2012). Towards Digital Game-Based Learning (DGBL) in Higher Education:
The Educators' Perception. Developing Country Studies 2(11), 228-236. Retrieved on
20th February, 2018 from
http://www.iiste.org/Journals/index.php/DCS/article/view/3579/3628
Azman, H., Salman, A., Supyan H., Norizan A. R., Hashim, M. S., Abu Hassan, M., Samsinar
M. S., Rozhan M. I., Manap, M. R., & Satirah A. (2015). Measuring Readiness,
Acceptance and Satisfaction of Innovative Digital Economy: Preliminary Findings. EBangi-Journal of Social Sciences & Humanities: Special Issue (1), 023 – 030.
Bawa, P. (2017). Game On: Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOG) as Tools to
Augment Teaching and Learning. Purdue University, ProQuest Dissertations
Publishing, 2017. 10681049. ProQuest LLC: Ann Arbor.
Berns, A., Palomo-Duarte, M., Dodero, J. M., & Valero-Franco, C. (2013) Using a 3D Online
Game to Assess Students' Foreign Language Acquisition and Communicative
Competence, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 19-31.
Canale, M. (1983). From Communicative Competence to Communicative Language
Pedagogy, In J. C. Richard, & R. W. Schmidt (eds.), Language and Communication
(pp. 2-27). London: Longman.
Corti, K. (2006). Game-based Learning: A Serious Business Application, PIXELearning
Limited, 34, (2), 1-20.
Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational Research: Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating
Quantitative and Qualitative Research 4th Ed. United States: Pearson Education Inc.
Dollsaid, N. F. (2015). Exploring the Potential of Massive Multiplayer Online Role-Playing
Games (MMORPG) for ESL Language Learning. (Unpublished Master’s Thesis).
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia.
ESA. (2016). 2016 sales, demographic and usage data: essential facts about the computer and
video game industry. April. Retrieved on 18th February, 2018 from
http://essentialfacts.theesa.com/Essential
Fortugno, N. & Zimmerman, E. (2005). Learning to Play to Learn – Lessons in Educational
Game Design. Retrieved on 18th February, 2018 from
http://www.gamasutra.com/features/20050405/zimmerman_01.shtml
Gee, J. P. (2003). What Video Games Have To Teach Us About Learning And Literacy. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gee, J. P. (2005). Learning by Design: Good Video Games as Learning Machines. E–
Learning, 2, (1), 5-16.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

16

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Gee, J. P. (2008). Good Videogames, the Human Mind and Good Learning. In T. Willoughby
& E. Wood (Eds.), Children’s Learning in a Digital World (pp. 40-63). Oxford, UK:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Gee, J. (2012). Foreword. In H. Reinders (ed.), Digital Games In Language Learning &
Teaching. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gryzelius, J. (2015). ICT in Classroom Learning: Exploring the Discrepancies between Ideal
Conditions and Current Malaysian Policy. Policy Ideas No. 18-ICT in Classroom
Learning, February 2015, (pp. 1-13). Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs
(IDEAS).
Henderson, M., & Romeo, G. (2015). Teaching and Digital Technologies: Big Issues and
Critical Questions. Port Melbourne, VIC: Cambridge University Press.
Hsu, S. H., Wen, M. H., & Wu, M. C. (2009). Exploring user experiences as predictors of
MMORPG addiction. Computers & Education, 53, (3), 990-999.
Hong, J. S., Han, D. H., Kim, Y. I., Su, J. B., Sun, M. K., & Renshaw, P. (2016). English
language education on-line game and brain connectivity. ReCALL 29, 3–21.
doi: 10.1017/S0958344016000173
Hu, M. M., & Chang, B. (2007). Massively multiplayer online game supported foreign
language listening ability training. In Proceedings of the First IEEE International
Workshop on Digital Game and Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning (DIGITEL), Banff,
AB, 176–178.
Johnson, L. F. & Levine, A. H. (2008). Virtual Worlds: Inherently Immersive, Highly Social
Learning. Spaces, Theory into Practice, 47, (2), 161-170.
Kongmee, I., Strachan, R., Montgomery, C., & Pickard, A. (2011). Using massively
multiplayer online role playing games (MMORPGs) to support second language
learning: Action research
in the real and virtual world. In 2nd Annual IVERG
Conference: Immersive Technologies for Learning: Virtual Implementation, Real
Outcomes, 27-28 June 2011, Middlesborough, UK.
Lai, A. F., & Wen, S. S. (2012). Evaluating an Online Role Playing Game for Promoting the
Elementary School Students’ English Speaking Abilities. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Information Science and Digital Content Technology,
Daegu, 610–615.
Lee, Y.J., & Gerber, H. (2013). It's a WOW World: Second Language Acquisition and
Massively Multiplayer Online Gaming. Multimedia-Assisted Language
Learning, 16,
(2), 53–70.
Lee, J.Y., & Pass, C. (2014). Massively Multiplayer Online Gaming and English Language
Learning.
In H.R. Gerber & S.S. Abrams (eds.), Bridging
Literacies
with
Videogames (pp. 91–101). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Machado, L. J., & Chung, C. (2015). Integrating Technology: The Principals’ Role and Effect.
International Education Studies, 8, (5), 43-53.
Milton, J., Jonsen, S., Hirst, S. & Lindenburn, S. (2012). Foreign Language Vocabulary
Development through Activities in an Online 3D Environment. The Language
Learning Journal, 40, (1), 99-112.
Musa, N. C., Lie, K. Y., & Azman, H. (2012). Exploring English language learning and
teaching in Malaysia. GEMA: Online Journal of Language Studies, 12, (1), 35-51.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

17

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)

Azman & Dollsaid

Osman, K., & Bakar, N. A. (2012). Educational Computer Games for Malaysian Classrooms:
Issues and Challenges. Asian Social Science, 8, (11), 75-84.
Pandian, A. (2006). What Works in the Classrooms? Promoting Literacy Practices in English.
3L Journal of Language Teaching, Linguistics and Literature 11, 15-39.
Paraskeva, F., Mysirlaki, S., & Papagianni, A. (2010). Multiplayer Online Games as
Educational Tools: Facing New Challenges in Learning. Computers & Education,
54, (2), 498-505.
Perrotta, C., Featherstone, G., Aston, H. & Houghton, E. (2013). Game-based Learning: Latest
Evidence and Future Directions (NFER Research Programme: Innovation in
Education). Slough: NFER. Retrieved on 3 March, 2018 from
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/GAME01/GAME01.pdf
Peterson, M. (2016). The Use of Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games in CALL:
An Analysis of Research. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29, (7), 1181- 1194.
Plass, J. L., Homer, B. D., & Kinzer, C. K. (2015). Foundations of Game-Based Learning.
Educational Psychologist, 50, (4), 258–283.
Rama, P.S., Black, R.W., Van Es, E. & Warschauer, M. (2012). Affordances for Second
Language Learning in World of Warcraft. RecALL 24, (3), 322-338.
Rankin, Y., Gold, R. & Gooch, B. (2006). 3D Role-Playing Games as Language Learning
Tools. In Proceedings of Eurographics, 25, (3), 211-225.
Schrader, P. G. (2008). Learning in Technology: Reconceptualizing Immersive Environments.
AACE Journal, 16, (4), 457-475.
Sylven, L.S. & Sundqvist, P. (2012). Gaming as Extramural English L2 Learning and L2
Proficiency among Young Learners. ReCALL, 24, (3), 302-321.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wu, M. L., Richards, K., & Saw, G. K. (2014). Examining a Massive Multiplayer Online RolePlaying Game as a Digital Game-Based Learning platform. Computers in the Schools,
31, (1-2), 65-83.
Zhang, F., & Kaufman, D. (2015). The Impacts of Social Interactions in MMORPGs on Older
Adults’ Social Capital. Computers in Human Behaviour, 51 (Part A), 495-503.
Zhang, Y., Song, H., Liu, X., Tang, D., Chen, Y-e., & Zhang, X. (2017). Language Learning
Enhanced by Massive Multiple Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) and the
Underlying Behavioral and Neural Mechanisms. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11:95.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

18

