Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE

Seeing Green and Feeling Blue:
The Effect of Natural Environment Exposure on Mental Health*

Gina Pryciak
Skidmore College

Word Count = 9252
*Please direct all correspondence to Gina Pryciak, 815 N. Broadway, Skidmore College,
Saratoga Springs, NY 12866. E-mail: gpryciak@skidmore.edu. The author would like to thank
Professor Andrew Lindner, Professor Catherine Berheide, and their senior seminar colleagues for
their support and guidance throughout the process of this project.

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Seeing Green and Feeling Blue:
The Effect of Natural Environment Exposure on Mental Health
ABSTRACT
Does exposure to natural environments improve mental health? Past research shows
benefits from spending time in green spaces, including improved well-being, as well as better
mental and physical health (van den Berg et al. 2010; Atuoye et al. 2019; Bingley 2013).
However, these studies focus on spending time in parks, gardens, or other natural environments
and build their cases around the advantageous effects resulting from actual time spent in such
places (Fan, Das, and Chen 2011; Litt et al. 2015; van den Berg et al. 2010). This study focuses
instead on whether exposure to, regardless of time spent in green spaces, has similar effects.
Using attention restoration theory and the theory of therapeutic landscapes, I hypothesize that the
more one agrees that they have access to or views of natural environments, the fewer days of
poor mental health they will have. This study uses data from the 2018 General Social Survey,
with a restricted sample of only those who are employed or temporarily not working (N = 649).
After controlling for race, family income, full-time employment status, size of place, and
dwelling type, results show no significant relationship between access to or views of natural
environments and days of poor mental health. However, multivariate results show that
controlling for all other factors, white individuals had more days of poor mental health, and those
who work full-time, live in single-family detached homes, or have higher family incomes had
fewer days of poor mental health. While the results do not support the proposed hypotheses, the
bivariate correlations begin to indicate which populations have access to green spaces, as well as
which may be more likely to experience poor mental health based on demographic
characteristics.

2

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Walking down a busy city street in an up-and-coming neighborhood bustling with
activity, a pair of friends brings their take-out lunch to a popular new pocket park. The area had
been renovated from an old unused courtyard to a patio with trees, garden beds, fountains, and
benches and tables for people to sit and socialize. This image may sound familiar, as pocket
parks have recently become trendy and desirable destinations. Similarly, rooftop gardens, nature
walkways, and other green spaces are increasing in popularity in urban places. While these areas
are clearly nice to look at and create an intriguing ambiance, the powerful draw such spaces have
on the public begs the question of if these spaces somehow effect people in a more concrete way.
If there is some deeper benefit, green spaces could begin to dictate residential selection, or rewire
the priorities of urban planning.
Residential location is a complex matter, involving public safety, eviction, neighbors,
public transportation, and residential segregation. Finding a safe and healthy place to live is a
pressing issue in today’s society, as cities grow ever more crowded, and rural areas become less
accessible. Urban sociology aims to study complexities within urban communities and spaces,
encompassing the issue of residential satisfaction. While amenities affecting physical health are
often studied in this field, those affecting mental health are sometimes less apparent. However,
living near or with features that can improve one’s mental health is important, as a home should
be somewhere to find safety, security, and a sense of happiness or well-being. This being said,
determining what residential or neighborhood factors may affect resident mental health could
make a large impact on housing regulations and policies in the future.
When examining residential factors affecting mental health, nature is an important
subtopic, because of the disparities in local nature between different sizes of places. Mainly,
compact urban areas are less likely to have copious amounts of nature, whereas rural or suburban

3

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
areas have more. On the other hand, upkeep of such places is also important. Where cities might
have highly maintained parks or greenways, rural areas might be more prone to unkempt natural
spaces that do not offer areas for socialization, exercise, or other spaces that urban areas might
cultivate for human use. The differences in uses of nature by area are another study altogether,
but before determining these uses, it is important to distinguish if green spaces do in fact have
positive benefits for those situated nearby.
As pocket parks, rooftop gardens, and vegetated walkways increase in popularity, green
spaces are becoming regular sights in cities. However, these aesthetic recreational areas are often
disproportionally planned for wealthier, white-centric areas. Moreover, where green spaces are
located in lower-income neighborhoods or non-white areas, they tend to be more poorly
maintained, and less conducive of relaxation and recreation. Attentive planning and continuous
upkeep of green spaces differs from neighborhood to neighborhood, block to block, county to
county. These differences present another reason to study the effects of having available green
space, as beneficial results could provide a basis for working to improve green spaces for
everyone, not just the white upper-class.
By analyzing both the effects of having exposure to green spaces, as well as the
disparities in distribution of such spaces, there is potential to use this information to improve the
residential lives of many people, whether they live in urban or rural areas. If city planners, policy
makers, and sociologists had access to information detailing a relationship between exposure to
green spaces and mental health, they could accordingly plan, design, and implement procedures
and spaces to benefit the mental health of those who lack exposure to green spaces. In addition to
structural and natural changes being made, such a conclusion could also inform people about
benefits they may gain by orienting themselves toward nature. These possibilities create

4

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
opportunities to improve residential satisfaction and mental health, as well as equalize access to
green space by taking action on provided research.
While past research has shown that spending time in natural environments can improve
well-being and mental health, it is still unclear whether there is an effect of presence of green
space on mental health, regardless of whether or not one utilizes the space (van den Berg et al.
2010; Atuoye et al. 2019; Bingley 2013). Time is a leading factor in having the ability to partake
in activities or spend free time in natural environments, and it is reasonable to assume that some
may simply lack the time to devote to natural environment exploration or recreation. Therefore,
it is important to distinguish whether having the access or views of these spaces will still impact
mental health regardless of time spent in them. Being able to see parks or trees from home could
lead to calming effects similarly to sitting in or walking through a park. Likewise, just walking
by natural or green spaces may share some of the positive effects of partaking in activities in
green spaces. Pockets of nature also balance out urban areas, making them slightly more
reminiscent of suburban or rural spaces. Because green spaces have an association with health
and growth, and spending time in such places can lead to improved well-being and quality of
life, I hypothesize that the more someone agrees that they have access to natural environments,
the fewer days of poor mental health they will report. Additionally, I hypothesize that the more
someone agrees that they have views of nature at home, the fewer days of poor mental health
they will report.

LITERATURE REVIEW
This study intends to answer the question of whether access to nature and views of nature
affect mental health. This question has been discussed in an interdisciplinary array of past

5

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
research, and is not fully agreed upon. Much research argues natural environments themselves
contain healing elements that boost mental health or well-being, whereas others propose a
relationship mediated by time-spent in the environments, or certain activities done in these
spaces. While this body of research forms an ongoing conversation, the study at hand aims to
look at the most simplistic aspect: whether being exposed to natural environments alone upholds
the same effect past research describes. The literature revolves around themes of aesthetical
appeal, functionality, and healing aspects when describing how a natural place may affect a
person’s mental state or well-being. Each of these themes will be discussed below in terms of
how they shape and inform the central research question.
Aesthetical Appeal
The aesthetical appeal of an area has to do with how one experiences an area, particularly
through visual elements. While many factors make up the aesthetical appeal of a place, including
design, color, lighting, and decorative elements, natural features have a large contribution to the
overall aesthetics of a place. The presence and quality of natural aesthetics differ greatly between
rural and urban areas. Therefore, the aesthetics of natural spaces may be viewed in very different
ways, depending on the type of place.
Some research shows a direct effect of aesthetics on happiness, while others suggest the
effect is indirect, but still exists. Hogan et al. (2016) found an increase in happiness if residents
rated ‘place’ factors in their area such as aesthetics, presence of nature, and other visual aspects
higher. Interestingly, younger people valued this measure of aesthetical places more than older
people. Litt et al. (2015) argue that it is not the aesthetical appeal itself leading to happiness, but
the way the community is strengthened by living in a beautiful place. Specifically, they found a

6

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
mediating relationship where the better a place looked, the more there was collective efficacy
and attachment to the place, in turn leading to higher resident happiness.
While the effect of aesthetical appeal is up for debate, previous research argues that the
quality, sometimes more than the quantity of such natural features is what really matters (de
Vries et al. 2013; Francis et al. 2012). If quality is a stronger predictor of residential happiness
than quantity of streetscape greenery, this suggests that while the presence and amount of these
natural features matters, upkeep and design are just as important, if not more (de Vries et al.
2013). Similarly, quality or enhanced aesthetical appeal can lead to more place attachment, pride,
and eventually happiness, whereas quantity is less likely to have such an effect (Litt et al. 2015).
It is important to note as well, that some research shows that the quality of a natural space
benefits mental health specifically, whether or not the individual spends time in the space
(Francis et al. 2012). This is an important take on the study at hand, as much research shows
effects of green spaces only as mediators or pathways for other happiness inducing activities,
such as social interaction or exercise (Fan et al. 2011; Litt et al. 2015; van den Berg et al. 2010).
Functionality and Amenities
A discussion of residential satisfaction would be incomplete without considering nearby
resources and services, referred to in the literature as functionality and amenities. These features
are also sometimes referred to as the ‘performance’ of a place, as they determine how well a
place performs functionally for residential life (Hogan et al. 2016). Functionality and amenities
could consist of accessible grocery stores, public transportation, good schools, or a slew of other
resources and services. The presence of such amenities and their functionality has been found to
increase social cohesion, as well as resident happiness or well-being (Hogan et al. 2016; Oidjarv
2018; Saporito and Casey 2015). Sometimes, nature is considered an amenity as well (Saporito

7

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
and Casey 2015). While a common thread in this field of research shows social cohesion or
physical activity mediating the relationship between green spaces and well-being, another take
may be that green spaces are valuable and functional amenities that promote such activities.
Natural environments function in ways that bring people together, and promote leisure time or
recreational activities, as well as create emotional attachments to local areas (Volker and
Kistemann 2013). The presence of nearby green spaces has been found to reduce feelings of
loneliness and increase feelings of social support, suggesting that natural spaces function as a
social amenity (Maas et al. 2009). Therefore, both functionality and the aesthetics of natural
environments are important considerations to make when analyzing green spaces.
Natural spaces may have many functions, but the social aspect brought up in research
discussed previously is particularly notable, as social integration has been found to improve
mental health. Social integration is important for many reasons, including providing social
support, social influences, social engagement and attachment, and increased access to resources
and material goods (Berkman et al. 2000). Social support has been found to increase quality of
life as well, making it imaginable that if green spaces promote social integration and social
support, their accessibility could lead to better well-being or quality of life (Xia, Wang, and Lin
2018). While this study focuses on access to green space as a hypothesized direct relationship,
the body of research studying social integration and social support as mediating factors should
not be ignored, as it contributes to the conversation as a whole.
Saporito and Casey (2015) add depth to the discussion of natural environment effects by
explaining that green spaces are disproportionally present and functional across areas with
different demographics. White, upper class people are the most likely to live near high quality
natural environments, especially when analyzing green space distribution in metropolitan areas.

8

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Inner-city residents and disadvantaged populations are often exposed to lower quality natural
environments, and are more likely to be situated near industrial facilities or polluted areas
(Downey and van Willigen 2005; Fitzpatrick and LaGory 2003). So, if exposure to natural
environments does benefit mental health, this could be categorized as an urban health factor that
is experienced disproportionally by white, wealthier people.
Healing Aspects
While natural environments are aesthetically pleasing and provide space for outdoor
activities or socializing, some research argues that these spaces have inherent healing qualities.
This trait is described in multiple different ways, including ‘restorative’ ‘healing’ and
‘therapeutic’ (Atuoye et al. 2019; Bingley 2013; van den Berg et al. 2010; Volker and Kistemann
2013). Sometimes, the healing or therapeutic feelings come as a result of nature giving the sense
of ‘being away’ or escaping from everyday life and its stressors (Bingley 2013; Volker and
Kistemann 2013). Of course, this effect would likely be stronger if one was ‘getting away’ from
an urban setting where nature is sparser, creating a high contrast with green spaces. Another way
in which nature can heal is by helping to alleviate negative effects from past trauma, especially if
one spends time in these places (van den Berg et al. 2010).
Healing aspects also contribute to general residential satisfaction, as a large factor of how
satisfying a residence is results from the opportunities for restoration within or around the
residence (Hartig, Johansson, and Kylin 2003). Much of the potential for restoration in a home is
based around sleep, but during waking hours, restoration is often found through exchanges with
people or environments, as well as being engaged by aesthetical or stimulating aspects of the
environment (Hartig et al. 2003). Opportunities for restoration would then be much more

9

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
frequent for those with more access to or views of natural environments near their home or in
their so-called environment.
Green spaces can also act as communal therapy or restoration through the connections
that people form with spaces they live in, and the community around them. Atuoye et al. (2019)
found that the destruction of communal natural environments in Tanzania from large scale land
acquisition led to worse health reports. The members of the studied communities believed that
these spaces were therapeutic and almost sacred. By spending time in these spaces, they
experienced mental health benefits, leading to continued belief in the positive effects on their
health. Once commercialized building took off in the area, the community experienced a blow to
residential well-being and health as a result of their natural environments being destroyed.
While most research concerning restorative properties of nature focuses on immersing
oneself in the natural space, Kaplan (2001) argues that windows have potential to offer
restoration from a distance. Kaplan proposed that if natural elements can be seen through a
window, neighborhood satisfaction and well-being are likely to improve (Kaplan 2001). While
these findings are important and vastly contribute to the overall question of natural
environments’ impact on mental health, the study was conducted within six low-rise apartment
communities, and cannot be generalized to other types of residences or areas.
While some studies, including Kaplan’s, theorize that natural environments are
restorative and healing without having to enter the space, others focus on the time spent in nature
as the key to improving mental health and well-being (Fan et al. 2011; Litt et al. 2015; van den
Berg et al. 2010). It is left unclear whether or not the benefits of natural environments can be
reaped simply from the presence and access to green spaces, or if time spent and specific
activities completed are required.

10

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
In order for one to feel satisfied in their residential situation, a certain level of functioning
amenities must be present in the area. Residential satisfaction and mental health can be improved
even more if these amenities are aesthetically pleasing and high quality. Because natural
environments have healing aspects and are aesthetically appealing, past literature suggests that
green spaces become important natural amenities to have nearby a residence. Based on past
research, I hypothesize that those who more strongly agree that they have access to natural
environments will report fewer days of poor mental health. I also hypothesize that those who
more strongly agree that they have views of natural environments will report fewer days of poor
mental health.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
This study is framed largely around two main theories; attention restoration theory, and
the theory of therapeutic landscapes. Both of these theories focus on beneficial qualities of
places, specifically soothing or relaxing qualities that lead to well-being or improved mental
health. While these theories do not exclusively focus on green spaces, they attest to qualities that
green spaces possess, and describe the ways in which these qualities can yield positive mental
effects.
Attention restoration theory hypothesizes that sensory aspects of a place can lead to
tranquility and well-being. By spending time in nature or pleasing environments, one is able to
replenish their ability to focus or direct attention to everyday life (Kaplan and Kaplan 1989). The
pleasure and aesthetics of the environment relax the mind and help it refresh. Additionally,
attention restoration theory posits that aspects of nature contrast with aspects of everyday life in

11

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
school, work, or social life, offering a healing, or restorative experience in nature (Atuoye et al.
2019; Colléony et al. 2017; Hartig et al. 2003; Spilková 2017).
Therapeutic landscape theory similarly argues that natural places have therapeutic,
healing qualities, and that the aesthetic aspects of nature can lead to increased tranquility.
Wilbert Gesler originally coined the theory of therapeutic landscapes while attempting to define
and discuss some of the relationships between humans and landscapes in terms of health and
healing (Gesler 1992). The concept was originally used to describe places where healing features
were located, whether mental, physical, or spiritual. Such places were coveted destinations and
experienced influxes of travelers seeking to be healed in a range of different ways. Now, the
definition of a therapeutic landscape has expanded to include natural, built, or even imagined
environments that exude any type of healing effect (Rose 2012). These so-called ‘therapeutic
landscapes’ have since been largely agreed upon to benefit and improve residents’ or travelers’
health and well-being (Huang and Xu 2018; Rose 2012; Volker and Kistemann 2013; Williams
2010; Zhao 2018).
Attention restoration theory and the theory of therapeutic landscapes suggest that green
spaces may possess healing qualities, leading to better well-being, or in the case of this study,
better mental health. While these theories focus on time actually being spent in natural
environments, this study aims to find out whether simply being exposed to such places still has
similar effects to those speculated in attention restoration theory and therapeutic landscape
theory.

12

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
METHODS
Design
In order to answer my research question, I performed a secondary data analysis using
survey data. The data I used comes from the 2018 General Social Survey (Smith et al. 2018). The
population of this dataset is every un-institutionalized English speaking adult (18+) living in the
United States who works full-time, part-time, or is temporarily not working. The original dataset
sample size was 2,348 individuals, with the individual as the unit of analysis. The data were
collected in 2018 mainly by 90 minute face-to-face interviews, with the exception of a small
number of computer-administered interviews for those who could not schedule an interview
time. The response rate for the 2018 GSS was 59.5 percent.
The sample size of my study was restricted to 649 individuals, as the nature module from
which my independent variables come only appeared on Ballots B and C. In addition, the mental
health variable used as the study’s dependent variable is part of the Quality of Working Life
module, which is asked only to working people. Specifically, only those who answered ‘fulltime,’ ‘part-time,’ or ‘temporarily not working,’ therefore restricting the population available for
use in my sample. To learn more about the data, visit
http://www.gss.norc.org/getthedata/Pages/Home.aspx.
Variables
To assess the effect of exposure to green spaces on mental health, I use two different
independent variables to fully encompass this concept. I study both access to green spaces and
views of green spaces in order to get a better sense of general exposure, rather than one specific
type of encounter with nature. I operationalize the concept of access to green spaces by using a
question from the 2018 GSS, which asks “I have easy access to natural environments, such as

13

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
public parks, gardens or trails.” This is an ordinal variable, measured by strength of agreement
with the statement given. The possible answers and their respective values are as follows: 1,
“Strongly agree”, 2, “Somewhat agree,” 3, “Somewhat disagree,” and 4, “Strongly disagree.” I
removed any missing data, including “Don’t know,” “No answer,” and “Not applicable.” Then, I
reverse coded the responses to this question, so that higher values would represent more
agreement.
My other independent variable measures views of green spaces. I operationalize this
concept by using a question that states “I have views of nature (trees, lawns, gardens, water, etc.)
when I am home.” The respondent then has the option to answer based on how strongly they
agree with the statement. The options and their values are: 1, “Strongly agree”, 2, “Somewhat
agree,” 3, “Somewhat disagree,” and 4, “Strongly disagree.” Again, I removed any missing data.
I also reverse coded this variable, so that 4 indicated the highest level of agreement, and 1
represents the lowest level. This is also an ordinal variable, and I will look at my independent
variables’ effects on the dependent variable separately, as two different possible indicators of
mental-health.
The dependent variable aims to measure the respondent’s mental health. I operationalize
this concept by using a question which asks “Now thinking about your mental health, which
includes stress, depression, and problems with emotions, for how many days during the past 30
days was your mental health not good?” The respondent has the option to answer between zero
and 30 days, with the values coded to align with the number of days. I removed all missing data,
including “Not applicable” (-1), “Don’t know” (98), and “No answer” (99). This is a ratio
measure, assessing self-reported frequency of poor mental health. The question asks about poor
mental health, so zero indicates the best mental health, and 30 indicates the worst mental health.

14

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
I also control for several other factors that could potentially affect mental health, or
determine the presence of green space. First, I control for the size of place the respondent lives
in. This was operationalized by using a question which instructs the interviewer to determine
“Size of Place in thousands-A 4-digit number which provides actual size of place of interview.”
This is a ratio-level measure, as each possible answer has a coded value of the number of
thousands it represents. The cases in this sample range from 0-8175, in thousands. This control is
used because of the differences in presence and amount of green space in more densely settled
areas compared to more sparsely settled areas.
Another control variable I include is income. I measured this variable by using the most
recent family income variable, which reads “In which of these groups did your total family
income, from all sources, fall last year -- 2015 -- before taxes, that is. Just tell me the letter. Total
income includes interest or dividends, rent, Social Security, other pensions, alimony or child
support, unemployment compensation, public aid (welfare), armed forces or veteran's allotment.”
This variable’s possible responses are broken into 26 groups, ranging from under $1,000 to
$170,000 or more. I recoded this variable to instead represent a midpoint for each category,
making the recoded income variable a ratio measure, instead of an interval measure. For
example, the category $3,000 to $3,999 became $3,500; $40,000 to $49,999 became $45,000,
and so on.
Next, I controlled for race. In order to measure the race of the respondent, I use a
question that asks the interviewer to “Code without asking only if there is no doubt in your mind.
What race do you consider yourself? Record verbatim and code.” The possible answers and their
associated values are, 1, “White,” 2, “Black,” or 3, “Other.” I removed any missing data, and
then recoded to make a dummy race variable, because the original race variable was nominal.

15

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
The dummy variable is coded as 1, “White,” and 0, “Not white.” This new dichotomous variable
assesses whether or not the respondent is white.
Labor force status was also controlled for, as this concept could have an effect on the
amount of time a respondent has to actually utilize green space rather than just being exposed to
it. Labor force status could also have an effect on the respondent’s mental health. To
operationalize this concept, I use a variable that asks “Last week were you working full time,
part time, going to school, keeping house, or what?” The possible responses and their associated
values are as follows: 1, “Working full time,” 2, “Working part time,” 3, “Temp not working,” 4,
“Unempl, laid off,” 5, “Retired,” 6, “School,” 7, “Keeping house,” and 8, “Other.” Because my
dependent variable, days of poor mental health in the past 30 days is a part of the Quality of
Working Life module, my subset includes only the first three response options. This is a nominal
measure, so I deleted all the missing data, and then recoded labor force status into a dummy
variable assessing whether the respondent works full time or not. The dummy variable is coded
as 1, “Working full time” and 0, “Not working full time.”
Lastly, I control for the type of dwelling the respondent lives in. This is an important
control because some dwelling types, such as houses, are much more likely to have views of
green spaces, because they often have adjacent yards or gardens. To operationalize this concept,
I use a question that assesses the respondent’s “Dwelling type.” The possible responses and their
values are: 1, “Trailer,” 2, “Detached 1-fam house,” 3, “2 units side by side,” 4, “2 units-one
above,” 5, “3-4 fam house,” 6, “Row house,” 7, “Apartment house,” 8, “Apartment-4 stories,” 9,
“Apartment-commercial,” and 10, “Other.” This is an ordinal variable, so I had to recode into a
dummy variable, after deleting any missing data. I decided to simplify this measure to determine
whether the respondent lived in a detached, single family house or not, as that is the dwelling

16

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
type that would most typically come alongside natural views or elements. My dichotomous
recoded variable is coded as 1, “Detached 1-fam house” and 0, “Not detached, 1-fam house.”

FINDINGS
Univariate
Table 1 shows a mean of around four for access to natural environments, meaning that
the average response was strong agreement that the respondent has access to natural
environments. As seen in Figure 1, most respondents agree or strongly agree that they have
access to natural environments. This is not a normal distribution, and is concentrated heavily at
the agreement side. The median is four as well, showing that at least half of the respondents said
that they strongly agreed they had access to natural environments. The standard deviation of 1
shows that two thirds of the population fell between agree and strongly agree.
***Insert Table 1 about here***
***Insert Figure 1 about here***
Figure 2 shows that there was slightly more variation in having views of natural
environments than access to natural environment, although the distribution is still highly
irregular. Table 1 shows a mean of four and a median of four, so strong agreement was still the
average response for views of natural environments, even though there is more variability than
the distribution of access to natural environments. The standard deviation is also one, meaning
that two thirds of the population fell between three and four, or agree and strongly agree.
***Insert Figure 2 about here***
Figure 3 shows an abnormal distribution for the dependent variable, days of poor mental
health in the past 30 days. The responses cluster around zero, and show spikes at multiples of

17

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
ten, likely as a result of respondent estimation. As seen in Table 1, the mean is four days of poor
mental health in the past 30 days, and the median is zero. This indicates a right skew, as a few
high outliers make the mean larger than the median. The standard deviation of seven tells us that
two thirds of the population fell between zero and eleven days of poor mental health in the past
30 days.
***Insert Figure 3 about here***
In Figure 4, we see that family income has a relatively normal distribution, with a
seemingly high amount of respondents with a family income of 170,000 or higher. This is likely
because the subset is limited to full-time, part-time, or temporarily not working people. Table 1
shows a mean of $75,926, and a median of $67,500. It is notable that this distribution is right
skewed because of the outlying higher values, which is clear from the mean exceeding the
median. The standard deviation of $49,495 indicates that two thirds of the population fell
between total family incomes of $26,431 and $125,421.
***Insert Figure 4 about here***
Figure 5 shows that most respondents in this subset are full-time workers. The mean for
full-time employment in Table 1 shows that 80 percent of the sample works full-time, and the
median of one confirms that most respondents work full time. The standard deviation of 0.4
shows that at least two-thirds of the population works full-time.
***Insert Figure 5 about here***
In Figure 6, it is clear that most respondents are white. Table 1 shows a median of one
and a mean of 0.72, telling us that 72 percent of the population is white. The standard deviation
of 0.5 indicates that at least two-thirds of the population is white.
***Insert Figure 6 about here***

18

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Figure 7 shows a concentration of respondents who live in places under one million
people. This is not a normal distribution, and we can see outliers near eight million people,
which likely explains the right skew exemplified by the mean of 346 thousand people being so
much larger than the median of 37 thousand people. The standard deviation of around one
million tells us that two-thirds of the population lives in areas between zero and 1.3 million
people.
***Insert Figure 7 about here***
As seen in Figure 8, most respondents live in a detached, single family house. Table 1
shows that 66 percent of the sample lives in a detached, single family house, and the median of
one tells us there is no skew. The standard deviation of 0.5 shows that at least two-thirds of the
population lives in a detached, single-family house.
***Insert Figure 8 about here***
Bivariate
As seen in Table 2, there are no significant correlations between access to or views of
natural environments and mental health. However, detached single family house has a significant
weak negative correlation with days of poor mental health, meaning that those who live in
detached single family houses are more likely to have fewer days of poor mental health. Race
had a significant, weak, positive correlation with poor mental health meaning that white people
are more likely to report more days of poor mental health. Family income and employment status
both had significant, weak negative correlations with poor mental health, respectively meaning
that the higher one’s family income, the better their mental health, and full-time workers are
more likely to have better mental health. Access to natural environments and views of natural
environments had the strongest correlation, with a correlation coefficient of .432. This is a

19

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
moderate, positive, statistically significant relationship. While we would expect these two
variables to be correlated, it is notable that the relationship is not stronger. The moderate
correlation suggests that while it is common to have both views of and access to natural
environments, some may live in places where natural environments are accessible, but not visible
out of their windows, or areas where they can see natural environments, but cannot access them.
***Insert Table 2 around here***
The correlation matrix also indicates which demographics might be more likely to have
access to or views of natural environments. As seen in Table 2, both access to and views of
natural environments have a weak positive statistically significant relationship with race. This
means that white people are slightly more likely to be exposed to natural environments.
Additionally, both nature exposure variables are weakly but positively correlated with family
income. Here, the correlations suggest that the higher one’s family income, the more likely they
are to be situated around visible, accessible natural environments. Detached single-family house
is also significantly and positively correlated with both exposure variables, meaning that those
who live in detached single family homes are more likely to have access to and views of natural
environments. Lastly, size of place is negatively correlated with exposure to natural
environments, meaning that the larger the place one lives in, the less likely they are to have
access to or views of natural environments.
Multivariate
Table 3 reveals a significant regression equation with an F value of 4.458 (p < .05). The
R2 value is .046, meaning that 4.6 percent of variation in days of poor mental health can be
explained by access to natural environments, views of natural environments, dwelling type, size
of place, race, employment status, and family income. Table 3 shows that the two independent

20

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
variables, access to and views of natural environments, are not statistically significant. However,
detached single family house, race, full-time employment, and family income are statistically
significant predictors of days of poor mental health (p < .05). Race is the strongest predictor of
poor mental health (b = .130). Because white is a dummy variable, the unstandardized
coefficient (b = 2.052) tells us that on average, white people reported 2.052 more days of poor
mental health than non-white people. The other three significant variables have negative effects,
meaning that they decrease poor mental health, or increase good mental health. The second
strongest predictor, detached single family house (b = -.101) has an unstandardized coefficient of
-1.513, meaning that those who live in detached single family houses reported 1.5 days fewer of
poor mental health than those who live in any other type of dwelling. The third strongest
predictor (b = -.092) is family income. The unstandardized coefficient (b = -.00001316) tells us
that for every extra dollar of family income, respondents reported -.00001316 days fewer of poor
mental health. More simply, for every extra 10,000 dollars in family income, respondents
reported 0.1316 days fewer of poor mental health. Lastly, full-time employment (b = -.088) tells
us that with an unstandardized coefficient of -1.529, those who work full-time reported 1.529
days fewer of poor mental health than those who work part-time or are temporarily not working.
While this regression equation is significant, the insignificant independent variables show that
the hypotheses must be rejected, as access to and views of natural environments do not affect
mental health.
***Insert Table 3 about here***
DISCUSSION
The multivariate findings show no significant relationship between views of and access to
natural environments and poor mental health. Therefore, both hypotheses are disproven. The

21

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
findings challenge attention restoration theory and the theory of therapeutic landscapes, although
both theories assume the individual spends time in the given natural setting. However, the
control variables uncover important relationships that hint at what may be affecting mental
health instead. For example, the relationship between living in a detached single family home
and mental health shows better mental health for those in single family detached homes. From
the correlation matrix alone, we would expect the detached, single family house effect to
disappear when controlling for income or size of place, as the table also shows that wealthier
individuals living in smaller places are more likely to live in houses. Additionally, poor mental
health is less common among those with higher incomes, which would suggest the relationship
between single family, detached house and mental health would disappear in the regression, after
controlling for those factors. However, the regression produces an interesting result showing that
living in a detached house, regardless of income, size of place, or any of the other control
variables, improves mental health. Attention restoration theory could be loosely applied to this
finding, as it can apply to settings that are relaxing or calming, as well as natural settings (which
usually are associated with relaxation). Therefore, single-family, detached homes could possess
certain qualities—possibly including more space, agency over the building, and less noise—that
relax and restore the mind, following attention restoration theory’s framework (Kaplan and
Kaplan 1989). Additionally, the security of owning a home rather than renting or leasing could
forge deeper connections with the space, reinforcing the potential relaxation and restoration of
the home.
Another consideration to take away from the bivariate results is the relationship between
race and mental health. Being white is positively correlated with both access to and views of
natural environments, and these correlations are relatively strong compared to the other

22

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
coefficients in the matrix. However, when transitioning to the regression results, white is the
strongest predictor of poor mental health, where being white leads to two more days of poor
mental health. Because the bivariate findings showed that white people are more likely to have
natural environment exposure, and are also more likely to have poor mental health, the
insignificant effect of natural environment exposure on mental health in the multivariate findings
becomes interestingly layered. Considering why white people report worse mental health is
crucial to untangling these findings. Past research shows that functionality and quality of
amenities lead to better well-being or mental health, and that these features are more likely to be
located in largely white areas (Downey and van Willigen 2005; Fitzpatrick and LaGory 2003;
Saporito and Casey 2015). Therefore, it is unlikely that residential features could explain the
racial difference in mental health found in the multivariate regression. Additionally, white people
experience less stress and trauma related to discrimination. One possible answer to this curious
result is that discussing mental health is more accepted in white settings, and that people of color
are not taken seriously when disclosing poor mental health, which could possibly lead to
suppressing or downplaying experiences with poor mental health, especially in a survey setting.
Another area that stands out within this study is which characteristics increase the
likelihood of having access to or views of natural environments. Whether or not exposure to
natural environments has an effect on mental health, there is still significant evidence from
previous studies showing that spending time in, or doing activities in natural environments can
boost well-being or social cohesion (de Vries et al. 2013; Francis et al. 2012; Hogan et al. 2016;
Kaplan 2001; Litt et al. 2015; Maas et al. 2009; Saporito and Casey 2015; van den Berg et al.
2010). Considering the general agreement that spending time in natural environments has some
form of beneficial mental result, it is important to note the positive correlations between access

23

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
to and views of natural environments with being white and having a higher family income. These
findings suggest that wealthier, white people have access to resources that may be found within
natural environments, while people of color or people with lower family incomes are less likely
to have access to these spaces and experience the social cohesion or increased well-being that
past studies have suggested can be gained from spending time in natural environments.
The bivariate results also show a negative correlation between access to and views of
natural environments and size of place. Substantively, this means that the larger the place one
lives in, the less exposure to natural environments they will have. This is not surprising, given
rural and suburban areas often allow for yards and gardens, whereas urban areas are less likely to
have the same opportunities for natural features. However, if past research shows benefits in
being able to see natural environments out of a window, there may be an underlying benefit to
living in rural or suburban areas, compared to urban areas in this sense (Kaplan 2001).
The findings of this study show that mental health benefits from living in detached,
single-family houses, and that lower-class, non-white people are more likely to lack access to
and views of natural environments. These results yield two very different deductions, which
should be clearly distinguished. First, one might interpret this study’s findings to mean that the
production of more detached, single-family houses would be a tactical way to improve mental
health on a large scale. However, this mindset is counter-productive to housing markets, the
environment, and residential satisfaction in urban areas. While this study shows an inherent
benefit of living in a detached, single family house, this benefit could be a result of people
feeling as though they have achieved the ‘American Dream,’ or a so-called ‘successful’ lifestyle
by owning a home. If this is the basis for detached-single family homes showing a mental-health
reward, we must attempt to deconstruct the ideal of a large, single family house being part of the

24

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
‘American Dream.’ These dwellings take up valuable land and resources, which could be
conserved by building more urban-based shared resource housing, focused on offering more
green-space access. The take-away to emphasize here is not one that supports an increase in
building detached, single-family homes, but instead one that attempts to dismantle the
disentanglement of single-family homes with success, and promotes wide-spread green space
access and views for the community at large.

CONCLUSION
This study examines the effect of access to and views of natural environments on mental
health. Using attention restoration theory and the theory of therapeutic landscapes as a
framework, I hypothesized that the more strongly someone agrees that they have access to and
views of natural environments, the fewer days of poor mental health they will report. By using
2018 GSS data with a sample of 649 full-time and part time workers, as well as temporarily not
working people, regression results show that when controlling for other demographic
characteristics, access to and views of natural environments have no significant effect on mental
health. However, holding all else constant, white people are more likely to report more days of
poor mental health, and those with higher family incomes who work full time and live in singlefamily, detached homes are more likely to have better mental health.
Attention restoration theory and the theory of therapeutic landscapes posit a beneficial
relationship between spending time in natural environments and well-being, focus, or happiness.
The results of this study challenge attention restoration theory and the theory of therapeutic
landscapes, leading to the possibility that the key factor in these relationships may be the actual
time spent in natural environments. While having parks or nature trails nearby might be nice, it is

25

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
possible that the real benefits of such places may only have an effect if the person physically
spends time in these places, allowing for psychological relaxation and restoration to occur, rather
than simply being aware of and in close proximity to green spaces.
Limitations and Future Research
Past research largely argues that exposure to natural environments does improve mental
health and well-being, making possible limitations especially important to examine, as this study
finds no significant relationship (Atuoye et al. 2019; Bingley 2013; Francis et al 2012; Gesler
1992; Kaplan 2001; Saporito and Casey 2015; Volker and Kistemann 2013). The first area to
consider is how this study is different than past studies. Past research has often focused on
individuals who make time to immerse themselves in natural environments whether through
gardening, exercising in the outdoors, or spending time with others in parks (Fan, et al. 2011;
Litt et al. 2015; van den Berg et al. 2010). This study, however, aimed to diagnose whether
access to and views of natural environments still impacted mental health, regardless of time
actually spent in such places. The limitation here is that time spent in green spaces is not
controlled for. Because this study finds no significant relationship between natural environment
exposure and mental health, it is probable that the existence of these spaces is not the key
element leading to increased mental health as past studies have argued. Instead, the key element
may be time spent or activities done in the natural environments. Therefore, future research
should aim to control for either time spent in or activities done in natural environments, in order
to distinguish what the key factor is in improving mental health.
Another limitation lies within the confounds of the sample. Because the dependent
variable was part of the ‘Quality of Working Life’ module of the 2018 GSS, the sample was
constricted to only those who are full-time workers, part-time workers, or temporarily not

26

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
working. Therefore, anyone who is searching for a job, is a stay at home parent, retired, or any
other form of unemployed is not included in this study. This becomes an especially important
limitation to consider because of the relationship between employment and mental health. As
seen in both the bivariate and multivariate findings, working full-time is negatively related to
days of poor mental health, meaning that those who work full-time are more likely to have better
mental health than those working part-time or temporarily not working. Likewise, it is
reasonable to conclude that those who work even less than part-time people, or are searching for
jobs, may have even worse mental health. Including these populations in future studies could
result in much more variation in the dependent variable. The sample also consists mainly of
people who agree that they have access to and views of natural environments, and who reported
few days of poor mental health. While these are uplifting findings, a sample with more variation
in both the independent and dependent variables could show more exaggerated results.
Lastly, the format of the dependent variable poses some caution around interpreting
results. The question asks the respondent to answer how many days in the past thirty days they
experienced poor mental health. This is a subjective statement, and each respondent might come
into the survey with a different standard of what is considered ‘poor’ mental health. The
subjectivity of this question could very well have led white people to over-report days of poor
mental health, or people of color to underreport, due to stigma surrounding discussions of mental
health. Additionally, it is generally difficult for respondents to remember how they may have
been feeling over a week or two prior to the time of interview, so they are likely to end up
estimating. While estimation often can still yield telling results, the exact number of days
reported from each respondent may not be exactly accurate. Therefore, a subjective measure that
may be hard to remember should be taken cautiously as the dependent variable, and processed

27

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
more as an estimate rather than an exact number. In future research, a more objective measure of
mental health could help balance out factors that could skew this variable’s distribution,
including stigma, estimation, and relativity.
This study aims to identify a possible relationship between exposure to green spaces and
mental health. While there is no significant relationship found between access to or views of
natural environments and mental health, other relationships in the bivariate and multivariate
results have important connotations for future research and urban planning. By determining that
white, wealthier people are more likely to have access to and views of natural environments, it is
clear that lower-income people and people of color are generally situated farther away from
gardens, parks, or trails. While the findings of this study do not show a mental health benefit
from access to or views of natural environments, past research shows benefits resulting from
spending time in natural environments. Therefore people of color and low income people would
have a harder time reaping these reported benefits (Atuoye et al. 2019; Bingley 2013; Francis et
al 2012; Gesler 1992; Huang and Xu 2018; Kaplan 2001; Rose 2012; Saporito and Casey 2015;
Volker and Kistemann 2013). This finding could inform urban planning policies in an attempt to
create and upkeep more green spaces in low-income neighborhoods or areas with high
proportions of people of color.
In this study, those who live in detached, single-family houses are found to have better
mental health than those residing in other types of dwellings, regardless of their income. This
finding is intrinsically important in terms of housing research, residential decisions, and
residential satisfaction disparities between urban and rural or suburban areas. Future research
should look into why single-family detached houses contain inherent benefits for mental health,
and if this effect is related to ideals of success or the ‘American Dream.’

28

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
While the results of this study disproved the hypotheses and challenge its theoretical
framework, the findings yield new directions for housing research and urban planning, as well as
the potential to improve green space development to be more equitable for all.

29

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
REFERENCES
Atuoye, Kilian Nasung, I. Luginaah, H. Hambati and G. Campbell. 2019. “Politics,
Economics, How About Our Health? Impacts of Large-Scale Land Acquisitions
on Therapeutic Spaces and Wellbeing in Coastal Tanzania.” Social Science &
Medicine 220(1):283-91.
Berkman, Lisa F., Thomas Glass, Ian Brissette and Teresa E. Seeman. 2000. "From
Social Integration to Health: Durkheim in the New Millennium." Social Science &
Medicine 51(6):843-57.
Bingley, Amanda. 2013. “Woodland as Working Space: When Is the Restorative Green
Idyll?” Social Science & Medicine 91(1):135-40.
Colléony, Agathe, Léo Martin, Nicolas Misdariis, Susan Clayton, Michel Saint Jalme and
Anne-Caroline Prévot. 2017. "Exoticism as a Mediator of Everyday Experiences
of Nature: An Anthropological Exploration of Soundscape in Zoos." Human
Ecology 45(5):673-82.
de Vries, Sjerp, Sonja M.E. van Dillen, Peter P. Groenewegen and Peter Spreeuwenberg. 2013.
"Streetscape Greenery and Health: Stress, Social Cohesion and Physical Activity
as Mediators." Social Science & Medicine 94(1):26-33.
Downey, Liam, and Marieke van Willigen. “Environmental Stressors: The Mental Health
Impacts of Living Near Industrial Activity.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior
46:289-305.
Fan, Yingling, Kirti V. Das and Qian Chen. 2011. "Neighborhood Green, Social Support,
Physical Activity, and Stress: Assessing the Cumulative Impact." Health and
Place 17(6):1202-11.

30

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Fitzpatrick, Kevin M., and Mark LaGory. 2003. "’Placing’ Health in an Urban Sociology: Cities
as Mosaics of Risk and Protection." City & Community 2(1):33-46.
Francis, Jacinta, Lisa Wood, Matthew Knuiman and Billie Giles-Corti. 1978. "Quality
or Quantity? Exploring the Relationship Between Public Open Space Attributes
and Mental Health in Perth, Western Australia." Social Science &
Medicine 74(10):1570-7.
Gesler, Wilbert. 1992. “Therapeutic Landscapes: Medical Issues in Light of the New Cultural
Geography.” Social Science and Medicine 34(7):735-46.
Hartig, Terry, Gunn Johansson and Camilla Kylin. 2003. "Residence in the Social
Ecology of Stress and Restoration." The Journal of Social Issues 59(3):611-36.
Hogan, Michael J., Kevin M. Leyden, Ronan Conway, Abraham Goldberg, Deirdre
Walsh and Phoebe E. McKenna-Plumley. 2016. "Happiness and Health Across
the Lifespan in Five Major Cities: The Impact of Place and Government
Performance." Social Science & Medicine 162:168-76.
Huang, Liyuan, and Honggang Xu. 2018. "Therapeutic Landscapes and Longevity:
Wellness Tourism in Bama." Social Science & Medicine 197:24-32.
Kaplan, Rachel. 2001. “The Nature of the View from Home: Psychological Benefits.”
Environment and Behavior 33(4):507-42.
Kaplan, Rachel, and Stephen Kaplan. 1989. The Experience of Nature: A Psychological
Perspective. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Litt, Jill S., Sarah J. Schmiege, James W. Hale, Michael Buchenau and Fahriye Sancar. 2015.
“Exploring Ecological, Emotional, and Social Levers of Self-Rated Health for Urban
Gardeners and Non-Gardeners: A Path Analysis.” Social Science & Medicine 144(1):1-8.

31

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Maas, Jolanda, Sonja M.E. van Dillen, Robert A. Verheij and Peter P. Groenewegen. 2009.
"Social Contacts as a Possible Mechanism Behind the Relation between Green Space and
Health." Health and Place 15:586-95.
Oidjarv, Helo. 2018. “The Tale of Two Communities: Residents’ Perceptions of the Built
Environment and Neighborhood Social Capital.” Sage Open 8(2):1-20.
Rose, Emma. 2012. "Encountering Place: A Psychoanalytic Approach to Understanding
how Therapeutic Landscapes Benefit Health and Wellbeing." Health and
Place 18(6):1381-7.
Saporito, Salvatore, and Daniel Casey. 2015. "Are There Relationships among Racial
Segregation, Economic Isolation, and Proximity to Green Space?" Human Ecology
Review 21(2):113-32.
Smith, Tom W., Michael Davern, Jeremy Freese, and Stephen L. Morgan. General
Social Surveys, 2018 [machine-readable data file] /Principal Investigator, Smith,
Tom W.; Co-Principal Investigators, Michael Davern, Jeremy Freese and Stephen
L. Morgan; Sponsored by National Science Foundation. --NORC ed.-- Chicago:
NORC, 2019.
Spilková, Jana. 2017. "Producing Space, Cultivating Community: The Story of Prague´s
New Community Gardens." Agriculture and Human Values 34(4):887-97.
van den Berg, Agnes E., Jolanda Maas, Robert A. Verheij and Peter P. Groenewegen. 2010.
"Green Space as a Buffer Between Stressful Life Events and Health." Social Science &
Medicine 70(8):1203-10.
Volker, Sebastian, and Thomas Kistemann. 2013. "'I'm Always Entirely Happy When I'm Here!'
Urban Blue Enhancing Human Health and Well-being in Cologne and Dusseldorf,

32

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Germany." Social Science & Medicine 78:113-24.
Xia, Tianqiong, Yifu Wang, and Qiyi Lin. 2018. "City Newcomers' Adaptation to Urban Life,
Personal Well-being, and Social Support." Social Behavior & Personality: An
International Journal 46(7):1201-13.
Williams, Allison. 2010. "Spiritual Therapeutic Landscapes and Healing: A Case Study of St.
Anne De Beaupre, Quebec, Canada." Social Science & Medicine 70(10):1633-40.
Zhao, Jing. 2018. “Place, Sociality, Health: Forms of Relocation and Recuperation in Modern
Japan.” Communication and the Public 3(4):302-209.

33

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE
Table 1. Means, Medians, and Standard Deviations for Variables (N = 649)

Table 2. Correlations (r) between Days of Poor Mental Health and Seven Variables (listwise
deletion, two-tailed test, N = 649.)

*p < .05

34

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE

Figure 1. Bar Graph of Access to Natural Environments

35

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE

Figure 2. Bar Graph of Views of Natural Environments

Figure 3. Histogram of Days of Poor Mental Health in the Past Thirty Days

36

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE

Figure 4. Bar Graph of Total Family Income

Figure 5. Bar Graph of Labor Force Status

37

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE

Figure 6. Bar Graph of Race of Respondent

Figure 7. Histogram of Size of Place in Thousands

38

Running Head = GREEN SPACE EXPOSURE

Figure 8. Bar Graph of Type of Dwelling

39

