STI 2018 Conference Proceedings
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Science and Technology Indicators

All papers published in this conference proceedings have been peer reviewed through a
peer review process administered by the proceedings Editors. Reviews were conducted
by expert referees to the professional and scientific standards expected of a conference
proceedings.

Chair of the Conference
Paul Wouters

Scientific Editors
Rodrigo Costas
Thomas Franssen
Alfredo Yegros-Yegros

Layout
Andrea Reyes Elizondo
Suze van der Luijt-Jansen

The articles of this collection can be accessed at https://hdl.handle.net/1887/64521
ISBN: 978-90-9031204-0
© of the text: the authors
© 2018 Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS), Leiden University, The Netherlands

This ARTICLE is licensed under a Creative Commons Atribution-NonCommercial-NonDetivates 4.0
International Licensed

Ethical challenges around the use of social media data: Views of
researchers and research ethics committee members
Samuel, G.1, Derrick, G.E.2 and van Leeuwen, T.3
1

gabrielle.samuel@kcl.ac.uk

Department of Global Health & Social Medicine, King’s College London (United Kingdom)
2

g.derrick@lancaster.ac.uk

Centre for Higher Education Research & Evaluation, Lancaster University (United Kingdom)
3

leeuwen@cwts.leiden.nl

CWTS, Leiden University (The Netherlands)

Introduction
This paper reports the presence of a problematic “personal ethics” approach to decisionmaking by social media scholars who use data from general audience social media platforms
for their research.
When new methodological tools like social media (SM) research are developed, differing
norms of what constitutes ethically responsible research clash.

Mining data from SM

platforms such as Facebook, is of particular interest to scholars in the research evaluation field
and the availability of this data has contributed to the rapid development of the field over
recent years (Warren, Raison, & Dasgupta, 2017). More generally, SM data has been
described as particularly rich sources of data (Vayena, Mastroianni, & Kahn, 2012), and the
platforms used to generate it effective ways to recruit a large number of participants (Chu &
Snider, 2013), as well as specifically sample participants with particular interests and/or
health conditions (Renton et al., 2014; Rice et al., 2014)
Along with the growth of the field, there has been little focus on the ethical boundaries around
using SM data. In the research evaluation field, there has been no discussion about the ethical
considerations associated with using data from academic social media platforms. Instead, SM
platforms are widely considered a general source of seemingly publicly available data
(Gabaron, Serrano, Wynn, & Lau, 2014), and therefore free for public use. Recent behaviours
of researchers and their affiliated entrepreneurial partners such as Cambridge Analytica

221

STI Conference 2018 · Leiden
(Greenfield, 2018) however, highlight that despite dominant thought to the contrary, the use
of SM data is not ethically-free, nor should it be free from ethical scrutiny.
Unfortunately, the nature of SM data is not contingent with traditional notions of consent,
privacy, risk to participants, nor the freedom to withdraw.

Nonetheless, there are now

numerous calls for more researchers to have more consideration for the ethical issues
associated with large-scale use of SM data.

Indeed, the ethical hurdles related to SM

research, these guidelines purport a researcher driven, case based approach.
This paper reports uses data from UK higher education institutions, journal Editors, UK
funding bodies, social media research scholars, and research ethics committee members,
consider the ethical boundaries of SM data. In particular, it focuses on how these academic
governing bodies are failing to consistently promote a community-wide norm relating to the
used of SM data. This leads to the application of ad hoc ethical definitions, or the promotion
of the ability of researchers to apply a sense of “personal ethics” about SM use, that is not
necessarily in line with the nature of SM data. As such, this paper offers a number of
recommendations for the academic community to reflect on the ethical dimensions associated
with responsible research behaviour relative to the use of SM data.

Methods
A mixed methods analysis combining guideline analysis, bibliometrics and qualitative
(interview) techniques was employed in this study. Interviews from scholars using SM data
for health research (n=14) were used along with interviews from members of university
research ethics committees (n=19).
Document analysis of existing research ethics policies from Publishing houses, Peer-reviewed
journal Editors and the UK funding councils were gathered. This included the top 20 UK
research-intensive universities; the main UK funding bodies (UKRI, the Wellcome Trust and
the National Institute of Health Research); the top 5 most prolific publishing houses, which
account for more than 50% of all papers published; and the top 10 journals which publish SM
research (n=16).
A summary of the data types, its nature and its source are included in Table 1.

222

STI Conference 2018 · Leiden

Table 1: Sources and nature of data used in this study
Ethics ecosystem actor

Nature of methodological
inquiry

Source

Research ethics committee

Interviews (qualitative)

REC members

Universities

Website analysis and clarifying
survey

University ethics managers

Researchers

Interviews (qualitative)

Bibliometric search of authors of
SM articles

Publishing houses

Document analysis and
clarifying survey

Selective sample

Journals

Document analysis and
clarifying survey

Bibliometric search for journals
publishing SM articles

UK Funding councils

Document and website
analysis

All RCUK actors

Analysis
Analysis of interview data was approached using inductive reasoning employing the inductive
approach of grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). The analysis (or coding) of data was
based on two inter-linked rounds: overview analysis and detailed analysis (Glaser & Strauss,
1967). Overview analysis consisted of memo-making and broad coding. Extensive memomaking was employed by the interviewer directly after each interview. Broad coding
proceeded by scanning the interview transcripts for relevant ideas and themes before each of
these themes were explored in a detailed analysis.

Results
Researchers views
Researchers’ experiences made them acutely aware of the various ethical issues associated
with using SM approaches in their research. They were also familiar with the various
guidelines published to help them negotiate these ethical issues, though in line with previous
reports (Woodfield et al., 2013) these were generally viewed as not overly helpful. This was
because the guidelines often acknowledged the messiness and complexity of SM research,
described the ethical issues, but did little to prescribe how to act, or define boundaries relating
to SM use. Researchers described them as ‘deliberately grey’ (researcher 1), feeling that they
were left with little instruction on how to approach their research ethically: ‘those ones
(guidelines) and the BSA, I think those are the only two, They weren’t very…they weren’t kind
of guidelines are they, they’re more like make your own decision’ (researcher 6)

223

STI Conference 2018 · Leiden
This lack of any prescriptive standard, alongside the need to adopt a researcher-led approach,
gave interviewees permission to approach ethical decision-making in terms of how they felt
‘personally’ about their ethical choices, and the types of ethical issues which were salient to
them within their own work:
‘…there’s a series of ethical dimensions and considerations and it is up to each
researcher to reflect on that and consider what they mean for their particular project
for their particular research question and population and specific methodology’
(researcher 3).
Interviewees thus placed emphasis on the subjective, individual nature of ethics when
justifying their research practices using SM data; It’s my guidelines. Everybody has their own
definition of ethics…. (researcher 5). And interviewee 10 spoke about how any researcher,
with any subjective beliefs about ethics, could justify their SM research just by ‘working
around’ the vague guidelines:
‘they are [guidelines] slightly contradictory in places and you can argue around
them...so there is some issues around integrity that don’t necessarily hold true and you
can argue either way for some of the issues around that’.
This meant that the ethical weight placed on any particular issue within a particular research
project varied amongst researchers. A ‘personal ethics’ approach also led to inconsistencies
in terms of whether researchers felt the need to receive ethical approval for SM research
proposals1. For some, all research should be subject to ethical review ‘in some form’
(researcher 7), since ‘it’s still research, so I would say anything that involves – even if it’s
looking at newspaper coverage…should still be subject to ethical approval’ (researcher 2).
Other interviewees did not feel the need to gain ethical approval for their research: ‘for data
scraping I think no [I would not get ethical approval]’ (researcher 9).

Research ethics committees
REC members were increasingly aware of the types of ethical issues associated with the use
of SM data in health research, however they have little experience in reviewing SM research
proposals. REC members spoke about the newness of the SM field, and the need to draw on
Not all researchers’ beliefs about ethical review will affect their practices since some institutions demand
ethical review for SM health research. However institutional practices are inconsistent and under-developed
making it easier for researchers’ personal views about whether to receive ethical approval manifest in research
practice
1

224

STI Conference 2018 · Leiden
available guidelines, literature or training to aid with their decision-making. Though
guidelines adopting a researcher-led approach were often described as being ‘purposively
vague’ providing little direction in terms of decision-making.
Without useful guidelines, and parallel with the approaches adopted by a number of
institutions and publishing houses discussed above, ethical decision-making was performed
on a case-by-case basis (‘it’s very much on a case-by-case’ (interviewee 11)).
We are aware that this [their revised best practice guidance for research which uses
social media data] was quite vague at the moment still. We tried to address the most
significant issues that have come up, but because each case is different we can’t say
“well, you have to do this every single time” because it might not be appropriate
depending on the subject area or the methodology or what people want to do
(interviewee 17)
Within this framework of ethical decision-making, focus was placed on researchers’
justifications of their research approach, including their rationale for chosen research
questions, methodologies and publication practices:
I think it depends on the project…you can’t make blanket judgment and I think that’s
why we look at applications in detail in each case. And sometimes make different
decisions even for projects that look pretty similar. It’s how they build up their case
doing that particular project (interviewee 15)
Without any accepted guidance, and with inconsistencies in REC interviewees’ approaches to
ethical practice, researcher justifications of their research approach rather than objective
standards, were often used to drive the process of ethical decision-making in the absence of
firm guidelines on the ethical use of SM data. This allowed for researchers’ ‘personal ethics’
approach to dominate the field’s regulation of research behaviour around the use of SM data

Discussion
This paper shows how researchers and research governance bodies are currently not working
effectively to collectively promote examples of responsible research behaviour around the use
of SM data. Specifically, the tendency of social media research ethics guidance to promote a
case-based, researcher-led ethical decision-making has led to the establishment of a ‘personal
ethics approach’

225

STI Conference 2018 · Leiden
. This means that researchers generally do not submit their research proposals to formal
governance structures and instead govern their own research behaviour that may not always
be in line with a broader academic definition of ethically responsible behaviour. In addition,
the inexperience of governing bodies in assessing whether research using SM data is being
conducted ethically or not promotes this personal ethics.
This “personal ethics” approach as the main approach to regulating research using SM data
can be dangerous as it leaves researchers at risk of failing to engage substantively about the
ethical decisions they need to make when conducting research. To address this issue, the
following guidelines are suggested for researchers, research organisations, funding
organisations, journals and professional organisations, to address the risk;
1. Research using Social Media data should always seek formal, institutional ethical
approval for their research prior to mining the data from a collaborative platform;
2. As with other big data resources such as biobanking, it must not be assumed that the
notion of consent in research using SM data is the same as traditional definition of
consent.
3. Ethical decisions concerning risk to participants, consent and privacy should focus
beyond principles of how data is “collected” and instead concentrate of how data is
being “used”, processed and with whom it is shared.
4. Where traditional consent is not possible, other forms of consent and openness must
be considered to allow participant to be aware of how their data is being used.
5. Researchers should not conduct themselves in one way as academics and another as
entrepreneurs. In all situations, if a researcher is affiliated with a public funding body
(such as a university), they are expected to conduct themselves in line with the highest
academic standards of responsible research.
Although contentious, requiring all SM research to pass through a formalised process of
ethical oversight will ensure that the next generation of knowledge, learning, and eventual
standards relating to the use of SM data can emerge. While such a (temporary) change in
governance may not solve all concerns related to how to conduct SM research ethically, it
provides an important first step towards building an understanding within the academic
community about the ethical boundaries surrounding the appropriate use of SM data.

226

STI Conference 2018 · Leiden

References
Chu, J. L., & Snider, C. E. (2013). Use of a Social Networking Web Site for Recruiting
Canadian Youth for Medical Research. Journal of Adolescent Health, 52, 792e794.
Gabaron, E., Serrano, J. A., Wynn, R., & Lau, A. (2014). Tweet Content Related to Sexually
Transmitted Diseases: No Joking Matter. Journal of medical Internet research, 16(10),
e228.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for
Qualitative Research. Chicago: Aldine.
Greenfield, P. (2018, March 26th). The Cambridge Analytica files: the story so far. The
Guardian. Retrieved from https://http://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/mar/26/thecambridge-analytica-files-the-story-so-far
Renton, T., Tang, H., Ennis, N., Cusimano, M. D., Bhalerao, S., Schweizer, T. A., &
Topolovec-Vranic, J. (2014). Web-Based Intervention Programs for Depression: A
Scoping Review and Evaluation. Journal of medical Internet research, 16(9), e209.
doi: v16i9e209 [pii]
Rice, S. M., Goodall, J., Hetrick, S. E., Parker, A. G., Gilbertson, T., Amminger, G. P., . . .
Alvarez-Jimenez, M. (2014). Online and Social Networking Interventions for the
Treatment of Depression in Young People: A Systematic Review. Journal of medical
Internet research, 16(9), e206. doi: v16i9e206 [pii]
Vayena, E., Mastroianni, A., & Kahn, J. (2012). Ethical Issues in Health Research With
Novel Online Sources. American Journal of Public Health, 102(12), 2225-2230.
Warren, H. R., Raison, N., & Dasgupta, P. (2017). The rise of altmetrics. JAMA, 317(2), 131132.
Woodfield, K., Morrell, G., Metzler, K., Blank, G., Salmons, J., Finnegan, J., & Lucraft, M.
(2013). Blurring the boundaries? New social media, new social research: Developing a
network to explore the issues faced by researchers negotiating the new research
landscape of online social media platforms. In N. C. f. R. M. M. R. paper (Ed.).

227

