"x"
"1" "In the Mix :  Social  Integration  and Social Media Adoption"
"2" "Hana Shepherd"
"3" "Department of Sociology ,   Rutgers University"
"4" "Jeffrey Lane"
"5" "Department of Communications , Rutgers University"
"6" "Forthcoming,  Social Science Research"
"7" "Abstract   What is the nature of the relationship between online and offline social life? Specifically, how does participation in the traditional forms of social life of a community shape social media adoption?  Using a unique, two-wave panel dataset with  saturated  network data from over 2 0 ,000 students in 56 New Jersey middle schools, we test  how measures of integration into a community are  associated with adoption and de-adoption of social media platforms over the course of a school year. Social media adoption and de-adoption  are  related to the extent of students’ bonding integration ( social connections and social support)  and competitive integration (related to  status and dominance hierarchies)  into the social life of the school, where more integrated students are more likely to adopt more social media platforms. S ocial media provides a space for community members to be  in the know  and  to be known , both of which are more valuable with greater social integration."
"8" "Keywords:  Social Media; Social Integration; Social Networks; Adolescents; S chools"
"9" "Acknowledgments.  We are grateful to Mike Benediktsson, Emily Marshall, Amy Kate Bailey, and Latonya Trotter for valuable feedback on this manuscript.  The dataset used  in this paper  was collected  by  Elizabeth Levy Paluck  and Hana Shepherd ,  and  funded by grants from  the W . T .  Grant Foundation Scholars Program, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Princeton Educational Research Section,  the  Russell Sage Foundation,  the  Rutgers Research Council,  the  National Science Foundation, and the Spencer Foundation .   Direct correspondence to  hshepherd@sociology.rutgers.edu ."
"10" "I ntroduction"
"11" "The proliferation of  internet  access  and  the growth of  social media  platforms  have   p rompted scholars to theorize the relationship between  two types of social engagement —online and offline . In 2003,  Hampton and Wellman  posed  “the internet question”  regarding   whether adoption of  the internet  introduces positive, negative, or transformative change in  local communities. A  broad  literature   along these lines addresses the  influence of social media use on  face-to-face interaction  (e.g., boyd 2014 ;  Tufekci 2017 ) ,  and  on  group  solidarity  and community life   ( Ellison, Steinfield and Lampe 2007; Hampton 2010; Hampton and Wellman 2003; Stern and Dillman 2006 ) .  The negative influence of online contact   through  cyberbulling ( e.g.,  Festl and Quandt 2013;  Kowalski and Limber 2007 ) or  through  reduced   emotional intima cy   and  empathy   (e.g., Turkle 2011; Gardner and Davis 2013)   has  received   particular popular media and policy attention ."
"12" "Here ,  w e flip “the internet question” and instead  concern ourselves with the general question of  how the traditionally face-to-face experience of community integration extends and translates online.  More s pecifically, we ask:  How do   different  forms   of  social  integration— behaviors, patterns of relationships, network position ,  and peer social media use —shape the adoption of social media  platforms?  In other words, w hat   are the  specific contributions of established  markers of social  integration to the online participation of community members ?   Th ese  are especially timely  questions  given  an expanded understanding of   digital life  as  an outgrowth of  face-to-face  relationships and local   community .  D igital   ethnography   has revealed how  internet use   i s  an   “embedded, embodied, and everyday”  phenomenon  (Hine 2015) .   N ationally representative data  shows that participation in traditional activity settings mediate s  the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) (Hampton, Lee & Her 2011). Youth researchers, in particular, have been adamant that social media  serves not as an independent source of social life but an extension of school and other local settings that  now  blend face-to-face and digital forms of engagement (e.g., boyd 2014; Ellison and boyd 2007; Livingstone  and   Sefton-Green 2016)."
"13" "This paper   more precisely  characterizes   contemporary  social  integration  in the context of the  digital expansion of  traditional  community  life .   Currently, t here are two conflict ing  accounts of the impact of social integration on social media.  One is that greater isolation leads to more social media use ;  research  illustrates   that individuals who  are  introverted and less  socially  integrated in  face-to-face life  have a more robust online life   (Chak and Leung 2004; Ebeling-Witte, Frank and Lester 2007;  Jackson and Wang  2013; Lee and Stapinski 2011; Orr et al. 2009).  In other words,  limited social support offline may drive  more social media use  as a  substit ute.  The  second  account  posits the   opposite :   greater  social  integration leads to more social media us e . Studies associating e xtr o verted personality traits   (Correa, Hinsley and de Zúñiga  2010 ;  Ryan and Xenos 2011;  Seidman 2013)  and increased  participation in  social activities  (Hofstra, Corten and van Tubergen 2016) ,   with  broader  social media  use,  provide support for this type of position. One suggested mechanism is that extroverted individuals or those who participate in offline activities  have  more  experiences to share online, making online participation easier and perhaps more valuable for them   (Hofstra, Corten and van Tubergen 2016) ."
"14" "W e   use a dataset uniquely suited to assess ing  how   different  types  of  social engagement  in a traditional community setting  relate to  digital  engagement.  W e  argue that  the  value of online participation , both in the sense of the extent of online participation and the type of online participation ,  is a  positive  function of social integration into the life of a community.  We develop a new line of argument regarding why this might be the case. Specifically, we argue that s ocial media provides information that allows community members to be  in the know  and a space for community members  to be known .  Importantly, b oth of these functions are more valuable with greater social integration.  U s ing  a  two-wave panel  dataset  that includes   saturated   network data for over 2 0 ,000 students at 56 middle schools in New Jersey over the course of a single school year, we examine students’ social media adoption and de - adoption in light of their social integration."
"15" "O ne  key advance lies in our conceptualization of social integration.  We consider social integration to involve two dimensions: a bonding dimension, representing the presence of social connections and social support, and a competitive dimension, representing involvement in status and dominance hierarchies of social life  ( see  Tufekci 2008) . We find that  individuals take up  social media  platforms  when they are more integrated in both a bonding and a competitive manner.  E ven  those social  experiences that are considered negative , like  antagonistic  interactions with  others,  are part of what makes social media adoption valuable for those who are integrated;  social  competition and conflict  with peers   are integral to participation in a community, and thus they  provide  an i mpetus to participate in social media ,   just as do  positive sentiments and experiences.   The uptake of technology  is most valuable to  those students who are most integrated, both in bonding and competitive terms, and  furthers the  process of  their social   integration ."
"16" "Our orientation towards  social integration  as both supportive and competitive is drawn from  the insight that  group  participation   sometimes  involve s   behaviors that are often considered  de trimental to social life ; conflict and aggression toward  other  group members are features of group s .   A number of theoretical and empirical accounts  document the integral role of  aggression and conflict in the status ordering of groups  ( e.g.,  Faris and Felmlee 2011; Gould 2003; Martin 2009 ) .  S ocial com petition and  social  support  capture different but equally important aspects of integration into groups, whether those groups are students in a middle school or scholars in academic disciplines.  We know that the scholars  at the center of  an academic  discipline have staked positions in opposition to colleagues a t the same time as  they have also fostered collegiality.  The idiom  for integration that  we use  here ,  “in  the mix , ”   entails willingness to  “ m ix it up ”  – to engage with others  through the forms of  support and  competition that make community life dynamic ."
"17" "The comprehensiveness of the  network  data  we use  provides a robust investigation of the relationship between  community  integration and  digital  participation  beyond a single residential or school  community  ( e.g., Hampton and Wellman 2003; Livingstone and Sefton-Green 2016 ;  D. Miller 2016 )  to examine 56  middle-school  communities  across New Jersey . In addition to behavioral measures of social integration, we are able to identify patterns of relationships, network position,  peers’ social media participation , and change in these measures of social integration  in each of  the  56 middle-school communities.  Figure 1 provides a visual representation of social media platform  participation  in one school social network at wave 1 ( panel A ), and  the phenomenon we wish  to explain,  change in social media platform participation in that same school at wave 2 ( panel B ).  [FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE.]"
"18" "Social Integration and Social Media Adoption"
"19" "Social media serves several key roles in a community. Among youth, it can create or exacerbate forms of peer conflict and harassment, and it can provide important sources of social support. S ixty-eight percent of teen social media users say that they have had people support them through difficult times through social media platforms and the same number report that people have promoted drama through social media platforms (Lenhart et al. 2015). We see support and drama as aspects of the same overarching social experience, often among the same set of peers. Here, we focus on  two important functions of social media in a community: it allows community members to be  in the know  and it provides a space for community members  to become or be known . We posit that both of these functions are more valuable with greater social integration."
"20" "Social media  provides access to information that coordinates the construction of shared realities and common knowledge bases  about social life (DiMaggio and Cohen 2005). In middle and high school, where classmates are overwhelmingly connected online, social media is fundamental to learning about groups and cliques and issues related to popularity and status that are associated with drama (Marwick and boyd 2014). Lane ( 2018 ) found that street life in Harlem extends online and that it was important for youth to stay active on social media in order to understand neighborhood conflict and thus dodge or prepare for potential violence. Low-income urban youth interviewed by Stevens et al. (2016) also describe the interplay between neighborhood and social media drama and the role of Facebook as a local  peer-level  news center.  The value of being  in the know  should   increase with greater social integration. T he more a student participates in the social life of the school, the more likely she is to benefit from the information social media conveys about the community, by virtue of her ability to understand and contribute to the content of interactions online, and to use digital information in the form of gossip, in-jokes, or memes in the offline world."
"21" "Social media additionally provides a forum on which individuals can perform for and be seen by other community members. The concept of “drama” in digital spaces illustrates this point. Among teenagers, online participation affects the scale and visibility of drama – “performative, interpersonal conflict that takes place in front of an active, engaged audience, often on social media” (Marwick and boyd 2014: p. 1191). Teens speak broadly of drama as consisting of three dimensions: the interpersonal— about other people and relationships; conflict—wide ranging from minor disagreements to hurtful sexual or relationship drama; and audience—comments, pictures, posts and other forms of online participation that are visible to and constructed for a large audience. Drama can be more or less pointed or serious. It may blur the boundaries between “real conflict and jokes, and hurt and entertainment” (Marwick and boyd 2014: 1197). Drama, after all, is expressive and performative in interaction with and in front of a social media audience. These peer dynamics manifest on social media in the “digital stress” of impersonation, receiving mean and harassing personal attacks, public shaming and humiliation, breaking and entering into accounts and devices, feeling pressure to comply, and feeling smothered (Weinstein and Selman 2014). Youth go online to test and determine behaviors that cross “over the line” (Weinstein and Selman 2014)."
"22" "Participating in drama and testing social boundaries online, part of the process of  being known,  is likely more valuable to an individual when she plays a more active role in a given offline social world. Others will have more context for understanding and interpreting an individual’s online performance to the extent that she also has  a  visible and recognized reputation among peers offline. In effect, attempts to  be known  online are likely more successful when there is a recognized offline identity to draw on, something that requires some degree of social integration. For instance, teenagers in street-corner groups in Harlem evaluated threats online in terms of actual willingness to fight with respect granted or lost depending on whether displays of toughness on “the digital street” were backed up in person (Lane 2016)."
"23" "Thus, we propose that integration into the social system allows individuals to fully capitalize on the value of social media. We expect that choices to join, stay on, or leave social media platforms relate fundamentally to students’ integration in the social system of their s chool. W e provide a n empirical account of  socially embedded adoption dynamics."
"24" "Social Integration"
"25" "We conceptualize of social integration  as a holistic  account  of the degree of involvement in social life .   We account for two dimensions  of  social integration,  bonding  integration and  competitive  integratio n .   B onding -related  integration  derives from and  increases access to non-scarce resources and social solidarity  ( e.g.,  Friedkin 2004) ,  while competitive integration  is linked to social  reputation and status  ( e.g.,  Gould 2002) ; it derives from and provides  access to limited resources within the group.  Instead of thinking of these  types of integration as mutually exclusive, we propose thinking of them as compatible forms of social participation. Students with many friends to whom they provide and from whom they receive social support  may also have negative interactions with other sets of students.   Having positive peer interactions may go hand in hand with participating in negative behaviors to assert dominance in some situations.  Not all students will participate in bonding and competitive integration to the same extent, but they may.   Our key proposition is that  i ntegration in terms of both  bonding and competition  promote s  adoption and  discourage s   de-adoption  o f  social media ."
"26" "Bonding  Social Integration"
"27" "A key feature of social integration is  the extent to which people are connected to each other and the nature of their connections (e.g.,  Coleman 1990;   Friedkin 2004 ;  Putnam 2000 ).  Individuals  vary in the extent to which they are  connected to, trust, and  get support from  others in their community , and this variation is  important for  health and  well being  ( Berkman and Glass 2000;   Lomas 1998 ;  Thoits 2011 ). At the community level,  more  connection, trust, and support between members  are   associated with  better community outcomes of  collective action and efficacy ( e.g.,  H ampton 2010 ;  Sampson, Raudenbush ,  and Earls 1997 ).   The relevance  of  social  connection and social  support   extends to  youth , with important consequences .   For example,  Ream and Rumberger (2008) found  that,   at the national level ,   peer social capital  was associated with  school completion  and reduced dropout  rates   among  both  Mexican American and non-Latino white adolescents.  Bonding integration in the sense of  s upport from teachers and peers is a key component of  perceived  school belonging, which has been linked to many positive outcomes ( e.g., Allen and Bowles 2012)."
"28" "In  various  contexts, social media use plays a key role in social connection and giving and receiving informational and emotional support from one’s close friends and social groups ( Liu, Wright and Hu 2018). In school-based peer worlds, social media provides students with an easy and inexpensive way to learn about each other (Donath and boyd 2004) and  this process of  information   seeking  allows students to  exchange opportunities and support  and establish more  lasting acquaintanceship (Ellison, Steinfield and Lampe 2010).  For college students enrolled at the same university , social media use   is  positively  associated with  social capital,  satisfaction with  campus  life ,  and support for  the university  ( Ellison,  Steinfield and Lampe  2007 ) ."
"29" "Here , in the context of middle school communities , w e think of  bonding  social integration in terms of processes of social acceptance ,  belonging ,  and  other  supportive  behavior among   classmates . We expect that ,"
"30" "Bonding Social Integration   Hypothesis 1:   S tudents who gain more  friends across the school year or who have more positive peer experiences throughout the year,  indicating greater integration into the social life of the school, will have greater social media adoption and less social media de-adoption."
"31" "Competitive  Social Integration"
"32" "Social hierarchies take different forms and are derived from different sources across the life course. Social hierarchies may be driven by roles in formalized bureaucratic structures , or they may result from  status-conferring gestures within interactions  (e.g.,  Gould 2002) , or from  social validation of nominal differences between individuals (e.g., Ridgeway and Correll 2006) .  We consider  competitive  social integration to involve  both  relative status within a group and a behavioral component  of  involvement in conflict with others.  Scholars have identified a number of behaviors generally related to sorting out dominance hierarchies, in particular, aggression and conflict-related behaviors. For example,  Gould (2003) argues that conflict  is part of   challeng ing and clarifying  dominance arrangements  in a group ."
"33" "A key feature of youth social worlds in comparison to adult social worlds is a lack of formalized roles that give rise to hierarchical rankings, which results in relatively flat initial hierarchies in which young people sort out dominance hierarchies among themselves (Faris 2012 ;  Martin 2009b).  Classmates gain traction not only through acceptance and supportive behaviors but also through peer competition and cliquishness.  A consequence of this youth-driven social sorting is that, as opposed to individuals in formal structures, youth have more flexibility in the extent to which they engage in behaviors that are relevant to social status and mobility compared to others in more fixed hierarchies.  Thus, in addition to characterizing the relative social status of students  in terms of  where they are in the  social  hierarchy, we can characterize the extent to which students actively participate in behaviors relevant to the  competitive  hierarchy of the social life at school."
"34" "What, then, are the behaviors related to participation in the hierarchy of a school?  As students gain more social status, they increasingly engage in aggressive behaviors (Pri n stein and Cillessen 2003;  Faris 2012;  Faris and Felmlee 2011; Faris and Ennett 2012) and they are more likely to become victims of aggression (Faris and Felmlee 2011).  Friends compete for admiration and respect (Felmlee and Faris 2016). The competition to maintain or gain status motivates peer aggression (Faris and Felmlee 2011).  Martin (2009a) finds that interactions that involve displays of dominance can stabilize into vertical hierarchies among young people. Peers see students who engage in physically or verbally aggressive behaviors to “get what they want” as popular (Collins 2008).  G ossip  i s a form of power within the teenage economy, often wielded by or attributed to girls  ( S.  Miller 2016) .  Based on these findings, we use participation in conflict-related behaviors as an indication of  the  greater likelihood of  competitive  integration into the social system of a school.   Because participation in  peer  conflict is relevant to competitive integration into the social life of a school,  we hypothesize that,"
"35" "Competitive Social Integration  Hypothesis 2 a :  M ore personal involvement with conflict across the school year will be associated with the adoption of and less de-adoption of social media platforms."
"36" "Students who participate in peer conflict have more to gain from social media participation, both in the sense of getting information about and actively participating in and generating social drama online,  such as posting gossip  (Weinstein and Selman 2014).  Th is  prediction regarding de-adoption contrasts with suggestions from previous literature that students may choose to de-adopt social media platforms if they personally have negative experiences of conflict, as a means of controlling their exposure to conflict, given that being online exacerbates or amplifies those experiences and the negative feelings around those experiences (Stevens et al. 2016).   B ecause students who participate in social drama in a school find social media more valuable for this very purpose, we anticipate that they will continue to use these platforms through the drama of the school year rather than quit after conflict arises ."
"37" "Relatedly,   under the assumption that as students gain social status they participate more in the social scene of the school ,  we anticipate that:"
"38" "Competitive Social Integration Hypothesis 2b :   S tudents who increase in social status across the school year  will  have higher levels of social media adoption and lower levels of social media de-adoption than students who experience no increase or a decline in social status across the school year ."
"39" "Finally,  b eginning to date other students, which can indicate access to a wider social network and potential social support also exposes youth to more conflict and aggression. Felmlee and Faris (2016) find that an early romantic connection boosts risks of victimization, and that having a dating tie increases the chances of online aggression by a factor of 7. Because dating represents greater integration into the school social system and it has implications for a students’ social status in the school hierarchy, we expect that"
"40" "Competitive Social Integration  Hypothesis 2c:  S tudents who report starting to date other students will have greater social media adoption and less social media de-adoption compared to students who do not start dating  ( either because they were already dating others or because they do not date ) ."
"41" "B eing  in the mix ,   as opposed to  standing on the sidelines  of social life ,   encompasses both   social acceptance and conflict  behavior s .  We expect that  face-to-face experiences  of integration  extend   to social media ;  students   traditionally  integrated  in the sense of  gaining friends, dating, forming cliques, and other classic measures  of traditional integration   should  be the most willing to  adopt social media  generally   and to take up different types of social media that allow for more  kinds of communication ,  from sharing photos to expressing opinions."
"42" "Network Externalities   and Social Integration"
"43" "We propose that s ocial integration is related to social media adoption in a manner different from that posited by the concept of network externalities.   Network externality effects describe situations where the value of a good or service to any one individual depends on the extent to which others use that good or service ( e.g.,  Shapiro and Varian 1999). In  this  case, the value of social media  clearly  increases the more others use it ( Hampton and Wellman 2003;  Lin and Lu 2011).  This network externality insight has been the main focus of existing work on understanding social media adoption and use ( e.g.,  Smith  2011).  T he value of participating in social media is increased  both  if members of one’s own network also use social media ,   a  network-based effect  (DiMaggio and Cohen 2005), and  when  social media is widely used at the school, regardless of whether one’s friends use it or not ,  a general externality effect  ( DiMaggio and Cohen 2005). Because the barrier to forming contacts on social media platforms is lower than the barrier to forming friendships offline, students can participate in social media, and derive value from participating in social media, regardless of whether their friends also participate.  We expect that greater social media platform participation among one’s peers (defined as those to whom one is connected in the network) is associated with greater social media adoption (Hofstra, Corten and van Tubergen 2016) and less social media de-adoption."
"44" "Below, we test whether  community  social integration increases adoption above and beyond the effects of  these forms of  network externalities ; network externality constitutes a  critical   but distinct part of adoption .   We now turn to an elaboration of th e relationship between social integration and social media adoption  based on  information from a  unique dataset ."
"45" "Data"
"46" "Data for this analysis comes from a  year-long ,  randomized field experiment conducted over the 2012-2013 school year  (see Paluck, Shepherd and Aronow 2016).  The  experiment tested whether students’ behavior, particularly the behavior of salient individuals, could influence other students’ perceptions of social norms of conflict and shift overall levels of conflict behavior at the school. The experiment randomly assigned half of 56 public middle schools (which include students ages 10-15 years old) throughout the state of New Jersey to receive an intervention program. The intervention program  consisted of  a series of 10 meetings with a group of randomly selected students in the school  who were encouraged to be and assisted in becoming “change-makers” with respect to peer harassment at the schools.  As part of the design and evaluation of the intervention,  s tudents in  the  56 public middle schools  completed a survey   at the beginning of the school year,  in fall of 2012 , and at the end of the school year ,  in late spring 2013   (N= 21,110 ) ."
"47" "Survey s"
"48" "Each survey included a network nomination section, a personal background and activities section , which included questions on access to technologies and social media platform participation , and a  peer  experiences section. For the purposes of this study,  we do not  focus on t he causal effects of the intervention on social media adoption because the experiment was not designed to alter social media adoption.  We  include  a  control for being a treatment student (participating directly in the intervention program) in the  change score   model  presented  below. 1"
"49" "Network Nominations .   Using a roster design,  at both waves of the survey,  students reported who they had “decided to spend time with (in school, out of school, or online)” from their school in the last few weeks. Nominations were capped at ten. The phrasing was designed to elicit a behavioral measure of social connections.   Students also reported up to five students at the school with whom they “had conflict with” whether face to face, through texts or online , at both survey waves ."
"50" "W e acknowledge that including interactions that occur online as indicators of these two  types of  relationships  may complicate the clarity of the question of the relationship between traditional social integration and  digital  integration in the form of  social media  platform  participation . However , given that  phones and social media  were already  highly  utilized  and discussed  among students in these schools, it w ould have been   a distortion  to exclude any relationships that already  included mobile and social media  communication.  As a test of robustness, when we conduct the same analyses presented below but exclude these sociometric measures, we find the same results as including them."
"51" "Personal Background.   At wave 1, s tudents provided information about a number of personal characteristics including their racial identity, whether they predominantly spoke English at home, gender,  age ,  whether they were new to the school,  and whether  “Friends say I have a really nice house , ” as an age-adjusted measure of relative socioeconomic status.  At wave 1, students reported whether they had access to a computer with internet at home.  At both waves, students reported  whether they had a “cell phone with internet.”"
"52" "Activities   and Social Media.   Using a  series of questions that they checked off to indicate participation and left blank to indicate lack of participation,  at both survey waves,  students reported  whether they  participated in sports at school, sports outside of school, theater and drama, music, other arts, other school clubs , and various social media platforms .  At both waves, s tudents also indicated whether they dated other students at their school  (a binary measure)."
"53" "Positive and Negative Peer  Experiences .  At both survey waves,  students reported on  their  specific experiences  with peers  at the school.  Students reported their own experiences  by indicating whether  students at the school had done any of the following:  “ been nice  to me” ,  “ excluded  me” ,  “ messed with or picked on  me” ,  “ told  me  I look nice ” ,  “ started rumors or gossiped about me ” ,  “ gossiped about my reputation with boys ”, “made fun of how I look”, “threatened, hit, or pushed me, as a joke or for real”, “insulted my race or ethnicity, not as a joke”, “said I am gay”, “spoke up for me when I had a proble m with other students.” The three  positive events were summed to create an index of p ositive experiences and the eight  negative events were summed to create an index of negative experiences. 2"
"54" "Dependent Variables  for Analyses Predicting Social Media  Adoption"
"55" "To assess social media  adoption , we focus on three social media platforms: Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. We use these three platforms  for two reasons: the  availability of information about  adoption of   these platforms at both waves of the study  and  because these social media platforms  were the three most popularly used sites  by  12- to 17-year-olds in the U.S.  during the time of the study  (Madden et al. 2013) .  See descriptive statistics for these variables in Table 1.  (The general results reported below are robust to considering a larger number of social media platforms.)"
"56" "Given that we  have a general measure of social media platform participation,  a point of clarification  about  youth  social media  use is in order. Youth  use social media to  hang out  and  attempt to  fit in  with their classmates  (boyd 2014; Livingstone and Sefton-Green 2016 ; Marwick and boyd 2014 ) .   All  three  social media  platforms  are a place for  peers  who knew each personally  to further develop  their relationships and  social   i dentities   ( George and Odgers  2015 ).  For example,  evidence from studies of  teenagers  in Harlem  (Lane 2018) and a diverse national sample (Marwick and boyd 2014)  use d  Twitter  to provoke and take sides  in  incidents of drama  that started or continued in person.   Social media platforms are consistently used to participate   in  local  peer communities  ( Reich, Subrahmanyam and Espinoza 2012) , though the  norms and  affordance s  of particular platforms  may  vary . The  adolescent  school children  in  Daniel Miller’s (2016) study ,  for  instance,  “enjoy the public argy- bargy (arguments and banter)   of Twitter ”  ( p.  27 )  and  go to  Instagram  to take a photo  as  “ a way of concluding an engagement with some other craft ” (p.  71 ) . For y oung  users especially ,  s ocial media   facilitat es passive and active forms of peer engagement  (Weinstein 2018) ."
"57" "Social Media  Platform Participation .  We construct a count of the number of the three platforms that a student reports using at wave 1  and of the number of  the three platforms that a student reports using at wave 2.   These are  very general  measures of participation that  do not specify  how much students use these platforms or whether they use  them passively  to get information on social life ,  or actively ,  to  contribute in both positive and negative ways to  social life .  One way to think about these very general measures is as a signal of identity as “the kind of kid”  who says they are on  Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram , the most popular sites  at this time."
"58" "Change in  Social  Media  Platform   P articip ation :   We measure  change in  social media   platform participation  across the school year using  the number of  the  three social  media platforms that the student reports using at wave 2  minus the number that the report using at wave 1. The variable ranges from -3 to 3 , where negative values indicate a decline in social media  platform participation  ( net platform   de-adoption ), zero indicates no net  change in social media  platform participation , and positive values indicate an increase in social media  platform participation  (net platform adoption) . For example, if a student reports using two social media platforms at wave 1 and 3 at wave two, they receive a score of 1.  Using a change score as the dependent variable, which considers adoption and  de-adoption  simultaneously, has the benefit of ignoring the meaning of switching between specific platforms, which is not our concern here, and instead measuring overall change in social media  platform participation .  The results we report below are robust to  different  constructions  of the change in social media  platform participation  variable."
"59" "Independent Variables  for Analyses Predicting Social Media  Adoption"
"60" "We use the survey data described above to construct the set of independent variables for the analyses.  See Appendix A for descriptive statistics  of  these variables.  For the cross-sectio nal analyses of social media platform participation , we use  the independent variables  measured at wave  1, in order to be able to compare the characteristics associated with social media  platform participation  at wave 1.   The time-invariant variables are dummies for racial identification (White, Black, Hispanic, Asian American, Native American, and Middle Eastern, where White is the reference category), whether a language other than English is primarily spoken at home, SES, gender, new to the school, whether a student was in a treatment school, and whether a student was in the intervention program in treatment schools. We also include a continuous variable for age."
"61" "For the  longitudinal analysis, we use change scores for the time-var iant  independent variables  (the value of the variable at wave 2  minus  the value at wave 1)  to assess how  change  in social integration is associated with social media platform adoption and  de-adoption , controlling for the baseline level of the  independent  variable s  at wave 1 ."
"62" "Bonding  Social Integration"
"63" "We  first  measure  bonding  social integration using  two  variables calculated from the social network nominations: the number of incoming network nominations (how many times other students nominated the target student as someone with whom they spend social time; also referred to as indegree),  the number of outgoing network nominations  ( how many other students the target student nominated as someone with whom they spend social time; also referred to as outdegree) .   Higher values of network indegree indicate greater general social network integration."
"64" "We also  use a measure of students’ positive personal experiences in the school as an additional measure of bonding social integration.   Because these measures are continuous, we construct change scores for each measure, assessing the change in a student’s  scores  from wave 1 to wave 2.   We treat the positive  peer   e xperiences   as behavioral measures of bonding integration, and the negative  peer  e xperiences  as indicating competitive social integration, though we note that positive behaviors can also indicate status-related upward deference (e.g., Martin 2009a) relevant to competitive social integration."
"65" "Models including  another measure of bonding social integration, the  ind ividual clustering coefficient — a measure of the connections among a student’s network neighbors  that assesses embeddedness in a local cl ique within the school network— did not fit significantly better than the models presented below, and there was no effect of clustering coefficient on  adoption and de-adoption."
"66" "Competitive  Social Integration"
"67" "We assess competitive social integration through measures of social status, peer conflict, and dating.  To assess change in social status across the year, we use a measure based on social network nominations of status, betweenness centrality , measured  for each individual within their school-specific network . Betweenness centrality calculates  the number of shortest paths between any two students in the network that pass through the target student .   Betweenness is often seen as a measure of control in a network . Students with high between n ess may have the power to  connect others who might otherwise be disconnected and since others depend on him or her to make ties possible, this student can receive resources that flow through the network and/or stop others from gaining access to those resources. Students who occupy central  between n ess  positions in a network are also likely highly visible  in the group, another basis for social status.   Indegree centrality captures a certain aspect of social status based on being well-liked ( Prinstein and Cillessen 2003) , but betweenness centrality captures an aspect of status related to control over social resources in a group (author cite , Faris and Felmlee 2012 ).  Because network betweenness captures social status in a group, w e  assume  that h igher values of network betweenness , a measure of sociometric status,  indicate greater   competitive  social i ntegration  as social status is central to our definition of social integration ."
"68" "We use three types of measures of peer conflict: negative personal experiences  with peers  in the school, the number of conflict nominations  they receive  (the number of other students who say they have conflict with the target student ) ,  and  the number they  send out ( the number of students the target student reports having conflict with).  The  definition of  conflict  in these  nominations  is  not specific in order to capture a wide range of types of interactions that they students themselves consider relevant to conflict."
"69" "We assess change in personal experiences  with peers  using the difference in the number of negative experiences at wave 2 compared to at wave 1.  These measures   represent  the lived experience of interactions with other students , and signal students’  integration into the  competitive , hierarchical  life  o f a school.   Change in the number of conflict nominations is assessed as the number of nominations at wave 2 minus the number of incoming nominations at wave 1, for incoming and outgoing nominations separately."
"70" "To measure change in dating activity, one dummy variable indicates who reported  not  dating at wave 1 but dating at wave 2, another indicates students who reported dating at wave 1 but not at wave 2. The reference category is students who did not change their dating status, either because they dated at both waves or because they dated at neither wave. The results are robust to considering these two types of non-changes separately."
"71" "Network Externalities"
"72" "We assess the traditional network externality effect—the extent to which adoption depends on the adoption of others in the network—using a measure of the proportion of a student’ s network neighbors (those the target student nominates as someone they spend time with)  who  report using any of the three social media platforms at a particular wave. Thus,  we look at the effect of change in the p ropor tion of network neighbors  who are on any of the three social media platforms at wave 1  to the proportion of  network neighbors who are on any of the three social media platforms at wave 2."
"73" "Activities"
"74" "Existing literature suggests that youth who participate in more activities (e.g., sports, music, art) have more content about which to post online (Hofstra, Corten and van Tubergen 2016), so we expect  t hat youth who report increasing their participation in out-of-school activities across the school year have greater social media adoption and less social media  de-adoption .  W e constructed an additive measure of participation in  the  activities  described above (sports at school, sports at home,  theater and drama, music , other arts, other school clubs)  at wave 1 and at wave 2. The  control for  change in activities is assessed as the difference in the number of activities at wave 2 compared to at wave 1."
"75" "Access to Technology"
"76" "Individuals with greater access and exposure to social networking sites are more likely to open their own accounts (Hargittai 2008). Because social media participation is facilitated by access to devices that support it, we anticipate that getting a phone with internet  (i.e., a smartphone)  is associated with greater social media adoption (Hofstra, Corten and van Tubergen 2016) and less social media  de-adoption .   To  control for  change in access to cell phones with internet, we use one dummy variable to indicate reporting having a cell phone with internet at wave 1 but not at wave 2 (losing access over the year),  and  another to indicate reporting having a cell phone with internet at wave 2 but not at wave 1 (gaining access over the year) . The reference category is no change in phone  access , either having a cell phone with internet at both waves or at neither wave. The results reported here are robust to considering these  two types of  non-changes separately."
"77" "Analytic Approach"
"78" "Below, we present two  main  analyses. In the first analysis, we examine the characteristics, activities, and social integration of students who  report  social media  platform participation  based on cross sectional measures for wave 1 to  describe  the students on social media platforms at the beginning of the school year. For the analysis, we use ordinary least squares (OLS) regression models with robust standard errors to assess the variables related to using social media platforms (from 0 to 3 platforms). We do not have finer measures of the nature of social media use but we examine the uptake of social media (adoption and de-adoption levels) as a broad measure of opportunity for use. In order to test the adequacy of using OLS models, we also modeled the outcome using the assumptions of a Poisson distribution. The results reported below are identical employing either the OLS or Poisson models; we present the OLS results in order to facilitate interpretation of the results. We use this analysis to describe the factors associated with social media  platform participation  in order to characterize which students use social media and use more social media in these schools."
"79" "We then leverage the valuable two-wave panel data in the dataset to account for change over time in individual students’ social media  platform participation   (the number of social media platforms a student reports using at wave 2 minus the number of social media platforms the student reported using at wave 1)  using change score models . In these analyses, we examine how changes in bonding and competitive social integration are related to social media  platform  adoption and de-adoption, controlling for social integration   measures at wave 1. We also control for both the level at wave 1 of and change in peer social media  platform participation  (network externalities), access to technology, and activities.  This model allows us to focus on the effects of change in social integration specifically."
"80" "We re gress change in social media platform participation  on change in social integration for two reasons. First, while we do not have a randomized experiment, regressing change in the dependent variable on change in the independent variable allows us to control for exogenous differences between individuals who did and did not experience the forms of social integration that we use as our key independent variables.  Our theoretical concern is with the relationship between the  extent  of community social integration and social media platform participation.   We u se the two-wave panel data to approximate the effect of change in our key independent variables on social media adoption and de-adoption  in order to provide a more precise account of the relationship between the extent of community social integration and social media platform participation .   Second, we use change score analysis, instead of a lagged dependent variable regression, based on work reporting advantages of change score models over lagged dependent variable regression models with two-wave panel data (see Johnson 2005). The results of change score regression, which we describe below, are more conservative than those using lagged dependent variable models; these other models produce results that only provide stronger support for our overall claims (available upon request)."
"81" "We employ OLS regression models with robust standard errors to assess how changes in students’ social integration across the school year relate to the number of social media platforms they adopt or de-adopt over the school year. We use school-level fixed effects in these analyses (though the results are substantively the same without fixed-effects) .  Equation 1 below provides the equation for the change score regression. Note that time-invariant characteristics and the constant term drop out in the change score model (see Johnson 2005)."
"82" "Eq. 1 . (Y i2 -Y i1 )= b 1 X i1  + b 2 (X i2 -X i1 )  +    e i"
"83" "We also modeled the results using separate models for adoption and for de-adoption (using either OLS or Poisson models; available upon request) and the results are nearly identical across models. While changes in social integration are not experimentally varied and we cannot make definitive causal claims, by examining the association between change and social media outcomes, we attempt to illustrate a more precise association between these factors and social media adoption than we can using only cross-sectional data."
"84" "In these models, we use  listwise deletion for missing values  because of the relatively small percentage of the sample that has missing values (no more than 10 percent for any one variable, a total of 13 percent of the sample) .  To ensure that the results are not affected by this approach to missing data, we conducted the same change score analysis with imputed data for the variables with highest missingness (the peer experience variables), leaving only 4 percent of the sample missing, and we find the same results as reported below. This strategy allowed us to bypass the issue of bias introduced by multiple imputation for missing network data (e.g., Huisman 2009)."
"85" "Results"
"86" "Cross-S ectional Results: Associations with  Wave 1 Social Media Use"
"87" "We first present the descriptive, cross-sectional analyses of students’ characteristics, background, and social integration associate d  with social media  to describe the characteristics of students already using social media at wave 1 .  Results are presented in Table 2.   [TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE.]  Students who  participate in  more social media  platforms  at the beginning of the school year,  wave 1 ,  are more likely to identify as Black than as  W hite,  to speak  a language other than  English at home, to be female,  to be older, to participate in   fewer  activities,  to  have access to a computer with internet at home,  to have a phone with internet . These students  have more friends  (they  both  receive more network nominations  and send out more nominations )  and  they  have a higher proportion of friends using any social media platform.  They report   both  more negative and  more  positive experiences with other students ,   they  are more likely to  date other students,  and  they receive more nominations from  other students as someone they have conflict with  and they nominate more others as someone they have conflict with ."
"88" "When we conduct the same analysis described above to examine  t he characteristics of students with more social media platform  participation  at wave 2 ,   at the end of t he school year,  we find that the characteristics   are  very similar , suggesting that  the overall composition of the students using social media largely did not change.  This is the same whether we examine the predictors  of the number of reported  social media platforms  as measured at wave 1 or at wave 2.   When we consider  student reports of their participation in the  three platforms,  we do not see any  substantial shift in the  characteristics, activities, or social integration of s ocial media users among these schools over the 2012-2013 school year.   Generally, we find that  greater levels of social integration, both bonding and competitive, are  associated with greater social media  platform participation."
"89" "To elaborate on these findings, and to test whether more integrated students are not just more likely to adopt social  media  platform s  in general, but to  adopt  more  social media platform s , we conduct a logistic regression analysis  comparing the  wave 1  characteristics  of students who reported no social media platforms at wave 1 and one social media platform at wave 2, with students who reported no social media platforms at wave 1 and two or more social media platform at wave 2.  Controlling for other characteristics, students who  went from zero to two or more platforms had greater odds of reporting more friends at wave 1 (greater social tie outdegree) and experiencing more negative peer interactions at wave 1, compared to students who went from zero to one platform.   No other social integration measures were  significantly  different  at the  p  <.05 level  between the two types of students .   ( R esults not shown.)"
"90" "Social Media Platform Adoption and  De-adoption   Over Time"
"91" "We use change over time in our key predictors to analyze  the extent of  adoption and  de-adoption  of social media platforms.  This analysis allows us to assess the impact of  change  in social integration over time  on social media adoption and  de-adoption .   Results are presented in Table 3.  [TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE.]"
"92" "Bonding Social Integration .   In terms of bonding social integration,  students who increase the number of other students they nominate as someone they spend time with are more likely to increase their social media platform  participation  over the school year, net of the number of other students they nominated at wave 1 , though the marginal effect of a gain of one nomination is small . There is no effect of change in the number of incoming nominations.   The significant effect of outgoing nominations and the lack of effect of incoming nominations indicate that these two measures of network degree are capturing substantively different forms of social integration.  Controlling for a similar number of incoming nominations, s eeing yourself as someone who spends time with more students is sufficient for increasing the value of social media platform participation."
"93" "Students who have more positive peer experiences over the course of the school year are more likely to adopt more social media platforms over the year. One more positive peer experience is associated with 0.04 more social media platforms.  These results provide support for Hypothesis 1, that an increase in bonding social integration is associated with social media platform adoption."
"94" "Competitive Social Integration.   In terms of  competitive  social integration,  s tudents who receive more nominations from peers   as someone they have conflict with  over  the school year also adopt more social media platforms, though the effect is small ; w e find no effect of change in the number of outgoing conflict nominations . This suggests  that these two measures of peer conflict are capturing different forms of competitive integration, only one of which is relevant social media adoption, net of other factors. Other students identifying a student as someone they have conflict with may be a better measure of competitive social integration than self-reported conflict.  We find support for Hypothesis 2a that more involvement in peer conflict is associated with more social media adoption, when conflict is assessed in terms of an increase  in  incoming conflict nominations."
"95" "S tudents who experience an increase of one unit in their betweenness centrality across the year, a network measure of social status mobility, adopt  almost  three  more social media platforms across the school year.  Because network betweenness is a measure of status related to controlling resources in a network (e.g., Faris and Felmlee 2011), gaining  more  status within the group, a measure of competitive integration,   is associated with  more  social media platform adoption  ( supporting  Hypothesis 2b ) ."
"96" "S tudents who  start dating during the school year are more likely to join social media platforms over the school year  compared to students who   did not change their dating status t hroughout the year  (equivalent to gaining one-tenth of a social media platform, all other variables held constant)  (supporting Hypothesis 2c) ,  while students who stop dating during the school year adopt  fewer  social media platforms  than  students who did not change their dating status ."
"97" "There is additionally no effect of t he number of negative experiences  over  the school year on social media adoption or de-adoption , indicating that, net of other changes, this form of competitive social integration is not a key part of social media adoption or de-adoption.  This stands in contrast to previous reports of de-adoption of social media in response to negative peer experiences (Stevens et al. 2016 )."
"98" "Other Effects.   In line with predictions stemming from the network externality effect of social media, we find that students with a larger proportion of friends on social media at wave 2 compared to wave 1 are more likely to adopt social media platforms.  Finally, s tudents who participate in more activities across the school year also adopt more social media platforms, as do  students who gain access to a phone with  internet across the school year."
"99" "Based on the magnitude of the standardized coefficient s  (not shown) , the largest relative effects on social media platform adoption are, in descending order, getting a phone, having more positive peer experiences, an increase in the proportion of one’s network peers who use any of the three social media platforms, starting to date, participating in more activities, and gaining betweenness centrality."
"100" "Given that  our results show that traditionally integrated students  are  more likely  to  adopt social media  and  to adopt more social media, we  next examined  whether such students  also  take up different types of platforms, specifically the most in-demand platform."
"101" "Adoption by Platform Type : Instagram"
"102" "I n order to provide an additional test of the value of our explanatory framework,  we  analyze  the relationship between  community social integration and specific types of social media platform participation using the case of Instagram.  In these schools,  Instagram use  grew much more than did either Facebook or Twitter use  over the 2012-13 school year  (41 to 65 percent of the sample reporting Instagram use from wave 1 to wave 2, compared to 48.6 to 49 percent for Facebook and  25 to 34 percent for Twitter ) .  Facebook usage was high but not growing, while Twitter usage was moderate and growing,  though  at a slower rate than Instagram. By the end of the year, Instagram was the most widely reported social media platform in th ese schools.  We can therefore consider Instagram to b e  the most in-demand and relevant platform  in these communities."
"103" "We  examine whether community social integration produces not only more social media platform adoption  in general , but more adoption of the trendi ng  platform  brand .  If our contention th at  social integration leads  students to experience online participation  as more socially valuable  is correct, then we would expe ct an increase in social integration to b e associated with adoption of the most socially in-demand platform in particular.   We  conduct a logistic regression comparing the  characteristic s of students who start with  one non-Instagram social media platform and do not adopt Instagram across the school year, to students who start with one non-Instagram social media platform and do adopt Instagram.  This comparison allows us to  control for initial  differences in  social  media  platform  participation .   The results are reported in Table  4 .  [TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE.]  In terms of  bonding  community integration, students who adopt Instagram have much greater odds of  both incoming and outgoing  social tie nominations  and  of  having more positive peer experiences.  In terms of competitive social integration, students who adopt Instagram have much greater odds of dating other students,  and have higher odds of receiving more conflict tie nominations from other students.   An increase in particular types of both  bonding and competitive social integration is  associated with Instagram adoption."
"104" "Discussion"
"105" "There are  many reasons to be interested in community and digital participation, from  understanding  why persons adopt technology in general to  understanding  how practitioners can use this knowledge to diffuse social technologies that influence behaviors .  In stead of asking  “ the internet question , ”  which concerns how  the integration of the internet  changes  community , we ask how changes in  community integration shape the internet, namely the uptake of social media .  This conceptual shift  pushes  the adoption literature  beyond   individual-level predictors like gender (e.g., Thelwall 2008)  and user types such as “dabblers” (Hargittai and Hsieh   2010) , and beyond  processes of simple diffusion (Rogers 2003) or peer “herding” (e.g., Hooper and Kalidas 2012).  We find that social media platform adoption is driven by social dynamics within a community;  the  bonding and competitive processes of social integration within middle school peer communities  bring  about the  adoption  of social media .  T he  evolving dynamics of friendship,  social  status,  peer  conflict , and dating   marr y   offline engagement and online engagement."
"106" "E ven accounting for technology access, activities, and network externalities, students who are more integrated into the social life of school, both  in terms of  bonding  and  competition , are more likely to  report  be ing  on   social media platforms. Students with more friends  take up  more social media. Greater participation in conflict, an indicator of participation in the  hierarchical dimensions  of school social life, is associated with more social media  platform participation . Students who report more negative and positive experiences  with  their classmates  or who date other students  are more likely to use social media.   Additionally,  when comparing students who start fr om no social media platform use and adopt  at least one platform over the school year,   the students who adopt  more  social media platforms  are  more integrated in both bonding and competitive ways than students who adopt only one social media platforms.   These findings provide associational support for the proposed account of the positive relationship between  digital  participation and  community  social integration."
"107" "M ost importantly, t his  data  provides us with a  unique  opportunity to examine  the dynamics of social media adoption and  de-adoption ;  we leverage  the  two waves of data to examine the relationship between change in social integration measures and change in social media  platform participation , in order to specify the relationship between the extent of community integration and digital participation .  When we turn our attention to the dynamics of  social media platform  adoption and  de-adoption  o ver the course of the school year , we find that , net of wave 1 measures,  greater social integration in  terms of more  outgoing social time nominations, more  positive experiences,  being identified by others as someone others have conflict with ,  gaining network-based social status (betweenness centrality),  and   beginning to date  are  all positively  associated with social media adoption.   On the flip side, students who experience social de-integration across the school year, those who stop dating from wave 1 to wave 2, adopt fewer social media platforms across the school year.   These social integration effects are distinct from, and in addition to, a  robust  friend externality effect:  students who experience an  increase in the percentage of  their  friends on  any social media platform across the school year  adopt more  social media  platforms .   In contrast to our findings regarding the association between forms of social integration at wave 1 and the number of social media platforms students use, we find no effects for  change in the number of  negative experiences."
"108" "When we consider the relationship between  community integration and the  type  of social media platform adoption  in order to further test our proposed argument that social integration increases the value of social media platform participation ,  students who start  with  one non -Instagram social media platform and adopt Instagram over the school year  are more socially integrated in both bonding and competitive terms at wave 1, relative to similar students who  start with one non-Instagram social media platform and do not adopt Instagram over the school year.  Like the consumption of  earlier  branded  technologies (Pugh 2009) ,  it appears that  being someone who is in the mix, also  entails joining the “right” social media ."
"109" "Importantly, both bonding and competitive forms of social integration lead to more social media adoption.  This finding resonates with  pattern s in previous work (e.g. ,  Lenhart 2015). P articipating in the hierarchical organization of social li f e, including participating in conflict,  is not only associated with adoption ,  but  it also does not motivate  de-adoption , at least for the type and magnitude of behaviors we measure here.  While  Stevens et al. (2016)  f ound  that   some  youth   de -adopt a platform  to get away from drama , our data suggests that youth do not typically  react this way .  It is possible that there is some threshold amount of conflict after which students  de-adopt  social media.  That  the type and amount of  conflict  we explore here  neither deters adoption  (and  in fact  encourages it)  nor prompts  de-adoption ,   indicates  its social value for youth."
"110" "Our cross-sectional findings  largely corroborate what previous literature on social media use has found: the students who are most active on social media tend to be female (Hargittai 2008), older, and date others. Technology access is an important factor in social media platform participation. Having more friends using social media, the friend network externality effect, is strongly associated with more social media platform participation.  Our findings are mixed   compared to   those of  Hofstra, Corten, and van Tubergen (2016) .  W hen we consider the cross-sectional association at wave 1, we find that students who participate in more activities are  less  likely to be on social media , which is in contrast with their findings .  However,  in our change score models,  holding constant these starting levels  of activity , when students take up more activities they also take up more social media, which suggests they may see more value in social media when or after their participation in social life grows , corroborating the previous findings ."
"111" "Li mitations and Future Directions"
"112" "G iven that we cannot determine specifically when students adopted or de - adopted social media and when their social integration changed  over the school year , we cannot make definitive claims about the causal direction of these effects. However,  the se   valuable  data provide us with  support for the claim that students’ social integration  is  positively  related to   both the amount and type of  social media platform adoption.  The breadth and detail of th is   unique  data on student life at 56 middle schools  allow us to evaluate how the dynamics of bonding and competitive social integration  into a community  relate to participation on social media platforms."
"113" "Because the study was not designed to assess students’ social media use, our measures of social media platform participation are broad and do not specify the degrees and types of social media use. We are therefore not in a position to say which of the two integrative functions of social media — to be in the know and to be known — is more prevalent or more precisely connected to  community social integration . Studies of social integration stand to benefit by specifying in greater detail the role of social media use and the feedback effects between online and offline integration.  Our findings also suggest that  social media scholars  direct their attention to  forms of bonding and competitive integration— patterns of relationships, network position,   dating, and  conflict —to understand adoption at the community level instead of  considering  primarily individual-level factors like demographics."
"114" "Conclusion"
"115" "Murray Milner (2004) writes that in the absence of any r eal economic or political power, teenagers wield   “ the power to create an informal social world in which they evaluate one another”  (p. 4).  About as much has been said of why youth gravitate to social media by danah boyd (2008: 134): “The power that adults hold over youth...is the root of why teenagers ar e on MySpace in the first place.” So cial media allows teenagers to regulate public life on their own terms. Drama is a social good in youth contexts (Faris  and  Felmlee 2011) that  extends  from school  to  online  interaction . To participate in the social system of school is to adopt social media, be in and around conflict, and  thus to be  connected to the drama of  the social system   online , often  through one ’ s phone. Conflict is indicative of ,  rather than  distinct  from ,  social integration. We find that students  choose to persist in social media  participation   through  both  positive and negative experiences online.  T his suggests that we might rethink the assumption about the asocial nature of online conflict. The  usual  debate about  the  positive and negative  experiences one derives from  online engagement  (with a caveat for extreme negative experiences), may be  false because  of the value of both positive and negative  peer  experiences to social integration."
"116" "We presume that once a student opens an account on a social media platform, they are initiated into competitive social life directly rather than being dependent upon secondhand accounts of their classmates and overhearing some of what is happening in their peer world. They likely see conflict, enter into  it , or become incidentally implicated more than before. By joining social media, their involvement grows the online extension of the school social system. As each student joins, this choice bears on their classmates ’ choices about whether  to join a platform relevant to an increasingly larger share of their peers.  B oth personal  experiences  and perceptions of school-level conflict make social media more relevant to students. By not participating in conflict, they lose out on the bonding, learning, and growing that accompanies the drama of social integration, along with the social support and positive experiences available in the same social media environment."
"117" "Our research  centers on youth in middle school,  a social setting marked by distinct features as b oth  social status and social media become newly and especially important.  However,  the model we propose here  may very well extend to adult world  across  different economic fields. The important social media  functions  of being in the know and being known  are  widely relevant.  For example, t he  increased acceptance of Twitter  in the field of journalism  means that  participation  on the platform  becomes increasingly important  for journalists in the achievement of  professional relevance and the acquisition of  multiple forms of capital (Barnard 2016).  It may be the case that those forms of capital are more valuable to journalists integrated into the field of journalism more broadly.  In corporate settings,  e mployees may improve their network position and performance within the firm by taking advantage of the  centralization of  communication  and knowledge  on social media ( Treem and Leonardi 2012 ). Leonardi (2014) found that employees at a financial firm who proactively monitored the online communication of coworkers not only avoided work redundancies but also developed new financial products to sell to clients.  Again, the value of these benefits may depend on existing levels of integration into the firm.  DiMicco et al. (2008) show that career advancement and campaigning for their own projects are primary motivators of social media use inside a large corporate enterprise.  Given the possible extensions of these findings to  different settings, o ur research suggests that scholars pay closer attention to the  competitive  dimension of community  integration  to see whether the   dynamics  of conflict  associated with peer popularity systems ( e.g.,  Cillessen and Rose 2005)  also  apply to the adults , and to the greater relative value of social media adoption .  Our work  illustrates the continuing importance of social integration into the life of a community  and th e  process  of social integration  as  structuring participation in  online life ."
"118" "NOTES"
"119" "1.  The characteristics of these 56 public middle schools, which applied to be part of the intervention program, are approximately representative of the characteristics of public middle schools in New Jersey overall. The sample here has a smaller mean percentage of Black students and Asian American students (9 percent for this sample compared to 15 percent in all NJ middle schools for Black students; 6 percent for this sample compared to 9 percent in all NJ middle schools for Asian American students), but a larger mean percentage of Hispanic students (24 percent for this sample compared to 18 percent in all NJ middle schools). This sample also has slightly fewer mean suspensions than in all NJ middle schools (5 vs. 8), and slightly larger student to teacher ratios and student to administrator ratios (11.3 vs. 10.8, and 338 vs. 303, respectively). Finally, based on composite metric of the median family income, poverty rate, unemployment rate, occupation type, and education of the school district constructed by the NJ Department of Education, this sample includes fewer of the poorest schools, more of the second-poorest schools, and more of the upper-middle class (but not the wealthiest) schools."
"120" "2.  The design of the binary measures on the survey is such that checking a response indicates an affirmative answer and not checking a response indicates a negative answer.  A possible concern is conflating non-responses with negative responses. To attempt to address this issue, the survey was divided into many subsections and we used  non- response to all questions in a sub section to  gain additional insight into whether not checking a response indicated a  true negative response or  a  non-response."
"121" "References"
"122" "Allen, Kelly A., and Terence Bowles.  2012.   “ Belonging as a Guiding Principle i n the Education of Adolescents. ”   Australian Journal of Educational & Developmental Psychology  12 : 108-119."
"123" "boyd, danah. 2014.  It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press."
"124" "boyd, danah. 2008.  “Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked Publics in Teenage Social Life.” In  Youth, Identity, and Digital Media  ( Pp. 119–142 ) , ed. by David Buckingham,  The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learnin g. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press."
"125" "Berkman, Lisa F., and Thomas Glass. 2000.  “ Social Integration, Social Networks, Social Support, and H ealth.”   Social Epidemiology  1: 137-173."
"126" "Chak, Katherine and Louis Leung. 2004. “ Shyness and Locus of Control as Predictors of Internet Addiction and Internet Use.”  CyberPsychology & Behavior  7 (5): 559 – 570."
"127" "Cillessen, A ntonius  H. N.  and Amanda J.  Rose . 2005 .  “ Understanding  P opularity in the  P eer  S ystem. ”   Current Directions in   Psychological Science   14 :  102–105."
"128" "Coleman, James. 1990.  Foundations of Social Theory .  Cambridge, MA: Belknap ."
"129" "Correa, Teresa, Amber Williard Hinsley  and Homero Gil  de Zúñiga. 2010. “ Who Interacts on the Web?: The Intersection of Users’ Personality a nd Social Media Use.”  Computers in Human Behavior  26 (2): 247–253."
"130" "Donath, Judith and danah boyd.  2004.  “ Public Displays of C onnection.”  BT Technology Journal  22 ( 4): 71 – 82."
"131" "DiMaggio, Paul and Joseph Cohen. 2005. “Information Inequality and Network Externalities: The Diffusion of Television and the Internet.” In V. Yee and R. Swedberg (eds.),  The Economic Sociology of Capitalism . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"132" "DiMicco, Joan, David R. Millen, Werner Geyer, Casey Dugan, Beth Brownholtz and Michael Muller. (2008). “Motivations for Social Networking at Work.”  Proceedings of the 2008   ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , November 8-12. San Diego, CA, USA."
"133" "Ebeling-Witte, Susan, Michael L. Frank and David Lester. 2007. “ Shyness, Internet Use, and Personality.”   CyberPsychology & Behavior  10 (5): 713 – 716."
"134" "Ellison, Nicole B., Charles  Steinfield and Cliff Lampe. 2010 .  “Connection Strategies: Social Capital Implications of Facebook-Enabled Communication Practices.”  New Media & Society   13(6) :  873–892"
"135" "Ellison, Nicole B., Charles Steinfield and Cliff Lampe. 2007.  “ The Benefits of Facebook “Friends:” Social Capital and College Students’ Use of Online Social Network Sites. ”   Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  12: 1143–1168."
"136" "Faris, Robert. 2012. “Aggression, Exclusivity, and Status Attainment in Interpersonal Networks.”  Social Forces  90 (4): 1207–1235."
"137" "Faris, Robert and Diane Felmlee. 2011. “Status Struggles.”  American Sociological"
"138" "Review  76 (1): 48-73."
"139" "Felmlee, Diane and Robert Faris. 2016. “Toxic Ties: Networks of Friendship, Dating, and   Cyber Victimization.”  Social Psychology Quarterly  79 (3): 243–262."
"140" "Festl, Ruth and Thorsten Quandt. 2013. “Social Relations and Cyberbullying: The Influence of Individual and Structural Attributes on Victimization and Perpetration via the Internet.”  Human Communication Research  39: 101 –126."
"141" "Friedkin, Noah E. 2004.  “ Social Cohesion. ”   Annual Review of Sociology  30:  409-425."
"142" "Gardner, Howard and Katie Davis. 2013.  The App Generation: How Today’s Youth Navigate Identity, Intimacy, and Imagination in a Digital World . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press."
"143" "George, Madeleine J. and Candice L. Odgers. 2015.   “ Seven Fears And The Science Of How Mobile Technologies May Be Influencing Adolescents In The Digital Age. ”   Perspectives on Psychological Science  10(6): 832–851."
"144" "Gould, Roger V. 2002. “The Origins of Status Hierarchies: A Formal Theory and Empirical Test.”  American Journal of Sociology  107   (5): 1143-1178."
"145" "Gould, Roger V. 2003.  Collision of Wills: How Ambiguity about Social Rank Breeds Conflict.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"146" "Hampton, K eith  N. 2010.  “ Internet Use and the Concentration of Disadvantage: Glocalization and the Urban Underclass. ”   American Behavioral Scientist  53(8) :  1111 – 1132."
"147" "Hampton , Keith  and Barry Wellman. 2003. “Neighboring in Netville: How the Internet Supports Community and Social Capital in a Wired Suburb.”  City & Community   2   (4): 277–311."
"148" "Hargittai, Eszter. 2008. “Whose Space? Differences Among Users and Non-users of Social Network Sites.”  Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  13 (1): 276–297."
"149" "Hargittai, Eszter and Yu-li Patrick Hsieh. 2010. “From Dabblers to Omnivores:A Typology of Social Network Site Usage.” In  A Networked Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social Network Sites  (Pp. 146–168), ed. by Z. Papacharissi. London: Routledge."
"150" "Hine, Christine. 2015.  Ethnography for the Internet: Embedded, Embodied and Everyday . London, England: Bloomsbury."
"151" "Hofstra, Bas, Rense Corten and Frank van Tubergen. 2016. “Who was First on Facebook? Determinants of Early Adoption Among Adolescents.”  New Media & Society  18 (10): 2340–2358."
"152" "Hooper, Val and Tarika Kalidas. 2012. “Acceptable and Unacceptable Behaviour on Social Networking Sites: A Study of the Behavioural Norms of Youth on  Facebook.”  Electronic Journal of Information Systems Evaluation  15 (3): 259–268."
"153" "Huisman, M ark . 2009.  “ Imputation of Missing Network Data: Some Simple Procedures. ”   Journal of Social Structure  10: 1-29."
"154" "Jackson, Linda  A. and Jin-Liang Wang. 2013. “Cultural Differences in Social Networking Site Use: A Comparative Study of China and the United States.”  Computers in Human Behavior  29 (3): 910–921."
"155" "Johnson, David. 2005. “Two-Wave Panel Analysis: Comparing Statistical Methods for Studying the Effects of Transitions.”  Journal of Marriage and the Family  67 (4): 1061-1075."
"156" "Kowalski, Robin M. and Susan P. Limber. 2007. “Electronic Bullying Among Middle School Students.”  Journal of Adolescent Health  41 (6, Supplement): S22 – S30."
"157" "Lane, Jeffrey.  2018 .  The Digital Street . New York: Oxford University Press."
"158" "Lane, Jeffrey. 2016.  “ The Digital Street: An Ethnography of Networked Street Life in Harlem. ”   American Behavioral Scientist  60 (1): 43 – 58."
"159" "Lee, Bianca W. and Lexine A. Stapinski. 2012. “Seeking Safety on the Internet: Relationship between Social Anxiety and Problematic Internet Use.”  Journal of Anxiety Disorders  26 (1): 197 – 205."
"160" "Lenhart, Amanda, Aaron Smith, Monica Anderson, Maeve Duggan and Andrew Perrin. 2015. “Teens, Technology and Friendships.” Pew Research Center, August, 2015. http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/06/teens-technology-and-friendships/"
"161" "Lin, Nan. 1999. “Social Networks and Status Attainment.”  Annual Review of Sociology  25: 467 – 87."
"162" "Lin,  Kuan-Yu and Hs i -Peng Lu. 2011.  “ Why  P eople  U se  S ocial  N etworking  S ites: An  E mpirical  S tudy  I ntegrating  N etwork  E xternalities and  M otivation  T heory . ”   Computers in  Human Behavior  27(3):   1152–1161"
"163" "Liu,  Dong, Kevin B.  Wright and  Baijing  Hu .  2018 . “A Meta-Analysis of Social Network Site Use and Social Support.”  Computers & Education  127: 201 – 213."
"164" "Lomas, Jonathan.  1998.  “ Social  C apital and  H ealth:  I mplications for  P ublic  H ealth and  E pidemiology. ”   Social  S cience &  M edicine  47  ( 9 ) : 1181 – 1188."
"165" "Levi Martin, John. 2009a.  “ Formation and Stabilization of Vertical Hierarchies among Adolescents: Towards a Quantitative Ethology of Dominance among Humans. ”   Social Psychology Quarterly  72: 241 – 264."
"166" "Livingstone, Sonia and Julian Sefton-Green. 2016.  The Class: Living and Learning in the Digital Age . New York: New York University Press."
"167" "Madden, Mary, Amanda Lenhart, Sandra Cortesi, Urs Gasser, Maeve Duggan, Aaron Smith and Meredith Beaton. 2013. “Teens, Social Media, and Privacy.” Pew Research Center, May, 2013. http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/05/21/teens-social-media-and-privacy/"
"168" "Martin, John Levi. 2009b.  Social Structures.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"169" "Marwick, Ali ce and danah boyd. 2014. “It’s Just D rama. ”   Journal of Youth Studies   17 (9): 1187 – 1204."
"170" "Miller, Daniel. 2016.  Social Media in an English Village . London, England: UCL Press."
"171" "Miller, Sarah A. 2016. “ “How You Bully a Girl”: Sexual Drama and the Negotiation of"
"172" "Gendered Sexuality in High School.”  Gender & Society  30 (5): 721–744."
"173" "Milner, Jr., Murray. 2004.  Freaks, Geeks, and Cool Kids: American Teenagers, Schools, and the Culture of Consumption . New York: Routledge."
"174" "Orr, Emily S., Mia Sisic, Craig Ross, Mary G. Simmering, Jaime M. Arseneault, and R. Robert Orr. 2009. “ The Influence of Shyness on the Use of Facebook in an Undergraduate Sample.”   CyberPsychology & Behavior  12 (3): 337–340."
"175" "Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, Hana Shepherd and Peter M. Aronow. 2016.  “ Changing Climates of Conflict: A Social Network Experiment in 56 Schools. ”   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  113(3): 566–571."
"176" "Prinstein, Mitchell J. and Antonius H.N. Cillessen. 2003. “Forms and Functions of Adolescent Peer Aggression Associated with High Levels of Peer Status.”  Merrill-Palmer Quarterly  49: 310–342."
"177" "Pugh, Allison J. 2009.  Longing and Belonging: Parents, Children, and Consumer Culture . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press."
"178" "Putnam, Robert D. 2000.  “ Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital. ”  In  L. Crothers and C. Lockhart (Eds.),   Culture and P olitics , pp. 223-234.  New York:  Palgrave Macmillan ."
"179" "Ream, Roger K. and Russell W. Rumberger. 2008.  “ Student Engagement, Peer Social Capital, and School Dropout Among Mexican American and Non-Latino White Students. ”   Sociology of  Education   81(2) :  109–139 ."
"180" "Reich ,  S tephanie  M . ,  Kaveri Subrahmanyam and Guadalupe Espinoza. 2012.   “ Friending, IMing, and  Hanging Out Face-to-Face: O verlap in  Adolescents’ Online and Offline Social N etworks. ”   Developmental Psychology  48(2): 356–368."
"181" "Ridgeway, Cecilia L. and Shelley J. Correll. 2006. “Consensus and the Creation of Status Beliefs.”  Social Forces  85: 431 – 453."
"182" "Rogers, Everett. 2003.  The Diffusion of Innovations (5 th  Edition).  New York: Free Press."
"183" "Ryan, Tracii and Sophia Xenos. 2011. “Who Uses Facebook? An Investigation into the Relationship between the Big Five, Shyness, Narcissism, Loneliness, and Facebook Usage.”   Computers in Human Behavior  27 (5): 1658–1664."
"184" "Sampson, Robert J., Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls. 1997. “Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.”  Science  277: 918 – 924."
"185" "Seidman, Gwedolyn. 2013. “Self -Presentation and Belonging o n Facebook: How Personali ty Influences Social Media Use a nd Motivations.”  Personality and Individual Differences  54 (3): 402–407."
"186" "Shapiro, Carl and Hal R. Varian. 1999.  Information Rules . Cambridge, MA: Ha r vard Business School Press."
"187" "Smith, Aaron. 2011. “Why Americans Use Social Media.”  Pew Research Center, November 2011 .   http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Why-Americans-Use-Social-Media.aspx"
"188" "Stern, Michael J. and Don A. Dilman. 2006. “Community Participation, Social Ties, and Use of the Internet.”  City & Community  5 (4): 409–424."
"189" "Stevens, Robin, Stacia Gilliard-Matthews, Jamie Dunaev and Bridgette M. Brawner. 2016. “The Digital Hood: Social Media Use Among Youth in Disadvantaged Neighborhoods.”  New Media & Society  Published online before print:   1–18, doi: 10.1177/1461444815625941."
"190" "Thelwall, Mike. 2008. “Social Networks, Gender, and Friending: An Analysis of MySpace Member Profiles. ”   Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology  59 (8): 1321–1330."
"191" "Thoits , Peggy A. 2011.  “ Mechanisms Linking Social Ties and Support to Physical and Mental Health. ”   Journal of Health and Social B ehavior  52 :  145-161."
"192" "Tufekci, Zeynep. 2017.  Twitter and Tear Gas: The Power and Fragility of Networked Protest . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press."
"193" "Tufekci, Zeynep. 2008. “Gr ooming, Gossip, Facebook and MyS pace: What  Can We Learn about these Sites from t hose Who Won’t Assimilate?”  Information, Communication & Society  11 (4): 545 –564."
"194" "Turkle, Sherry.  2011.  Alone Together:   Why We Expect More From Technology and Less From Each Other . New York: Basic Books."
"195" "Weinstein, Emily. 2018. “ The Social Media See-Saw: Positive And Negative Influences On Adolescents’ Affective Well-Being .”  New Media & Society   00(0) : 1 – 27 ."
"196" "Weinstein, Emily C. and Robert L. Selman. 2014. “Digital Stress: Adolescents’ Personal Accounts.”  New Media & Society  18 (3): 391 – 409."
"197" "Yardi, Sarita and Amy  Bruckman.   2011 . “Social and Technica l Challenges in Parenting Teens’  Social Media Use.” In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Fa ctors in Computing Systems (CHI’ 11). V ancouver, Canada. May 7-12 ."
"198" "Table 1.  Social Media Platform  Participation  and Change,  Descriptive Statistics."
"199" "Number of Social Media Platforms"
"200" "0"
"201" "1"
"202" "2"
"203" "3"
"204" "Mean"
"205" "StDev"
"206" "No. Students on Social Media Platforms, W1"
"207" "7844"
"208" "7095"
"209" "4309"
"210" "3451"
"211" "1.15"
"212" "1.06"
"213" "No. on Facebook, W1"
"214" "11037"
"215" "No. on Twitter, W1"
"216" "5679"
"217" "No. on Instagram, W1"
"218" "9350"
"219" "No. Students on Social Media Platforms, W2"
"220" "4924"
"221" "6697"
"222" "5561"
"223" "5082"
"224" "1.49"
"225" "1.07"
"226" "No. on Facebook, W2"
"227" "10929"
"228" "No. on Twitter, W2"
"229" "7602"
"230" "No. on Instagram, W2"
"231" "14534"
"232" "Change in Social Media Use"
"233" "-3"
"234" "-2"
"235" "-1"
"236" "0"
"237" "1"
"238" "2"
"239" "3"
"240" "Mean"
"241" "StDev"
"242" "No. Social Media Platforms at W2- No. at W1"
"243" "42"
"244" "247"
"245" "1624"
"246" "11441"
"247" "5889"
"248" "1380"
"249" "216"
"250" "0.34"
"251" "0.82"
"252" "Table 2 . Ordinary Least Squares Regression of Number of Social Media Platforms on Student  Social Integration,  Activities, and  Characteristics ,  Wave 1"
"253" "Number of Social Media Platforms"
"254" "Coefficient"
"255" "Standard Error"
"256" "Social Integration"
"257" "Bonding"
"258" "Indegree Nominations"
"259" "0.02"
"260" "(0.002)"
"261" "***"
"262" "Outdegree Nominations"
"263" "0.01"
"264" "(0.003)"
"265" "*"
"266" "No. of Positive Experiences"
"267" "0.05"
"268" "(0.009)"
"269" "***"
"270" "Competitive"
"271" "Date Other Students"
"272" "0.34"
"273" "(0.018)"
"274" "***"
"275" "Betweenness Centrality"
"276" "1.62"
"277" "1.133"
"278" "No. of Negative Experiences"
"279" "0.04"
"280" "(0.006)"
"281" "***"
"282" "Conflict Indegree"
"283" "0.04"
"284" "(0.004)"
"285" "***"
"286" "Conflict Outdegree"
"287" "0.01"
"288" "(0.004)"
"289" "***"
"290" "Network Externalities"
"291" "Proportion of Friends Using Social Media"
"292" "0.90"
"293" "(0.031)"
"294" "***"
"295" "Technology Access"
"296" "Computer at home"
"297" "0.08"
"298" "(0.019)"
"299" "***"
"300" "Phone with internet"
"301" "0.41"
"302" "(0.014)"
"303" "***"
"304" "Activities"
"305" "No. of Activities"
"306" "-0.02"
"307" "(0.005)"
"308" "***"
"309" "Personal Characteristics"
"310" "Male"
"311" "-0.23"
"312" "(0.014)"
"313" "***"
"314" "Age"
"315" "0.00 04"
"316" "(0.000)"
"317" "***"
"318" "Language Other than English at Home"
"319" "0.07"
"320" "0.018"
"321" "***"
"322" "Nice House (SES)"
"323" "0.04"
"324" "(0.014)"
"325" "**"
"326" "New to School"
"327" "0.03"
"328" "(0.014)"
"329" "Black"
"330" "0.09"
"331" "(0.028)"
"332" "**"
"333" "Hispanic"
"334" "0.02"
"335" "(0.022)"
"336" "Asian American"
"337" "-0.02"
"338" "(0.029)"
"339" "Middle Eastern"
"340" "-0.01"
"341" "(0.063)"
"342" "Native American"
"343" "0.11"
"344" "(0.115)"
"345" "Intercept"
"346" "-1.70"
"347" "(0.112)"
"348" "Adjusted R-Sq"
"349" "0.29"
"350" "Degrees of Freedom"
"351" "19347"
"352" "NOTE:     *  p< .05, **  p <.01 ,  ***  p <.001 .  Models include school-level fixed effects. Robust standard errors appear  next to  coefficients."
"353" "Table 3 . Ordinary Least Squares Regression of Number of  Adopted and  De-adopted   Social Media Platforms on  Change in Social Integration from Wave 1 to Wave 2"
"354" "CHANGE IN SOCIAL MEDIA  PLATFORM PARTICIPATION"
"355" "Coefficient"
"356" "Standard Error"
"357" "Social Integration"
"358" "Bonding"
"359" "Change in Indegree Nominations"
"360" "0.00"
"361" "(0.002)"
"362" "Wave 1 Indegree"
"363" "0.00"
"364" "(0.002)"
"365" "*"
"366" "Change in Outdegree Nominations"
"367" "0.01"
"368" "(0.003)"
"369" "*"
"370" "Wave 1 Outdegree"
"371" "0.01"
"372" "(0.004)"
"373" "**"
"374" "Change in No. of Positive Peer Experiences"
"375" "0.02"
"376" "(0.008)"
"377" "**"
"378" "Wave 1 No. Pos Peer Expers"
"379" "-0.01"
"380" "(0.010)"
"381" "Competitive"
"382" "Start Dating Other Students W1 to W2"
"383" "0.11"
"384" "(0.020)"
"385" "***"
"386" "Stop Dating Other Students W1 to W2"
"387" "-0.08"
"388" "(0.025)"
"389" "**"
"390" "Change in Betweenness Centrality"
"391" "2.78"
"392" "(0.991)"
"393" "**"
"394" "Wave 1 Betweenness Centrality"
"395" "3.04"
"396" "(1.231)"
"397" "*"
"398" "Change in No. of Negative Peer Experiences"
"399" "0.01"
"400" "(0.004)"
"401" "Wave 1 No. Neg Peer Expers"
"402" "-0.01"
"403" "(0.006)"
"404" "Change in Conflict Indegree"
"405" "0.01"
"406" "(0.003)"
"407" "*"
"408" "Wave 1 Conflict Indeg"
"409" "0.00"
"410" "(0.003)"
"411" "Change in Conflict Outdegree"
"412" "0.00"
"413" "(0.004)"
"414" "Wave 1 Conflict Outdegree"
"415" "0.00"
"416" "(0.005)"
"417" "Network Externalities"
"418" "Change in Proportion of Friends Using Social Media"
"419" "0.17"
"420" "(0.036)"
"421" "***"
"422" "Wave 1 Proportion of Friends Using Social Media"
"423" "-0.01"
"424" "(0.036)"
"425" "Technology Access"
"426" "Gained Phone with Internet W1 to W2"
"427" "0.15"
"428" "(0.016)"
"429" "***"
"430" "Lost Phone with Internet W1 to W2"
"431" "0.00"
"432" "(0.022)"
"433" "Activities"
"434" "Change in No. of Activities"
"435" "0.02"
"436" "(0.006)"
"437" "***"
"438" "Wave 1 Activities"
"439" "-0.01"
"440" "(0.005)"
"441" "Treatment Student"
"442" "0.03"
"443" "(0.033)"
"444" "Adjusted R-Sq"
"445" "0.02"
"446" "Degrees of Freedom"
"447" "18302"
"448" "NOTE:  *  p< .05, **  p <.01 ,  ***  p <.001 . Models include school-level fixed effects. Robust standard errors appear beneath coefficients."
"449" "Table 4. Logistic  Regression Results of Student Social Integration at Wave 1 for"
"450" "Instagram  Non- Adopt ers   and Instagram Adopters."
"451" "INSTAGRAM ADOPTION AMONG SOCIAL MEDIA USERS"
"452" "Odds Ratio (Exponentiated Coefficient)"
"453" "Standard Error"
"454" "Social Integration"
"455" "Bonding"
"456" "Indegree Nominations, W1"
"457" "1.06"
"458" "(0.01)"
"459" "***"
"460" "Outdegree Nominations, W1"
"461" "1.07"
"462" "(0.02)"
"463" "***"
"464" "No. of Positive Experiences, W1"
"465" "1.11"
"466" "(0.05)"
"467" "*"
"468" "Competitive"
"469" "Date Other Students, W1"
"470" "1.58"
"471" "(0.10)"
"472" "***"
"473" "Betweenness Centrality, W1"
"474" "0.00"
"475" "(6.26)"
"476" "No. of Negative Experiences, W1"
"477" "0.96"
"478" "(0.03)"
"479" "Conflict Indegree, W1"
"480" "1.06"
"481" "(0.02)"
"482" "*"
"483" "Conflict Outdegree, W1"
"484" "0.99"
"485" "(0.02)"
"486" "Network Externalities"
"487" "Proportion of Friends Using Social Media, W1"
"488" "2.33"
"489" "(0.19)"
"490" "***"
"491" "Technology Access"
"492" "Computer at home, W1"
"493" "0.86"
"494" "(0.01)"
"495" "Phone with internet, W1"
"496" "1.38"
"497" "(0.08)"
"498" "***"
"499" "Activities"
"500" "No. of Activities, W1"
"501" "0.99"
"502" "(0.03)"
"503" "AIC"
"504" "4370.90"
"505" "Degrees of Freedom"
"506" "3267"
"507" "NOTE:     *  p< .05, **  p <.01 ,  ***  p <.001 . Models include the controls for personal characteristics that appear in Table 2, and school-level fixed effects. Robust standard errors appear next to coefficients."
"508" "Figure 1.  Representation of Social Media Platform Participation at Wave 1 in a School Social Network (A) and Change in Social Media Platform Participation at Wave 2 in the Same School (B)."
"509" "A.  Nodes colored according to self-reported social media platform participation at  W ave 1 ,  Social Network Assessed at Wave  1 .   Black=0 social media platforms, light blue=1 social media platform, turquoise=2 social media platforms, darker blue=3 social media platforms, white= missing value."
"510" "B.  Nodes colored according to self-reported change in social media platform participation from Wave 1 to Wave 2, Social Network Assessed at Wave 2. White=de-adoption of 3 social media platforms, light gray= de-adoption of 2 social media platforms, dark gray= de-adoption of 1 social media platform,  Black=no change in number of social media platforms, light blue=adoption of 1 social media platform, turquoise= adoption of 2 social media platforms, darker blue=adoption of 3 social media platforms."
"511" "Appendix A.  Descriptive Statistics for Independent Variables for Analyses Appearing in Tables 2 ,  3 , and 4 .  (N=21,110)"
"512" "Mean"
"513" "Standard Deviation"
"514" "Min."
"515" "Max."
"516" "Number"
"517" "Missing"
"518" "Social Integration"
"519" "Bonding"
"520" "Change in Indegree Nominations"
"521" "0.21"
"522" "3.49"
"523" "-23"
"524" "21"
"525" "0"
"526" "Wave 1 Indegree"
"527" "7.74"
"528" "4.38"
"529" "0"
"530" "35"
"531" "0"
"532" "Change in Outdegree Nominations"
"533" "0.31"
"534" "2.53"
"535" "-10"
"536" "10"
"537" "0"
"538" "Wave 1 Outdegree"
"539" "7.96"
"540" "2.48"
"541" "0"
"542" "10"
"543" "0"
"544" "Change in No. of Positive Experiences"
"545" "0.13"
"546" "0.94"
"547" "-3"
"548" "3"
"549" "1855"
"550" "Wave 1 No. Pos Expers"
"551" "1.93"
"552" "0.82"
"553" "0"
"554" "3"
"555" "1138"
"556" "Competitive"
"557" "Start Dating Other Students W1 to W2"
"558" "0.12"
"559" "0.32"
"560" "0"
"561" "1"
"562" "185"
"563" "Stop Dating Other Students W1 to W2"
"564" "0.07"
"565" "0.25"
"566" "0"
"567" "1"
"568" "100"
"569" "Dating W1"
"570" "0.22"
"571" "0.41"
"572" "0"
"573" "1"
"574" "96"
"575" "Change in Betweenness Centrality"
"576" "0.0002"
"577" "0.008"
"578" "-0.11"
"579" "-0.07"
"580" "0"
"581" "Wave 1 Betweenness Centrality"
"582" "0.007"
"583" "0.007"
"584" "0.00"
"585" "0.11"
"586" "0.00"
"587" "Change in No. of Negative Experiences"
"588" "0.68"
"589" "1.63"
"590" "-8"
"591" "8"
"592" "1855"
"593" "Wave 1 No. Neg Expers"
"594" "0.77"
"595" "1.28"
"596" "0"
"597" "8"
"598" "1138"
"599" "Change in Conflict Indegree"
"600" "0.27"
"601" "2.08"
"602" "-18"
"603" "28"
"604" "0"
"605" "Wave 1 Conflict Indeg"
"606" "1.4"
"607" "2.14"
"608" "0"
"609" "39"
"610" "0"
"611" "Change in Conflict Outdegree"
"612" "0.3"
"613" "1.92"
"614" "-5"
"615" "5"
"616" "0"
"617" "Wave 1 Conflict Outdegree"
"618" "1.4"
"619" "1.75"
"620" "0"
"621" "5"
"622" "0"
"623" "Network Externalities"
"624" "Change in Proportion of Friends Using Social Media"
"625" "0.1"
"626" "0.23"
"627" "-1"
"628" "1"
"629" "279"
"630" "Wave 1 Proportion of Friends Using Social Media"
"631" "0.67"
"632" "0.24"
"633" "0"
"634" "1"
"635" "154"
"636" "Technology Access"
"637" "Gained Phone with Internet W1 to W2"
"638" "0.19"
"639" "0.39"
"640" "0"
"641" "1"
"642" "293"
"643" "Lost Phone with Internet W1 to W2"
"644" "0.09"
"645" "0.29"
"646" "0"
"647" "1"
"648" "504"
"649" "Phone with Internet at W1"
"650" "0.5"
"651" "0.5"
"652" "0"
"653" "1"
"654" "756"
"655" "Access to Computer at Home at W1"
"656" "0.85"
"657" "0.35"
"658" "0"
"659" "1"
"660" "100"
"661" "Activities"
"662" "Change in No. of Activities"
"663" "-0.02"
"664" "1.23"
"665" "-6"
"666" "7"
"667" "271"
"668" "Wave 1 Activities"
"669" "2.26"
"670" "1.36"
"671" "0"
"672" "7"
"673" "96"
"674" "Student Characteristics"
"675" "Male"
"676" "0.51"
"677" "6"
"678" "Age in Years"
"679" "12.5"
"680" "1.06"
"681" "1124"
"682" "English Spoken at Home"
"683" "0.62"
"684" "0"
"685" "Nice House (SES)"
"686" "0.58"
"687" "656"
"688" "New to School"
"689" "0.36"
"690" "0"
"691" "Treatment Student"
"692" "0.03"
"693" "0"
"694" "Racial Identification (non-exclusive categories)"
"695" "White"
"696" "0.66"
"697" "548"
"698" "Black"
"699" "0.1"
"700" "548"
"701" "Latino"
"702" "0.2"
"703" "548"
"704" "Asian American"
"705" "0.06"
"706" "548"
"707" "Other"
"708" "0.1"
"709" "548"
