Talking Your Self Into It: How and When Accounts Shape Motivation for Action*

Authors:
Daniel Winchester, Purdue University
Kyle D. Green, The College at Brockport, State University of New York

*Forthcoming in Sociological Theory

Corresponding Author Contact Information:
Daniel Winchester
Assistant Professor, Sociology
Purdue University
700 W. State St.
West Lafayette, IN 47907
dwinches@purdue.edu
(765) 494-4668

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the following people for their constructive feedback on earlier
versions of this manuscript: Jean Beaman, Claudio Benzecry, Andrew Deener, Penny Edgell,
Iddo Tavory, Jonathan Wynn, the editor and anonymous reviewers at Sociological Theory, and
attendees of the Irene Flecknoe Ross lecture series at UCLA Sociology.

1

ABSTRACT
Following Mills (1940), several prominent sociologists have encouraged researchers to analyze
actors’ motive talk not as data on the subjective desires that move them to pursue particular ends,
but as post hoc accounts oriented toward justifying actions already undertaken. Combining
insights from hermeneutic theories of the self and pragmatist theories of action, we develop a
theoretical position that challenges dichotomous assumptions about whether motive accounts
reflect either justifications or motivations for action, instead illustrating how they can migrate
from one status to the other over time. We develop this perspective through a comparative
analysis of actors’ involvements in two quite different careers of social action – religion and
mixed martial arts – documenting both how and when justificatory talk about actors’ motives for
initiating a course of action at one point in time became formative of their subjective motivations
for sustaining these same courses of action at another.
Introduction
What are people doing when they talk about their motives? In everyday life, the common
sense answer is people are verbally expressing the psychological desires, thoughts, and intentions
that move them to pursue particular courses of action. Yet, within sociology, a line of influential
scholars extending from Mills (1940) in the mid-20th century to Vaisey (2009) in the early-21st
have encouraged sociologists to analyze actors’ motive talk not as data reflecting the underlying
subjective states that drive action forward but as socio-rhetorical devices that seek to align
actors’ past conduct with the normative or interpretive demands of the present situation (e.g.,
Mills 1940; Scott & Lyman 1968; Goffman 1971; Vaisey 2009). Many sociologists, in other
words, have understood actors’ motive talk not in terms of the inner desires that move them to
pursue particular ends, but as post hoc accounts oriented toward justifying actions already
undertaken.
While affirming several insights within this perspective, in this paper we challenge a
priori assumptions about whether motive talk best reflect actors’ justifications or motivations for
action, instead illustrating how accounts can migrate from justificatory to motivational status over

time. While previous research has noted that actors’ post-hoc accounts may be poor reflections of
the subjective desires that initiated a course of action in the first instance, we demonstrate that

2

such accounts can nevertheless play pivotal roles in explaining what sustains motivation for that
same line of action over time. Combining hermeneutic perspectives on self-identity with
pragmatist insights on the temporality of action, we show that accounts can function as
“hermeneutic hooks” that interpretively link actors’ present actions with elements of their more
temporally extended self-narratives, conjoining their practices in the here and now with a
motivational project of identity exploration and development that extends far beyond the
boundaries of the present moment.
We go on to apply this perspective to ethnographic case studies of actors’ involvements
in two different careers of social action – religion and mixed martial arts, respectively – to
empirically illustrate both how and when accounts worked to subjectively motivate subjects to
continue pursuing their courses of action, especially in the face of initial feelings of ambivalence,
ambiguity, or lack of desire. Through accounts, actions associated with religion and fighting
became re-interpreted as significant plot points in actors’ ongoing life stories – i.e., their
understandings of who they were in the past, are in the present, and might become in the future.
In interaction with others in their respective communities, religious and MMA practitioners
talked their selves into the action, interpretively linking their religious and fighting practices to a
deeply meaningful and motivational identity project.
We begin with a discussion of the sociological trend of analyzing subjects’ motive
accounts as indices of the cultural constraints on action within a social situation, a line of thought
and analysis that can be traced as far back as Mills (1940) but has also been incorporated into
several other contemporary theoretical traditions. While noting the important insights of these
perspectives, we also critique some problematic assumptions about the relationship (or lack
thereof) between actors’ “external” motive accounts and their “internal” subjective motivations,
ones that tend to foreclose alternative – and perhaps ultimately complementary –

3

conceptualizations of the relationship between motive talk and subjective motivation. We go on
to develop our conceptualization of how and when accounts come to influence motivation for
action, foregrounding dynamics of self-interpretation and temporality overlooked in previous
approaches. We then illustrate the explanatory value of this perspective through our ethnographic
case studies, showing how – both in the pews and on the mats – accounts worked to motivate
actors to continue pursuing their lines of action. We conclude with a discussion of our findings’
broader significance for ongoing conversations regarding the relationships among culture, action,
and subjectivity.

Tracing Sociological Analyses of Motive Talk: From subjective “springs” to situational
“strings”
When I look back, throughout my life, I was always searching for something real, you know,
something with a solid foundation, with roots. And then I found [Eastern] Orthodoxy, the
original Christian Church, and it was like, “Yeah, this is for me. This is the real deal. This is
what I’ve been searching for all along.”
--Corey, Eastern Orthodox catechumen
We are the products of thousands of years of evolution. It took a long time to get bodies that can
do this! [laughingly gesturing to the people grappling on the mat beside us, twisting and
writhing against each other as they struggle to gain an advantage]. I can’t head back to that
chair and desk. It would be insulting to my monkey ancestors.
--Mark, ex-accountant, cage fighter

What motivates people to commit themselves to a new and seemingly strange religious
path? Or to persistently and enthusiastically engage in a violent sport that might get them
seriously injured? In our respective fieldwork with Eastern Orthodox Christian converts and
Mixed Martial Artists in the contemporary United States, practitioners’ own discussions of these
questions converged on a surprisingly similar theme. According to our research subjects,
engaging in the action of religion or fighting was primarily motivated by a search for selfhood, a
quest to discover who one is, was, and might become. In seeking out their local Orthodox
4

churches and MMA gyms, our participants said they were also seeking out – and discovering –
their very selves.
What are we to make of such accounts in explaining why people pursue particular lines
of action? Several contemporary strands of sociological thought have urged caution in
approaching actors’ accounts as offering insight into the subjective intentions that propel action
forward. Instead, these traditions have argued actors’ verbal accounts are actually oriented
toward – and so a better reflection of – the normative expectations for action existing within the
external social milieu. Talk of motives, in other words, does not actually index motivation in the
sense of a subjective desire or “drive” that moves action forward but instead points to how
people must make sense of and justify actions already undertaken.
An important starting point for this particular perspective on subjects’ motive talk is the
now classic paper by C. Wright Mills, “Situated Actions and Vocabularies of Motive” (1940).
Mills famously argued against a representational approach to language that would take motive
talk as “referring to private states in individuals” (904). Instead, Mills suggested, one should
examine the socially constitutive functions of language: how motive language “coordin[ates]
diverse actions” (Ibid) and thus helps consolidate social order. In other words, instead of treating
motive talk as accurately reflecting the “subjective ‘springs’ of action” (Ibid) inhering within
individuals, they should be conceptualized as social rhetorics people use to interpret, explain, and
justify their actions to others. “Motives,” as Mills succinctly put it, “are words…they do not
denote any elements ‘in’ individuals” (905). Instead they function as “accepted justifications for
present, future, or past programs or acts” (907). As such, the researcher should not look to
accounts for evidence of the psychological “springs” that propel individuals to action, but instead
look to accounts of motive as providing the rhetorical “strings” that tie peoples’ actions to the

5

normative expectations of a socially delimited time and place (910) and/or the “strategies of
action” that actors use to make their conduct sensible to others (907).
Mills’ original insights about the socially constitutive functions of language and his
decoupling of motive talk from subjectivity were eventually developed by later sociological
traditions. One well-established line of research originates from the sociology of accounts
tradition pioneered by interactionists Scott and Lyman (1968). Within this line of work,
researchers examine how actors use the language of motives to account for behavior that is
deemed problematic by others. This has proved quite productive, as demonstrated by the
numerous empirical studies and attempts at theoretical refinement published since (Blum and
McHugh 1971; Blumstein 1974; Hopper 1993; Monaghan 2006; Nichols 1990; Orbuch 1997;
Pryor 1996; Scully and Marolla 1984; Stokes and Hewitt 1976). Goffman also incorporated Scott
and Lyman’s perspective into dramaturgical sociology (1971), particularly in the analysis of
“remedial interchanges” – i.e., how actors use accounts of their motives to reposition the
meaning of actions as socially acceptable, protecting themselves against a potentially “spoiled
identity”. Like Mills before them, sociologists of accounts do not treat motive talk as reflecting
the subjective intentions animating the action, but as after-the-fact justifications that actors use to
attempt to bridge the gap between untoward actions and situational expectations.
Following Garfinkel (1967), ethnomethodologists have examined the everyday
techniques by which actors “observably organize their accounts of action” (Mulkay and Gilbert
1982:182) – in other words, how social actors make their actions intelligible to one another as
instances of an ordered reality. Verbally accounting for actions by excusing or “remedying” them
and by imputing typical motives to oneself and others is one of the primary methods by which
social actors constitute their everyday social realities (e.g., Barnes 2000; Schlegoff et al. 1977).
Again, the analytic focus shifts away from analyzing actors’ talk for insight into the subjective

6

reasons why an action is undertaken towards analyzing accounts as reflecting how the normative
order of a particular social situation is maintained. Like Mills, ethnomethodologists encourage
sociologists to understand actors’ accounts of why they did something as radically oriented
toward the intersubjective demands for action that exist in the present situation. As Barnes
(2000: 2) puts it, “for all that it appears to refer to the internal states of individuals, voluntaristic
discourse is actually the vehicle of human sociability, through which its users co-ordinate their
actions and cognitions.”
The influence of this perspective on actors’ talk is also found within strands of
contemporary cultural sociology that focus less attention on culture’s role in determining the
ends of human action and more on its role in organizing the means (Kaufman 2004; Frye 2012;
Vaisey 2009, 2010), or what Vaisey (2009) has termed cultural sociology’s “motivationjustification split”. Swidler-inspired repertoire or “toolkit” theories, for example, approach
actors’ accounts not as reflections of their subjective desires but as cultural tools through which
they develop and organize strategies of action. Swidler argues in her influential Talk of Love
(2001) that what Americans in her study verbally expressed about love should not be analyzed as
accurate reflections of motivations for why they involve themselves in romantic relationships.
Instead, their accounts offer insight into the available cultural repertories through which they can
justify, make sense of, and meaningfully act out – or opt out of – their relational commitments.
Actors’ accounts of romantic love, Swidler argues, “correspond neither to personal experience
nor to the observations people make of others they know….Rather the love myth accurately
describes the structural constraints of the institution of marriage” (2001: 127-128). Like the
scholars above, Swidler analyzes subjects’ motive accounts for why they get or stay married as
data on the demands of “external,” institutional factors, not actors’ “internal” desires and
intentions.

7

More recently, Vaisey (2009) has developed an influential dual-process model of culture
in action that attempts to put the question of motivation back at the center of cultural analysis.
Vaisey brings together Bourdieu’s notion of habitus with cognitive psychologists’ distinctions
between system 1 and system 2 cognition (e.g., Evans 2003; Haidt 2001; Kahneman 2011) to
argue that motivations operate primarily at the level of deeply ingrained dispositions and
automatic cognitive associations existing below the threshold of discourse and reflective
consciousness. More specifically, Vaisey argues that subconscious cultural schemas of attraction
and repulsion within “habitus” or “system 1 cognition” are what motivate people to behave in
consistent ways across time and space, while consciously articulated motives operating at the
level of discursive or system 2 cognition are generally after-the-fact justifications that are only
loosely coupled to what subjectively drives actors to do what they do. While critical of theories
of action that ignore the question of motivation altogether, Vaisey also treats actors’ own
accounts of their motives as post-hoc, socially acceptable rationalizations for action.
In sum, over the course of several decades and across multiple theoretical traditions
(interactionism, ethnomethodology, dramaturgy, toolkit theory, dual-process theory, etc.), many
sociologists have eschewed treating actors’ motives accounts as relevant data on what
subjectively motivates action, opting instead for a perspective that analyzes them as rhetorical
devices – vocabularies of motive, justifications, excuses, techniques of neutralization, remedial
actions, strategies of action, etc. – aimed at aligning actions with the cultural, normative, and/or
interactional requirements of the situation.
There are certainly good reasons for being skeptical of accounts as straightforward data
on underlying motivations. Sociologists of accounts have rightly pointed out that when actors are
asked about motivations influencing why they did something, they may come up with socially
acceptable reasons that make sense in the moment of questioning but have little relationship to

8

what actually motivated the action in the first instance, an insight backed by research on the
sometimes unstable relationship between observed behavior at one point in time and selfreported attitudes at another (e.g., Beckford 1978; Martin 2010, 2011; Jerolmack and Khan 2014;
Vaisey 2009). It is also the case that actors’ accounts are not purely individual but are influenced
by the broader scripts and discourses existing within the wider culture. Actors’ behaviors are
enabled and constrained by collective understandings of what counts as justifiable action (cf.
Boltanski and Thevenot 2006), and talk about motives plays an important role in deciphering,
legitimating, and negotiating what counts as such. And, as the ethnomethodologists point out,
actors’ accounts are not simply a representational medium to communicate internal states but can
also be performative – i.e., partially constitutive of action and the social contexts in which action
occurs. Finally, as Vaisey (2009) notes, peoples’ motivations for acting may operate through
habitual dispositions and automatic cognitive associations that are difficult if not impossible for
them to consciously recognize and articulate.
Despite our appreciation of these insights, we depart from the above literature in two
significant ways. First, we diverge from strong assumptions that motive accounts only provide
sociologists data on the immediate social context and “do not denote any elements ‘in’
individuals” (Mills 1940: 905). Or, in the more evocative language of Garfinkel, “there is no
reason to look under the skull, for nothing of interest is to be found there but brains” (1963: 190).
We argue that such strong a priori assumptions lead sociologists to overlook how accounts can
also be directed toward aligning actions with “internal” understandings of the self and how, in
turn, these interpretive “hooks” can sharpen, redefine, and even construct new motivations over
time. Below, we argue that one does not have to take a strictly representational view of the
relationship between motive accounts and motivations – i.e., do they accurately reflect the

9

previous motivations or not? – but can attend to the ways such accounts reconstitute motivations
through ongoing processes of self-interpretation.
Second, even when accounts are inaccurate representations of actors’ initial motivations
for embarking on a course of action, our cases shows this is not necessarily reason to dismiss
their value for explaining motivation in toto. Our research highlights the significance of accounts
for sustaining motivation for action over time, particularly over the course of what sociologists
have termed “social careers” or trajectories of “becoming” – i.e., long-term, consistent lines of
action in which actors develop a particular identity (e.g., Becker 1953; Becker and Strauss 1956;
Benzecry 2009; Goffman 1959; Hughes 1958; Richardson 1978; Tavory 2016). We analyze a
process in which initially ambivalent religious and martial arts practitioners would be offered
motive accounts that made sense of their experiences by more established members of the sites,
ones aimed at persuading them their new actions were very much “for and about them”. While
initially post-hoc justifications, over time these accounts became re-worked and internalized by
actors as part of their own self-interpretations. In each case, we document how and when
accounts subjectively propelled action forward by closely linking actors’ practices to a
meaningful and motivational project of self-development and -discovery.
In the next section, we develop a theoretical perspective that more fully elaborates on this
process, helping us makes sense of our empirical cases as well as the motivational significance of
accounts more generally.

From Situational Strings to Hermeneutic Hooks: How and When Accounts Matter for
Motivation
In what follows, we draw from hermeneutic theories of self-identity and pragmatist
insights on action and experience to provide a conceptual framework for understanding how

10

accounts shape motivation and when in a course of action they are most motivationally
significant.
We rdirect sociological focus from how motive talk aligns out-of-place actions with the
normative demands of the situation to how it attempts to align them with actors’ own
interpretations of self. On this point, we draw inspiration from hermeneutic scholars of identity
(Giddens 1991; Mead 1934; Ricoeur 1988, 1992; Taylor 1985, 1989), theorists who assert that
self-identity is constituted in ongoing acts of self-interpretation. Human beings, as Taylor (1985:
45) phrases it, are “self-interpreting animals” – to possess an identity is to have on ongoing,
reflexive interpretation of oneself, one which typically takes the form of a narrative. In the face
of present action, such theorists argue, a primary way humans make sense of what they are doing
is by interpretively placing – or “emplotting” – the action in relation to aspects of their personal
pasts, presents, and perceived futures. This transforms the meaning of the action from an isolated
event to a causally connected episode within a more temporally extended and personally relevant
chain of meaning (Somers 1994; Wagner-Pacifici 2000). At the same time, emplotting new
events into one’s autobiography can also alter identity, as the integration of new kinds of actions
and experiences into one’s story can reshape the meaning and significance of past events as well
as future trajectories (Atkins 2010; Ricoeur 1984, 1992; Somers 1994). The content of actors’
self-understandings are thus in part constituted by “the capacity to keep a particular narrative
going….[to] continually integrate events that occur in the external world, and sort them into the
ongoing ‘story’ about the self” (Giddens 1991).
We draw from but also extend this literature by arguing that motive accounts are key
mechanisms through which such narrative integration occurs. More specifically, while research
on accounts has largely looked at how they function as situational “strings”, we focus theoretical
attention on how accounts may also serve as hermeneutic hooks that propose where a meaningful

11

connection between a course of action and an actor’s life story can be found. Utilized as “hooks”,
motive accounts introduce interpretive linkages between present actions and more temporally
extended autobiographies, suggesting to actors that their current practices are in some way
central to their ongoing understandings of who they were in the past, are in the present, and
might become in the future. As we illustrate in the empirical sections below, while these
accounts are often initially “cast” by others in interaction, actors may internalize and continue to
develop these accounts as key aspects of their self-narratives.
We also follow hermeneutic scholars in their arguments that self-interpretations are
deeply intertwined with subjective motivation, as the desire for self-understanding can itself be a
strong and influential driver of action (Giddens 1991; Ricoeur 1992; Taylor 1989; Trzebinski
1998). This a claim supported by a robust literature in cognitive and social psychology, where
scholars find peoples’ involvements in and commitments to particular courses of action are
deeply motivated by their own self-concepts (see Gecas 1986, 1991; Hitlin and Elder 2007;
Miles 2014; Miyamoto 1970; Oyserman 2007; Oyserman and Destin 2010; Quinn 1992). A
central insight here is that when a line of action is understood as congruent with actors’ senses of
self – as “for and about them” in some meaningful way – they become more invested in,
animated by, and committed to it. Accounts, we argue, can be important mechanisms through
which such congruence between identities and actions are interactively forged. In articulating a
significant connection between actors’ practices and their self-narratives, we illustrate how
accounts shaped motivation by suggesting that continuing to engage in the actions constituting
religion or MMA was fulfilling or elaborating parts of their life stories in important ways. In
other words, accounts motivated actions by imbuing them with “narrative possibilities” (Katz
1988: 290), intimating that continuing to engage in the action was a logical, significant, even

12

causally necessary next step or “plot point” in an actor’s life story (see also Mattingly 1994;
Trzebinksi 1998).
This conceptualization of accounts also draws from pragmatist insights on motivation,
action, and experience. Pragmatists understand motivation as a relational phenomenon, one
arising from the interaction and resonance between 1) aspects of the social situation and 2) the
sediments of past, present, and anticipated future experience individuals bring with them into
that situation (Emirbayer and Mische 1998; Mead 1934; Norton 2019; Schutz 1967; Tavory and
Eliasoph 2013). In important ways, this perspective shares with the aforementioned dual-process
model the assumption that what motivates people to do something cannot be solely explained in
terms of the present context, as actors bring with them a personal history of experience based on
previous socialization. However, while dual-process theorists highlight the importance of the
automatic cognitive associations and subconscious dispositions – or habitus – actors bring into
the social environment, pragmatists also emphasize the significance of actors consciously held
and discursively articulable self-concepts (Dewey 1922; Gross 2008; Leschziner 2015; Mead
1934). We demonstrate how establishing a motivation-inducing “hook” between actors’ actions
and self-interpretations is an active, collective accomplishment, one in which motive accounts
play a pivotal role.
Also drawing from pragmatist insights, we pay close attention to how this selfinterpretive process unfolds over time, allowing us to document not only how accounts work to
sustain motivation but also pinpointing those instances when they appear to be most causally
significant. We argue accounts are most motivationally significant during moments when actors
experience ambivalence, ambiguity, and/or trepidation with regard to their present practices –
i.e., times when actors’ current actions conflict with, disrupt, or otherwise problematize their
existing habits and dispositions. Following Bourdieu, sociologists have pointed to how such

13

moments of misalignment between existing dispositions and practices are motivationally
problematic, as they disrupt the “ontological complicity” that holds between habitus and social
context – a condition Bourdieu terms “hysteresis” (1990: 62). Yet, for pragmatists, the
problematization of habitual action also provides actors with opportunities for reflective thought
and the creative (re)construction of meanings, identities, and possibilities for action (Dewey
1922; Joas 1996). We demonstrate accounts can play a crucial role in this process of
reinterpreting initially problematic experience, rekindling actors’ motivation by orienting
attention away from the frustrations of the present moment and toward the more spatially and
temporally expansive self-narrative in which the present action plays a supporting role (cf.,
Mische 2008). Accounts, to draw from the terminology of Dewey (1922), help construct new
“ends-in-view”, encouraging actors to “reread” frustrating, painful, or dull actions in the present
as necessary – even vitally important – components of a more meaningful, expansive project of
identity development and self-discovery.

Research Settings and Methods
The analysis in this article is based on two separate ethnographic studies—an
examination of religious conversion to Eastern Orthodox Christianity conducted by the first
author and an exploration of the allure of training in mixed martial arts conducted by the second
author.
Both studies were conducted in Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN and the surrounding
metropolitan region. The area was particularly suited to a study of religious conversion as it
represented a diverse microcosm of Eastern Orthodoxy—and conversions to Orthodoxy—in the
United States. At the time of research, the area was home to sixteen Orthodox churches
representing eight of the eleven self-governing ethnic jurisdictions in the nation. For the majority

14

of their time in the United States, Eastern Orthodox parishes were ethnically homogeneous
enclaves characterized by the ethnonational identifications of Eastern European and Middle
Eastern immigrants and their descendants (Stokoe and Kishkovsky 1995). Over the past two
decades, however, many Eastern Orthodox churches have become home to converts from
different religious, spiritual, and even “unchurched” backgrounds.
The bulk of the data presented here comes from three parishes in which the first author
conducted intensive fieldwork for 14 months in 2010–2011. The author selected these particular
parishes because they were three of the most well known in the local Orthodox community for
receiving and socializing converts, and because each represented variation with regard to ethnic
culture, ratio of converts to “cradle” Orthodox (those born and raised in the Church), geographic
location, and size.
Minneapolis-St. Paul is also one of the epicenters of MMA in the United States—more
than twenty schools operate within a forty-five- minute drive of the city center, many with
members competing in cage fights. Most are located in suburban strip malls or warehouses on
the outer edge of urban sprawl. The rapid rise of such training sites followed the popularization
of the full-combat sport first being introduced to the United States in 1993 by the inaugural
Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) (Gentry 2011). Following this event, MMA went
through accelerated periods of growth, controversy, regulation and rule-change, and
acceptance—with the UFC recently being sold for $4 billion (Merced 2016).
From 2007-2013 the second author trained at gyms ranging from the nationally-known to
mid-sized businesses opened by entrepreneurs seeking to capitalize on the increasing popularity
to local schools opened by Traditional Martial Artists, MMA fans, and rag-tag collectives
learning to fight in converted garages and barns. The majority of the analysis in this article is
based on immersion within two locations chosen for their contrasting approaches and range of

15

clientele—one more structured and linked with traditional martial arts and the other offering a
clearer rejection of traditional approaches and mythologies. In both sites, the vast majority of
participants were enthusiastic amateurs, not paid professionals.
Both researchers began their respective projects independently but with a similar interest
in why people were involved in and how they became socialized into these new practices and
communities. Both also employed a form of “observant participation” (Wacquant 2011) –
immersing themselves in their sites and participating in the practices of the field in order to
analyze the processes and attendant experiences by which people became Orthodox Christians
and MMA fighters. For example, the first author engaged in rituals such as liturgies, prayers, and
lengthy periods of fasting and the second author exchanged punches, kicks, and chokes with
other members of the gym. While neither fully became members of the sites – the first author did
not convert and the second author continued to have research as a motivation for his time spent
on the mats – both were able to draw on their participation to gain access to conversations and
experiential aspects of these activities that would have otherwise been impossible to appreciate.
During the process of immersion, both authors became independently interested in the
question of what motivated people in their sites to commit to these at once voluntary but also
physically and psychologically demanding lines of action, crossing the threshold from curious
newcomer to devoted enthusiast. The authors found little in these actors’ backgrounds or
networks alone that consistently explained what motivated them to keep coming back to the
action, week after (often grueling) week. For example, while those interested in Eastern
Orthodoxy were mainly (though not exclusively) people with prior religious backgrounds, there
were also substantial differences in belief, ritual, and experience between Eastern Orthodoxy and
their former religious identifications, and potential converts did not share the salient ethnic
backgrounds of the “cradle” members of their new religious communities. Similarly, while some

16

of those who engaged in MMA had previous experience with organized athletics, the majority
were of the highly educated, upper-middle, professional, and creative class – a set of class
dispositions that generally discourages participation in violent combat sports (e.g., Bourdieu
1978). In addition, most people in these individuals’ existing social networks did not share an
enthusiasm for these practices. Subjects talked about how engaging in Eastern Orthodox and
MMA careers made them appear “strange,” “weird,” or “crazy” to significant others including
spouses, parents, coworkers, and friends. In short, there appeared just as many background
factors discouraging continued participation in these communities as encouraging it.
In continuing to investigate this question in their fieldwork, both authors became aware
of a process in which those who stuck with the practice would be regularly “talked into” the
action. In both sites, actors would be offered various accounts that made sense of why they were
involved in these new, seemingly strange practices and experiences, motive talk aimed at
persuading them that these actions were very much “for and about them”. After discussing these
similarities, the authors decided to combine these observations in an effort to investigate and
theorize the processes by which accounts appeared to sustain motivation for action across such
seemingly disparate cases.

Findings and Analysis
In the following sections, we utilize data from our respective field sites to demonstrate
how and when accounts subjectively motivated actors to engage in Orthodox Christianity and
Mixed Martial Arts. While the content of these accounts differ in several respects, the processes
by which talk about action at one point in space and time served to motivate action at another are
strikingly similar. In the first section, we analyze accounts that connected present actions with
events and identities from our subjects’ pasts, leading them to re-interpret engaging in religious

17

and fighting actions as shedding new light on things both present and lacking in their previous
lives. In the second, we look at accounts that connected present religious and fighting
experiences with other actions in the present, leading our subjects to view their new pursuits as
providing insight far beyond the pews or the mats. Finally, we document accounts that
interpretively linked actors’ present religious and fighting actions to potential future states of
being, suggesting to our subjects that continuation in the practice would lead to a more
physically, morally, and/or spiritually advanced self. In each case, we demonstrate how and
when accounts worked to “hook” actors’ experiences with religion and fighting to elements of
their biographies, helping to subjectively propel action forward by indexing their practices to a
motivational project of self-understanding and identity (re)construction. For reasons of analytic
depth as well as constrained space, we focus the bulk of our analysis on representative cases
from each site.

I. Where you were always meant to be: Accounts linking present and past
Members of both the churches and the gyms often invoked their pasts as ways to explain
what motivated their current practices. These accounts were just as, if not more, common among
veterans of the scene. However, following newcomers as they overcome initial hesitations and
build their commitments to the practices offers insight into the process by which members came
to the see the gym or church as shedding new light on their pasts and providing something that
had been previously lacking. Here we follow Danielle, a forty-eight year old artist, and Matt, a
twenty-eight year old high school chemistry teacher, as their respective accounts take form.
Before becoming an Eastern Orthodox Christian at the age of 48, Danielle had spent most
of her adult years involved in New Age Spirituality and then, later, as a committed Buddhist. In
her early 40s, however, Danielle became what she described as “burned out” on Buddhism and

18

religion altogether. Only after discovering the Orthodox Church, she relayed in an interview
shortly after her chrismation1, did Danielle “find my spiritual home, where I really belonged”
and “who God was leading me to be all this time.”
Danielle’s explanation of her conversion as a moment of profound self-discovery, of
finding out where she really belonged and who she was always meant to be, was an extremely
common theme within the conversion narratives of Eastern Orthodox Christian converts. In
accounts such as these, the motivation for converting was explained by a deep Orthodox
unconscious that had been guiding the quest for a previously unknown Orthodox Church all
along. In this vocabulary of motive, a deep desire to become an Orthodox Christian was always
already there (just not yet explicitly recognized).
With regard to the MMA case, while Matt’s history did not include an overt search for
religious meaning, his account of “finding exactly what I didn’t realize I needed” in the MMA
gym bears a striking resemblance to Danielle’s. Matt would often speak of how he had sunk into
a state of repetition, boredom, and disconnect over the last few years. His initial excitement
about achieving his goal of being a teacher had been forced out of him by a “steady diet of
bureaucracy and grading”. And, while Matt had numerous “work place friendships,” few went
beyond perfunctory greetings and wearisome complaints about state requirements and
misbehaving kids. As with other members of the site, the MMA gym provided Matt the
community and purpose he did not know he was looking for. In finding a “home”, he discovered
a spark that he did not even know was gone:
As Ted [the gym owner] likes to say, I was ‘sleepwalking through life’. I had
energy; I just never turned it on. Now I’m training 6-hours a week...It was all pent
up. I didn’t even know it…I used to just lay in bed at night not being able to turn
my mind off. Now when I sleep, I really sleep.”

1

The ritual by which one becomes an official member of the Church.

19

However, these accounts of finding a perfect fit, whether between the Orthodox Church
and one’s deep Orthodox unconscious or the MMA gym and unmet corporeal and social needs,
were common only after a prolonged engagement with the respective communities. Among
newcomers, initial engagements with the actions that comprised Orthodox Christianity and
MMA were characterized by hesitancy and ambivalence. In particular, the ornate liturgies and
ascetic practices (such as fasting) of the church and the close physical contact and pain of the
gym forced inquirers to ask if these kinds of activities were truly “for them”.
When the first author initially observed Danielle at her first liturgy at a local church, for
example, she did not appear to be feeling “at home.” Like most newcomers, Danielle stood in the
back of the room acting more as a spectator to – rather than participant in – the liturgy.
Throughout the two-hour Sunday ritual, the author observed Danielle regularly lifting one leg
and then the other, as they would tire and ache from standing for so long. At one point, Danielle
even had to quickly move out of the way of the priest as he swung a canister of incense during a
liturgical procession. At this point in time, her relationship to Orthodox ritual space and action
seemed far from a perfect fit.
After the liturgy, when the author struck up a conversation with Danielle, she herself
admitted as much: “Well, it was very interesting,” she answered, referring to the ritual, “but I
have to admit I was kind of lost.” When asked what brought her to the church that day, Danielle
replied that she had not been to a Christian church since she was a child and while she wasn’t
much interested in belonging to a Christian community, she thought she should at least visit an
Eastern Orthodox church because she had never been to one before: “I thought I should give it a
try before writing off Christianity completely!”
Matt’s entrance into the MMA gym was no more graceful. On the first day he faced
many of the difficulties that first-time MMA participants experience. He looked uncertain on the

20

way to the changing area, apologizing for not having “the right” gear, and nervously moved
between stretches he saw other participants doing as he waited for the session to begin. However,
as with other newcomers, it was the drilling of different grappling and submission movements
that offered the greatest barrier to entry. Matt was notably hesitant to touch his training partners,
including the second author. When asked about this later, he laughingly explained it was due to
his lack of experience being in “such close contact with sweaty men.” When the class shifted
over to light sparring, Matt chose to observe, saying he wasn’t ready to hit someone yet. Instead
he sat on the side, switching between watching the rest of the group work striking combinations,
rubbing his throat where he had recently been choked, and inspecting his elbows, now raw from
mat burns.
Again, much like Danielle, Matt did not seem to have a clear vision of what he was doing
there and articulated ambiguous motives for why he had chosen to set foot in the door. When the
second author sat beside Matt as the more serious sparring began, he explained “I must have
driven by this place 200 times and thought about stopping 100 times.” He said he thought he
would be out of place and there would be “a lot more blood and tattoos…I thought I would walk
in and it would be like in the movies where the record just stops and everyone looks.” When
asked what finally brought him in he seemed initially stumped, “I guess the more bored I got, the
slower I would drive by. I felt like a creep—driving by [he leans back and down as if hiding
behind a steering wheel], watching guys head in. Then one day I just did it.”
Like many newcomers, Danielle and Matt’s later accounts of finding a preternatural fit
with their new communities seemed quite out of step with their initial speech and behavior. If
anything, the observational evidence suggests newcomers’ motives were mixed and ambiguous.
Like Danielle and Matt, many were “checking things out,” “just curious,” or “testing the waters.”
From a traditional accounts or vocabulary of motives perspective, such discrepancies between

21

initial behaviors and later speech would immediately lead to skepticism as to whether their
subsequent accounts were trustworthy reflections of the motives underlying the acts themselves.
However, as argued above, such a purely representational and time-bound view of accounting
practices – i.e., do they accurately reflect the earlier attitudes and behaviors or not? – overlooks
the constitutive power of accounts to define, sharpen, and even transform motives over time. In
what follows, we examine how the process of retrospectively accounting for what is subjectively
driving one’s behavior at time 1 (casually visiting a new church or MMA gym) may actually
generate clearer and stronger motives for sustaining a line of action up to and beyond time 2
(becoming a committed Christian or fighter).
In the Eastern Orthodox case, Danielle – with the aid and encouragement of already
established members of the community – began the process of developing a new account for her
initial visit to the Eastern Orthodox church quite early on. A week after her initial visit, Danielle
was back at church and much more engaged. She held a small pamphlet that helped new visitors
follow along with the liturgy and made an effort to keep up with the ritual event, reading aloud
specific bible verses and creedal statements, singing along with some of the hymns, even making
the sign of the cross at times.
At the coffee hour following liturgy, the first author chatted with Danielle, joking that all
the incense must not have driven her away after all. Danielle admitted while she was still not
crazy about the incense, she “had a very interesting conversation” with the church priest, Father
Peter, at coffee hour last week. During that conversation, Danielle told Father Peter she had spent
most of her adult life as a practicing Buddhist, which probably put her a long way from Eastern
Christianity. But the priest had replied that the distance between the two traditions what not as
far as she might think. He explained to Danielle that Buddhism and Eastern Orthodoxy actually
have significant similarities in that they share a mystic, experiential mindset and a strong

22

contemplative tradition. “There is great spiritual truth in the Buddha’s teachings,” Father Peter
interjected, reaffirming what he had told Danielle a week earlier, “particularly about human
desire…Eastern Orthodoxy also has a strong focus on asceticism and the transcendence of
desire.”
“Isn’t that so interesting?,” Danielle asked the author, looking genuinely enthusiastic.
Danielle also said she learned from other members of the parish that Eastern Christianity had
something similar to meditation within its tradition. At that point, Father Peter chimed in with
the appropriate terminology: “hesychasm,” or the Orthodox mystical tradition of “ceaseless
prayer” centering around the repeated ritual utterance of Jesus Prayer. When Danielle discussed
these similarities with the priest and others last week, she told the author, “I had to come back
and learn more about what’s going on here!”
Matt’s immersion into gym culture bears much in common with Danielle’s process of
finding new connections to the practice and justifications for participation. In the weeks that
followed Matt’s initial entry, the second author noticed he spent a great deal of time eagerly
absorbing both fighting-techniques and stories from Keith, a young patent lawyer. During open
training, Matt was no longer so hesitant and often found his way to rolling with him, laughing
and expressing frustration after Keith submitted him, and expressing gratitude as he explained
technique. When the author commented that the more veteran gym member seemed to have
taken Matt under his wing, Matt talked both of Keith’s skills on the mats and his outlook on the
world: “maybe it is because he comes from a physics background…he is so committed to
breaking down every detail. He never just does something. He always needs to know why and
how.” When the author followed-up asking what he admires about it, Matt’s answer revealed
how Keith had helped him understand some of the elements lacking in his life that pushed him
through the doors of the gym; in particular, the absence of passion for a craft and curiosity:

23

It [Keith’s approach to MMA] is almost spiritual. I don’t think it is. You can’t help
but admire that kind of commitment to something…I didn’t have that for anything.
I think that is why he is so good. Because he never gets bored with it. And you can
see it every day. Yesterday he spent an hour playing around with just his hand
position on a choke! Literally, an hour. He is a scientist! That is the scientific
method right there…I need to get my 8th graders in here!
Here we observe how accounts created interpretive linkages that suggest a narrative path
to the practice. In the Church, Father Peter and others drew a plotline between Danielle’s
religious past as a Buddhist and her current quasi-interest in the Orthodox Church. This narrative
alignment between past experience and present action effectively hooked Danielle’s interest and
seemed to motivate her to return – “I had to come back and learn more,” as she put it. And, in the
gym, other fighters helped Matt connect what was happening on the mat to both his preexisting
understandings of himself as a “man of science” and new understandings of what was previously
lacking in his life—true friends and a craft to pursue.
To be clear, this process of casting interpretive hooks between Eastern Orthodoxy/MMA
and potential newcomers’ pasts was not only confined to Danielle and Matt’s cases. It was a
ubiquitous feature of discourse surrounding entry into each of the religious and fighting
communities we studied (see Green 2016; Winchester 2015). In such instances, others in the
community suggested to the newcomer there might be something more, something “deeper” to
their interest in Eastern Orthodoxy or MMA than initially perceived. From our hermeneutic
perspective, what is important here is not whether these post-hoc explanations of a deeper,
unconscious motive accurately reflected a pre-existing Orthodox or fighting subconscious, but
how such accounts encouraged this self-understanding within the actors themselves. In
persuading them that their new practices did indeed have some kind of deep continuity with preexisting predilections and desires, the accounts cast by the community held out the possibility

24

these novel activities held some kind of interpretive key to their pasts, leading to moments of
self-discovery of which they were previously unaware.
It is important to stress here that to successfully begin the process of hooking these
actions to actors’ self-narratives, not just any motive account would do. Returning to our
pragmatist understanding of motivation as relational, the proffered account had to successfully
resonate or hook up with some aspect of the actor’s biography and self-understanding. For
example, while in Danielle’s case (and in other cases where actors had previous experience with
“Eastern” religions) Father Peter’s account suggested a connection based on her previous
interests in mysticism and contemplation, in others, the author observed members of the
community emphasizing accounts that aligned more with the background of the particular
newcomer.2 This process of utilizing an account based on perceived fit with aspects of the
individual’s biography involved some level of educated guesswork and trial-and-error. It was
also one in which newcomers could take an active role. In the same conversation in which he
discussed his connection with Keith, for example, MMA newcomer Matt also demonstrated how
participants could “filter out” accounts that did not mesh with their narratives. Matt explained:
You know, I’m a chemist, so I can see through lot of the spiritual stuff that Jonah
[a fighter with a penchant for telling complicated stories drawing on disparate
types of knowledge] says. I mean, some of it is really interesting but some it is
based on these interpretations of science that are just wrong. It is really cool how
he connects fighting to all these cosmic processes, but sometimes I have trouble
not being the jerk, [goes into a nasally ‘nerd voice’] ‘well actually, that isn’t how
sub-atomic particles work’.
In aligning with Keith’s science-based talk over Jonah’s spiritual discussions, Matt rejected
engagement with an account that offered little motivational resonance with his self-concept. The
diversity of accounts in these settings demonstrates that, while there were many acceptable ways
actors could hypothetically justify their participation in light of community norms, individuals
It is important to note that these attempts were not cynical, but rather based on a sincere belief that Eastern
Orthodoxy contained universal truths relevant to people of all backgrounds (see Winchester 2015).
2

25

were drawn to the account they perceived to align with their self-understandings. As hermeneutic
hooks, many accounts could be cast out, but not all would necessarily catch the interest of actors.
While at earlier stages, newcomers were being talked into the action by others, later on,
the authors observed how many of these same religious and martial arts neophytes began to
internalize and build on these accounts themselves, more deeply embedding their new actions
into narratives of past identities. Approximately two months after their initial entries, both Matt
and Danielle demonstrated the manner in which the motive accounts had begun to take hold.
Matt had begun a more detailed unearthing of past experiences that foreshadowed his newfound
love of fighting. Along with the previous themes of boredom and lack of purpose, Matt now
incorporated stories of early encounters with fighting through movies and videogames. Perhaps
even more importantly, Matt now told the second author of times where he had shied away from
physical confrontation in high school and college. When the first author conversed with Danielle
again, she explained how she had been practicing the Jesus Prayer, and that it had “opened up
something in me that I haven’t experienced in years…a very transcendent, spiritual feeling.”
Danielle told the author she used to get this type of feeling with Buddhist meditation but now
“also with this strong feeling of great love and acceptance.” At this point, Danielle said, “there is
a reason that I found the Church; I think this is where God has been leading me all along.”
A few months later still, Matt’s adoption of the accounts could be seen as he began to
perform the role of teaching newcomers how to account for their participation, encouraging them
to interpretively hook their present actions into their narrative pasts. When the second author
returned to the gym after a short break from the field, he found Matt helping initiate a new
member. As Matt showed the basics of applying a triangle-choke he simultaneously explained
how MMA had helped him not just learn how to fight, but realize how he had lost his passion for

26

life, his drive to improve, and an honest form of connection to other people before discovering
the mats.
Again, from a traditional accounts perspective, the discrepancy between the ambivalent
speech and behavior when an actor entered the gym or the church and the fully-formed
retrospective accounts of motives we see here would be viewed as evidence of the decoupling of
motive talk from motivated action, intersubjective “string” from subjective “spring”. In terms of
explaining what propelled our Eastern Orthodox and MMA neophytes from casual visitors to
committed converts, talk did not appear to accurately reflect the initial actions to which it
ostensibly referred nor the subjective states underlying them. What we have aimed to show here,
however, is how this perspective misses how accounts link actions to ongoing processes of selfinterpretation, making the actions part of a project of self-discovery that can itself become a
strong motivator for – and thus also important sociological explanation of – further action.

II. It’s about life: Accounts linking actions and identities in the present
In both churches and gyms, we observed a second form of accounting that, instead of
connecting religious and MMA practices to past lives, aimed to interpretively hook them to
actions and identities in the present. As newcomers learned to grapple and strike or fast and pray,
they also quickly learned how these behaviors were always about something more than just
learning how to escape a painful armlock or deal with a grumbling stomach during Lent. Each
site was rich with accounts that suggested connections between MMA and Orthodox religious
actions and other aspects of actors’ current lives and selves—revealing significant truths about
both. As in the previous section, we found the casting out and subsequent adoption of these
accounts to be important explanations for what motivated newcomers to continue to engage in
practices about which they were initially unsure, ambivalent, or troubled.

27

In the Orthodox case, ritual fasting was usually the action in which newcomers appeared
least motivated to participate, at least initially. Orthodox fasting generally involves abstaining
from meat, dairy, oil, and alcohol and greatly reducing food intake. In addition, most fasting
periods or “seasons” in the Orthodox Church are quite lengthy, ranging from the two-week
Dormition Fast in August to the seven week Lenten or “Great” Fast before Pascha (i.e., Easter).
These strict rules and the extended length of fasting seasons struck newcomers as particularly
daunting, even draconian. Several predicted this might be what ended their inquiries into Eastern
Orthodoxy. As a new inquirer, Jeremy, told me, “I’m intrigued [by Eastern Orthodoxy], but I
think once it comes to the fasting, I’ll be out of here.” Or as Abby, who later converted with her
husband Jacob told me, “the fasting was a big obstacle to our committing at first. It just
seemed…to be over-the-top and rigid. We thought, ‘Why does God care at all what you eat?’”
Moreover, newcomers’ initial experiences with fasting could prove quite frustrating.
Eastern Orthodox inquirers often talked about feeling like “failures” when first participating in a
fast as they found themselves unconsciously breaking the rules in the course of trying to abruptly
change ingrained eating habits. The body’s tendency to act first and ask questions later created
numerous situations in which eating habits outpaced reflective awareness, only to be consciously
“caught” a moment later. As one individual put it, “You find yourself reaching for that beer at
the end of the day or unwrapping that candy bar in the afternoon and going, ‘Whoa, wait a
minute, what I am doing here?’” In addition, prolonged fasting would invariably lead to
physiological and psychological disruptions such as hunger pangs, strong cravings, and feelings
of irritability and moodiness that could make everyday routines and relationships problematic.
From this perspective, it is little wonder newcomers initially experienced fasting as a
motivational obstacle to continued action.

28

In the MMA gym, perhaps unsurprisingly, ever-present pain and physical contact offered
the greatest obstacles to entry. It is safe to assume most people who entered the gym expected the
obvious sources of pain—getting kicked in your leg or punched in the nose hurts. However, what
surprised people is how long the pain lasts and how when someone first started training, it all
hurts (see Green 2011). Many newcomers expressed shock at how unforgiving the mats were and
how scraping along the rubber surface left the flesh burned and raw. Even the seemingly nonviolent parts of training involved a degree of contact rarely encountered outside of the gym as
partners practiced chokes, joint-locks, and positional control on each other. This intense
physicality led some newcomers (even those with a strong background in athletics) to drop out
after a brief engagement. Kristin, a recent college graduate, captured this well when talking
about bringing a few teammates from her soccer team to the gym. They had expressed interest
after she came home “with my arms and legs all bruised and with my knuckles bleeding from
working the heavy bag”. However, their initial confidence and proclaimed toughness quickly
vanished – “it was just too much contact…They didn’t know what they were getting into.”
Laughing, she concluded none of her friends made it past two weeks.
Much like the recent religious convert doubting their mettle after struggling to resist a
cold beer or perfectly cooked steak, hesitations to be hurt, or hurt another, led to questions about
whether someone was cut out to be a fighter. Chris, a successful local musician, reflected back
on how his days in the gym almost came to an end the first time he got into the “cage” to spar
another member of the site. He described the experience as “eye-opening” and “ugly”. He had
been practicing grappling and striking for over a month but quickly found himself afraid to get
hit and even more afraid to hit his sparring partner. “I felt like a failure…Mark [the trainer/cage
fighter] was screaming at me to throw the combinations I had been working on…I was frozen”.
For others, it was discovering how pain followed them from the gym to all areas of their life. For

29

example, Steve, a burly physical education teacher shared that all of his talk of MMA being good
for his body looked less convincing when he was not able to help his wife with gardening due to
elbow and shoulder damage.
However, participants in both sites would later come to experience these difficulties as
something they appreciated, even looked forward to with anticipation. For converts, this
surprising transformation happened as they learned to account for their frustrating fasting
experiences in new ways, explaining their failures to follow the rules, their strong cravings, or
their tendencies to be irritable as consequences not just of the current condition of their bodies
but also of their souls. A first-time faster named Beth illustrated this shift in perspective quite
well when she started to account for her repeated failures to keep the fasting rules:
So many times now, I’ve found myself mindlessly breaking it [the fast]. Just
unthinkingly eating stuff that I’ve already told myself I’m not supposed to
eat!....And then I begin to wonder, how often does that happen with sin? How
often do I just act on a sinful desire without even thinking about it?....I wasn’t
keen on fasting at first, but now I understand what it does. It’s just like what
Father Andrew [her priest] says, it’s this really profound way to learn about your
spiritual situation, the things that are tripping you up and keeping you from God.
What is interesting here is newcomers like Beth became hooked by accounts that
explained fasting “failures” as moments of deep self-insight. Through such accounts, bodily
experiences related to appetite, hunger, and food became interpretively linked to one’s present
moral and spiritual condition, serving as metaphors for behaviors and inclinations that extended
well beyond those related to food. The fasting body, then, could be experienced as a window into
the previously opaque workings of one’s soul. And, while newcomers may have not have liked
what they initially perceived, accounting for fasting as a deeply ethical and spiritual form of selfknowledge motivated them to come back to the practice. As a convert named Jeremy explained:
When I was first learning about the Church, people would say, “Oh, I really look
forward to the fasts!” And I’m like, “Sure you do.” You know, “that’s what you
tell all the new converts, right?”. [laughing]….But I get it now, because it’s not

30

even really about being hungry, or not just that, I should say. It’s about learning
about your passions, your tendencies to sin, and learning about how to discipline
and retrain yourself… When you realize that, it makes you want to do it. You’re
getting a lot of spiritual insight, self-insight from it, you know?
Similarly, in the MMA gym we can see the painful exchanges providing an
impetus for reflection and meaning-making. Because of the unpleasant qualities of the
corporeal experience, members were pushed to account for why they engaged in the
action. In the case of pain, the account would often extend outwards to find meaning in
the present rather looking backwards to past experiences or imagining future trajectories.
Most immediately, the pain was re-interpreted as evidence that what was being learned in
the MMA gym was effective, authentic, and “real”. As Jeff, a thirty-one year old
computer programmer explained, one of the first things he heard when entering the gym
after years of aikido was “‘this is going to hurt’…They weren’t wrong.” Similar to the
experience of athletes participating in physically demanding endurance sports (Atkinson
2008), the pain was reinterpreted as proof Jeff was testing his limits and “doing
something”. In this sense, the account was able to transform the most difficult moments
into something to be sought after.

III. The Promise of a Better You: Accounts, Imagined Futures, and the Construction of
Anticipation
In the third type of accounting we observed, we found Orthodox Christians and MMA
fighters engaging in forms of motive talk that interpretively linked their present actions to
anticipated future states of being. In these instances, actors would be introduced to accounts that
suggested religious or martial arts practices undertaken in the here and now were ultimately
leading them to some version of a more enlightened and desirable self. Such discourses hooked

31

present practices to a future-oriented process of self-improvement, charging present actions with
future potential that motivated actors toward continued engagement.
In the Eastern Orthodox case, individuals learned they should establish and keep a prayer
rule as part of their daily lives. While some of those who were familiar with the practice of ritual
prayer from their previous religious traditions (such as Roman Catholicism) engaged in such
prayers with enthusiasm, many others were reluctant. This was especially the case for those
individuals coming from an Evangelical Christian background, a tradition that emphasizes a
much more spontaneous and conversational style of prayer in which the praying subject simply
“talks to God” whenever and wherever the need arises (Winchester and Guhin 2019). A formerly
Evangelical woman named Christine, for example, told two new inquirers she initially struggled
with keeping a prayer rule. Growing up in an Evangelical Church, she was used to “just saying
what’s on my heart whenever the need [for prayer] arises” and so reciting what were in many
cases centuries-old prayers written by other people at set times during the day proved both
uncomfortable and difficult. Christine confided that she used to skip her prayers due to both
forgetfulness and lack of motivation.
In the MMA gym, participants faced challenges that seemingly existed on far ends of a
spectrum. Some days required repetitive drilling of the same move with attention being paid to
each small detail of the positioning and transitions. This would involve a combination of the
painful and the monotonous (e.g., having a choke or joint lock applied over and over by a
training partner). Other days participants engaged in intense conditioning drills where they were
pushed past the point of exhaustion as they worked their way through a circuit of MMA-related
exercises or engaged in round-after-round of sparring or grappling until the mat was covered in
puddles of sweat. As Jeff explained, after a long workweek, it could be difficult to muster the
motivation and concentration for the former and energy and courage for the latter: “Don’t

32

underestimate the grip strength of the couch! Some nights that thing won’t let you go.” Dan, a
young banker added, “when everyone is going out for happy hour after work it is hard to be like,
‘sorry, I have to go work my armbar escape’.”
In both cases, guidance was offered by respected voices in the scene, and new
motivations were cultivated through accounts that oriented the participants towards future goals
or ends-in-view. Orthodox clergy and more seasoned parishioners in the communities, for
example, were well aware of converts’ antipathy toward ritualized prayer and relied on accounts
to justify the action. One of the most common accounts justified keeping a set prayer rule as a
type of spiritual exercise for the strength of the soul, analogous to the importance of physical
training for the body. As one priest explained following a Bible study:
As [Eastern Orthodox] Christians, we keep a prayer rule for the same reason we
should keep a physical exercise regimen. If we want to maintain a strong and
healthy body, we have to engage in regular, disciplined physical training. By the
same token, if we want to maintain a strong and healthy soul, we have to engage
in regular, disciplined spiritual training. Prayer strengthens the inner, spiritual life,
just as surely as push-ups or sit-ups strengthen the outer, physical life.
Moreover, just as training through bodily exercise develops new physical capabilities,
training through prayer was said to develop novel or improved spiritual capacities. According to
Eastern Orthodox tradition, the saints developed their prayer lives to such an extent they learned
to “pray without ceasing” – i.e., prayer had become so ingrained in them that they were
constantly praying, internally, all the time.
The idea that a prayer rule was akin to dedicated spiritual exercise or training struck a
chord of recognition with many converts, including the initially reluctant Christine who had a
background in high school and collegiate athletics. As she told the author:
A big change in my thinking about [having a prayer rule] was after a
conversation I had with Father Mark….[H]e asked me, “Do the top athletes only
practice when they feel like it?” And I was like, “No.” And so he asked, “Why
not?” And I said, well, of course it’s because to be the best player on the field or

33

court or whatever, you have to train on a regular basis regardless of whether you
feel like it. And he was like, “Bingo.” That’s the way it works with spirituality
too….So that really helped me think about it in a new way….This is something
I’m doing not just for today but for my long-term benefit, to improve myself
spiritually. So even if I don’t feel like doing it today, I do it because it will pay off
down the road.
While physical training and athletic accomplishment provided a powerful metaphor in the
Orthodox Church, recent MMA converts embraced the pursuit of corporeal improvement as both
an end in itself and a long-term path to self-improvement. Much of the motivating talk came in
the form of future-oriented clichés that could be found in other sports spaces and provided the
necessary boost to get people through the workout/sparring session: “the pain is peeling off the
layers of weakness…getting to a true or better self”; “facing down your demons day after day”;
and Zach, a local fighter’s favorite during sparring day, “When we are in here, they are sitting at
home. They took off that final round. We don’t take off rounds.”
For many in the site, these seemingly clichéd accounts hooked monotonous actions in the
present to a superior version of the future self that extended beyond their time in the gym. Erik, a
twenty-seven year-old part-time carpenter came to see cage-fighting as his calling even as he
acknowledged it was not likely to lead to a sustainable source of income. In discussing his time
recovering from a severe knee injury that required surgery and kept him off the mats for over a
year, Erik explained:
People would always ask me, ‘what is plan B’? They would act like I was crazy
when I told them that it doesn’t matter. I’m probably not going to get rich
fighting… I’m not dumb. But, with what I’m learning I’m confident I can succeed
at anything…I’m losing my weakness. I’m losing my ego. It is all getting chipped
away. After being in that cage! I’m not scared of a little adversity.….I don’t care
what I do. I know what I am…All that forged steel shit [referring to a common
phrase in the gym] is kind of true. I’m going to keep getting sharper.”
What is significant here is not just that the sports/physical training analogies in the
Church or the motivational talk in the gym provided after-the-fact justifications for the practice

34

nor even that it gave a different, more positive spin on challenging activities. More important for
the purposes of our argument is that the discursive account became hooked into their own
interpretations of the action, connecting current prayer and training practices to an anticipated
future state of being in which they would be more spiritually advanced (cf., Frye 2012; Johnston
2016).
In sociological terms, ritual prayer and MMA training protocols became part and parcel
of new “imagined futures” as present actions were interpretively linked with potential future
selves (Mische 2009: 698). And, as in previous sections, while newcomers were initially “talked
into the action” by others, later these same practitioners internalized and built on these accounts
themselves, more deeply indexing their new actions to narratives of desirable futures. As a result,
the anticipation of future improvement subjectively motivated action in the present, even in
instances where, to quote Christine or countless MMA hobbyists facing a difficult strength and
conditioning circuit or day of sparring, “I don’t feel like doing it today”.

Discussion and Conclusion
Taking inspiration from hermeneutic perspectives on self-identity as well as pragmatist
conceptualizations of the temporality of action and experience, we have argued accounts
significantly influence motivation when they interpretively connect or “hook” actors’ present
actions with aspects of their self-narratives – i.e., their past, present, and/or future selfunderstandings. Drawing on ethnographic case studies of actors’ involvements in Eastern
Orthodoxy and Mixed Martial Arts, we demonstrated common processes by which accounts
helped integrate actors’ fighting and religious actions into highly motivational projects of selfdevelopment and discovery. While decades of previous sociological scholarship on motive talk

35

has placed analytic focus on how actors’ accounts index the normative constraints of social
contexts as opposed to subjective motivations, our perspective has aimed to highlight how this is
a false dichotomy. Accounts can be invaluable for explaining what sustains motivation for a
course of action, particularly in the face of feelings of ambivalence, doubt, or routinization.
As scholars such as Campbell (1996), Vaisey (2009, 2010), and Smith (2015) have noted,
longstanding sociological debates about the relationship between accounts and motivation are
also deeply embedded within and reflective of different theoretical assumptions about how
culture in general “works” to shape human subjectivity and action. With this in mind, we suggest
how our findings speak to – and may ultimately help bridge – two interrelated theoretical divides
in cultural sociology: 1) the role of automatic vs. discursive cognition in the culture-action
relationship; and 2) the means/ends or justification/motivation “split” in contemporary cultural
sociology.
This research provides an important corrective and complement to sociological theories
of action that have emphasized automatic cognitive associations and non-discursive dispositions
when it comes to explaining what subjectively organizes and motivates action (e.g. Bourdieu
1990; Martin 2010, 2011; Vaisey 2008, 2009; Vaisey and Lizardo 2010). Like us, dual-process
theorists have been critical of sociological approaches that abandon the question of motivation
altogether. However, they tend to share the assumption that actors’ motive accounts are post-hoc
rationalizations for action that are only loosely coupled – if at all – to the underlying desires and
intentions that propel action forward.
While we agree with these theorists that action is often strongly motivated by
subconscious habits and cognitive schemas resistant to discursive articulation, the one-to-one
association of culture’s motivational role with habitus/automatic cognition ultimately hinders
investigation into how discursive consciousness and accounts also play important (and ultimately

36

complementary) motivational roles. Our findings suggest accounts are most significant for
influencing motivation at precisely those times when significant aspects of actors’ habitual
dispositions/automatic cognitive processes become problematized. Our research also suggests
such moments of “problematization” are relatively common, occurring at several stages within
the social career. Upon moments of entry into a new field of practice, for example, many people
may initially approach the action with feelings of ambivalence and trepidation, a mixture of both
curiosity/attraction and wariness/repulsion. After initial entry and involvement, actors encounter
plenty of moments of discomfort and displacement as old habits and cognitive associations are
reconstructed in line with the demands of the new practice, whether that reconstructive process
involves prolonged periods of fasting, fisticuffs, or something else entirely. These moments are
usually what initiate the development of accounts and the concomitant process of identity
exploration and reconstruction. The excitement generated by this self-interpretive process may
be strong enough to motivate actors to sustain lines of action even in the face of dispositional
ambivalence. Indeed, such accounts and the anticipation of future moments of self-discovery
may “carry” an actor through periods of dispositional misalignment until they develop and
solidify the elements of their habitus that are “out of place”.
However, our research also highlights there are instances where even developing the
requisite habitus may not always in and of itself be enough to sustain motivation. Previous
research has shown prolonged habituation into a new set of activities may actually lead to
periods of decreased motivation, as actors “burn out” or lose the desire that led them to engage in
the action (see Tavory and Winchester 2012). Indeed, we found instances where seasoned and
well-habituated members had to be talked into the action – i.e., provided with accounts for why
they should desire to practice the same prayer rule or training routine they had been doing for
months or even years on end. New accounts added new layers of meaning to the “same old”

37

action, encouraging even “old-timers” that there was still something in it for (and about) them. In
sum, our research suggests accounts become invaluable for sociological explanations of
motivation at precisely those moments in time when it is phenomenologically weak, unclear,
ambiguous, – i.e., when actors are trying to understand and work through their own muddied and
muddled desires for sustaining a course of action.
Conversely, while dispositional theories of action can be criticized for not taking the
narrative dimension of subjectivity into full account, hermeneutic theorists of the self can in turn
be critiqued for assuming actors’ self-interpretations matter for what they do but not being
sufficiently concerned with how and when. This research also extends hermeneutic perspectives
on subjectivity by highlighting the intimate sequencing of narrative selves and social actions,
drawing attention to when narrative self-understandings matter for sustaining a course of action,
and how these understandings are solicited and even in part transformed through motive
accounts.
This paper also speaks to what various scholars have highlighted as a means/ends or
justification/motivation split within parts of contemporary cultural sociology (Kaufman 2004;
Friedland & Mohr 2004; Frye 2012; Vaisey 2009, 2010). While earlier, Parsonian theories
conceptualized culture as shaping action by instilling deeply internalized values that motivate
actors to pursue particular ends, theories following the more contemporary “cultural turn” in
American sociology have largely replaced this view with one that sees culture as providing the
publicly-available, symbolic means through which actors make sense of and justify their actions
(most notably in Swidler-inspired repertoire or toolkit approaches). This turn towards “culture as
means” offers an important criticism of models that view culture strictly in terms of internalized
values and motivations. However, simply reversing the dualism evacuates questions of
subjectivity from cultural analysis and leaves the question of what motivates people to pursue,

38

commit to, and stick with lines of action vague and underdetermined (Kaufman 2004; Vaisey
2008).
While Vaisey’s (2009) previously mentioned dual-process model attempts to bridge this
division by grounding culture’s motivational and justificatory roles within two different
cognitive systems, our research suggests – in line with pragmatist insights (Dewey 1922; Frye
2012; Whitford 2002) – rejecting a stark dichotomy between justifications/means vs.
motivation/ends is a more tenable way forward. Dewey (1922) claimed there was no strong
division between ends and means and that the two were in fact reciprocally related. Within a
particular course of action, what was initially a means for action at Time 1 can quickly become
an end of one’s action at Time 2, which then can act as a means for further action at Time 3, and
so on. Post-hoc justifications for an action undertaken at one point in time, in other words, can
transform into sincere motivations for undertaking that same action at another. In our cases,
after-the-fact accounts of why actors were engaging in the action began as justifications that
were likely only loosely coupled with what was initially motivating the action, as traditional
theorists of accounts would predict. But these initial ex-post-facto justifications were just the
start of a more temporally extended interpretive process of linking the new actions and
experiences with existing self-understandings. As actors began to identify new religious or
martial arts practices as part of a larger narrative of self-discovery and -improvement, what were
once “disconnected” justifications or accounts became constitutive of motivations for further
action.
A final general point here is while action and commentary on action may appear
disjointed if we only attend to a very short sequence of (inter)action, if we take a longer view, we
may find action and accounts can become tightly woven together into temporally-extended social
career trajectories. Our research found it was precisely the work of accounting for the practices

39

comprising Eastern Orthodoxy and MMA training that made them about more than prayers and
fasts or roundkicks and kneebars. While such embodied actions and experiences were central to
each social career, these aspects alone did not constitute the entirety of their cultural form or
meaning. Motive accounts extended and expanded the meaning of a rumbling stomach or a
bruised rib into new cultural terrain – i.e., it’s not only about fasts or fists; it’s also about your
life and who you are. While sociologists have sometimes been dismissive of reflexive selfconcepts and self-narratives as so many “biographical illusions” (Bourdieu 2000), we argue
attending to how actors interpret their actions as implicated in their own self-narratives and life
“projects” (Schutz 1967; Mische 2009) is vitally important for explaining what sustains
motivation within particular career trajectories.
This study also opens avenues for further research. While we have analyzed cases of
religious and sporting careers specifically here, we hope our more general claims about how and
when accounts influence motivation will be usefully applied to (and evaluated against) empirical
research on other social careers – e.g., marriage, parenthood, professions and occupations,
criminality, schooling, military service, physical and/or psychological rehabilitation, etc. While
habituated dispositions, routines, and normative expectations certainly propel action forward in
many moments within such careers, there are also likely important instances where habits and
expectations become problematized and where people reflect on and question their own
motivations for continuing on (with that same relationship, that half-finished book manuscript,
that next month of therapy sessions, etc.). The temporal patterning of these moments, the role
accounts may play in motivating actors to move beyond them, and the kinds of self-narratives
that emerge from these interactions are fruitful areas for future comparative inquiry.
Additionally, while we have focused on processes by which accounts successfully
motivated actors to continue with their practices, future scholarship is needed on the converse

40

question – when do accounts fail to do this work? This research suggests two important factors
likely to contribute to such failure: 1) the contents of the motive accounts developed within a
given community do not resonate with elements of an actor’s self-narrative and/or 2) the
otherwise resonant accounts are not deployed at the right moments within the actor’s career
trajectory (particularly during those times when actors face ambivalence, discomfort, frustration,
or some other problematization of their current course of conduct). Future sociologists could
develop more carefully controlled comparative studies of “stayers” and “leavers” within a given
social career, more rigorously testing how, when, and to what extent these (and other) factors
influence the likelihood accounts will or will not sustain a course of action.
Future research could also explore whether some accounts contribute to motivation for
exiting a particular career trajectory. While our case studies attend to the motivational
significance of accounts for sustaining a line of action, it stands to reason that accounts may also
play an important role in persuading actors to opt out and/or choose alternative careers. Once
embedded within a particular social career and community, do actors’ hear competing accounts –
perhaps from family members, friends, or peers outside of the community of practice – which
suggest that perhaps another career would in reality be more fulfilling, more in line with who
they were, are, and wish to become? Is the current commitment cast as “just a phase” or perhaps
a stepping stone to a different social career path? And how and when might such competing
accounts motivate actors to leave one line of action and embark on another? Answers to such
questions would stand to make significant contributions not only to understanding motive talk
but also role exit (e.g., Ebaugh 1988).
Ultimately, we hope this research serves as encouragement for sociologists to reconsider
the motivational significance of accounts, particularly as they pertain to how we understand what
moves social actors to keep coming back to the action.

41

References
Atkinson, Michael. 2008. "Triathlon, suffering and exciting significance." Leisure studies 27.2:
165-180.
Barnes, Barry. 2000. Understanding Agency: Social Theory and Responsible Action. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Becker, Howard S. 1953. “Becoming a Marijuana User.” American Journal of Sociology 59(3):
235–242.
Becker, Howard S. and Anselm Strauss. 1956. “Careers, Personality and Adult Socialization.”
American Journal of Sociology 62(3): 253–263.
Beckford, James A. 1978. “Accounting for Conversion.” British Journal of Sociology 29(2):249–
62.
Benzecry, Claudio. 2009. “Becoming a Fan: On the Seductions of Opera.” Qualitative
Sociology 32(2): 131–151.
Blum, Alan F. and Peter McHugh. 1971. “The Social Ascription of Motives.” American
Sociological Review 36(1):98–109.
Blumstein, Philip W. 1974. “The Honoring of Accounts.” American Sociological Review
39(4):551–66.
Boltanski, Luc and Laurent Thevenot. 2006. On Justification: Economies of Worth. Princeton
University Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1978. “Sport and Social Class.” Social Science Information 17(6):819–40.
____. 1990. The Logic of Practice. Stanford University Press.
____. 2000. “The Biographical Illusion,” ps. 299-305 in Identity: A Reader. Edited by P. Du
Gay, J. Evans, and P. Redman. London: Sage.
Campbell, Colin. 1996. The Myth of Social Action. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, John, 1922. Human Nature and Conduct. New York: Holt & Co.
Ebaugh, Helen R.F. 1988. Becoming an Ex: The Process of Role Exit. University of Chicago
Press.
Evans, Jonathan. 2003. “In Two Minds: Dual-Process Accounts of Reasoning.” Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 7(10): 454-459.

42

Emirbayer, Mustafa and Ann Mische. 2010. “What Is Agency ?” The American Journal of
Sociology 103(4):962–1023.
Friedland, Roger and John Mohr. 2004. “The Cultural Turn in American Sociology,” ps. 1-70 in
Matters of Culture: Cultural Sociology in Practice, edited by R. Friedland and J. W. Mohr.
Cambridge: UK.
Frye, Margaret. 2012. “Bright Futures in Malawi's New Dawn: Educational Aspirations as
Assertions of Identity”. American Journal of Sociology 117(6): 1565-1624.
Garfinkel, Harold. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gecas, Victor. 1986. “The Motivational Significance of Self-Concept for Socialization Theory,”
ps. 131-56 in Advances in Group Processes, vol. 3, edited by E. J. Lawler. Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.
____. 1991. “The Self-Concept as a Basis for a Theory of Motivation,” ps. 171-87 in The SelfSociety Dynamic: Cognition, Emotion, and Action, edited by J. A. Howard and P. L.
Callero. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gentry, Clyde. 2002. No Holds Barred: The Story of Ultimate Fighting. Ramsbottom: Milo
Books.
Giddens, Anthony. 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Goffman, Erving. 1971. Relations in Public. New York: Basic Books.
Green, Kyle D. 2011. “It Hurts So It is Real: Sensing the Seduction of Mixed Martial Arts.”
Social & Cultural Geography 12(4):377-96.
____. 2016. “Tales from the Mat: Narrating Men and Meaning Making in the Mixed Martial Arts
Gym.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 45(4):419-50.
Gross, Neil. 2008. Richard Rorty: The Making of an American Philospher. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2001. “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach
to Moral Judgment.” Psychological Review 108(4):814–34.
Hitlin, Steven and Glen H. Elder, Jr. 2007. “Time, Self, and the Curiously Abstract Concept of
Agency.” Sociological Theory 25(2): 170-191.
Hopper, Joseph. 1993. “The Rhetoric of Motives in Divorce.” Journal of Marriage and Family
55(4):801–13.
Hughes, Everett C. 1958. Men and Their Work. New York: Free Press.

43

Jerolmack, C. and S. Khan. 2014. “Talk Is Cheap: Ethnography and the Attitudinal Fallacy.”
Sociological Methods & Research 43(2):178–209.
Joas, Hans. 1996. The Creativity of Action. University of Chicago Press.
Johnston, Erin. 2016. “The Enlightened Self: Identity and Aspiration in Two Communities of
Practice.” Religions 92:1-15.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Penguin.
Katz, Jack. 1988. Seductions of Crime. New York: Basic Books.
Kaufman, Jason. 2004. ‘‘Endogenous Explanation in the Sociology of Culture,’’ Annual
Review of Sociology 30: 355–387.
Leschziner, Vanina. 2015. “At the Chef’s Table: Culinary Creativity in Elite Restaurants.”
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Martin, John Levi. 2010. “Life’s a Beach but You’re an Ant, and Other Unwelcome News for the
Sociology of Culture.” Poetics 38(2):229–44.
____. 2011. The Explanation of Social Action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mattingly, Cheryl. 1994. “The Concept of Therapeutic Emplotment.” Social Science and
Medicine 38(6): 811-822.
Mead, George H. 1934. Mind, Self, & Society. edited by C. V. Morris. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Merced, Michael J. 2016. “U.F.C. Sells Itself for $4 Billion.” New York Times.
Miles, Andrew. 2014. “Addressing the Problem of Cultural Anchoring: An Identity-Based Model
of Culture in Action.” Social Psychology Quarterly 77(2): 210-227.
Mills, C. Wright. 1940. “Situated Actions and Vocabularies of Motive.” American Sociological
Review 5(6): 904-913.
Mische, Ann. 2008. Partisan Publics: Communication and Contention across Brazilian Youth
Activist Networks. Princeton University Press.
______. 2009. “Projects and Possibilities: Researching Futures in Action.” Sociological Forum
24(3): 694-703.
Miyamoto, S. Frank. 1970. “Self, Motivation, and Symbolic Interactionist Theory,” ps. 271-285
in Human Nature and Collective Behavior: Papers in Honor of Herbert Blumer, edited by
T. Shibutani. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Monaghan, Lee F. 2006. “Weighty Words: Expanding and Embodying the Accounts

44

Framework.” Social Theory & Health 4(2): 128-167,
Mulkay, Michael and G.Nigel Gilbert. 1982. “Accounting for Error: How Scientists Construct
Their Social World When They Account for Correct and Incorrect Belief.” Sociology
16(2):165–83.
Nichols, Lawrence. 1990. “Reconceptualizing Social Accounts: An Agenda for Theory Building
and Empirical Research.” Current Perspectives in Social Theory 10:113–44.
Norton, Matthew. 2019. “Meaning on the Move: Synthesizing Cognitive and Systems Concepts
of Culture.” American Journal of Cultural Sociology 7(1):1-28.
Orbuch, Terri L. 1997. “People’s Accounts Count: The Sociology of Accounts.” Annual Review
of Sociology 23:455–78.
Oyserman, Daphna. 2007. “Social Identity and Self-Regulation,” ps. 432-453 in Social
Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles, 2nd ed., edited by A. W. Kruglanski and E.T.
Higgins. New York: Guilford Press.
Oyserman, Daphna and Mesmin Destin. 2010. “Identity-based Motivation: Implications for
Intervention.” Counseling Psychology 38(7): 1001-1043.
Pryor, Doug W. 1996. Unspeakable Acts: Why Men Sexually Abuse Children. New York: NYU
Press.
Quinn, Naomi. 1992. “The Motivational Force of Self-Understanding: Evidence from Wives’
Inner Conflicts.” Pp. 90–126 in Human Motives and Cultural Models, edited by R. G.
D’andre and C. Strauss. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Richardson, James T. 1978. Conversion Careers: In and Out of the New Religions. London:
Sage.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1988. Time and Narrative, vol. 3. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—. 1992. Oneself as Another. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schlegoff, Emanuel, Gail Jefferson, and Harvey Sacks. 1977. “The Preference for SelfCorrection in the Organization of Repair in Conversation.” Language 52(2):361–82.
Schutz, Alfred. 1967. The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Scott, Marvin B. and Stanford M. Lyman. 1968. “Accounts.” American Sociological Review
33(1):46–62.
Scully, Diana and Joseph Marolla. 1984. “Convicted Rapists’ Vocabulary of Motive: Excuses
and Justifications.” Social Problems 31(5):530–44.

45

Smith, Christian. 2015. To Flourish or Destruct: A Personalist Theory of Human Goods,
Motivations, Failure, and Evil. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Somers, Margaret. 1994. “The Narrative Constitution of Identity: A Relational and Network
Approach.” Theory and Society 23(5): 605-49.
Stokes, Randall and John P. Hewitt. 1976. “Aligning Actions.” American Sociological Review
41:838–49.
Stokoe, Mark and Leonid Kishkovsky. 1995. Orthodox Christians in North America, 1794–1994.
Syosset, NY: Orthodox Christian Publications Center.
Swidler, Ann. 2001. Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tavory, Iddo and Daniel Winchester. 2012. “Experiential Careers: The Routinization and DeRoutinization of Religious Life”. Theory & Society 41(4):351-73.
Tavory, Iddo and Nina Eliasoph. 2013. “Coordinating Futures: Toward a Theory of
Anticipation.” American Journal of Sociology 118(4):908–42.
Tavory, Iddo. 2016. Summoned: Identification and Religious Life in a Jewish Neighborhood.
Univesrity of Chicago Press.
Taylor, Charles. 1985. Human Agency and Language. New York: Cambridge University Press.
____. 1989. Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Trzebinski, Jerzy. 1998. “Self-Narratives as Sources of Motivation.” Psychology of Language
and Communication 2(1): 13-22.
Vaisey, Stephen. 2008. “Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle: Three Ways of Thinking about Culture
in Action.” Sociological Forum 23(3):603–13.
____. 2009. “Motivation and Justification: A Dual-Process Model of Culture in Action.”
American Journal of Sociology 114(6):1675–1715.
____. 2010. “What People Want: Rethinking Poverty, Culture, and Educational Attainment.” The
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 629(1): 75-101.
Vaisey, Stephen and Omar Lizardo. 2010. “Can Cultural Worldviews Influence Network
Composition?” Social Forces 88(4):1595–1618.
Wacquant, Loic. 2011. “Habitus as Topic and Tool: Reflections on Becoming a Prizefighter.”
Qualitative Research in Psychology 8:81–92.
Wagner-Pacifici, Robin. 2000. Theorizing the Standoff: Contingency in Action. Cambridge
University Press.

46

Whitford, Josh. 2002. “Pragmatism and the untenable dualism of means and ends: Why rational
choice theory does not deserve paradigmatic privilege.” Theory & Society 31(3):325-363.
Winchester, Daniel. 2015. “Converting to Continuity: Temporality and Self in Eastern Orthodox
Conversion Narratives.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 54(3):439-60.
Winchester, Daniel and Jeffrey Guhin. 2019. “Praying ‘Straight from the Heart’: Evangelical
Sincerity and the Normative Frames of Culture in Action.” Poetics 72(1): 32-42.

47

View publication stats

