Reinforcing at the Top or Compensating at the Bottom? Family Background and
Academic Performance in Germany, Norway, and the United States

Michael Grätz
Swedish Institute for Social Research (SOFI), Stockholm University
Institute for Futures Studies, Stockholm
michael.gratz@sofi.su.se

Øyvind N. Wiborg
Department of Sociology and Human Geography, University of Oslo
Centre for the Study of Professions, Oslo Metropolitan University
oyvind.wiborg@sosgeo.uio.no

This version: May 6, 2019

1

Abstract
Research on educational mobility usually fails to consider variation in the association between
social origin and academic performance across the distribution of children’s academic
performance. However, theories of social mobility as well as theories about resource allocation
within families predict such variation. We use quantile regression models to estimate variations
in the associations between different indicators of family background (parental education,
occupation, earnings, and wealth) and children’s educational performance across the
performance distribution. We apply this approach to data on Germany, Norway, and the United
States, three countries that represent different kinds of welfare and education regimes that may
affect the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage. We find a stronger
association between family background and academic performance at the bottom than in the
middle and the weakest association at the top of the performance distribution. These findings
are virtually identical across all four indicators of family background. We also find no crossnational differences in the variation of the association between family background and
academic performance across the performance distribution.

Keywords
academic performance, cross-national comparison, education, quantile regression, social
mobility

2

In all advanced, industrialized societies, family background shapes children’s life chances;
educational choices and academic performance play pivotal roles in this. Much literature, using
various data sources and methodological approaches, has documented strong associations
between family background and children’s educational outcomes (Björklund and Salvanes
2011; Breen and Jonsson 2005). Usually, research in this area focuses on whether children’s
academic performance varies on average by their family’s socioeconomic background.
However, little research has examined whether such associations vary between children whose
performance is low, average, or high. We focus on this theoretically important research
question that is also relevant to policies aimed at influencing educational inequalities.
Many theoretical approaches predict that the associations between family background
and educational performance will vary depending on the level of children’s academic
performance. Within a family, children whose academic performance is high may benefit more
from the same amount of parental investment than their low-performing counterparts (Becker
and Tomes 1986). Parents may also invest in their children in response to their academic
performance. If parents focus their investments on the child whose academic performance is
the highest (Becker and Tomes 1976), or if children with higher academic performance benefit
more from the same amount of parental resources than their low-performing counterparts, a
stronger association should emerge between family background and academic achievement at
the top rather than at the bottom of the performance distribution. Conversely, if parents focus
resources on the child with the lowest academic performance (Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman
1982; Conley 2008a; Griliches 1979), a stronger association should emerge between family
background and academic performance at the bottom rather than at the top of the performance
distribution. Compensatory behavior by parents can occur if they want their children to avoid
downward social mobility (Bernardi 2014; Bernardi and Cebolla-Boado 2014; Boudon 1973;
Breen and Goldthorpe 1997; Jackson 2013).

3

Naturally, families’ strategies to reinforce or compensate children’s academic
performance are constrained by the parental resources available (Conley 2008a; Grätz and
Torche 2016; Hsin 2012; Restrepo 2016). These constraints link different forms of parental
behavior within families to broader processes that generate inequalities between families
(Boudon 1973; Breen and Goldthorpe 1997; DiPrete and Eirich 2006).
Shedding light on the variation in the association between family background and
educational performance across the performance distribution has important implications for
our understanding of the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage. By ignoring
such heterogeneous effects, previous studies may have under- or overestimated
intergenerational educational mobility. In addition, knowledge about whether the impact of
social origin varies for children whose performance is low, average, or high can inform policies
that aim to increase equality of educational opportunity.
We test the two opposing predictions stated above about variation in the associations
between family socioeconomic background and children’s academic performance across the
performance distribution using quantile regression models. Family socioeconomic background
is operationalized in a number of ways to ensure the robustness and generalizability of our
findings, including measures of parental education, occupation, earnings, and wealth.
We apply this approach to data from three countries. We use the Socio-Economic Panel
Study (SOEP) from Germany, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) from the United
States, and administrative register data from Norway. Comparing these countries is of
theoretical importance as they represent the three main types of welfare regimes found in
advanced, industrialized societies (Esping-Andersen 1990) and have different education
regimes (Allmendinger 1989; Busemeyer and Nikolai 2010). Institutional theories argue that
educational institutions’ characteristics affect the intergenerational transmission of educational
advantage (van de Werfhorst and Mijs 2010). For instance, the German education system tracks

4

students earlier into different types of schools than Norway and the United States. Early
tracking may diminish educational mobility, but it may also lead to a more equal distribution
of differences in social origin across different levels of academic performance. Previous
research has indicated particularly low levels of educational mobility in Germany and the
United States compared to other Western societies (Bradbury et al. 2015; Pfeffer 2008, 2015;
Shavit and Blossfeld 1993). Our analysis not only offers a new test of this hypothesis, it also
tests—for the first time—whether the association between family socioeconomic background
and children’s educational performance varies across the performance distribution in different
ways in countries with different education and welfare regimes.

Background and Theoretical Considerations
The Importance of Family Background for Low, Middle, and High Academic Performance
Although previous research on the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage has
neglected that the relationship between parental and children’s education may vary for children
with different levels of academic performance, studies from economics have found
intergenerational income mobility to vary across the distribution of offspring’s income (Eide
and Showalter 1999; Grawe 2004; Raitano, Vittori, and Vona 2016; Schnitzlein 2016). Similar
nonlinearities may exist in educational mobility.
Theories explaining why family socioeconomic background affects children’s
educational outcomes lead us to expect that the importance of family background is different
for children whose performance is low, average, or high. The first theoretical approach we
consider argues that the intergenerational transmission of education is strongly motivated by
parents’ attempts to avoid children’s downward social mobility (Bernardi and Cebolla-Boado
2014; Boudon 1973; Breen and Goldthorpe 1997; Jackson 2013). This literature usually refers
to educational decision-making, but in line with Bernardi (2014) and Bernardi and Grätz

5

(2015), we argue that if parents aim to avoid downward social mobility, they may also do so
by influencing their children’s academic performance. If families are mainly motivated by
avoiding downward social mobility, we would expect a stronger association between family
background and academic performance at the bottom or middle than at the top of the
performance distribution. We assume this to be the case because children who perform well in
school are less at risk of experiencing downward social mobility. Children whose performance
is low or average are particularly at risk of failing to achieve the same level of education,
occupation, or earnings as their parents. Accordingly, socioeconomically advantaged parents
may focus on improving the educational performance of these children.
Contrary to that, the cumulative advantage model (DiPrete and Eirich 2006) leads us to
expect a stronger association between family background and academic performance at the top
than at the middle or bottom of the performance distribution. This may be the case if parents
invest equally in their children. This assumption is usually made in research on
intergenerational mobility (Conley 2008a). Within families, high-performing children may
benefit most from the same amount of parental support (Becker and Tomes 1986). Greater
benefits from parental investments for children whose academic performance is high lead to an
increase in the association between family background and children’s academic achievement
across the performance distribution. Differences between families in parental resources
strengthen this pattern. High-ability children in families with many resources benefit more from
parental investments than their counterparts with fewer resources.
In addition, parents may also reinforce differences between siblings if they want to ensure
the success of the child whose academic potential is the greatest (Becker and Tomes 1976).
This strategy will be more effective for parents from socioeconomically advantaged families
who have more resources available to influence child development (Conley 2008a). If parents
reinforce differences between siblings, we expect a process of cumulative advantage to occur

6

(DiPrete and Eirich 2006). This theory thus predicts a stronger association between family
background and academic achievement at the top than at the bottom of the performance
distribution.
However, parents may also allocate resources between siblings in an endeavor to equalize
their educational outcomes (Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman 1982; Conley 2008a; Griliches
1979). Parents may compensate for siblings’ different abilities by investing more in lowperforming children. This process may also be socioeconomically stratified. Conley (2008a)
has developed a theoretical model predicting that socioeconomically advantaged families
compensated for ability differences between siblings whereas their socioeconomically
disadvantaged counterparts reinforced these differences. According to this theory, we should
observe a stronger association between family background and low academic performance than
between family background and high academic performance.
Empirical evidence about parental responses to differences in siblings’ or twins’ birth
endowments or early abilities is ambiguous. Studies comparing parents’ responses to
differences in siblings’ birth weights (used as a measure of birth endowments) have found
compensatory responses in families with high levels of parental education, but reinforcing
responses in families with less educated parents in the United States (Hsin 2012; Restrepo
2016). These findings are in line with the notion of a more pronounced association between
family socioeconomic background and children’s educational performance at the bottom of the
performance distribution. However, in their analysis of differences in early abilities between
twins in the United States, Grätz and Torche (2016) have found that socioeconomically
advantaged families reinforced differences in early abilities whereas their socioeconomically
disadvantaged counterparts did not respond to differences in early abilities among their twins.
If parents responsed to ability differences in this way, we would expect the association between

7

family background and educational performance to be more pronounced at the top than at the
bottom or middle of the performance distribution.
Because of these diverging theoretical expectations and previous empirical findings, it is
unclear where the association between family background and children’s education will be
strongest in the performance distribution. Processes at play between and within families may
influence our results. Our analysis does not aim to disentangle the contributions of these
processes, as we are only interested in obtaining a descriptive picture of the variation in the
association between family background and children’s performance across the performance
distribution. When interpreting the results, however, we must bear in mind that the variation
observed reflects processes between and within families.1

Variation across Different Indicators of Family Socioeconomic Background
Research on the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage has used numerous
indicators to measure family socioeconomic background, including parental education,
occupation, earnings, and wealth. Lazarsfeld (1939) has argued that different measures of
family background could be used interchangeably. Theoretical justification for this approach
may be found in the notion that different indicators of family background measure the same
underlying, unobserved concept (Conley 2008b).
Several authors have questioned the accuracy of this simple model due to both theoretical
and empirical reasons. Theoretically, researchers have argued that different indicators of family
socioeconomic background capture different mechanisms underlying the intergenerational
transmission of educational or socioeconomic advantage (Blau and Duncan 1967; Bukodi and
Goldthorpe 2013; Mood 2017). Empirically, these studies showed net associations between
various indicators of family background and children’s outcomes while conditioning on the
other indicators.

8

On the one hand, operationalizing family background in several ways using measures of
parental education, occupation, earnings, and wealth can simply be understood as a check for
the robustness of our results to different measures of social origin. On the other hand, there are
also theoretical reasons to expect differences in the variation in the association between family
background and educational performance across the performance distribution in terms of
different indicators of family socioeconomic background. We can speculate that the
associations between parental earnings and, in particular, between parental wealth and
children’s educational performance may be different from the associations between the other
indicators of family background and child education; this is because earnings and wealth are
more unequally distributed within societies than education and occupation (Hällsten and
Pfeffer 2017; Wiborg 2017). For this reason, we may expect stronger variations in the
associations between parental earnings/ wealth and children’s educational performance than
between parental education/ occupation and children’s educational performance.
In our empirical analysis, we are interested in the gross associations between each
indicator of social origin and children’s educational performance. We are not interested in
conditioning on the other dimensions of family background when estimating the association
between one indicator of family background and children’s education as this has often been
done in previous research (Blau and Duncan 1967; Bukodi and Goldthorpe 2013; Mood 2017).
Comparing the gross associations between different indicators of family background will allow
us to compare the variations in the associations between these indicators and children’s
educational performance in a purely descriptive way.2

9

Cross-National Variation in the Association between Family Socioeconomic Background and
Children’s Education
While there is general agreement that family background is a strong predictor of children’s
educational outcomes in all developed countries, it is unclear to what degree the
intergenerational transmission of educational advantage varies across countries. Some
literature assumes that there are cross-country differences in educational mobility (Pfeffer
2008, 2015; van de Werfhorst and Mijs 2010). However, some authors have argued that there
is little or no substantive variation in intergenerational mobility across countries and that any
variations identified could largely be due to random influences and errors in measurement
(Clark 2014; Erikson and Goldthorpe 1992). These authors have claimed that there is little
variation in social mobility across advanced, industrialized societies.
Much research has investigated cross-national variation between different measures of
social origin and children’s education. Pfeffer (2008, 2015) used data on 20 countries from the
International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS) to analyze the associations between parental
education and adult literacy, as well as final educational attainment. He used the unidiff
parameter of log-linear models to compare cross-national variation. Using data from the
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) and the Programme for International
Student Assessment (PISA), Chmielewski and Reardon (2016) have found variation in the
association between family income and academic performance across 20 countries. In most of
the countries in their study, however, the variation within countries was greater over time than
between them. Bradbury et al. (2015) have argued that there is a stronger association between
parental resources and children’s cognitive skills in the United States than in Australia, Canada,
and the United Kingdom.
Our study is the first to analyze whether the pattern of variation in the association between
different indicators of family background and educational performance varies across countries.

10

This adds depth to the cross-national comparisons of mean (or conditional mean) differences
in educational performance according to family background that previous research has
reported.
We expect the same family strategies exist in Germany, Norway, and the United States.
However, the specific institutional features of the education and welfare regimes of each
country may shape the degree to which these family strategies influence children’s educational
performance. On the one hand, the more egalitarian features of the Norwegian education
system (e.g., no tracking at an early age and a higher proportion of the population attending
institutions of higher education) may lead to less influence of social origin at the top of the
performance distribution. On the other hand, less variation in the effects of social origin across
the performance distribution could also stem from earlier between-school tracking in Germany
than in the two other countries. Because early tracking may be influenced less by students’
educational performance and more by parental preferences (i.e., family background), there may
be less variation in the association between family background and academic performance
across the performance distribution in Germany than in the two other countries.

Data and Methods
Data and Sample Selection
Data for Germany, Norway, and the United States are used. The sources of data employed are
often used to study the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage in these
countries. The data for Germany come from the German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP)
(Wagner, Frick, and Schupp 2007), a nationally representative household panel study; we use
version 32.1 (DOI: 10.5684/soep.v32.1). This version includes information from all previous
waves. For the United States, we use all the current waves available (1997, 2002, 2007, and
2014) from the Child Development Supplement (CDS) module of the Panel Study of Income

11

Dynamics (PSID). The Norwegian data are derived from administrative registers containing
complete individual-level records for the whole population. We harmonize the data and
measures across these countries to make the data comparable.
The Norwegian data include 473,209 respondents born 1985–1995. We observe their
school grades for 2002–2011. The sample from the German data includes 2,571 respondents
born 1987–1998 and observed 2004–2005 who had a valid cognitive skills score. The data from
the United States include 3,569 respondents born 1984–2004 and observed 1997–2012 aged
10–18. Some children in the PSID data were observed in multiple waves; the most recent
observation for each child is used.

Measures
Academic performance. In the Norwegian data, the dependent variable is the average school
grade in secondary school at age 16. In Germany, academic performance is measured by a
cognitive skills test conducted as part of the survey when respondents were age 17. These
measures are comparable. Previous research has shown that school grades and achievement
tests are highly correlated within countries and thus likely to capture the same underlying
concept (Borghans et al. 2016).3 Because of tracking in the German education system, using a
cognitive skills measure is the only means available to rank all respondents in Germany on a
common metric. In the United States, academic performance is measured through the
Woodcock-Johnson rescaled (WJR) test when respondents were aged 10–17. This test of
cognitive skills consists of three dimensions: letter-word recognition (LW), passage
comprehension (PC), and applied problem-solving skills (AP). The Cronbach’s alpha between
these dimensions is 0.86. We age-standardize the scores and compute average scores across all
three dimensions. In all three countries, we standardize the measures of academic performance
to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.

12

Family socioeconomic background. This is measured in four ways. First, we use parental
education, measured as the highest level of education attained by either parent, as a measure of
social origin. A continuous version of this variable is used, years of education. This measure
corresponds to the years needed to complete the highest degree a respondent’s parent holds.
We standardize this measure to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Second, a measure of parental occupation is used, measured in each country by
constructing a continuous measure of occupational status. The International Socio-Economic
Index of occupational status (ISEI) is used for this. In Germany, the measure refers to parental
occupation when parents’ children were around 15 years old. In Norway, it was measured as
the parents’ most frequent occupation in the period 2003–2008, and in the United States from
2002–2007. Again, we take the highest value of either parent. We standardize the measure that
results to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Third, in Norway and the United States we use measures of parental earnings. We do not
have this information available for our German data. Hence, we report results for the
association between parental earnings and academic performance only for Norway and the
United States. In Norway, we use the sum of mother’s and fathers’ average earnings during the
time when their children were 10 to 16 years old. In the United States, we use information on
the total family earnings, based on the parents’ wages and self-employed earnings, measured
in and averaged across 1997 to 2006. To account for the skewed distribution of earnings, we
estimate the relative placement of individuals in the earnings distribution by dividing the
distribution into 100 percentiles. In line with the other measures of family background, we
standardize parental earnings to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Fourth, parental wealth is used as a measure of social origin based on parental net value,
calculated as gross wealth minus debt. In Germany, parental wealth was measured for both
parents in 2002, 2007, and 2012. We use the sum of the father’s and mother’s wealth in each

13

survey wave. In the United States, we use the average family net wealth for 1999–2007. In
Norway, we use the sum of the mother’s and father’s average net wealth when their children
were aged 10–16. Similar to earnings, parental wealth is a highly skewed continuous variable;
in addition, net worth also consists of many negative values and zeros. We therefore apply a
percentile rank and standardize the resulting measure to have a mean of 0 and a standard
deviation of 1.
Control variables. The analysis provides descriptive estimates of the gross associations
between our four indicators of family background and academic performance. We therefore
estimated quantile regression models without including any control variables. We also tested
the robustness of our results by including gender as a control variable. The results from these
models, reported in Figure S1 and Table S3 in the Online Supplement, are fully in line with the
results of the models that do not control for gender. We also report separate results for male
and female respondents below.
Descriptive statistics of the variables included in the analysis are reported in Table 1.

[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]

Analytical Strategy
Our study tests whether the association between family background and children’s academic
performance varies across the performance distribution. OLS regression models assess this
association only at the mean. To assess different parts of the distribution, we apply conditional
quantile regression models (Hao and Naiman 2007; Koenker and Basset Jr. 1978). These
models allow us to assess the association at specific quantiles of academic performance.
We use conditional quantile regression models in our main analyses. Some authors have
criticized their use when including more than one independent variable, arguing that

14

unconditional quantile regression models should be used in analyses that include several
independent variables (Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux 2009; Killewald and Bearak 2014). In our
main analyses, however, we estimate models that include only one independent variable and
conditional quantile regression models are the preferred option for these. In a robustness check,
we estimated conditional quantile regression models that control for gender (see Figure S1 and
Table S3 in the Online Supplement). These models led to virtually the same results as the
conditional quantile regression models with no gender control. The Online Supplement also
reports comparisons between the conditional and unconditional quantile regression models.4
These additional analyses confirm that conditional quantile regression models are appropriate
for our analyses.

Results
Figure 1 reports the main findings of our analysis. It is divided into four panels, showing the
variation in the association between our four indicators of family background and children’s
educational performance across ten quantiles in each country. The point estimates and standard
errors of the quantile regression models on which this figure is based are reported in Table S1
in the Online Supplement.

[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

The first panel of Figure 1 shows the association between parental education and
children’s educational performance (Panel A). Overall, this association follows an almost linear
decline across the ten quantiles of the performance distribution. In all three countries, the
association between parental education and children’s educational performance is strongest at
the bottom and weakest at the top of the performance distribution. In the United States, the

15

decline is steeper than in Germany and Norway. For most parts of these distributions, however,
the patterns are virtually identical in Germany, Norway, and the United States. In all three
countries, the differences between the associations in the lowest and highest quantiles are
substantial. At the 10th quantile, each standard deviation increase in parental education is
associated with a between 0.42 (Norway) and 0.52 (United States) standard deviation increase
in academic performance. At the 90th quantile, each standard deviation increase in parental
education is associated with a between 0.26 (Norway) and 0.33 (United States) standard
deviation increase in academic performance. The association between parental education and
academic performance is about one-third weaker at the top than at the bottom of the
performance distribution in all three countries.
Panel B reports the variation in the association between parental occupation and
academic performance across the performance distribution. The findings are nearly identical
to those observed for parental education. In all countries, there is a continuous decline in the
association between parental occupation and academic performance across the performance
distribution. Again, this decline is most pronounced in the United States. In the United States,
a one standard deviation increase in parental occupation is associated with a 0.46 increase in
academic performance at the 10th quantile, but only with a 0.24 standard deviation increase at
the 90th quantile, i.e. the association between parental occupation and academic performance
is reduced by nearly one-half across the performance distribution. A slightly less pronounced
but largely similar pattern is observable in Germany and Norway.
With respect to parental earnings as a measure of family background (Panel C), we find
a continuous decline in the association between them and academic performance across the
performance distribution in both Norway and the United States. Due to data limitations, we do
not have an indicator of parental earnings in Germany. The gap between Norway and the United
States in the strength of the association between family background and academic performance

16

is larger for earnings than for education, occupation, or wealth. The pattern of variation in the
association between parental earnings and children’s academic performance is, however, very
similar across both countries. In Norway, a one standard deviation increase in parental earnings
is associated with a 0.39 standard deviation increase in academic performance at the 10th
quantile, but with only a 0.19 standard deviation increase at the 90th quantile. In the United
States, the association between parental earnings and educational performance decreases from
0.60 at the 10th to 0.34 at the 90th quantile. In both countries, the association between parental
earnings and educational performance is nearly twice as large at the bottom than at the top of
the performance distribution.
Finally, with respect to parental wealth (Panel D), there is a continuous decline in all
three countries in the association between parental wealth and educational performance across
the performance distribution. In line with the results for parental earnings, there is a larger gap
in the bottom quantile between the United States and the other countries. At the 10th quantile,
a one standard deviation increase in parental wealth is associated with a 0.54 standard deviation
increase in academic performance in the United States, but with a 0.33 standard deviation
increase in Norway and a 0.34 standard deviation increase in Germany. At the top of the
performance distribution, however, the association between parental wealth and educational
performance is of a similar strength in all countries. At the 90th quantile, the association
between parental wealth and academic performance is 0.16 in Norway, 0.21 in Germany, and
0.28 in the United States. Nevertheless, the overall pattern of a decline in the association
between parental wealth and academic performance by around one-half across the performance
distribution occurs in all three countries.
In addition to cross-national differences, we also analyze gender differences in the
variation between family background and academic performance across the performance
distribution. Such differences can emerge if the influence of family background on children’s

17

education varies by gender (Entwisle, Alexander, and Olson 2007). Since such interactions
could exist in our case, we examine whether the associations between family background and
children’s educational performance vary differently for male and female children whose
performance is low, middle, or high. Figure 2 reports conditional quantile regression models
predicting academic performance separately for male and female respondents. The point
estimates and standard errors of these models are reported in Table S2 in the Online
Supplement.

[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]

The findings show that for both male and female children, the association between family
background and academic performance varies in a similar way across the performance
distribution. Independent of gender, the association between family socioeconomic
background and educational performance decreases in all three countries across the
performance distribution. Nevertheless, the size of the association between family background
and academic performance is not the same for male and female children for each quantile.
In the Norwegian case, we can also find evidence of small differences in the degree to
which the association between family background and academic performance varies across the
distribution for male and female children. For instance, the association between parental
education and academic performance for males is 0.44 at the 10th and 0.24 at the 90th quantile.
For females, the difference is 0.41 at the 10th and 0.30 at the 90th quantile. Accordingly, there
may be less variation in the association between family background and educational
performance across the performance distribution for girls than for boys.
Because of the smaller sample sizes, there is more uncertainty involved in comparing
male and female respondents in Germany and the United States. These countries, however,

18

show the same pattern of gender difference as Norway. Despite these gender differences, the
overall pattern of a decrease in the association between family background and academic
performance across the performance distribution applies to both male and female respondents.

Discussion and Conclusion
In this study, we have tested whether the association between family background and academic
performance varied across the performance distribution. Theories from social mobility research
and theories about resource allocation within families predicted variation in this association
across the performance distribution. Using high-quality data from three countries with different
welfare and education regimes (Germany, Norway, and the United States), the empirical
analysis revealed that the association between family background and academic performance
was weakest at the top and strongest at the bottom of the performance distribution, no matter
which measure of family background was used. These findings were observed for male and
female children.
The weaker association between family background and academic performance for highperforming children is not in line with expectations that such children profit most from parental
resources in a process of cumulative advantage (DiPrete and Eirich 2006). Instead, our results
are in line with predictions derived from theories arguing that families aim to avoid downward
social mobility (Bernardi and Cebolla-Boado 2014; Boudon 1973; Breen and Goldthorpe 1997;
Jackson 2013). These results are also consistent with theories suggesting that resources are
distributed within families to equalize outcomes between siblings (Behrman et al. 1982; Conley
2008a; Griliches 1979). We cannot distinguish between these two mechanisms in this study as
samples of siblings in Germany and the United States are too small to apply quantile regression
models with family fixed effects. Further research is needed to test the extent to which these

19

different mechanisms underlie the variation in the association between family background and
academic performance for children whose performance is low, average, or high.
The finding of a weaker association between family background and academic
performance at the top of the performance distribution adds a new insight to theories of social
mobility. If families behave to avoid downward social mobility (within and/ or between
families), they do not only influence educational decision-making (sometimes referred to as
“secondary effects”) (Boudon 1973; Jackson 2013); it also seems that parents influence
children’s academic performance (“primary effects” [Boudon 1973; Jackson 2013]). This
behavior has crucial implications for research on social mobility, particularly because it leads
low educational performance to be less consequential for children from socioeconomically
advantaged families than for children from socioeconomically disadvantaged families
(Bernardi 2014; Bernardi and Grätz 2015).
A further contribution of our study was to analyze cross-national differences in
intergenerational educational mobility. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first study to
compare variation in the association between family background and children’s low, average,
or high academic performance across countries. Even though we have focused on three
countries with different welfare (Esping-Andersen 1990) and education regimes (Allmendinger
1989; Busemeyer and Nikolai 2010; van de Werfhorst and Mijs 2010) and different levels of
educational inequality (Pfeffer 2008, 2015; Shavit and Blossfeld 1993), we did not find
substantial cross-national differences. Not only the strength of the association between family
background and academic performance, but also its variation across the performance
distribution, are very similar in Germany, Norway, and the United States. These findings
support the notion of limited variation in the way family background affects educational
outcomes across advanced, industrialized countries. Of course, evidence based on only three

20

countries will always be limited; it would therefore be desirable to see our approach applied to
a larger set of countries representing different types of welfare and education regimes.
In addition, we assessed whether the associations between social origin and children’s
educational performance varied across different indicators of family background. We found
virtually identical results for the various indicators of family background, both in effect sizes
and in the variation across the performance distribution. Our results therefore support the view
that, at least with respect to the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage,
different indicators of family background capture the same underlying concept (Conley 2008b).
Despite the limitations of our analysis, our study demonstrates that there is indeed
variation in the strength of the association between family socioeconomic background and
children’s educational performance across the performance distribution. Future research on
educational mobility should account for these nonlinearities: As we have shown, focusing on
the associations between family background and children’s educational performance at the
mean can misrepresent the true underlying relationships. The pattern of variation in the
associations between family background and academic performance seems to be similar across
advanced, industrialized countries. These findings put at center stage the question of which
mechanisms underlie this variation. Our results suggest that these mechanisms transcend
national contexts and are likely to be located at the family level. Socioeconomically advantaged
families primarily influence the performance of their low-performing children. Therefore,
policies focusing on low-performing children may be particularly effective in reducing
inequality of educational opportunity.

21

Notes
1. Variation in the association between family background and academic performance across
the performance distribution may also be caused by school resources having different effects
for children whose performance is low, average, or high. School resources are likely to be
correlated with family background. The aim of our study is not to distinguish between these
explanations, but to draw attention to the so-far largely neglected variation in the association
between family background and academic performance across the performance distribution.
In our view, however, parents choose their children’s schools by changing their place of
residence, by deciding which schools their children attend, or by paying school fees. School
resources are thus probably mediating variables of the parental strategies emphasized in our
theoretical framework.
2. Adding several indicators of family background to the same model requires precise ideas
about the causal relationships between these variables. For instance, it is doubtful whether
it is fruitful to control for parental earnings, wealth, and occupation when estimating the
association between parental and children’s education. Parental earnings, wealth, and
occupation are likely to be mediating variables of parental and children’s education, i.e.
variables lying on the causal pathway connecting parental and children’s education.
Therefore, models which include several indicators of family background introduce
overcontrol bias and do not identify the effects of each indicator of family background on
children’s education (Elwert and Winship 2014). In addition, given the high likelihood that
key confounding variables remain unobserved, any approach that relies on selection of
observed variables is unlikely to identify the causal effects of different indicators of family
background on children’s education even when specifying a correct model that relates the
different indicators of family background to each other. Due to these challenges that any
analysis aiming to identify the causal effects of different indicators of family background

22

on children’s education will have to tackle, our analysis focuses on the descriptive, gross
estimates between parental education, earnings, occupation, and wealth and children’s
education. We thus follow Torche’s (2015) appeal to focus social mobility research on the
description of variation in bivariate mobility estimates across contexts. Although this
approach is descriptive, it is theoretically informative as it sheds light on competing theories
explaining the intergenerational transmission of education, the variation in this transmission
across different indicators of family background, and its variation across countries.
3. We acknowledge that the slight differences in measures of academic performance across
countries is a limitation in our cross-national comparison. However, because we find
virtually no variation across countries in the variation between family background and
academic performance across the performance distribution, these measurement differences
are unlikely to affect our conclusions.
4. We compared conditional and unconditional quantile regressions with only one independent
variable, i.e. no control variables (Figure S2 and Table S4 in the Online Supplement). In
Norway and Germany, these unconditional quantile regression models provided, as we
would expect, the same results as conditional quantile regression models. In the United
States, however, the unconditional quantile regression models differed in some instances
from the conditional ones. As these models should produce identical estimates without
control variables, we have some concerns about the unconditional quantile regression
models and therefore focus on the conditional ones in our analysis.

23

Funding
This work was supported by a Småforsk Grant from the University of Oslo. In addition, Grätz
acknowledges funding from the Forskningsrådet om Hälsa, Arbetsliv och Välfärd (FORTE)
under grant agreements 2012-1741 and 2016-07099.

Acknowledgements
The German data used in this study were made available to us by the German Socio-Economic
Panel Study (SOEP) at the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW), Berlin. Earlier
versions of this study were presented at the University of Oslo, the University of Oxford, the
annual meeting of the Population Association of America in Chicago, the meeting of the
Research Committee 28 on Social Stratification and Mobility in New York, and the conference
of the European Consortium for Sociological Research at Bocconi University in 2017. We
thank participants at these occasions and, in particular, John H. Goldthorpe, Juho Härkönen,
and Arne Mastekaasa for their comments and suggestions.

References
Allmendinger, Jutta. 1989. “Educational Systems and Labor Market Outcomes.” European
Sociological Review 5(3):231–50.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1976. “Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of
Children.” Journal of Political Economy 84(4):S143–62.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.”
Journal of Labor Economics 4(3):S1–39.
Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollak, and Paul Taubman. 1982. “Parental Preferences and
Provision for Progeny.” Journal of Political Economy 90(1):52–73.

24

Bernardi, Fabrizio. 2014. “Compensatory Advantage as a Mechanism of Educational
Inequality: A Regression Discontinuity Based on Month of Birth.” Sociology of
Education 87(2):74–88.
Bernardi, Fabrizio, and Héctor Cebolla-Boado. 2014. “Previous School Results and Social
Background: Compensation and Imperfect Information in Educational Transitions.”
European Sociological Review 30(2):207–17.
Bernardi, Fabrizio, and Michael Grätz. 2015. “Making Up for an Unlucky Month of Birth in
School: Causal Evidence on the Compensatory Advantage of Family Background in
England.” Sociological Science 2:235–51.
Björklund, Anders, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. “Education and Family Background:
Mechanisms and Policies.” Pp. 201–47 in Handbook of the Economics of Education,
Volume 3, edited by E.A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Blau, Peter M., and Otis D. Duncan. 1967. The American Occupational Structure. New York:
The Free Press.
Boudon, Raymond. 1973. L’Inégalité des Chances. Paris: Armand Colin.
Borghans, Lex, Bart H. H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and John E. Humphries. 2016. “What
Grades and Achievement Tests Measure.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 113(47):13345–59.
Bradbury, Bruce, Miles Corak, Jane Waldfogel, and Elizabeth Washbrook. 2015. Too Many
Children Left Behind: The U.S. Achievement Gap in Comparative Perspective. New
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Breen, Richard, and John H. Goldthorpe. 1997. “Explaining Educational Differentials:
Towards a Formal Rational Action Theory.” Rationality and Society 9(3):275–305.

25

Breen, Richard, and Jan O. Jonsson. 2005. “Inequality of Opportunity in Comparative
Perspective: Recent Research on Educational Attainment and Social Mobility.” Annual
Review of Sociology 31:223–43.
Bukodi, Erzsébet, and John H. Goldthorpe. 2013. “Decomposing Social Origins: The Effects
of Parents’ Class, Status and Education on the Educational Attainment of their Children.”
European Sociological Review 29(5):1024–39.
Busemeyer, Marius R., and Rita Nikolai. 2010. “Education.” Pp. 494–508 in The Oxford
Handbook of the Welfare State, edited by F. G. Castles, S. Leibfried, J. Lewis, H.
Obinger, and C. Pierson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chmielewski, Anna K., and Sean Reardon. 2016. “Patterns of Cross-National Variation in the
Association between Income and Academic Achievement.” AERA Open 2(3):1–27.
Clark, Gregory. 2014. The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social Mobility.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Conley, Dalton. 2008a. “Bringing Sibling Differences In: Enlarging Our Understanding of the
Transmission of Advantage in Families.” Pp. 179–200 in Social Class: How Does It
Work?, edited by A. Lareau and D. Conley. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Conley, Dalton. 2008b. “Reading Class Between the Lines (of This Volume): A Reflection on
Why We Should Stick to Folk Concepts of Social Class.” Pp. 366–73 in Social Class:
How Does It Work?, edited by A. Lareau and D. Conley. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
DiPrete, Thomas A., and Greg M. Eirich. 2006. “Cumulative Advantage as a Mechanism for
Inequality: A Review of Theoretical and Empirical Developments.” Annual Review of
Sociology 32:271–97.

26

Eide, Eric R., and Mark H. Showalter. 1999. “Factors Affecting the Transmission of Earnings
across Generations: A Quantile Regression Approach.” Journal of Human Resources
34(2):253–67.
Elwert, Felix, and Christopher Winship. 2014. “Endogenous Selection Bias: The Problem of
Conditioning on a Collider Variable.” Annual Review of Sociology 40:31–53.
Entwisle, Doris R., Karl L. Alexander, and Linda S. Olson. 2007. “Early Schooling: The
Handicap of Being Poor and Male.” Sociology of Education 80(2):114–38.
Erikson, Robert and John H. Goldthorpe. 1992. The Constant Flux: A Study of Class Mobility
in Industrial Societies. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 1990. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 2009. “Unconditional Quantile
Regressions.” Econometrica 77(3):953–73.
Grätz, Michael, and Florencia Torche. 2016. “Compensation or Reinforcement? The
Stratification of Parental Responses to Children’s Ability.” Demography 53(6):1883–
904.
Grawe, Nathan D. 2004. “Reconsidering the Use of Nonlinearities in Intergenerational
Earnings Mobility as a Test for Credit Constraints.” Journal of Human Resources
39(3):813–27.
Griliches, Zvi. 1979. “Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey.”
Journal of Political Economy 87(5):S37–64.
Hällsten, Martin, and Fabian T. Pfeffer. 2017. “Grand Advantage: Family Wealth and
Grandchildren’s Educational Achievement in Sweden.” American Sociological Review
82(2):328–60.

27

Hao, Lingxin, and Daniel Q. Naiman. 2007. Quantile Regression: Quantitative Applications in
the Social Sciences. London: SAGE.
Hsin, Amy. 2012. “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Differential Parental Treatment.”
Demography 49(4):1385–405.
Jackson, Michelle (Ed.). 2013. Determined to Succeed? Performance versus Choice in
Educational Attainment. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Killewald, Alexandra, and Jonathan Bearak. 2014. “Is the Motherhood Penalty Larger for LowWage Women? A Comment on Quantile Regression.” American Sociological Review
79(2):350–7.
Koenker, Roger, and Gilbert Bassett Jr. 1978. “Regression Quantiles.” Econometrica
46(1):33–50.
Lazarsfeld, Paul F. 1939. “Interchangeability of Indices in the Measurement of Economic
Influences.” Journal of Applied Psychology 23(1):33–45.
Mood, Carina. 2017. “More than Money: Social Class, Income, and the Intergenerational
Persistence of Advantage.” Sociological Science 4:263–87.
Pfeffer, Fabian T. 2008. “Persistent Inequality in Educational Attainment and its Institutional
Context.” European Sociological Review 24(5):543–65.
Pfeffer, Fabian T. 2015. “Equality and Quality in Education: A Comparative Study of 19
Countries.” Social Science Research 51:350–68.
Raitano, Michele, Claudia Vittori, and Francesco Vona. 2016. “The Effect of Parental
Background along the Sons’ Earnings Distribution: Does One Pattern Fit for All?”
Applied Economics Letters 23:1073–8.
Restrepo, Brandon J. 2016. “Parental Investment Responses to a Low Birth Weight Outcome:
Who Compensates and Who Reinforces?” Journal of Population Economics 29(4):969–
89.

28

Schnitzlein, Daniel D. 2016. “A New Look at Intergenerational Mobility in Germany compared
to the U.S.” Review of Income and Wealth 62(4):650–667.
Shavit, Yossi, and Hans-Peter Blossfeld. 1993. Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational
Attainment in Thirteen Countries. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Torche, Florencia. 2015. “Intergenerational Mobility and Equality of Opportunity.” European
Journal of Sociology 56(3):343–71.
van de Werfhorst, Herman G., and Jonathan J. B. Mijs 2010. “Achievement Inequality and the
Institutional Structure of Educational Systems: A Comparative Perspective.” Annual
Review of Sociology 36:407–28.
Wagner, Gert G., Joachim R. Frick, and Jürgen Schupp. 2007. “The German Socio-Economic
Panel Study (GSOEP): Scope, Evolution and Enhancements.” Schmollers Jahrbuch
(Journal of Applied Social Science Studies) 127:139–69.
Wiborg, Øyvind N. 2017. “Family Wealth and School Grades in Norway: Exploring How
Immediate and Extended Family Wealth Matter for Children’s School Performance.” Pp.
136–60 in Social Inequality across the Generations: The Role of Compensation and
Multiplication in Resource Accumulation, edited by J. Erola and E. Kilpi-Jakonen.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

29

TABLES
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics.
Germany
Norway
United States
M
SD
N
M
SD
N
M
SD
N
Academic performance
0.00
1.00
2,571
0.00
1.00
473,209
0.00
1.00
3,569
Female
0.49
0.50
2,571
0.49
0.50
473,209
0.50
1.00
3,569
Parental education
0.00
1.00
2,219
0.00
1.00
471,568
0.00
1.00
3,567
Parental occupation
0.00
1.00
2,120
0.00
1.00
438,708
0.00
1.00
2,492
Parental earnings
0.00
1.00
473,152
0.00
1.00
3,568
Parental wealth
0.00
1.00
2,571
0.00
1.00
473,077
0.00
1.00
3,560
Sources: Germany: Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP), v32.1 (DOI: 10.5684/soep.v32.1). Norway: Registers. United States: Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID).

30

FIGURES
Figure 1. Quantile Regression Models Estimating the Associations between Different Indicators of Family Background and Educational Performance in
Germany, Norway, and the United States.

Note: 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors.
Sources: Germany: Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP), v32.1 (DOI: 10.5684/soep.v32.1). Norway: Registers. United States: Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID).

31

Figure 2. Quantile Regression Models Estimating the Associations between Different Indicators of Family Background and Educational Performance in
Germany, Norway, and the United States by Gender.

Note: 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors.
Sources: Germany: Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP), v32.1 (DOI: 10.5684/soep.v32.1). Norway: Registers. United States: Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID).
32

