The Inequality Lab.
Discussion Paper 2019-4

Fabian T. Pfeffer, Paula Fomby & Noura Insolera
The Longitudinal Revolution. Sociological Research at the 50Year Milestone of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.

December 2019
www.theinequalitylab.com

THE LONGITUDINAL REVOLUTION
SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH AT THE
50-YEAR MILESTONE OF THE PANEL STUDY OF INCOME DYNAMICS
Fabian T. Pfeffer*, Paula Fomby, and Noura Insolera

Abstract
The U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2018. Initially
designed to assess the nation’s progress in combatting poverty, PSID’s scope broadened quickly
to a variety of topics and fields of inquiry. To date, sociologists are the second-most frequent users
of PSID data after economists. Here, we describe the ways in which PSID’s history reflects shifts
in social science scholarship and funding priorities over half a century, take stock of the most
important sociological breakthroughs it facilitated, in particular those relying on the longitudinal
structure of the data, and critically assess the unique advantages and limitations of the PSID and
surveys like it for today’s sociological scholarship.
Keywords
Surveys; Longitudinal Data; Intergenerational; Family; Neighborhoods

*

We thank Wendy Dong for excellent research assistance and Samuel Hansen for generous support in the
matching to the Web of Science database. We also thank Charles Brown, Greg J. Duncan, Sandra
Hofferth, Robert F. Schoeni, and Frank P. Stafford for providing valuable historical information in
personal interviews as well as feedback on this manuscript as well as Vicki Freedman, Katherine
McGonagle, David Johnson, Narayan Sastry, and an anonymous ARS reviewer for constructive feedback
on an earlier version of this manuscript. Errors and omissions are our own. The collection of data used in
this study was partly supported by the National Institutes of Health under grant number R01 HD069609
and R01 AG040213, and the National Science Foundation under award numbers SES 1157698 and
1623684. Please direct correspondence to Fabian T. Pfeffer, 426 Thompson Street, 3240 Institute for
Social Research, Ann Arbor, MI 48104.

INTRODUCTION
The US Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is the world’s longest-running active
household panel study, launched in 1968 with a sample of 4,802 US families to study family
income change. The first scientific article based on PSID public-use data was published half a
century ago, in 1970. It was authored by a team of economists and focused on fluctuations in
family income. In 2018 alone, contributions from sociology addressed educational inequality,
multigenerational associations, parenting behavior, child health, obesity, marriage patterns, racial
inequality, neighborhood segregation, career mobility, time use, and financial transfers. This
review describes how and why the country’s longest-running active nationally representative
panel survey expanded its scope and disciplinary reach, how in turn it shaped sociological
scholarship, some of the landmark sociological findings it enabled, and what its future may hold.
We take a data-driven approach, drawing on PSID metadata including a complete
bibliographic database, a topical classification of all variables ever publicly released, Board of
Overseers membership rosters, and other sources. We begin with a brief history of PSID and
some of its major changes across time, focusing on the historical, institutional, organizational,
and social contexts that shaped it. We then present quantitative evidence on the representation of
sociology in PSID and how sociological work has used the study. As the latter also allows us to
identify the most central topical areas addressed by sociologists using PSID, we proceed to
review contributions to some of those areas, namely, intergenerational mobility, family
composition, and geographic contexts. We conclude by highlighting what we consider
challenges to and promises for PSID’s continued relevance in supporting novel sociological
insights.
This article can also be read alongside other transdisciplinary reviews, such as a recent
special issue that focuses on PSID’s contributions over the past half-century to select topical
areas (Johnson et al. 2018) and accounts of the history and current status of the PSID (Hill 1992;
Brown, Duncan, and Stafford 1996; Duncan 2002; Duncan, Hofferth, and Stafford 2004;
McGonagle et al. 2012; McGonagle and Sastry 2015; Freedman and Cornman 2015; McGonagle
and Sastry 2016; Sastry, Fomby, and McGonagle 2018).

1

DESIGN OF A NATIONAL PANEL STUDY: A PRIMER
PSID was designed to interview families longitudinally to understand the degree of persistence
in poverty and the factors that contributed to entry into and exit from poverty. At origin, the
nationally-representative sample included approximately 2,000 working age, low-income
families and 3,000 families drawn from the general population. The study has a genealogical
design. As children raised in PSID families reach adulthood and establish their own households,
they too became PSID respondents. Individuals who are related to an original PSID householder
are referred to as “gened” sample members. This design feature allows the sample to produce,
with occasional immigrant refresher samples, continuous population representation (Fitzgerald,
Gottschalk, and Moffitt 1998) and has also enabled decades of research on intergenerational
transmission. Study design and content have changed over time. In 1997, in order to contain
escalating study costs, roughly one-third of families were removed from the active sample using
a probability subsampling strategy that ensured a higher drop rate for households from the low
income oversample without young children, and the study moved from annual to biennial
interviewing. To maintain population-representativeness, immigrant refresher samples were
added in 1997 and 2017. Questionnaire content in the main PSID interview has moved beyond a
primary focus on income and employment to broaden its scope, with much of the new content
emphasizing adult health and well-being. In 1988 and 2013, PSID included modules on
intergenerational transfers of time and money. Since 1997, supplemental studies have captured
information on child and young adult development and the well-being of older adults.
THE SOCIOLOGY OF A NATIONAL PANEL STUDY
We begin by treating PSID not as a source but as a subject of sociological inquiry. Working from
a life course perspective, we situate changes in the study’s design, content, and use in a variety of
sociologically relevant contexts to interrogate fifty years of primary data collection as a social
field. We consider the historical context that led to the inception and maintenance of PSID, the
institutional context as defined by shifts in federal funding available to the social sciences, the
unique organizational context of PSID’s physical home, and the social context – in particular,
changing gender regimes – that shaped its content.

2

Historical Context
The first PSID interview was completed on March 4, 1968, during a period in US history marked
by rapid social change. Over the next month, student protests took root on college campuses, US
ground troops killed hundreds of Vietnamese civilians in the My Lai massacre, President Lyndon
Johnson announced that he would not seek re-election, and Martin Luther King, Jr. was
assassinated. In comparison to the chaotic national mood depicted in contemporary media and in
historical accounts of the period, the respondent newsletter (PSID 1968) mailed to PSID families
in October described a population that was almost anachronistically staid. Nearly four in 10
workers had been with the same employer for a decade or longer, more than half of families had
savings equal to at least two months’ salary, and two out of three adults spent their leisure time
driving, talking with neighbors, playing cards, or reading.
This portrait of quotidian order belies the more radical impetus to launch the world’s first
household panel study. PSID grew out of the War on Poverty, an expansive program of federal
legislation spearheaded by President Johnson in 1964. At the time, despite an extended period of
national economic growth, nearly one in five families was poor, a status that largely cleaved
along racial lines. In contrast to the Depression-era New Deal program that was designed to
reduce unemployment and benefit the average American household, the War on Poverty targeted
those who were excluded from the country’s broad economic prosperity (Bailey and Duquette
2014). The Economic Opportunity Act, passed in July 1964, provided the institutional catalyst
for PSID. The act was intended to distribute resources to communities to address the root causes
of poverty locally and with the participation of the intended beneficiaries. Importantly, those
resources could be transferred directly to private or nonprofit agencies rather than through state
or local governments. To administer and oversee the distribution of funds, the Office of
Economic Opportunity (OEO) was located independently in the executive branch. This model
effectively insulated the office from federal and state legislatures and other executive
departments. As a result, the office was powerful but vulnerable to political change.
In 1966 and 1967, the OEO charged the US Census Bureau with administering the
Survey of Economic Opportunity, a time series study to explore the causes and correlates of
poverty (US Census Bureau n.d.). The national sample included approximately 30,000 addresses
with an oversample of addresses expected to be occupied by African-American families. The
same dwellings were visited in each year, regardless of whether the occupants had changed. This

3

design was well-suited to describe the share of the population experiencing poverty in each year
but could not discern whether economic circumstances in a family were improving or worsening
because families or individual family members who changed residence were not followed.
Likely in an effort to balance the value of a more rigorous longitudinal research design against
the survey’s potential political sensitivity and the cost and complexity of administering it, the
OEO arrived at two lasting decisions (Morgan and Smith 1969b). The first was to winnow the
sample down to 2,000 families with working-age household heads and family income at or
below 200 percent of the 1966 federal poverty line in order to focus on the population the War
on Poverty programs were designed to help. The second was to outsource data collection to an
external research institution.
From a pool of three applicants, the five-year contract was awarded to the Survey
Research Center (SRC) at the University of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research under the
directorship of economist James N. Morgan (Morgan and Smith 1969b). Morgan, however,
hesitated to take on a sample that included only low-income families because it would not
identify the conditions that put families at risk of poverty. Instead, he argued successfully to pair
the SEO subsample with a nationally-representative sample of 3,000 families from the general
population that would be drawn at SRC. Together, these families provided the foundation for
PSID.2
Institutional Context
At its inception, the purpose of PSID was “to explain the short-run changes in the economic
status of individuals and families” (Morgan and Smith 1969a: p. ii). Over the ensuing halfcentury, the scope and research value of the study have co-evolved with the funding support
provided to sustain it. Compared with other long-running studies in the US and internationally,
PSID has been particularly reliant on a variety of funders who have valued the study for different
purposes over time. In part, this strategy was an unintended consequence of the study’s initial
attachment to the Office of Economic Opportunity. After the first five-year contract ended, OEO
supported one more year of data collection in 1973, with telephone interviews replacing home

2

The selection of cases for the SEO sample and their transfer to University of Michigan were not
straightforward and introduced some error. Brown (1996) describes the probability of SEO sample
inclusion in PSID and evaluates its representativeness.

4

visits under a limited budget. Mention of future data collection in that year’s user guide and
respondent newsletter imply that OEO intended to continue investing in the study.
But by 1974, the Nixon administration had almost entirely shuttered OEO and many
programs and staff were relocated to the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation (ASPE) in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW, now Health and
Human Services). Although briefly orphaned, PSID survived this move, securing an additional
five years of funding under a series of one-year contracts (Duncan et al. 2004). There is nothing
to suggest that this continuity was assured; in fact, other research programs that moved from
OEO to ASPE at the same time faced scrutiny and skepticism (Greenberg 2003). The study had
the good fortune to be championed by “visionary ASPE officials” (Duncan et al. 2004),
highlighting the role of institutional actors in shaping the national data infrastructure.
During the 1970s, HEW initiated the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
to study family income dynamics longitudinally, a development that made PSID redundant
within the agency’s portfolio in terms of its original purpose. At the same time, however, the
study’s longevity and genealogical design were beginning to pay dividends for longitudinal
research on the intergenerational transmission of income and status attainment. The National
Science Foundation (NSF) had already come to see the potential for PSID to become an enduring
component of the national social science data infrastructure (as emphasized in interviews with
former PSID leaders) and in 1980 became the primary sponsor through its extramural grants
program. Still, what eventually became a source of central support for PSID was initially built on
shaky ground; in 1981, President Reagan proposed to cut social science research at NSF by 75
percent. NSF funding was restored by Congress, but support for PSID was substantially cut for
several years and the study’s long-term prospects appeared to be freshly in jeopardy. In that
period, the study’s location in an academic research setting may have saved it. The director of
the Institute for Social Research negotiated three years of supplemental support from the Ford,
Sloan, and Rockefeller Foundations to sustain PSID through the mid-1980s (Duncan et al. 2004).
Also in the mid-1980s, the National Institute on Aging (NIA) first provided funding to
develop a questionnaire module on family wealth that is now as a standard component of the
biennial main interview. Since then, NIA has become a primary sponsor to support questionnaire
content on adult and late life health and a number modules and supplements that provide
opportunities to study health and wellbeing over the life course and across generations. In 1997,

5

the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) joined as the study’s
third primary sponsor to interview families with children under age 13 for the newly established
Child Development Supplement (CDS) and, later, to support new study content on family
formation, fertility, and educational attainment.3 NICHD also continues to sponsor PSID’s
substantial supplemental data collection on children and young adults. Sponsorship continues to
be awarded through competitive extramural grant programs on a five-year cycle, a strategy that
requires PSID to serve as both a foundational component of public social science data
infrastructure and as a site for research innovation in order to meet a variety of research
purposes.
Organizational Context
Until 1972, SRC field interviewers visited PSID respondents in their homes and completed
interviews using pencil-and-paper questionnaires. This seemingly low-tech approach to data
collection was actually built upon two decades of advances in survey research and infrastructure
development. Two innovations were especially relevant. First, during the Second World War,
probability-based survey methodology gained credibility as a reliable, low-cost approach to
identify federal agency spending priorities (House, Juster, and Kahn 2004). Second, the war
period created novel opportunities for collaboration between the federal government and
scientists in universities and private foundations to improve public health management and
increase agricultural and manufacturing productivity. In the post-war period, this collaborative
effort transitioned to a model of federally-funded research performed in university settings,
largely through peer-reviewed extramural research programs established at the NIH in 1946 and
at NSF in 1950. Research centers supported by external grants and contracts provided a low-risk
opportunity to universities to host scientists carrying out innovative research without requiring
long-term budgetary or university tenure commitments. Thus, the extramural research model
provided a three-way win during a period of substantial expansion of public investment in
science: the federal government could continue its support of scientific research more
inexpensively than if it were to directly employ research teams and support staff; scientists could
3

Other agencies and institutes that have supported specific questionnaire content include the Department
of Housing and Urban Development, the Economic Research Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture, the IUPUI Lilly Family School of Philanthropy, the Urban Institute, and the Assistant
Secretary of Planning and Evaluation of the United States Department of Health and Human Services.

6

continue to develop and apply innovations in data collection to new questions with scientific
merit evaluated by peer review rather than by government priorities; and universities could
capitalize on the prestige of scientific accomplishment largely supported by external funds.
PSID was launched near the end of this period of scientific expansion and benefited from
SRC’s established infrastructure, size, and social science culture, including access to the center’s
standing national sampling frame from which the general population sample was drawn.
Furthermore, the availability of skilled professionals and computing resources for the enormous
data processing needs of a study of this size enabled a quick and wide release of public data
(beginning in 1972 and for many years within a year of the end of data collection), which was
crucial in building its user base. Another perhaps unexpected example arose from the study’s
location in the center’s Economic Behavior Program, which included an interdisciplinary team of
economists and psychologists. The first PSID questionnaires included measurement of socialpsychological concepts such as locus of control, future orientation, risk aversion, and
achievement motivation, with the expectation that these personal characteristics would explain
transitions into or out of poverty. That expectation received only marginal short-run support
(Smith and Morgan 1970), and most related items were eventually dropped from the
questionnaire (to be reprised in later topical modules, such as the 2016 Wellbeing and Daily Life
Supplement (Freedman 2017). Over time, as PSID sample management has become increasingly
complex, the study has continued to benefit from and contribute to the physical concentration of
infrastructural and human resources, in particular the expertise in survey methodology and
survey data collection at the Institute for Social Research. In sum, the initial coalescence of
funding support, organizational context, and personnel experience that enabled the eventual codevelopment of and integration between local infrastructure and PSID’s complex requirements
arose in a distinctive historical moment that likely could not be replicated today.
Social Context
The original PSID questionnaire and interview strategy were designed based on the expectation
that most households4 included a primary wage earner, and that in married-couple families, that
4

PSID uses the term “family unit” to describe individuals who live in a common dwelling and share
living expenses. The term “household” refers to a physical dwelling that may be occupied by multiple
family units. For ease of presentation, we use the terms family unit and household interchangeably, but
they are technically distinct in PSID data and documentation.

7

person was male. As a result, men were systematically designated as the head of household
where they were present, and most questionnaire content about economic activity pertained to
the head’s experience. Even at the time, this view of household economic organization was
incomplete: among married women, more than one-third were employed in 1967 (US Bureau of
the Census 1968b, table 321), and over forty percent of married working women in PSID
families were working full-time in 1968 (unweighted). Further, twenty-eight percent of 1968
PSID families were female-headed (unweighted).
The initial choice to designate men as head of household when present was consistent
with practice at the US Census Bureau, which had used the concept of a unitary family or
household head in nearly every decennial census since 1790 (Presser 1998). Even in 1960, wives
remained ineligible to be household heads on US Census forms. That this practice was a national
standard and that PSID had its origins in a study administered by the Census Bureau likely
contributed to adherence to this strategy. But public resistance to this practice increased during
the following decade under the argument that headship implied an authority structure that
families did not universally recognize (Presser 1998). In its place, the 1980 Census and other
federal surveys adopted the more neutral term householder to describe the person or persons in
whose name the household residence was owned or rented and allowed respondents to select
which householder would be listed first if there was more than one.
In contrast, PSID retained the practices that it started with, partly because the study was
not designed initially to collect parallel information on all adults in the household. Because much
of the early questionnaire content pertained only to the household head, the definition of
headship needed to be constant in order to allow meaningful comparison between households. In
order to enable longitudinal analysis within families, only a change in family unit composition
could trigger the identification of a new head. Specifically, if a male head moved out or died, his
wife (or female cohabiting partner since 1983) would become the head of the family unit. Once
an unpartnered woman entered a marriage or long-term cohabiting union with a man, her spouse
or partner would become the family unit head regardless of whether he was a gened PSID sample
member. Thus, unlike for men, a woman’s position in the family unit could (and frequently does)
change over time.
To simplify data management, distribution, and use, these rules remain in place today.
But over time, study leadership has taken steps to neutralize these gendered asymmetries in

8

practice. First, the questionnaire has collected an increasing amount of information about the
spouse or partner of the household head since the 1970s. Starting in 1985 with a new set of
spouse/partner questions, the content collected on both partners in couple-headed households has
become largely parallel and finally, based on minor additional updates in 2017, the survey
instrument today yields identical information on both partners.5 Second, interviewers refer to
family unit members by their first names, rather than by the positions they occupy in the
household, and the printed materials respondents receive have generally avoided the term
“household head” since the mid-1970s. Third, PSID study documentation replaced the phrase
wife/“wife” with the term spouse/partner in 2015 and has used the term reference person in
place of head since 2017. In the same year, the study began collecting parallel information on
spouses or partners in same-sex unions.
Though slowly, PSID has come to better reflect changing social and legal norms around
families and marriage and has largely left behind the initial male-centric focus in its definition of
households and respondents. Over the same period, women have become a growing share of
PSID interview respondents. In 1968, nine percent of respondents in married-couple households
were women; by 2017, this share (in married or cohabiting couples) had increased to 53 percent.
As the sons and daughters of original PSID householders have replaced their parents as active
study participants, it is increasingly the case that only one householder in any couple-headed
household carries the PSID “gene.” That person, rather than their spouse or partner, completes
the main PSID interview over 90 percent of the time and, in about half of cases, that person is
female. Thus, in practice, PSID has shifted from interviewing a unitary (male) household head to
interviewing householders who have an ancestral connection to the study, and about half of those
respondents are the daughters or granddaughters of original PSID participants.
REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE AND TOPICS
Having traced the contexts that helped shape PSID’s development, we now describe PSID’s
changing structure and content from a quantitative perspective, focusing on its most proximate
patrons, i.e., those involved in collecting the data and those using them, as well as on its content,
5

The exception is information on relationship to the family unit reference person. The questionnaire does
not collect parallel information on all family unit members’ relationship to the reference person’s spouse
or partner. However, those relationships are identified during data processing and the information is
available in the standalone family unit matrix.

9

i.e., the information collected and the information analyzed. We consider several dimensions of
inputs – namely, the characteristics of PSID leadership, the PSID Board of Overseers, and the
PSID data and outputs – namely, variables and publications – to describe the representation of
people and topics in PSID. Details on our data sources and data construction are detailed in the
Online Supplement, Table S.1.
Disciplinary Representation in PSID Leadership
James Morgan, the first director of PSID, was an economist with a strong interdisciplinary
orientation, a profile that has continued to be represented in the diversity of PSID leadership. The
director team has continuously included at least one labor economist, likely both a cause and a
result of the enduring content emphasis on income and employment as well as of the disciplinary
composition of the majority of the public user base. This continuity has been further
institutionalized by the organization of extramural funding to PSID through the Economics and
cross-directorate programs at the National Science Foundation.
Over time, the study director team, Board of Overseers, and content collaborators have
added disciplinary diversity to PSID’s leadership. Represented fields include developmental
psychology, demography, epidemiology, social psychology, sociology, and survey methodology.
This multidisciplinary orientation has contributed to the inclusion of supplemental studies
focused on children, young adults, and older adults; survey content on dyadic relationships
between parents and adult children; and innovations in fieldwork efficiencies and respondent
engagement. Contributions from sociologists have included directorship of the first two waves of
the PSID Child Development Supplement under Sandra Hofferth and collaborative input to the
design and content of the 2013 Rosters and Transfers module from Suzanne Bianchi and Judith
Seltzer.
The composition of the PSID Board of Overseers has also been marked by substantial
disciplinary diversity. Averaged across the span of its existence, the Board has been composed of
about a dozen members at any one time, with just less than half hailing from economics, about a
third from sociology, and the remainder from other disciplines. Remarkably, this disciplinary
diversity and in particular the representation of sociologists among Board members is not a
recent phenomenon. In fact, in each decade, there were periods when sociologists and
economists were approximately equally represented on the Board (see Online Supplement Figure

10

S.1). During the most recent years, sociologists were in fact in the majority. Two sociologists
have also served as Board chairs, Nancy Tuma (1990-1993) and Suzanne Bianchi (2006-2008).
In contrast to the early and stable representation of sociologists on the PSID Board, the
community of PSID users in sociology has grown steadily and is now represented by more than
600 PSID-based publications (a conservative estimate; see also Online Supplement Figure S.2
and the description of our data collection in Table S.1). Among those are 64 articles published in
the American Sociological Review or the American Journal of Sociology and 113 dissertations
defended in Sociology departments. The first dissertation in Sociology that used PSID data was
Erik O. Wright’s 1976 doctoral thesis on “Class Structure and Income Inequality.”
Topical Representation
From the first survey wave in 1968, the PSID released a total 467 variables to its users. The 2017
wave, in comparison, contained 5,784 separate public-use variables. Here, we draw on a tool
maintained by PSID staff, the cross-year index, that allocates each of these variables to a specific
topical area. Counts of released variables are an indirect and incomplete indicator of topical
representation as they are also influenced by specifics of the survey instrument (for instance,
through ‘dependent interviewing’ a large number of variables may be recorded for just a small
number of individuals). We account for and discuss some of these specifics below to provide a
more valid analysis of topical trends (Online Supplement Figure S.2 also reports interview
minutes by topical area for a more recent period as a validation check).6 Figure 1 displays the
number of PSID variables in the four largest topical areas (each made up at least 15% of released
variables in at least one wave): work (employment status, occupational information, working
hours, and more), income (from labor, business, assets, transfers, and others), health (health
status, health history, health insurance, and health care utilization), and consumption (housing
expenditures, food expenditures, child care expenditures, and others). As Figure 1 illustrates, the

6

In principle, we consider interview minutes the preferable indicator of where a survey puts its focus,
although it has its own limitations, in particular when interview modes change over time as they have for
PSID. For this and other reasons, the available minute counts for topical areas reported in Online
Supplement Figure S.2 only go back to 2003 and will be used as a validation check for our discussion of
the variable counts. Another minor measurement limitation in our variable count estimates is a small
number of duplicate variables that are released at both the individual and family level (though we do not
believe that this duplication meaningfully impacts the comparisons for the four main areas selected here)
and the exclusion of some restricted-use data (such as those containing geographic identifiers).

11

Figure 1: PSID variables by topical area

1,750
Work
1,500

1,250

1,000
Income
750
Health
500
Consumption

0

1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

250

Note: Lines represent the number of variables released for each PSID wave by topic. Only topical areas that
represent at least 15% or more of the variables released in any wave are included (Table 1 provides a full list of
topical areas). We condense age-specific childhood health variables collected since 2007 into single variables (one
variable for each health condition).

number of variables in all of these four topical areas increased substantially across decades:
Variables capturing work and income increased most from 1980 to the early 2000s, with a large
set of variables added in the early 1990s (partly due to a switch to Computer-Assisted Telephone
Interviewing (CATI) which allowed for monthly reporting of work and income) and in the late
1990s (when PSID switched to biennial interviewing and, as a consequence, began collecting
work and income information on the years in-between survey waves). The number of variables
on work declined in 2003 with the collection of employment history was streamlined but
increased again as mentions of additional jobs expanded. The number of income variables
decreased in 2009 as PSID aggregated several questions about between-wave income (‘T-2

12

income’). Health variables also expanded over time, first in 1999 and then again substantially in
2007 when a health history section was added. Figure 1 displays an adjusted variable count for
health that deflates the large number of variables added due to age-specific reports of childhood
health conditions (one variable for each age and condition) by condensing conditions into a
single childhood variable. (The increase in health content is also reflected in the average
interview minutes spent in the health section of the survey, which increased by about 5 minutes
in 2007; see Online Supplement Figure S.3.) Finally, consumption variables were significantly
expanded in 1999.
Turning to the scientific contributions PSID has enabled, we draw on the collection of
PSID-based contributions published in sociological outlets (see Online Supplement Table S.1 for
a detailed definition and discussion). This allows us to describe the representation of topical
areas in sociological scholarship and how sociology differs from other disciplines in its use of
PSID. Table 1 lists the share of sociology publications and non-sociology publications that fall
within each topical field and reveals the ten most commonly studied topics in the PSID-based
sociological literature – labor market outcomes, family formation and composition, racial-ethnic
differences, aging, intergenerational influences and transfers, educational attainment and
achievement, income, neighborhoods and geographic mobility, poverty, and gender differences.
To show how sociological use of PSID differs from other disciplines, we compare the share of
each topical area covered in PSID-based sociology journals to the share of each topical area
covered in PSID-based non-sociology journals, with the ratio reported in the right-most column
of Table 1. It shows, for instance, that the attention paid to the topic of racial and ethnic
differences compared to all other topics is much higher (2.6 times as high) in sociological PSID
publications than non-sociological PSID publications. Other topical areas that are frequently and
disproportionately addressed by sociologists (highlighted in grey) are intergenerational
influences and transfers, family formation and composition, and neighborhoods and geographic
mobility. We review these four areas in more detail below and describe the sociological insights
in each area that PSID has been able to support. We note that PSID has also contributed to new
sociological knowledge in many other topical areas that we lack space to explore here. Topics
that are more often addressed using PSID data in sociology outlets compared to non-sociology
outlets also include but are not limited to poverty, educational attainment and achievement, and
gender differences.

13

Table 1: PSID-based publications by topical area
Sociology

Non-Sociology

Soc./Non-Soc.

Labor Market & Outcomes
Family Formation & Composition
Racial-Ethnic Differences
Aging
Intergenerational Influences & Transfers
Education Attainment & Achievement
Income
Neighborhoods & Geographic Mobility
Poverty
Gender Differences

10.5%
8.9%
8.3%
6.9%
6.3%
6.2%
5.5%
4.8%
4.7%
4.4%

13.4%
5.3%
3.2%
7.4%
3.8%
4.9%
6.6%
2.8%
3.3%
3.8%

0.8
1.7
2.6
0.9
1.7
1.3
0.8
1.7
1.4
1.2

Other Topics

33.4%

45.7%

0.7

100.0%

100.0%

Total (Publication * Topics)

Note: Percentages express the share of sociological/other publications assigned to a given topical area, with each
publication typically assigned to multiple areas. The right-most column compares the share of publications in a
given topical area between those publications designated to sociology versus those designated to a different field
with a ratio above 1 (also highlighted in grey) indicating that sociology publications are more likely to address a
given topic. Categories included under “other topics” (in descending order of prevalence in sociology): Wealth,
Children, Health, Child Development Supplement, Life Course, Time Use & Home Production, Wellbeing,
Government Transfers, Housing, Statistical & Econometric Models, International Studies, Expenditures, Transition
to Adulthood Supplement, Food & Nutrition, Retirement, Taxes, Philanthropy, Disability & Use of Time.

Finally, we provide a different perspective on the use of PSID in sociology and the
unique contributions of PSID-based research to the sociological literature based on an analysis of
the 50 most-cited publications in each of the field’s two flagship journals, American Sociological
Review and American Journal of Sociology in two historical periods (1970-2007 and 2008-2018;
for details see Online Supplement Table S.1). Strikingly, the PSID-based publications that are
among the “top 200” of the discipline all fall into the topical area of intergenerational effects
(Duncan et al. 1998; Torche 2011) and, within that, the intergenerational effects of neighborhood
conditions (Brooks-Gunn et al. 1993; Sharkey 2008; Sharkey and Elwert 2011; Wodtke,
Harding, and Elwert 2011). That is, two of the topics identified as the subject of sociological
inquiry more often compared to other disciplines – intergenerational influences and
14

neighborhood effects– are also highly influential, as they have become some of the most widely
cited contributions in the top journals of the discipline.
SOCIOLOGICAL LANDMARK FINDINGS BASED ON THE PSID
Intergenerational Processes
Intergenerational mobility. Sociologists rightfully claim a productive and long-standing line of
research on intergenerational social mobility and intergenerational influences that precedes other
fields, including economics (Torche 2015; Mazumder 2018). However, after a replication of the
classical status attainment model (Blau and Duncan 1967) by Corcoran (1980), PSID-based
contributions were largely absent from the burgeoning literature on social class mobility of the
1980s (Ganzeboom, Treiman, and Ultee 1991). This may be partly due to the initially limited
detail of the released occupational information as costs associated with occupational coding and
data (tape) storage led to the use of 1-digit occupational codes for the first survey waves. Along
with a later switch to 2- and 3-digit occupation coding, an suggestion by a sociologist to add
survey items on occupational characteristics helped open the possibility of a sociological class
analysis based on PSID (Wright 1979: p. 238) and supported later, long-term assessments of
occupation-based class mobility (e.g., Hertel and Pfeffer 2019).
Following seminal contributions in economics (e.g., Solon 1992), sociologists have also
focused on intergenerational correlations in earnings and income and documented their
heterogeneity across population groups. For instance, Torche (2011) found that intergenerational
income and earnings correlations differ by offspring’s educational attainment, with those
attaining a college degree being most mobile. Bloome (2014) documented stark racial
differences in income mobility, with particularly high levels of downward mobility among
African-American compared to white sample members (see also Wilson 2009). Bloome (2015)
also revealed large differences in the levels of and trends in income mobility across U.S. states
and uses this variation to demonstrate that social mobility and social inequality are largely
independent from each other, a finding that contrasts with international comparisons of the
relationship between income inequality and mobility, also partly based on the PSID (Corak
2013).

15

Intergenerational associations and education. Sizeable intergenerational correlations
have also been found for other dimensions of socio-economic wellbeing, such as poverty status
and welfare receipt (Corcoran 1995; Martin 2003), neighborhood poverty (Sharkey 2008), and
family wealth (Pfeffer and Killewald 2018). Beyond estimating intergenerational correlations,
sociologists have also investigated associations between different characteristics of origin
families, such as family structure (Lopoo and DeLeire 2014) or family instability (McLanahan
and Bumpass 1988), and different outcomes of the next generation. By far the most heavily
studied outcome of the next generation is educational attainment. Here, PSID has supported a
more encompassing view of parental resources: Researchers have gone beyond measures of
parental degree completion to consider parents’ college attendance without a degree (Fomby and
Cross 2018) or the prestige of parents’ postsecondary institution (Ford and Thompson 2016), in
both cases finding a weak relationship with their offspring’s probability of obtaining a college
degree. Going beyond the role of parental education and family income in predicting educational
success, researchers have documented the independent role of parental wealth (Conley 2001b;
Williams 2003; Pfeffer 2018), parental home ownership (Conley 2001a; Mohanty and Raut
2009), the quality of parental employment conditions (Yetis-Bayraktar, Budig, and TomaskovicDevey 2013), and neighborhood conditions (Harding 2003; Wodtke et al. 2011; Wodtke, Elwert,
and Harding 2016). Multiple studies have shown that various parental investments facilitate
offspring’s educational success, including investments of money (Hill and Duncan 1987;
DeLeire and Kalil 2005; Benton and Keister 2017), time (Hsin 2009; Milkie, Nomaguchi, and
Denny 2015; Fomby and Musick 2018), and the use of particular parenting practices geared at
imparting social capital (Hofferth, Boisjoly, and Duncan 1998, 1999) or cultural capital (Lareau
and Weininger 2008; Carolan and Wasserman 2015; Weininger, Lareau, and Conley 2015).
Multigenerational Mobility. As the PSID sample has grown beyond two generations of
family members it increasingly supports investigations of multigenerational mobility and
associations (Mare 2011; Pfeffer 2014). Recent contributions have documented threegenerational associations along a variety of dimensions, including social class (Hertel and GrohSamberg 2014), income (Wightman and Danziger 2014), education (Pfeffer 2014; Song and
Mare 2017), wealth (Pfeffer and Killewald 2018), neighborhood characteristics (Sharkey and
Elwert 2011), fertility (Fomby, Krueger, and Wagner 2014), and parenting behaviors (Roksa and
Patter 2011). Other research has expanded measures of family background by considering

16

extended family networks, including aunts and uncles (Prix and Pfeffer 2017; Erola et al. 2018)
and step-parents (Seltzer 2019; Wiemers et al. 2019).
Prospective Approaches. PSID’s panel design also uniquely supports prospective
analyses of the maintenance of inequality across generations. Rather than beginning with an
analytic sample of offspring and tracing their socio-economic roots back to prior generations, the
prospective approach begins with a baseline population and ascertains the channels through
which it maintains socio-economic (dis)advantage across following generations (Maralani 2013;
Mare 2011; Song and Mare 2015). This approach differs from the classical retrospective
perspective as it necessarily takes into account demographic processes involved in
intergenerational reproduction processes (Duncan 1966), such as fertility or family formation
processes, which we discuss below. The prospective approach is also particularly well-suited to
assess the population-level effects of social policies (Hofferth and Stanhope 2005; Hofferth,
Stanhope, and Mullan Harris 2002).
Racial and Ethnic Inequality
Labor Market Outcomes and Careers: A large PSID-based literature has focused on racial
inequality, most often Black-white gaps, in labor market outcomes and careers. Many
contributions documented and sought explanations for the racial wage gap: Contrary to Wilson’s
(1978) thesis of the “declining significance of race,” authors documented that the Black-white
wage gap continued to increase during the 1970s and 1980s as well as across individuals’ lifecourses (Cancio, Evans, and Maume Jr. 1996; Maume 2004b; Wilson and Sakura-Lemessy
2000) and, in the absence of observable explanatory factors, likely increased due to
discrimination (Maume 2004b). Underlying these wage gaps are racial differences in
occupational positions: Wright (1978) showed that the lower income returns to education for
Black men compared to white men are largely explained by differences in social class
attainment. Others documented Black-white differences in access to and the wage return to job
authority (Mueller 1989; Wilson 1997).
Another set of contributions underlined the importance of economic contexts for racial
inequality, tracing the influence of labor market conditions on race differences in wages (Parcel
1979a) and female labor-force participation (Browne 2000). Progress towards racial labor market
equality has been shown to be either limited or fleeting: Ren (2019) showed that Black/white

17

earnings gaps have declined only among the college-educated and during economic upswings.
Maume (1985) documented that the earnings of Black men and women were higher in areas with
a strong public sector; yet more recent shifts towards privatizing public sector institutions eroded
the progress towards racial wage parity made within the public sector (Wilson, Roscigno, and
Huffman 2015).
Finally, taking full advantage of the longitudinal feature of the PSID, many contributions
investigated racial differences in job mobility. Early on, Black workers were shown to be less
able to make voluntary moves to improve their career as well as to avoid involuntary changes,
such as layoffs (DiPrete 1981; Sorensen and Fuerst 1978). Whether the obstacles to upward
mobility faced by racial minorities constitute a “glass ceiling” was debated after an influential
article by Cotter et al. (2001) reported that Black men face a consistent race penalty at all points
in their career and at all income levels (rather than greater disadvantage at later career stages and
higher incomes), a pattern inconsistent with a “glass ceiling” as defined by these authors.
Subsequent work, however, found patterns consistent with a racial glass ceiling, in particular in
terms of Black employees’ access to managerial and other privileged occupational positions
(Maume 2004a; Wilson et al. 2019). More broadly, researchers found slower promotion rates to
managerial positions among Black and Latino workers compared to white workers, and those
promotions are more likely to be based on formal qualifications and experience than for whites
(Maume 1999; Wilson and Maume 2014); the reverse pattern holds for downward mobility
(McBrier and Wilson 2004; Wilson and McBrier 2005). Again, these racial differences in the
patterns of job mobility are less marked in the public sector compared to the private sector
(Wilson and Roscigno 2010; Wilson, Roscigno, and Huffman 2013; Wilson, Sakura-Lemessy,
and West 1999).
Neighborhood Sorting: Another substantial strand of research on racial inequality
supported by PSID consists of studies of neighborhood sorting. Largely motivated by “The Truly
Disadvantaged,” another seminal work by Wilson (1987), many contributions have compared
residential mobility patterns of whites and non-whites to understand high levels of racial and
ethnic segregation and inequality in exposure to neighborhood disadvantage. Massey et al.
(1994) found that the geographic concentration of poor Blacks, contrary to Wilson’s thesis, is not
caused by nonpoor Blacks leaving urban neighborhoods. Subsequent research also showed that
Blacks were much less likely than whites to escape poor neighborhoods and more likely to move

18

into them, even when they hold similar socio-economic characteristics and despite similar
preferences for mobility (Crowder 2001; South and Crowder 1997, 1998a). While non-Hispanic
Blacks face the highest risk of moving into a high-poverty neighborhood, Mexicans and Puerto
Ricans show the highest rates of persisting in high-poverty neighborhoods (South and Crowder
2005). Furthermore, Blacks and Latinos are more likely to live in and move into neighborhoods
with higher pollution hazards (Crowder and Downey 2010; Kravitz-Wirtz et al. 2016).
More recent contributions to this literature have focused on the residential choices of
whites as this group is increasingly exposed to racial diversity, albeit in very segmented ways
(Lichter, Parisi, and Taquino 2017). Quillian (2002) showed that explanations of continued
segregation must take into account whites’ avoidance of predominantly Black or multiracial
neighborhoods. That avoidance is especially strong among white households with children
(Goyette, Iceland, and Weininger 2014) and also extends to the avoidance of multi-ethnic
neighborhoods and flight from neighborhoods with a large and growing immigrant population
(Crowder, Hall, and Tolnay 2011; Crowder, Pais, and South 2012). Yet, the avoidance of otherrace or mixed neighborhoods is not exclusive to whites. For instance, Latinos display a level of
avoidance of Black neighborhoods similar to that of whites and Blacks display the same
avoidance of Latino neighborhoods as whites (South, Crowder, and Pais 2008). Departing from
the more conventional approach of using aggregate geographic data on Census Tracts and Blocks
matched to the geocoded PSID data to trace the distribution and movement of different racial and
ethnic groups, Bruch (2014) drew on PSID estimates of residential mobility for empirically
grounded agent-based models of neighborhood sorting.
Housing and Wealth: Racial differences in neighborhood attainment also contribute to
racial inequality in wealth (Thomas, Mann, and Meschede 2018) (although the reverse is not the
case, i.e., racial gaps in wealth do not appear to explain minorities’ limited access to advantaged
neighborhoods; Crowder, South, and Chavez 2006). In particular the lower housing prices in
neighborhoods with high minority concentration (Harris 1999) may explain why minority
household accumulate less home equity and derive less equity return from their earnings and
marital status (Parcel 1982). Furthermore, in a more hidden way, unequal tax benefits
disadvantage minority households as white homeowners disproportionally benefit from property
tax limitations (Martin and Beck 2015). Besides racial differences in returns to home ownership,
home ownership itself is of course also marked by continued and stark racial inequality (Hirschl

19

and Rank 2010; Rank 2009). The Great Recession further increased racial gaps in home
ownership as Blacks faced a dramatically higher risk of losing their home during the foreclosure
crisis (Sharp and Hall 2014).
With home ownership as the key vehicle of wealth accumulation, these inequalities also
translate into large racial gaps in net worth. Racial wealth gaps have grown over time and across
the life-course and can be found even among otherwise more privileged segments of the
population, such as the college educated (Meschede et al. 2016; Taylor and Meschede 2018).
The racial wealth gap is of intergenerational significance, e.g. as family wealth promotes the
educational success of Black offspring (Williams Shanks and Destin 2009). Large Black/white
gaps in extended family wealth, e.g. grandparental wealth (Chiteji 2010) also exert
intergenerational influence, e.g. hindering Blacks’ access to home ownership. However, Blacks
are also disadvantaged in their ability to translate extended family wealth into home ownership
(Hall and Crowder 2011; Pfeffer and Killewald 2018). More broadly, Black/white difference in
wealth attainment are partly – but far from fully – explained by differences in parent wealth
(Conley 2001c, 2006; Killewald 2013) and ongoing processes of institutional discrimination that
impact the current generation of non-whites may account for the higher levels of
intergenerational downward mobility in the wealth position of Blacks (Pfeffer and Killewald
2019)
Family Composition and Change
Family structure and poverty. Sociological scholarship using PSID has documented how families
experience and negotiate poverty (Harris 1993; Massey and Shibuya 1995; Rank and Hirschl
1999; Timberlake 2007) and measured the impact of childhood poverty on achievement and
status attainment across the life course (Duncan and Rodgers 1988; Wagmiller et al. 2006). In a
series of influential articles, Sara McLanahan (1983, 1985, 1988) leveraged PSID’s longitudinal,
intergenerational design and its inclusion of a relatively large number of families headed by
unmarried women to illustrate that economic strain and family stress, more so than father
absence, explained the observed association between growing up with a single parent and an
elevated risk of poverty in early adulthood. This work contributed to re-orienting research and
public discourse about the relationship between family structure and poverty away from a

20

pathologized view of “broken families” to one that emphasized the capacity for public policy to
bolster children’s and parents’ well-being across family structures.
Gender dynamics in marriage and divorce. Rich longitudinal information on men’s and
women’s time use and earnings paired with PSID’s genealogical design have enabled a large
literature on couple-level unpaid labor (Brines 1994; Lareau and Weininger 2008; Rexroat and
Shehan 1987; Sandberg and Hofferth 2001) and earned income dynamics (Evertsson and Nermo
2004; Farkas 1976; Heckert, Nowak, and Snyder 1998; South 2001) and on gender differences in
economic well-being after divorce (Espenshade 1979; Weiss 1984; Zick and Smith 1991). This
work has documented that over historical time, women’s higher earned income relative to
husbands’ has become an increasingly less salient predictor of divorce (Heckert et al. 1998; Ono
1998; Schwartz and Gonalons-Pons 2016), but men’s declining employment prospects have
contributed to a decline in marriage rates (Schneider, Harknett, and Stimpson 2018) and
marriages in which men are unemployed remain at elevated risk of divorce (Killewald 2016).
Other work has demonstrated that although men’s household income recovers following divorce
more quickly than women’s (Duncan and Hoffman 1985b) and men are less dependent on
remarriage to regain economic stability (Duncan and Hoffman 1985a), divorce also carries
significant financial consequences for them (McManus and DiPrete 2001).
Kin networks and family complexity. The PSID household rosters, marriage and birth
histories, time use supplements, and periodic extra-household family rosters have permitted
careful analysis of kin networks and dynamic family relationships within and across households
(Carr, Cornman, and Freedman 2019; Hofferth 1984; Hofferth and Anderson 2003; Seltzer 2019;
Seltzer et al. 2005). Key to this research is the precise work performed by PSID interviewers and
data processing staff to update and review field notes that describe family relationships. A
significant set of recent innovations describes time and money exchanges between older adults
and their children and stepchildren (Friedman, Park, and Wiemers 2015; Wiemers et al. 2019).
Other recent work has characterized the full scope of change in household composition to yield
new insights about the prevalence of extended kin coresidence among children in AfricanAmerican and Latinx families (Cross 2018) and the frequency of their experience of household
instability beyond parents’ union status changes (Perkins 2019).

21

Geographic Contexts of Opportunity
Geographic Mobility over the Life Course. Since the first wave of PSID, families have answered
questions about their homes and neighborhoods, as well as reporting their addresses and whether
or not they moved since their last interview. Parcel (1979b) was one of the first to link
geographic identifiers from PSID to aggregated Census data to find that residential segregation
and racial competition dampened earnings levels for black individuals. Massey and colleagues
linked Census tract and metropolitan data with PSID to examine racial differences in movement
into or out of poor neighborhoods (Massey et al. 1994). Also focused on the issue of residential
mobility, Crowder and colleagues (2012) used almost 30 years of PSID data to show that even
with the emergence of more racially diverse neighborhoods, few black or white families moved
to these locations (Crowder et al. 2012). Thanks to the oversampling of African-American
families, researchers have also been able to verify the lasting associations between racial
segregation, socioeconomic status, and geographic mobility (Massey et al. 1994; South and
Crowder 1997, 1998b).
Child Development and Place. Crowder and South (2003) showed that increases in the
concentration of urban poverty have reinforced the link between socioeconomic distress and
school dropout rates and Harding (2003) found a causal effect of childhood neighborhood
characteristics on high school dropout and teenage pregnancy. Wodtke and colleagues (2011)
built on this research to establish a large effect of sustained exposure to disadvantaged
neighborhoods has on high school graduation rates. Similar research has used PSID to follow
children through adolescence and adulthood to study long-term poverty exposure and its negative
association with cognitive skills (Brooks-Gunn et al. 1993; Jackson and Mare 2007; Timberlake
2007).
Linking Location and Context. Crowder (2001) examined restrictive housing markets and
their deleterious effects on the successful geographic mobility of black families. Hunter and
colleagues (2005) showed that families in neighborhoods with growing natural amenities have
higher incomes but also face higher living costs. South and Crowder (2010) used information
about the neighborhoods in which PSID families resided as well as the surrounding
neighborhoods to show that contexts of high poverty increase women’s risk of becoming an
unmarried parent. Corcoran and Adams (1995) found that males’ labor supply is related to the
working hours observed in their childhood neighborhood context. With advances in spatial

22

analysis and open access to linkable contextual data, the opportunities for geographic mobility
and neighborhood research are growing rapidly.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
We end this review with a discussion of some of the characteristics of PSID and similar studies
that create challenge and opportunity for its future position in the social science data universe.
The Single Respondent
Unlike other household panel studies, the main PSID interview is conducted with one respondent
per family unit (with only two exceptions in 1976 and 1985). In many ways, this is an obvious
and economical way to manage a (primarily) telephone interview. Depending on interview
content, the time, effort, and expense required to speak directly with multiple family members by
telephone may not yield much additional information beyond what a knowledgeable respondent
could report on their behalf. The practice of interviewing a single respondent is, however, a
convention that remains from the study’s first wave of in-person data collection, when household
heads were reporting mostly about their own activity.
As questionnaire content has changed, this approach has imposed some constraints on the
individuals about whom such content can be collected reliably. Today, a large share of the
survey content is collected about reference persons (formerly household heads) and spouses or
partners only; very little information is collected about other household members, including
minors. Respondents also report on the current employment status and earnings and education,
marriage, and birth histories of all adult household members, but with more item nonresponse.
For a limited number of items, such as questions about mental health, respondents answer only
for themselves and attitudinal measures are avoided (see also Alwin 2007: p.152). In order to
collect more detailed information about other family unit members, PSID has regularly
conducted supplemental studies of sample children and young adults (many of whom remain in
their parents’ households) since 1997. The content, design, and analytic utility of those
supplements is beyond the scope of this paper, but they have made a significant contribution to
life course scholarship by providing much richer information about early life experience than
other panel studies have been able to collect (McGonagle and Sastry 2015). PSID has also
periodically collected supplements directly from both the reference person and spouse/partner in

23

a couple on topics such as wellbeing, cognitive skills, time use, and childhood circumstances. In
addition, data files are available to identify the relationships between all individuals within and
between family units over time regardless of whether they have been interviewed directly. These
include birth and marriage histories for all adults observed since 1985, the Family Identification
Mapping System to identify an individual’s vertical (e.g., parent, grandparent, child, and
grandchild) and sibling relations, and the family unit relationship matrix, which describes how
all co-resident family unit members are related in each wave. Together, supplements and
relationship data files leverage the content collected during the biennial Core interview to study
intergenerational relationships over the life course and historical time.
The Age of Big Data
By some measures, PSID is big data: Through its 2017 survey wave, it contains information on
more than 80,000 individuals and has collected nearly as many variables. But, of course, the
excitement and at times lofty expectations of the “big data” revolution in sociology is based on
other types of big data, often full-population administrative records (e.g., a Census) or “organic
data” continuously flowing from electronic or online systems (e.g., Twitter stream or phone
location tracking data). The competitive challenge these data pose to comparatively small social
scientific survey data may seem nowhere more obvious than for one of the core areas of the
PSID, the study of intergenerational mobility (Grusky, Smeeding, and Snipp 2015). Do we need
the PSID for the study of income mobility if we can link high-quality income tax records across
generations for the entire United States (Chetty, Hendren, Kline, Saez, et al. 2014)? Fullpopulation records are much better suited for the estimation of an intergenerational income
correlation for different areas of the country (Chetty, Hendren, Kline, and Saez 2014) or different
parts of the income distribution (Mitnik et al. 2014). However, these data have their own biasinducing limitations (see Mitnik, Bryant, and Weber 2019). In fact, the PSID has been used to
demonstrate and correct for those biases (Mazumder 2016). The clear comparative disadvantage
of many of these data sources, however, are the considerably more restrictive access to
individual-level records, in the case of IRS tax data, reserved to just a handful of scientists.
The real promise for new insights and innovative sociological research will likely come
from combining the comparative advantages of these different types of data through data linkage
(Groves 2011: p. 869). For instance, ongoing efforts to link the PSID to the 1940 Census as well

24

as real estate housing data will further expand opportunities for multi-generational and multidimensional assessments of social mobility.
Prospective Studies and Population Change
One of PSID’s most enduring innovations was the choice to follow “split-off” adult children in
PSID families who established their own households is the design element that has enabled
intergenerational and multigenerational analysis. In a population with no immigration, this
approach would have been ideal as a strategy to maintain population representativeness without
sample refreshment. And in the late 1960s, the impact of immigration on population composition
might have felt relatively trivial compared to most other historical periods: only about 5% of the
US population was foreign-born in 1960 (US Census Bureau 1999), compared to 13.7% in 2017
(US Census Bureau 2016). To account for population change, PSID added new families through
immigrant refresher samples in 1997 and 2017.7 These families included a householder who was
foreign-born and entered the United States after 1968 (or 1997 for the more recent refresher) or
who was born after 1968 (1997) to a parent who entered the United States after that year (PSID
2019). Samples are proportional in size to their representation in the US population. The PSID
refreshers are relatively infrequent compared to international panel studies, which occur in
geographically more concentrated populations and also may be able to sample from registry data
rather than from door-to-door screeners. In the US context, refreshers on special, hard-to-reach
populations are expensive to implement, and the obtained samples are challenging to retain. And
while immigrant refreshers offer immediate benefit by providing improved cross-sectional
estimates, their payoff to longitudinal and intergenerational analysis takes much longer to accrue.
The Life Course of the Longitudinal Revolution
Like others in their early fifties, PSID today is not what it set out to become. At its core are
approximately 2,000 families who were poor or low-income in a time of plenty and a federal
government agency that asked how to improve their life chances. Two early innovations – the
addition of a population-representative sample and a design that allowed the sample to replenish
itself over time – gave the study the momentum to continue beyond its first five years. Built on
7

An additional 2000 Latino households were included in 1990-1995, but this sample was eventually
dropped in favor of an immigrant refresher representative of all places of origin.

25

this foundation, PSID has ridden out historical, institutional, technological, and social changes
that have contoured sample composition, questionnaire content, and the study’s position in the
national data infrastructure. We argue that it has survived because it has proven flexible to
scholarly, policy, and funding priorities across a variety of social science research regimes. It
continues to do so, for instance, through web-based survey data collection (Couper and
McGonagle 2019) and biomarker measurement (Sastry, McGonagle, and Schoeni 2009).
Certainly, the study that PSID has become is likely not the study it would be if it were to begin
today. A new study might begin with a larger sample and perform more frequent population
refreshers, both to capture new populations and as a buffer against attrition. It might pair survey
interviews with linkages to administrative data in order to harness the synergies between these
modes of data collection. And like most other current national longitudinal studies, it might
obtain the majority of its support from a steady single sponsor, a path that carries its own risks
for continued relevance. But of course, were the study to begin today, it might never have begun
at all.

26

References
Alwin, Duane F. 2007. Margins of Error. A Study of Reliability in Survey Measurement. Vol.
547. New York: Wiley.
Bailey, Martha J. and Nicolas J. Duquette. 2014. “How Johnson Fought the War on Poverty: The
Economics and Politics of Funding at the Office of Economic Opportunity.” The Journal
of Economic History 74(2):351–88.
Benton, Richard A. and Lisa A. Keister. 2017. “The Lasting Effect of Intergenerational Wealth
Transfers: Human Capital, Family Formation, and Wealth.” Social Science Research
68:1–14.
Blau, Peter M. and Otis Dudley Duncan. 1967. The American Occupational Structure. New
York: The Free Press.
Bloome, D. 2014. “Racial Inequality Trends and the Intergenerational Persistence of Income and
Family Structure.” American Sociological Review 79(6):1196–1225.
Bloome, Deirdre. 2015. “Income Inequality and Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United
States.” Social Forces 93(3):1047–80.
Brines, Julie. 1994. “Economic Dependency, Gender, and the Division of Labor at Home.”
American Journal of Sociology 100(3):652–88.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela K. Klebanov, and Naomi Sealand. 1993. “Do
Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?” American Journal of
Sociology 99(2):353–95.
Brown, Charles. 1996. Notes on the “SEO” or “Census” Component of the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics. 96–03. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan.
Brown, Charles, Greg J. Duncan, and Frank P. Stafford. 1996. “Data Watch: The Panel Study of
Income Dynamics.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2):155–68.
Browne, Irene. 2000. “Opportunities Lost? Race, Industrial Restructuring, and Employment
among Young Women Heading Households.” Social Forces 78(3):907–29.
Bruch, Elizabeth E. 2014. “How Population Structure Shapes Neighborhood Segregation.”
American Journal of Sociology 119(5):1221–78.
Cancio, A. Silvia, T. David Evans, and David J. Maume Jr. 1996. “Reconsidering the Declining
Significance of Race: Racial Differences in Early Career Wages.” American Sociological
Review 61(August):541–56.
Carolan, Brian V. and Sara J. Wasserman. 2015. “Does Parenting Style Matter? Concerted
Cultivation, Educational Expectations, and the Transmission of Educational Advantage.”
Sociological Perspectives 58(2):168–86.
27

Carr, Deborah, Jennifer C. Cornman, and Vicki A. Freedman. 2019. “Do Family Relationships
Buffer the Impact of Disability on Older Adults’ Daily Mood? An Exploration of Gender
and Marital Status Differences.” Journal of Marriage and Family.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where Is the Land
of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4):1553–1623.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nicholas Turner. 2014. “Is
the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational
Mobility.” American Economic Review 104(5):141–47.
Chiteji, Ngina S. 2010. “Wealth in the Extended Family: An American Dilemma.” Du Bois
Review: Social Science Research on Race 7(2):357–79.
Conley, Dalton. 2001a. “A Room of One’s Own or a Room with a View? Housing and
Educational Stratification.” Sociological Forum 16(2):263–80.
Conley, Dalton. 2001b. “Capital for College: Parental Assets and Postsecondary Schooling.”
Sociology of Education 74(1):59–72.
Conley, Dalton. 2001c. “Decomposing the Black-White Wealth Gap: The Role of Parental
Resources, Inheritance, and Investment Dynamics.” Sociological Inquiry 71(1):39–66.
Conley, Dalton. 2006. “Being Black, Living in the Red: Wealth Matters.” Pp. 350–57 in The
Race, Class, and Gender in the United States, edited by P. S. Rothenberg. Macmillan
Publishers.
Corak, Miles. 2013. “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational
Mobility.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(3):79–102.
Corcoran, Mary. 1980. “Sex Differences in Measurement Error in Status Attainment.” Pp. 241–
76 in Five Thousand American Families: Patterns of Economic Progress. Vol. 8, edited
by G. J. Duncan and J. N. Morgan. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research,
University of Michigan.
Corcoran, Mary. 1995. “Rags to Rags: Poverty and Mobility in the United States.” Annual
Review of Sociology 21:237–67.
Corcoran, Mary and Terry Adams. 1995. “Family and Neighborhood Welfare Dependency and
Son’s Labor Supply.” Journal of Family and Economic Issues 16(2,3):239–64.
Cotter, David A., Joan M. Hermsen, Seth Ovadia, and Reeve Vanneman. 2001. “The Glass
Ceiling Effect.” Social Forces 80(2):655–81.
Couper, Mick P. and Katherine McGonagle. 2019. “Recent Developments in Web-Based Data
Collection for Longitudinal Studies.” PSID Technical Series Paper (19–03).

28

Cross, Christina J. 2018. “Extended Family Households among Children in the United States:
Differences by Race/Ethnicity and Socio-Economic Status.” Population Studies
72(2):235–51.
Crowder, Kyle D. 2001. “Racial Stratification in the Actuation of Mobility Expectations:
Microlevel Impacts of Racially Restrictive Housing Markets.” Social Forces 79(4):1377–
96.
Crowder, Kyle D. and Liam Downey. 2010. “Inter-Neighborhood Migration, Race, and
Environmental Hazards: Modeling Micro-Level Processes of Environmental Inequality.”
American Journal of Sociology 115(4):1110–49.
Crowder, Kyle D. and Scott J. South. 2003. “Neighborhood Distress and School Dropout: The
Variable Significance of Community Context.” Social Science Research 32(4):659–98.
Crowder, Kyle D., Scott J. South, and Erick Chavez. 2006. “Wealth, Race, and InterNeighborhood Migration.” American Sociological Review 71(1):72–94.
Crowder, Kyle, Matthew Hall, and Stewart E. Tolnay. 2011. “Neighborhood Immigration and
Native Out-Migration.” American Sociological Review 76(1):25–47.
Crowder, Kyle, Jeremy Pais, and Scott J. South. 2012. “Neighborhood Diversity, Metropolitan
Constraints, and Household Migration.” American Sociological Review 77(3):325–44.
DeLeire, Thomas and Ariel Kalil. 2005. “How Do Cohabiting Couples with Children Spend
Their Money?” Journal of Marriage and Family 67(2):286–95.
DiPrete, Thomas. 1981. “Unemployment over the Life Cycle: Racial Differences and the Effect
of Changing Economic Conditions.” American Journal of Sociology 87(2):286–307.
Duncan, Greg J. 2002. “The PSID and Me.” Pp. 133–66 in Landmark Studies of the 20th Century
in the US, edited by E. Phelps, Jr. Furstenberg Frank F., and A. Colby. New York:
Russell Sage.
Duncan, Greg J., Sandra L. Hofferth, and Frank P. Stafford. 2004. “Evolution and Change in
Family Income, Wealth and Health: The Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2000
and Beyond.” in A Telescope on Society: Survey Research and Social Science at the
University of Michigan and Beyond, edited by J. S. House, F. T. Juster, R. L. Kahn, H.
Schuman, and E. Singer. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Duncan, Greg J. and Saul Hoffman. 1985a. “A Reconsideration of the Economic Consequences
of Marital Dissolution.” Demography 22(4):485–97.
Duncan, Greg J. and Saul Hoffman. 1985b. “Economic Consequences of Marital Instability.” Pp.
427–70 in Horizontal Equity, Uncertainty, and Economic Well-Being, edited by M.
David and T. Smeeding. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

29

Duncan, Greg J. and Willard Rodgers. 1988. “Longitudinal Aspects of Childhood Poverty.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 50(4):1007–21.
Duncan, Greg J., Wei-Jun J. Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith Smith. 1998. “How Much
Does Childhood Poverty Affect the Life Chances of Children?” American Sociological
Review 63(3):406–23.
Duncan, Otis D. 1966. “Methodological Issues in the Analysis of Social Mobility.” Pp. 52–97 in
Social Structure and Mobility and Economic Development, edited by N. J. Smelser and S.
M. Lipset. Chicago: Aldine.
Erola, Jani, Elina Kilpi-Jakonen, Irene Prix, and Hannu Lehti. 2018. “Resource Compensation
from the Extended Family: Grandparents, Aunts, and Uncles in Finland and the United
States.” European Sociological Review 34(4):348–64.
Espenshade, Thomas J. 1979. “The Economic Consequences of Divorce.” Journal of Marriage
and Family 41(3):615–25.
Evertsson, Marie and Magnus Nermo. 2004. “Dependence within Families and the Division of
Labor: Comparing Sweden and the United States.” Journal of Marriage and Family
66(5):1272–86.
Farkas, George. 1976. “Education, Wage Rates, and the Division of Labor Between Husband and
Wife.” Journal of Marriage and Family 38(3):473–84.
Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert Moffitt. 1998. “An Analysis of the Impact of
Sample Attrition on the Second Generation of Respondents in the Michigan Panel Study
of Income Dynamics.” The Journal of Human Resources 33(2):300–344.
Fomby, Paula and Christina J. Cross. 2018. “Parents Who Left College and Children’s
Postsecondary Educational Attainment.” Sociological Forum 33(4):923–49.
Fomby, Paula, Patrick M. Krueger, and Nicole M. Wagner. 2014. “Age at Childbearing over
Two Generations and Grandchildren’s Cognitive Achievement.” Research in Social
Stratification and Mobility 35:71–88.
Fomby, Paula and Kelly Musick. 2018. “Mothers’ Time, the Parenting Package, and Links to
Healthy Child Development.” Journal of Marriage and Family 80(1):166–81.
Ford, Karly Sarita and Jason Thompson. 2016. “Inherited Prestige: Intergenerational Access to
Selective Universities in the United States.” Research in Social Stratification and
Mobility 46:86–98.
Freedman, Vicki A. 2017. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics’ Wellbeing and Daily Life
Supplement (PSID-WB) User Guide: Final Release 1. Ann Arbor, MI.

30

Freedman, Vicki A. and Jennifer C. Cornman. 2015. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics:
Second Supplement on Distability and Use of Time (DUST 2013). User Guide: Release
2015.3. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Friedman, Esther M., Sung S. Park, and Emily E. Wiemers. 2015. “New Estimates of the
Sandwich Generation in the 2013 Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” The Gerontologist
57(2):191–96.
Ganzeboom, Harry B. G., Donald J. Treiman, and Wout C. Ultee. 1991. “Comparative
Intergenerational Stratification Research. Three Generations and Beyond.” Annual
Review of Sociology 17:277–302.
Goyette, Kimberly, John Iceland, and Elliot Weininger. 2014. “Moving for the Kids: Examining
the Influence of Children on White Residential Segregation.” City & Community
13(2):158–78.
Greenberg, David H. 2003. “Social Experimentation and Public Policymaking.” Retrieved
September 6, 2019 (http://webarchive.urban.org/publications/210784.html).
Groves, Robert M. 2011. “Three Eras of Survey Research.” Public Opinion Quarterly
75(5):861–71.
Grusky, David B., Timothy M. Smeeding, and C. Matthew Snipp. 2015. “A New Infrastructure
for Monitoring Social Mobility in the United States.” The ANNALS of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 657(1):63–82.
Hall, Matthew and Kyle Crowder. 2011. “Extended-Family Resources and Racial Inequality in
the Transition to Homeownership.” Social Science Research 40(6):1534–46.
Harding, David. 2003. “Counterfactual Models of Neighborhood Effects: The Effect of
Neighborhood Poverty on High School Dropout and Teenage Pregnancy.” American
Journal of Sociology 109(3):676–719.
Harris, David R. 1999. “Property Values Drop When Blacks Move in, Because...": Racial and
Socioeconomic Determinants of Neighborhood Desirability.” American Sociological
Review 64(3):461-479.
Harris, Kathleen Mullan. 1993. “Work and Welfare among Single Mothers in Poverty.”
American Journal of Sociology 99(2):317–52.
Heckert, D. Alex, Thomas C. Nowak, and Kay A. Snyder. 1998. “The Impact of Husbands’ and
Wives’ Relative Earnings on Marital Disruption.” Journal of Marriage and Family
60(3):690–703.
Hertel, Florian R. and Olaf Groh-Samberg. 2014. “Class Mobility across Three Generations in
the U.S. and Germany.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 35:35–52.

31

Hertel, Florian R. and Fabian T. Pfeffer. 2019. “The Land of Opportunity? Trends in Social
Mobility and Education in the United States.” Pp. 29–68 in Education and
Intergenerational Social Mobility in Europe and the United States, Studies in Social
Inequality, edited by R. Breen and W. Müller. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Hill, Martha S., ed. 1992. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: A User’s Guide to Major Social
Science Data Bases, Vol. 2. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Hill, Martha S. and Greg J. Duncan. 1987. “Parental Family Income and the Socioeconomic
Attainment of Children.” Social Science Research 16(1):39–73.
Hirschl, Thomas A. and Mark R. Rank. 2010. “Homeownership Across the American Life
Course: Estimating the Racial Divide.” Race and Social Problems 2(3–4):125–36.
Hofferth, Sandra L. 1984. “Kin Networks, Race and Family Structure.” Journal of Marriage and
Family 46(4):791–806.
Hofferth, Sandra L. and Kermyt G. Anderson. 2003. “Are All Dads Equal? Biology versus
Marriage as a Basis for Paternal Investment.” Journal of Marriage and Family
65(1):213–32.
Hofferth, Sandra L., Johanne Boisjoly, and Greg J. Duncan. 1998. “Parents’ Extrafamilial
Resources and Children’s School Attainment.” Sociology of Education 71(3):246–68.
Hofferth, Sandra L., Johanne Boisjoly, and Greg J. Duncan. 1999. “The Development of Social
Capital.” Rationality and Society 11(1):79–110.
Hofferth, Sandra L., Stephen Stanhope, and Kathleen Mullan Harris. 2002. “Exiting Welfare in
the 1990s: Did Public Policy Influence Recipients’ Behavior?” Population Research and
Policy Review 21(5):433–72.
Hofferth, Sandra L. and Stephen/Harris Stanhope Kathleen Mullan. 2005. “Remaining Off
Welfare in the 1990s: The Influence of Public Policy and Economic Conditions.” Social
Science Research 34(2):426–53.
House, James S., F. Thomas Juster, and Robert L. Kahn, eds. 2004. A Telescope on Society:
Survey Research & Social Science at the University of Michigan & Beyond. Michigan:
The University of Michigan Press.
Hsin, Amy. 2009. “Parent’s Time with Children: Does Time Matter for Children’s Cognitive
Achievement?” Social Indicators Research 93(1):123–26.
Hunter, Lori M., Jason D. Boardman, and Jarron M. Saint Onge. 2005. “The Association
Between Natural Amenities, Rural Population Growth, and Long-Term Residents’
Economic Well-Being.” Rural Sociology 70(4):452–70.

32

Jackson, Margot I. and Robert D. Mare. 2007. “Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Measurements
of Neighborhood Experience and Their Effects on Children.” Social Science Research
36(2):590–610.
Johnson, David S., Katherine A. McGonagle, Vicki A. Freedman, and Narayan Sastry. 2018.
“Longitudinal Research on Social Dynamics: The PSID at 50 Years.” The ANNALS of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 680(1):1–259.
Killewald, Alexandra. 2013. “Return to Being Black, Living in the Red: A Race Gap in Wealth
That Goes Beyond Social Origins.” Demography 50(4):1177–95.
Killewald, Alexandra. 2016. “Money, Work, and Marital Stability: Assessing Change in the
Gendered Determinants of Divorce.” American Sociological Review 81(4):696–719.
Kravitz-Wirtz, Nicole, Kyle Crowder, Anjum Hajat, and Victoria Sass. 2016. “The Long-Term
Dynamics of Racial/Ethnic Inequality in Neighborhood Air Pollution Exposure, 19902009.” Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 13(2):237–59.
Lareau, Annette and Elliot Weininger. 2008. “Time, Work, and Family Life: Reconceptualizing
Gendered Time Patterns through the Case of Children’s Organized Activities.”
Sociological Forum 23(3):419–54.
Lichter, Daniel T., Domenico Parisi, and Michael C. Taquino. 2017. “Together but Apart: Do US
Whites Live in Racially Diverse Cities and Neighborhoods?” Population and
Development Review 43(2):229–55.
Lopoo, L. M. and T. DeLeire. 2014. “Family Structure and the Economic Wellbeing of Children
in Youth and Adulthood.” Social Science Research 43:30–44.
Maralani, Vida. 2013. “The Demography of Social Mobility: Black-White Differences in the
Process of Educational Reproduction.” American Journal of Sociology 118(6):1509–58.
Mare, Robert D. 2011. “A Multigenerational View of Inequality.” Demography 48(1):1–23.
Martin, Isaac William and Kevin Beck. 2015. “Property Tax Limitation and Racial Inequality in
Effective Tax Rates.” Critical Sociology 43(2):221–36.
Martin, Molly A. 2003. “The Role of Family Income in the Intergenerational Association of
AFDC Receipt.” Journal of Marriage and Family 65(2):326.
Massey, Douglas S., Andrew B. Gross, and Kumiko Shibuya. 1994. “Migration, Segregation,
and the Geographic Concentration of Poverty.” American Sociological Review
59(3):425–45.
Massey, Douglas S. and Kumiko Shibuya. 1995. “Unraveling the Tangle of Pathology: The
Effect of Spatially Concentrated Joblessness on the Well-Being of African Americans.”
Social Science Research 24(4):352–66.

33

Maume Jr., David J. 1985. “Government Participation in the Local Economy and Race- and-SexBased Earnings Inequality.” Social Problems 32(3):285–99.
Maume, Jr., David J. 1999. “Glass Ceilings and Glass Escalators: Occupational Segregation and
Race and Sex Differences in Managerial Promotions.” Work and Occupations 26(4):483–
509.
Maume, Jr., David J. 2004a. “Is the Glass Ceiling a Unique Form of Inequality?” Work and
Occupations 31(2):250–74.
Maume, Jr., David J. 2004b. “Wage Discrimination over the Life Course: A Comparison of
Explanations.” Social Problems 51(4):505–27.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2016. “Estimating the Intergenerational Elasticity and Rank Association
in the United States: Overcoming the Current Limitations of Tax Data.” Pp. 83–129 in
Inequality: Causes and Consequences, edited by L. Cappellari, S. Polachek, and K.
Tatsiramos. United Kingdom: Emerald Publishing.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2018. “Intergenerational Mobility in the United States: What We Have
Learned from the PSID.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science 680(1):213–34.
McBrier, D. B. and G. Wilson. 2004. “Going Down? Race and Downward Occupational
Mobility for White-Collar Workers in the 1990s.” Work and Occupations 31(3):283–322.
McGonagle, Katherine A. and Narayan Sastry. 2015. “Cohort Profile: The Panel Study of
Income Dynamics’ Child Development Supplement and Transition into Adulthood
Study.” International Journal of Epidemiology 44(2):415–22.
McGonagle, Katherine A. and Narayan Sastry. 2016. “Using the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics to Analyze Housing Decisions, Dynamics, and Effects.” Cityscape: A Journal
of Policy Development and Research 18(1):226–40.
McGonagle, Katherine A., Robert F. Schoeni, Narayan Sastry, and Vicki A. Freedman. 2012.
“The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Overview, Recent Innovations, and Potential for
Life Course Research.” Longitudinal and Life Course Studies 3(2):268–84.
McLanahan, Sara. 1983. “Family Structure and Stress: A Longitudinal Comparison of Male and
Female-Headed Families.” Journal of Marriage and Family 45(2):347–57.
McLanahan, Sara. 1985. “Family Structure and the Reproduction of Poverty.” American Journal
of Sociology 90(4):873–901.
McLanahan, Sara. 1988. “Family Structure and Dependency: Early Transitions to Female
Household Headship.” Demography 25(1):1–16.
McLanahan, Sara and Larry Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of Family
Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94(1):130–52.

34

McManus, Patricia A. and Thomas A. DiPrete. 2001. “Losers and Winners: The Financial
Consequences of Separation and Divorce for Men.” American Sociological Review
66(2):246–68.
Meschede, T., H. Thomas, A. Mann, A. Stagg, and T. Shapiro. 2016. “Wealth Mobility of
Families Raising Children in the Twenty-First Century.” Race and Social Problems
8(1):77–92.
Milkie, M. A., K. M. Nomaguchi, and K. E. Denny. 2015. “Does the Amount of Time Mothers
Spend with Children or Adolescents Matter?” Journal of Marriage and Family
77(2):355–72.
Mitnik, Pablo A., Victoria Bryant, and Michael Weber. 2019. “The Intergenerational
Transmission of Family-Income Advantages in the United States.” Sociological Science
6:380–415.
Mitnik, Pablo, Victoria Bryant, David B. Grusky, and Michael Weber. 2014. “New Estimates of
Intergenerational Income Mobility Using Administrative Data.” Stanford Center for the
Study of Poverty and Inequality.
Mohanty, Lisa L. and Lakshmi K. Raut. 2009. “Home Ownership and School Outcomes of
Children: Evidence from the PSID Child Development Supplement.” American Journal
of Economics and Sociology 68(2):465–89.
Morgan, James N. and James D. Smith. 1969a. “A Report on Research in Process Under
Contract to the Office of Economic Opportunity.” Retrieved September 5, 2019
(https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/Data/Documentation/pdf_doc/psid68w1.pdf).
Morgan, James N. and James D. Smith. 1969b. “Study Design, Procedures, and Forms , 1968
Interviewing Year (Wave I).”
Mueller, Charles. 1989. “Particularism in Authority Outcomes of Black and White Supervisors.”
Social Science Research 18(1):1–20.
Ono, Hiromi. 1998. “Husbands’ and Wives’ Resources and Marital Dissolution.” Journal of
Marriage and Family 60(3):674–89.
Parcel, Toby L. 1979a. “Race, Regional Labor Markets and Earnings.” American Sociological
Review 44:262–79.
Parcel, Toby L. 1979b. “Race, Regional Labor Markets and Earnings.” American Sociological
Review 44:262–79.
Parcel, Toby L. 1982. “Wealth Accumulation of Black and White Men: The Case of Housing
Equity.” Social Problems 30(2):199–211.
Perkins, Kristin L. 2019. “Changes in Household Composition and Children’s Educational
Attainment.” Demography.

35

Pfeffer, Fabian T. 2014. “Multigenerational Approaches to Social Mobility. A Multifaceted
Research Agenda.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 1(35):1–12.
Pfeffer, Fabian T. 2018. “Growing Wealth Gaps in Education.” Demography 55(3):1033–68.
Pfeffer, Fabian T. and Alexandra Killewald. 2018. “Generations of Advantage.
Multigenerational Correlations in Family Wealth.” Social Forces 96(4):1411–42.
Pfeffer, Fabian T. and Alexandra Killewald. 2019. “Intergenerational Wealth Mobility and
Racial Inequality.” Socius: Sociological Research for a Dynamic World
5:237802311983179.
Presser, Harriet B. 1998. “Decapitating the U.S. Census Bureau’s ‘Head of Household’: Feminist
Mobilization in the 1970s.” Feminist Economics 4(3):145–58.
Prix, Irene and Fabian T. Pfeffer. 2017. “Does Donald Need Uncle Scrooge? Extended Family
Wealth and Children’s Educational Attainment in the United States.” in Social Inequality
Across the Generations: The Role of Compensation and Multiplication in Resource
Accumulation, edited by J. Erola and E. Kilpi. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
PSID. 1968. “Study of Family Economics.”
PSID. 2019. PSID Main Interview User Manual: Release 2019. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social
Research, University of Michigan.
Quillian, Lincoln. 2002. “Why Is Black-White Residential Segregation So Persistent?: Evidence
on Three Theories from Migration Data.” Social Science Research 31(2):197–229.
Rank, Mark R. 2009. “Measuring the Economic Racial Divide Across the Course of American
Lives.” Race and Social Problems 1(2):57–66.
Rank, Mark R. and Thomas A. Hirschl. 1999. “The Economic Risk of Childhood in America:
Estimating the Probability of Poverty Across the Formative Years.” Journal of Marriage
and Family 61(4):1058–67.
Ren, Chunhui. 2019. “Fluctuating Courses and Constant Challenges: The Two Trajectories of
Black-White Earnings Inequality, 1968–2015.” Social Science Research 77:30–44.
Rexroat, Cynthia and Constance Shehan. 1987. “The Family Life Cycle and Spouses’ Time in
Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 49(4):737–50.
Roksa, Josipa and Daniel Patter. 2011. “Parenting and Academic Achievement: Intergenerational
Transmission of Educational Advantage.” Sociology of Education 84(4):299–321.
Sandberg, John F. and Sandra L. Hofferth. 2001. “Changes in Children’s Time with Parents, U.S.
1981-1997.” Demography 38(8):423–36.

36

Sastry, Narayan, Paula Fomby, and Katherine McGonagle. 2018. “Using the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) to Conduct Life Course Health Development Analysis.” Pp.
579–99 in Handbook of Life Course Health Development. Springer.
Sastry, Narayan, Katherine A. McGonagle, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2009. “Introduction to the
Special Issue on the Scientific Assessment of Biomeasures in the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics.” Biodemography and Social Biology 55(2):113–17.
Schneider, Daniel, Kristen Harknett, and Matthew Stimpson. 2018. “What Explains the Decline
in First Marriage in the United States? Evidence from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics, 1969 to 2013.” Journal of Marriage and Family 80(4):791–811.
Schwartz, Christine R. and Pilar Gonalons-Pons. 2016. “Trends in Relative Earnings and Marital
Dissolution: Are Wives Who Outearn Their Husbands Still More Likely to Divorce?”
RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 2(4):218–36.
Seltzer, J. A., C. A. Bachrach, Suzanne M. Bianchi, C. H. Bledsoe, L. M. Casper, P. L. ChaseLansdale, Thomas A. DiPrete, V. J. Hotz, S. P. Morgan, S. G. Sanders, and D. Thomas.
2005. “Explaining Family Change and Variation: Challenges for Family Demographers.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 67(4):908–25.
Seltzer, Judith A. 2019. “Family Change and Changing Family Demography.” Demography
56(2):405–26.
Sharkey, Patrick. 2008. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Context.” American Journal of
Sociology 113(4):931–69.
Sharkey, Patrick and Felix Elwert. 2011. “The Legacy of Disadvantage: Multigenerational
Neighborhood Effects on Cognitive Ability.” American Journal of Sociology
116(6):1934–81.
Sharp, Gregory and Matthew Hall. 2014. “Emerging Forms of Racial Inequality in
Homeownership Exit, 1968-2009.” Social Problems 61(3):427–47.
Smith, James and James N. Morgan. 1970. “Dynamics of Income Distribution: Poverty and
Progress: Variability of Economic Well-Being and Its Determinants.” American
Economic Review 60(2):286–95.
Solon, Gary. 1992. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States.” American
Economic Review 82(3):393–408.
Song, X. and R. D. Mare. 2017. “Short-Term and Long-Term Educational Mobility of Families:
A Two-Sex Approach.” Demography 54(1):145–73.
Song, Xi and Robert D. Mare. 2015. “Prospective Versus Retrospective Approaches to the Study
of Intergenerational Social Mobility.” Sociological Methods & Research 44(4):555–84.

37

Sorensen, Aage B. and Sarah Fuerst. 1978. “Black-White Differences in the Occurrence of Job
Shifts.” Sociology and Social Research 62(4):537–57.
South, Scott J. 2001. “Time-Dependent Effects of Wives’ Employment on Marital Dissolution.”
American Sociological Review 66(2):226–45.
South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 1997. “Escaping Distressed Neighborhoods: Individual,
Community and Metropolitan Influences.” American Journal of Sociology 103(1):1040–
84.
South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 1998a. “Avenues and Barriers to Residential Mobility
among Single Mothers.” Journal of Marriage and Family 60(4):866–77.
South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 1998b. “Leaving the ’Hood: Residential Mobility Between
Black, White, and Integrated Neighborhoods.” American Sociological Review 63(1):17–
26.
South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 2005. “Exiting and Entering High-Poverty Neighborhoods:
Latinos, Blacks and Anglos Compared.” Social Forces 84(2):873–900.
South, Scott J. and Kyle D. Crowder. 2010. “Neighborhood Poverty and Nonmarital Fertility:
Spatial and Temporal Dimensions.” Journal of Marriage and Family 72(1):89–104.
South, Scott J., Kyle D. Crowder, and Jeremy Pais. 2008. “Inter-Neighborhood Migration and
Spatial Assimilation in a Multi-Ethnic World: Comparing Latinos, Blacks and Anglos.”
Social Forces 87(1):415–45.
Taylor, Joanna and Tatjana Meschede. 2018. “Inherited Prospects: The Importance of Financial
Transfers for White and Black College-Educated Households’ Wealth Trajectories.”
American Journal of Economics and Sociology 77(3–4):1049–76.
Thomas, Hannah, Alexis Mann, and Tatjana Meschede. 2018. “Race and Location: The Role
Neighborhoods Play in Family Wealth and Well-Being.” American Journal of Economics
and Sociology 77(3–4):1077–1111.
Timberlake, Jeffrey M. 2007. “Racial and Ethnic Inequality in the Duration of Children’s
Exposure to Neighborhood Poverty and Affluence.” Social Problems 54(3):319–42.
Torche, Florencia. 2011. “Is a College Degree Still the Great Equalizer? Intergenerational
Mobility across Levels of Schooling in the United States.” American Journal of
Sociology 117(3):763–807.
Torche, Florencia. 2015. “Analyses of Intergenerational Mobility: An Interdisciplinary Review.”
The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 657(1):37–62.
US Census Bureau. n.d. “Guide to the Documentation and Data Files of the 1966 and 1967
Survey of Economic Opportunity.”

38

US Census Bureau. 1968. “Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1968.” Retrieved September
6, 2019 (https://www.census.gov/library/publications/1968/compendia/statab/89ed.html).
US Census Bureau. 1999. “Nativity of the Population and Place of Birth of the Native
Population: 1850 to 1990 (Technical Paper 29, Table 1.).” Retrieved September 6, 2019
(https://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0029/tab01.html).
US Census Bureau. 2016. “Selected Social Characteristics in the United States - 2016 American
Community Survey 1-Year Estimates.” Retrieved September 6, 2019
(https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bkmk)
.
Wagmiller, Jr., Robert L., Mary Clare Lennon, Li Kuang, Philip Alberti, and J. Lawrence Aber.
2006. “The Dynamics of Economic Disadvantage and Children’s Life Chances.”
American Sociological Review 71(5):847–66.
Weininger, Elliot B., Annette Lareau, and Dalton Conley. 2015. “What Money Doesn’t Buy:
Class Resources and Children’s Participation in Organized Extracurricular Activities.”
Social Forces 94(2):479–503.
Weiss, Robert S. 1984. “The Impact of Marital Dissolution on Income and Consumption in
Single-Parent Households.” Journal of Marriage and Family 46(1):115–27.
Wiemers, Emily E., Judith A. Seltzer, Robert F. Schoeni, V. Joseph Hotz, and Suzanne M.
Bianchi. 2019. “Stepfamily Structure and Transfers Between Generations in U.S.
Families.” Demography 56(1):229–60.
Wightman, Patrick and Sheldon Danziger. 2014. “Multi-Generational Income Disadvantage and
the Educational Attainment of Young Adults.” Research in Social Stratification and
Mobility 35:53–69.
Williams Shanks, Trina R. and Mesmin Destin. 2009. “Parental Expectations and Educational
Outcomes for Young African American Adults: Do Household Assets Matter?” Race and
Social Problems 1(1):27–35.
Williams, Trina Rachelle. 2003. “The Impact of Household Wealth and Poverty on Child
Development Outcomes: Examining Asset Effects.” Washington University.
Wilson, George. 1997. “Payoffs to Power Among Males in the Middle Class: Has Race Declined
in Its Significance?” The Sociological Quarterly 38(4):607–22.
Wilson, George. 2009. “Downward Mobility of Women from White-Collar Employment:
Determinants and Timing by Race.” Sociological Forum 24(2):382–401.
Wilson, George and David Maume. 2014. “Men’s Mobility into Management from Blue Collar
and White Collar Jobs: Race Differences Across the Early Career Years.” Social Science
Research 46:117–29.

39

Wilson, George and Debra McBrier. 2005. “Race and Loss of Privilege: African
American/White Differences in the Determinants of Job Layoffs From Upper-Tier
Occupations.” Sociological Forum 20(2):301–21.
Wilson, George, Nick Petersen, Ryan Smith, and David Maume. 2019. “Particularism and Racial
Mobility Into Privileged Occupations.” Social Science Research 78:82–94.
Wilson, George and Vincent J. Roscigno. 2010. “Race and Downward Mobility From Privileged
Occupations: African American/White Dynamics Across the Early Work-Career.” Social
Science Research 39(1):67–77.
Wilson, George, Vincent J. Roscigno, and Matt Huffman. 2015. “Racial Income Inequality and
Public Sector Privatization.” Social Problems 62(2):163–85.
Wilson, George, Vincent J. Roscigno, and Matt L. Huffman. 2013. “Public Sector
Transformation, Racial Inequality and Downward Occupational Mobility.” Social Forces
91(3):975–1006.
Wilson, George and Ian Sakura-Lemessy. 2000. “Earnings over the Early Work Career among
Males in the Middle Class: Has Race Declined in It’s Significance?” Sociological
Perspectives 43(1):159–71.
Wilson, George, Ian Sakura-Lemessy, and Jonathan P. West. 1999. “Reaching the Top: Racial
Differences in Mobility Paths to Upper-Tier Occupations.” Work and Occupations
26(2):165–86.
Wilson, William J. 1978. The Declining Significance of Race. Blacks and Changing American
Institutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, William J. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged. The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wodtke, Geoffrey T., Felix Elwert, and David J. Harding. 2016. “Neighborhood Effect
Heterogeneity by Family Income and Developmental Period.” American Journal of
Sociology 121(4):1168–1222.
Wodtke, Geoffrey T., David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert. 2011. “Neighborhood Effects in
Temporal Perspective: The Impact of Long-Term Exposure to Concentrated
Disadvantage on High School Graduation.” American Sociological Review 76(5):713–36.
Wright, Erik O. 1978. “Race, Class and Income Inequality.” American Journal of Sociology
83(6):1368–97.
Wright, Erik Olin, ed. 1979. Class Structure and Income Determination. New York: Academic
Press.

40

Yetis-Bayraktar, Ayse, Michelle J. Budig, and Donald Tomaskovic-Devey. 2013. “From the
Shop Floor to the Kitchen Floor: Maternal Occupational Complexity and Children’s
Reading and Math Skills.” Work and Occupations 40(1):37–64.
Zick, Cathleen D. and Ken R. Smith. 1991. “Marital Transitions, Poverty, and Gender
Differences in Mortality.” Journal of Marriage and Family 53:327–36.

41

ONLINE SUPPLEMENT
THE LONGITUDINAL REVOLUTION
Fabian T. Pfeffer, Paula Fomby, and Noura Insolera

FIGURE S.1. COMPOSITION OF THE PSID EXTERNAL BOARD OF OVERSEERS
60%

50%

Sociology

40%

Economics

30%

20%

Other

10%

0%
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Note: Lines represent 3-year smoothed averages of the relative share of disciplines represented by members of the
Board of Overseers (including the Board Chair).

S-1

FIGURE S.2: TOTAL PSID-BASED PUBLICATIONS IN SOCIOLOGY
600
550
500
450
400
All Sociology Contributions
350
300
250
200
150
100
Sociology Dissertations
50
ASR & AJS Publications
0
1969

1974

1979

1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

2009

2014

Note: Cumulative count of PSID-based publications in the field of sociology (as designated by Web of Science);
included in the total count are dissertations awarded in a department of sociology and ASR/AJS articles.

S-2

FIGURE S.3: INTERVIEW MINUTES BY SECTION

24

Employment

22
20
18

Consumption

Health

16
14
12
10

Income

8
6
4
2
0
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

Note: Average number of minutes spent on four longest questionnaire sections. Other substantive questionnaire
sections that are shorter and not shown are: Housing, Wealth, Philanthropy, Pensions, Background, and Marriage &
Fertility.

S-3

TABLE S.1: OVERVIEW OF DATA SOURCES
Our review draws on multiple types of data to trace the history of the PSID, the representation
the sociology within the PSID, and the uses of PSID within sociological research. To examine
the disciplinary representation, we draw on a collection of publications based on the PSID and on
historical records of the PSID Board of Overseers. To assess topical coverage in the PSID, we
use a topical classification of all public-release PSID variables as well as a classification of
PSID-based publications. This table contains information on each data source.
Description
Board of Overseers

Variables

Access

The describe the disciplinary composition of the
Board of Overseers, we use board membership
records and ascribe a discipline to each Board
member based on their doctoral degree (which we
ascertain via a web search for their CVs or other
biographic information)

Disciplines: Sociology, Economics,
Others

Link

Areas: education, work, income,
wealth, and consumption, as well as
health, family relationship, survey
methodology, behavior,
demographic outcomes, geographic
contexts, time use, and “other”

Link

Variable Classification
PSID staff sorts each public-release PSID variable
into topical areas and subareas to enable users to
browse data by topical interests. We use and
aggregate this classification scheme to 13 broad
topical areas and count the number of variables from
each topical area and each survey wave as a
representation of topical flows in the PSID data.

Interviews
We interviewed all living former PSID directors
using a semi-structured interview.

Interviewees: Greg Duncan, Sandy
Hofferth, Frank Stafford, Robert
Schoeni, Charles Brown

Bibliography
The PSID requires its data users to self-report their
PSID-based publications but tracks down
publications not registered by authors themselves.
The resulting bibliographic database includes 6,179
journal articles, dissertations, books, book chapters,
and reports at the time of this writing. After
reviewing each publication’s content, PSID staff also
categorize each by topical area (“keywords”) using
up to 29 categories.
To help us identify the sociological
contributions in this bibliographic collection, and
following other bibliographic analyses, we draw on
disciplinary classifications provided by Web of
Science (WoS). WoS assigns up to three “subject
categories” to each of publication outlet (i.e.,
typically journal) based on their own analysis of the

S-4

Categories: Aging, Child
Development Supplement,
Children, Disability & Use of Time,
Education Attainment &
Achievement, Expenditures, Family
Formation & Composition, Food &
Nutrition, Gender Differences,
Government Transfers, Health,
Housing, Income, Intergenerational
Influences & Transfers,
International Studies, Labor Market
& Outcomes, Life Course,
Neighborhoods & Geographic
Mobility, Philanthropy, Poverty,
Racial-Ethnic Differences,
Retirement, Statistical &

Link

content, scope, and citation patterns among all
references in their collection.8 We count a
publication as sociological if “Sociology” is included
in any of its subject areas. We also add dissertations
written in sociology departments as sociological
contributions.
The matching of the PSID bibliographic
database to their WoS records was accomplished via
machine-linkage (on DOI or, where not available, a
sequential matching on article title, journal title, and
author) as well as hand-linkage (via the WoS search
interface).
Most Influential Publications in Sociology
To identify the most influential publications in top
sociology journals, we drew on Google Scholar
citation records (access date: 11/11/2019) to identify
the 50 articles with the highest annual citation count
(total citations divided by year since publication)
within the two flagship sociology journals and two
different time spans.
We then reviewed all articles to determine
whether they use secondary data and whether they
draw on the PSID.

8

Econometric Methods, Survey
Methodology, Taxes, Time Use &
Home Production, Transition to
Adulthood Supplement, Wealth,
Wellbeing.

Journals and time spans:
- American Sociological Research
- 1970-2007
- 2008-2018
- American Journal of Sociology
- 1970-2007
- 2008-2018

Certainly, the resulting field designation is bound to miss some contributions written by sociologists,
mostly because they are published in journals primarily associated with other fields (e.g., a publication in
the American Economic Review authored by a sociologist) or in books (although WoS does capture and
classify some books and book chapters, it does to less reliably than for journal articles). For instance,
some may want to identify sociological contributions as those written by researchers with a degree in
sociology or an affiliation in sociology irrespective of the journal outlet. Besides its practical drawbacks
(we know of no database that contains identifiable individual-level records of the holders of sociological
degrees or appointments), this alternative approach would also exclude contributions to sociological
knowledge by those outside of the discipline (e.g., a publication in the American Sociological Review
authored by a psychologist) as well as those outside of sociology departments and those without academic
appointments.

S-5

The Inequality Lab.
Discussion Paper Series

The Inequality Lab at the University of Michigan is a research and training
laboratory that investigates the dynamics of social inequality and trains the next
generation of inequality scholars. The lab opened in the fall of 2017 to support
the study of social inequality, its change across time, and its maintenance across
generations. Current projects are focused on wealth inequality and its
intergenerational consequences, the determinants and effects of social mobility,
and the development of new data and methods to address these topics.
The Discussion Paper series serves to distribute ongoing work by members and
affiliates of the Inequality Lab.

Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
The Inequality Lab, University of Michigan
www.theinequalitylab.com

