Page 1 of 12

“Of Mastery and Weariness”:
Qualitative Evaluation of the Lecture-RLE Series Scheduling Scheme
Martinez, Rudolf Cymorr Kirby
rmartinez@sanbeda.edu.ph
San Beda University - College of Nursing
Arellano University – Graduate School of Nursing

ABSTRACT
This paper explored the experiences of students on the Lecture-RLE Series
Scheduling Scheme (LRSS) both as an evaluation of the program and as a basis for
enhancement. Grounded on the interpretive paradigm, forty two (42) participants were
recruited to partake in this study. Further, reflection papers from the participants serve
as the narratives of the study and where then reflectively analyze via the process of
thematization.
After the three (3) level of reflective analysis, the following themes were
identified: (1) Dedication: Focused Learning; (2) Mastery of Professional Qualities;
(3) Setbacks: Stress & Weariness. The themes shows that in general, the overall
experience of the participants was affirmative and optimistic claiming that LRSS
promotes a conducive learning environment wherein they felt “less pressured” to
perform task. Further the participants felt that the LRSS provides them with a mean to
fully realize the development of their professional qualities, skills and attitude of a
“real” nurse since it mirrors the realities of an “on-the-job-training”. Lastly, the
identified setbacks of the LRSS are two-folds: stress and a sense of weariness, largely
attribute to the consecutive days of duty schedules as well as a perceived monotony of
activities in the area of exposure.
Insights from this study suggest that there is a need to update and upgrade
strategies and methodologies of teaching implemented in the clinical area to provide
varied approaches to learning skills as well as limit the perception of monotony
among student clinicians. Further research that dwells on the (1) nature of stress, (2)
the patterns of coping and adjustment among student clinicians is also implied.
Keywords: Qualitative Research, Nursing Education, Related Learning Experience

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 2 of 12

CONTEXT OF THE STUDY
The San Beda University College of Nursing has adopted an unorthodox
method in plotting its didactic and related learning experiences. Rather than the
traditional method of having related learning experience rotations in concurrence with
classroom lectures, the College has crafted a scheme wherein students undergo 12
weeks of pure classroom lectures, followed by 6 weeks of uninterrupted clinical
exposures. The consistent nurse licensure examination performance of graduates, the
positive feedback from affiliate institution, the students and clinical instructors plus
the relatively low occurrence of errors committed by students have encouraged the
continued adoption of the scheme.
However, a recent visit by the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools,
Colleges and Universities (PAASCU) has raised some questions on the effectiveness
of the “Lecture-RLE Series Scheduling” (LRSS) scheme used by the College thus in
order to address the concern, the College has commissioned the conduct of this study.
This study specifically employed the qualitative approach to deeply understand and
investigate the experiences of students in a contextualized manner.
This preliminary evaluation of the “Lecture-RLE Series” teaching scheme in
the San Beda College of Nursing specifically aims to explore the insights of the
students who have undergone its teaching methodology. It limits itself to evaluating
the LRSS scheme through the experiences of the students and not through other
variables thus the implications arising from the insights generated by this study can
only be ascertain within the context of the participants’ reality and may not be
transferrable to other select group of student.
The researchers are optimistic that this scientific inquiry into a novel teaching
scheme in nursing instruction is a step towards the future of nursing education since
as Giden and Brady (2007) puts it: there is a dire need for reforms and innovation.

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 3 of 12

METHODOLOGY
This research is grounded on the qualitative paradigm to understand the
experiences of select students in the lecture-RLE series scheduling (LRSS) scheme.
Specifically the adopted approach developed by Martinez (2013) was utilized as the
method of analysis rooted on the process of thematization. Forty-two (42)
participants, composed of 24 junior and 18 senior students, the total current
population of the College, were recruited to partake in this study. They were
purposively selected since they have undergone the “Lecture-RLE Series" teaching
methodology for at least a year (2 semesters). The participants were instructed to
write a reflection paper on their experience of the LRSS scheme which serves as the
“raw data” of the study.
The following process describes and summarizes how the experiences were
reflectively analysed in this study. Specifically, it shows the process of reflective
analysis of the experiences, together with its concurrent level of reflection, essential
steps, ways of enriching the experiences and their outcomes (Figure 1).
The yellow shaded boxes shows the level of reflections that was utilized in
this study, opposite of which, blue shaded boxes, are the essential steps in the
reflective analysis related with each level. In addition to that, the pink shaded boxes
represent the ways on how the experiences was enriched, validated and countervalidated, by the participants’ experiences. The green shaded boxes represent the
outcomes of each essential steps as well as each level of reflections.
The following are the essential steps in the reflective analysis of the
participants’ experiences
1. Written reflections from the participants were gathered after which they were
encoded verbatim. This represents the first essential steps termed as the “gathering
of experiences”. Thereafter, the encoded reflections were given back to participants
to validate their content which then resulted in the narrative, a validated account of
the participant’s experiences and will be thus considered as the “raw data”.
2. After the transcription, the researchers then identified the essential meanings found
in these narratives via identifying their thought markers. As a result of this first
reflection, the enhanced and validated thought element of the experiences was
produced. During this phase, member checking of the thought elements were

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 4 of 12

performed both to maintain the rigor of the study as well as ascertain its credibility.
This was done by first separately extracting the thought elements by the individual
researchers and then convening the research team to discuss and compare notes on
the process. The end goal is to produce a single version of the narratives with
thought elements agreed upon by the research team.
3. Next, after the meaning units of the combined experiences were explicated, the
researcher then reflected on these thought elements to give birth to themes,
representing the second level of reflection, the thematic interlace. The resulting
themes were again validated and counter validated by the participants through an
interview which then results in the enriched and validated themes.
4. To embellish grounding to the significant insights gathered from the process of
reflective analysis, reflective resonance was done by situating the resulting themes
from literatures. This process, paralleling the related literature review done in a
quantitative paradigm, will neither affirm nor negate the insights formed from the
reflection but merely add a lens by which the result can be appreciated, following
the philosophical underpinning of a contextual understanding based on the
tradition of the qualitative philosophy. This constitutes the 2rd level of reflection,
the thematic embodiment.
The process of validation and counter validation was done by presenting the
significant outcomes of each step in the process of reflective analysis to the
participants for resonance. It is only when they have agreed that the outcomes mirrors
their narratives shall the researchers continue to the next level of reflective analysis.
This continuous process of validation and counter validation ascertain that great

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the Lecture-

Page 5 of 12

Figure 1: The research process developed by Martinez (2013) showing the process of reflective
analysis of the experiences, together with its concurrent level of reflection, essential steps, ways of
enriching the experiences and their outcomes

emphasis is placed on the primacy of the participants’ narratives as well as ground the
study on the tenet that understanding is a co-created reality between the researchers
and the participants.
MAINTAINING ETHICAL STANDARDS
This study upholds ethical standards throughout its process of inquiry. Respect
for human dignity was upheld with the highest standard all throughout the study. This
said standard will be reflected in this paper by the following methods.
1. Approval of the Internal Review Board was solicited prior to beginning the
inquiry
2. Informed consent was secured from the prospective participants after explaining
the objectives of the study, the risks involved, the extent of their participation,
assurance of the confidentiality of their identities and/or any identification that can
be alluded to the participants on the information that they provide. Voluntary
withdrawal anytime along the conduct of the study may be done by the
participants without any question, explanation or repercussion was also be
explained together with the possibility that the research might be published in a
local or international journal.
3. Anonymity of the participants was maintained by providing number codes instead
of their true identity as well as making their narratives (raw data) only available to
the research team and not including it in any part of the final manuscript.
4. Safe keeping of information in the form of notes was facilitated by securing it in a
locked cabinet and only the research team held the key to such.
5. Going back and forth to the participants for the ongoing process of validation and
counter validation and final approval of the content of the study and
6. Destroying the hard data gathered through burning, a year after finishing the study

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 6 of 12

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Narratives from 42 participants were synthesized into 126 thought elements
and these thought elements were further explicated to form 13 clusters containing
essentially parallel elements. The following clusters were thus identified:
Setback/disadvantage; efficient and comfortable; focused; analytical and organized,
helpful; appreciative of lecture; preparedness; confident; comparison to other
methods; mastery; professional nurse; fear. It must be noted however that these
clusters are not the end in itself but a mean to further understand the themes, the
significant insights, of the study. Following the process described above, three (3)
themes reflective of the participants experiences were thus culled out and are as
follows: Dedication: Focused Learning; Mastery of Professional Qualities; Setbacks:
Stress &Weariness
Themes
Dedication: Focused Learning
This theme explores the students experience of the L-R series as promoting a
conducive learning environment wherein the students felt “less pressured” to perform
task, by giving priority to fully mastering theory prior to practice.
For them, one of advantages of the L-R series is that it focuses first on
understanding the theoretical basis before the actual performance/ exposure in the
area. It enables them to fully grasp the topic by zeroing in on learning the principle
first without the burden of preparing for the duty (RLE) unlike the traditional model.
This was perceived by the students as less stressful thus facilitating the learning
process wherein the mastery of the concepts was claimed to be more fluid and
dynamic. A student shares that
“I do not need to prepare for our duty the same time as we prepare for our
lecture”

Moreover, some students who have undergone the traditional method
verbalized that the traditional method is physically taxing since time as well as their
focus is divided both for their lecture and RLE preparations.

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 7 of 12

With much focus given by the students to classroom instructions, students
verbalized that they appreciate more the lectures, can focus more on studying and
maximize the time to acquire knowledge prior to the actual exposure in the area.
Having a pure classroom instruction first let the student feel that they are better
guided in learning, motivated in studying and prepared in their future exposure in the
clinical area.
When it comes to the learning process, for the students, grasping mastery of
the concept, therefore, is given priority than acquiring the ability to multitask.
Mastery of Professional Qualities
This theme explicates the students’ appreciation of the Lecture-RLE series as
a mean to fully realize the development of their professional qualities equip with the
proper knowledge, skills and attitude.
Because the Lecture-RLE series was seen by the student as a mean to fully
prepare them with the needed concepts, they verbalized that they feel more confident
in the performance of their task during their RLE exposure. They further claimed that
the scheme enabled them to perform their clinical task with relative ease since all of
the needed concepts were discussed prior to their clinical exposure. They verbalized
that because they already know the concepts, it is will be like “just a simple review”
when they try to recall things as opposed to learning the concept without any prior
lecture. It seems that for the student, their confidence is built upon the knowledge of
their perceived mastery of the concepts prior to their exposure.
In the Lecture-RLE series, students are exposed in the clinical area 4-5x a
week with minimal lecture class. For the student, this scheme let them feel as if “they
are like a true nurse” in the area since their shifting schedule is almost identical to
staff nurses enabling them to acculturate more to the routine, nuisance and culture of
the clinical area. One student verbalize
“You really feel that you are a nurse and you will be ready to become a
professional nurse in the future since you can see what they really do”

The students also verbalized that the scheme enables them to know their
patient more since they are exposed at bedside on a relatively longer period of time.

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 8 of 12

This facilitates the development of rapport and trust with the students and their
patients that lets the students render care on a more personal level since they “see the
patient not only as a patient but also as a human being”. Within this context, the
student felt more fulfilled, and satisfied with the care that they give to their patients.
Working together with the staff nurses on their duty hour that are almost parallel, the
students verbalized that they appreciate more their part as a member of the health care
team and not just merely as a student. The student also verbalized that this enables
them to be more familiar with the members of the health care team and vice versa thus
facilitating rapport among them making the work environment “less stressful”.
For the students, the Lecture-RLE series allows the realization and
development both of their professional qualities and human character.
Setbacks: Stress and Weariness
This theme elucidate on the participants notion of the LRSS scheme’s setback,
namely stress and the perceived sense of weariness during the duration of the
program. These two concepts resonate among the participants during the process of
validation and counter validation as the main impediment of the LRSS scheme.
The participants claimed that the scheme’s consecutive day’s schedule, 5 for
juniors and 4 for seniors, give them “stress” at times especially during the first few
days. Though the participants are aware that the stress for the first few days could be
attributed to their process of adaptation of the routines of the hospital setting, some
verbalized that this stress continued well beyond the adaptation stage. It is interesting
to note however that the LRSS scheme only seems to “add up” to their stress and not
the root cause of it. One participant’s verbalization that the consecutive days of duty
“nakakadagdag sa stress (Adds up to stress)” echoed well among the other
participants. Asked if the duty per se caused them stress, the participants would
answer “di naman, yung schedule lang (not really, only the schedule)”
Another setback that the participants identified is the feeling of weariness
from having monotonous activities during the clinical exposure. The participants
verbalized that though mastery and familiarity is built through repetitive activities,
sometimes it bores them. One participant explains

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 9 of 12

“Minsan nakakasawa yung paulit-ulit yung ginagawa sa ward
(Sometimes it becomes boring when you do the same activities in the ward)”
For the participants, the duty scheduling and the nature of activities in the
LRSS scheme contribute to its disadvantage as it add up to their stress and is
perceived as repetitive and monotonous thus seen as “boring”.
Core Insight
The themes shows that in general, the overall experience of the participants
was affirmative and optimistic claiming that LRSS promotes a conducive learning
environment wherein they felt “less pressured” to perform task, by giving priority to
fully master theory prior to the hands-on practice. Further the participants felt that the
LRSS provides them with a mean to fully realize the development of their
professional qualities and equip them with the proper knowledge, skills and attitude of
a “real” nurse since it is more grounded on the day to day realities of an “on-the-jobtraining” (OJT). Lastly, for the participants, the identified setbacks of the LRSS are
two-folds: stress and a sense of weariness. The participants largely attribute these to
their consecutive days of duty schedules as well as a perceived monotony of activities
in the area of exposure.
Thematic Resonance
This section provide context from existing literature to further provide another
layer of understanding the resulting insights of this study. It does not aim to compare
and contrast but rather to merely situate the insights from available foreign studies.
Having limited distractions, in the form of preparations for clinical exposure,
during the lecture days enable the participants to focus more on understanding the
concepts and theories facilitating the learning process. Focusing on a limited task one
at a time demands less physical and psychological effort thus there is a fluid transfer
of knowledge. Moreover, for the participants, focusing first on the lecture enables
them to feel at ease and be more motivated to learn and prepare for the hospital
exposure. This minimizes anxiety as a result of feeling incompetent, echoing the
result of the study done by Sharif & Masoumi (2005).

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 10 of 12

Feeling less pressured in the clinical setting was seen by the participants as a
contributing factor in their mastery of skills. This confidence was seemingly
developed during the intensive lecture prior to their exposure in the area. This was
parallel to the result of the study done by Kim et al (2014) and Shepard (2009) which
posts it that the degree of confidence is related to the perceived competence in skills.
Further, with a developed confidence and an intensive clinical exposure, the
participants verbalized that they imbibed more a sense of being a professional nurse.
Being exposed in the area for a longer period of time enables the participants
to develop their interpersonal skills, such as rapport building among patient and their
family. This was parallel to the studies which noted that students’ confidence
(Wieland et al, 2007) and satisfaction (Warne et al, 2010) increase with a longer
exposure to their area as they appreciate the whole individual nursing process over a
longer period of time. Another aspect of the LRSS scheme that the student found
positive is the paralleling of their duty schedule to that of the staff nurses. This
enables them to "be in the shoe" of a professional nurse and have a better appreciation
of the profession building competence among the participants. Greater amount of
interaction with the staff nurse was seen as developing a greater degree of competence
among student as was shown by the study of Haitana & Bland (2011); Kim (2007);
Kim et al (2004).
The parallel duty hours of the participants and the staff nurse also contributed
to students' sense of fulfilment and satisfaction with the care they rendered since they
feel that they are part of the health care team. This was also reflected in the study
done by Warne et al (2010) which emphasize that the longer interaction with the staff
nurse enables the student to recognize the crucial element of the caring relationship.
Neary (1997) also found the same insight in this study and concluded that providing a
sense of belonging by being part of the caring team alleviate fear and insecurities
among students.
One setback of the LRSS scheme is credited to stress attributed to the
consecutive duty days within the week. Gibbon et al (2011) similarly found out that
much of the stress of nursing student can be attributed to “placement-related
demands” such as duty schedules. Another perceived setback is the sense of weariness
among the participants largely ascribed to monotonous, repetitive clinical activities.
Papastavrou (2009) found a similar pattern in his study which points out that the

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 11 of 12

learning environment was seen by the participants as contributing to their “premise of
learning”.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE STUDY
The core of a qualitative inquiry is a deeper understanding of the phenomenon
under exploration thus following its philosophical root; it does not claim to generalize
the insights gathered from the process of reflection nor aim to give recommendations
based on the reflected realities gleaned from this approach. Instead, the insights, vis-àvis themes, are utilized to make suggestive implications drawn solely from the
phenomenon, confine within the context of this study. After careful reflection on the
resulting insights, vis-à-vis themes, of the study, the following implications are thus
put forth.
1. The Lecture –RLE series is generally favoured by the students as it promotes both
mastery of theoretical knowledge and clinical skills by providing an environment that
is less stressful
2. Though it promotes familiarity with the clinical setting, and rapport with the
members of the health care team, and their patients, some students verbalize
exhaustion at some point during the clinical exposure. It may be implied that a break
in the RLE duty schedule, either through a day off or a classroom lecture day, might
be warranted.
3. Insights from this study suggest that there is a need to update and upgrade strategies
and methodologies of teaching implemented in the clinical area to provide varied
approaches to learning skills as well as limit the perception of monotony among
student clinicians.
4. Since stress was an incidental reason for the perceived setback of the LRSS
scheme, further research that dwells on the nature of stress and patterns of coping and
adjustment among student clinicians is also implied.
5. Further research comparing the traditional scheme and the Lecture-RLE scheme in
terms of students acquired knowledge and skills, level of preparedness for RLE
exposure as well as student’s level of stress is needed.

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

Page 12 of 12

References
Gibbons, C., Dempster, M., Moutray, M. (2011) Stress, coping and satisfaction in
nursing students. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 67(3), 621–632.
Giddens, J., Brady, D. (2007). Rescuing nursing education from content saturation:
the case for a concept-based curriculum. Journal of Nursing Education, 46(2),
65-69.
Haitana, J., & Bland, M. (2011).Building relationships: The key to preceptoring
nursing students. Nursing Practice in New Zealand, 27(1), 4 – 12.
Kim, K. (2007). Perceived competency of senior nursing students after their clinical
preceptorship programs. Journal of Professional Nursing, 23(6), 369-375.
Kim, K., Lee, A., Eudey, L., Dea, M. (2014).Improving clinical competence and
confidence of senior nursing students through clinical preceptorship.
International Journal of Nursing, 1(2), 184-209.
Martinez, R. (2013). “Masked”: The lives of adolescents undergoing chemotherapy.
Philippine Journal of Nursing, 83(2), 9-18.
Neary, M.(1997). Project 2000 students' survival kit: a return to the practical room.
Nurse Education Today, 17(1): 46-52.
Papastavrou, E., Lambrinou, E., Tsangari, H., Saarikoski, M., Leino-Kilpi, H. (2009).
Student nurses experience of learning in the clinical environment. Nurse
Education in Practice, 10(3), 176-182.
Sellek, T. (1982).Satisfying and anxiety creating incidents for nursing students.
Nursing Times, 78(35): 137-140.
Sharif, F., Masoumi, S. (2005). A qualitative study of nursing student experiences of
clinical practice. BMC Nursing.4(6).doi:10.1186/1472-6955-4-6
Shepard, L. (2009). Examining the effectiveness of a preceptorship on clinical
competence for senior nursing students in a baccalaureate program..
Dissertations Abstracts International, 71(3), DAIB.(UMI No. AAT 3396353)
Warne, T., Johansson, UB., Papastavrou. E,,Tichelaar, E., Tomietto, M., Van den
Bossche, K., Moreno, MF., Saarikoski, M. (2010). An exploration of the clinical
learning experience of nursing students in nine European countries. Nurse
Education Today. 30(8), 809-815.
Wieland, D., Altmiller, G., Dorr, M., & Wolf, Z. (2007).Clinical transition
baccalaureate nursing students during preceptorship, pre-graduation practicum.
Nursing Education Perspective, 28(6), 315-321.

Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). "Of Mastery and Weariness": Qualitative Evaluation of the LectureRLE Series Scheduling Scheme. SocArXiv. Doi: 10.31235/osf.io/nb8pa

