Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings Pp.97- 108
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.9

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

Chams-Eddine LAMRI
Department of English
Faculty of Letters and Foreign Languages
Tlemcen University, Algeria

Abstract
Globalization of trade and economy led to a growing demand all over the world for English for
Specific Purposes courses. Conscious of this fact, Algeria has incorporated English for Legal
Purposes teaching into tertiary studies. In Algeria, Law students receive ELP course aimed to help
them in their studies and future careers. However, at the end of their learning process these students
still find linguistic and communication difficulties in situations where English is needed as the
course received is no more than teaching specific words and phrases and translating some texts
following the traditional Grammar Translation Method. Accordingly, this paper aims to presents
the current ELP course situation and to measure students’ and teachers’ attitudes towards the use
of Blended ELP course based on Content Language Integrated Learning model. The course has
twofold: to provide students with international legal knowledge and to compare them to the
Algerian one, and to expose learners to intensive reading activities and overcome lack of teaching
time activities. In this quantitative study, seven teachers were interviewed and fifty seven masters’
students were questioned. The results revealed that the students have comprehension difficulties
because the time load for reading activities is not sufficient. Concerning informants readiness to
use Blended approach, the teachers present negatively the usefulness of such an approach for their
students; on the contrary, students show a positive attitude to have additional English reading
comprehension activities online, and they demonstrate a high interest to the proposal to support
their English course with extra home tasks.
Keywords: Blended Learning, CLIL, ELP, Online Based Education
Cite as: LAMRI, C. (2019) E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals.
Arab World English Journal, May 2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings.
97-108. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.9

97

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

Introduction
The prevalent use of English as an international language is in constant expansion. This fact is
reflected in different fields and various domains where English is considered as a working tool. In
order to reach specific objectives, world countries, including Algeria, introduced English courses
at all levels of education, and more particularly at the university. At this level, ESP is taught to
achieve specific learners’ needs, and meet the social requirement. Furthermore, in ESP specific
language skills are focused on in order to help the students to acquire English knowledge. For
instance, ELP students learn how to decode and comprehend specific types of texts through reading
tasks; while learners are exposed to the targeted terminology, language structures, topics and
contexts. However, achieving correctness and accuracy in reading authentic complex texts needs
considerable teaching time; for this reason, technology is widely used nowadays by ESP
practitioners to overcome these difficulties. With the availability of internet, teachers have adopted
the blended-learning approach to intensify students’ exposure to the language. Even if this teaching
approach has already started in some developed countries in the beginning of this century, in
Algeria it has not been used yet.
Nowadays, in the Algerian Universities and due to the efforts the Department of English,
almost all the faculties have integrated English courses in the learning programme as a compulsory
module from the first year of graduation. ELP students study English with a timing length of one
hour and a half per week during five years. After finishing their studies, they remain at a low or
intermediate level of reading comprehension. Today knowledge is transferred either through
printed or digital text. Students in general and ELP learners in particular are required to read texts
written in English to achieve academic tasks. Concerning their future professional activities, they
will face legal documents that need a specific mastery of the terminology used in addition to an
appropriate level of comprehension. But almost all the students have technical difficulties to read
correctly because of the inappropriate teaching time devoted to English.
The issue led the researcher to ask for what teaching approach and materials would be
appropriate to develop the target students’ reading skills through blended learning? and predict
that content and language integrated instruction through a blended approach can help ELP students
to develop their reading skills by exposing them to intensive reading tasks in their field of study
and increasing the teaching time. Thus, the main objective of this paper is to test teachers and
students readiness to use the blended approach.
Literature Review
The spread of technological inventions during the 20th century and especially with the information
and communication technologies (ICTs) resulted in an unimaginable extent of different kinds of
interactions. To ensure the technological, economic, scientific, cultural and diplomatic exchanges,
English imposed itself as a medium of communication, and its position as an imperialist language
shifted to the status of language of knowledge embraced officially by more than one hundred
countries (Crystal, 1997).
World institutions organise training sessions for their staff with the help of ESP specialists
in order to update employees’ English proficiency level. Additionally almost all world universities
have adopted English as a pedagogical tool for studies or integrated English for Legal Purposes
(ELP) in students’ curriculum. This module is methodologically and pedagogically based on ESP
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

98

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

teaching and learning approaches and methods. Nevertheless ELP is characterised by some
specific features that are not commonly found in other domains.
Teaching/Learning Legal Language
Legal English is a complex language, which needs a combination of both good basic skills, and
legal background. The lawyers and administrators play important roles in managing different
affairs related to regulation. They are responsible for people’s interests and if there is a language
barrier which leads to confusion in the interpretation of meaning, it will be highly risked for the
results of the files under study. For that reason, acquiring English specific to legal context is not
an easy task to be reached because of the various existing situations that are found in real life.
Language specialists being aware of these facts adopted the teaching methodologies according to
these facts and have designed courses, specific to this range of the society, known as ELP.
In this context, ELP teacher role is, first to produce materials and present the language
content and course activities in various ways to help and motivate students to learn the target
language needed to update their academic or occupational knowledge. Then to determine the
language skills needed to carry out specific jobs or studies (West, 1994).On the basis of this idea,
researchers developed Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) approach to develop
students content knowledge and English fluency at the same time.
Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL)
CLIL, mostly implemented in English (Dalton - Puffer, 2011), refers to learning a subject in a
language that is not frequently used by the community and it is viewed as a mixture of both
language and subject matter learning (Marsh & Wolff, 2007). Therefore, applying CLIL teaching
approach in the ELP context can provide the necessary input in terms of content and language
needs simultaneously.
If an attractive subject or relevant academic topic area can provide meaningful context in
which students can reach language objectives; in this situation, content serves the language. On
the other hand, if language can be used to attain content objectives; in this case, language serves
the content. Teaching language and content together is an effective way of developing English
language proficiency (Brinton et al., 1989). A number of reasons are advocated by Nordmeyer &
Barduhn (2010, p.4) for using a content-based language curriculum:
• It builds on the interests and linguistic needs of learners.
• It increases motivation by using content relevant to learners.
• It incorporates the eventual uses that learners will make of the target language.
• It teaches meaningful language embedded within relevant discourse contexts.
In ESP, it is crucial to identify students’ content and language needs in order to design a syllabus
that will fulfill their language lacks and content requirements. One of the essential problems for
ELP students is to comprehend what they have to read; and it is commonly recommended that
“reading exposure is the primary stage of developing language skills” (Krashen, 1989,p.
109).Through reading activities the ELP students will be familiarised with the terminology used
in their speciality. Furthermore, reading comprehension tasks must be designed to guide the
students to guess the meaning of the text. Here major questions challenge an efficient reading
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

99

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

process: what is the appropriate reading strategy that can be used to ELP students to comprehend
legal text?
Teaching Reading Strategies
The commonly suggested reading strategies to be taught are the ones elaborated by the National
Capital Language Resource Centre (NCLRC)1. In its web document entitled The Essentials of
Language Teaching it is stated that “effective language instructors]...[ help students develop a set
of reading strategies and match appropriate strategies to each reading situation” (NCLRC,2007,
para. 2). These strategies can help students read more quickly and effectively and include
previewing, predicting, skimming and scanning, guessing from context, and paraphrasing. In
addition to calling-up his background knowledge in L1, the reader needs to use these strategies
when reading because he can gain confidence in his ability to read and comprehend the language.
Hence the instructor role, according to the NCLRC, is to help students learn when and how to use
reading strategies in several ways.
•

By modelling the strategies aloud, talking through the processes of previewing, predicting,
skimming and scanning, and paraphrasing. This shows students how the strategies work and how
much they can know about a text before they begin to read word by word.
• By allowing time in class for group and individual previewing and predicting activities as
preparation for in-class or out-of-class reading. Allocating class time to these activities indicates
their importance and value.
• By using cloze (fill in the blank) exercises to review vocabulary items. This helps students learn
to guess meaning from context.
• By encouraging students to talk about what strategies they think will help them approach a
reading assignment, and then talking after reading about what strategies they actually use. This
helps students develop flexibility in their choice of strategies.
(NCLRC, 2007, para. 3)
Regarding the context under investigation, it is important for ELP Algerian students, first, to learn
and know how to use the appropriate reading strategies; then, to retrieve their knowledge
experience. That is to say, a conscious use of cognitive strategies will motivate them to overcome
their reading difficulties, and lead to the use of metacognitive strategies. To reach this objective,
students need to be exposed intensively to the target language. However, classroom instruction in
ELP context cannot provide the required learning time to help students perform their language
competencies. Accordingly new trends in education propose online platforms to assist both
teachers and learners fulfil their needs.
Online-Based Education
World Wide Web technologies have attracted educational specialists’ attention very early. Internet
offers an opportunity to expand the learning environment outside classroom walls and various
applications of World Wide Web technologies in academic settings have been studied and tested.
The results led to the emergence of different definitions of online-based education (OBE). After a
review of literature, it seems that Khan’s (1997, p. 6) definition includes the major elements of
OBE, when he states that it is “a hypermedia-based instructional programme that utilizes the
resources of the World Wide Web to create a meaningful learning environment where learning is
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

100

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

fostered and supported.”, i.e., OBE is a teaching programme implemented through internet aiming
at improving students’ abilities. In many ways teaching in an online environment is much like
teaching in any other formal educational context; the difference lies in specific components that
are used in online teaching as the use of content development, multimedia component, computers
and storage devices, internet tools, authoring programmes, servers, browsers and other
applications (Khan,1997). All these components are indispensable characteristics of the OBE
learning environments because a course designer needs both content and technological resources
to implement online activities. Components, also serve as tools to the emergence of OBE features.
In this vein, Khan (1997) states that “features are characteristics of WBI programme contributed
by those components” (p.6).
Literature distinguishes two feature categories in an OBE design relying on the level of
technical and pedagogical importance. Khan (1997, p. 8) explains that there are key and additional
features. The former one are considered as base characteristics of the OBE system and inherent to
the Web such as interactivity, multimedia, open system, online search, electronic publishing, cross
cultural interaction, device-distance-time independency, globally accessibility, etc. OBE can
provide a flexible teaching and learning environment because the contents can be extended beyond
those prepared by instructors and shared to the outside world. Furthermore, in OBE projects course
designer can adapt contents to match each individual student according to his or her goals and
previous knowledge. Hence, learners have more autonomy in making decisions regarding their
learning.
Concerning additional features, their effectiveness depends on the quality of OBE design
for instance convenience, easiness of use, online support, authenticity, cost-effectiveness,
collaborative learning, online evaluation, virtual cultures etc. It is important to devise appropriately
the course according to students’ competencies. Learners in OBE learn collaboratively as well as
individually, they share information and seek for clarifications through continuous interaction, that
is why, an easy access and use of online support is essential for an effective learning.
To sum up, components can contribute to one or more features, for example emails as a
web component can provide interactivity between students and teachers. Features as device,
distance and time independency are facilitated by internet (component). Students enrolled in an
online course can study by using any computer device, anywhere and in anytime. These learning
advantages presented by OBE environment lead researchers to adapt university programmes
according to students’ needs and wants.
Though, even if a great development is achieved in order to facilitate the use of
technologies for educational purposes, learners are still frustrated with problems in OBE as
Technical problems, inadequate feedback, overwhelming messages, lack of navigational skills,
conversation domination, and physical tiredness (Driscoll, 2002). Subsequently, the designer has
the responsibility to overcome these constraints since OBE learners need both traditional and new
skills to be successful. Hence, it is implied that the role of the teacher in blended environment goes
beyond the classroom walls. The next part deals with the new tasks that should be performed by
the teacher.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

101

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

In OBE the role of the teacher goes beyond the design of materials and involves active
participation because he has to master additional skills in technology to deal with a new teaching
environment (time and space separation), and to use new teaching strategies. Nowadays many
researchers focus on identifying and defining the role of online instructors; according to Berge
(1995), online instructor characteristics are grouped under four categories: pedagogical, social,
managerial and technical. These roles are considered as basics for the 21st century teacher;
however, the literature agrees that it is not an easy task. Online instructors need more time, as they
play many additional roles. Berge (1995) adds that “not all of these roles need to be carried out in
their entirety by the same person. In fact, it may be rare that they are” (p.2). The time requisite in
the OBE to teach specific language and content is much more than that spent in a traditional
educational context.
The Study
This study concerns Master’s students enrolled in the academic year 2016/2017 at the Department
of Political Science and International Relations, Faculty of Law and Politics, Tlemcen University.
A questionnaire was designed and administered to the students which are specialised in general
relations and communication, general politics, and diplomacy and international exchange. A total
number of fifty seven (57) students out of one hundred and ninety three (193) students were dealt
with.
The teachers are concerned with this study in order to give their points of view, through a
structured interview, on students’ English language needs and the use of new technologies in their
context. The subject specialist teachers’ number in the Faculty is one hundred and six, seven
among them teach English. One informant involved in the study is a full-time teacher in the Faculty
with a long teaching experience. He is specialised in international law and political relations and
in charge of the legal English terminology course for post graduate students, in the Department of
Law and administrative sciences, without receiving any prior specific training. The other
informants are part time teachers in the Faculty specialized in ESP, TEFL, and translation.
Data Analysis and Discussion
The teachers’ interview and the students’ questionnaire reveal interesting facts regarding the
current ELP course situation.
Students’ comprehension difficulties
According to the results provided by the respondents, more than half of the students (55%) evaluate
their level in reading English texts as beginner, i.e., they could just identify words and sentence
elements and structures and no more than that. While 43% of students stated that, in addition to
vocabulary they could also interpret the general idea of the text, in other words they consider
themselves having an intermediate level. An exception is made for one informant who considered
himself of an advanced level with the ability to identify, interpret and analyse the linguistic,
contextual and discoursal elements of the text.
Regarding the nature of their reading difficulties, data were gathered at three language levels:
the phonological, the syntactic, and the lexical levels. Nearly half of the students (50.87%) stated
to have difficulties to match words with their sounds/pronunciation. 38, 59% informants reported
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

102

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

that they had a problem at the syntactic level; they added that they did not understand the
grammatical relationship between sentences. Concerning lexical difficulties, it should be noted
that some students ticked more than one answer. First, 61,42% students reported that when reading
they could not understand word meanings. 33.33% of them ticked that they did not know what the
text was about in general. Finally, 73,68% students stated to have a difficulty to know the meaning
of some sentences. We deduce from informants’ arguments, the existence of difficulties at all
language levels.
English Course Content
The content of the English course is inappropriate to ELP students’ study needs, because it focuses
mainly on general English activities or provides business terminology or translation. The content
provided cannot be considered as a source for legal vocabulary acquisition. Furthermore, except
for some broad lines no ELP syllabus is provided by the Department.
Legal English

General English

14%

Other

19%

67%

Figure 1. English course content
Concerning the extent to which students are satisfied with the reading topics dealt with, it appears
from their answers that the percentage of students who seem to be interested in the provided topics
represents 53,15%. However, 46.84% are not satisfied because, according to them, the topics are
not related to the other modules, or are not motivating, or are difficult to comprehend.
The Reading Frequency in the Classroom
In addition, the data obtained from teachers’ answers revealed that the English course in general
and the reading activities in particular are not instructed with the same time distribution. Some
teachers devote half an hour in each lecture, others an hour and a half or even three hours for each
didactic unit, and a teacher emphasizes all his sessions on text comprehension, that is, the time
allocated to reading activities is not the same for all the students.
43.83% of students asserted that they read the text with their teachers twice; while, others
(33.33%) stated that they read it only once. Regarding self-reading, 52,63% of students responded
that their teacher asked them to read the same text twice; whereas, twenty-one informants (36,84%)
said that broadly speaking they were ordered to read the text only once. The answers are
summarized in the table 1:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

103

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

Table 1. The reading frequency in the classroom
Reading Frequency of
Once
Twice
the
same
text
AF
RF
AF
RF
Types of reading
With the teacher
19 33,33% 25 43,85%
Self-reading
21 36,84% 30 52,63%

Three
Times

More

AF

RF

AF

RF

6
3

10,52%
5,26%

7
3

12,28%
5,26%

The students’ questionnaire also shows that informants are aware of the inadequacy of the time
allocated to the English course with their learning needs. They maintain that the English course
time load is not sufficient to deal with more texts, to vary the genres, to increase the frequency of
text reading in class, and to augment the number of reading tasks. In addition, they do not receive
reading homework assignments to overcome the lack of time, i.e., they are not intensively exposed
to English texts.
Finally, even if the students see that the English course can complete the content modules,
they maintain that they do not like the English course in general (38%) or that they are not
interested by the provided reading topics in particular (36,84%) because they have a problem of
comprehension. The results obtained also show an unbalanced use of the reading strategies. All
teachers emphasize mainly inferring the meaning from context, skimming, scanning and
vocabulary acquisition, and only 2 out of 7 teachers activate students’ background knowledge.
Readiness to Use Blended Approach
Regarding informants’ attitudes towards the use of a blended approach, the gathered information
from teachers and students’ answers are not identical. The teachers disapprove the idea, and stated
that it is not possible to use this approach; this may show that they are not ready to use it. According
to them, various constraints and limitations exist and play a negative role to the feasibility of the
blended approach in their context: Absence of conditions, lack of technological materials,
students’ internet inaccessibility, reticence from a new teaching/learning environment, and
students’ lack of technological skills are the main arguments advocated.
Unlike teachers, students demonstrate an interest to support their English course with
online activities. In addition, they stated to have personal computers and to have an easy access to
the net as they are daily users leading to assume that the requirements to establish a blended
learning environment exist in the present situation. From students’ answers, we can deduce that
the technological materials are available to experiment a blended course. This will also allow ELP
students to be exposed to intensive reading activities and overcome lack of teaching time.
Blended ELP Course Pre-requisite
This study revealed that the ELP students need to develop their reading skill. It was also noticed
that they have to increase their learning time. Thus, this paper recommends a blended approach to
overcome these difficulties. Therefore, the role of the teacher should be readapted to the current
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

104

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

situation, i.e., an ESP practitioner specialised in teaching ELP and instructing his lectures both in
the classroom and online. The following pedagogical suggestions can overcome the noticed issues.
ELP Teacher Role
Informants declared that neither the lectures nor the activities are programmed and prepared in
accordance with a prescribed syllabus. Accordingly, the ELP teacher major role is to design a
syllabus and learning activities. However, he needs to be aware of the students’ needs which
constitute a major source of information for his course design and for choosing the appropriate
teaching methodology. Second, as an ESP teacher, he has to organize his course, to set learning
objectives, to establish a positive learning environment in the classroom, and to evaluate students’
progress. Then, when teaching legal English the teacher has to provide a comprehensible content
input; therefore, he is required to possess an important corpus of legal terminology and knowledge
that helps him to cope with the new teaching situation.
In addition, as already stated, the online teacher has to master additional skills in
technology to deal with in this new teaching environment and to use new teaching strategies.
Besides, his pedagogical and managerial roles he has to integrate his students into the virtual social
environment and to choose and perhaps design an appropriate computing programme that supports
the learning goals and helps students to become competent users.
The above mentioned roles are considered as basics for the ELP online teacher; however,
it is not an easy task. The time required teaching specific language and content using blended
approach is much longer than that spent in a traditional educational context. That is why it is
important to train ELP teacher to manage and perform his roles according to students’ necessities,
lacks and wants.
Content Selection
In education the content is mainly represented in the topic and the text selected for pedagogical
purposes. This selection is of central significance in the course design process. Therefore, it is
necessary to choose topics that belong to students’ specialty taking into consideration subject
specialists’ suggestions and learners’ needs in materials design. These topics can be related to the
British and American legal systems, international laws, administrative laws and human rights.
Furthermore, when the students have needs to study the language, as such they have a tendency to
be less motivated to learn it. However, they will be more interested in learning English as an
interesting activity if they deal with topics closely associated to their field of study. Accordingly,
the more narrowly and explicitly a topic is related to their area of concern, the more they will be
motivated to work on and to deal with the language content presented.
Subsequent to the selection of the suitable topics that will be used for the didactic units,
the ELP teacher will have to select the appropriate texts for reading practice, by providing the ones
which reflect real life situations. To ensure course efficiency, authentic texts are intensively
motivating and helpful. The students should be exposed as widely as possible to legal discourse
from the beginning. The selected texts should include a variety of text genres that the students are
likely to become familiar with and produce for academic or professional purposes. These resources
are available in diverse printed or electronic sources related to the students’ field of speciality such
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

105

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

as specialised journals and articles, academic textbooks, magazines and newspapers written in the
target language by native or non-native speakers. By using authentic texts, the students will be
able to identify the most and widely used specific vocabulary and grammatical structures applied
in English.
To sum up, authentic texts can be implemented or simplified if the teacher feels that this
would develop a pedagogic value. However, such materials have to be set up for learners’ needs
and requirements purposes, be prominently interesting, able to generate a lot of practical and
interesting classroom activities and readable by the target students.
Techniques for Teaching Reading in the ELP Classroom
The aim of the language teacher is to help his learners to communicate effectively in the target
situation. In the case of reading, this means helping students to use reading strategies to maximize
their comprehension of text and identify relevant information. Different techniques can be
suggested to fulfill this goal.
ELP teacher should focus on both the process and the product of reading. It is important to
develop students' awareness of the reading process and reading strategies by asking them to think
about how they read in Arabic or in French. Teacher also helps his students to practice the full
repertoire of reading strategies by using authentic reading tasks. He has the responsibility to guide
his students to learn to read and vice-versa by providing interesting reading materials. Furthermore,
students should be conscious of what they are doing while they complete reading assignments in
class or at home. Doing so, students can develop their abilities to handle interactive situations they
may encounter beyond the classroom.
The effective reader is the student who knows how to use strategies before, during, and
after reading, .i.e., teaching reading strategies is an integral part of the use of reading activities.
Before reading, the tasks are prepared according to the purpose of reading and the needed linguistic
or background knowledge. During and after reading, students comprehension should be monitored
by examining their predictions and content guesses, by defining what is important to understand,
and by rereading to check comprehension. After reading students are assessed; first, their
comprehension is evaluated according to a specific task or area, and then the appropriateness of
the used strategies is verified.
E-learn Platforms to Teach ELP Reading
Nowadays, the computer is a significant part of the learner's daily life. “It is, by now, inevitable
that methods of teaching and learning should include E-learning components that are based on the
computer environment and include proper preparation for the 21st century which requires a "new
pedagogy"”(Martin & Madigan, 2006,p. 201). The latter requires appropriate tools available and
easy to manage for the teacher.
E-learn platforms as Moodle were created to combine online and face to face instructions.
They have become very popular among teachers around the world as teaching tools. There are
many ways to use Moodle. It can be used to conduct full online courses, or simply to augment
face-to-face courses (known as blended learning). Many institutions use it as their platform where
we can find all the necessary information such as Tlemcen University web site (www.univArab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

106

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

tlemcen.dz/). Moodle has also features that allow it to be used for large numbers of users.
Furthermore, many activities such as forums, databases, and wikis are considered by the students
as fashionable. This can help them to build collaborative communities of learning around their
subject matter. Moreover, Moodle can be used as a way to deliver content to students and assess
learning using assignments or quizzes. All these features, and more specifically the last one,
provide strong arguments to use Moodle platform as an open source to deliver blended ELP
reading course through Tlemcen University web site. However, what are the main didactic and
pedagogical advantages when using Moodle? The next part will try to answer this
question.According to Race (2008), Moodle is designed to support a style of learning called Social
Constructionism. This style of learning is interactive. “Learning is interactive when learners are
actively engaged in a variety of activities, and along with their peers and teacher, they are coconstructors of knowledge.” (Chamberlain &Vrasidas, 2001, p. 79). People learn best when they
interact with the learning material and interact with the teacher or other students about the material.
Race (2008) maintains that Moodle does not require the teacher to use the social constructionist
method for his course. However, it best supports this method. For example, with Moodle platform
the teacher can add course material that a student reads, but does not interact with.
Race (2008) also adds that as Moodle supports interaction and exploration, students'
learning process will often be non-linear. Nevertheless, Moodle has few features for imposing a
specific order upon a course. Teachers need to manually enroll the student in each part of the
course. If the teacher wants to impose that kind of linear course, he needs to place his students into
controlled groups that are authorized to view and perform the target tasks.
It is also important to mention that Moodle offers a variety of different activities from
giving information via testing to final evaluation. Dudeney & Hockly (2007) see a big advantage
mainly in the fact that in such a form of course everything is done in one place. Using blended
courses leads to simplifying lesson preparation and saving time. The online tutor can control
students’ activities and see the amount of time they have spent online or what documents and
forums they have accessed. In our case, i.e., Algerian ELP students, the LMD system imposes that
during an academic year they should perform approximately 80 to 90 hours for personal work (Art
7 of Order No. 137 of 20 June 2009); thus, it is an interesting tool to assess, evaluate and grade
our students.
In addition to the above pedagogical solutions that have been suggested to fulfill students’
needs and to stimulate their motivation for learning English, it important to programme at least
two sessions of one hour and a half per week to reach a certain degree of course efficiency.
Conclusion
This study investigated ELP teaching situation at Tlemcen University (Algeria) and explored
students’ and teachers’ attitudes towards the use of Blended course. The results revealed that the
students are not competent in comprehending legal text. In addition, they stated that they are eager
to support their English course with extra hours. Accordingly, Blended learning approach can help
to overcome lack of teaching time and to expose ELP students to additional reading activities. This
recommendation should be the subject for further and in depth investigation in which both
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

107

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

E-Learn Platform to Teach Legal English for Law Professionals

LAMRI

academicians and ministry officials would take part in order to generalize the idea across all the
Algerian universities.
Footnotes
The George Washington University (GWU), in collaboration with Georgetown University (GU)
and the Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL), comprises the National Capital Language Resource
Center (NCLRC), one of fourteen Language Resource Centers (LRCs) in the United States funded
by the U.S. Department of Education Title VI.
About the author:
Dr. Lamri Chams Eddine is an English lecturer at Tlemcen University (Algeria). He mainly
teaches ESP and academic writing in the Department of English. His particular research interest is
incorporating e-learning platforms in higher education to support ESP teaching. Recent works
include a paper on ‘developing ELP students’ reading skills through a blended learning approach’
in Eurasian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4, (2), 389-407. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-75625799
References
Berge, Z.L.(1995). Facilitating Computer Conferencing: Recommendations from the Field.
Educational Technology,15, (1), 22-30.
Chamberlain, R., & Vrasidas, C. (2001).Creating Engaging Online Instruction. Proceedings from
the 17th Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning. Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin System.
Crystal, D. (1997). English as Global Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dalton Puffer, C. (2011).Content and - Language Integrated Learning: From Practice to Principle?
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 31 ,(1), 182-204.
Driscoll, M. (2002).Blended Learning: Let's Get beyond the Hype. LTI Newsline: Learning &
Training Innovation. Available at: http://elearningmag.com/ltimagazine/article/
Dudeney, G.&Hockly, N. (2007). How to Teach English with Technology. Harlow:
Pearson/Longman.
Khan, B. H. (1997).Web-based Instruction: What is it and why is it? Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Educational Technology Publications
Krashen, S. (1989).Language Acquisition and Language Education. Prentice Hall International.
Marsh, D.,& Wolff, D.(2007) Diverse Contexts-Converging Goals: CLIL in Europe. Peter Lang,
Frankfürt.
Martin, A.,& Madigan, D. (eds) (2006). Digital Literacies for Learning. London: Facet Publishing.
242 pp. ISBN: 1-85604-563-3.
National Capital Language Resource Center (NCLRC). (2007). The Essentials of Language
Teaching. Available at: http://nclrc.org/essentials.
Nordmeyer, J., & Barduhn, S. (2010). Integrating Language and Content. Available at:
http://www.tesolmedia.com/docs/bookmail/660/Chap1.pdf (2014-02-20)
Race, W.H. (2008).Moodle: E-learning Course Development: A Complete Guide to Successful
Learning Using Moodle. Birmingham: Packet.
West, R. (1994). Needs Analysis in Language Teaching. Language Teaching, 27, (1), 1-19.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

108

