A framework for mission-oriented innovation policy:
Alternative pathways through the problem-solution space

Iris Wanzenböck * (+)
Joeri Wesseling *
Koen Frenken *
Marko Hekkert *
Matthias Weber **
* Innovation Studies, Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, Utrecht University
** Center for Innovation Systems & Policy, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna
+

corresponding author: i.wanzenbock@uu.nl

ABSTRACT: We aim for a better conceptualization of Mission-oriented Innovation Policy
(MIP). Our starting point is an analytical decomposition of societal problems and
innovative solutions based on the degrees of wickedness regarding three aspects: i)
contestation, ii) complexity and iii) uncertainty. We argue that both problems and solutions
can be diverging (contested, complex, uncertain) or converging (uncontested, well-defined,
informed). Based on the resulting problem-solution topology, we suggest a processoriented view on MIP and discuss three alternative pathways along which convergence
between problems and solutions can be achieved to transform wicked problems into
legitimate solutions. We illustrate the pathways with the examples of smoking bans, CCTV
and wind energy. For policy makers, locating a societal challenge in this problem-solution
space, and implementing policy strategies accordingly, is expected to accelerate both the
legitimacy of a mission and the resulting solutions.

Keywords: innovation policy, wicked problems, mission, societal challenges, grand challenges

1

1. Introduction
In the wake of societal challenges facing countries around the world, innovation policy is undergoing
major changes. No longer is economic growth the sole guiding rationale for stimulating technological
development. Instead, there is an emerging consensus that innovation, and innovation policy, should
focus on solving concrete and pressing problems in society at large.
The change in the objectives of innovation policy from economic growth towards societal challenges
has prompted renewed interest into mission-oriented types of innovation policy (MIP) that were
particularly prevalent in the 1960s and 1970s. However, the meaning of MIP today differs considerably
from its meaning in the past. Past policies used to be framed in terms of ambitious technical
achievements with the man-on-the-moon project as the archetypical example of a technology-led
mission (Nelson 1974). With a clear formulation of the problem and the solution, these missions
addressed a relatively ‘tame’ problem, but paid scant regard to societal or economic impacts (Mowery
et al. 2010). By contrast, over the past decade, missions have been directed to the persistent societal
problems of our time, also labelled as ‘grand challenges’ or ‘societal challenges’, such as climate
change, ageing, and security (EC 2011; Cagnin et al. 2012; Hicks 2016; Mazzucato 2018a).
Compared to traditional technology-led missions, societal challenge-led missions appear more complex
and unstructured, going beyond technological advances alone. It is the ‘wicked’ nature of societal
problems (Rittel and Webber 1973) that poses new questions and obstacles for innovation policy
makers. Pursuing a societal mission-oriented approach raises the issue of how to identify, define and
subsequently target a problem which is complex and systemic and for which solutions, be it a
technological or non-technological solution, can be hardly predefined.
In this view, mission-oriented innovation policy relates to policies supporting transformative system
change (Weber and Rohracher 2012; Rogge and Reichardt 2016; Schot and Steinmueller 2016; Boon
and Edler 2018). Societal challenges may require fundamental societal transformations, not just
technologically but also institutionally and behaviorally, as recognized in the literature on sociotechnical transitions (Geels 2004; Smith and Kern 2009; Alkemade et al. 2011). Indeed, the persistent
nature of societal problems may call for missions that go beyond the optimization of current sociotechnical systems. In this context, Weber and Rohracher (2012) suggested that the rationales for
challenge-led innovation policies follow from ‘transformational’ system failures, including the lack of
directionality, the lack of demand articulation, limited reflexivity and missing coordination across
policy domains and levels. Accordingly, a major part of mission-oriented innovation policy lies in
ensuring legitimacy, broad engagement and cooperation among multiple actors to govern the wicked
challenges of current societies (Borrás and Edler 2014; Kuhlmann and Rip 2018; Schot and
Steinmueller 2018).
As yet, the literature on MIP has remained relatively silent on the fact that societal challenges may
fundamentally differ in nature. Different societal problems may require different types of solutions, and
consequently, different types of policies to address a societal challenge effectively. Both academics and
policy makers have focused primarily on the range of technological solutions conceivable to solve a
societal problem (Diercks et al. 2018). In doing so, the framing and legitimacy of a societal challenge
itself has been often taken for granted, just as the need for technological innovation. While some
challenges may indeed require research and innovation or fundamental transitions in the socio-technical

2

regimes that society employs, other problems may be tackled by regulation and behavioral change
(institutional innovations) without necessitating technological innovation per se. Hence, MIP goes
beyond the spheres of science or innovation policies alone (Kuhlmann and Rip 2014), which implies
that alternative policies, or policy mixes, to tackle societal challenges should not be disregarded.
We will argue that societal challenges, and the corresponding innovation missions, may differ in many
ways. Drawing on policy sciences, there is much more to say about the complexity and scope of societal
challenges, beyond their generic definition as ‘wicked’ (Rittel and Webber 1973; Levin et al. 2012;
Newman and Head 2017; Daviter 2017). The simple wicked-tame dichotomy often invoked does not
do justice to the heterogeneity of the underlying problem structures, nor to the specific design of
missions needed to tackle them. Here, the policy sciences literature proves useful to take into account
the value-based discourses in formulating a challenge and to capture the political dynamics in framing
‘the best’ solutions for a particular problem (Hoppe 2011; Ison et al. 2015). By disregarding the ‘degree
of wickedness’ involved in a particular challenge, the innovation policy literature runs the risk of
providing a one-size-fits-all approach for a MIP, with taken-for-granted problem definitions and a too
strong emphasis on technological innovation, while marginalizing the opposing voices and discarding
complex trade-offs. As a consequence, MIP as currently conceived may turn out to be much less
effective than many hope for.
Below, we combine insights from innovation studies and policy sciences to provide analytical clarity
about the nature of a particular societal challenge on the one hand, and the differences in scope and
scale between different challenges on the other hand. We will distinguish between two analytical
dimensions referring to the problem side (i.e. the type of underlying problem structures) and the solution
side (i.e. the type and availability of potential innovations) of a societal challenge. From this, we derive
a two-dimensional problem-solution space which allows one to locate different societal challenges
depending on their divergence or convergence of both problems and solutions.
On this basis, we argue that a MIP should be seen as a policy that provides directionality in supporting
the process towards converging problem-solution constellations. In this way, it aims at advancing
problem-solution constellations which become sufficiently stable to serve as common frame of
reference for actors. If such a configuration emerges, a mission-oriented approach can provide guidance
to the conventional market-based or system-based innovation policies to support the upscaling and
diffusion of technological and/or institutional innovations.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we briefly review the literature with
respect to the development of MIP. Section 3 provides the analytical basis for decomposing societal
challenges in problem side (Section 3.1) and solution side (Section 3.2) of diverging/converging societal
problems and innovative solutions, while Section 4 introduces four different problem-solution
constellations. In Section 5 we discuss three stylized policy pathways to achieve convergence around
societal problems and solutions, and derive implications for a further theoretical conceptualization and
practical implementation of MIP in Europe. Section 5 concludes with further research needs on MIP.

3

2. The re-emerging interest in mission-oriented innovation policies
Mission-oriented policies originally emerged as a technology policy concept implemented to support
governmental goals of national importance. Often recalled historical examples of science- or
technology-led missions are the Manhattan project, or the U.S. Apollo project putting a man on the
moon (Hicks 2016; Mazzucato 2017; Kaldewey 2018). This classical mission-orientation was
motivated primarily by political ambitions more than economic competitiveness. The technology
missions in the 1970s and 1980s stand in in contrast to diffusion-oriented policy approaches adopted
by countries such as Germany or Sweden focusing predominantly on the diffusion of technological
capabilities (Ergas 1987; Cantner and Pyka 2001).
It was only in the 1970s that technology-led missions for economic purposes started to dominate as a
response to the economic downturn. As a result, mission-oriented programs increasingly pursued
industrial policy ambitions. Among the best known examples of a mission that was driven by both
industrial and political ambitions was France’s high speed train TGV. However, with the limited
success of government-led missions to deliver economic growth and employment, the mission-oriented
approach became increasingly discredited. Instead, since the 1990s, innovation policy was dominated
by a belief in generic technology-neutral policies fixing market and system failures as to improve a
nation’s innovation and growth performance without the directionality provided by mission-oriented
policies in the past (Boekholt 2010; Mazzucato 2017).
During the last decade, academic interest in mission-oriented approaches has attained renewal due to
growing concerns about threats posed by global warming. A belief that a “strong, well-resourced
government technology policy is part of the solution [for climate change]” (Mowery et al. 2010, p.
1012) has fuelled the academic discourse on innovation policy targets related to future needs of society
rather than generic innovation objectives. Early contributions by Mowery et al. (2010) and Foray et al.
(2012) emphasized the ways in which societal challenge-oriented missions differ from traditional
technology-oriented missions: Societal missions (i) show longer time frames and are of greater breadth,
(ii) make (technological) diffusion inevitable as neither the state nor any other actor will be the single
user of the innovation, (iii) require a diversity of funding and investment sources and coordination
between numerous actors, and (iv) often have to overcome established industrial structures dominated
by incumbents with which new solutions have to compete (Foray et al. 2012, p. 1698). What is more, a
stronger need for demand-side policies and policies targeted at behavioural change was identified
(Mowery et al. 2010; Foray et al. 2012).
More recently, a wider literature stream emerged under the labels of ‘innovation policy for grand
challenges’ (Ulnicane 2016; Frenken 2017; Edler and Boon 2018; Kuhlmann and Rip 2018), ‘new
mission-oriented policy’ (Mazzucato 2017, 2018a) or ‘transformative innovation policy’ (Steward
2012; Diercks et al. 2018; Schot and Steinmueller 2018). Despite some differences in emphasis and
labelling we can identify a set of defining characteristics broadly shared between these approaches.
First, challenge-oriented innovation policies are directed towards complex, multi-dimensional and
systemic societal problems. Importantly, many societal challenges are open-ended in nature without the
expectation that the underlying problems can be fully solved (Kuhlmann and Rip 2014). The complex
and open-ended nature of societal challenges may impede the articulation of clear-cut missions and
bears the risk of arriving at missions without a clear target. As a way to address the multi-dimensionality

4

of societal challenges, Mazzucato (2018b) proposes to define of a set of clear research and innovation
mission projects at the European level, all derived from the broader challenge. Her approach thus
assumes that complex societal problems can be decomposed into more manageable building blocks
with clearly defined targets. The transformational innovation policy approach of Schot and Steinmueller
(2018) instead takes a different, more radical, position in regarding the systemic nature as inherent to
today’s societal problems. They call for experimenting with fundamentally different policy models and
the development of new experiences to foster socio-technical system change.
Second, the role of innovation policy genuinely changes in a mission-oriented context. While
conventional innovation policies were mostly ‘neutral’ with regard to the innovation output, the
legitimization of policy intervention shifted. With the advent of transformational policy, supporting
‘directionality’, ‘coordination’, ‘reflexivity’ and ‘demand articulation’ (Weber and Rohracher 2012)
emerged as new reference points for innovation policy. Recently, the role of innovation policy is
increasingly seen in shaping the direction of innovation activities (Mazzucato 2013, 2016), in
formulating societal needs and their articulation into demand (Boon and Edler 2018), and in breakingup of path-dependencies in the existing system (Schot and Steinmueller 2018).
Third, new mission-oriented approaches call for new and more decentralized governance modes. With
societal needs being a central innovation policy objective there is an enlarged set and variety of
stakeholders influencing and being influenced by the policy agendas (Borrás and Edler 2014; Kuhlmann
and Rip 2018). More inclusive arrangements go beyond well-established innovation systems built
around incumbent firms, but involve consumers, professionals, NGOs and lower governments (Frenken
2017). A mission formulation is increasingly recognized as a political process involving a plurality of
actors and governance structures that are capable of dealing with conflicts emerging along core values
of societal actors (Steward 2012; Kuhlman and Rip 2018). Broad societal acceptance and legitimacy of
the defined challenge is regarded essential to generate the demand needed for societal diffusion (Edler
and Boon 2018).

3. Contextualizing societal challenges: Beyond a wicked problem framing
Despite progress in conceptualizing the new roles and governance modes necessary to deal with societal
problems in the sense of a MIP, the innovation policy literature lacks approaches that can cope with the
heterogeneity of societal challenges at hand. Challenges may be wicked in different ways and to
different degrees. They vary considerably in the scale and scope of the underlying problem statements
on the one hand, and the scale and scope of solutions that are regarded as feasible and legitimate to
tackle the problem on the other hand. Conceptually disentangling societal challenges by their problem
and solution structures may prove particularly useful if we assume that technological innovations may
indeed be key but not necessarily silver bullets in tackling current challenges.

5

3.1. The problem side: Diverging or converging problem statements
Wicked problems1 are societal problems that are complex, unpredictable, and have poorly defined
boundaries, while so-called tame problems are inherently different by resembling more typical scientific
and technical problems (Rittel and Webber 1973). As pointed out by Newman and Head (2017), fully
tamed scientific or technical-type problems usually do not reflect the policy realities for societal issues.
Most of the recent societal problems have highly wicked tendencies and are “immune to linear, rational
or scientific methods of problem-solving” (Newman and Head 2017, p. 414).
Several policy sciences scholars have attempted to determine the ‘wickedness’ of policy issues and
problem structures (Roberts 2000; Head 2008; Hoppe 2011; May et al. 2013; Alford and Head 2017;
Carley and Christie 2017). Accordingly, the degree of wickedness can be seen as combination of
different dimensions (Head 2008). Reoccurring aspects in the scientific discussion and topologies of
wicked problems are:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

contestation referring to the degree of normativity related to an issue. Contestation is seen
as the result of diverging claims, values and framings, or the inherent conflicts of interest
resulting from social pluralism and stakeholder divergence (Hoppe 2011; Alford and Head
2017);
complexity understood in institutional terms is caused by the multi-scalar and multidimensional nature of societal problem (May et al. 2013; Carley and Christie 2017).
Responsibilities for action or non-action are hard to determine, causing a ‘problem of many
hands’ (Thompson 1980) especially if multiple actors, policy domains and governance
levels need to cooperate (Head 2008; Van de Poel et al. 2012);
uncertainty pointing to a lack of knowledge or limited availability of evidence, for instance
related to the risks or damages of action and non-action, the specific relationship between
causes, consequences and side-effects of a problem, but also the fragmentation of
knowledge across different stakeholders ( Van Bueren et al. 2003; Newman and Head
2017).

Consequently, the higher the contestation, complexity and uncertainty of the problem underlying a
particular challenge, the higher its wickedness and the more difficult might it be for (innovation) policy
to frame societal challenges as to derive clear, legitimate and broadly supported missions from it. The
degree of convergence/divergence of the problem statement depends on how (severe) different
stakeholders perceive a problem, or contest a specific narrative about the challenge. Examples can be
found in the recent discourses around climate change, genetically modified food or inequality. Problem
divergence increases if (scientifically) accepted knowledge on a problem is lacking, the division of
responsibilities to address the problem is not clear or institutional complexity is high (see Table 1). In
contrast, problem statements are likely to converge when different stakeholders can agree on a problem
framing and the importance of tackling it (lowers contestation), responsibilities for addressing the
problem – in e.g. institutional or geographical terms – are clear (lowers complexity), and when the main
causes and effects of a problem are fairly understood (lowers uncertainty).

1

Wicked problems are also known as persistent problems in the transition literature (Rotmans and Loorbach 2009;
Schuitmaker 2012). Other terms such as unstructured or incorrigible problems (Hoppe 2011), complex problems
(May et al, 2013), or grand challenges (Cagnin et al. 2012; Kuhlmann and Rip 2014) are related.

6

Table 1: The wickedness of societal problems
Contestation:
Stakeholder divergence, normativity

High

Low

Complexity:
Institutional and situational

High

Low

Uncertainty
Lack or fragmentation of knowledge

High

Low

Problem statement

Divergence

Convergence

Mission-oriented approaches that underestimate contestation and focus on scientific or technological
uncertainties as the root of the problem run the risk of building their arguments on the assumption that
the problem itself is well understood and widely shared (‘tamed’). This is especially apparent in the
motto of “big science deployed to meet big problems” which did not only drive the policy logic in the
1960s, but is still referred to in some present-day proposals (Mazzucato 2017, p. 7). However, ‘hard
facts’ no longer necessarily dominate ‘soft values’ in the context of social problems (Funtowicz and
Ravetz 1993). The scientific evidence base on how to best address future societal needs is generally not
considered as strong by all stakeholders involved, and this is likely to remain so in the future. Instead,
different framings and attitudes to evidence and data usually co-exist and shape policy design and
implementation (Turnpenny et al. 2009).
As emphasized by Daviter (2017), governing wicked problems comes with a trade-off. A ‘taming
strategy’ that prioritizes one way of problem-solving and excludes competing perspectives may
facilitate governability, but at the same time comes at high costs of problem reflexivity. If problem
identification is based on specific epistemic knowledge of a certain group of experts, it may well allow
faster agreement and action. On the other hand, the stifling of conflicts and competing perspectives in
the policy process might not only reduce the quality but in the end also provoke resistance against the
mission design.

3.2. The solution side: Diverging or converging views on innovative solutions
Contributions from policy sciences are valuable for determining the wickedness of problems but have
not drawn a clear distinction between societal problems and their solutions yet. Instead, for typical
wicked problems such as poverty, drug traffic and ghettos2, it is assumed that the definition of a problem
and the definition of a solution emerge gradually and in tandem. This assumption of inseparability of
problems and solutions links back to the original contribution by Rittel and Webber (1973) who argued,
from a governmental planning perspective, that social problems “can’t be defined until the solution has
been found” (Rittel and Webber 1973, p. 161).
Insights from innovation and transition studies are useful to shed new light on how new solutions (i.e.
innovations) emerge, why they diffuse or not diffuse, and how these processes can be supported by
policy to solve societal challenges. Even if there is growing consensus on a problem statement (e.g.,
The ‘ghetto’ problem was used by Nelson as archetypical counter-example to the ‘moon’ problem. While moon
problems have relatively clear goals and technological solutions, ghetto problems are rather wicked in nature. On
this, see Nelson (1974).
2

7

greenhouse gas emissions are too high), proposed solutions typically diverge between different
stakeholders (e.g., carbon tax, subsidies for renewable energy, subsidies for carbon capture and storage,
expand nuclear energy). It is therefore important to recognize that, despite a relatively clear problem
definition, solutions can still be subject to different degrees of contestation, complexity and uncertainty,
resulting in a degree of wickedness of solutions that may well differ from the degrees of wickedness of
the problem at hand. This can be explained as follows:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

contestation can emerge around the feasibility of a solution, the opportunities and threats
of innovations for businesses, for users or for society as a whole. Actors usually build their
opinions, for instance about whether better technologies or new social practices are
necessary to tackle a societal problem, based on their institutional or cultural context
(Wolsink 2000; Roeser 2011; Dignum et al. 2016). Such conflicting framings and interests
restrict diffusion patterns, and can lead to the refusal of a technically feasible innovation
due to particular norms and values (Wesseling et al. 2015).
complexity is related to the fact that novel technologies need to be combined and aligned
with new forms of organising the socio-technical system and radical changes in social
practices to achieve systemic change. The large-scale diffusion of renewable energy, for
instance, calls for new technologies to balance supply and demand, but also for new
governance institutions and behavioural change (Elzen et al. 2004; Walker and Cass 2007).
Even though changes in practices appear incremental and small at first, the accumulation
of ‘small wins’ may in the end bring about systemic transformation (Termeer et al. 2017;
Termeer and Dewulf 2018).
uncertainty refers to a lack or fragmentation of knowledge on the feasibility of a solution,
or the fact that multiple solutions seem to be possible and promising (technological and/or
institutional) without indication which works best for tackling the challenge in reasonable
time. A lack of clarity about effects and side-effects of innovations can reduce the
legitimacy and broad acceptance, and set back the development and diffusion of effective
solutions (Sengers et al. 2010).

Consequently, we can say the higher the degree of contestation, complexity and uncertainty about an
innovation, the more diverging the views on its solution potential (see Table 2).
Table 2: The wickedness of innovative solutions
Contestation:
Opinions on best solution

High

Low

Complexity:
Need for systemic approaches

High

Low

Uncertainty
Lack of knowledge on feasibility,
reach and impact

High

Low

Solution potential

Divergence

Convergence

8

4. A problem-solution space to differentiate types of societal challenges
We attempt to improve analytical clarity about the context of missions and mission-oriented innovation
policies by conceptualizing the underlying problem-solution structure. We focus on how problem
statements and views on potential solutions may diverge or converge. Based on the categorization in
Section 3, we can characterize four problem-solution constellations3 and derive a two-dimensional
problem-solution space (Table 3). This problem-solution space will further allow us to locate and
characterise different societal challenge-led mission policies based on the divergence/convergence of
the societal problems and solutions.
Table 3: A two-dimensional problem-solution space to contextualize missions

Diverging views
on solutions

Converging views
on solutions

Diverging views on the problem
I. Disorientation
High wickedness of the problem due to
i) broadly framed challenge
ii) lacking problem legitimacy
(societal, geographical, temporal)
iii) limited knowledge on problem nature

Converging views on the problem
II. Problem in search of a solution
Wickedness of the problem reduced due to
i) legitimized problem or shared vision
ii) clarity about responsibilities
iii) advanced problem understanding and social
learning

High wickedness of the solution due to
i) no (shared) vision on feasible solution, vague
and disputed ideas
ii) fragmented approaches, low willingness to
cooperate
iii) limited knowledge on effects and side effects

High wickedness of the solution as in I

Example: sustainable agriculture
III. Solution in search of a problem
High wickedness of the problem as in I.

Example: obesity
IV. Alignment
Wickedness of the problem reduced as in II.

Wickedness of the solution reduced due to
i) concrete expectations on technological, or
institutional innovations
ii) new business models and integrated
approaches
iii) claims on feasibility and (positive/negative)
societal impact of innovation

Wickedness of the solution reduced as in III;
societal embedding limited

Example: self-driving car

Examples: smoking ban, CCTV, wind energy

3

We are aware that problems or solution convergence (divergence) is neither a discrete nor a self-contained
phenomenon; each of the illustrated problem-solution structures represents a more symbolic and simplified
representation of a continuum.

9

Below we illustrate typical governance modes and arrangements4 for each of the four problem-solution
constellations, and discuss policy strategies to coordinate actions, to involve actors and to progress on
the current state5.

Quadrant I: Disorientation
The top-left quadrant characterises a ‘highly wicked’ problem-solution constellation in which neither a
consensus on the problem definition nor on a clear, realistic or practicable idea about solutions has
developed. Such a situation of diverging problems and diverging solutions can be illustrated with the
example of sustainable agriculture (see Box 1). Different stakeholders are highly influenced by their
particular background and knowledge in understanding and assessing the situation, and driven by their
individual interests, values and opinions on what a desirable future state could be. Hence, a commonly
accepted framing of the societal challenge in terms of the real problems and the best way(s) to solve
them is missing.
Box 1: Sustainable agriculture - a diverging problem with diverging solutions
After World War 2, Agricultural Policy was first and foremost aiming to secure Europe’s internal food
production and market. Driven by technological innovations (Grin et al. 2004) and farm size increases,
productivity has doubled (de Wit et al. 2011). European agriculture can be typified by what Duru et al.
(2015) define as a ‘productivist’ paradigm. This paradigm, however, has also led to a diverse set of
large adverse social and ecological impacts (Henle et al. 2008; Stoate et al. 2009) like a strong decline
of insects and birds (Sanderson et al. 2013), high nitrogen deposition levels (Bobbink et al. 2010), high
impact on climate change, low animal welfare and low or negative income for farmers (CBS statline
2018). Different societal groups (firms, farmers, NGOs, retailers) stress different problems and propose
solutions for these problems. Apart from specific groups focusing on specific problems, also different
and incompatible holistic visions dominate the debate. The two extremes are 1) the belief in large-scale
agriculture in which high tech knowledge is able to deliver high amounts and high quality products
within environmental constraints and 2) the belief in small scale organic farming practices with low
inputs of pesticides and fertilizer (Morgan and Murdoch 2000; Lamine 2011). Different perceptions of
the problem and different views on solutions that are highly contested make it very hard to develop a
shared vision on a sustainable agricultural system.

We build on Borrás and Edler (2014) seeing governance as “… a way in which societal and state actors
intentionally interact […], by regulating issues of societal concern, defining the processes and direction of how
technological artefacts and innovations are produced, and shaping how these are introduced, absorbed, diffused
and used within society and economy” (Borrás and Edler 2014, p. 14). This definition is useful because of its
comprehensibility from setting direction to the societal diffusion of innovations, on the one hand, and its emphasis
on a range of actors and their intentionality in dealing with issues of social concern, on the other hand.
5
Importantly, our aim is not to conceptualize the role of actors for different problem-solution constellations. We
do not address questions regarding the best actor arrangement for a specific problem-solution structure but see in
policy, irrespective of governance levels, a central role for taking collective decisions and mobilising societal
resources for societal ends (Meadowcroft, 2009). At the same time we acknowledge that socially-led stakeholders
with a specific interest in the issue (e.g. NGOs, companies, innovators, experts, researchers, everyday users, social
entrepreneurs, civil society associations of people affected) may dominate, support or accelerate political
dynamics.
4

10

In a highly wicked situation, scientific evidence regarding problem causes and consequences is crucial
to learn about and better specify the problem. However, policymaking in the context of societal
problems can rarely be based on objectivity and technical evidence alone, but involves trade-off
between competing social values (Parkhurst 2017). Processes of social learning (Ison et al. 2015),
collective visioning (Loorbach 2010; Hajer and Pelzer 2018) and participatory governance and research
practices (Weber 2006; Cagnin et al. 2012) allow different actors to cooperate despite their diverging
viewpoints and backgrounds. New institutional arrangements are needed to provide a platform for
discussion, allow for conflict and negotiation, and enable the development of a collective
understanding. It is about increasing awareness about different framings and explanations of a problem,
accommodating these differences, and building mutual expectations (convergence). Recent studies
suggest that the more open and inclusive these processes of learning are, not only for policy actors but
also for societal actors (experts and non-experts such as citizens, firms, civil society and interest
organizations), the higher will be the legitimacy of framing and shaping the problem (Wesseling and
Edquist 2018; Boon and Edler 2018).
Quadrant II: Problem in search of a solution
The top-right quadrant typifies a situation in which a dominant definition of a societal problem enjoying
broad societal acceptance has emerged, for instance due to convincing evidence or rising urgency.
Despite a rather clear problem framing, as exemplified for the case of obesity (see Box 2), multiple
solutions to approach the problem are still conceivable (both technological and institutional innovation),
and ideas on how to achieve transformation or solve the challenge are vague, uncertain or disputed.
Box 2: Obesity - a converging problem with diverging solutions
Obesity is under the top three global social burdens generated by human beings, after smoking and
armed violence/war/terrorism (Dobbs et al. 2014). Specialized agencies stress the obesity epidemic as
a societal problem (WHO 2000), and politicians followed, particularly emphasizing childhood obesity
(Popkin and Larsen-Gordon 2004; Dobbs et al. 2014). The shift from seeing obesity as a personal matter
to seeing obesity as a major policy issue can be explained not only by the rising obesity rates across
Europe and the US, but also by increasing scientific understanding about the risk of other chronic
diseases (type 2 diabetes, heart diseases, cancer) and the society-wide costs obesity causes due to
treatment expenses or increasing health inequality. (Childhood) obesity is nowadays recognized as
highly societally-induced, namely as a systemic problem rooted more in lifestyle choices, dietary
choices as well as socio-economic conditions than only in genetic predisposition (HM Government
2016). Despite increasing recognition that only individualized, science-based treatment based on drugs,
therapy or bariatric surgery will not be sufficient and effective enough, as yet there are no
comprehensive solutions or policy models of how to prevent or stop the rising obesity rates. Obesity
requires coordinated and cross-sectional action beyond the health sector, including agriculture,
manufacturing and retailing (for changing product ingredients and availability, pricing, portions),
education, media and culture (for building knowledge, skills, and awareness around food and physical
activity), transportation and urban planning (for car-free and physical activity based mobility) or
economic policies (for subsidies or taxation of food) (Lang and Rayner 2007; Gortmaker et al. 2011).
For instance, Dobbs et al. (2014) identified 74 types of interventions in 18 areas worldwide, but solid
evidence on how well these intervention work or on their societal impact is scarce.

11

If a dominant definition of a societal problem has emerged and enjoys broad acceptance, setting
priorities and targets may be a means for policy to overcome coordination and directionality failures
(Weber and Rohrarcher 2012), to pool knowledge and to accelerate progress towards meeting the
challenge. For situations in which a converging problem understanding has developed, the formulation
of clear and approachable research and innovation missions, as recently advocated in Mazzucato
(2018b), could indeed be an effective instrument for a targeted transformation. In this way, a joint vision
about the future can be translated and operationalized in form of missions with clear goals and target
values that are realistic and in line with the envisioned future state. The question of how innovation can
contribute to achieve the mission is still open and uncertain at this stage, which requires exploration
and experimentation with different types of solutions.

Quadrant III: Solution in search of a problem
The bottom-left quadrant of Table 3 refers to a situation in which shared and optimistic expectations
have emerged regarding the feasibility and importance of an innovation. Yet, the nexus between a
societal problem and the innovation is ill-defined, normatively loaded or faces public reluctance due to
uncertainties regarding risks or trade-offs. As such, the solution appears to be in search of a concrete
problem to showcase its feasibility (see the example of self-driving cars Box 3). Social barriers
originating from the prevalent practices, limited legitimacy and awareness of the need for change
hamper the societal embedding of the innovation to provide a large-scale solution for a societal
challenge.
Box 3: Automated vehicle technology - a converging solution with diverging problem perceptions
Several terms like autonomous vehicles, self-driving cars, driverless vehicles, robotic cars are used to
describe the technology where car technology takes over the control of the car from a human being.
The technology can best be understood through levels of automated driving where on the low-end level
1 refers to driver assistance and on the high-end level 6 refers to full automated driving (SAE 2014).
Car manufacturers have been working on innovative solutions to create more comfort for the driver
using several forms of automation. Cruise control was already developed in 1945. Since then car
manufacturers have developed a range of technologies like adaptive cruise control, lane departure
warning, parking assist and break assist to increase comfort and driving safety. Google changed the
paradigm that automation technology should aid the driver by introducing a self-driving car that was
designed to replace the driver completely. Over the years the set of reasons that support the development
of automated vehicle technology is increasing. Where driving comfort and safety were original
arguments, later many more arguments were added like: 1) increased productivity as the car becomes
an office space, 2) higher capacity of highways and therefore reduction of congestion, 3) solution for
an aging society where disabled elderly can now enjoy car mobility, 4) reduction of employee costs for
taxi companies and 5) allowing for improved car sharing schemes (Van der Meer 2017; Brummelen et
al. 2018). The increasing set of societal benefits that are argued to be stemming from this solution is a
clear sign that solution convergence has taken place, but that the solution is still looking for societal
problems to link to in order to increase its legitimacy.

12

A situation of converging solutions but still diverging problem perceptions may require high reflexivity
on the part of policy (Weber and Rohracher 2012), to evaluate the validity of the innovation’s claim
and, more generally, to balance expectations and future application potentials. Without sufficient
reflexivity, the implementation of targeted policies focussing on one specific innovation runs the risk
of low acceptance. Here, low societal acceptance can be due to high uncertainty about the effects, side
effects and the real contribution a proposed solution can make to solve a societal challenge. Such a
situation may give room for stakeholders (e.g. incumbent firms) to capture processes of problem
framing according to their interests and own benefits (Frenken 2017).

Quadrant IV: Alignment
The bottom-right quadrant of Table 3 characterises a situation in which both societal problems are
relatively well understood and supported, and in which views on promising solutions have converged.
Examples for a constellation characterised by convergence of both the problem perception and the
solutions. Examples of innovations in this quadrant include wind energy, CCTV and the regulatory ban
on second-hand-smoking (SHS). These examples are discussed in more detail in Section 5, where we
discuss their biographies as a historical process from wicked problem-solution constellations (Quadrant
I) to widely accepted and well-aligned problem-solution constellations (Quadrant IV).
Situations in which societal problems are relatively well understood and broadly supported, and in
which views on solutions with high potential have converged, call for policies that focus the targeted
development and diffusion of innovations, and the embedding (widening and deepening) of new social
practices. Diffusion-oriented policies are essential if convergence around a solution for a clear,
legitimate problem has been achieved, but innovations are not able to fully compete on the mainstream
market (e.g. renewable energies), due to incumbent products that have benefited from decades of
incremental improvement (Geels 2004), or missing demand to upscale and implement the innovation
on a broad basis (Boon and Edler 2018). With the advent of converging structures, systemic innovation
policies can come into play to support market creation, the diffusion of new technologies or the broader
societal embedding of particular ways of acting.

5. A role for policy to move towards converging problem-solution constellations?
Three stylized policy pathways
Following our framework, mission oriented innovation policy can be understood as an attempt to
accelerate progress in solving societal challenges, by shaping the direction, diffusion and embedding of
innovations in society. So far, we have argued that given the variations in the ‘wickedness’ of societal
challenges and their associated problem-solution constellations, a one-size-fits-all approach to
designing mission-oriented policies and innovation missions seems not appropriate. In what follows,
we make an attempt to characterise how policy might stimulate movements away from a ‘wicked’
towards an aligned problem-solution constellation6, and to support the creation of a stable basis for
6

The idea of movement contradicts with the assumptions made in the policy sciences literature (e.g. Alford and
Head 2017; Hoppe 2011). This literature takes a static perspective and sees wickedness as an inherent quality of

13

society-wide uptake of innovations. Hereby, a policy pathway constitutes a movement in the matrix
reflecting the processes of problem and solution convergence. Our arguments are supported by three
empirical cases (Box 4-6), based on which we point to possible barriers and limitations associated with
a certain pathway and potential approaches to govern contestation, complexity and uncertainty for
different stages.
Table 4 Different pathways for MIP in the problem-solution space

The problem-led pathway (1)
A problem-led pathway (1) aims at creating a broadly legitimized and defined societal problem framing
(movement towards a converging problem), based on which the search for and experiments with
different solution can build. The initial focus is on comprehending the multiple dimensions, causes and
effects of a problem for different social groups, and to stimulate the development of a common,
converging vision about a desired future. Different perceptions, expectations and claims for action or
non-action to mitigate or tackle a problem will be brought on the table.
As the case of second-hand smoking shows (Box 4), even though contestation can defer the creation of
a shared vision significantly and for a long time, the collection of evidence contributed to an improved
understanding of the societal costs of second-hand smoking. Once the problem of second-hand smoking
was delineated from smoking, and became publicly accepted as a problem, efforts were directed towards
experimenting with different solutions (technological, institutional, or a combination of these) and
diffusing them later on.
A problem-led policy strategy combines the a mission orientation with reflexive governance (Voss and
Bornemann 2011) and social learning (Ison et al. 2015) to comprehend the multiple dimensions of a
societal problem, and to increase awareness about the normative choices policy has to make in defining,
selecting and setting innovation missions or solution-seeking strategies. Also, a clear and uniform
problem framing may be difficult to achieve, due to the lack of knowledge, conflicting interests or the
high stakes involved. Fast decisions requiring the acceptance of a certain problem framing can create a
certain problem/solution situations that cannot be changed. On the contrary, the literature on social learning (e.g.
Ison et al. 2015) suggests that wicked problems can be tamed through framing. In doing so, a problem is simplified
but remains wicked in nature. We build on the latter assumption by emphasizing the need for technical and social
learning about different solutions, expectations and problem perceptions to arrive a converging and stable
constellations.

14

new breeding ground for refusal (bounce-back effects), especially if the initially high expectation for a
solution cannot be met due to technological or economic barriers (e.g. no feasible large-scale solutions,
or high costs which imped the market creation and finance for innovations).
Box 4: The case of smoking bans to reduce second-hand smoking: A problem-driven pathway
Stage 1: convergence around secondhand smoking as a societal problem
Smoking is responsible for about six million annual deaths worldwide. This societal problem has
however remained contested and unclear for a long time. Since the 1970s, the scientific evidence in the
US on the consequences of secondhand smoking (SHS) has been mounting with impactful Surgeon
General reports in 1971 (first proposing a government ban on smoking in public places due to
anticipated health risks; Surgeon General 1971), in 1972 (identified SHS as a health risk; Surgeon
General 1972) and in 1986 (conclusive evidence on SHS causing cancer and health problems in
children; Surgeon General 1986). Subsequently, a 1993 EPA report classified SHS as a Group A
carcinogen and determined that SHS leads to various diseases (EPA 1993), which provided grounds for
the EPA to regulate smoking. Over this entire period, the tobacco industry questioned scientific
evidence of the adverse health effects of SHS (Widome et al. 2010), and even started smear campaigns
against the EPA (Oreskes and Conway 2010) (contestation). They invested significantly in smoking
advertisement to associate smoking with coolness, strength and freedom (Ibid). Due to this wellorganized lobby and framing, SHS was not accepted by all stakeholders, scientific evidence on SHS
was disputed (creating problem uncertainty), and diverging norms were actively promoted (contesting
the problem). The debate was settled with the 2006 Surgeon General report that concluded that “‘the
debate is over’ and ‘the science is clear’ that SHS causes lung cancer and heart disease in nonsmokers,
among many other conditions” (Surgeon General 2006, in: Hyland et al. 2012).
Stage 2: convergence around smoking bans as a solution
With growing evidence on the adverse health effects of SHS, the range of solutions had increased
(solution divergence): In the 1970s, governments started to tax cigarettes and control advertisement
(Oreskes and Conway 2010), after the 1986 Surgeon General report, many local initiatives started
banning smoking because of SHS , and in 1995 the first state-wide smoking ban in restaurants was
issued in California (Widome et al. 2010). Over this period public contestation slowly decreased as the
norm changed from ‘smoking bans impinge on people’s freedom to smoke’, to ‘smoking in public
places harms the health of others’. Smoking bans were issued at both the local and state level, with the
result that by 2010 “41% of the US population lives in a community that requires all indoor workplaces
(including restaurants and bars) to be completely smoke-free” (Widome et al. 2010).
This converging trend around smoking bans, however, was preceded by strong industry contestation to
this solution. Since the 1970s, the tobacco industry has strongly lobbied against any restrictions on
smoking (Mandel and Glantz 2004; Oreskes and Conway 2010; Widome et al. 2010). Regulations were
assailed with normative arguments related to infringement of freedom or with references to
Communism and totalitarianism (Oreskes and Conway 2010). Industry offered alternative solutions
aimed at reducing the negative externalities of smoking, such as better filters, cleaner tobacco and
cigarette paper, or later e-cigarettes and inhalers (Oreskes and Conway 2010), and advocated for
ventilated spaces (Mandel and Glantz 2004). The smoking lobby demanded public research funding for
developing even saver cigarettes instead of bans and successfully pushed for laxer e-cigarette regulation

15

(Oreskes and Conway 2010), which mitigated convergence around the smoking ban solution. Also, a
range of solutions have been developed to wean people off smoking, including replacements such as
nicotine patches and gums, telephone quit lines or web-based services, non-nicotine pharmacotherapies
or reinforced antismoking education in school (Bertollini et al. 2016). To conclude, although a range of
solutions that link directly to the cause of smoking is needed to overcome the problem of SHS, smoking
bans have, despite aggressive industry opposition, become increasingly accepted as a central part of the
solution-range (Hyland et al. 2012; Bertollini et al. 2016) (solution convergence).

The solution-led pathway (2)
The solution-led pathway (2) constitutes in contrast to a problem-led pathway a bottom-up or solutionpush approach centred around the development of single innovations. Initially, their contribution to
meeting a societal challenge is not clear, not made explicit or not intended. This pathway is consistent
with policies that legitimize funding for basic research with reference to science’s broad potential to
solve societal challenges (Dosi et al. 2006; Mazzucato 2017). It also fits with disruptive innovation
strategies applied by technology companies such as Airbnb, Google, Juul and Uber, who often justify
their lack of regulatory compliance by their contribution to solving health, social cohesion and
sustainability issues (Schor 2016).
As evident in the case of CCTV in the UK (Box 5), once an innovation ‘finds’ a societal problem,
however, the build-up of expectations can be a major driver for its societal embedding. In such cases,
uptake of a (technological or institutional) solution could take place despite the initially open, diffuse
or even contested problem definition, or without profound evidence about the effectiveness of the
solution.
Along a solution-led pathway, focus is on the development of solutions, while the attention to societal
problem definitions and trade-offs between societal values is underrepresented. Particularly solution
providers from science or industry, and possibly from other stakeholders with strategic interests, might
try to influence the societal framing of the problems to which the solution could contribute. If the
effectiveness and societal consequences of the solution are not fully clear, this pathway bears the risk
of societal barriers emerging along the way, ranging from limited public awareness and problem
legitimacy (is safety at public places a problem that justifies large-scale surveillance?), uncertainty
about the solution’s impact (is CCTV capable of increasing safety and reducing crime rates?), or limited
willingness to implement the solution on a large scale (surveillance at which places and at what time?).

16

Box 5: The case of CCTV to reduce crime in public spaces: a solution-driven pathway
CCTV refers to video surveillance cameras used in public places. Its purpose is “mainly to deter and
detect crime, disorder and antisocial behaviour”, but also “to help reduce the ‘fear of crime’” (Webster
2009 p. 11). Though CCTV systems have a long history in private spaces, its diffusion in public spaces
started only in the 1990s. The United Kingdom (UK) is commonly regarded as the frontrunner in the
deployment of CCTV. The central government played a key role in the diffusion of CCTVs by
advocating its use and financing most of the costs in the ‘Fight Against Crime’ (Webster 2009).
Stage 1: rapid solution convergence around CCTV to reduce crime without a clear problem
understanding
The case of CCTV exemplifies a policy pathway in which CCTV had been early on framed as the key
solution by the UK government (solution convergence). The government invested large sums in rolling
out the technology without formal regulation. Instead, technical standardisation was achieved through
self-regulation by service providers. In the process, the wickedness of the problem of crime was not
acknowledged: the alleged benefits of CCTV to public safety were not weighted against other public
values such as privacy or discrimination. Instead, the national government acted upon the belief, shared
by the general public, that CCTV would be effective in reducing crime and feelings of unsafety. During
the initial stages of diffusion, no evidence about the effects of CCTV was available, marking the policy
uncertainty typical for wicked problems. The wicked nature of the CCTV solution is further exemplified
by institutional complexity following from the involvement of different government agencies and
service providers. In the absence of national legislation, CCTV systems developed common technical
standards and operational procedures through voluntary self-regulation. According to Webster (2002),
the involvement of the government in pushing CCTV technology explains why it allowed CCTV to be
adopted by local agencies without much formal national regulation. National government removed
some of the local regulatory hurdles, such as a planning permission for CCTV installation. CCTV also
met contestation by particular advocacy groups (especially those concerned with privacy). Yet, as
Webster (2002) indicates, policy networks marginalised critical views and alternative solutions as
public discourse concentrated on the (alleged) benefits of the cameras, downplaying possible problems
regarding privacy, admissible evidence in courts, discrimination and crime displacement effects.
Stage 2: developing an ex-post deeper understanding of the problem
Hence, we understand the initial CCTV policy by the UK’s national government as the key pillar in
crime prevention as an instance of solution convergence without a comprehensive problem assessment
(i.e. problem uncertainty). Slowly, in the wake of a more general turn to evidence-base policy-making
and to prevent contestation, CCTV’s legitimacy was sought in empirical studies looking for crimereduction effects of CCTV. Such evaluations can be understood as part of a process of problem
convergence by reducing the problem uncertainty, as evaluation necessitates to define and measure
crime in the first place. A systematic overview by Welsh and Ferrington (2009) found only a modest
decrease in crime, which can almost fully be explained by the effectiveness of CCTV in car parks.
Webster (2009), reviewing the UK evidence, also concludes that the evidence base is weak regarding
the impact of CCTV on crime reduction. Interestingly, CCTV seems to be more effective to reduce
antisocial and undesirable behaviour rather than to prevent real crimes. And, after several terrorist
attacks, CCTV was further legitimized as useful in the prevention of terrorism.

17

The hybrid policy pathway (3)
A hybrid policy pathway follows a co-evolutionary logic, balancing problem and solution wickedness
at the same time by experimenting in both directions and learning about the problem(s) in the course of
finding solution(s). It may seem to be a promising course for wicked societal problems that are illdefined and have no known solution, and might be pursued as a matter of urgency given the nature of
the problem, high societal expectations or political pressure to act. For instance, dealing with societal
problems of great urgency, also referred to as ‘super-wicked problems (Levin et al. 2012) might be best
addressed by a co-evolutionary approach. Negotiating, balancing interests, together with performing
experiments at a small-scale allows learning about outcomes, possible impact and potential for uptake.
However, as the Dutch case of wind energy shows (Box 6), it is possible that missions specified in such
a situation can be misleading, for instance if expectations associated with an innovation cannot be met
or specific goals are set based on unfounded assumptions. For onshore wind it turned out only later that
the solution already converged upon generated unforeseen side effects in the phase of large-scale
diffusion (e.g. visual, audible and safety effects of wind turbines), which slowed down the achievement
of renewable energy targets and redirected the process of problem-solution convergence.
Box 6: The case of wind energy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions: a hybrid pathway
Stage 1: societal problems and targets stimulate initial local renewable energy solutions
The development of wind energy in the Netherlands started in the 1970s. Reasons for developing
renewable energy technologies at that time were related to a range of problems: The oil crisis in 1973
and the negative effects of high fuel prices on the economy, declining fossil fuel reserves, or foreign
dependencies related to fuel security. Wind energy was considered as a technology with high potential
but with significant uncertainties regarding feasibility. The first period was characterized by
investments in technology development for onshore wind turbines. The Dutch followed a so-called
break-through strategy as there was a strong focus on developing highly complex large wind turbines
which are most efficient from an engineering perspective (Garud and Karnøe 2003). There was
optimism that engineers from the existing airplane industry in The Netherlands would be able to develop
well-functioning large-scale turbines. This trajectory failed. During the 2000s, the Danes who followed
a totally different, bricolage strategy – focusing on slowly upscaling small turbines –outcompeted the
Dutch initiatives and only one Dutch turbine manufacturer (Lagerwey) survived.
In 1995 the Dutch government converged upon the problem by setting concrete targets for renewable
electricity: 10% in 2020 (Economic Affairs 1995). The main arguments for setting such targets were
the exhaustion of fossil fuel reserves and the emergence of climate change as a major societal problem
(Economic Affairs 1997). A related, economic argument was that by getting experience with renewable
energy now, the Dutch could regain an export position by building up a renewable energy industry. The
target reduced institutional complexity as it provided clear guidance of the search (Economic Affairs
1995 p. 51). However, during the years that followed the diffusion of onshore wind energy did not
develop according to expectations. Reasons for this were contestation by local opposition and by
specific NGO’s complicated planning procedures, and struggles related to responsibilities between
local, provincial and state government (i.e. high institutional complexity).

18

Stage 2: Problem converge pushed different renewable energy solutions
To solve the above implementation problems for onshore wind, attention shifted slowly to offshore
wind, which was not considered in the initial plans (Economic Affairs 1995). At the same time, climate
change was increasingly perceived as a societal threat, spiked by Al Gore’s ‘An Inconvenient Truth’ in
2006, resulting in the Renewable Energy Directive (European Parliament & European Council 2009)
that set a mandatory 14% renewable energy target as share of total final energy consumption for the
Netherlands in 2020. This increased problem convergence meant that significant additional policy
efforts were needed to reach the target. In this light, ambitious targets were initially set for offshore
wind (institutional guidance), but offshore as a solution was strongly contested by liberal political
parties due to the high electricity prices associated with this technology. Consequently, the policy
attitude towards offshore wind in those days was still defined by uncertainty and could best be
characterized as a hedging strategy: some investments to keep options open, but no intention to fully
commit and invest massive resources (Wieczorek et al. 2013).
Stage 3: solution convergence around offshore wind to meet the mandatory mission
Only recently, this attitude changed. The Dutch government was under pressure since the Netherlands
was falling short in realizing its promised contribution to the European renewable energy target of 20%
in 2020. Offshore wind was identified as the only available technology to quickly upscale the potential
of renewables (reducing uncertainty) (SER 2013). The high-cost argument therefore was overruled, and
later it turned out that offshore wind parks can be built at much lower costs than previously expected.
This led to a surge of political and societal interest in the technology from 2016 onwards, and the current
tender procedures are even prepared for subsidy-free offshore wind parks. This has led to strong solution
convergence around offshore wind as a key technology in realizing renewable energy and carbon
emission targets.
Following a hybrid pathway by aiming at a thorough understanding of the contestation, institutional
complexity or uncertainty related to a potential solution and the societal problem at the same time, runs
the risk of remaining stuck in an un-guided policy approach without realistic goals or a clear solution
path. Set-backs are more likely to come from both sides, the inhibited specification of the ‘real’ problem
or the unfounded selection of the ‘best’ solution, which might cause significant delays for a strategy
initially build upon high expectations. However, if well managed, an iterative process of experimenting
with new solutions, while better understanding the problem as well as the impacts of the new solution
on the problem, offers a lot of learning potential.

6 Implications and conclusions
6.1. Implications for mission-oriented innovation policy
This paper set out an analytical contribution to the recent debate on the challenges of current societies
and how mission-oriented innovation policy could help to meet them. Our aim was to provide a
conceptual framework for a better contextualization of the plurality of ‘grand’ societal challenges,
ranging from climate change, over energy and food security to public health or obesity that recently
emerged in both scientific literature and innovation policy practice.

19

Our starting point was that the policy discourse about directionality and societal mission-orientation
insufficiently considered the mission context. Undoubtedly, remaining vague and defining societal
challenges in broad terms can be the preferred political strategy, to circumvent political conflicts or
contestation, and to support acceptance on a broad basis. Such a strategy, however, comes at a price,
because disregarding the normative elements involved in prioritizing a certain problem framing (e.g. to
narrow down and formulate a specific mission), or in prioritizing a certain innovation (e.g. to accelerate
in solving the problem) can impede the legitimacy of policy, the public acceptance of an innovation or
its uptake across different industries or locations. Clearly, the emergence of opposition during the
upscaling process of an innovation cannot be ruled out when designing MIP, just as conflicting evidence
on problem causes or negative effects of the alleged solutions may become known afterwards.
We argue that the widening of the innovation policy agenda towards societal challenges bears
governance implications along two dimensions. At the problem side, a non-trivial part of missionoriented innovation policy is to identify, select and demarcate a societal challenge into a clear problem
formulation. At the solution side, societal challenges often require solutions that go beyond the
traditional science- and technology-based strategies still being pursued by most universities, firms and
governments. As such, not just problems but also solutions can be considered to be wicked. Solutions
have different forms, result from various types of search processes, be of technological or institutional
nature, and involve different actors in their development and diffusion. Hence, the derivation of a
universal formula for effective societal mission-oriented policies might be both hard to achieve and
ineffective in dealing with societal challenges.
Societal challenges, then, can fundamentally differ in terms of both the problem framings and the search
processes needed to generate solutions. By contextualizing societal challenges along both the problem
and solution side, we depart from one-size-fits-all policy approaches and suggest four stylized types of
problem-solution constellations (I. Disorientation, II. Problem without a solution, III. Solution without
a problem, IV. Alignment). Assessing the location of a particular societal challenge in this problemsolution space seems necessary to consider the specific character of the challenge, and to pursue targeted
policy strategies to achieve public acceptance and institutional support for the mission at hand.
Moreover, the characterization of three stylized policy pathways suggests a process-oriented missionoriented innovation policy, by revealing the different routes and phases policy may take – intentionally
or non-intentionally – in dealing with the changing patterns of uncertainty, contestation and complexity
involved in pursuing societal missions. Our elaboration makes clear that, if the aim of mission-oriented
policies is to find effective solutions for diffusely defined challenges, more dynamic and flexible
approaches are needed. Setting the direction for innovation activity by defining targets at the outset
might not be sufficient. In fact, it is more about learning how to deal with the degrees of contestation,
complexity and uncertainty involved in addressing societal issues, and to govern a converging problemsolution nexus in a reflexive way.

6.2 Implications for the implementation of mission-oriented policies in Europe
Against the backdrop of our more differentiated perspective on missions, we can now take a look at the
current debates about mission-oriented policies in Europe. With the launch of the still ongoing Horizon
2020 European Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, the orientation of innovation

20

policy towards societal challenges has obtained a prominent place on the funding landscape. A major
part of Horizon 2020 is earmarked for research and innovation activities on seven societal challenges 7
However, it became evident in the aftermath of the interim evaluation that the prominence of societal
challenges in the Horizon 2020 programme has proven insufficient to re-orient significant parts of
research and innovation activities towards clear and ambitious societal goals (Lamy et al. 2017; EC
2017). As long as the modalities of research and innovation funding programmes remain by and large
the same as they have been for the past thirty years, the gap between ambitious long-term and higherorder goals, on the one hand, and the prescription of specific topics as defined in work programmes, on
the other hand, will continue to be too wide to lead to the ambitious or even transformative solutionoriented innovations needed to tackle grand societal challenges.
In recognising these deficits, the specification of ‘missions’ at an intermediate level of granularity was
suggested as focusing devices to bridge the gap between societal challenges on the one hand and specific
research and innovation projects on the other. Such missions should ensure that the intended impact of
research and innovation activities funded by the Framework Programme can be achieved (Lamy et al.
2017). With the programmatic paper on mission-orientation in European research and innovation policy
(Mazzucato 2018b), the rationales for a mission-oriented approach have been visibly spelled out as a
trigger of further political debate and public consultation at the European level. Furthermore, it has been
suggested to formulate missions that are goal-oriented, measurable and time-bound as to make missions
more concrete and orchestrate innovation activities at multiple ends.
This approach has been largely followed in the proposal for Horizon Europe as presented in June 2018
(EC 2018). It is a major step forward because first of all it recognises the wicked nature of the societal
challenges in the focus of the Framework Programme. Second, by suggesting to translate missions into
bold, inspirational plans with clear targets, it promises to make them manageable by an institution that
relies on formal technocratic procedures. Third, a debate has started on what fields of research might
be appropriate for missions. These are still under discussion, and the suggestions range from targeted
technological missions to truly wicked areas in need of socio-technical transformation.
The initial ideas for a mission-oriented approach in Horizon Europe have been critically discussed in
several contexts, not least by studies and expert groups set up by the European Commission itself.8 Four
main points of criticism of the approach can be extracted to which our more differentiated approach to
missions indicates promising responses.
First, the too undifferentiated understanding of missions in the Commission documents, which reflects
a one-size-fits-all and technocratic interpretation of mission-oriented policies. It assumes the existence
of converging problem and/or solution specifications, which in the reality of most societal challenges
do not exist. It is here that our problems-solution framework can be put to use. Most of the challenges
formulated by the European Union and its Member States are arguably best described as wicked. Little
convergence so far has been achieved regarding concrete problem formulations in most aspects of
7

These seven areas are: Health, demographic change and wellbeing; Food security, sustainable agriculture and
forestry, marine and maritime and inland water research, and the Bioeconomy; Secure, clean and efficient energy;
Smart, green and integrated transport; Climate action, environment, resource efficiency and raw materials; Europe
in a changing world - inclusive, innovative and reflective societies; Secure societies - protecting freedom and
security of Europe and its citizens.
8
See for instance the reports by two high-level groups (ESIR 2017, RISE 2017), analytical studies (JIIP 2018a,
2018b) and the foresight activity inn preparation of Horizon Europe (Weber et al. 2018).

21

climate change, cybersecurity, sustainable agriculture and healthy ageing, and the innovation-led
solutions are still unclear. Hence, for each of the challenges, one may ask how sufficient convergence
can take place in terms of problem formulation, including specific and measurable targets, before
embarking on ambitious innovation programs (Frenken 2017). As long as challenges remain broadly
defined, specific interest groups – and their preferred solutions – are likely to capture the policy process.
By taken differences across societal challenges in terms of convergence and divergence in the problemsolutions space into account, a more differentiated approach to mission-oriented policies can be
developed.
A second important point of criticism refers to the too narrow range of actors and stakeholders involved
in the definition of problems and the ideation of solutions. Wicked and uncertain problems, however,
require a wide spectrum of problem framings and potential solutions. Initially, the European
Commission envisaged a wide consultation, involving also citizens, in the specification of missions,
but this process has not taken place so far. The dimension of contestation, as suggested in our
framework, captures this necessity of giving enough room to diverging opinions and ideas to be
harvested, before convergence around a shared understanding of the problem and of the solution(s)
agenda can take place.
A third criticism stresses the necessity to fundamentally rethink the design of mission-oriented funding
programmes. Past Framework Programmes, and even the societal challenges part of Horizon 2020,
predefined strategic research agendas down to the level of specific research topics. If, however, the
dimension of uncertainty as suggested in our framework is taken seriously, then a much more ‘tentative’
approach to programme design needs to be pursued (Kuhlmann et al. 2019). In practice, this means that
an open, multi-stage and selective process of moving from a large number of smaller exploratory
projects to a limited number of large-scale research and innovation initiatives would allow learning
from the early stages. A learning phase will show which potential solutions might be promising for
being carried forward in order to address a mission-type problem, while others can be discarded. The
three types of pathways suggested in our framework indicate that different strategies to move towards
convergence in terms of both problem and solution are possible and that programme design should
enable pursuing these different pathways. This kind of multi-stage programme design has been tested
in a number of national programmes already, which could serve as source of inspiration for the future
design of mission-oriented elements of Horizon Europe.9
Finally, a fourth criticism of the Horizon Europe approach to missions points to the importance of
rethinking the governance approach, and in particular policy coordination needs, if the ambitions of a
mission-oriented programme are to be achieved. These ambitions go well beyond the delivery of new
innovative solutions, and aim at contributing effectively to resolving societal challenges. In other words,
much more attention is paid to the ultimate impact of research and innovation, and how research and
innovation outcomes are actually generalised, scaled and diffused in order to realise missions and
trigger transformative change processes. This implies that mission-oriented research and innovation
activities cannot be seen in isolation, but need to be embedded in domain-specific policies of the areas
in question. Effective coordination and alignment between R&I policy and sectoral/thematic policies,
multi-level coordination between European-level research and local implementation, and the
See for instance the Swedish programme ‘Challenge-Driven Innovation’ or the French initiative ‘Commission
Innovation 2030’, which both followed a multi-stage model.
9

22

orchestration with private and third sector stakeholders pose serious challenges for the governance of
missions. In terms of our conceptual framework, this points to the importance of the dimension of
complexity and the need to move from a diverging to a more converging situation also in this regard.
This poses high demands on the management of mission-oriented programmes, which will need to be
much more pro-actively supervised in order to facilitate the alignment between the different types of
actors and stakeholders playing a role in the realisation of a mission.

6.3. Implications for further research
Our analytical framework to contextualize mission-oriented innovation policy builds on academic
literature in policy and innovation studies based on which we map a two-dimensional problem-solution
space. With our brief empirical cases on smoking bans, CCTV and wind energy we could draw first
lessons on how different dimensions of problem and solution wickedness may play together and change
over time, as well as on the different strategies a mission-oriented policy can take to govern this process.
Our framework emphasises the need for new governance modes involving new actors, such as users or
other stakeholders, more reflexive strategies that facilitate adaptations in response to new knowledge
on the problem, its causes and societal significance, and new developments with regard to the envisaged
solution, its effectiveness or side-effects (Loorbach 2010; Shove and Walker 2010; Bugge et al. 2018).
However, more empirical research and investigations of policy practices are needed to further develop
the proposed process-oriented perspective on mission-oriented policies.
Necessary steps in this direction should include: First, empirical investigations regarding the drivers
and barriers of policy pathways, in particular the difficulties in governing problem and solution
wickedness in different institutional or geographical contexts (Coenen et al. 2012). Our cases of policy
pathways serve only as first stylized examples. We would need more empirical insights on how specific
geographical and institutional conditions or multi-level arrangements can foster or hamper the
governance of convergence at both the problem and solution side.
Second, the interplay of problem-solution constellations and policy mixes along distinct pathways.
Given that most societal problems cannot be tackled with a single solution, a set of solutions is typically
necessary, and this requires the implementation of a mix of policy measures and instruments along the
mission’s lines. Recent literature on policy mixes for innovation and sustainable transitions (see e.g.
Borrás and Edquist 2013; Rogge and Reichardt 2016; Kern et al. 2017) can serve as valuable reference
here.
Third, the interdependencies between mission-oriented innovation policies and socio-technical
innovation systems. System thinking could provide a framework for understanding how system
components (i.e. actors, institutions, network and materiality) interact with different policy designs
(Hoppmann et al. 2014), how they influence the formulation of missions and the search paths for
solutions. So far, innovation systems have been defined around nations, sectors and technologies, but
focused mostly on the supply of innovation. More attention should be paid also to the demand for
innovation by defining innovation systems around societal problems or specific missions.

23

References
Alford J, Head BW (2017) Wicked and less wicked problems: a typology and a contingency framework. Policy
and Society 36:397–413
Alkemade F, Hekkert MP, Negro SO (2011) Transition policy and innovation policy: Friends or foes?
Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 1:125–129.
Bertollini R, Ribeiro S, Mauer-Stender K, Galea G (2016) Tobacco control in Europe: A policy review.
European Respiratory Review 25:151–157.
Bobbink R, Hicks K, Galloway J, et al (2010) Global assessment of nitrogen deposition effects on terrestrial
plant diversity: a synthesis. Ecological applications 20:30–59
Boekholt P (2010) The Evolution of Innovation Paradigms and their Influence on Research, Technological
Development and Innovation Policy Instruments. In: The Theory and Practice of Innovation Policy. Edward
Elgar Publishing
Boon W, Edler J (2018) Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new trends in innovation policy.
Science and Public Policy. doi: 10.1093/scipol/scy014
Borrás S, Edler J (2014) Introduction on governance, systems and change. The Governance of Socio-Technical
Systems: Explaining Change 1–22
Borrás S, Edquist C (2013) The choice of innovation policy instruments. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change 80:1513–1522.
Brummelen JV, O’Brien M, Gruyer D, Najjaran H (2018) Autonomous vehicle perception: The technology of
today and tomorrow. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 89:384–406
Bugge MM, Coenen L, Branstad A (2018) Governing socio-technical change: Orchestrating demand for assisted
living in ageing societies. Science and Public Policy 45:468–479
Cagnin C, Amanatidou E, Keenan M (2012) Orienting European innovation systems towards grand challenges
and the roles that FTA can play. Science and Public Policy 39:140
Cantner U, Pyka A (2001) Classifying technology policy from an evolutionary perspective. Research Policy
30:759–775
Carley M, Christie I (2017) Managing sustainable development. Earthscan Publications, London
CBS statline (2018) Statistic Netherlands https://opendata.cbs.nl/statline/#/CBS/en/, accessed March 2018
Coenen L, Benneworth P, Truffer B (2012) Toward a spatial perspective on sustainability transitions. Research
Policy 41:968–979
Daviter F (2017) Coping, taming or solving: alternative approaches to the governance of wicked problems.
Policy Studies 38:571–588
de Wit M, Londo M, Faaij A (2011) Productivity developments in European agriculture: Relations to and
opportunities for biomass production. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15:2397–2412.
Diercks G, Larsen H, Steward F (2018) Transformative innovation policy: Addressing variety in an emerging
policy paradigm. Research Policy. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.028
Dignum M, Correljé A, Cuppen E, et al (2016) Contested technologies and design for values: The case of shale
gas. Science and engineering Ethics 22:1171–1191

24

Dobbs R, Sawers C, Thompson F, et al (2014) Overcoming obesity: an initial economic analysis. McKinsey
global institute
Dosi G, Llerena P, Labini MS (2006) The relationships between science, technologies and their industrial
exploitation: An illustration through the myths and realities of the so-called ‘European Paradox.’ Research
Policy 35:1450–1464
Duru M, Therond O, others (2015) Designing agroecological transitions; A review. Agronomy for Sustainable
Development 35:1237–1257
Economic Affairs (1995) Derde Energienota, Tweede Kamer, vergaderjaar 1995–1996, 24 525, nrs. 1–2
Economic Affairs (1997) Duurzame energie in opmars. Actieprogramma 1997-2000
Edler J, Boon WP (2018) ‘The next generation of innovation policy: Directionality and the role of demandoriented instruments’—Introduction to the special section. Science and Public Policy. doi:
10.1093/scipol/scy026
Elzen B, Geels FW, Green K (2004) System innovation and the transition to sustainability: theory, evidence and
policy. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham and Northampton
EPA (1993) Fact sheet: respiratory health effects of passive smoking. Sacramento
Ergas H (1987) The importance of technology policy. In: Dasgupta P, Stoneman P (eds) Economic Policy and
Technological Performance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 51–96
ESIR (2017): Towards a Mission-Oriented Research and Innovation Policy in the European Union: An ESIR
Memorandum: Executive Summary, Expert group on the Economic and Societal Impact of Research,
European Commission, Brussels.
European Commission (EC) (2011) Horizon 2020 - The Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Communication from the Commission
European Commission (EC) (2017): Interim evaluation of Horizon 2020. Commission staff working document,
European Commission
European Commission (EC) (2018): Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of rthe Council,
establishing Horizon Europe – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, laying down its
rules for participation and dissemination, COM/2018/435 final, European Commission, Brussels
European Parliament & European Council (2009) Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently
repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC
Foray D, Mowery DC, Nelson RR (2012) Public R&D and social challenges: What lessons from mission R&D
programs? Research Policy 41:1697 – 1702
Frenken K (2017) A complexity-theoretic perspective on innovation policy. Complexity, Innovation and Policy
35–47
Funtowicz SO, Ravetz JR (1993) Science for the post-normal age. Futures 25:739–755
Garud R, Karnøe P (2003) Bricolage versus breakthrough: distributed and embedded agency in technology
entrepreneurship. Research Policy 32:277–300
Geels FW (2004) From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical systems: Insights about dynamics and
change from sociology and institutional theory. Research policy 33:897–920

25

Gortmaker SL, Swinburn BA, Levy D, et al (2011) Changing the future of obesity: science, policy, and action.
The Lancet 378:838–847
Grin J, Felix F, Bos B, Spoelstra S (2004) Practices for reflexive design: lessons from a Dutch programme on
sustainable agriculture. International Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy 1:126–149
Hajer MA, Pelzer P (2018) 2050—An Energetic Odyssey: Understanding ‘Techniques of Futuring’ in the
transition towards renewable energy. Energy Research & Social Science 44:222–231
Head BW (2008) Wicked problems in public policy. Public policy 3:101
Henle K, Alard D, Clitherow J, et al (2008) Identifying and managing the conflicts between agriculture and
biodiversity conservation in Europe–A review. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 124:60–71
Hicks D (2016) Grand Challenges in US science policy attempt policy innovation. International Journal of
Foresight and Innovation Policy 11:22–42
HM Government (2016) Childhood Obesity. A Plan for Action. 08/2016:13
Hoppe R (2011) The governance of problems: Puzzling, powering and participation. Policy Press
Hoppmann J, Huenteler J, Girod B (2014) Compulsive policy-making—The evolution of the German feed-in
tariff system for solar photovoltaic power. Research Policy 43:1422–1441
Hyland A, Barnoya J, Corral JE (2012) Smoke-free air policies: Past, present and future. Tobacco Control
21:154–161.
JIIP et al. (2018a): Mission-Oriented Research and Innovation: Inventory and characterisation of initiatives.
Final report. European Commission, Brussels.
JIIP et al. (2018b): Mission-Oriented Research and Innovation: Assessing the impact of a mission-oriented
research and innovation approach. Final report. European Commission, Brussels.
Ison RL, Collins KB, Wallis PJ (2015) Institutionalising social learning: Towards systemic and adaptive
governance. Environmental Science & Policy 53:105–117
Kaldewey D (2018) The Grand Challenges Discourse: Transforming Identity Work in Science and Science
Policy. Minerva 56:161–182
Kern F, Kivimaa P, Martiskainen M (2017) Policy packaging or policy patching? The development of complex
energy efficiency policy mixes. Energy Research & Social Science 23:11–25
Kuhlmann, S., Stegmaier, P, Konrad, K. (2019): The tentative governance of emerging science and technology:
A conceptual introduction, Research Policy, doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.01.006
Kuhlmann S, Rip A (2018) Next-Generation Innovation Policy and Grand Challenges. Science and Public
Policy 1–7. doi: 10.1093/scipol/scy011
Kuhlmann S, Rip A (2014) Research policy must rise to a grand challenge. Research Europe 1–11
Lamine C (2011) Transition pathways towards a robust ecologization of agriculture and the need for system
redesign. Cases from organic farming and IPM. Journal of rural studies 27:209–219
Lamy P, et al. (2017) Investing in the European future we want Report of the independent High Level Group on
maximising the impact of EU Research & Innovation Programmes. Luxembourg
Lang T, Rayner G (2007) Overcoming policy cacophony on obesity: an ecological public health framework for
policymakers. Obesity reviews 8:165–181

26

Latour B (1992) ‘Where Are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts. In: Shaping
Technology/building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change. MIT Press, pp 252–258
Levin K, Cashore B, Bernstein S, Auld G (2012) Overcoming the tragedy of super wicked problems:
Constraining our future selves to ameliorate global climate change. Policy Sciences 45:123–152.
Loorbach D (2010) Transition management for sustainable development: a prescriptive, complexity-based
governance framework. Governance 23:161–183
Mandel LL, Glantz SA (2004) Hedging their bets: Tobacco and gambling industries work against smoke-free
policies. Tobacco Control 13:268–276.
May PJ, Jochim AE, Pump B (2013) Political limits to the processing of policy problems. Politics and
Governance 1:104
Mazzucato M (2017) Mission-oriented innovation policy. UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose
Working Paper.
Mazzucato M (2018a) Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities. Industrial and
Corporate Change 27:803–815
Mazzucato M (2018b) Mission-Oriented Research & Innovation in the European Union
Mazzucato M (2013) The Entrepreneurial State: debunking private vs. public sector myths. Anthem, London
Mazzucato M (2016) From market fixing to market-creating: a new framework for innovation policy. Industry
and Innovation 23:140–156
Morgan K, Murdoch J (2000) Organic vs. conventional agriculture: knowledge, power and innovation in the
food chain1. Geoforum 31:159–173
Mowery DC, Nelson RR, Martin BR (2010) Technology policy and global warming: Why new policy models
are needed (or why putting new wine in old bottles won’t work). Research Policy 39:1011–1023
Nelson RR (1974) Intellectualizing about the moon-ghetto metaphor: a study of the current malaise of rational
analysis of social problems. Policy Sciences 5:375–414
Newman J, Head BW (2017) Wicked tendencies in policy problems: rethinking the distinction between social
and technical problems. Policy and Society 36:414–429
Oreskes N, Conway EM (2010) Merchants of Doubt.pdf. Bloomsbury Press, New York
Parkhurst J (2017) The politics of evidence: from evidence-based policy to the good governance of evidence.
Taylor & Francis
RISE (2018) Mission-Oriented Research and Innovation Policy: A RISE Perspective, Research, Innovation and
Science Policy Experts High-Level Group, European Commission, Brussels.
Rittel HWJ, Webber MM (1973) Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy sciences 4:155–169
Roberts N (2000) Wicked problems and network approaches to resolution. International public management
review 1:1–19
Roeser S (2011) Nuclear energy, risk, and emotions. Philosophy & Technology 24:197–201
Rogge KS, Reichardt K (2016) Policy mixes for sustainability transitions: An extended concept and framework
for analysis. Research Policy 45:1620–1635.

27

Rotmans J, Loorbach D (2009) Complexity and transition management. Journal of Industrial Ecology 13:184–
196.
SAE (2014) Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving
Systems J3016_201401, issued 2014-01-16
Sanderson FJ, Kucharz M, Jobda M, Donald PF (2013) Impacts of agricultural intensification and abandonment
on farmland birds in Poland following EU accession. Agriculture, ecosystems & environment 168:16–24
Schor J (2016) Debating the sharing economy. Journal of Self-Governance & Management Economics 4:
Schot J, Steinmueller E (2016) Framing innovation policy for transformative change: Innovation policy 3.0.
SPRU Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex: Brighton, UK
Schot J, Steinmueller WE (2018) Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of innovation and
transformative change. Research Policy 47:1554–1567
Schuitmaker TJ (2012) Identifying and unravelling persistent problems. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change 79:1021–1031.
Sengers F, Raven RPJM, Venrooij AV (2010) From riches to rags: Biofuels, media discourses, and resistance to
sustainable energy technologies. Energy Policy 38:5013–5027.
SER (2013) Energieakkoord voor duurzame groei. Rapport Energieakkoord, Sociaal-Economische Raad
Shove E, Walker G (2010) Governing transitions in the sustainability of everyday life. Research Policy 39:471–
476.
Smith A, Kern F (2009) The transitions storyline in Dutch environmental policy. Environmental Politics 18:78–
98
Steward F (2012) Transformative innovation policy to meet the challenge of climate change: sociotechnical
networks aligned with consumption and end-use as new transition arenas for a low-carbon society or green
economy. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 24:331–343
Stoate C, Báldi A, Beja P, et al (2009) Ecological impacts of early 21st century agricultural change in Europe –
A review. Journal of Environmental Management 91:22–46
Surgeon General (1971) The Health Consequences of Smoking. Rockville
Surgeon General (1972) The Health Consequences of Smoking. Rockville
Surgeon General (1986) The health consequences of involuntary smoking. Rockville
Surgeon General (2006) The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: a Report of the
Surgeon General. Atlanta
Termeer CJAM, Dewulf A (2018) A small wins framework to overcome the evaluation paradox of governing
wicked problems. Policy and Society:1–17. doi: 10.1080/14494035.2018.1497933
Termeer CJAM, Dewulf A, Biesbroek GR (2017) Transformational change: governance interventions for
climate change adaptation from a continuous change perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and
Management 60:558–576
Thompson DF (1980) Moral responsibility of public officials: The problem of many hands. American Political
Science Review 74:905–916
Turnpenny J, Lorenzoni I, Jones M (2009) Noisy and definitely not normal: responding to wicked issues in the
environment, energy and health. Environmental Science & Policy 12:347–358

28

Ulnicane I (2016) “Grand Challenges” concept: a return of the’big ideas’ in science, technology and innovation
policy? International Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy 11:5–21
Van Bueren EM, Klijn E-H, Koppenjan JF (2003) Dealing with wicked problems in networks: Analyzing an
environmental debate from a network perspective. Journal of public administration research and theory
13:193–212
Van de Poel I, Fahlquist JN, Doorn N, et al (2012) The problem of many hands: Climate change as an example.
Science and engineering ethics 18:49–67
Van der Meer E (2017) Evolution versus revolution; incumbents and entrants shaping the roadmap for
autonomous vehicles, Utrecht University. Utrecht University
Voss JP, Bornemann B (2011) The Politics of Reflexive Governance: Challenges for Designing Adaptive
Management and Transition Management. Ecology and Society 16:
Walker G, Cass N (2007) Carbon reduction, ‘the public’ and renewable energy: engaging with socio-technical
configurations. Area 39:458–469
Weber KM (2006) Foresight and adaptive planning as complementary elements in anticipatory policymaking: A
conceptual and methodological approach. In: Reflexive governance for sustainable development. Edward
Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham and Northampton, pp 189–221
Weber KM, Rohracher H (2012) Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for transformative
change: Combining insights from innovation systems and multi-level perspective in a comprehensive
‘failures’ framework. Research Policy 41:1037–1047
Weber KM, Andreescu L et al. (2018) Transitions at the Horizon: Perspectives for the European Union’s future
research- and innovation-related policies. Final Report of BOHEMIA project. European Commission,
Brussels.
Webster CWR (2009) CCTV policy in the UK: reconsidering the evidence base. Surveillance and Society 6:10–
22
Webster CWR (2002) The diffusion, regulation and governance of closed-circuit television in the UK.
Surveillance & Society 2:
Welsh BC, Farrington DP (2009) Public area CCTV and crime prevention: an updated systematic review and
meta-analysis. Justice Quarterly 26:716–745
Wesseling JH, Edquist C (2018) Public procurement for innovation to help meet societal challenges: a review
and case study. Science and Public Policy
Wesseling JH, Farla JCM, Hekkert MP (2015) Exploring car manufacturers’ responses to technology-forcing
regulation: The case of California’s ZEV mandate. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions
16:87–105.
Widome R, Samet JM, Hiatt RA, et al (2010) Science, prudence, and politics: The case of smoke-free indoor
spaces. Annals of Epidemiology 20:428–435.
Wieczorek AJ, Negro SO, Harmsen R, et al (2013) A review of the European offshore wind innovation system.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 26:294–306
Wolsink M (2000) Wind power and the NIMBY-myth: institutional capacity and the limited significance of
public support. Renewable energy 21:49–64
World Health Organization (WHO) (2000) Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic. World
Health Organization

29

