Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Pp. 394-408

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.30

Literary Pragmatics
Fareed Hameed Al-Hindawi
Department of English, College of Education for Human Sciences
University of Babylon, Hilla, Iraq
Mariam D. Saffah
Department of English, College of Education
Islamic University
Hilla, Iraq
Abstract
The present study aims at presenting a thorough account of the field termed literary pragmatics
which emerges in a consequence of applying the different pragmatic approaches to the study and
analysis of literary genera. Additionally, it also attempts to explore and shed some light on the
relationship between the two domains: pragmatics and literature in order to reveal their
commonalities. There exists a strong assumption that these have something in common as they
both have to do with language users and how meaning is conveyed. Despite the fact the various
pragmatic approaches including speech act theory, conversational implicature, politeness theory
and relevance theory are developed mainly in relation to spoken interactions, the study has
revealed that they offer invaluable insights to the study of literary texts. Moreover, the process of
analyzing literary texts has led to the development and the explanation of the pragmatic approaches
themselves.
Key Words: context, literature, literary pragmatics, narrator, readers
Cite as: Al-Hindawi, F. H., & Saffah, M. D. (2019) Literary Pragmatics. Arab World English
Journal, 10 (2) 394-408.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.30

394

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

1. Introduction
Banfield (2003, p. 475) says that the term literary pragmatics lacks a common use with a welldefined referent, it represents less a unified theory than an area of research. It has developed in
replay to insights provided by pragmatic-theory over the past few decades.
In this regard, Mey (2010, p. 251) asserts that literary pragmatics lacks a pervasive use due to
the diverse approaches to pragmatics that have provided its insights and because of the various
kinds of relationship between literary analysis and pragmatic theory. Another complication comes
from the different understanding or definitions of the term literary and the special nature of literary
communication.
2. Literary Pragmatics
According to Mey (1999, p. 12), literary pragmatics signifies a field of inquiry which investigates
those sorts of influences that writers endeavour to exert on their audience in pursuit of establishing
a working cooperation by employing the properties of language. Such influences require precise
consideration of the conditions of use of these properties when addressed to a specific audience
including consumers of literary work.
The pragmatic effects in question demand a thorough exploitation of the whole contextual
factors governing the use of the linguistic elements involved (Mey, 1999, p. 12).
More specifically, literary pragmatics concentrates on the user’s role in the societal production and
consumption of literary texts (Mey, 2006, p. 549).
Similarly, Crystal (2008, p. 379) mentions that this field seeks to apply pragmatic notions to
the production and reception of literary texts.
Chapman (2011, p. 141) asserts that the different notions and frameworks for analysis emerged
within pragmatics have proven to be useful instruments for analyzing literary texts. This can be
attributed to the fact that pragmatics is all about studying language in use and creating and reading
literary texts are significant and fascinating instances of language use. The increased interest in
language use within linguistics has led to emphasis on the contextual and intertextual properties
of literary texts besides their formal ones.
Additionally, MacMahon (2014, p. 90) assumes that it is essential to have a pragmatics of
communication and interpretation. Without such a theory, stylistic approaches, which concentrate
only on form, unavoidably fall into difficulties to account for why a specific form should have
certain influence in a particular context.
It has been suggested that there are two chief concerns of those fascinated by the relation
between pragmatics and literature. Firstly, there is the utilization of pragmatic theory in the
analysis of the language of individual literary texts, so as to elucidate certain facet of how meaning
is expressed, how characters interact or how the author/narrator of a text interacts with the reader.
In other words, these frameworks borrow some aspect of pragmatic meaning and use it as their
method and certain literary text(s) as their data. Secondly, the resources of some pragmatic theories
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

395

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

have been applied to more general questions regarding the nature of literature itself. That is,
pragmatics has been used in the debate of what constitutes a literary text (Chapman, 2011, p. 142).
3. Literature
Searle (1979, p. 59) believes that it is not possible to produce a formal account of literature because
it signifies a set of attitudes individual readers take towards a stretch of discourse. Hence, what
counts as literature is decided by readers and is not open to further analysis.
It has been suggested that throughout history, the term literature has had different senses at
different times. These vary from elevated treatment of dignified subjects to merely writing in the
most general sense of the word to the sense of creative, highly imaginative literature appropriated
under the influence of romantic theories of literature in the last one hundred years. Moreover, it is
subject to endless modification and it does not mean the same universally. (Carter, 1997, p. 123)
In relation to this matter, Burton & Carter (2006, p. 267) say that definitions of literature and
of literary language are socially and historically diverse. Their history has been established by
different readers and writers formulating different replays to inquiries regarding a proper
definition. It should be emphasized that definitions of literature have to be viewed as functional.
That is, they form certain and variable circumstances in which texts are described as literary, and
the purposes that these texts can be used to achieve.
Leech (2008, p. 6) argues that the notion of literature has been identified in accordance with
some elusive concept of literariness. In this regards two accounts can be identified, formal and
functional.
Formalists accounts identified literariness with the linguistic elements of the literary medium.
Their basic assumption was that literary language is deviant language. That is, literariness inheres
in the extent to which language use departs from ordinary patterns of language and thus
deformalizes the reader. However, their functionalists counterparts defined literariness in terms of
function. In this respect, literariness occurs when language attracts attention to its own status as a
sign and when there is an emphasis on the message for its own sake. For instance, Jakobson, being
a functionalist and formalist as well, introduces a conception of the poetic function (Burton &
Carter, 2006, pp. 269-70).
According to Leech (2008, p. 6), both accounts are incorrect, because literature is chiefly a
prototype concept . It is demonstrated that the majority of conceptual categories in the human mind
and in language are categorized by a core of clear cases with a fuzzy periphery of blurred,
borderline cases. By the same token, the concept of literature and literariness are prototypical.
Hence, there is no litmus test for literature, but rather an array of coinciding markers of various
types such as sociocultural, aesthetic and linguistic criteria.
4. Literary Discourse
According to Van Dijk (1980, p. 5), the majority of the previous literary studies, whether
traditional or modern, concentrate on the analysis of the literary text rather than on the process of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

396

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

literary communication. Nevertheless, a pragmatic account of literature assumes that in literary
communication the production of a literary text are social actions.
MacMahon (2006, p. 234) mentions that the bulk of contemporary literary pragmatics tries to
define literature as having an exceptional functional and communicative status, yet at the same
time operating on principles which are similar to those of nonliterary discourses. That is, it
endeavours to restore the importance of context in literary linguistics, and the consideration of
literary works as communicative acts.
Black (2006, p. 3) proposes that is expected that literary discourse differs from ordinary
conversation and other written discourses due to the fact that any published work is subject to a
process of careful composition and much revision. In fictional dialogue the slips of the tongue,
repetitions, elisions and opaque reference which mark the spoken language are rarely represented,
except occasionally for humorous effect.
5. Context
Mey (1999, p. 36) believes that in order to comprehend an utterance, one needs to know the
circumstances surrounding its being uttered. In isolation, utterances do not make sense or make
the wrong one. In its broadest sense, context stands for the cultural, political, and economic
conditions of people whose actions and words are attempted to describe or capture within the
minutest context of language.
Allott (2010, p. 38) states that the context of an utterance represents a source of information
that assists the hearer in finding out what the speaker intended to express. Without taking the
context of words and phrases into consideration, it will not be likely to interpret the implicatures
of an utterance. Moreover, in numerous cases, it will be impossible to calculate the proposition
conveyed or the desired illocutionary force.
According to MacMahon (2006, p. 234), certain pragmatic approaches emphasize the
importance of paying attention to context and literary functions as crucial to any explanation of
literature. Hence, these approaches attempt to restore the significance of context in literary
linguistics, and consider literary works as a sort of communication.
Black (2006, p. 3) suggests that in a written text the outset offers the essential orientation into
the discourse because nothing precedes it. However, it is worth mentioning that the title,
appearance, author and even publisher of a book or a magazine offer the reader many hints as the
type of text they can expect, and so contextualize it to some extent. Additionally, whereas the
normal situation of discourse is face-to-face interaction, there is no reason to assume that written
texts work differently.
Nevertheless, it is stated that the production and reception of a spoken discourse takes place
within a single context of time and space. However, this is not the case with a written one such as
a letter. Besides, the addresser and addressee in a discourse situation are not always distinct. As
for published texts, there is usually one addresser but a great number of addressees, most of them
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

397

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

the writer has never met. Hence, literature is a type of discourse where the writer can assume fairly
little about the receiver of his message or its context (Leech & Short, 2007, p. 206).
6. Author and Reader
Mey (1999, p. 262) says that readers fetch to the text a specific set of preconditions from which to
approach the text and which make the text possible. That is, there exactingly is no reader’s text
until there is a reader. The reason behind this is that the text designates a probable world of
occurrences which demands a reader to cause those probabilities come into existence. It can be
inferred that the text the reader approaches is not the same as the one which he/she leaves behind.
As far as literary texts are concerned, the language user is the reader who obtains the product
of someone else’s literary activity and by consuming them fulfills a personal need. Such
relationship is not merely one of buying and selling a normal product. These two have more in
common than regular sellers and buyers. It is this commonality accompanied by the resulting
cooperation between them that renders the world of literary production and consuming diverse
from a typical marketplace (Mey, 2001, p. 788).
Additionally, Mey (2006, p. 551) mentions that the success of a story can be determined to a
great extent by the reader in addition to the author. Hence, books are bought and sold not because
they are indispensable for one material existence, but because they represent a personal
communication from an author to a potential readership. That is, the author produces books due to
the fact that he/she has a message for the reader as a person rather than a sort of making a living.
Leech & Short (2007, p. 207) state that in spite of the fact that the author of a literary work such
as a novel is not acquainted with his readers, he is capable of assuming that he shares with his
readers a mutual knowledge and experience. Such background knowledge comprises not only
shared inferences, but also knowledge regarding famous historical events and literary works.
Additionally, a writer will also resort to matters which is sensible to suppose the cultivated
readers of his time to be aware of, but which a later reader have to make himself alert to. Due to
the fact that the author can suppose knowledge which any specific reader might not essentially
have, it can be concluded that the addressee in literary communication is an implied reader. This
refers to a hypothetical personage who shares with the author a set of presuppositions, sympathies
and criteria of what is pleasant and unpleasant, good and bad, right and wrong. (Leech & Short,
2007, p. 207).
Mey (1999, p. 266) proposes that there exists a creative cooperation between authors and
readers even across time and distance. This cooperative process is taken to refer to the ability to
take up diverse positions grounded on the type of reading one is engaged in. In other words, it is
the capacity of collaborating with various authors in various ways in order to realize different
possible worlds. Hence, the reader is a main player in the literary game and his/her influence
requires entering the universe that the author has created. Via doing so the reader becomes an
actor, rather than a mere spectator.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

398

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

It has been said that the pragmatic study of literature concentrates on the features that categorize
the dialectic facet of literary production above. That is, the text as an author originated and guided
but at the same time reader oriented and activated process of wording. The reader is limited by the
boundaries of the text but the text offers the required extent of liberty in which the reader can
cooperate with the author to create the proper textual universe (Mey, 2001, p. 788).
7. Author and Narrator
Since narration is about storytelling, the story has to be told by someone referred to as the narrator.
In every story, the author creates a world of fiction, the narrative, in which the narrator assumes a
prominent role, even though not usually evident on the surface (Mey, 2014, p. 513).
Similarly, and according to Mey (2001, p. 789), the author creates the narrator regardless of
whether the latter overtly reveals himself\herself on the narrative scene. In both cases, the narrator
is a character in the story who cannot be held accountable for the actions and opinions of the other
characters. It is crucial for the readers to realize that the author cannot be identified with the
narrator not even the story is told in the first person singular.
Leech & Short (2007,p. 210) point out that authors and readers are not the only figures involved
in the fictional discourse. In this respect, it has been distinguished between the author and the
narrator. Additionally, the narrator may be addressing someone other than the reader. This is very
evident in an I-narration novels such as Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights which assumes the
form of a diary which Mr. Lockwood writes to himself:
“I have just returned from a visit to my landlord- the solitary neighbour that I shall be troubled
with. This is certainly a beautiful country!”
The same narration includes long passages reporting Nellie Dean’s narration of the events of the
story to Mr. Lockwood:
“About twelve o’clock, that night, was born the Catherine you saw at Wuthering Heights:
a puny, seven months’ child; and two hours after the mother died, having never recovered
sufficient consciousness to miss Heathcliff, or know Edgar.”[Chapter 16]
Leech & Short (2007, p. 211) propose a structure of the fictional discourse in which the writer and
the reader lie outside the direct communicative flow established in the text. Within the text, the
narrator tells the story. The narrative may contain dialogue among characters. Hence, there exists
an embedded discourse in which a real author addresses readers through the implied author within
whose discourse there is characters’ dialogue.
According to Black (2006, p. 61), third-person narrator signifies a disembodied voice, identified
by ubiquity and the capacity to enter into the minds of characters in the fiction. The flexibility of
this kind of narratorial voice allows a blend of the voices of the characters and narrators which
present some of the most fascinating and intricate features of fictional discourse.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

399

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

It has been pointed out that it is more typical for a novelist to utilize an impersonal style of
narration where reference by the narrator to himself is avoided. The passage below from George
Eliot’s (1871) Middlemarch is an example:
Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty which seems to be thrown into relief by poor dress. Her hand
and wrist were so ﬁnely formed that she could wear sleeves not less bare of style than those in
which the Blessed Virgin appeared to Italian painters
It can be inferred that the first advantage of this kind of narration is that the lack of an I asks the
reader to suppose that there is no evident you. Hence, the narration is introduced to the reader
directly. Additionally, the absence of an I also calls the reader to collapse the addresser side of the
novel discourse structure so the implied author and narrator become mingled. It is due to this
reason that most third-person narrators are omniscient since they stand in the place of the implied
author they take on his absolute knowledge (Leech & Short, 2007, p. 213).
8. The Voices of the Text
It is believed that in a narration each portion of text has a definite voice. That is, a way of speaking
that can be ascribed to one or the other of the agents involved in the narrative process. Normally,
each agent speaks with a single voice, his or her own (Mey, 1999, p. 112).
According to Mey (2014, p. 513), narrativity concentrates on the techniques and devices that
a narrator has at his/her disposal when telling a story. The concept of character and the
complementary voice are among the most essential devices. In a story, the characters come to life
via their voices. The characters are kept separately with their voices parted by means of simple
typographic means or in other ways; the purpose of these techniques is to allow the reader to locate
and shift the focus of his/her attention.
It has been pointed out that vocalization is a powerful way of forming and sustaining the
fictional space with the agreeable help and indispensible assistance from the readership and of
organizing the dialectics of creativity between author and reader. From a literary pragmatics
perspective, vocalization means giving a voice to a character in the story. More specifically, it
refers to the phenomenon of making the character speak (Mey, 2006, p. 553).
Consider the extract below:
“He [Jack Kemp] joined the Buffalo Bills after an injury.
‘ I hit a helmet with my passing hand and dislocated a finger to severely that I had to literally
decide what shape I wanted it in. So, I put my hand on a football and they put a cast over it.’ In
those days football was pretty Darwinian. ‘We ‘d do anything to survive’ I glanced at the finger.
Yep.”
(From an interview with the late Republican U.S. Congressman Jack Kemp).
In the extract above, a panorama of voices is encountered. First occurs the voice of the narrator,
the journalist who is reporting the story of the interview he has with Jack Kemp providing both a
historical frame and a running commentary. Second, there is Kemp’s own voice telling how he “
hit a helmet with his passing hand and dislocated a finger.” Then, a character’s voice is heard
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

400

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

therefore the focus of the narration has altered. Finally, “Yep” represents the voice of the narrator
who rapidly makes his attendance in the interview overt (Mey, 2014, p. 517).
Mey (2006, p. 553) proposes that this phenomenon is intricate in the sense that it not just offers
voice to a character but also provides information regarding the latter’s perspective or point of
view from which the latter sees the other characters and indeed the world. Accordingly, voices
range over the total fictional space they create.
It has been suggested that readers’ determination of the narrative development is maintained
through a bunch of devices some of which can be attributed to the realm of reader pragmatics.
Among these, there exists the phenomenon of focalization. Such contextual device is very
significance to the analysis understanding of text (Mey, 2001, p. 794).
According to Mey (1999, p. 147, 2006, p. 553), vocalization usually entails focalization which
indicates a focusing on the characters’ assignment in the literary universe. The process by means
of which the author’s perception of the events is associated with the reader’s situation in time and
place is called focalization. It has to do with the fact that every presentation is made in accordance
with the point of view of the presenter and his/her focus of the world. Moreover, so long as the
process of positioning the narrative voices in their appropriate contexts eventually has to be based
on some spatial and temporal universe, the focalization of the text presumes the localization of its
character.
9. Pragmatic Approaches to Literature
In spite of the fact that the pragmatic theories to be discussed below are developed mainly in
relation to spoken interactions, Black (2006, p. 17) argues that such theories can be applied to the
interpretation of written texts.
In this regard, Chapman (2011, p. 142) says that the principal frameworks of classical
pragmatics, speech act theory and conversational implicature are immediately preserved as
potentially invaluable to the study of literary texts. Besides, politeness theory and relevance theory
have lately come up with priceless insights into the different facets of the texts scrutinized.
Additionally, the process of analyzing literary texts has in turn fed back into the development and
the exposition of the pragmatic theories themselves.
9. 1 Speech Act Theory
In the sets of lectures that were posthumously published as How to do Things with Words,
Austin revolts against the view of language that placed the truth-conditions as central to language
understanding (Levinson, 1983, p. 228).
In his own search for ways of coping with language as a sort of action, Austin first made a
distinction between constative and performative utterances. In this dichotomy, constatives, such
as We went down to Como, are utterances in which something is said which can be evaluated a
long a dimension of truth. Performatives, on the other hand, are utterances, such as I promise to
go to Como, in which something is done which can be evaluated a long a dimension of felicity
(Verschueren, 1999, p. 22).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

401

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

According to Levinson (1983, p. 236), Austin isolates three basic senses in which in saying
something one is doing something. Therefore, three kinds of acts are simultaneously performed.
So, whenever we produce an utterance, we are engaged in three acts. A locutionary act is the
production of a well-formed utterance in any language one is speaking. The illocutionary act is the
meaning we intend to convey. The perlocutionary act is the effects of our words. For instance,
when saying, please open the door, and the listener does so, the speaker has achieved his
perlocutionary aim (Black, 2006, p. 17).
According to Miller (2005, p. 12), speech act theory can be considered as a tool for analyzing
prose fiction. Metaphorically speaking, a literary work does not represent a machine that can be
dismantled with this or that way, rather its working exposed. When reading literature, the tool turns
into the machine and vice versa. That is, both speech act theory and fiction are composed of
language.
From a speech act perspective, three forms can be identified in connection with literature. These
are (i) the author’s act of writing is a doing that assumes the form of putting things in this way or
that, (iii) the narrators and characters in a work of fiction may produce speech acts that are a form
of doing things with words such as promises, excuses, denials (iii) the reader in acts of teaching,
criticism, or informal comments may do things by putting a reading into words. Doing that could
have an influence on students, readers, or acquaintance (Miller, 2005, p. 12).
MacMahon (2006, p. 232) states that the main concern of different accounts of literature is to
define literature as what seems to be a particular type of speech acts. Fiction appears to make
assertions, but clearly without truth conditions. In this regard, Austin himself claims that his theory
cannot be applied to non-serious uses of language such as poetry. Nevertheless, some propose that
that speech act theory can be developed in relation to literary interaction.
For instance, Fish (1980, p. 233) demonstrates that definitions of literary speech acts assume a
demarcation between two kinds of discourse: nonliterary discourse that in different ways hooks up
with the real world, and literary discourse that functions with diminished responsibility to that
world. The former is stereotypically privileged by speech act theorists and is portrayed as basic
and prior, while the latter is depicted as derivative and dependent.
Consequently, and according to Ohmann (1971), cited in (Burton &Carter, 2006, p. 270)
literary speech acts require a suspension of the typical pragmatic functions that words could have
in order for the reader to consider them as somehow signifying or exhibiting the actions they would
ordinarily perform. In this regard, a literary speech act brings a world into being for its readers or
listeners, but beyond that does nothing.
Nevertheless, Van Dijk (1980, p. 10) believes that literature can be explained in terms of the
notion of an indirect speech act. An indirect speech act is one which is achieved by means of
another speech act. For instance, an assertion such as I’m hungry may function as a request for
food or That’s a stupid book as advice not to buy or read. By the same token, literature may have
predominant practical functions, such as warning, criticism, defense or piece of advice with regard
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

402

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

to certain attitude or action of the author or the reader via asserting the conditions for such an
illocutionary function. Hence, a novel may depict the atrocities of the Vietnam War, and thereby
indirectly functions as a severe criticism of American imperialism which may even be the main
function.
Black (2006, p. 20) suggests that various types of speech acts including representative,
expressive, directives, commissives and declarations occur in literary texts.
9. 2 Implicature
According to Chapman (2011, p. 142), one of the first attempts to apply pragmatics to literary
texts require Gricean analysis. In this respect, linguists start to consider the question regarding the
utility of applying Grice’s account of interaction in conversation to interaction between writers
and readers of literary texts.
Grice (1989, p. 26) states that people’s conversations are not random strings of separate
remarks, but rather they are somehow cooperative efforts, where each party identifies in them a
shared purpose or set of purposes, or a reciprocally acknowledged direction. Therefore, it is
possible to propose a general principle that interactants are supposed to notice:
“Make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the
accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in which you are engaged.”
To this Grice (1989, pp. 26-28) proposes four maxims, which elucidate how the co-operative
principle functions. The maxims strengthening the cooperative principle include the maxim of
quality, the maxim of quantity, the maxim of relevance, and the maxim of manner.
According to Grice (1975, p. 49) it is assumed, unless otherwise manifested, that every language
user will follow these maxims and expect his partner to do so. However, if an interlocutor can and
in a position to follow a specific maxim, but intentionally and bluntly infringes it, a conversational
implicature can be generated. Here, the maxim in question is exploited by the speaker to imply
more than what he states openly.
Pratt (1977) as cited in Chapman (2011, p. 142) proposes that it is possible to elucidate literature
along other types of discourse without resorting to a separate set of maxims. In literary texts, the
cooperative principle is chiefly secured between author and readers, therefore it can be liberally
and cheerily jeopardized. This indicates that flouting and the resulting conversational implicatures
are features of literary texts, although they are properties shared with all communicative uses of
language.
As an example of the cooperative principle functioning in the discourse between author and
reader, Pratt employs the opening sentence of Jane’s Austin’s Pride and Prejudice (1972):
It is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of a fortune must be in
want of a wife.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

403

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

In the example above, the reader believes neither the truth nor the claim that is universally
acknowledged. Additionally, he/she also believes that the author of the novel is conscious of this.
Hence, it can be presumed that Austin is intentionally flouting the maxim of quality. That is, she
is saying something that is manifestly false for communicative purpose, rather than attempting to
seduce the reader into believing what she says. The resulting implicature of flouting the quality
maxim is that the opposite of what is said is actually the case (Chapman, 2011, p. 143).
According to Black (2006, p. 27), the Gricean maxims could be expected to have some
relevance for the processing of literary discourse, particularly on the innermost level of characterto-character interactions. Additionally, it may be applicable to the processing of the whole text, in
the interaction between narrators and readers, and the relation between narrator and characters.
Grice’s maxims propose interpretive procedures which are familiar from daily communication.
On the character-to-character level, the maxim of quality functions in a similar way to real-life
interactions. Characters will lie, exaggerate, or conceal. The only difference is that the reader may
know more than the characters and be in a better position to arrive at probable implicatures not
available to them. More fascinating are those instances where the narrator plays fast and loose with
the maxims. It should be said the general violation of the maxims is an indication of unreliable
narrators (Black, 2006, p. 27).
Below is an example of character-to-character implicatures. It is an extract from Hemingway’s
The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber (1964)
‘That was a pretty thing to do,’ he said in a toneless voice. ‘He would have left you too.’
‘Stop it,’ she said
‘There’s a hell of a lot to be done,’ he said . . . ‘Why didn’t you poison him? That’s what they do
in England.’
‘Stop it. Stop it. Stop it,’ the woman cried.
‘Oh, please stop it’, she said. ‘Please, please stop it.’ ‘That’s better,’ Wilson said. ‘Please is much
better. Now I’ll stop.’
It can be seen that the speaker, Wilson, violates the maxim of quality as he did not noticed what
took place. The maxim of manner is also involved. This is the most inappropriate way of
addressing a widow. The implicature is that she murdered him. Since Wilson lacks evidence for
this the quality maxim is violated also (Black, 2006, p.29)
9. 3 Politeness
Chapman (2011, p. 146) states that the diverse accounts of the way politeness functions as a
modeling power in the interactions between language users have been utilized in the analysis of
literary texts.
It has been claimed that the most prominent work in politeness theory is that of Brown &
Levinson (1987). It provides a framework to describe and explain diverse linguistic resources that
can be utilized to signify politeness in face-to-face interactions. Central to their theory is the notion
of face (LoCastro, 2012, p. 137).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

404

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

Brown & Levinson (1987, pp. 68-71) suggest a set of five possibilities for the speaker to
accomplish this ranging from the best case (strategy type 5) to the worse (strategy type 1).
As for politeness, Chapman (2011, p. 146) asserts that two kinds of interaction are obtainable
for the analysis: generally, the interactions between the characters within the text, and the
interaction that readers themselves enter into more normally in reading the texts. It can be said that
perhaps because it is an area of pragmatics particularly directed at elucidating spoken discourse,
the sorts of literary texts most recurrently examined in relation to politeness are scripts from plays
and films.
In this regard, Simpson (1989, pp. 169-83) investigates the linguistic strategies of politeness
employed by the characters in Ionesco’s play The Lesson. The main event is a private lesson
comprising an elderly professor and an eighteen-year-old pupil. At the beginning of the play, the
professor is worried and hesitant, while the pupil is energetic and dynamic. Nevertheless, the
professor increasingly loses his shyness, becoming gradually domineering and antagonistic,
whereas the pupil becomes more and more passive. The transition in the interactive roles of the
two characters in question is reflected via subtle variation in the linguistic strategies employed by
the characters. To account for this, Simpson examines three extracts taken from key stages in the
play development.
In the first extract, the professor uses elaborate negative politeness strategies to his younger
more confident interlocutor. These strategies indicate that the professor is really the inferior
member of the interaction. In the second extract, the situation is somehow different. The two
characters show difference with one another implying a more symmetrical power relation exists
between them (Simpson, 1989, p. 183).
However, there appear signals of initial hostility in the professor since he starts to choose
strategies from the slightest polite end of the politeness scale. The final extract manifests evidence
of an obvious power differential between the characters when the professor issues a sequence of
bald, non-redressive face threatening acts to the pupil (Simpson, 1989, p. 183).
9. 4 Relevance Theory
Sperber & Wilson (1995, p. 260) propose relevance theory to account for the interpretation of
utterances. Their theory makes two essential claims concerning cognition and communication. The
first is that ‘human cognition tends to be organized so as to maximize relevance’; and the second
is that ‘every act of ostensive communication communicates a presumption of its own optimal
relevance.’ These claims indicate that there exists a solitary expectation criterion guiding the
interpretation process, both producing and estimating interpretations.
Hence, relevance constitutes a property and is quantifiable: something is relevant to the extent
that positive cognitive effects it produces are large and to the extent that cognitive effort needed
to achieve these effects is small (Sperber & Wilson, 1995, p. 261).
Sperber & Wilson (1995: 236) define the term poetic effect as the peculiar effect of an utterance
which achieves most of its relevance through a wide array of weak implicatures. Broadly speaking,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

405

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

the broader the array of potential implicatures and the greater the hearer’s accountability for
creating them, the more poetic the effect, the more creative the metaphor. A good creative
metaphor is accurately one in which a multiplicity of contextual effects can be retained and
understood as weakly implicated by the speaker.
Pilkington (2000, p. 102) applies a relevance-theoretical approach to the analysis of Seamus
Heaney’s Digging with special emphasis on the concluding lines:
The cold smell of potato mould. the squelch and slap
Of soggy peat. The curt cuts of an edge
Through living roots awaken in my head
But I’ve no spade to follow men like them.
Between my finger and my thumb
The squat pen rests. I’ll dig with it.
It is remarked that such a metaphor is too vague in its desired effects since the reader has no
evidence that the writer had anything specific in mind. However, in Heaney’s poem the
interpretation of the metaphor has been prepared by the rest of the poem. The reader is encouraged
to derive a very large number of implicatures from exploring the encyclopaedic entries for the
concepts Dig and Poetry or Writing. If these implicatures are accessible in an on-line reading, the
metaphor is both rich and successful (Pilkington, 2000, p. 104).
Some of the contexts established earlier in the poem comprise information that digging is the
way the poet’s forefathers earned their living. That is, it is an activity and occupation with a lengthy
convention in the society, that it is tough and honest and essential work which involves intense
attentiveness. Numerous of these contextual assumptions might be accessed and the properties of
digging in such assumptions transmitted, via inference, to the activity of poetry. The majority of
them are weakly implicated or rendered slightly more evident (Pilkington, 2000, pp. 102-3).
10. Conclusions
On the bases of the discussion conducted previously, the following conclusions can be made:
1. Literary pragmatics is a recent trend which is interested in the investigation of the contextual
influences exerted by authors or writers on their readers by means of their literary products. That
is, this field of inquiry focuses on the language user’s role in the production and reception of
literary texts.
2. As for the question regarding the relationship between pragmatics and literature, it is remarked
that this can be answered with reference to the fact that since pragmatics is concerned with
language in use and creating and reading literary texts are significant and fascinating examples of
language in use, the former has been proven to be a useful instrument for analyzing literary texts.
3. Additionally, it can be inferred that because literary texts cannot be accounted for in terms of
their formal properties, pragmatics holds out the probability of being capable of saying something
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

406

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

concerning the distinctive features of literary texts themselves, specifically in relation to the ways
in which readers interact with literary texts or the types of discourse involved.
4.The different pragmatic frameworks represented by speech act theory, conversational
implicature, politeness theory and relevance theory have been demonstrated to provide invaluable
insights to the study of literary texts. Besides, the process of analyzing literary texts has led to the
development and the elucidation of the pragmatic theories themselves.
About the Authors:
Lecturer Dr. Mariam D. Saffah holds an M.A. in Pragmatics from Babylon University, and a
Ph.D. in English Language and Linguistics from Babylon University. She is also interested in
Pragmatics, Phonetics and Phonology and Discourse analysis. She published a book and five
research papers.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1277-4623
Prof. Dr. Fareed H. Alhindawi is a professor of linguistics in the College of Education for Human
Sciences/University of Babylon. He majors in applied pragmatics. He published more than 60
research papers and authored, coauthored, and edited more than 12 books in different fields of
linguistics.
References
Allott, N. (2010). Key Terms in Pragmatics. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.
Banfield, A. (2003). Unspeakable Sentences. New York: Routledge.
Black, E. (2006) Pragmatic Stylistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Brown, P. &Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some Universals in Language Use. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Burton, B. & Carter, R. (2006). Literature and the Language of Literature. In Mey, J. (Ed.) The
Concise Encyclopedia of Pragmatics. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Carter, R. (1997). Investigating English Discourse. London: Routledge.
Chapman, S. (2011). Pragmatics. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Chilton, P. (2004). Analysing Political Discourse. London: Routledge.
Coulthard, Malcolm (1985). An Introduction to Discourse Analysis. London : Longman
Cruz, M. (2015). Pragmatics and Discourse Analysis. University of Seville.
Crystal, D. (2008). A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Fish, S. (1980) Is There a Text in This Class? Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press.
Leech, G. (2008). Language in Literature. London: Pearson Education.
Leech, G. & Short, M. (2007). Style in Fiction. London: Pearson Education.
Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MacMahon, B. (2006). Stylistics: Pragmatic Approaches. In Mey, J. (Ed.) The Concise
Encyclopedia of Pragmatics. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
MacMahon, B. (2014). Relevance Theory, Syntax and Literary Narrative. In Chapman, S. and
Clark, B. (Eds.) Pragmatic Literary Stylistics. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mey, J. (1999). When Voices Clash. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Mey, J. (2001). Literary Pragmatics. In Schiffrin, D., Tannen, D. and Hamilton, E. (Eds.). The
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

407

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Literary Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Saffah

Handbook of Discourse Analysis. London: Blackwell.
Mey, J. (2006). Literary Pragmatics. In Mey, J. (Ed.) The Concise Encyclopedia of Pragmatics.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mey, J. (2010). Literary Pragmatics. In Cummings, L. (Ed.) The Pragmatics Encyclopedia.
London: Routledge.
Mey, J. (2014) Pragmatics and Literature. In Bublitz, W. and Norrick, N. (Eds.) Foundations of
Pragmatics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Miller, J. H. (2005). Literature as Conduct. New York: Fordham University Press.
Pilkington, A. (2000). Poetic Effects. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Searle, J. (1976). A Classification of Illocutionary Acts. Language in Society, 5(1): 1-23.
Searle, J. (1979). Expression and Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication & Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Van Dijk, Teun A. (1980). The Pragmatics of Literary Communication. University of
Amsterdam.
Verschueren, J. (1999). Understanding Pragmatics. London: Arnold.
Simpson, P. (1989). Politeness Phenomena in Ionesco’s The Lesson. In Carter, R. and Simpson,
P. (Eds.) Language, Discourse and Literature. London: Routledge.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

408

