Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.11

Pp. 162 -176

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics
Fareed Hameed Al-Hindawi
Department of English,College of Education for Human Sciences
University of Babylon, Babel, Iraq
Wafaa Sahib Mehdi Mohammed
Department of English, College of Languages
University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq

Abstract
Aspects like power, dominance or ideology affect our choice of words in addition to other
contextual factors (such as settings, participants and so on). The power we enjoy as social actors
or the ideology we adhere to concerning any issue in life may play a crucial role in our language
production or interpretation. Issuing a certain speech act rather than another or producing one
impolite form rather than a polite one owning to such aspects falls within the realm of critical
pragmatics. It is one analytical methodology where critical issues are examined in terms of the
pragmatic phenomena to explore how the latter aid in the manifestation of the former. It attempts
to answer this question: what are the most common pragmatic phenomena that reveal how racists
or sexists pass on their critical ideologies? It aims to develop an analytical model for critical
pragmatics and identify the common pragmatic themes utilized. The study is qualitative. It
confines itself to the political discourse in the American context. The analysis of the data proves
the workability of the model that has been developed by the study. It also shows that various
pragmatic phenomena can be utilized to unravel critical issues.
Key words: critical pragmatics, pragmatics, racism, sexism
Cite as: Al-Hindawi, F.H., & Mohammed, W. S. M. (2018). Towards an Analytical Model in Critical
Pragmatics. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 162 -176.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.11

162

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

1. Introduction
Since Morris’ definition of pragmatics as the study of the relation between signs and their users
(1938), pragmatics has been one of the earliest paradigms that links language to context; it
considers language use as an action. As such, it easily lends itself to the critical and social
constructivist approaches to discourse studies. Critical pragmatics (CPs) alludes to lending a
critical eye to the pragmatic theories and how they are activated in examining critical issues. It
differs from pragmatics proper in that language abuse is scrutinized rather than ordinary language
use. If pragmatists are concerned with, say, the categorization of speech acts, felicity conditions,
the way of using them appropriately and correctly in social settings, critical pragmatists aim to
increase the independence and freedom of language users by making them aware of the linguistic
conditions of power exercising in societies and institutions.
Relations of inequality and domination are typically seen as illegitimate. Focusing on such
perspectives is the inherent meaning of criticality. Since language is one of the “social practices
through which people enact relations of domination and subordination” (Cameron, 2001, p. 161),
it is not surprising that power and how it is enacted in language is subject to investigation. Thus,
inherent to any kind of critical study is the concepts of power and ideology. Critical discourse
studies are defined as critical approaches to discourses such as critical linguistics, feminist
linguistics, critical discourse analysis, critical stylistics, and so on (Polyzou, 2018). Hence, CPs is
one such an approach that focuses on how the pragmatic issues are exploited in critical language
use. Its basic pillars are specifying a stance and presenting a critique.
2. Previous Attempts in CPs
Mey (2001, p. 320) argues that it is important to critically examine how language functions in
society to understand its various uses and manifestations. Language use is inherently a
combination of linguistic variations and sociological parameters. As a social science, pragmatics
needs to help us recognize social injustice or discrimination to work to end it (p. 321). It is vital to
notice that social aspects in pragmatics concern our language use and the authority we form out of
our words. Thus, we may delve into examining language use in society to have a critical eye on
certain states of affairs like discrimination, injustice or rudeness, among others. This is how Mey
(2001) introduces his concept of CPs which represents a pioneering attempt to ignite the
eclecticism between criticality and pragmatics in language production and interpretation. He builds
his insights on Fairclough’s Lancaster School of critical language awareness (p. 316). The term
critical is associated with assigning power to groups in society whether on the level of production
or interpretation (Fairclough, 1989). In this regard, we may produce or construe a piece of
discourse in a powerless or a powerful way.
Korta and Perry (2011, p. 93) introduce their view of CPs to portray a picture of how parts of
the language are used to materialize human thoughts and actions because it critically tries to probe
into how human beings use language so as to shape and influence the realities of the community
to which they belong. This means that people may intentionally use their language to impose or
reveal their power or higher status. The co-authors advocate a focus on intention discovery because
“speaking is an intentional activity and understanding involves intention discovery” (Korta and
Perry, 2011, p. 2), at a first place. They aver that intentions are part of plans as “plans do not occur
on their own, but with beliefs” (p. 4). Plans are cognitively originated and fostered.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

163

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

Korta and Perry (2013, p. 161) subsume that understanding any utterance is a process of
grasping the speaker’s communicative intention even by inference or recognition of the
illocutionary force of that utterance. Utterances are inherently of different levels. In assigning
contents, one needs to consider “what the rest of the world has to be like for the utterance to occur
and be true” (p. 162). The meaning of words provides one level of content. Other levels are further
added by other facts related to the utterance such as the speaker, addressee, place, time and
communicative intentions of the speaker.
2.1 The Current Perspective of CPs
Mey (1989) claims that “there is a pragmatic aspect to all linguistic phenomena” (p. 829);
pragmatics “should get itself involved in improving the human environment” (p. 830). Mey (2001)
argues that pragmatists “need to integrate their practical endeavors toward a better use of language
with a theory of language use” (p. 289). For Korta and Perry (2011), language is action; meaning
is derived from the speaker’s intentions (p. 2-4). They blame the mono-propositional concept that
was believed to be adequate for the pragmatic meaning. Their basic purport is that CPs is a natural
development of these insights that have never received their due attention from contemporary
pragmatists (p. 158). Thus, a critical eye needs to be given to the pragmatic issues. One such an
approach can be exemplified by intermingling these pragmatic issues into the critical examination
of language use.
Archer et al. (2012, p. 41) aver that empirical studies take the interactional aspect of language
and the role of receivers into consideration. To activate these arguments, critical approaches to
discourse can provide such a widening of scope. CPs is one kind of critical studies which is
concerned with shedding light on discourse just like critical linguistics or critical stylistics. This is
how Polyzou (2018) differentiates between critical discourse analysis and critical studies on
discourse. He expounds that “critical discourse studies would be more concerned with
communication in a broader sense – we might consider communication successful for one
participant only if that participant has met her goals regardless of or even at the expense of another”
(p. 196). As cognitive principles, the pragmatic norms of Grice’s Maxims or Austin’s Conditions
are narrow for critical discourse analysts. The maxims can be flouted to generate irony or humor
and our interlocutors would grasp our intention. Thus, the analysis needs to be enriched by looking
at a broader context (p. 196).
Archer et al. (2012) hold that pragmatics is after “what is unsaid/unwritten yet communicated”
(p. 291). The explicit theorization of what is ‘not said’ in pragmatics hints to more than the context.
This counters the idea that critical linguists ‘read into’ texts ideologies that are not stated explicitly
(p. 291). According to LoCastro (2012, p. 6), an inclusive perspective of pragmatic analysis should
encompass aspects like the intended meaning of the speaker, the perceived meaning, the purpose
of the talk, social and cultural contexts, the distance between interlocutors, non-verbal elements,
among others. All these go beyond the scope of linguistic pragmatics which looks for the linguistic
forms used by a speaker.
An approach to criticality entails that a stance is to be embraced concerning the critical issue at
hand. As far as racism is concerned, an anti-racist stance is adopted to show how utterances may
convey racism. The same applies to sexism. Specifying such a stance entails unraveling how the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

164

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

critical issue is analyzed and discussed to lay it open in front of receivers and making them aware
of the undesired racist or sexist implications in language. This is a critique process. To think of
putting the racist utterance in another form raising racism from its meaning, is a process of
reproduction.
To sum up, bringing glimpses and borrowing ideas from previous approaches to pragmatics
and criticality and their interrelatedness, this research paper adopts the CPs as an analytical method
to probe into discourses looking for the manifestations of critical ideologies that are imparted via
pragmatic theories. This paper concerns itself with racism and sexism as critical issues in social
communication by adhering to an anti-racist/anti-sexist stance. It explicates such instances in a
critique endeavor to put the illegitimate points unveiled to receivers making them aware of them.
A proposed reproduced form might be suggested to minimize the racist or sexist aspects in
alignment with the political correctness attempt which is the “excessive concern with the
replacement of problematic words with the correct term” (Mills, 2008, p. 100).
3. Basic Concepts in CPs
Key concepts in all critical studies are ideology and power. Incorporating these issues in the
pragmatic work is the goal of CPs. These two issues are not alienated from the pragmatic
frameworks, yet they are not given their due attention there. Ideology is a cognitively-related
concept that is associated with language production and interpretation. The theory of ideology can
be traced philosophically or sociologically, but most importantly socio-cognitively as the latter
approach relates ideology to discourse: how “ideologies articulate themselves at the level of
discourse meaning” (van Dijk, 1995, p. 244). According to Verschueren (1999, p. 238), the
constellation of commonsensical, fundamental, and usually normative, ideas and beliefs that are
related to certain aspects of social reality is termed as ideology. It is “associated with underlying
patterns of meaning, frames of interpretation, worldviews or forms of everyday thinking and
explanation” (Verschueren, 2013, p. 7). The most salient “manifestation of ideology is language
use or discourse which may reflect, construct and/or maintain ideological patterns” (p. 17).
Power, on the other hand, has been discussed as one of the sociological variables along with
distance and rank of imposition in the theory of politeness (Brown and Levinson, 1987, p. 79).
Power is a value assigned to the individuals or their roles in a particular context (p. 83). Following
Archer et al. (2012, p. 133), pragmatic investigations of power are the basic constituent of CPs.
Courtroom talk, police interaction, political interviews, doctor-patient interactions and talk in the
workplace are instances where power emerges as an effective element which might be violated.
This study attempts to hinge upon political debates as another proposed genre of investigation in
terms of CPs.
4. Pragmatic Works and Critical Issues
In (2004), Chilton worked on the pragmatic concepts of implicature and presupposition in the
analysis of political discourse. Wodak (2007) studied how the pragmatic devices related to rhetoric
such as allusions or puns are utilized in terms of their functions to convey anti-Semitic prejudices
in political speeches. Both scholars maintain, however, that the pragmatic aspects can be one level
in the critical analysis of discourse. This research paper argues that other pragmatic phenomena
can be incorporated into the critical orientation in analyzing language use. Such phenomena may
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

165

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

play a role in underpinning the ideological perspectives. Put conspicuously, these pragmatic
aspects are used as strategies to convey a certain critical state of affairs such as racism or sexism.
4.1 Racism
The notion of racism is basically related to that of race. Wren (2001) holds that race designates
a “pseudo-scientific division of all humans into distinct categories based on skin color” (p. 142).
The race is based on “inherent inferiority of particular racial groups” (p. 142). For Hill (2008, p.
6), it is a basic category of human biological variation. To Garner (2010, p. 5), racism is a social
relationship and this essentializes an imbalance of power realized by various accesses to resources.
Essed (1991, p. 39) conceives racism as an ideological construction where a relationship of
power is sustained in a systemic process of domination exercised by one group over another. For
Guillaumin (1995), “racism is a symbolic system operating inside the system of power relations
of a particular type of society” (p. 30). It is fostered by the concept of differences. Racism is used
loosely and unreflectively to describe all the negative hostile feelings of one group toward another
and the actions emerging from such attitudes (Fredrickson, 2002). It is not only about human
differences or bad thinking of one group against another with no control, but also it proposes and
sustains a hierarchy of order which is believed to be a natural law (p. 6).
Two manifestations of racism can be scrutinized: overt and covert (Teo, 2000, p. 8). The overt
is exemplified by the use of racial slurs, epithets or jokes. The word nigger is a slur that stigmatizes
an African American person in American society. The covert form is disguised in subtleness and
it can be resolved via the pragmatic aspects.
4.2 Sexism
To discriminate is to make a difference in treatment on a categorical basis (Graumann and
Wintermantel, 1989, p. 183). Discrimination is a phenomenon of exclusion. In this regard, Wodak
(2009, p. 315) stipulates that gender-differentiation is one form of discrimination. Women have
always been subject to marginalization and segregation. Sexism is a product of the dominant
patriarchal ideologies where males are superior to females in the social hierarchy. Recent studies
view gender as “another manifestation of social diversity” (LoCastro, 2012, p. 216).
Two kinds of sexism in language are distinguished: overt and covert. The overt is “the type of
usage which can be straightforwardly identified through the use of linguistic markers” (Mill, 2008,
p. 11) such as the use of the generic ‘he’ or words as ‘actor’ and ‘actress’. The covert kind of
sexism, on the other hand, is embedded in language and it is unraveled by means of implicature,
presupposition and so on. These aspects fall within the domain of pragmatics. This means that
other pragmatic aspects can be operationalized to detect sexism (or racism) in language. It is
worthy to mention, however, that overt racism as well as overt sexism are out of the realm of this
study and the main concern focuses on the covert kinds of both.
5. Pragmatic Issues
Due to space limitation, speech acts (SAs), reference, strategic maneuvering (SM) and
implicature in addition to their strategies are chosen as the pragmatic phenomena to understand
how critical issues are conveyed via language.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

166

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

5.1 Speech Acts (SAs)
The engagement in any communicative encounter entails the use of various SAs. The essence
of Austin’s (1962, p. 101) theory of SAs is that saying is doing. A racist or sexist speech is a form
of offensive speech which has an illocution. Offending or hurting the feelings of hearers is its
perlocutionary act. Searle (1969, p. 54) explains four felicity conditions for the successful
execution of an illocution: propositional, preparatory, sincerity and essential conditions. A
classification of five macro categories of SAs has been introduced (Searle, 1976, pp. 17- 20) where
each one hosts some other micro- acts distinguished from each other by their own felicity
conditions. The five macro ones are: commissives (the speaker is committed to doing something
as in promising), declarations (the speaker’s utterance causes an external change like declaring a
war), directives (the speaker gets people to do something such as requesting), expressives (the
speaker expresses his feelings and attitudes like criticizing) and representatives or assertives (the
speaker informs others about the truth as in affirming).
To ridicule, pose a threat, accuse or belittle a person due to the racial origin, sexist
differentiation or even religious practices or political beliefs is to issue such acts. Directive acts as
commands and orders, for instance, are used by the powerful to tell others to do or not to do
something (van Dijk, 1993, p. 100). The prevalence of such acts in discourse hints to authority and
power of speakers. Skinner (2008, p. 647) expounds that SAs need to be understood in relation to
the circumstances in which they are issued. Racist accusations uttered about people from various
backgrounds are understood as such in their own contexts (Reyes, 2011, p. 464).
5.2 Reference
Reference is a wide research topic with fuzzy borders where the meaning is relative to a specific
situation (Crystal, 2003, p. 231). It occurs when a speaker intends to impart a piece of information
about a particular object with a certain property or relation. It houses proper names, definite
descriptions, demonstratives, pronouns, indexicality or deixis (Korta and Perry, 2011). Deixis is
the study of deictic expressions in language (Levinson, 2007, p. 100). Deixis falls into distinct
semantic fields: personal (you, me), spatial (here, there), temporal (now, then), social (Mr., his
highness), etc. The latter is best interpreted in terms of familiarity and respect. In social contexts
where the status of interlocutors, their age and their power are recognized, such uses have specific
denotations (Yule, 1996, p. 11).
In portraying the positive-self and the negative-other representation in revealing racism (van
Dijk, 2004, p. 44), referencing has a notable role (Wodak, 2009). To call someone by his first name
or to refer to someone by a specific attribute is to show ideology in terms of one’s projective angle.
This can be best clarified by the pragmatic investigation. Interest in referencing as far as the
pragmatic study is concerned lies in its psychological reference. Physically close objects are
projected as psychologically close and the opposite is true. A speaker, however, may wish to
represent a physically close object as psychologically distant due to ideological motivations. Out
of a racist motivation, one may say ‘that person’ to denote remoteness pointing to a person who is
standing in front of his eyes, present in time and space.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

167

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

5.3 Strategic Maneuvering (SM)
People usually maneuver so as to capture their goals, win the assent of interlocutors or be
persuasive. To maneuver is to manipulate situations or events in order to gain some ends with a
skill or cunning way (Web Source 1). The mere act of expressing an ideology or let it pass through
words is a gain by itself. The pragmatic dimension in this theory is linked with the descriptive
insights from the theory of SAs, Grice’s philosophy of language and discourse studies (Goodnight,
2009, p. 77). The dialectical dimension, on the other hand, is inspired by the reasonableness of
arguers. Then the rhetorical aspect (exemplified by the presentational devices) has been noticed as
effective, if incorporated in the dialectical efforts (Eemeren et al., 2012, p. 38).
SM is an amalgamation of reasonableness and effectiveness. Reasonableness is “using reason
in a way that is appropriate in view of the situation concerned”, as Eemeren (2010, p. 29) observes.
Thus, it is a context-specific concept. Effectiveness is associated with rhetoric which, in turn, has
to do with the persuasive techniques (p. 39). Classic rhetorical devices such as metaphor,
hyperbole, pun and so on are effective presentational devices in argumentation.
Eemeren and Houtlosser (2002) observe three basic aspects in the analysis of SM: topical
potential, audience demands and presentational devices (p. 135). To maneuver is to highlight one
of the three aspects more than the others ( Eemeren and Houtlosser, 2009, p. 6). Each aspect has
its own realization. The first dimension of topical potential involves selecting materials from those
available in terms of what is believed to be the best to serve the advantages of a speaker (Tindale,
1999, p. 43). Arguers choose topics from a list of topics available at their disposal that best advance
their interests as they discuss and present them. A racist, for instance, may resort to topics like how
immigrants are burdens for the country (by taking jobs or destroying infrastructures).
Audience demand is to lead the moves in speech “in such a way that they are expected to be
optimally acceptable to the other party in view of that party’s views and preferences” (Eemeren
and Houtlosser, 2002, p. 136). Adherence to audience demand, can be represented by claiming
common grounds with hearers as belonging to some group of people who share specific wants,
needs or goals, intensifying interest in hearer’s wants and desires (Brown and Levinson, 1987, p.
117). These two aspects are utilized in this work. Presentational devices are subsumed under the
rhetorical dimension resulted from Grice’ work and his maxims.
The classical presentational devices relate to the “phrasing of the moves a party makes” (Rees
and Rigotti, 2011, p. 207) and the style of presentation. Their function lies in the fact that “they
present something in a certain light” (p. 207) and project the situation in a particular way so as to
appropriately fit the aims of the speaker. The use of euphemisms or hyperboles to emphasize or
deemphasize meanings or the use of metaphors to describe the ‘invasion’ of immigrants are usually
noticed in racist discourses (van Dijk, 2012, p. 26).
5.4 Implicature
Grice’s (1975) Cooperative Principle signals some basic assumptions concerning the nature of
any conversation where interlocutors are expected to adhere to quantity, quality, relevance and
manner maxims in their contribution. By flouting such maxims, figurative uses of language result
such as metaphors, hyperboles and so on. A metaphor is an example of flouting the maxim of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

168

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

quality; a hyperbole results from flouting the maxim of quantity (Grice, 1989, p. 34). An
implicature is an additionally-conveyed meaning (Yule, 1996, p. 35). These are conversational
implicatures as they are derived due to the violation of the aforementioned maxims. If the
implicature is derived from the conventional meaning of the word, it is called conventional
implicature or explicature (Horn, 2007: p.19).
In addition to the four maxims, there are other sorts of social, moral or aesthetic maxims that
generate nonconventional implicatures such as ‘Be polite’ (Grice, 1989, p. 28). This means that all
impolite utterances observed in interactional exchanges are instances of nonconventional
implicatures because by not adhering to politeness strategies the speaker implicates that he shows
impoliteness whether intentionally or not.
6. The Model of Analysis
The model of analysis developed by this paper is based on the pragmatic issues discussed in
the previous sections. The analytical framework is basically divided into four basic components:
SAs, reference, SM and maxim breaching. This last strategy yields implicature. These pragmatic
phenomena are utilized as strategies. SAs invite the macro acts of Searle’s (1979) categorization
into the scene. Reference, following Korta and Perry (2011), is concerned with the deictic
expressions, definite descriptions and proper nouns. SM, as Eemeren and Houtlosser (2002)
expound, focuses on topical potentials and audience demands. Implicature is conversational,
conventional and nonconventional. Conversational implicature yields some tropes like metaphor,
hyperbole or the like (Grice, 1975). It is worthy to mention that all the examples that are observed
as racist or sexist are characterized with the non- conventional implicature since being racist or
sexist is an impolite act because it inherently designates discriminatory behaviors and thoughts as
well as prejudice against others due to inappropriate conceptions. Thus, the eclectic model of
analysis is engineered in Figure 1 as follows:

Figure 1. An analytical framework for critical pragmatics
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

169

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

7. Data and Analysis
7.1 Data Collection and Description
The data under scrutiny are extracts taken from a transcribed version of the third presidential
debate of D. Trump and H. Clinton in 2016 (Web Source 2). The choice of this debate is due to
the fact that it represents the American context. Since it is between a man and a woman candidate,
sexist instances are looked for. Four excerpts, where instances of racism and sexism manifest
themselves, are selected. The unit of analysis is the utterance. The most relevant contextual factors
of the data are summarized in Table 1, following Hymes’ (1974) grid of SPEAKING (p. 55).
Table 1. The contextual factors of the data
Contextual Factors
Setting
Participants

Description
Las Vegas, Oct. 20, 2016
Speaker: Trump
Addressee: Clinton

End

Elections

Instrumentalities
Genre

Spoken
Presidential debate

7.2 Analysis
The eclectic model developed by this study and represented by Figure 1 is the basic apparatus
for analyzing the data of this work. Four illustrative examples, two for racism and two for sexism,
are introduced.
7.2.1 Racist Exemplifications
Excerpt 1
“Trump: Just to finish on the borders, she wants open borders. People are going to pour into our
country. People are going to come in from Syria. She wants 55% more people than Barack Obama.
And he has thousands and thousands of people. They have no idea where they come from. And you
see, we are going to stop radical Islamic terrorism in this country”.
Trump’s racism against immigrants (the Syrians) manifests itself via his words. Those different
Others (immigrants) are not welcomed by Trump because they cause fear to America as potential
terrorists. The image coincides with the positive-us/negative-them dichotomy. He associates the
Syrians in the States with terrorism, which has become associated with Islam. There is a sense of
accusingi all Syrians of being terrorists. His racism is also shown by utilizing SM. This is activated
by the potential topical aspect where an urgent theme has been chosen by Trump (immigration) to
be related to (terrorism). Referencing to the Syrians (using the proper noun) clarifies this racist
ideology.
The word ‘pour’ in this extract is a metaphor. It represents the image of refugees and
immigrants pouring like unstoppable water in the sense that it is difficult to contain or control them
as with liquids; this image conveys a notion of danger, threat and urgency of action. Moreover,
water lacks shape and color and those people are given similar attributive qualities. In the Gricean
paradigm, metaphors are generated by flouting the quality maxim (Grice, 1989, p. 34). The hearer
has been misled by additional information making the speaker as uncooperative. According to
(Holmgreen, 2006, p. 96), metaphors are ideal instruments for maintaining powerful positions. The
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

170

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

word ‘border’ is associated with the wall Trump wants to build, a recurrent theme in his speech
denoting the idea of isolation and power. It hints to a racist tendency.
Excerpt 2
“Trump: I will do more for African-Americans and Latinos than she can do for ten lifetimes. All
she's done is talk to the African-Americans and to the Latinos, but they get the vote and then they
come back, they say ‘we’ll see you in four years’”.
Trump claims that he will help and do more for African-Americans and Latinos in America.
Those groups are minorities. He hints to his superior status over such weak jobless people
emphasizing the negative- them/ positive-us dichotomy. He views himself as better and superior
to Clinton (alluding to sexism) promising to help those people who are conceived as inferior and
helpless in American society. His racism is manifested by the commissive SA of promising (See
Searle, 1969, p. 54 for the felicity conditions of promising), although this promise can be but a lie.
He uses definite descriptions as a referencing strategy. “African- American” refers to a minority
group in America who descends from a black racial group from Africa (Web Source 3). The word
“Latino”, on the other hand, refers to a person of “Dominican, Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican,
South or Central American, and other Spanish origin or culture” (Web Source 4). It is a minority
group that suffers from the lack of job opportunities. The utterance alludes to a prototypical belief
that those people are lazy; therefore, they are left unemployed. His words remind those people of
their negative image: helpless, jobless or vulnerable.
7.2.2 Sexist Exemplifications
Excerpt 3
“Clinton: That's part of my commitment to raise taxes on the wealthy. My Social Security payroll
contribution will go up as will Donald's assuming he can't figure out how to get out of it, but what
we want to do is -Trump: Such a nasty woman”.
The moderator discusses the Medicare and Social Security programs in America as they need
to be saved and put in effect. Trump intends to cut taxes, when he is elected, whereas Clinton
wants to put more money into the Social Security program by raising taxes on the wealthy. He
rejects her idea and calls her ‘nasty’. Calling a woman as ‘nasty’ is a pejorative act that is not
suitable for women who like to be respected and appreciated especially in public. This negative
word means evilness and wickedness. Trump’s utterance counts as an expressive SA of insultingii.
Women are sensitive creatures who can be injured easily.
The utterance exploits SM by touching upon audience demands. By cutting taxes, Trump shows
interest in some of his audience’s needs. According to Haney-Lopez (2014, p. 54), the phrase ‘cut
tax’ is a code word that politicians deploy as veiled racial appeals to persuade white voters to
support their favorite policies. This word conveys a message to the middle-class people in the
United States that your money is not going to be spent and wasted on the minorities. Thus, this
utterance bears a racist hint, as well.
Excerpt 4
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

171

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

“Trump: We have a country with tremendous numbers of nuclear warheads, 1,800, by the way.
Where they expanded and we didn't. 1,800 nuclear warheads. And she is playing chicken. Look.
Clinton: Wait.
Trump: Putin from everything I see has no respect for this person.
The sexist ideology of Trump appears when he refers to Clinton saying: ‘this person’. This is
a demonstrative pronoun, a referencing strategy, that is exploited to belittleiii Clinton. It is an
expressive SA that regards or portrays someone or something as less impressive or important than
reality. Instead of referring to her as a candidate or call her by personal name, he uses this phrase.
Regardless of the fact that this is a debate between two rival candidates where each one tries to
win the votes of viewers, Trump directly attacks Clinton and calls her names and disrespects her
publically out of his sexist ideology. He says that she is ‘playing chicken’ which means that she
is playing a dangerous game just to show who is the bravest (Web Source 5). This is a metaphoric
use of language. His utterance counts as a SA of criticizing. Trump criticizes Clinton of
indifference in the hard times the country is passing through. He criticizes her policies and political
visions. This implies that he sees himself as better than her due to his sexism.
The qualitative analysis shows that focus on the pragmatic phenomena can help
manifest racism or sexism in language. These phenomena, in turn, are the pragmatic strategies
utilized to impart such ideologies. For example, different SAs (such as accusing or insulting,
etc.) are utilized to reveal these ideologies. The referencing strategies of resorting to proper
nouns or definite descriptions are utilized as well. Table 2 below demonstrates a summery for
the analyses of the four instances scrutinized above.
Table 2. Summery for the sample analysis
Critical
ideology
Racism

SAs

Reference

SM

Implicature

Ex.
1

Accuse

Proper nouns

Topical
potential

2

Racism

Promise

3

Sexism

Insult

4

Sexism

Belittle
Criticize

Definite
description
Definite
description
Definite
description

Audience
demands
Audience
demands
---

1.Conversational
(Metaphor)
2.Non-conventional
Non-conventional
Non-conventional
1.Conversational
(Metaphor)
2. Non-conventional

Conclusion
According to the above analysis, the following conclusions are derived:
1. The analysis of the data under investigation proves the workability of the model that has been
developed to analyze a piece of discourse in terms of the critical pragmatic paradigm.
2. Since CPs is an analytical methodology that activates pragmatics in analyzing and
understanding discourses, this approach is useful to probe into critical issues and how they are
implemented via language. The aim is to unravel and oppose them. In this case, the social
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

172

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

functioning of language is highlighted and how such criticality may affect harmony in society
is put under focus.
3. Different pragmatic phenomena can be discussed in the critical pragmatic approach to
discourse. This includes pragma-linguistic, pragma-dialectic and pragma-rhetoric levels.
4. Under the critical pragmatic paradigm, it is recommended to follow the data-driven method in
the analysis. Put conspicuously, the data that are characterized by a critical issue can be
examined to find out how the pragmatic aspects help in imparting such a critical issue.
5. There is an overlapping between the racist and sexist ideologies in the minds of speakers. What
seems to be as implicating racism implies sexism as well. This is so because both ideologies
stem from the concept of discrimination, prejudice and superiority. One may even claim that
sexism is one form of racism in the sense that sexism is a kind of prejudice against the other
sex (usually women) fed by discrimination and the feelings of superiority.
6. Doing a critical pragmatic analysis requires vast background knowledge in terms of the
detailed aspects of contexts, history, culture, cognition, societies among others as well as
conscious pragmatic competence. Critical pragmatists need a pragmatic meta-level which
enables them to make sense of discourse and the world and see behind the lines delving into
speakers’ minds.
Endnotes:
About the authors:
Prof. Fareed Hameed Al-Hindawi holds Ph. D. in English Language and Linguistics. His M. sc.
degree was from the University of Edinburgh, UK. He teaches B. A., M.A. and Ph.D. programs at
the College of Education for Human Sciences, University of Babylon. He has published twelve
books and more than fifty articles in national and international academic journals. He is interested
in pragmatics, discourse studies and phonology. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-26272146
Wafaa Sahib Mehdi Mohammed, University of Baghdad, College of Languages, Department of
English. She holds a Master Degree in English language and linguistics. Her Ph. D. dissertation is
concerned with critical pragmatics. The areas of interest are pragmatics, critical studies, stylistics
and discourse analysis. She has published various papers, a book and co-authored some many other
ones. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5506-9529
References
Andone, C. (2013). Argumentation in Political Interviews: Analyzing and Evaluating Responses
to Accusations of Inconsistency. Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing.
Archer, D.; Aijmer, K. & Wichmann, A. (2012). Pragmatics: An Advanced Resource Book for
Students. London and new York: Routledge.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brown, P. & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, D. (2001). Working with Spoken Discourse. London: Sage.
Chilton, P. (2004). Analysing Political Discourse: Theory and Practice. London, New York:
Routledge.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

173

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

Crystal, D. (2003). A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics, 5th ed. MA: Blackwell
Publishing.
Eemeren, F. (2010). Strategic Maneuvering in Argumentative Discourse. Amsterdam: John
Benjamin Publishing Company.
Eemeren, F & Houtlosser, P. (2002). Strategic Maneuvering in Argumentative Discourse:
Maintaining a Delicate Balance. In F. Eemeren and P. Houtlosser (eds.), Dialectic and
Rhetoric. The Warp and Woof of Argumentation Analysis (pp. 131–159). Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Eemeren, F & Houtlosser, P. (2009). Strategic Maneuvering: Examining Argumentation in
Context. In F. Eemeren (ed.) Examining Argumentation in Context: Fifteen Studies on
Strategic Maneuvering (pp.1-25). Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing Company.
Essed, P. (1991). Understanding Everyday Racism: An Interdisciplinary Theory. California:
Sage Publications, Inc. [Book review].
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and Power. London: Longman.
Fredrickson, G. M. (2002). Racism: A Short History. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Garner, S. ( 2010). Racisms: An Introduction. London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Graumann, C. & Wintermantel, M. (1989). Discriminatory Speech Acts: A Functional Approach
In D. Bar-Tal, C. Graumann, A. Kruglanski, & W. Stroebe (eds.), Stereotyping and
Prejudice: Changing Conceptions. (pp. 183-207). New York: Springer.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and Semantics,
Vol. 3, Speech Acts (pp.41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Grice, P. ( (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. MA: Harvard University Press.
Guillaumin, C. (1995). Racism, Sexism, Power and Ideology. London: Routledge.
Haney-Lopez, I. F. (2014). Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented
Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hill, J. H. (2008). The Everyday Language of White Racism. MA: Wiley-Blackwell Press.
Holmgreen, L. (2006). September 11, New-Liberalism and Discourse- The Cohering Function of
Metaphor, Quaderns de Filologia. Estudis Lingüístics. XI, 95-111
Horn, L. R. (2007). Implicature. In L. Horn & G. Ward (eds.), The Handbook of Pragmatics. (pp.
3-28). MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in Sociolinguistics: an Ethnographic Approach. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Korta, K. & Perry, J. (2011). Critical Pragmatics: An Inquiry into Reference and Communication.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Korta, K. & Perry, J. (2013). Highlights of Critical Pragmatics: Reference and The Contents of
the Utterance, Intercultural Pragmatics, 10 (1), 161-182
Levinson, S. (2007). Deixis. In L. Horn & G. Ward (eds.) The Handbook of Pragmatics (pp. 79122). MA: Blackwell Publishing.
LoCastro, V. (2012). Pragmatics for Language Educators. London: Routledge.
Meibauer, J. (2016). Slurring as Insulting. In R. Finkbeiner , J. Meibauer & H. Wiese ( eds.)
Pejoration (pp. 145-167). Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing Company.
Mey, J. (1989). The End of The Copper Age or Pragmatics 12 ½ Years After, Journal of
Pragmatics, (13), 825–832.
Mey, J. (2001). Pragmatics: An Introduction, 2nd ed. MA: Blackwell Publishing
Mills, S. (2008). Language and Sexism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

174

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

Morris, C. (1938). Foundations of The Theory of Signs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Polyzou, A. (2018). Pragmatics and critical discourse studies. In J. Flowerdew & J. E. Richardson
(eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Critical Discourse Studies (pp.195- 215). New York:
Routledge.
Rees, M. & Rigotti, E. (2011). The analysis of the strategic function of presentational Techniques.
In E. Feteris, B. Garssen & F. Henkemans (eds.), Keeping in Touch with Pragma-Dialectics
(pp. 207-221). Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing Company.
Reyes, A. (2011). Racist: Metapragmatic Regimentation of Racist Discourse by Asian- American
Youth, Discourse and Society, 22, (4), 458- 473.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Searle, J. R. (1976). A classification of Illocutionary Acts, Language in Society, 5, (1), 1- 23.
Searle, J. R. (1979). Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Skinner, Q. (2008). Part Two: Is It Still Possible to Interpret Texts?, International Journal of
Psychoanalysis, 89 (3), 647–654.
Teo. P. (2000). Racism in the News: a Critical Discourse Analysis of News Reporting in Two
Australian Newspapers, Discourse and Society. Vol. 1, (1), 7–49.
Tindale, C. (2009). Constrained maneuvering: Rhetoric as a rational enterprise. In F. Eemeren
(ed.), Examining Argumentation in Context: Fifteen Studies on Strategic Maneuvering (pp.
41-61). Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing Company.
van Dijk, T. (1993). Analyzing Racism Through Discourse Analysis: Some Methodological
Reflections. In J. Stanfield (ed.), Race and Ethnicity in research Methods (pp. 92-134).
CA: Newbury Park.
van Dijk, T. (1995). Discourse semantics and ideology, Discourse and Society, 6, (2), 43-289.
van Dijk, T. (2004). Ideology and Discourse: A Multidisciplinary Introduction. Barcelona:
Pompeu Fabra University.
van Dijk, T. (2012). The Role of Press in the Reproduction of Racism. In M. Messer, R. Schroeder
& R. Wodak (eds.), Migrations: Interdisciplinary Perspectives (pp. 15- 29). Berlin:
Springer.
Verschueren, J. (1999). Whose Discipline? Some Critical Reflections on Linguistic Pragmatics,
Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 869-879.
Verschueren, J. (2013). Ideology in Language Use: Pragmatic Guidelines for Empirical Research.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wodak, R. (2007). Pragmatics and critical discourse analysis: A cross-disciplinary inquiry,
Pragmatics and Cognition, 15, 203–225.
Wodak, R. (2009). The Semiotic of Racism. In J. Renkema (ed.), Discourse, Of Course: An
Overview of Research in Discourse Studies (pp. 311- 353). Amsterdam: John Benjamin
Publishing Company.
Wren, K. (2001). Cultural racism: something rotten in the state of Denmark?, Social and Cultural
Geography, 2, (20), 141- 162.
Yule, J. (1996). Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Web Sources
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

175

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Towards an Analytical Model in Critical Pragmatics

Al-Hindawi & Mohammed

1. https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/manoeuvre
2. https://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/full-transcript-third-2016-presidential-debate230063
3. https://www.google.iq/search?q=who+are+the+african+americanandoq=who+are+the+af
rican+americanandaqs=chrome..69i57j0l5.10802j0j7andsourceid=chromeandie=UTF-8
4. https://www.google.iq/search?q=who+are+latinosandoq=who+are+latinosandaqs=chrom
e..69i57.5383j0j7andsourceid=chromeandie=UTF-8
5. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/play-chicken
Kauffeld (1998, p. 252) sets the following felicity conditions of accusation, as cited in Andone (2013, p. 6):
1. Propositional content condition: predicts hearer’s responsibility for some state of affairs
2. Preparatory condition: the state of affairs is bad according to speaker.
3. Sincerity condition: speaker has knowledge of hearer’s behaviours.
4. Essential condition: producing the act counts as an attempt to set hearer accused and needs to response.
ii
Following Meibauer (2016, p. 157), the expressive act of insulting has these felicity conditions:
1. Propositional content condition: what is to be expressed is any proposition or expressive meaning functioning as
insulting.
2. Preparatory conditions: S does not need to have a particular motive for insulting hearers (henceforth H). S may have
one, however.
3. Sincerity condition: S wants H to feel insulted.
4. Essential condition: counts as an undertaking to the effect that H feels insulted.
iii
The belittling SA is an expressive act; it has the following felicity conditions:
1. Propositional content condition: a negative picture of H results.
2. Preparatory conditions: a. S holds that H is (or anything referring to him or any of his characteristics) not important
in terms of previous premises in S’s mind or aim. b. S has power to impart such an unimportance about H to surface
or S believes he can do so.
3. Sincerity conditions: a. S wants to show the unimportance in H (or anything related to H) due to personal desire or
belief in S. b. It is beneficial for S to communicate that.
4. Essential condition: S wants to communicate H’s unimportance to others for a purpose or aim.
i

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

176

