"x"
"1" "Productivity, Profits, and Pay:"
"2" "A Field Experiment Analyzing t he I mpacts of  C ompensation  S ystems"
"3" "in  an Apparel Factory"
"4" "Niklas Lollo  and Dara O’Rourke"
"5" "March  201 9"
"6" "Abstract"
"7" "Factory w orker  pay in  global value chains  remains a  contentious  issue . In this paper, we evaluate  a two-year field experiment in an apparel factory to analyze altered compensation systems  designed to increase worker pay while supporting factory goa ls  around productivity and profitability . Using a quasi-experimental design, with unique data on wages, hours, productivity, quality, and  worker engagement , we estimate the impact of three  altered  compensation systems on  pay , productivity, and factory profits.  The compensation systems can be described as: 1) an improved productivity-based scheme, 2) a  scheme that brings quality and waste reduction in to the calculation; and 3) a  “ target  wage ”  scheme.  Overall, the treatment s  raised wages by 4.2- 9.7 % and increased productivity by  8 - 1 0 %   points . Management reported significant financial benefits from the experiment, including  increased profits for five  of six  lines, and  avoided costs and productivity losses due to  decreased  turnover. The factory workers, through focus-group  interviews  before, during, and after the intervention, reported improved relations with team members and managers. This study demonstrates  altered  factory compensation can  support  better factory performance and a better paid workforce, indicating a path towards advanced supply chains with  improved  wages."
"8" "1.  Introduction"
"9" "There are few more  contentious , yet poorly studied  issues in the global economy than factory worker pay. Activists point to pennies-per-hour wages in consumer good s   factories  as proof of  systemic  exploitation  (Harbour and Woodward 2014, Pollin et al. 2004) .  For the last twenty years,  non-governmental organizations (NGOs)  have advocated for  a “Living Wage.”   In response, g lobal brands assert  that they have limited ability to increase the wages paid by  contracted  factories , that their suppliers  pay “prevailing wages,” and  that they have  even less influence over  government - set   minimum wages   (Bhagwati 2005) .  Further, some industry actors contend a “Living Wage” is difficult to define , may simply motivate further automation and decreased employment,  and  may undermine government minimum-wage-setting efforts.  The backdrop to this argument is that d espite increasing productivity ,  factory workers  have experienced   flat or declining real wages  around the world   (ILO 2014, Lee and Sobeck 2012, Rossi et al. 2014, Selwyn 2016, Vaughan-Whitehead 2014) ."
"10" "During this time, t here has been  surprisingly little empirical  research on wage dynamics in emerging markets  (Miller 2014) , a nd even less  experimental research on  how compensation systems might be  altered  to increase worker pay, while supporting factory imperatives for productivity and profitability   (Miller and Williams 2009, Robertson et al. 2016) .   B rand and factor y management  have  argued   that productivity  enhancements, and productivity-based pay systems,  are the economically- efficient  and prudent  strategy   to raise w orker wages to “fair” levels  (Miller and Williams 2009) .  Activists , unions,  and NGOs  disagree , arguing that   productivity-based wage schemes   are used   in practice to maintain long work hours (sometimes beyond legal limits) for the sake of maximizing output, but often without actually increasing worker take-home pay   (Impactt Limited 2005, Miller and Williams 2009, Raworth and Kidder 2009) .  Indeed, productivity-based compensation schemes have been linked with workplace stress, accidents, and injuries  (Brown and O’Rourke 2007) , problems which lead, in turn, to high  turnover ."
"11" "Despite this disagreement, the fact remains that   many  technologically - advanced  and “Lean”   factories  continue to  employ  traditional  compensation systems   such as  piece-rate pay   (Vaughan-Whitehead 2014) .  Worker incentive systems , it turns out, in most factories around the world,  are not aligned with modern management  best   practices   n or worker goals   (Adler et al. 2017, Helper et al. 2010) .  Th e lack of best practice uptake  may be due to an information-deficit  (about what workers want, the ideal policy, the benefits afforded by said policy, etc.), managerial attention scarcity , local management norms, or a perverse, yet profit-maximizing strategy that sweats workers   (Robertson et al. 2016) .   Owing in part to continued gender wage discrimination  (Christian et al. 2013, Collins 2003) , wages for most factory workers look today the way they did in 1980  (Vaughan-Whitehead 2014) .  Indeed, a ten-country audit by  the Fair Labor Association showed 38% of the companies paid workers according to piece-rates, 42% offered workers an output bonus, and only 2% had implemented profit-sharing  (Vaughan-Whitehead 2014) ."
"12" "This situation raises the practical question of whether compensation and incentive systems could be better aligned with modern production systems  and worker goals   (Helper et al. 2010, Román 2009) .   Despite a small number of examples of improvements in worker pay in factories producing for global brands (such as the Alta Gracia factory in the Dominican Republic  (Nova and Kline 2013) ), there remains a surprising dearth of experimentation in compensation systems in developing country factories.   Is there an opportunity for factory management to improve productivity and profitability, enhance worker pay, and create an agile and competitive factory environment  (Appelbaum 2001, Becker and Huselid 1998, Blasi et al. 2009, Schuler and Jackson 2014) ? Further, could compensation systems be designed to motivate problem solving in a way that is better for workers and factories  (Becker and Huselid 1998, Bloom and Van Reenen 2010, 2011, Boselie et al. 2005, Ichniowski and Shaw 2013) ?"
"13" "Despite observational and theoretical research suggesting the possibility for  win-win  systems  (Robertson et al. 2016) , we sought to test these propositions empirically through a  quasi- experiment  in a factory .   In this paper, we analyze the impacts of implementing three alternative compensation systems in an operating apparel factory  in Thailand  over a two-year period.  Using panel data and focus group information, o ur  research  provide s  empirical estimates of the effect of   altered   compensation system s  on worker wages, hours of work, productivity, and factory profitability."
"14" "Our hypotheses about mechanisms are drawn from the high-performance work practices (HPWP) literature, which itself draws from the personnel economics and human resource management literatures. While emphasizing the mutually dependent nature of various workplace practices, through our  quasi-experimental intervention, we  are able to  provide empirical estimates for the size of potential worker and factory gains  due to  specific  changes  to  the compensation system.  Before discussing the experiment,  we briefly cover theoretical and context ual   background s ."
"15" "2. Compensation and Human Resource Management"
"16" "E conomic  theory   posits  that   firm s  should  pay workers   according to   their   marginal productivity  (Billikopf 2008, Lazear 2000, Lazear and Shaw 2007) .  The “piece rate” system, where workers are paid per piece  produce d , is  the  exempla r .  Yet w ith the onset of Lean manufacturing, the focus of productivity shifted from the individual to teams or modules   (Abernathy et al. 1999) , and so the piece-rate became a  “group-based piece rate”  or “group rate”   (Bloom and Van Reenen 2011, Helper et al. 2010) .   Empirical r esearch  on  group -rate systems  is mixed: they can   raise productivity  in team-based  workplaces   (Bloom and Van Reenen 2011, Boning et al. 2007) , but may encourage  free-riding ,  withholding effort to avoid the rate  being adjusted  downwards   (Bloom and Van Reenen 2011) , as well as problematic social dynamics like workers “sweating” one another  (Billikopf 2008, Helper et al. 2010) ."
"17" "In order to  give  weight to each claim, we need to consider that factories are now primarily operating according to “Lean” manufacturing principles. In order to meet buyer demands for on-time delivery and varied product styles, factory goals have shifted from total output to the continuous flow of high-quality, in-demand styles. Thus, the group rate’s narrow focus on productivity  fails to align fully with, or take advantage of, Lean principles  (Helper et al. 2010) , which seek to  increase speed to market,  enhance productivity and quality, while eliminating waste."
"18" "The  “High-Performance Work Practices” (HPWP) literature  is instructive in this regard.  The HPWP  literature  argues that successful companies  support  workers  in  three interlocking  ways : (1) skills to develop and master, (2) meaningful participation opportunities, and (3) compensation that incentivizes core job functions  (Appelbaum 2001, Arefin and Raquib 2015, Boxall and Macky 2009, Gittell et al. 2009, Ichniowski and Shaw 2003, Posthuma et al. 2013, Sterling and Boxall 2013, Wallner et al. 2012) .  Where factory Lean practices have focused on workers,  they most often have increased worker skillsets and added new job functions, such as identifying and solving problems on the line.  Compensation systems have not been modified to match."
"19" "HPWP theory maintains that   external   motivation,   particularly   compensation  and benefits ,  is   central to  driving   workplace change .   Workers are more productive when the pay process and schema are transparent, communication with management is open, and pay is connected to the firm’s short- and long-term goals  (Billikopf 2008, Cohn et al. 2015) . In this way,  workers are more likely to perceive that their pay— including both  wage structures a nd  the payment process—accurately reflects and adequately compensates them for their effort, skills, and contributions  (Appelbaum et al. 2001, Cohn et al. 2015,  Vaughan-Whitehead 2014) .    When workers are more fairly compensated,  the literature hypothesizes that the other  two categories of HPWP—skills and participation —are enhanced, because workers are sufficiently motivated."
"20" "Using this perspective, as it is most often implemented in factories, the group rate suffers from  several   limitations.   First,  the rate  is   rarely  transparent ly set   or communicated.  In the ten-country audit  discussed above , only 48% of workers  were given pay slips that included information about hours worked   (Vaughan-Whitehead 2014) .  Coupled with a  lack of  workplace   dialogue  about   wages , let alone bargaining,  workers may distrust management  and thus seek  to game piece-rate systems (by reducing productivity fearing that rates will simply be lowered) or become motivationally untethered to the group rate (assuming the wage will remain constant regardless)  (Billikopf 2008) . Without information and dialogue, even if workers  were   paid better, they would lack the tools to  evaluate whether   their wage adequately compensates them for their effort, skills, and contributions."
"21" "Under a group-rate,  workers are incentivized to dislike style changes and new products or processes, both of which are commonplace in Lean factories.  The group-rate tends to vary with the “standard allowable minutes” (SAM) of each garment, which is set through brand-factory negotiation. The SAM is often based on industrial engineering methods (i.e. time measurements of ideal physical movement) . However,  f rom a worker perspective, even garments with the same SAM can vary in difficulty.   Mismatched or unrealistic  output  targets  set according to the SAM can lower  morale when workers are required to work additional hours of overtime   (Chang and Gross 2014) .   And changes in style s  c an cause changes in machines and number of workers on the line, precipitating long, unproductive changeover periods."
"22" "As the market moves towards increasing product differentiation and just-in-time delivery, factories need to incentivize workers to respond to style changes and  unforeseen  problems. Instead, workers continue to be incentivized to focus on maximizing output of garments they are already good at producing. One could imagine altered compensation systems that seek to compensate workers for getting good at style changes,  such as a process that starts from the actual (not estimated) time to produce a garment and then incents continuous improvement over time, or that adjusts the SAM over time as workers learn a new style, explicitly incentivizing an efficient “ramping” process to full productivity levels. A “lean-aligned” compensation system might also bring in incentives for improving quality, while reducing waste and solving line-level problems."
"23" "3. The Experiment"
"24" "In 2015, we partnered with a multinational  company   and one of their suppliers based in Thailand. The factory   is one of the  company’s   strategic supplier s ,  regularly  entrusted to  produce   the  company’s   innovative  and high-value  products due to its strong management capacity  and demonstrated production capability .  The  “ cut-and-sew ” final assembly  factory had a history with pilot projects as management were keen to try new approaches."
"25" "At the start of our study  in late 2015 , the factory had already implemented both first- generation ( physical factory and process-improvement-focused Lean technologies )  and second-generation Lean practices  ( management training, multi-skill training, social dialogue, and worker engagement programs ) .  T he second-generation  practices  were implemented  between May and  November 2015 .  In this program, a ll  sewing line team members  and supervisors  received five trainings,  including  te chnical  and  interpersonal skills .  T he management developed a social dialogue system  with :   election by workers of line representatives; training of line rep re s entatives  on how to hold meetings, elicit input from workers, elevate issues, and communicate resolutions  between workers and line  representatives (without supervisors present).  Management   trained workers  and supervisors  in stress management  and provided time  each  morning for a short set of stress management activities. They also  hosted discrete “Kaizen”  5-day, worker-only  problem-solving events  in which workers would define the problems to be solved, often using insights from the   an internal   “e ngagement and  w ell - being ”   s urvey, define how to solve  them , and then present their ideas to management .  This system, when coupled with Lean problem-solving, was meant to improve communication between workers and management to discuss production issues as well as, among other topics, wages."
"26" "Before   the second-generation Lean   program , worker dissatisfaction was quite high , as measured  via an   engagement and well-being survey .  I nitial focus group discussions  revealed   that l ine managers were  highly  dissatisfied  due to perceived undue pressure from both  upper management  and  sew ing line workers ,  coupled with unsatisfactory compensation .  In the same set of focus group discussions (separate from line managers),  s ewing line workers expressed frustration with  nearly all other workers:  quality  control personnel, mechanics, and line managers.  W orkplace  tensions added  to concerns  about   wages,   were seen as major   contributors   to  high  worker- turnover rates  (upwards of 80%  per year  on some lines) ."
"27" "Despite wages being a central concern of most workers, the first- and second-generation Lean changes did not address worker wages.  Instead of each worker being paid to meet the factory goals or to facilitate learning or continuous improvement , many low-level workers—including mechanics, fabric cutters, and quality control personnel—were either paid the minimum wage or according to  a group  rate. Line managers were paid a monthly salary, with year-end bonuses. There were no seniority or skill-based bonuses.  Worker compensation ,  which varied by level of  position,  could often work at cross purposes, hindering  factory goals."
"28" "Sewing line workers, the primary focus of our s tudy,  received the  greater  of the minimum wage or a group piece-rate multiplied by total line output , both of which we re indexed by style .  The wage formula expressed mathematically  wa s:"
"29" "Both of these wa ge systems  were   time- based. The minimum wage plus overtime (OT) system pays workers per hour, with a 50% multiplier for OT. But the  group  rate system is also essentially a system of “renting” worker minutes.  Contract  negotiations between brand and factory  hinge   on  the  SAM . The brand estimates SAM for sourcing, cost-accounting, and price-setting. The factory uses SAM to set the output target, breaking down costs into units of Thai baht per minute which are based on expected output per worker. And workers negotiate their effort and eventual wages  in respect to  the SAM."
"30" "Workers can make more if they beat the SAM estimate for the garment consistently throughout the day.  Due to learning effects (across the factory), workers become more productive  as they produce a given style for a longer period .  Any w age  gains are linear ; e ach additional garment produced above the day’s output goal is paid the same.  If workers fail to meet the   output target ,  they receive   the  minimum wage plus OT pay.  Failure to meet the target   occurs  most often   with   new styles, complex style s , or  if an unforeseen   problem , like a machine breaking,   occurs ."
"31" "3.1. Intervention"
"32" "Our intervention sought to test solutions to three problems —incentive misalignment,  poor   communication , and  ineffective   incentives — identified in the factory’s compensation system.  First, we decided all workers along the production process should be incented towards the same goal. Before,  line workers, mechanics, fabric cutters, quality control personnel, line managers, and so on , were paid either the minimum wage or some incentive related to their immediate focus .  This system created bottlenecks as well as a psychological disconnect between workers. In the intervention, all workers along the production process would be incented towards the same goal . W orkers that worked with multiple lines like team leaders and fabric cutters , received a modified incentive that  considered  the performance of all associated lines .   Here is a basic schematic  of the production process  for one  business unit (four sewing lines) :"
"33" "Figure  1 : The production schematic for  one business unit.  In the factory, the fabric cutters, embroidery, and supermarket supply to multiple lines. The team leader oversees two lines.  Mechanics help fix machines anywhere along this process."
"34" "Second, in initial discussions with workers, they were not clear about the compensation system. This lack of transparency and communication can weaken motivation as well as management-worker relations. So"
"35" "the factory  reconfigured   pre -existing  LCD screens with  more  detailed  hourly   wage , target output,  and  hourly rates of  productivity , and expected wage  information for each  treatment  line.   Workers were also trained to interpret the  reconfigured  LCD screens , ideally allowing  workers to  make informed,  real-time  decisions about their pacing and expected wages."
"36" "In addition, the management  held several discussions and hired a third-party to hold small group discussions  to introduce the new wages, answer questions, and receive feedback about the new compensation scheme.  W orker feedback was incorporated  within   the final intervention desig n, informing  the  (soon-to-be-discussed)   wage  targets and  productivity  levels. Once treatments were finalized, both management and a third-party consultant trained workers to understand the new wage system,   and  guaranteed that  wages would not be lower than they would have been under the old system."
"37" "Transparency, alignment, and communication are essential characteristics, but t he crux of our quasi-experiment  focused on  incentive design. W e developed three alternative wage sch emes , which were then  applied to six treatment line   production  chains ,  with  two  additional  lines held as control lines .  Each of the new wage schemes  used   productivity  as its critical  measure."
"38" "Productivity is a mea sure of labor-time efficiency, d efined as the output multiplied by the expected minutes per garment divided by the number of workers, multiplied by the working minutes . It can be    e xpressed as:"
"39" "Using productivity had several advantages: (1) the management was comfortable with and adept at its calculation, (2) workers were familiar with the concept, (3) its value is affected by actions throughout the  production  chain,  and  (4) it is a primary factory goal.  We did aim to overcome some of the limitations noted above about productivity-based schemes.  For example, instead of  assuming   supply (output) would  match demand (target output) through a static piece-rate, we introduced a dynamic piece-rate to incent continuously increasing productivity.  This involved  a piece-rate-multiplier that incre ased as productivity increased.  Through analysis  of historical data , we conservatively estimated   a  breakeven - point  for the factory  at 85% productivity. Thus, the piece-rate-multiplier schedule began at 90% productivity, at which point the piece-rates for all garments produced that day (even with multiple styles) were multiplied by 1.06. This multiplier increased by 0.06 for every five-percentage-point productivity increment thereafter, with a ceiling at 1.48 for 125% productivity. Taking this multiplier into account, the new formula for worker wage was:"
"40" "This new wage, in addition to the alignment and transparency  measures ,  constituted  the first treatment, which  we called  the “ Productivity ”  treatment , and was applied to sewing line workers, team leaders, supervisors, mechanics, quality control personnel, and cutting room team members  associated with two of the treatment lines ."
"41" "The second treatment, “ Productivity, Quality, and Waste Reduction” (PQWR),   used this same new wage calculation,  but  sought to  anticipate and avoid   the tradeoff between productivity and quality. Since mistakes  and inefficiencies  can cascade across the  production  chain, workers at each stage were incentivized to maintain high-quality standards  and to identify material - utilization improvements . For instance, fabric cutters were given a 10-baht bonus when they identified that a given fabric layout could be  remarked  to  optimize  fabric usage. For  sewing  line workers, there was a  20-baht bonus if the line achieved a 97% quality rate for the day.  The q uality rate was defined as:"
"42" "The third treatment, “ Target Wage ,”  us ed  the same new wage calculation as  the  Productivity  treatment ,   and  sought to  understand if workers might be motivated by the ability to leave work early once they  achieved a target wage .  This hypothesis depends on the target wage being satisfactory to the workers as a daily wage as well as for the factory.  Thus, after consulting with  management and  workers   and  analyzing  the previous wage data, the  target wage   was set such that if and when the line reached  500 baht in 8 hours and 65 0 baht in 10 hours,  the line could collectively decide to leave.  The Thai minimum wage was 300 b aht per day , and during the pre-treatment, lines were making 440-530 baht per day  on average  during a  10-hour  day .  We believed the productivity incentive would raise productivity and wages, thus making this goal more feasible."
"43" "4. Experimental Design"
"44" "We employed a quasi-experimental design to evaluate the three treatments with eight sewing lines—six treatment lines and two control lines—out of 23 lines in the factory. The  quasi- experiment lasted two years, with  data collection beginning  12 months pre-intervention  and  lasting  12 months post-intervention to control for seasonality  of order volume  and worker turnover  (due to holidays) . The primary data comes from management-provided daily human resource and productivity data for each of the eight sewing lines from January 1, 2015 until January 15, 2017.   Factory management also provided   demographic information and  monthly turnover data,  while   a third-party  conducted four focus group  discussions  with  several sets of  workers before, during, and after the intervention."
"45" "The lines were not randomly selected; the  company   and factory management selected  what they considered to be four  average pairs of lines  (out of eleven possible) when implementing the second-generation lean practices .  The rest of the factor y’ s lines were not included in the control or treatment. These other lines were likely aware of the experiment and present a possible source of bias.  Since the line manager is critical for performance  (Adhvaryu et al. 2016, Bloom et al. 2013, Huo and Boxall 2017) , and line managers oversaw two lines each, line pairs were evaluated against one another. Using  data from the prior year (2014-2015) , the  company   and factory management tried to control for line-level variables they thought would influence the study:  productivity, number of workers, worker skill, location in the factory, the physical line shape, and line manager capability. Workers were not able to self-select onto or off of lines that received a treatment."
"46" "Despite non-random line selection,  the parallel trends assumption  was   not violated   in all cases  when  controls  (month   and  consecutive days in production for one style )  are included .  The parallel trend  assumption did not hold for a simple time trend, likely due to strong seasonality and differences in style consistency ( in  Appendix , see  Table A1 for the results  from  the  two-tailed t-test )."
"47" "Moreover, using a January 2016 snapshot of demographic data, we did not find significant differences in worker age or length of employment.  The workforce was  entirely ethnic Thai and about 95 %  of the sewing line workers, quality control personnel, line managers, and supervisors were  female  ( while  all the mechanics were men) .  While some lines lacked male workers, the amount of men on the other lines was sufficiently small (n <  7 ) that we did not expect much difference.   Finally, when comparing line manager characteristics—years at the facility, years as a manager, and number of trainings—the only significant difference was that the  PQWR  treatment manager ha d  less  management  experience  (as shown  in Table A1  in  the  A ppendix ) ."
"48" "5. Methods"
"49" "We employ a difference-in-difference model to compare cross-sectional groups. We have good coverage for our primary dataset.  T here are  4372  observations with full and consistent data (i.e. ,  no outliers or missing data).  T he  observations that are  missing  (about 200 line-days were missing data on either the dependent or independent variables)  do not disproportionately fall on any one line or treatment group.  We bolster this analysis with turnover data, a profitability model, and the focus group discussion data.  Table 1 below shows descriptive statistics of the key variables.  The appendix contains summary statistics  grouped  by treatment  (Tables A6-A9) ."
"50" "Table  1         Descriptive statistics of all variables over the full period  (January 2015-January 2017) ."
"51" "5.1. Regression Model"
"52" "We use an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model with fixed effects. We estimate the treatment effect through the difference-in-difference estimator.  To estimate the effect of the treatments, we compare the change in outcome s  for the treated group,  accounting for  the control group’s change, while controlling for other variables."
"53" "We estimate the treatment effects on wages, productivity, and factory profit-per-garment. In order to control for other independent variables that might also drive outcome differences, we include covariates and fixed effects. The covariates vary in each model specification, while the fixed effects do not. The covariates include  number of workers, work hours,  a binary variable for overtime,  the number of consecutive days a style has been in production on the line, the expected standard allowable minutes (SAM) to produce the garment , total tardiness in minutes , and unplanned absenteeism.  The fixed effects include  garment style, date,   month, day of week,  and  line."
"54" "The general model specification is:"
"55" "Where   is the outcome variable, indexed by line ( ) and time ( );   is the treatment effect interaction dummy variable (0,1);   is a vector of covariates;   is a vector of fixed effects; and,   is the error term, and is assumed  ."
"56" "The treatment variable can be decomposed into its interaction terms:"
"57" "Where,  is a dummy for the treatment phase, taking on the value of one after the treatment was applied, and   is a dummy variable for treatment  and is also indexed by treatment , with a value of one if a line received a treatment. Our coefficient of interest in Equation 5,  , therefore, captures the mean difference between treatment and control groups, controlling for any pre-treatment differences by group."
"58" "5.2. Covariates"
"59" "Below we discuss each covariate and the rationale for its inclusion in one or more of the model specifications."
"60" "Work hours & Overtime  In our focus group discussions, workers reported more energy on eleven-hour days (Tuesday-Friday) because of the possibility for greater total wages. This leads to the counterintuitive idea that workers are more productive on long days, which is not supported by research  (Shepard and Clifton 2000) .  We expect productivity to weakly decrease with work hours. If workers are able to be more productive on long days, this may provide evidence for workers intentionally modifying their productivity to maximize wages during overtime as discussed in section 2. We test for a nonlinear effect by including a dummy variable for overtime."
"61" "Style consistency  & Familiarity   We expect that as workers become familiar with a style, productivity should increase.  We use two metrics to account for style: consistency and familiarity. Consistency, labeled as “Style – consecutive days in production”  or “Lead Time” , accounts for how many consecutive days a line worked on a particular style. This covers short-term learning effects. Familiarity is measure of  how many days the style appeared on the line across the entire sample. This covariate takes account of long-term learning effects, or familiarity.  We tested multiple functional forms for familiarity, including polynomials and binned levels, however a linear specification was the only significant specification.  We used a demeaned form of familiarity.  We do not have visibility into within-day style changes, so we assume one style each day. A more thorough analysis would utilize data we do not have: output by style, productivity rates by style, style by hour, or rework of an old style on a line already producing a new style, etc."
"62" "Standard Allowable Minutes (SAM)  We are uncertain of the effect of SAM on productivity. On one hand, the target takes SAM into account, so there should be no productivity effect. However, a very high SAM indicates an outlier style, and we suspect productivity may drop due to unfamiliarity, and more coordination between sewers. During the experiment, management tried to maintain SAM between fifteen and thirty minutes. Yet, there are outlier SAMs of fewer than five minutes (e.g., repacking) and greater than forty (e.g., a jacket)."
"63" "Number of Workers &  Unplanned absenteeism  Lean apparel factories generally allocate workers to lines to meet the number of operations a shirt requires, typically  about  20 operations. However, this is not a one-to-one allocation; two workers might be assigned  to  a difficult operation, while one will be assigned to a quicker and easier operation. The impact of “line balancing” on outcomes is  well- known .  Factory management  estimated one fewer worker than pla nned decreased productivity by 1% . Two fewer wo rkers reduced productivity by 5%, and four or more  absent workers reduced productivity by 15% .  As a result, t he factory  created  a “relief” team of workers whose job is to fill  absences or line gaps .  We do not observe relie f  team use, so w e include both number of workers—which takes relief members into account—and unplanned absenteeism. Thus, unplanned absenteeism, when used with number of workers, tries to capture relief team effects, including  any  skill differences.  We tested multiple functional forms for number of workers including polynomials and binned levels. We settled on including the linear, square, and cube functional forms, because this specification captured the most variation.  We used a demeaned form of number of workers to reduce collinearity in  covariates ."
"64" "Tardiness  Tardiness occurs when a worker is late to the line but is not absent for the day. Since the worker  may  ultimately show up, the use of a relief team member is less likely  especially for brief tardiness .  However, production bottlenecks can accumulate quickly, so w e expect worker tardiness to negatively impact productivity  even though tardiness averaged less than twenty minutes per day . Thus, we aim to capture the effect of a slow or unbalanced start."
"65" "Fixed Effects  Style, date,   and line fixed effects were included in each model specification. We include style ID to capture major differences between the 170 styles not accounted for by SAM. Date controls for any temporal variations such as temperature, type of garments, and number of orders.  Line cap tures unobservable differences across lines that may cause different outcomes such as  the team culture."
"66" "There are several covariates for which we do not have data that  may be  important to precisely estimate treatment effects. This presents an endogeneity issue, meaning our treatment effect estimat or   may be   in consistent. Our most problematic omission is downtime, the length of time a line has stopped producing during normal working hours.  The dataset contains downtime data based on the type—machine, material, personnel, or quality—for the pre-treatment period, but we were unable to acquire it for the post-treatment period.  We ran multiple exploratory regressions over the p re-treatment period in order to  understand how downtime would likely impact wages and productivity .  We found no significant relationship between wage and any form of downtime. With   productivity , however,  total downtime was significant at the  10% level with a n estimate  of -0.02 5 . The number of occurrences where this would affect product ivity more than 1%-point was  708   and more than 5%-points was  33   instances  of  2020   total observations .  When explored by  type of  downtime, material-induced downtime ( e.g.,  the line  did not have fabric to sew ) was significant  at the 1% level  with an estimate of -0.17 . T he number of instances it reduced productivity more than 1% -point  was  192   and more than 5%-points was  65   times   out  of  2020   total observations .  The other types of    downtime were not significant nor  significantly  large estimates."
"67" "T here were a number of outliers in the data. In the outcomes of interest, these outliers are potentially the result of measurement error.  Some values were obviously  faulty , such as a value of unplanned absenteeism over 1000%. These  instances were excluded from the dataset. We also  flagged and  removed   instances  which were highly implausible, such as  where productivity was very high (greater  than 150%) while the incentive was very low (less than 50 THB) and productivity was very low (less than 55%) while the incentive was non-zero."
"68" "Other filtering decisions involved judgement and sensitivity analysis. For instance, the dataset was filtered for wages greater than 300 THB (the minimum wage in Thailand during the experiment), number of workers greater than zero and less than 35, and productivity greater than zero and no greater than 4 standard deviations from the mean (leaving a maximum of 178%).  The overall sta tistical story was not  affected  when we ran the specified regressions with productivity maxima of 140%,  160%,  180% ,  and 200% , or three standard deviations and five standard deviations .  In addition, we  backed-out daily productivity from the  SAM, output, number of workers, and other data ,  and compared  our calculations  with the given productivity. We expected some divergence between these figures because of the data granularity, but there were no abnormal or asymmetric deviations."
"69" "6. Results"
"70" "Across  six   OLS specifications, we find positive and significant treatment effects on wages, as the three treatments increased  hourly  wage s   two to  four-and-a-half   Thai  baht  (THB)  per hour .  On productivity, the  PQWR  and  Target Wage  treatments had positive, significant effects— 10 % -points  and  8 % -points , respectively—however, we do not find  a significant effect for  the Productivity treatment . W e find overall profit increased for the factory, as productivity gains swamped per-garment  distributions to workers . This positive financial result is further reinforced by decreases in employee turnover  and increases in  the  quality rate ."
"71" "In the following analyses, we corrected for standard errors using the Newey-West variance estimator. We tested the robustness of this method by trying out a specification that clustered the standard errors at the line level.  The general statistical story remained consistent, however we found the Newey-West method resulted  in  a better distribution between fitted values and residuals."
"72" "6.1. Wages"
"73" "Table  2       OLS regressions with hourly wage as the dependent variable. Fixed effects for each specification (1-6) are date, style, and line.  The point estimates represent a change in  hourly   wage due to each independent variable.  (Hlavac 2015, Newey and West 1987)"
"74" "Table 2  shows the  each of the treatments has a positive  impact on  hourly  wages, and the point estimates are  mostly  robust to the inclusion of covariates.  Using specification  6  as a reference, t he  Target Wage  treatment  is  significant at the  5 % l evel  and  has  a  larger effect  than the  PQWR and  Productivity treatment s,  0.8  to 2.5  THB  more   respectively .  Days with  overtime  also boosts hourly wage significantly,  though we do not have data to understand if the mechanism is simply because workers receive time-and-a-half or because of changes in productivity.   Interestingly, work hours also has a significant and positive effect, though its effect amounts to about one baht per hour.   Familiarity  also  has a  positive and  significant effect , leading to large benefits for very familiar styles .  Number of line workers is significant and negative for its squared and cubed forms. The squared term indicates a concave relationship between wages and number of workers.   SAM, style consistency, t ardiness ,  and unplanned absenteeism are  all   insignificant and negligible in magnitude ,  suggesting   no effect  on wages ."
"75" "6.2. Productivity"
"76" "Table  3      OLS regressions with productivity as the dependent variable. Fixed effects for each specification are date, style, and line.  (Hlavac 2015, Newey and West 1987)"
"77" "With productivity (%) as  the dependent variable,  the Target Wage  and  PQWR  treatments show large positive effects, with significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.  Both  point estimate   changes  about 4 %-point s   when the covariates are included compared to  the  no - covariate  specification .  The Productivity treatment   shows  no effect ,  a significant discrepancy  we explore further below . Work hours did not have an effect on productivity,  though overtime showed a consistently large and positive effect .  For productivity just like wages, number of workers appears to have diminishing returns, though this is more likely a story of line balancing, that is, appropriately matching workers with tasks.   SAM is positive and significant, with a potentially large impact as SAM typically ranges from 15- to 45-minutes.   Once more,  style consistency,  tardiness ,  and unplanned absenteeism are insignificant and negligible in magnitude."
"78" "6.3. Factory Profits"
"79" "A  critical question of course is the tradeoff between reducing per-garment profits for the factory (because workers are receiving a higher share of the value) versus the increase in overall productivity this motivates.  To assess this tradeoff, we constructed a simple profit model using pre- and post-treatment output and profit-per-garment. Because we lacked pre-treatment data on prices, we ran a cross-sectional OLS for the post-treatment period to determine the change in profit-per-garment attributed to the trea tments (for results see Table A 10  in the Appendix)."
"80" "In order to gen erate the pre -treatment profit-per- g arment, we  subtracted the   profit-per-garment estimate from   Table A3 ’s  regre ssion specification  ( 6 )  to  a  line-specific average post- treatment profit-per-garment .  We assumed the control  group’s  profit-per-garment remain ed  constant."
"81" "Table  4            A simple  profitability   model using average output and  OLS-derived  profit - per - garment to derive an estimate  for the change in   total profit between the  two  periods."
"82" "Table 4  shows   that  f ive out of  the  six treatment lines  realized   a n increase  in  overall  profit .  Both control lines saw a reduction in total profit  due to  decrease s  in output  (we kept  the   per-garment-profit fixed) .   Productivity  1   experienced  a  large  decrease  in pro fit driven by  decrease s  in output and profit-per-garment.  Beca u se  Productivity  1’s  total  profit  in the pre-treatment period is likely biased downward by the lack of pre-treatment profit-per-garment data, the overall negative decrease is likely larger ."
"83" "Importantly, we also find the treatment had a significant, positive effect on the quality rate of the PQWR (+1. 67 %-points) and T arget Wage (+1. 77 %-points) treatments (see Table A 11  in Appendix). This is significant because  there often is a tradeoff between  quality and  productivity   (Bloom and Van Reenen 2011) , but we find the opposite in this case. Quality and productivity are both improving  significantly."
"84" "This  simple analysis ,   of course,  does not tell the full story of factory  profit .  Significant additional  costs and benefits are driven by employee turnover, management expenses, and capital investments. We rule out any effect of capital investments since any changes that happened were exogenously driven.  M anagement expenses are  relatively small compared to employee turnover  costs , especially when  spillover effects are considered.  Employee turnover generates large costs  for  hiring and training, as well as lost  pro ductivity  when   a  line  has  reduced  number s  of  workers.   Turnover data for the t wo p eriods is shown in Table 5 ."
"85" "Table 5 Turnover rates per year per line. The bottom two rows are the control group. Turnover rate is   generated by total number of workers left during year divided by average number of workers on first day of month during the year."
"86" "Productivity  1 , with a persistently high turnover rate,   once again has the worst  outcome  among   the treatment lines .  There is almost certainly   a  correlation between  its poor productivity and turnover rate , perhaps due to difficulty continuously integrating new members.   All  of the  other  treatment lines either  reduce d   their  turnover rate or remain ed  constant  at lower levels .  C onversely, the control lines both experience d  an  increase in  turnover  rate ,  al though Control  1  continued to have a low  turnover  rate  and the  increase   wa s minimal ."
"87" "6.4.  Focus Group Findings"
"88" "In each  of four focus group  session s —one before the treatment, two during, and one post-treatment— a trained ,  local  facilitator  separately queried line members, line managers, quality control personnel, higher-level managers, and mechanics.  These  focus groups  provide d   important  visibility into team dynamics across treatments and over time."
"89" "In the final focus group, after  the treatment, line workers  in  the five successful  treatment  lines   reported  improved   communications  among  line   workers  and with  line   managers .  Line  managers, in turn,  reported  that  line  workers displayed  more p roblem-solving  initiative.  W orkers   reported they  felt  more  valued by management, felt listened to by team leaders, and perceived fellow workers as  more  supportive .   While m ost  workers reported positive feelings about the increased wages , l ine   managers , in particular, reported feeling  highly  motiv at ed by the wage increases and decreased financial stress.   The fabric cutter s  were the only workers still dissatisfied .   The cutters cited unmet income expectations as well as  team friction due to  unequal incentives for all  related  team members."
"90" "W orkers  were more a mbivalent towards other aspects of the  quasi- experimental design .  For instance,   line  w orkers  were encouraged by   the  more-informative  LCD screens, however  most  reported a continued inability to  calculate the incentive  while they were   work ing .  Line w orkers  report ed   better  communications with mechanics and  line  managers , whereas previously  poor interactions  were  a major reported cause of stress  prior to the experiment. Nonetheless, workers reported  that  the ir   jobs w ere still too stressful .   However, our focus group data indicates this stress is of a traditional form, that is,  of work in  an apparel factory , rather than from a new source of peer or management pressure."
"91" "7.  Impacts on the Factory and Workers"
"92" "This research  suggest s  that  in factories  operating  with  High Performance Work   P ractices,   improved compensation systems can unlock further gains in  productivity,  wages,  and profits.  T he treatments raised wages  between 20 and  46   THB   per day  (based on a ten-hour day)   from a pre-treatment average of  approximately 475 baht  per day . W orkers  thus  received a wage  increase   between 4.2% and  9.7 %.  Figure  2  below shows  the raw hourly wage change (not just the treatment effects)."
"93" "Figure  2 : Change in average hourly wage between pre-treatment and post-treatment periods for each line. The percentage gained or lost is presented on the right-hand side. This shows raw hourly wage change and is not  a measure  of the treatment effect , though they are related ."
"94" "The increased wages were linked with increased productivity of about 8 % -points  and  10 % -points   for the PQWR and Target Wage treatments, respectively .  O utput   gains  outweigh ed   profit- per-garment losses on five of  the six  treatment  lines.  Importantly, these productivity gains did not come at the cost of quality, as the quality increased  by 1. 67 %-points and 1. 77 %-points for the PQWR and Target Wage treatments, respectively.   In all, management   reported significant financial benefits  from the experiment , including  avoided productivity losses due to  decreased  turnover .   The clearest  testament  to this outcome is  the  fact that  management  expanded  parts of  the new compensation framework —the wage multiplier and  production  chain alignment— across the  entire  factory  as soon as the experiment was completed ."
"95" "A key  assumption  is that  communication, incentives, and transparency go hand-in-hand, and they also rely on a bedrock of positive team dynamics.  When comparing across the covariates,  the  Productivity  1 line  did not experience abnormal tardiness nor absenteeism, nor were any other variables systematically different. The major difference for Productivity  1  was its persistently high turnover rate. It is entirely possible that poor team dynamics resulted in increasing turnover, leading to a feedback loop of poor performance in spite of the enhanced compensation system."
"96" "Productivity 1’s experience is instructive in this case; the line received the same incentives, yet did not experience the same positive outcomes. A takeaway is thus that  d ysfunctional team dynamics, such as those witnessed in Productivity 1 line, are  not necessarily resolved   by  well-intentioned HPWP interventions. This line’s poor performance underscores the need to calibrate each intervention to the particular context. The intervention aimed to improve employee-manager dynamics, but apparently did not do so.  Of course, the fact that  dysfunctional team dynamics  and  poor  manager -employee relationships will negatively impact productivity is  a well-established  finding in the literature  (Bloom and Van Reenen 2011, Gittell et al. 2009, Robertson et al. 2016) ."
"97" "In  this case , the treatment  may have  instigated a feedback loop of negativity as poor performances relative to other treatment lines led to in-fighting and further poor performances .   W orkers on Productivity 1 , in the focus group sessions,   were  discontent ed  with  the skill level of their team members,  with the team leader for poor communication, and with management for not assuring an adequate flow of quality material.  The workers  perceived a general lack of accountability to show up to work on-time or at all, and to support one another. Even while Productivity 1’s wage potentials increased (for the same output), workers claimed the financial incentive to show up did not outweigh the guaranteed sick-leave wage (300 baht), and 71% of the line quit during the year.  So, p oor teamwork lowered productivity, which lowered  the expected  wage  thereby  incentivizing marginal increases in absenteeism,  further  decreasing productivity and, in turn, further worsening morale."
"98" "T he results suggest  that  factory management  may  benefit   in  both  the  short- and long-term  from creating a more  engaged and transparent  workplace   (Barrientos et al. 2011)  coupled with improved compensation systems . Many w orkers  reported feeling  motivated because they believed management “ cared ”  more under the new systems.   I mproved  communications and management-worker  relations,  combined with increased wages appeared to  alleviate  previous points of conflict  (Bloom et al. 2013) .  Again, this points to the synergistic potential when  management  combines initiatives to increase  engage ment ,  incent ives , and skills."
"99" "7.1.  Impacts on  Work   Hours"
"100" "As noted, the  Target Wage  treatment  aimed to  engage  the  wages versus hours  tradeoff . And while t he target wage of 50 0 baht in 8 hours was occasionally met,  neither treatment line  ever opted to go home early.  I n focus groups,  workers  reported   it was more important to bring home  additional wages  than take time off.  When given a hypothetical scenario, a lmost all workers preferred the ability to earn as much as possible each day , rather than receive  a flat wage  with  the same  mean   as the variable-wage  choice .  For workers, it was rational to take advantage of the wage multiplier to maximize that day’s earnings, when tomorrow’s rates were not guaranteed to be as high. Workers showed that they preferred a high daily wage to smooth out variability. They also reported that the  Target Wage  rate was set too low. When  the hypothetical flat wage was raised to  700 baht , some  workers  reported they would  prefer  the flat rate."
"101" "At the same time,   workers  reported a desire to work  fewer days and shorter hours.   However, they explained that this  was  actually not practical .  A number of  workers  explained that  they had secondary jobs , such as running a small shop  or selling items to other workers ,   on top of  the 60-hour factory week.  In addition to needing the money ,  if the workers left early, they would face the  sometimes- difficult task  of rearranging  rides ,  alert ing   family  members, and  c oordinating   plans ."
"102" "T urnover and absenteeism are  important  proxies  for worker satisfaction .  The  observed decrease in turnover, we infer, was   likely  driven by  increased wages compared to alternative jobs. T he factory  became  a better  option  than  it  previously  was .  However,  there was no change to unplanned absenteeism .  This is because   d ay-to-day t ardiness and  absences   are likely  driven by contingencies , such as a sick child  or personal illness ."
"103" "7.2.  Labor C oncerns"
"104" "While  the H igh  P erformance  W ork  P ractice  framework is   promising,   there remain significant tensions  between workers, factory  management ,  and brands   (Boxall 2014) .  When it comes to wages , the distribution of  productivity  gains  is highly contentious . Historically,   even as worker productivity has  increased , the financial gains have not been shared with workers  (Berg et al. 2004) . When  workers  realize they are not receiving  financial  benefits from increased effort, problem solving, or skills development ,  they  are likely to lose  motivat ion or depart the factory entirely .  T ransparency , communication,  incentive  alignment , and increased wages   are  all critical  to  responding to this tension .   Put simply, m anagers and employees need to be on the same page  (Adler et al. 2017) ."
"105" "To a skeptic ,  this  intervention  may  be  perceive d  as  just another  form of “sweating” workers , as wages  are still tied to productivity increases .  However, t his experiment  sought to give workers a clearer view into the connections between productivity and wages, and to  connect incentives to   engage ment  and skill -building .  Moreover, this  intervention  provides some clues  for the next generation of manufacturing. A gile production ,  mass customization ,  and even many forms of automation  will  require  skilled, engaged, and motivated workers.  A number of analysts have argued that with increased capital investments in factories, workers (that remain) will become even more valuable. Upgrading compensation and incentive systems may be a critical building block for this transition .   Moving away from a strictly transactional  “piece rate”  relationship  with workers may support both  long-term goals  and  short-term gains   (Boxall and Purcell 2011) ."
"106" "Of course , t hese findings do not negate the importance of  additional, external  efforts to improve working conditions  and wages .  F or instance ,  investigative journalism and  consumer  campaigns  can   contribute to  exposing problems and improving  conditions   (O’Rourke 2005) .  There is also a critical role for freedom of association, collective bargaining, and  labor unions   to  negotiate and protect   wage  gains ,  and  to  ratchet up  conditions   o ver time  (Esbenshade 2004, Fung et al. 2001) .   The social dialogue system perhaps provides a step in such a direction.  We also believe  there is a central role for  governments  to   support  more strategic  compensation and upskilling programs   (Gereffi and Lee 2016) ."
"107" "7.3.  Research L imitations  & F uture  R esearch"
"108" "A  two-year  field  intervention   in a dynamic operating business environment  presents inherent challenges .  In particular ,  i t is always difficult to study a moving object.  A Randomized Control Trial design would have improved our precision and causal  claims. However,   this would have  require d  factory management  to refrain f rom  making critical decisions for two years, which  was   not practical."
"109" "More specifically , w e  originally set out to  include  a profit-sharing scheme and a guaranteed  wage target  system. However, neither was possible to test in a pure sense.  Future research should consider these  types of compensation systems  as alternatives to productivity-based compensation system.  In addition,  future research should  explicitly  consider  how  gender  mediates HPWP interventions   (Barrientos 2013, Christian et al. 2013, Collins 2003) ."
"110" "This research  highlights the  need to  better specif y  the   conditions , such as automation or product diversity,   under which intervention s  can be effective.  I t may be that some brand sourcing practices—with respect to delivery time s , quality requirements, and styles—play  critical  role s in supporting or undermining  improved wages .  Important research still needs to be done to understand why factories do not already adopt win-win practices that have demonstrated impact  (Robertson et al. 2016) .   One management skill which we believe may be foundational to future efforts in this area is improved data collection and analysis."
"111" "8.  Conclusion s"
"112" "The most common systems of pay in the apparel industry, which represent very simple versions of output-based or time-based compensation, are not aligned with Lean principles, not transparent to workers, and do not share gains  equitably  with workers. These systems are likely holding back both productivity and profits.  This research  provides empirical evidence that  altered  compensation systems can be a vehicle  to simultaneously increase  productivity, profits, and wages .  W hen compensation systems  are aligned with  advanced  Lean  principles, transparent to workers, and deployed in a way that  engages  workers  in   decision-making,  problem-solving,  and supported by social dialogue systems,   altered compensation   can produce conditions that support  higher  worker pay  and more  profitable factory operations .  C arefully designed compensation  that incents continuous productivity improvements and  that s hare s   these  gains more equitably ,  may provide a pathway to move from  output -based ,   towards strategic approaches to compensation that pay the worker for their contribution to the business, while also making progress towards wage levels that are sufficient for workers and their families to live on with some discretionary income ."
"113" "."
"114" "Applying these lessons across factories and industries will require improved factory management, more sophisticated human resources  management data ,   careful efforts to  align  factory  goals  with incentives, and improved  communication and transpar ency. For wage gains to stick, and to improve over time,  workers  will need to participate fully in creating and benefiting from these   gains.  T his research  identifies  a pathway for  i ncreasing factory productivity to  better  achieve  the goals of factory managers, brands, and workers."
"115" "Appendix"
"116" "Table  A 1  Line manager characteristics in January 2016. Line managers did not change throughout the two-year period."
"117" "Table s   A2-A4  Line characteristics—age, length of employment, and sex—in January 2016. These line compositions changed over the course of the two-year period. They do attempt to show there are not any significant differences observed across lines, in addition to the parallel trends assessment. Some noticeable differences are the relative inexperience in Productivity 2 and the proportion of men in PQWR 1."
"118" "Table   A 5 :  Results from two-tailed t-test.   Comparison of simple time trend and time trend with controls for  line, style, and number of workers .  The first test shows a violation of the parallel trends assumption, however,  the parallel trends assumption is  not violated in the specification including controls ."
"119" "Table s   A6-A9  Treatment-grouped summary statistics for all variables included in regressions."
"120" "Table A 10 :  OLS regression output table of profit per garment on a similar set of covariates to Tables 8 and 9. The data only covers the post-treatment period however, so the comparison is to the control group.  (Hlavac 2015, Newey and West 1987)"
"121" "In Table  A2 , we first note there are only 1,692 observations, because we only have the necessary data to calculate profit-per-garment for the post-treatment period.  Thus, these are results for a cross-sectional OLS, not a difference-in-difference model. The treatment effect is the difference between treatment groups in the post-treatment period. The key takeaway is average profit-per-garment decreased by  about  three baht."
"122" "Table A 11 :   OLS regressions with quality rate as the dependent variable. Fixed effects  for each  specification are date, style, and line.  (Hlavac 2015, Newey and West 1987)"
"123" "References"
"124" "Abernathy FH, Dunlop JT, Hammond JH, Weil D (1999)  A Stitch in Time: Lean Retailing and the Transformation of Manufacturing-–Lessons from the Apparel and Textile Industries  (Oxford University Press)."
"125" "Adhvaryu A, Kala N, Nyshadham A (2016)  Management and shocks to worker productivity"
"126" "Adler P, Brown D, Dehejia R, Domat G, Robertson R (2017) Do Factory Managers Know What Workers Want? Manager–Worker Information Asymmetries and Pareto Optimal Human Resource Management Policies.  Asian Dev. Rev.  34(1):65–87."
"127" "Appelbaum E (2001)  Manufacturing Advantage: Why High-Performance Work Systems Pay Off.  (Cornell University Press)."
"128" "Appelbaum E, Bailey T, Berg P, Kalleberg AL (2001) Do high performance work systems pay off?  Vallas SP, ed.  Transform. Work . 85–107."
"129" "Arefin S, Raquib M (2015) The Mediating Role of Psychological Empowerment In The Relationship Between High-Performance Work Systems and Organizational Citizenship behavior.  Eur. Sci. J.  11(2):264–278."
"130" "Barrientos S (2013) Corporate purchasing practices in global production networks: A socially contested terrain.  Geoforum  44:44–51."
"131" "Barrientos S, Gereffi G, Rossi A (2011) Economic and social upgrading in global production networks: A new paradigm for a changing world.  Int. Labour Rev.  150(3–4):319–340."
"132" "Becker BE, Huselid MA (1998) High Performance Work Systems and Firm Performance : a Synthesis of Research and.  Res. Pers. Hum. Resour. Manag.  16:53–101."
"133" "Berg P, Appelbaum E, Bailey T, Kalleberg AL (2004) Contesting time: International comparisons of employee control of working time.  Ind. Labor Relations Rev.  57(3):331–349."
"134" "Bhagwati J (2005)  In Defense of Globalization  (Oxford University Press)."
"135" "Billikopf G (2008) Designing an Effective Piece Rate. Retrieved https://nature.berkeley.edu/ucce50/ag-labor/7research/7calag06.htm."
"136" "Blasi JR, Freeman RB, Mackin C, Kruse DL (2009) Creating a Bigger Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options on Workplace Performance. :1–43."
"137" "Bloom N, Eifert B, Mahajan A, McKenzie D, Roberts J (2013) Does managment matter? Evidence from India.  Q. J. Econ.  128(1):1–51."
"138" "Bloom N, Van Reenen J (2010) Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and Countries?  J. Econ. Perspect.  24(1):203–224."
"139" "Bloom N, Van Reenen J (2011) Human Resource Management and Productivity.  Handb. Labor Econ.  4:1697–1767."
"140" "Boning B, Ichniowski C, Shaw K (2007) Opportunity Counts: Teams and the Effectiveness of Production Incentives.  J. Labor Econ.  25(4):613–650."
"141" "Boselie P, Dietz G, Boon C (2005) Commonalities and contradictions in HRM and performance research.  Hum. Resour. Manag. J.  15(3):67–94."
"142" "Boxall P (2014) The future of employment relations from the perspective of human resource management.  J. Ind. Relations  56(4):578–593."
"143" "Boxall P, Macky K (2009) Research and theory on high-performance work systems: Progressing the high-involvement stream.  Hum. Resour. Manag. J.  19(1):3–23."
"144" "Boxall P, Purcell J (2011)  Strategy and Human Resource Management  (Palgrave Macmillan)."
"145" "Brown GD, O’Rourke D (2007) Lean manufacturing comes to China: A case study of its impact on workplace health and safety.  Int. J. Occup. Environ. Health  13(3):249–257."
"146" "Chang T, Gross T (2014) How many pears would a pear packer pack if a pear packer could pack pears at quasi-exogenously varying piece rates?  J. Econ. Behav. Organ.  99:1–7."
"147" "Christian M, Evers B, Barrientos S (2013)  Women in value chains: making a difference"
"148" "Cohn A, Fehr E, Goette L (2015) Fair Wages and Effort Provision: Combining Evidence from a Choice Experiment and a Field Experiment.  Manage. Sci.  61(8):1777–1794."
"149" "Collins JL (2003)  Threads: Gender, Labor, and Power in the Global Apparel Industry  (The University of Chicago Press)."
"150" "Esbenshade J (2004)  Monitoring Sweatshops: Workers, Consumers and the Global Apparel Industry  (Temple University Press)."
"151" "Fung A, O’Rourke D, Sabel C (2001)  Can we put an end to sweatshops?  Cohen J, Rogers J, eds. (Beacon Press, Boston)."
"152" "Gereffi G, Lee J (2016) Economic and Social Upgrading in Global Value Chains and Industrial Clusters: Why Governance Matters.  J. Bus. Ethics  133(1):25–38."
"153" "Gittell HJ, Seidner R, Wimbush J (2009) A Relational Model of How High-Performance Work Systems Work.  Organ. Sci. Artic. Adv.  (March 2016):1–17."
"154" "Hamilton BH, Nickerson JA, Owan H (2003) Team Incentives and Worker Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation.  J. Polit. Econ.  111(3):465–497."
"155" "Harbour E, Woodward C (2014) Tailored Wages.  Clean Clothes Campaign :114."
"156" "Helper S, Kleiner MM, Wang Y (2010)  Analyzing Compensation Methods in Manufacturing: Piece Rates, Time Rates, or Gain-Sharing?"
"157" "Hlavac M (2015) stargazer: Well-Formatted Regression and Summary Statistics Tables."
"158" "Huo ML, Boxall P (2017) Lean production and the well-being of the frontline manager: the job demands - resources model as a diagnostic tool in Chinese manufacturing.  Asia Pacific J. Hum. Resour.  55(3):280–297."
"159" "Ichniowski C, Shaw K (2003) Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders’ Estimates of the Value of Complementary Human Resource Management Practices.  J. Econ. Perspect.  17(1):155–180."
"160" "Ichniowski C, Shaw K (2013) Insider Econometrics: Empirical Studies of How Management Matters.  Handb. Organ. Econ.  (December):263–314."
"161" "ILO (2014)  Wages and Working Hours in the Textiles , Clothing , Leather and Footwear Industries"
"162" "Impactt Limited (2005)  Changing Over Time: Tackling supply chain labour issues through business practice"
"163" "Lazear EP (2000) Performance Pay and Productivity.  Am. Econ. Rev.  90(5):1346–1361."
"164" "Lazear EP, Shaw KL (2007) Personnel Economics: The Economist’s View of Human Resources.  J. Econ. Perspect.  21(4):91–114."
"165" "Lee S, Sobeck K (2012) Low-wage work: A global perspective.  Int. Labour Rev.  151(3):141–155."
"166" "Miller D (2014) Regulating the “Wage Effort Bargain” in Outsourced Apparel Production: Towards a Model.  Towar. Better Work Underst. Labour Appar. Glob. Value Chain.  (ILO), 103–124."
"167" "Miller D, Williams P (2009) What Price a Living Wage?: Implementation Issues in the Quest for Decent Wages in the Global Apparel Sector.  Glob. Soc. Policy  9(1):99–125."
"168" "Newey WK, West KD (1987) A Simple Positive-Definite Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation-Consistent Covariance Matrix.  Econometrica  55(3):703–708. http://www.nber.org/papers/t0055.pdf."
"169" "Ngai P (2005) Global Production, Company Codes of Conduct, and Labor Conditions in China: A Case Study of Two Factories.  China J.  54:101–113."
"170" "Nova S, Kline JM (2013) Social Labeling and Supply Chain Reform.  Work. Rights Labor Compliance Glob. Supply Chain. Is a Soc. label answer? . 262–281."
"171" "O’Rourke D (2005) Market movements: Nongovernmental organization strategies to influence global production and consumption.  J. Ind. Ecol.  9(1):115–128."
"172" "Pollin R, Burns J, Heintz J (2004) Global apparel production and sweatshop labour: can raising retail prices finance living wages?  Cambridge J. Econ.  28(2):153–171."
"173" "Posthuma RA, Campion MC, Masimova M, Campion MA (2013)  A High Performance Work Practices Taxonomy  (Journal of Management)."
"174" "Raworth K, Kidder T (2009) Mimicking “lean” in global value chains: It’s the workers who get leaned on. Bair J, ed.  Front. Commod. Chain Res.  (Stanford University Press, Redwood City, CA), 165–189."
"175" "Robertson R, Di H, Brown DK, Dehejia RH (2016) Working Conditions, Work Outcomes, and Policy in Asian Developing Countries.  SSRN ."
"176" "Román FJ (2009) An analysis of changes to a team-based incentive plan and its effects on productivity, product quality, and absenteeism.  Accounting, Organ. Soc.  34(5):589–618."
"177" "Rosen EI (2002)  Making Sweatshops: The Globalisation of the US Apparel Industry  (University of California Press)."
"178" "Rossi A, Luinstra A, Pickles J (2014)  Towards Better Work : Understanding labour in apparel global value chains  (International Labour Organization and Palgrave Macmillan)."
"179" "Schuler RS, Jackson SE (2014) Human resource management and organizational effectiveness: yesterday and today.  J. Organ. Eff. People Perform. VO - 1  1(1):35."
"180" "Selwyn B (2016)  Global Value Chains or Global Poverty Chains? A new research agenda"
"181" "Shepard E, Clifton T (2000) Are longer hours reducing productivity in manufacturing?  Int. J. Manpow.  21(7):540–553."
"182" "Somanathan E, Somanathan R, Sudarshan A, Tewari M (2014) The Impact of Temperature on  Productivity and Labor Supply : Evidence from Indian Manufacturing. (November):1–48."
"183" "Sterling A, Boxall P (2013) Lean production, employee learning and workplace outcomes: A case analysis through the ability-motivation-opportunity framework.  Hum. Resour. Manag. J.  23(3):227–240."
"184" "Vaughan-Whitehead D (2014) How “Fair” Are Wage Practices along the Supply Chain? A Global Assessment.  Towar. Better Work Underst. Labour Appar. Glob. Value Chain.  68–102."
"185" "Wallner T, Menrad M, Thurner S (2012) Empowerment in High Performance Work Systems From a Systems Theory Perspective.  Manag. Knowl. Learn. Int. Conf. :349–352."
