"x"
"1" "Nuclear Fusion Diffusion Challenges and"
"2" "Opportunities: Theory, Policy, Practice and Politics"
"3" "Abstract —Fusion energy has the potential to address long-term energy requirements and climate change. However, fusion energy is characterized by a ‘development divide’ between the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) consortium members and the non-ITER ‘Global South’ states. It is beset with problems, which can be divided into geopolitical, geoeconomic, geo-sociocultural, and geo-technological (GEO-PEST). Geopolitical problems include cooperation on fusion energy development between ITER members (of the Global North) and the Global South on fusion development. Geo-economic problems include the cost of funding ITER versus newly emerging privatesector fusion companies. Geo-sociocultural problems include the requirement to maintain the peacebuilding tradition of nuclear energy (embodied by the Cold War-era ‘Atoms for Peace’ initiative), as well as public perceptions of radiation. Geotechnological problems include tokamak lock-in, fuel type, the viability of ‘compact reactors’, and disruptive technology events. We outline these problems and discuss how to address them in a timely fashion via an external independent review mechanism, modelled on the International Energy Agency’s ‘Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency’, established in 2019 and due to deliver recommendations in 2020."
"4" "Index Terms —Energy for All, External Independent Review, Fusion power generation, Global South, ITER, Nuclear Industry,"
"5" "GEO-PEST Analysis"
"6" "I NTRODUCTION"
"7" "T"
"8" "H E  relationship between nuclear energy and the  environment  is a delicate one. Although climate change has been designated the highest impact and highest likelihood threat to the global ec onomy and society [1] , progress on rapidly resolving it has reached gridlock, one which the Pari s Agreement [2]  seems unlikely to overcome. The United Nations’  (U . N . )  position is that the Paris Agreement is not, on its present pathway, capable of maintaining greenhouse gas emissions at below  3°C above preindustrial levels [3] , let alone the 2°C defined in the Agreement. The likelihood of more extreme global warming scenarios developing is accentuated by most G20 countries not being on track to meet their Paris Agreement Natio nally Determined Contributions  [4] ."
"9" "This is partly because nuclear  fission  has not become globally accepted as a low-carbon baseload energy alternative to fossil fuels. This  situation  is likely to persist, despite the promise of Generation IV reactors, due to the  fundamental  problems of “(i) maintaining safe operation of the nuclear plants, (ii) securing the fuel supplies, (iii) a strategy for the management of radioactive  waste and spent nuclear fuel” [5 ,  41 ] ."
"10" "The present impasse, including the impending  withdrawal of the U nited  S tates ( U.S. )  from the Paris Agreement, is  partially  because national self-interests are triumphing over the notion that technological innovation leads directly to implemen tation (the ‘engineer’s myth’) [6] . However, these same national self-interests can be leveraged to escape gridlock via enabling actions to encourage the development and commercialization of energy innovations, like fusion energy.  W ith regard to such transformation , the role of international institutions is “to help governments deliver as much as they are willing and able to implement so that the collective effort better  reflects the  collective  good” [6, 49] . To this end, this article calls for a global external independent review (EIR) of the various international, national, and private-sector fusion projects that will  assess  the collective good that a collective effort, with  developing ‘ Global South ’  ( and  OPEC countries) co-funding and co-development, could deliver in terms of  fusion  energy ’s   contribution  to phasing out fossil fuels this century."
"11" "The fusion energy roadmap is presently dominated by the multi-billion dollar decades-long International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) scientific experiment, supported  by China, India the U.K., the European Union (E . U . ) , Japan,  South Korea, Russia, and the  U.S.   [7] [8] . Leveraging  ITER’s  progress  along its own technology maturation pathway [9,  92, 243 ] , the first  national  energy-generating tokamak-based fusion reactors are projected to emerge  in  around 2042, in the form of the  Chinese CFETR tokamak [10]  or, in the case of the United Kingdom  STEP spherical tokamak grid-connected design, by 2040  [11] ."
"12" "Meanwhile, leading private-sector fusion  companies  project fusion could materialize at the commercial application level within the next decade  [12] . However, these private-sector projections rely on full funding of sometimes highly speculative  new  physics, whereas the rapid development of a global fusion economy would likely require an international program great er in scope and size than the  U.S.  Atoms for Peace project  [13] , any s ign of which is so far lacking."
"13" "Despite  the slow progress of fusion development , over the past half-century,  various countries have viewed  the adoption of fusion  energy  as a highly attractive alternative to fossil fuels  [14] [15]  because of its revolutionary and cost-effective potential in global low carbon energy transition strategies  [16][17] . Fusion is  a  relatively low radiation  process , with the possibility of extremely low radiation aneutronic  fuel systems , for example via inertial electrostatic confinement  (IEC)   [18] ,  utilizing  the so-called Grad’s wiffle-ball  effect  [19];  it is  also  safer than fission in that there  exists  no possibility of a    terium) and manufactured inside the plant (tritium)  via a tritium breeder [21] ."
"14" "Given fusion’s potential and the present lack of a global fusion program, this  article makes the case for establishing a high-level, global commission in order for the  international  community to conduct an  external  independent review  (EIR)  of fusion’s progress and so investigate whether  collective  global ‘urgent action’ on fusion energy is, in any way, v iable, and if so, at what cost.   In response to increasing demands for energy and rising greenhouse gas emissions, such an approach has already been taken by th e International Energy Agency (IEA ) with regard to urgent action on energy efficiency, when it established the  ‘ Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency ’  on 24 June, 2019  [22] ."
"15" "In arguing for the timeliness of an  EIR   to examine  global progress on fusion  and make ‘urgent action’ recommendations , this article reviews fusion  via a high-level   geopolitical, geo-economic, geo-socio cultural and geo-technological (GEO-PEST) approach [23] , a form of PEST management analysis [24] ;   PEST   analysis  has already been applied  in a similar manner  to global wind energy [25] ."
"16" "This  article considers the development divide in fusion, briefly describes the external  EIR  mechanism,  then  makes the case for the timeliness o f the  EIR  in terms of the GEO -PEST framework.   The article  establishes that there  is  a  sufficient number of serious GEO -PEST fusion-relat ed  problem s to merit a global EIR.   This could then lead to  more countries  becoming involved  in  fusion energy development and commercialization , based on the  premise  of  various forms of patent  ‘ co-development ’  [26 , 5-31],   particularly through investment  by the Global South ,  and   the OPEC bloc"
"17" "The development divide in fusion"
"18" "The g eopolitics  of economic development  involves the promotion of North-South mutual respect, equal partnership, and mutual interests, as well as the avoidance of double standards between the developed nations and the developing world, especially in areas such as clean energy  te chnology and the environment [27 ] [2 8 ] . These  can be achieved through  the principle of  ‘distributive justice’ [ 2 9 ] , as embodied in the UN Sustainable Development Goals  ( UNSDG ) , especially Goal 7 on “affordable, reliable,  sustainable and modern energy  for all ” [ 30 , 14/35 ] , in order to bring about ‘en ergy justice’  [31 ] . In Goal 7, the U . N .  has set the goal of universal, primarily elec trical, energy for all by 2030 ."
"19" "The involvement of the  Global South  in the development of fusion is  important  for  the long-term development of  fair global sustainable energy and for equitably addressing energy transformation in climate mitigation policies, initiatives, and practices . If a fusion economy is adopted globally,   fusion energy can contribute  this century to  UNSDG  13 ,   “ Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts ” [30, 14/35]   Here, the Group of 77  UN bloc  ( G77;  actually  133  states )  [32]  stands out  as a potential co-development partner for global fusion community  because it is often synonymous with the Global South. It includes most OPEC countries and several very wealthy petro-states, such as Saudi Arabia, and large fossil-fuel reliant economies,  such as  Brazil."
"20" "Of the G77, o nly India is an ITER member,  although several  G77 countries have their own fusion  programs  and already  cooperate   with  ITER, such as Brazil , through  Euratom  [33],  and Thailand  [34] , or  invested in the fusion  pr ivate-sector , as when  Malaysia, via its sovereign wealth fund  (SWF) ( Khazanah Nasional ) , invested in the Canadian  company  General Fusion [35 ] . This  suggests  non-ITER  states , acting  either  as  sovereign  states  or as blocs,  e.g.,  G77, OPEC, Gulf Cooperation Council,  could co-develop  fusion  through   ITER DEMO projects ,  joint ventures , or investment   in  private-sector fusion companies,  via   SWF , government agencies, state-owned ent erprises, or private companies."
"21" "S uch arrangement s  may be viable given that the G77 has its own geopolitical  ‘ South-South cooperation ’  viewpoint  [36 ],  centered on the goals of G77 member states, North-South geopolitical differences, and countering the “power of the purse” of developed countries, as embodied in oppositional dynamics between the General Assembly (GA) and the UN Security Council, due to the G77’s ability to invoke  the ‘majority rule’ of the GA."
"22" "OPEC has its own viewpoint on energy  development ,  which , given the reality of resource depletion and exhaustion,  recognizes the development of alternative energies as valid,  and that to this end,   recognizes in principle that in developing e.g., nuclear energy,  it is necessary  “ to keep  the prices of fuel oil above those of i t s alternatives for the supply of electricity so that their development would not be damaged by uncertain prospects” [37 , 50 ].   OPEC also has  its own development  agenda for the G lobal South , realized through the  OPEC Fund for International Development  (OFID) , which  has historically focused on  developing  non-OPEC  (mainly Arab)  states  though an  emphasis on  energy   [38 ] , recently including en ergy alternatives like solar [39 ] ."
"23" "The development of fusion thus has significant implications for the G77, with ITER being  dominated by the global ‘North’ . The ITER and G77 blocs can be compared in terms of total GDP, total population  ( GDP and populat ion figures are sourced fr om [40 ]; GDP is nominal, in current  dollar prices for December 2017) , human development, and innovative ability in order to provid e a simple comparative profile."
"24" "The 35 countries that constitute ITER include all the former colonial powers, including Japan, and only one G77 country, India. Between them, they have a GDP of $56.9 trillion (around 7 5.2 per cent of the world’s GDP , and a population of 3.9 billion, or 52.1 per cent of the world’s population. The median country in terms of GDP is Denmark, with a GDP of $306.9 billion dollars, whereas the median for population is Portugal, with a pop ulation of 10.4 million people."
"25" "In terms of human development, using the 2018 UN Human Development Index (HDI)  [41 ] , which measures life expectancy, education, and per capita income, the ITER median  is 0.888 (‘very high’). In contrast, the GDP of the 133 G77 countries is $13.8 trillion (18.3% of the global total), and its total population is 4.4 billion, or 59.4 per cent of the global total. The median country’s GDP is $16.1 billion (Zimbabwe) and the median population is 8.7 million (Tajikistan). The G77 median HDI is 0.656 (‘medium’; no one country as median is an average of Cabo Verde/Guyana and Nicaragua), a drop of two  development  categories. As a bloc, the G77 is therefore much more populous than the ITER countries, but with a much lower total and average GDP. The countries are also, in HDI terms, much less developed."
"26" "Energy transformation is especially important for  the Global South ,   as it plays a role in increasing a country’s levels of development and in managing structural transitio ns , such as energy  transitions [42 ],  e.g.,  the transition to electric cars   [43 , 49] .  The difference between the ITER - Global  South blocs in the ability to innovate and engage in entrepreneurial activity is indicated by the  G lobal Innovation Index (GII) [ 44 ] . The GII draws on data from, inter alia, the International Telecommunication Union, the World Bank and the World Economic Forum, and is composed of up to five subcomponents, totaling 80 indicators. The Input Index is composed of Institutions, Human capital and research, Infrastructure, Market sophistication, and Business sophistication, whereas the Output Index is composed of Knowledge and technology outputs and Creative outputs (see Cornell Universi ty, INSEAD, and WIPO 2018, 15)."
"27" "Every ITER country has a GII score, with the highest being 68.4 (Switzerland), the lowest being 35.2 (India), and the median being 50.2 (Malta). In contrast, only 69 of the 133 G77 countries are included in the GII index, with the omissions being due to the small size of the economies (e.g., Nauru) or difficulties in collecting data (e.g., Somalia). For these 69 countries, the highest is 59.8 (Singapore), and the lowest is 15.4 (Yemen), with the median being 28.2 (Botswana). In addition, an Efficiency Ratio can be calculated, consisting of the ratio of the Output Sub-Index score to the Input Sub-Index score. This shows how much innovation output a country is obtaining for its inputs, and whereas the ITER median i s 0.84, the G77 median is 0.39."
"28" "This  brief high-level  analysis  illustrates the  current  barrier s  facing the Global South in integrating into the global fusion community  and  so  co-developing fusion  energy ."
"29" "The External Independent Review as a Mechanism for Global South Co-Development of Fusion"
"30" "External independent reviews (EIRs) are a crucial component of the energy industry. In the public sector, they are governed by government guidelines, such as the  U.S.  Department of Energy’s  (DoE)  External Independent Review (EIR) Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)  [45] , which was informed by the Na tional Research Council’s   Assessment of the Results of External Independent R eviews for U.S.  Department of Energy Projects   [46] ."
"31" "Such guidelines then inform more detailed assessment processes employed in both internal and external energy technology as sessment, such as the  U.S.  Do E’s   Technology  Readiness Assessment Guide  [47] ,  as well as assessments by non-Do E bodies, for instance the  U.S.  Navy, which conducted a series of four technical reviews on private contractor EMC2’s fusion technology between 2008 and 2013  [48 ][ 49][50]51] . This section describes the  U.S.  approach as a) the  U.S.  is most likely to insist its standards are adopted in any global  EIR  of the progress of fusion  energy , and b) the  U.S.  DoE’s  EIR  approach informs  that of  many other  countries’  energy sector s ."
"32" "Th e  U.S.  Do E distinguishes between i n dependent project reviews , which are “conducted by federal staff not directly affiliated with the project or program and management and operations (M&O) contractors” and EIRs, which are “overseen by the Office of Engineering and Construction Management and conducted by contractors external to the department” ( 46,  1). However, both reviews are peer reviews, and EIRs often rely on previous peer review work undertaken by IPRs. Peer reviews have multiple aspects and are defined by the National Research Council ( 46,  1) thusly:"
"33" "Peer reviews are conducted to ensure that activities are technically adequate, competently performed, and properly documented; to validate assumptions, calculations, and extrapolations; and to assess alternative interpretations, methodologies, acceptance criteria, and other aspects of the work products and the documentation that support them. Effective peer reviews are conducted in an environment of mutual respect, recognizing the contributions of all participants. Their primary objective is to help the project team achieve its goals. Reviews also contribute to quality assurance, risk management, and overall improvement of the management process."
"34" "They can be applied at five main critical decision (CD) stages in the project management process ( 46,  1):"
"35" "CD-0 Approve mission need"
"36" "CD-1 Approve alternative selection and cost range"
"37" "CD-2 Approve performance baseline"
"38" "CD-3 Approve start of construction"
"39" "CD-4 Approve start of operations or project closeout"
"40" "A n EIR should embody six main characteristics, in that it should consider the diverse stakeholders and benefits; review the planning process and involve tailoring, such as by complexity, cost,  risk, safety, schedule, security, and visibility ; maintain its independence; integrate the differing reviews; carefully consider cost and value; and be used to improve project management capabilities  [46] ."
"41" "An EIR’s criteria should  consider the amount of time elapsing between CDs, capabilities of the project management team, inherent risks, project complexity , and total project cost (TPC) [46, 23] . The EIR process itself includes a scoping meeting, team selection and staffing, allocation of roles and responsibilities, and project documentation, includ ing the EIR reports themselves [45] ."
"42" "At the global level and on the  concept  of ‘urgent action’, the IEA Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy  Efficiency  (IEA, 2019)   is a potential model for an EIR on fusion. The IEA Global Commission was established on 24 June 2019 at the IEA’s 4th annual Global Conference on Energy Efficiency in Dublin, Ireland. The Commission is chaired by Leo Varadkar, Prime Minister of Ireland,  his  moral claim to  lead  it   enhanced  by the success of the  2017  Irish Climate Assembly  [ 53 ] . The Commission  presently comprises 21 members, including national leaders, current and former ministers, top business executives and global thought leaders. The Commission is relying on the analytical expertise of the IEA as well as on a global public survey, and it is due to develop recommendations in  Spring  2020  and  deliver them in June 2020 ."
"43" "Although the  global fusion  EIR could involve the IEA, the IEA is an OECD-based organization rather than a global organisation, thus a similar commission on fusion would likely also involve International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) steering, as the IAEA is a global autonomous agency  that  has an existing remit for supervising  the development of   fusion energy   [54[55] . The diverse stakeholders affected both by energy development and climate change means the EIR must involve the participation of not just ITER consortium countries but the entire global community, which could be achieved through bloc-based participation, whether regional or interest-based, and UN Economic and Social Cou ncil (UN ECOSOC) participation."
"44" "The maintenance of the EIR’s independence could be guaranteed by ensuring the externality of reviewing, such as by country  for national projects (e.g., U.S./ U.K. /China),  fuel  type (neutronic   /   aneutronic), technology (e.g., tokamak   /   spherical tokamak   /   stellarator, etc.), sector (public   /   private), stakeholder (Global North   /   Global South), etc."
"45" "To conclude this section, this article is advocating a global EIR on fusion via a mechanism similar to, though not identical to, the IEA Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency. This EIR would independently review global planning and implementation progress towards fusion energy, tailoring by both main forms (neutronic and aneutronic), the technology maturation progress of different (tokamak and non-tokamak) projects, and public and private sector projects. The EIR would include cost and value considerations and estimations of total project costs for existing and planned projects towards prototype grid-connected reactors, such as the  U.K. ’s national  STEP  program . The result would be a global cost-benefit assessment of the possibility of urgent action on fusion energy to address both energy requirements and climate change. The main  concern  now is the timeliness of the EIR, which the following four sections will review."
"46" "Geo -PEST  Analysis of Fusion"
"47" "Geopolitical Analysis of Fusion"
"48" "The  problem  addressed in this section is whether there exists a geopolitical case for a fusion EIR. The ge opolitcs   of  fusion energy falls within the subfield of ‘open’ innovation diplomacy  [23] , a form of science diplomacy, a subfield of international relations  [56 ] [ 57] . T he geopolitics of fusion energy  is  characterized by a paucity of  recent academic research . A SCOP US  abstract and key word search on 29 October 2019 revealed only 33 academic articles, conference papers, or book chapters for the search term (“nuclear fusion” AND politic*) , only six of which are from after 2010 . Nonetheless. ITER is not just the world’s largest science experiment but also the world’s largest  science diplomacy  initiative, one designed to counter Cold War enmities by creating a common project for humanity. In the words of the Joint Soviet-United States Statement on the Summit Meeting in Geneva , November 21, 1985  [58] :"
"49" "The two leaders emphasized the potential importance of the work aimed at utilizing controlled thermonuclear fusion for peaceful purposes and, in this connection, advocated the widest practicable development of international cooperation in obtaining this source of energy, which is essentially inexhaustible, for the benefit for all mankind."
"50" "ITER thus began in 1985 as a Reagan–Gorbachev initiative designed to reduce the possibility of conflict during the Cold War by seeking to unite East and West in the quest for fusion, with the equal participation of the European Atomic Energy Community, Japan, the Soviet Union, and  the U.S.  The responsible development of fusion reactors is not a given and will likely be determined by three factors that depend on domestic policies and politics as we ll as international regulation [59, 525] :"
"51" "(i)   the  technological trajectory of global energy policies (fusion development pathways and timetables);"
"52" "(ii) the  management of a peaceful power transition between rising and declining powers (geopolitical conflict management); and"
"53" "(iii) the  overall acceptance of the nuclear normative order (International Atomic Energy Agency regulations)."
"54" "In the run-up to the launch of ITER in 2007, there was a growing appreciation that fusion was a ‘pathfinder’ for the globalization of research and development of technology, one which impacts sustainability, financial markets, information and communication networks, and global organizations of research and innovation processes. There are three dimensions to this pathfinding  [60,  1094):"
"55" "(i) the  recognition and treatment of global problems;"
"56" "(ii) the  transformation and evolution of new forms of organization and cooperation in a global community of researchers;"
"57" "(iii) the  constitution of Global Change Research."
"58" "The potential of fusion to address multiple global problems is particularly important. In the face of liberalizing energy markets, fusion scientists  have  called for political decisiveness to keep tokamak fusion (ITER) on track for commercialization around 2050, seeing it as of benef it for sustainable development [61] . The ITER pathway envisages initial experiments on DT fusion in 2035, with the actual development of  one or more  prototype  tokamak  fusion  energy  reactor s  (DEMO) around 2050 [9, 92,  243 ] ."
"59" "However,  as outlined above,  the ITER approach is not a global geopolitical initiative. In addition to China, the  EU, and the  U.S. , only five other  states  are participating on an equal basis,  i.e.,  India, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and Switzerland, the latter as a third country member of the European Domestic Agency’s ‘Fusion for Energy’ agency. Canada withdrew from the ITER proposal in 2003, and Australia is the only other country with substantive technical engagement. The high financial barrier to entry to ITER, where an equal partner contribution is measured in billions of dollars, means that the developing world  faces a problem  competing in the fusion energy race as individual countries; this leaves open the possibility of the Global South acting as a bloc or as sub-blocs."
"60" "Although the Cold War is over, the geopolitical role for ITER  and for fusion in general  in benefiting all  humanity   continues , as geopolitical tensions between the main participants remain. These include ‘New Cold War’ tensions between Russia and Europe  [62] , between Russia and the  U.S.  [63 ][ 64] , and particularly between China and the  U.S. . The tensions between the  U.S.  and China merit further consideration because of their severity. For example, due to emerging energy securitization challenges in the Asia Pacific region  [65 ][ 66][67] , the worsening of re lations between China and the U.S.  could lead to a Sino-American ‘Cold War’. Geopolitical hot spots include the South China Sea, South Asia (Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India),  and  Northern Africa and the Middle East  [ 68 ][ 69 ] [70] . The China-U.S.  trade war  [71[72] , is another factor, especially due to some of its roots being in China’s infringement of high-technology intellectual pr operty rights (IPR) [73] ,  including, potentially, fusion IPR. Sino- U.S.  c ompetition in cyberspace an d over artificial intelligence  add to the  complexity [74[75] ."
"61" "These tensions are worsening despite  the  U.S.  and  China’s membership of ITER. Chinese scientists are well aware of fusion’s potential,  including   ‘spillover  benefits ’ [76] ,  such as it being  a  neut ron source for medical purposes [77] . Chinese researchers are actively studying  U.S.   fusion patents  with the aim of  developing China’s own high profile  and successful fusion programs [78] , originally announced in the 2007 white paper  China’s Energy Conditions and Policies  [79] . China created the  world record beating  Experimental Advanced Su perconducting Tokamak [80] , in which there is  U.S. s cientific collaboration [9, 232 ] . It also has its own fusion development programs, including the HL-2A, the HL-2M and the China Fusion Engineerin g Test Reactor [81], in which U.S.  fusi on scie ntists also collaborate [9, 235 ] ."
"62" "However, the age of close Sino-American scientific collaboration effectively  ended in 2011, when the U.S.  passed a spending bill which prohibited NASA from working with China, shutting China out of the Internati onal Space Station [82, 18] . The more recent trade war, concerned with illicit IP transfer, including  Chinese theft of U.S.  nuclear IP , especially the Allen Ho incident  [83] ,  have led to significant U.S.  sanctions on civil nuclear technology transfer to China  [84] . Furthermore, the U.S.   is  concerned with the development of China as a military  [85]  and nuclear power  [86]  Chinese  military development appears to be focusing on fusion  reactor technology where the U.S.  has a noticeable lead,  i.e.,  inertial confinement [87, 37]."
"63" "In the   military  context, fusion reactors could be used to propel naval platforms and power military weapons. For example, since the 1983  Strategic Defense Initiative, U.S.  defense policy has sought to leverage state-of-the-art energy technology, such as Directed Energy  Weapons and Electronic Weapons [88] , for military purposes. The development of Chinese nuclear capabilities is seen  as a particular challenge to U.S.  dominance, as nuclear energy provides a sufficient and reliable energy source for such weapons  [89] ."
"64" "Because of these concerns, on October 11, 2018, the DoE issued new guidance with much wider presumption of denial of requests for technology export, including for non-light water advan ced fission reactors [84] . Moreover, there is an automatic presumption of denial for exports to the state-backed China General Nuclear Power Group,  as it is  currently facing charges related to the  U.S.  Atomic Energy Act. A case-by-case review process was put in place which will analyze “the risk of diversion to the military,  the risk to U.S.  national and economic security, and the risk inherent in the parties to the transaction” and balance this against the “economic and strategic bene fits the export might provide” [84, 1] ."
"65" "In addition, a June 2018 National Intelligence Council report noted that China’s “Thousand Talents” program was a threat to  U.S.  I ntellectual  P roperty  (IP) , and the U.S.  has limited cooperation with the program  [73] ."
"66" "This situation is clearly not ideal.  Considerable multilateral efforts were invested in the development of ITER in the 1980s to secure  U.S.-U.S.S . R .  cooperation on fusion energy during the Cold War period.  Likewise , with China’s emergence as a serious challenger to the current unipolar world system (the ‘Thucydides Trap’), considerable efforts may need to be invested to secure continued  U.S. -China cooperation on, rather tha n conflict over, fusion energy."
"67" "The Thucydides Trap is a term coined by Graham Allison, an American political scientist and professor at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. The concept refers to the fact that the situation of hegemonic powers challenged by newcomers, such as the British Empire when faced by the rise of the German Empire, has frequently led to preventive war, and Alliso n has applied the term to the U.S. -Chinese geopolitical context, as a warning rather than a spec ific prediction [90] ."
"68" "The recent worsening in U.S. -Chinese relations in the past year has provoked a number of sinologists to critically evaluat e Allison’s appraisal of Sino-U.S.  relations, with a recent issue of the  Journal of Chinese Political Science   being dedicated to the subject [91] . The consensus is that psychological misperceptions on both sides present a threat regarding status that must be overcome  [92 ][ 93 ] . How ever, with China  increasing   its  military spending  [94]  and—in the case of fusion research—with China’s actively seeking information on private-sector fusion developments in other ITER member countries  [95]  needing to be seen within China’s overall IPR infringement record  [96] [97] ,  the baseline for Sino-U.S.   science diplomacy must be re-created. In fact,  the U.S. has acknowledged the  requirement for it  to better understand  the interactions between the U.S.  fusion program and the programs of other ITER members (such as China), as  well as with the private sector   [9] ."
"69" "To conclude this section, we provide two geopolitical reasons for the argument that an EIR of global process on fusion is timely. The first reason is to review ITER’s progress towards becoming a global collective effort by humanity to achieve fusion. The second would review ITER’s role as a geopolitical instance of innovation diplomacy, considering geopolitical tensions between all consortium members. This is especially important in the case of Sino- U.S.  relations, as the Sino- U.S.  trade war may inhibit  progress   managing  climate change [98] . As such, an EIR could re-establish a baseline for global, and especially Sino- U.S. ,  cooperation on fusion energy."
"70" "Geo-economic Analysis of Fusion"
"71" "The problem addressed in this section is whether there exists a geo-economic case for an  EIR  of fusion. The development of tokamak-based fusion as an energy source has so far proven expensive. As of 2016, ITER is projected to cost  over €20 billion [99] ."
"72" "A fusion economy based on ITER successor ‘DEMO’ tokamak family machines (including the spherical tokamak ‘com pact reactor’) is decades away [100]  and in any case would require greenhouse gas externalities to be incorporated into a  unit cost scheme to be viable [101] . This  externalities  requirement  is one  which the U.S., by withdrawing from the Paris Agreement, may be unwilling to endorse, and which many  Global South  coun tries may be unable to afford. Moreover, t he Chinese CFETR and U.K. STEP machines,  while  grid-connected energy generating prototypes designed to ‘leapfrog’ ITER ,  do not  presently  have business cases associated with them that would lead to market."
"73" "In contrast to the  public-sector  tokamak route, private-sector companies generally promise cheaper, faster routes to market, based on less well understood, more speculative technologies.  According to the Fusion Industry Association, o ver a dozen companies are now developing ‘compact fusion’—small, economically attractive fusion technologies  [103] .  They include Commonwealth Fusion Systems, EMC2, General Fusion, Helion Energy, Lockheed Martin, TAE Technologies and Tokamak Energy, most of which are U.S.-based  [12][104][105] ."
"74" "S ome of these  companies  are also receiving public funding ,   typically  a few mill ion   d ollars , via the US government ’s  Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy  (ARPA-E) , which has been funding non-tokamak technologies since 2015 via its Alpha program   [106] ."
"75" "T he private-sector compa nies  are organizing as an industry  [107]  and  positioning themselves  to take advantage of theoretical and practical scientific advances in the field, such as iterative advancements in high power electronics, machine learning, materials science, and engineering  [9,  89-133 ). For instance, Helion Energy  projects  employing  advanced Heli um-3 fuels and leveraging  high power electronics developed for  space propulsion and the smart grid  [108 ] . This is complementary to the traditional approaches of the private-sector fusion community, which involves innovating through rapid turnover iteration of small, relatively inexpensive machines to develop technology incrementally in  order to test proof of concept   [109 ] ."
"76" "Unlisted private compact fusion companies generally guard their secrecy. However, their progress can still be evaluated by a) the amount and nature of public oversight, b) the amount of investment, c) the makeup of a board of directors, and d) if ever a recipient of public funding, Freedom of Information requests. The leading contender in terms of investment is the U.S.-based TAE Technologies, which was founded in 1998 and came out of stealth mode in 2015. It has received over 700 million USD in funding, mainly from private investors and venture capitalists like Goldman Sachs, Vulcan Inc., Venrock, and New Enterprise Associates  [110][111 ] . In 2017, its b oard of directors was augmented when  Ernest Moniz, the former U.S. Secretary of Energy who brokered President Bara ck Obama’s Ir anian deal, joined the team [112 ] ."
"77" "Commonwealth Fusion Systems, CTFusion, General Fusion, TAE Technologies, and Tokamak Energy all aspire to net gain fusion by around 2025 and a prototype commercial grid-connected reactor by around 2030,  although  this is extremely ambitious ,  and these companies are not  even  fully funded to  attempt  this goal. As the CEO of Helion Energy ,  David Kirtley ,  has made clear, such ambitious timelines a ssume full funding [113 ] .  At present, no private-sector fusion companies are fully funded to such a  degree   [114 ] . The business cases, and so geo-economics, of private-sector businesses are, generally speaking, commercial-in-confidence, although Helion Energy has released infor mation about its revenue model [1 15 ].  A private-sector prototype  non-grid connected  demonstration reactor cost s  from $50 million to $500 million, depending on the  technology [116] ."
"78" "Focusing on  the geo-economic  problem s  inherent to this situation ,  as we outlined in a previous section,  the majority of the world’s countries are, so far, not fully engaged with ITER or  the multi-billion dollar  fusion  industry  more generally, either as  co-developers  or as  future customers.  Fusion energy development along its multiple pathways, such as tokamak, spherical tokamak, stellarator, field-reversed configuration  (FRC) , and  IEC , requires billions of dollars of funding ,   in most cases  over decades ,  in order to reach  th e stage of a grid-connected reactor, and in the public sector, only ITER is close to fully funded; funding plans for the Chinese CFETR and the UK STEP are not, so far,  public ."
"79" "Furthermore , because of the  high level of technological complexity and  secrecy inherent in private-sector fusion IP, the fusion market risks market failure due to information asymmetries, i.e., gross inequality in information between the seller and buyer, which can affect, for example, interpersonal trust in the entrepreneur-investor relationship in technology situations  [117 ]. Information asymmetries can, nonetheless, be assuaged by signaling factors like patents or previous national grants, with one option being to build venture capital into the grant process  [118 ] ."
"80" "Finally , Global South-dominated blocs, such as OPEC, unless involved in global fusion co-development, could act to deter the development of an alternative energy  [119 ]. In particular, if fossil-fuel producing nations exhibit ‘limit-pricing resembling’ monopolistic behavior in response to fusion’s development, even when faced with a carbon tax as a  reaction to climate change [120 ], this could seriously restrict th e emergence of a  future fusion  energy  market."
"81" "To conclude this section,  we find three  geo-economic reasons why a global  EIR of fusion  energy  would be timely. The first is to obtain a better understanding of the business cases for both  the public and private sectors ,  across multiple competing technologies,  which between them require  substantial  further additional investments to reach the stage of grid-connected reactors .  The second, related issue, involves addressing fusion market failure in the form of information asymmetries.  The  third   concern  is how to better involve the Global South and OPEC countries in the fusion development process, as funders and co-developers, to prevent limit-pricing behavior  by  fossil fuel economies."
"82" "Geo-sociocultural Analysis of Fusion"
"83" "Serious sociocultural implications are attached to that fact that  nuclear  energy development is dominated by the Global North  ( and  fusion by  the ITER consortium  states) , such as fairness to , including peace-building obligations towards,  disadvantaged and developing countries [13] [121 ] , especia lly in an era of petro-wars [122 ] , and the public perception of radiation is a second problem ."
"84" "During the birth of the fiss ion era, the  moral need  for co-development to address  the  sociocultural  risk of war following  the Second World War  took the form of the U.S.-proposed United Nations. Managing the risk of atomic war following the development and dropping of the atomic bomb   was  addressed in  the Baruch Plan , presented to  the U. N. Atomic Energy Commission   (U.N. A . E . C . )  in 1946 with the aim of decommissioning existing atomic weapons and banning all future production of atomic weapons  [123 ]."
"85" "Following the collapse of the  U.N. A . E . C . , the U.S. effort focused on  the ‘Atoms for Peace’ approach,  which  was designed to  develop nations by leveraging the U.S. technological advantage within the overall geopolitics of the  Co ld War [13] . As our analysis  of the fusion divide suggests ,  this  development-cum- peace-building obligation , which   is already integral to the mission of the  U.N. A . E . C . ’s successor, the  IAEA ,   should  not just  be maintained , but strengthened  by  enlarging  the global  fusion  community ."
"86" "A ‘Trinity-test’-level critical juncture for fusion that could be leveraged for peace-building  along the lines of the Baruch Plan  could be the achievement of a self-sustaining fusion reaction, i.e., a burning plasma   [1 2 4 ] , although the first grid-connected reactor would be another opportunity ."
"87" "Finally, a n  EIR  should review the public perception of radiation from nuclear energy  [ 125 ] , especially given the Fukushima event  [126 ] . T he public’s response to the lower radiat ion risks of fusion is so far a  poorly researched, though important, topic , as it will inform the extent to which the public  will view fusion as an ‘alternative’ sustainable energy rather than ‘nuclear’ energy ."
"88" "To conclude this section, the  principal  geo-sociocultural reason why an EIR of the progress of fusion globa lly  would be timely concerns fusion’s potential with regard to peace-building , and a secondary issues is public perception of radiation risk levels ."
"89" "Geo- technologica l Analysis of Fusion"
"90" "The geo-technological context for fusion is defined by the fact it relies on cutting-edge technology beyond the grasp of most scientists, let alone governments, policy makers, and average citizens. This section considers technological issues,  beginning with  the problem of early technological lock-in,  turning next  to the two main kinds of fusion fuel reaction ,   and  finally considering  the difficulty in tracking the  diverse  fast-moving technologies driving fusion projects forwards."
"91" "Turning  first  to technological lock-in, the ‘scaling issue’ that affects the tokamak design, and fusion in general, has resulted in the development of a one ‘big machine’ approach  [7] , the ITER itself, based at Cadarache, in France. The tokamak is the dominant fusion technology family at present, and in path dependence terms, because of increasing returns, sunk costs, and institutional aspects, humanity may be facing tokamak technological ‘lock-in’  [127 ] . Four characteristics of the ITER pathway contribute to increasing returns  to the tokamak  [127 ] :"
"92" "1. The setup costs associated with the commercialisation of fusion are considerable, both in terms of research and development, as well as plant/infrastructure construction."
"93" "2. Given the likely desire to move beyond the first-of-a-kind DEMO into full-scale commercial operations, the learning effects will likely contribute to DEMO-like reactors becoming hegemonic."
"94" "3. The arrangements of the ITER/DEMO projects are inherently international, with China, the European Atomic Energy Community, India, Japan; South Korea, Russia and the US all financing and constructing the ITER reactor. This complexity, alongside with the significant infrastructure required to realise fusion leads to noteworthy coordination effects."
"95" "4. As fusion takes place in a political environment, where negative consequences are likely if designs are chosen that would operate on suboptimal levels, there will be adaption expectations around the post-ITER/DEMO pathway as well as risk averseness."
"96" "Going forwards, because the majority of global fusion research is connected to ITER, promising mainstream designs such as the stellarator, let alone  more speculative  designs such as inertial electrostatic confinement, may be unable to compete against ITER-derived  tokamak or spherical tokamak  designs globally, unless ‘new money’  becomes available , such as  via  the  SWF  of fossil-fuel producing economies.  T he tokamak  should, nonetheless  be  evaluated  against four potential exogenous shocks: a crisis in the existing technology, regulation, technological breakthroughs producing (real or  imagined) cost breakthroughs, and niche markets (such as military applications of otherwise prohibitively expensive technologies)  [127 ] . The fact that ITER celebrated its halfway mark in December 2017  [128 ]  adds  to the  timeliness  of  an EIR."
"97" "Secondly, one of the main technological differences in fusion is by fuel type, between neutronic fusion, typified on the one hand by the deuterium-tritium reaction, which emits neutrons, and on the other hand, aneutronic fusion, such as the proton-boron11 (p-B 11 ) reaction, which emits far less neutrons, but which requires substantially higher temperatures, with thermalization becoming problemat ic for the ignition process [1 29 ]. At a foundational level, it is generally held that there are fundamental limitations on plasma fusion systems not in thermodynamic equilibrium, a supposition which has in techno-institutional terms favored DT-fueled tokamak family reactors, as well as other magnetic confinement systems like the stellarator, in syste ms like the Wendelstein 7-X [13 0 ], and mitigated against technologies ultimately seeking to employ aneutronic fuels such as the p- B11 reaction.  However, this position has since been revised to acknowledge that an aneutronic fusion system not in thermodynamic equilibrium may be viable, though i t would requi re new, potentially Nobel Prize-winning  physics [1 31 ].  If aneutronic fusion is ever achieved, global regulation of fusion may need to vary by fuel type because of the different neutron emission levels."
"98" "Thirdly, t he fast-moving nature of diverse, cross-cutting cutting-edge technologies in the nuclear fusion  industry [132 ][ 133 ]  in themselves pose a problem for how policy analysts and politicians, in developing and developed countries alike, comprehend them. Given fusion energy via ITER/DEMO may now rely on slow progress by the Chinese CFETR during the 2020s and 2030s, in recent years, considerable interest has emerged in  innovative   compact modular reactor  alternatives  [13 4 ] ,  such as spherical tokamaks  [135 ] ; advanced magnetic-confinement cusp and mirror devices  [136 ] , including the Lockheed Martin Compact Fusion Reactor (CFR) and the EMC2 IEC ‘Polywell’ device  [19] ; the TAE Technologies FRC colliding beam fusion reactor  [137 ] ; Commonwealth Fusion Systems’ ARC tokamak  [138 ] , and the Canadian company General Fusion’s magnetized target fusion  [139 ] . The fact that some of these companies ultimately aim to employ aneutronic fusion adds complexity to any analysis.  The main fusion reaction systems that can be fueled by DT but which may eventually be capable of supporting aneutronic fusion are the inertial electrostatic confinement polywell, in the ‘wiffle-ball’ high-beta configuration, one used by EMC2 [19] and, in another system, by Lockheed Martin Skun k Works [140 ], and the FRC."
"99" "Although fusion companies file patents and sometimes  publish academic articles, their precise technology development pathways are zealously guarded and involve bleeding-edge technological developments at present not well understood except in dedicated university facilities or specialist national research laboratories. Moreover, due to their speculative nature, aside from research conducted by the defense sector (especially Lockheed Martin), no U.S. private-sector fusion firm is publicly traded on stock markets, instead primarily relying on venture capitalists, meaning the  opportunity to assess thei r business potential is limited."
"100" "However, the fact that such companies are entering the market  and are obtaining venture capital  suggests a certain  technology  threshold has now been reached, whereby fusion energy as a commercial venture is now a valid, if medium-to-long-term, concept.  The 2018 U.S. National Academies report on fusion notes that “ increasing  industrial interest in fusion is a good sign, indicati ng the readiness to transition  to more of a fusion energy focus and to take advantage of new opportunities for collaboration” [ 9, 166 ]."
"101" "Fourthly, b ecause of  private-sector  secrecy, there  also  exist s  the  remote  possibility of a ‘sudden’ brea kthrough.  As this eventuality is rather remote, we place it in the technological rather than economic section of this analysis.  O nce a  self-sustaining burning plasma  is  achieved, if only as a science experiment , fusion has the potential to be a ‘disruptive innovation’ within t he energy field [141 ] . This means it could cause a short-term shock to the financial sector and, if cheap enough to commercialize, disrupt other, potentially even cheaper fusion technology development pathways, as well as demand for other energy sources over the medium and long term."
"102" "To conclude this section,  we find three reasons why an EIR would be timely. A n EIR would review   the lock-in scenario facing the tokamak family,  review  the  situation concerning the two main  fusion  fuel types,   and  assess  the technological  maturation  projections of the main private-sector companies  against various business scenarios .   It would assess  signals like grants or venture capital obtained,  in the  process addressing  the risk of a disruptive technology emerging ."
"103" "GEO-PEST Summary"
"104" "This s ection  summarizes the GEO-PEST analysis in  tabular form (table 1).  We find multiple  problems  in all four GEO-PEST categories."
"105" "TABLE I GEO-PEST Summary Case for a Global EIR No. Problem Type Subtype GEO-P1 Fusion as global technological energy pathfinder GEO-P2 ‘New Cold War’ Russia-Europe Russia-U.S. China-U.S. (Thucydides Trap) GEO-E1 Status of public-sector fusion ITER DEMO (incl. U.K. STEP) business case GEO-E2 Status of private-sector fusion Business models Venture capital obtained Research grants obtained GEO-E3 Information asymmetry risk GEO-E4 Relationship with Global South re f uture fusion energy market Entrepreneur-investor Entrepreneur-established competitor (OPEC, etc.) GEO-S1 Peace-building GEO-S2 Public perception of radiation  & fusion as ‘alternative’ energy GEO-T1 Technological lock-in Tokamak Spherical tokamak? GEO-T2 Fuel type GEO-T3 Viability of diverse ‘compact reactor’ technology maturation pathways GEO-T4 Disruptive technology event TABLE I GEO-PEST Summary Case for a Global EIR No. Problem Type Subtype GEO-P1 Fusion as global technological energy pathfinder GEO-P2 ‘New Cold War’ Russia-Europe Russia-U.S. China-U.S. (Thucydides Trap) GEO-E1 Status of public-sector fusion ITER DEMO (incl. U.K. STEP) business case GEO-E2 Status of private-sector fusion Business models Venture capital obtained Research grants obtained GEO-E3 Information asymmetry risk GEO-E4 Relationship with Global South re f uture fusion energy market Entrepreneur-investor Entrepreneur-established competitor (OPEC, etc.) GEO-S1 Peace-building GEO-S2 Public perception of radiation  & fusion as ‘alternative’ energy GEO-T1 Technological lock-in Tokamak Spherical tokamak? GEO-T2 Fuel type GEO-T3 Viability of diverse ‘compact reactor’ technology maturation pathways GEO-T4 Disruptive technology event In total, twelve reasons for an EIR have been identified. T ogether , these  constitute a rationale for the timeliness of an EIR that can then make recommendations on ‘urgent action’ to address the problems."
"106" "TABLE I"
"107" "GEO-PEST Summary Case for a Global EIR"
"108" "No."
"109" "Problem Type"
"110" "Subtype"
"111" "GEO-P1"
"112" "Fusion as global technological energy pathfinder"
"113" "GEO-P2"
"114" "‘New Cold War’"
"115" "Russia-Europe"
"116" "Russia-U.S."
"117" "China-U.S. (Thucydides Trap)"
"118" "GEO-E1"
"119" "Status of public-sector fusion"
"120" "ITER"
"121" "DEMO (incl. U.K. STEP) business case"
"122" "GEO-E2"
"123" "Status of private-sector fusion"
"124" "Business models"
"125" "Venture capital obtained"
"126" "Research grants obtained"
"127" "GEO-E3"
"128" "Information asymmetry risk"
"129" "GEO-E4"
"130" "Relationship with Global South re f uture fusion energy market"
"131" "Entrepreneur-investor"
"132" "Entrepreneur-established competitor (OPEC, etc.)"
"133" "GEO-S1"
"134" "Peace-building"
"135" "GEO-S2"
"136" "Public perception of radiation  & fusion as ‘alternative’ energy"
"137" "GEO-T1"
"138" "Technological lock-in"
"139" "Tokamak"
"140" "Spherical tokamak?"
"141" "GEO-T2"
"142" "Fuel type"
"143" "GEO-T3"
"144" "Viability of diverse ‘compact reactor’ technology maturation pathways"
"145" "GEO-T4"
"146" "Disruptive technology event"
"147" "TABLE I"
"148" "GEO-PEST Summary Case for a Global EIR"
"149" "No."
"150" "Problem Type"
"151" "Subtype"
"152" "GEO-P1"
"153" "Fusion as global technological energy pathfinder"
"154" "GEO-P2"
"155" "‘New Cold War’"
"156" "Russia-Europe"
"157" "Russia-U.S."
"158" "China-U.S. (Thucydides Trap)"
"159" "GEO-E1"
"160" "Status of public-sector fusion"
"161" "ITER"
"162" "DEMO (incl. U.K. STEP) business case"
"163" "GEO-E2"
"164" "Status of private-sector fusion"
"165" "Business models"
"166" "Venture capital obtained"
"167" "Research grants obtained"
"168" "GEO-E3"
"169" "Information asymmetry risk"
"170" "GEO-E4"
"171" "Relationship with Global South re f uture fusion energy market"
"172" "Entrepreneur-investor"
"173" "Entrepreneur-established competitor (OPEC, etc.)"
"174" "GEO-S1"
"175" "Peace-building"
"176" "GEO-S2"
"177" "Public perception of radiation  & fusion as ‘alternative’ energy"
"178" "GEO-T1"
"179" "Technological lock-in"
"180" "Tokamak"
"181" "Spherical tokamak?"
"182" "GEO-T2"
"183" "Fuel type"
"184" "GEO-T3"
"185" "Viability of diverse ‘compact reactor’ technology maturation pathways"
"186" "GEO-T4"
"187" "Disruptive technology event"
"188" "Geo-PEST Discussion: Fusion Innovation Diplomacy"
"189" "We seek  to develop a  fusion energy  pathway  that can contribute towards  ‘energy for all’, i.e.,  UNSDG  7, as well as towards the long-term management of climate change ,  UNSDG  13 .  Although  fusion energy cannot meet short-terms requirements for low carbon energy, it may contribute to medium-term and long-term  goals of zero carbon emissions."
"190" "However, meeting medium-term goals requires potential customers of fusion energy reactors, many of whom are fossil-fuel based economies, to both be informed of, and receptive towards, fusion energy.  Our analysis indicates that this  necessitates their involvement in co-development of the technology and busines s models for commercialization, with a view to developing a future fusion economy."
"191" "Because of the  UNSDG -endorsed  higher-level requirements, there is a requirement for ‘principled realism’  [ 142 ]  with regard to developing and commercializing fusion . T he nature of the global grand geo-political  accommodation   that  we  recommend  creates a multilateral geo-economic and geo-sociocultural win-win-win  for the public and private sectors, Global North and Global South, and Global West and Global East . This win-win-win scenario  creates  a new baseline for the  understanding of, and respect for,   geo-technological   fusion  IPR .  We discuss our  GEO-PEST analysis in this overall context in more detail below."
"192" "Geopolitics"
"193" "Our GEO -PEST analysis indicates that the economic development of fusion requires global energy leadership, a substantive aspect of the increasingly contested Sino-U.S. wrangle over world economic and military leadership   [143 ][ 144 ] [145 ] . The current paradigm of bipolar U.S.-Chinese economic/military leadership risks being dominated by a competition for fossil fuels that historically, in other con texts, has led to warfare  [120 ] ."
"194" "The present  vacuum  in global economic leadership has been posited to result in a stable or unstable leadership vacuum (GO), the emergence of China as leader (G1), or a U . S .-Chinese partnership (G2) [145 ] . Our EIR mechanism would insert the Global South as a fulcrum to balance G2, especially as Global South co-development of fusion IP would lessen the likelihood of patent infringement, as Global South countries would be less likely to buy technology that infringed their own IP. Our analysis emphasizes overcoming the present trade deadlock via cooperative multipolar leadership,  via   ‘open’ innovation diplomacy  [146 ],  involving co-development  and co-creation of  a new baseline of respect for  high-technology  IP ."
"195" "We leave  open the question of who should chair a global commission’s EIR, but a global ‘soft power’ or a G77 OPEC member , or co-chairs,  would  all be valid choices. The c ommission could organize as part of the EIR a Global South oversight task force, probably including its most innovative countries in the 2018 GII, such as Singapore and the United Arab Emirates, together with a representative sample of less innovative countries that might already possess national fusion laboratories, such a s Brazil."
"196" "This type of oversight, perhaps facilitated by  both the IAEA and  the U . N .  Security Council through UN ECOSOC,  could analyze, and if adopted over the long term, monitor  progress  towards fusion energy  while putting in place fir ewalls between any sensitive IP  and  G77  countries presently under sanctions, such as North Korea and Iran. Despite the complexity challenges, this offers a pathway for Global South fossil fuel-based economies to  have the choice to  eventually transition to fusion  energy, concomitantly  addressing the  ‘ neo-colonial ’  situation inherent in nuclear e nergy  geopolitics ."
"197" "Geo-economics"
"198" "Current outlooks on energy transformation typically do not include fusion as  an energy source, and therefore  there has been little interest in addressing the challenges and opportunities of  a  future fusion energy  economy and fusion  businesses. Nonetheless,  our analysis indicates  the economic model for how fusion is developed and then commercialized  is  a critical issue for environmentally sustainable energy development, particularly  in the context of  UNSDG  7 ."
"199" "Although  nuclear fission power is developing technologically relatively rapidly, especiall y as regards safety  [147 ] , fusion is, in principle, preferable. Once a grid-connected fusion power plant is developed, fusion has the potential t o be a ‘disruptive  innovation ’  within the  alternative  energy field   [ 139 ] ,  which our approach could result in a process for  managing,  through multilateral co-developme nt of the future fusion economy ."
"200" "Presently, however,  fusion energy  risks being a luxury for developed nations. France converted 80% of its primary energy supply to nuclear fission through constructing 58 new reactors in three decades following the  first oil crisis [1 48 ] , and a similar adoption timeframe may be anticipated for fusion in the case of  select  ITER countries  once a grid-connected reactor is built ."
"201" "However, the fact that most Global South countries, including major fossil fuel economies, do not have any economic  or business  stake in developing fusion could leave many unable, and even unwilling, to adopt fusion. Energy transformation cooperation between ITER member entities and the developing world, and between public and private efforts, to achieve the potential of nuclear fusion requires in-depth stakeholder consideration, and a global EIR meets this need. Because fusion energy technologies are only at the early stages, several doors are open for fut ure collaboration in the field."
"202" "In terms of international cooperation, in the U.S., cooperation in the field of fusion technology innovation remains open to both U.S. and non-U.S. companies, as demonstrated in TAE Technologies’ ability to bring in global stakeholders, like  Russia, in the form of  Rusnano.  Although the U.S. DoE has issued restrictive guidelines on civilian nuclear  technology export to China [84] ,  in a principled realism approach,  fusion still holds promise in  enhancing not just Sino-U.S.  innov ation diplomacy, but also trade."
"203" "In terms of public-private cooperation,  the 2018  U.S.  National Academies report concludes,  “Opportunities exist to encourage and support private investment in fusion energy development and the focused, goal-oriented approach from U.S. industry, which is beneficial  to fusion energy development ”  [9 , 170 )."
"204" "A n EIR could lead not just to more regional and national fusion laboratories  in the Global South , which could benefit regions ’ and countries’  R&D efforts and business competitiveness, but to a programmatic approach to business matching between private-sector businesses and venture capital, via sovereign wealth funds, state companies or state-owned enterprises, perhaps  organized  on a bloc basis, such as  by  the G77 or OPEC.  This would contribute substantially to a future fusion economy."
"205" "Geo-sociocultural"
"206" "S erious sociocultural implications  are  attached to fusion energy development by the Global North-dominated ITER consortium, such as  developing , and facilitating peace in,  disadvantaged countries. During th e birth of the fission era, the  moral need was managed by the U.S. through the  UN AEC and then  continued by  the  ‘Atoms for Peace’  program ,  a feature of  Cold War geopolitics."
"207" "As o ur GEO -PEST analysis outlines, this peace-building obligation  should be maintained by the fusion commun ity,   and global peace-building is best  developed  as  a global program.  Furthermore, if the G77 or select blocs within the Global South co-develop fusion, the participating Global South countries, such as the OPEC nations, demonstrate South-North leadership and solidarity with populations in the developing world by co-developing fusion to benefit Global South interests, concomita ntly benefiting diplomatically."
"208" "The main disadvantage is the additional organizational complexity that this bloc-based peace-building scenario would bring. For instance, would countries like China (i) agree to Global South co-development under a global commission with IAEA support serving as a fulcrum for re-baselining diplomatic and trade relations with the U.S., (ii) have respect for the resultant IP, and (iii) commit to long-term peace-building via such an arrangement? If China’s government is to be consistent with the country’s recent commitment to a “beautiful C hina” [149 ][ 150 ], i.e., the securitization of Chinese  climate and energy politics [151 ], while remaining within the UN SDG framework, China will respect Global South co-development of fusion towards a peace-building goal, if only pragmatically because it grows the global market for fusion energy and so brings down the price of future Chinese fusion reactors,  benefiting China domestically."
"209" "In working towards global peace-building,  ITER member states and the Global South could cooperate  on fusion   energy  co-development and commercializa tion  within  an existing  overarching peace-building framework like Nonkilling Global Political Science (NKGPS), which as a paradigm is represented by the Center for  Global Nonkilling at UN ECOSOC  (Figure 1 ) ."
"210" "Fig. 1.   An NKGPS approach toward peaceful development and commercialization of nuclear fusion with perceived challenges and opportunities ."
"211" "T he ultimate aim  c ould be  reducing global military tensions v ia a universal peace treaty [124 ].  If this scenario can be achieved, f usion-based peace-building has a chance of securing genuine long-term  demilitarization , through reducing the likelihood of foss il fuel resource-base d wars [124 ], which, disadvantage populations in developing countries."
"212" "Finally, the radiation risk from fusion is less than that of fission, thus an EIR open to the  civil society and the  media  could go some way to better differentiating between  the radiation risk levels  in the mind of the global  media and  public."
"213" "Geo-technological"
"214" "A global EIR,  reviewing the technology of fusion and  leading to new, innovative funding from the  Global South , could spur both public sector national laboratories and private-sector companies in ITER member states  and beyond  to  co-develop  fusion technologies. This will need to be effec ted in a way that respects IPR."
"215" "The  2018 U.S.  National Academies’ report’s sixth recommendation included the need “to manage assignment of  intellectual property as a means to encourage both private and publicly funded researchers to establish mutually beneficial part nerships” [ 9, 171 ] . This has already  inspired  a new program between the U.S. DoE Office of Fusion Energy Sciences and the private sector that should both accelerate private sector-companies’ technology maturation pathways and support public sector projects. The new “Innovation Network for F usi on Energy” (INFUSE) program [152 ]  promotes collaboration between the public and private sectors by allowing private companies to apply for vouchers redeemable at public laboratories within the DoE complex. INFUSE thus addresses the IPR issue that can be divisive with regard to cooperation between the public and private sectors by enabling U.S. companies to work directly with government scientists on government assets, potentially facilitating access to computational modeling, design validation, and experimental testing as well as collaborative public-private publication of cutting-edge research  [153 ] ."
"216" "T he impact of the U.S.-Chinese trade war on  t he sharing of nuclear technology knowledge   cannot be underestimated. However,   tripartite involvement by the U.S. DoE,  the U.S. Department of State ,  and  U.S. Department of Defense,   could create  the safeguards via  which the  U.S .  may be open to an EIR  through  a global commission that then leads to  deeper academic collaboration. This could create  the potential for co-development of  core fusion technology  IP  via direct  deals between , on the one hand,   publicly funded U.S. national laboratories and  private U.S. fusion companies ,  and  on the other hand,  public or private entities  from  t he Global South.  This would be especially true if it involved strategic technological partners,  including   selected  OPEC states  and  non-NATO Treaty allies."
"217" "Turning to a disruptive technological energy innovation breakthrough, such an event could be foreseeable due to signaling by the company concerned. For example, within the global fusion community, which is still relatively open,  senior  physicists are generally aware of the likelihood of success of various iterations of machines, which can take 1-2 years to build  even in the case of compact reactors , and which require months ,   if not years,  of fine-tuning. Furthermore, if a breakthrough reactor required a DT fuel, substantial purchases of tritium by a single company would affect the global market for tritium and be noted by the fusion community.  The kind of ‘open’ innovation diplomacy that we advocate would minimize this risk."
"218" "To sum up, an EIR would contribute  to bottom-up confidence building on nuclear fusion in the Global South, thereby increasing the market for  future  fusion  technological   and energy  products , driving their development .   A n EIR  would also reduce the risks posed by a disruptive technological innovation."
"219" "Conclusion"
"220" "O ur GEO -PEST  analysis raises multiple concerns that would best be addressed by a global  EIR , with a view to assessing the possibility of ‘urgent action’ on fusion .   The EIR  would espouse an environmentally sust ainable multi-sector co-development  model that would begin to address and thereby alleviate the concerns. An EIR  at the level of  a  global commission on ‘urgent action’  would involve  all  five  ‘ helices ’  of the  innovation   ecosystem , i.e.,  academia ,  the public sector, the private sector, civil society and the media, and  socio-ecological interests [146 ] , both in ITER member states and in the  Global South . In geopolitical terms,  we emphasize  the need for North-South and East-West global rapprochements. In geo-economic terms, an EIR could identify optimal economic  and business  pathways to  clean, sustainable  fusion  energy . In ge o-sociocultural terms, the EIR sh ould  continue  the science diplomacy tradition of nuclear energy for peace-building.  In geo-technological terms, the EIR should review a diversity of technology maturation pathways."
"221" "Implications"
"222" "Nuclear energy research and development is concentrated in a handful of countries, primarily the U . S . , Germany, Japan, the U.K.,  France, and China [154 ] . Based on our preliminary GEO -PEST analysis,  we advocate  the  entire  international community becoming more engaged,  in a similar way to the IEA’s  ‘Global Commission for Urge nt Action on Energy Efficiency’. This would both leverage and revitalize  the science diplomacy that underpins the global fusion initiative, particularly with regard to relations between ITER member states ,   especially  China and the U.S."
"223" "With greater available information,  the  Global South, including OPEC, states will be able to decide for themselves whether they want to benefit from co-development of fusion power and whether fusion is a viable option for climate change mitigation—leading, thereafter, to institutional entrenchment in the promotion of nuclear fusion—or whether  it  is just a costly illusion, and other techn ologies should then be adopted."
"224" "In terms of further research, to better understand fusion energy development, a ‘five-helix’ view should be applied, as insights are required from the perspectives of academic, government, industry, civil society and media, and  socio-ecological  lenses. Quadruple/Quintuple Innovation Helix (Q2IH) frameworks are built for multi-level and multi-dimensional  innovation diplomacy  problem sets that require the university-industry-government-civil society relations to spur green innova tio n within natural ecosystems [145 ]  and  could be employed in further GEO -PEST analysis of fusion energy.   Future  research c ould examine the GEO -PEST challenges and opportunities  within such a  framework , including in the form of potential work pac kages for a commission."
"225" "To conclude ,  given the potential of fusion energy to contribute towards the  ‘ collective good ’ ,  ‘ collective effort ’  is required  on ‘urgent action’  to ensure that the Global South can make  informed decisions as to whether  or not  to invest in   a future fusion economy ,  in the process   potentially  optimizing  future  energy and climate  scenarios ."
"226" "References"
"227" "[1]    World Economic Forum .  The Global Risks Report 2019 , 14th ed. Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2019, p.5."
"228" "[2]    United Nations .  Paris Agreement .  New York, NY,  U.S. A:  United Nations Treaty Collection. Available :  https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris -agreement/the-paris-agreement"
"229" "[3]    United Nations .  Climate Action Summit Main Release .  New York, NY,  U . S . A . : United Nations, 2019.  Available :  https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/a ssets/pdf/CAS_main_release.pdf ."
"230" "[4]    den Elzen   et al .,   “ Climate–carbon cycle uncert ainties and the Paris Agreement,”   Nat. Clim.  Change , vol.  8 , no. 7, pp.  609–613,  Jul. 2018,  10.21552/cclr/2017/3/16 ."
"231" "[5]    A. Horvath  and  E. Rachlew,  2016.  “ Nuclear power in the 21st centur y: Challenges and possibilities,”   Ambio ,   vol.  45 , s uppl . 1,  p p. 38-49 , Jan. 2016,  10.1007/s13280-015-0732-y ."
"232" "[6]    D. G. Victor.  Global Warming Gridlock: Creating More Effective Strategies for Protecting the   Planet . Cambridge,  U.K. : CUP, 2011."
"233" "[7]    D. Clery.  A Piece of the Sun: The Quest for Fusion Energy . London ,  U.K. : Overlook Duckworth, 2014."
"234" "[8]    Europe an Fusion Development Agreement .  Fusion Electricity: A Roadmap to the Realisation of Fusion Energy . Abin gdon,  U.K. : EUROfusion,  2012 . Available:  https://www.euro- fusion.org/fileadmin/user_upload/EUROfusion/Documents/Roadmap.pdf ."
"235" "[9 ]    U.S.   National Academies of Scie nces, Engineering, and Medicine .  Final Report of the Co mmittee on a Strategic Plan for  U.S.  Burning Plasma Rese arch . Washington , DC,  U.S. A: The National Academies Press, 2018. Available:  https://www.nap.edu/catalog/25331/final-report-of-the-committee-on-a-strategic-plan-f or-us-burning-plasma-research ."
"236" "[10]   X. Liu ,  et al . ,  2017.  “ Mechanical performance evaluation of the CFETR central soleno id model coil design,”  Nucl. Fus.   vol.  58 , no. 1, pp.  1-9,  Jan. 2018,  10.1088/1741-4326/aa9866 ."
"237" "[11]   U.K.  Atomic Energy Authority .  U.K.  to Take a Big ‘STEP’ to Fusion E lectricity . Culham ,  U.K. :  U.K.  Atomic Energy Authority.  Available:  https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-to-take-a-big-step-to-fusion-electricity ."
"238" "[12]   J. McMahon, “Energy from fusion in 'a couple years,' CEO says, commercialization in f ive,”  Forbes ,  January  14,  2019.   Available:  https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffmcmahon/2019/01/14/private-firm-will-bring-fusion-reactor-to-market-within-fiv e-years-ceo-says/#2997b7ae1d4a ."
"239" "[13]  S.  Cooke ,   In Mortal Hands. A Cautionary History of the Nuclear Age . New York , NY,  U.S. A: Bloomsbury, 2009."
"240" "[14]   R. Guck,   “ The tasks for nuclear research from the viewpoint of electricity supply undertakings ,”   VGB-Kraftwerkstechnik , vol.  68 , no. 10, pp. 988-991, Oct. 1988."
"241" "[ 15]    K. Irie and K. Kanda .  “ Evaluation of nuclear energy in t he context of energy security: A nalysis based upon Japan’s policy documents ,”  Trans.   Atom. En . Soc.  of  Jap. ,  vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 107-118, Jun.  2002 ."
"242" "[16]   H. Cabal ,  et al . ,  2017.  “F usion power in a future low carbon global electricity system ,”   En .   Strat. Rev. , vol. 15, pp. 1-8, Mar. 2 017,  10.1016/j.esr.2016.11.002 ."
"243" "[17]   D. P.  Turnbull , A. Glaser, and R. J. Goldston,   “ Investigating the value of fusion energy using the  global change assessment model,”  En . Econ.  51:346–353, Sep. 2015,  10.1016/j.eneco.2015.08.001 ."
"244" "[18]   G. H. Miley  and  S. Krupakar Murali,   Inertial Electrostatic Confinement (IEC) Fusio n. New York , NY,  U.S. A: Springer,  2014 ."
"245" "[19]    J.  Park,  et al ..   “ High energy electron confinement in a magnetic cusp configuration ,”  Phys.  Rev . X , vol.  5 , no. 2 ,  021024.  Jun.  2015 ,  10.1103/physrevx.5.021024 ."
"246" "[20]    Y. Wu and S.  Şahin. 2018.  “Fusion energy production,” i n  Comprehensive Energy Systems ,  I.  Dincer ,   Ed . Amsterdam: Elsevier , 2018, pp.  538-589."
"247" "[21]    R. J. Pearson, A. B. Antoniazzi, and W. J. Nuttall,   “ Tritium  supply and use: A  key issue for the devel opment of nuclear fusion energy,”  Fus. Eng. and Des.   2018 ,   vol. 136,   pp. 1140- 1148 , Nov. 2018,  10.1016/j.fusengdes.2018.04.090 ."
"248" "[22]    In ternational Energy Agency.   Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency . Paris: Interna tional Energy Agency, 2019. Available:  https://www.iea.org/topics/energy efficiency/global%20commission/ ."
"249" "[23]    E. G. Carayannis  and C. B.  Papadopoulos , “Innovation diplomacy and the Hellenic-American innovation bridge as a s pecial  case-in-p oint ,”  J. of the Know. Econ.  vol.  2 , no. 3, pp.  257 to 326 , Sep. 2011,  10.1007/s13132-011-0056-5 ."
"250" "[24]    A. Gupta. “ Environmental   and   pest analysis:   An   approach   to   external   business   environment ,”   Intl. J. of Mod. Soc. Sci.   vol.  2 , no. 1, pp.  34–43 ,  Jun. 2013."
"251" "[25]    G .  E .  Valencia1, Y .  D . Cardenas,  and C .  H . Acevedo,   “ PEST analysis of wind energy in the world: From the worldwide boom to the emergent in Colombia ,”  J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. , vol.  1126 ,  012019 , Dec. 2018. Available:  https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/1126/1/012019 ."
"252" "[ 26 ]    G. M. Lawrence and C.  Baranowski .  Representing High-tech Companies . New York, NY,  U.S. A: Law Journal Press, 2005."
"253" "[2 7 ]    M. M. Yurchenko,   “UN-70: Problems of reforming,”   World Econ.  and  Intl. Rel. ,   vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 88-98,  2017 ,   10.20542/0131-2227-2017-61-5-88-98 ."
"254" "[2 8 ]    J. K. Sundaram. 2016. “Carpe diem: Bandung, historical inequalities and development goals,”  Inter-Asia Cult. Stud. , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 27-32, Jan. 2016, 10.1080/14649373.2016.1133389."
"255" "[29 ]  M. Vieira,   “ Rising  states and distributive justice,” i n  Regional Powers and Global Redistribution ,  P. Nel, D. Nabers, and M.   Hanif Eds.  London:  Routledge, 2016."
"256" "[ 30 ]    United Nations General Assembly.   Transforming Our W orld: T he 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  (Resolution 70/1). New York, NY,  U.S. A: United Nations. Available:  https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1 ."
"257" "[31 ]    L.  Guruswamy,  “The contours of energy justice,” i n  International Environmental Law and the Global South ,  S. Alam, S. Atapattu, C. G. Gonzalez, and J. Razzaque Eds.,   pp.  529-552. Cambri dge: CUP, 2015."
"258" "[32]    J. Toye,   “Assessing the G77 : 50 years after UNCTAD and 40 years after the NIEO ,”   Third World Q. ,   vol.  3 5, no. 10, pp. 1759-1774,  Nov. 2014,  10.1080/01436597.2014.971589 ."
"259" "[33]    European Commission.  Roadmap for EU -Brazil STI Cooperation . Brussels: European Commission, 2019. Available:  https://ec.europa.eu/research/iscp/pdf/policy/br_roadmap_2018.pdf ."
"260" "[34]    ITER.  A Princess Royal with a Passion for Science . Cadarache, France, 2018: ITER. Available:  https://www.iter.org/newsline/-/3196 ."
"261" "[35 ]   M. McCullough, “General fusion raises another $27 million to advance its reactor c oncept,”  Canadian Business , 20 May 2015.   Availab le :  http://www.canadianbusiness.com/innovation/general-fusion-raises-another-27-million-to-advance-its-reac tor-concept/ ."
"262" "[36 ]    K. Kheng-Lian and N. A. Robinson,   “South–South c ooperation: Foundati ons for sustainable development,” i n  International Environmental Law and the Global South  S. Alam, S. Atapattu, C. G. Gonzalez, and J.  Razzaque  eds. ,  pp.  553-571. Cambri dge: CUP,  2015 ."
"263" "[37]    OPEC: Twenty Years and Beyond , R.  el Mallakh , Ed.,   London : Routledge, 2016."
"264" "[38 ]     I. F. I. Shihata.  The OPEC Fund for International Development: The Formative Years . London: Routledge, 2011."
"265" "[39 ]    “ OPEC Fund for International Development   (OFID) ,”  OPEC Bulletin , vol. 42, no.  7,  pp.  45-47 , Sep. 2011."
"266" "[40 ]    Uni ted Nations Statistics Division.   National Accounts Main Aggregates Database . New York, NY,  U.S. A: United Nations Statistics Division. Available:  https://unstats .un.org/unsd/snaama/dnlList.asp ."
"267" "[41 ]    Unite d Nations Development Programme .  Human Development Index. 2018 Statistical Update . New York , NY,  U.S. A: United Nations Development Programme. Available:  http://hdr.undp.org/en/cont ent/human-development-index-hdi ."
"268" "[4 2 ]    The International Bank for Reconstruction and  Development and the World Bank .  Innovation Policy: A Guide for Developing Countries .  Washington: World Bank,  2010 ."
"269" "[43 ]    C. H. Matthews and R. Brueggeman .  Innovation and Entrepreneurship: A Competency Framework . London: Routledge,  2015 ."
"270" "[44 ]    Corne ll University, INSEAD, and WIPO .  Global Innovation Index 2018 . Available:  https://www .globalinnovationindex.org/Home ."
"271" "[45]    U.S.   Department of Energy.   External Independent Review (EIR) Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) . Washington , DC,  U.S. A: Department of Energy, 2011. Available:  https://www.nap.edu/catalog/11887/assessment-of-the-results-of-external-independent-reviews-for-u s-department-of-energy-projects ."
"272" "[46]    National Research Council.  Assessment of the Results of Ext ernal Independent Reviews for U.S.  Department of Energy Projects . Washington, DC ,  U.S. A: The National Academies Press, 2007."
"273" "[47]    U.S.   Department of Energy .  U.S.  Department of Energy Technology Readiness Assessment Guide . Washington, DC ,  U.S. A: Department of Energy,  2009 ."
"274" "[48]    U.S.  Navy .  Review Committee Evaluation of Recent EMC2 Progress on the Bussard Polywell Fusion Concept: July 21, 2008 . Washington, DC,  U.S. A:  U.S.  Navy,  2008 ."
"275" "[49]    U.S.  Navy .  Review Committee Evaluation of Recent EMC2 Progress on the Bussard Polywell Fusion Concept: February 28, 2012 . Washington, DC ,  U.S. A :  U.S.  Navy,  2012 ."
"276" "[50]    U.S.  Navy .  Review Committee Evaluation of EMC2 Progress on the Bussard Polywell Fusion Power Concept: July 5, 2013 . Washington, DC,  U.S. A:  U.S.  Navy, 2013."
"277" "[51]    U.S.  Navy .  Review Committee Evaluation of Recent EMC2 Progress on the Polywell Fusion Power Concept: Nov. 11, 2013 . Washington, DC ,  U.S. A:  U.S.  Navy,  2013 ."
"278" "[52 ]    International Energy Agency .  Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency . Par is: International Energy Agency,  2019 .  Available :  https://www.iea.org/topics/energy efficiency/global%20commission/ ."
"279" "[53 ]  D. Robins.  Climate Change, Politics and the Press in Ireland . Abingdon,  U.K. : Routledge, 2019."
"280" "[54]    D. Fischer .  History of the International Atomic Energy Agency: The First Forty Years . Vienna: IAEA, 1997."
"281" "[55]    M.  E lbaradei .  The Age of Deception: Nuclear Diplomacy in Treacherous Times . London: Bloomsbury , 2011 ."
"282" "[56]    P-B. Ruffini.   Science and Diplomacy: A New Dimension of International Relations . Cham: Springer, 2017."
"283" "[57]    V. C.  Turekian,  “The evolution of science diplomacy,”   Glob. Pol. ,   vol. 9, pp. 5-7, Nov.  2018 ,  10.1111/1758-5899.12622 ."
"284" "[58] R.  Reagan, Ronald ..   Joint Soviet-United States Statement on the Summit Meeting in Geneva .  Santa Barbara, CA,  U.S. A:  T he American Presidency Project,  1985 . Available:  https://www. presidency.ucsb.edu/node/258993."
"285" "[59] G. Franceschini, M. Englert, and W. Liebert,   “ Nuclear fusion power for weapons purposes: An exercise in n u clear p rol iferation f orecasting,”   Nonprolif. Rev. , vol. 20, no. 3, pp.  525-544,  Nov.  201 3,  10.1080/10736700.2013.852876 ."
"286" "[60] G.  Bechmann, F. Gloede, and E. Lessmann. 2001.  “ International  power supply policy and the globalisation of research:  The example of fusion research,”   Fus. Eng. and  Des. ,   vol. 58-59, pp. 1091-1095, Nov. 2001,  10.1016/s0920-3796(01)00556-7 ."
"287" "[61] W. D. D'haeseleer,  2003.  “ The importance of fusion development  towards a future energy source,”   Fus. Eng.  an d  Des. ,  vol.  66-68, pp.  3-15, Sep. 2003,  10.1016/s0140-6701(04)91445-2 ."
"288" "[62] M. Maslovskiy,   “ Russia against Europe: A clash of interpretations of modernity? ”   Eur. J.  o f Soc.  Theory , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 533-547, Nov.  2019 ,  10.1177/1368431018768623 ."
"289" "[63] R. Sakwa, “ U.S. -Rus sian relations in the Trump era,”   Insight Turkey ,  vol. 19, no. 4, pp.  13-27 , Oct. 2017,  10.22459/mic.04.2018.15 ."
"290" "[64] W. C.  Wohlforth, and  V. M.  Zubok,  “ An abiding antagonism: Realism, idealism and the mirage of western-Russian  partnership after the Cold War,”   Intl. Pol. , vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 405-419, Jul.  2017 ,  10.1057/s41311-017-0046-8 ."
"291" "[65] M. E.  Herberg, ed. ,  2014.  Energy Security and the Asia-Pacific . Washington , DC,  U.S. A : The National Bureau of Asian  Research, 2014."
"292" "[66] J. Nyman .  The Energy Security Paradox: Ret hinking Energy (In )Security  in t he United States and China .  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018."
"293" "[67] M. J.  Trombetta,  “Fueling threats: Securitization and the c hal lenges of Chinese energy policy,”   A si an Persp. , vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 183-206,  2018 ,  10.1353/apr.2018.0008 ."
"294" "[68]   U.S.  D epartment of Defense.   Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017 . Washington , DC,  U.S. A: Department of Defense, 2017.  Avai lable:  https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2017_ China_Military_Power_Report.PDF ."
"295" "[69] U.S.   Department of Defense .  Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America . Washington, DC,  U.S. A: Department of Defense, 2018. Available:   https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf>."
"296" "[70] United States Government .  National Security Strategy of the United States of America . Washington , DC,  U.S. A: The Whitehouse,  2017 . Available:  https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/1 2/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf ."
"297" "[71] E. Alden . 2018.  “ Trump: Reckless free trader or genuine protectionist? ”   Interecon. ,  vol.  53, no. 4, pp. 239-240, Jul. 2018,  10.1007/s10272-018-0756-1 ."
"298" "[ 72 ] M. Guo , Lin Lu, Liugang Sheng,  and Miaojie Yu,   “ The  day after tomorrow: E valuating  the burden of Trump's trade war,”  Asian Econ.  Pap. ,   vol.  17 ,   no. 1, pp. 101-120, Jul.  2018 ,  10.1007/s10272-018-0756-1 ."
"299" "[73] White House Office of Trade and Manufacturin g Policy .  How China’s Economic Aggression Threatens the Technologies and Intellectual Property of the United States and the World . Washington , DC,  U.S. A: The White House,  2018 . Available:  https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/FINAL-China-Technology-Report-6.18.18-P DF.pdf ."
"300" "[74] X. Qian, “Cyberspace security and  U.S. -China relations ,”  in  Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science . New York, NY,  U.S. A: ACM,  2019 ,  pp. 709-712 ."
"301" "[75] C. C. Demchak, “ China: Determin ed to dominate cyberspace and AI,”  Bull.  of  the Atom. Sci . , vol.  75 , no. 3 , pp. 99-104 , May 2019,  10.1080/00963402.2019.1604857 ."
"302" "[76] P. Bruns ,  M. Q. Tran, D. Kunz, H. Mueller, and C.  Soltmann. 2012.  “ Spillover  benefits from controll ed nuclear fusion technology - A  patent analysis . ”   World Pat. Inf . , vol.  34 , no. 4, pp. 271-278, Dec. 2012,  10.1016/j.wpi.2012.06.001 ."
"303" "[77] U.S.  D epartment  o f  E nergy .   Applications of Fusion Energy Sciences Research: Scientific Discoveries and New Technologies beyond Fusion . Washington , DC,  U.S. A:  U.S.  Department of Energy,  2015.  Available:  https://science.energy.gov/~/media/fes/fesac/pdf/2015/2101507/FINAL_FE S_NonFusionAppReport_090215.pdf ."
"304" "[78] H. Tong, Y. Cao, and J. Zhang .  “ Analysis of global nuclear power  based on  U.S. PTO's p ate nt database,”   Gaojishu Tongxin/Chin.  High Te ch. Let.,  vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 762-766, Jul.  2013 ."
"305" "[79] Information Office of the State Council.  China's Energy Conditions and Policies . Beijing : State Council,  2007 . Available:  http://en.ndrc.gov.cn/policyrelease/20 0712/P020071227502260511798.pdf ."
"306" "[8o] Chinese Academy of Sciences, “China's 'artificial s un' sets world record with 100 second steady-state high performance plasma,”  Phys.org , July  6,  2017. Available:  https://phys.org/news/2017-07-china-artific ial-sun-world-steady-state.html ."
"307" "[81] J. Li. 2015. Closing gaps to CFETR r eadiness.  P resented at the IAEA TCM 3rd DEMO Workshop, Hefei, China  [Online] .  Available:  http://www-naweb.iaea.org/napc/physics/meetings/TM49530/website/tal ks/May%2012%20Sessions/Li_J.pdf ."
"308" "[82] L.  Dawson.  The Politics and Perils of Space Exploration . Cham: Springer, 2017."
"309" "[83] U.S.  Department of Justice.   U.S. Nuclear Engineer, China General Nuclear Power Company and Energy Technology International Indicted in Nuclear Power Conspiracy against the United States . Washington, DC, U . S . A . : Department of Justice, 2016. Available:  https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-nuclear-engineer-china-general-nuclear-power-company-and- energy-technology-international ."
"310" "[84] U.S.  Department of Energy.  U.S. Policy Framework on Civil Nuclear Cooperation with China . Washington, DC , U . S . A . : US Department of Energy, 2018. Available:  https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/10/f56/US_Policy_Framework_on_Civil_Nuc lear_Cooperation_with_China.pdf ."
"311" "[85] R. O’Rourke.  China Naval Modernization: Implicati ons for U.S. Navy C apabilities⁠—B ackground and I ssues for Congress . Washington, DC , U . S . A . :  Congressional Research Service,  2018 ."
"312" "[86] American Security Project.   Fact Sheet: Chinese Nuclear Modernization . Washington , DC, U . S . A . : American Security Project. Available:  https://www.americansecurityproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Ref-0198-Ch inese-Nuclear-Modernization.pdf ."
"313" "[87] M. Brown and P. Singh .  China’s Technology Transfer Strategy: How Chinese Investments in Emerging Technology Enable a Strategic Competitor to Access the Crown Jewels of U.S. Innovation . Washington, DC , U . S . A . : Defense Innovation Unit Experimental  (DIUx), 2018."
"314" "[88] D. H.  Kiel , M. Ziv, and F. Marcell .  A Vision for Directed Energy and Electric Weapons in the Current and Future Navy .   2007 .   Available:  https://www.wired.com/images_blogs/dangerroom/files/asne_paper_a_vision_for_de_weapons.pdf."
"315" "[89] T. A. Mehlhorn . 2014.  “ National security research in pl asma physics and pulsed power: P ast, present, and future. ”  IEEE Trans. on Plas. Sci. , vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1088-1117,  May  201 4,  10.1109/tps.2014.2310468 ."
"316" "[90] G. Allison .  Destined for War: Can America and China Escape Thucydides's Trap?  New York:  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,  2017 ."
"317" "[91] C. Zhang and Xiaoyu Pu,   “ Intro duction: Can America and China e scape the Thucydides Trap? ”  J. of Chin. Pol. Sci ., vol 24, no. 1, pp.  1-9, Mar. 2019,  10.1007/s11366-019-09609-y ."
"318" "]92 ] W. Z.  Wang, 2019.  “Destined for misperception? Status dilemma and the e arl y origin of U.S.-China antagonism,”   J. of Chin. Pol. Sci. , vol. 24, no. 1,  pp. 49-65, Mar. 2019,  10.1007/s11366-018-09596-6."
"319" "[93] B. K. Yoder,   “ Uncertainty, shifting power and credible  signals in U.S.-China relations: Why the “T hucyd ides Trap” is real, but limited,” J. of Chin. Pol. Sci. , vol 24, no. 1, pp.  87–104, Mar.  2019 ,"
"320" "[94] Rand Project Air Force.  Forecasting China’s Military Spending Through 2025 . Santa Monica, CA, USA: Rand Corporation. Available:  https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_ briefs/RB162 /RAND_RB162.pdf ."
"321" "[95] ENN Group .  ENN Symposium on Compact Fusion Technologies , 19-20 April 2018, Langfang, China: Programme .  Available:  http://www.ennresearch.com /fusionsymposium2018/Programme/ ."
"322" "[96] C. Roper .  Trade Secret Theft, Industrial Espionage, and the China Threat . Boca Raton , FL, USA: CRC Press,  2014 ."
"323" "[97] W. C. Hannas, J. Mulvenon, and A. B. Puglisi .  Chinese Industrial Espionage . London: Routledge,  2015 ."
"324" "[98] R. Y. Shum. “ Heliopolitics: The international political economy of solar supply chains ,”  En . Strat. Rev. , vol.  26, 100390 , Nov.  2019, 10.1016/j.esr.2019.100390 ."
"325" "[99] J. Tirone,   “ World’s biggest science experiment seeks more time and money ,”  Bloomberg , June  15,  2016 . Available:  https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-06-15/world-s-biggest-science-exper iment-seeks-more-time-and-money ."
"326" "[100 ] H.  Elserafy,  “ Assessment of DEMO reactors for fusion power utilization ,”   Evergreen ,   vol. 5, no. 4, pp.  18-25 , Dec.  2018 ,  10.5109/2174854 ."
"327" "[101] S.  Entler,  J. Horacek, T. Dlouhy, and V. Dostal .  “A pproximation of the economy of fusion energy , ”  En . ,   vol.  152 , pp. 489-497, Jun.  2018 ,  10.1016/j."
"328" "[102] Fusion Industry Association.  Members . Available:  https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/members ."
"329" "[103] R. F.  Post ,   “ Magnetic mirror research points towards compact fusion power system. ”   Nuc. Eng. Intl. , vol. 22, no. 263, pp. 59-63, Oct.  1977 ."
"330" "[104] A.  Beall,  “Private sector companies are firing up the fusion r ace,”  Chinadialogue , September  6,  2017   Available:  https://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/10042-Private-sector-companies-are-firing-up-the-fusion-race."
"331" "[105] B. Wang,  2019.  “ CEO of TAE Technologies says they will begin commercialization of fusion by 2023, ”   Next Big Future , January  16,  2019. Available:  https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2019/01/ceo-of-tae-technologies-says-they-will-reach-commercial-fusion-by-2024.html ."
"332" "[106] ARPA-E.   ALPHA: Accelerating Low-Cost Plasma Heating and Assembly . Washington, DC, U . S . A . :  Department of Energy .  Available:  https://arpa-e.energy.gov/?q=arpa-e-programs/alpha ."
"333" "[107] J. Draper, “ Accelerating the Arrival of Fusion Energy within a Quintuple Helix Innovation Ecosystem to Address Climate Change ,”   SocArXiv, Paper  AXB 95. Available:  10.31235/osf.io/axb95 ."
"334" "[108 ] Next Big Future,  “Helion Energy raised . $ 10.9 million and has filed to raise $21 million which would be enough to build a breakeven scale fusion m achine in 2016-2017 ,”  August  18,  2015 . Available:  https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2015/08/helion-ene rgy-raised-109-million-and.html."
"335" "[109 ] R. W. Bussar, “Should Google go nuclear? Clean, cheap, nuclear p ower,”  GoogleTechTalks , November  9,  2006.  Available:  https://www.youtube.com/watc h?v=FhL5VO2NStU ."
"336" "[110 ] K. Fehrenbacher, “Nuclear fusion startup Tri Alpha Energy hits a big m ilestone,”  Greentech Media , July  10,  2017.  Available:   https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/fusion-startup-tri-alpha-energy-hits-a-big-mile stone ."
"337" "[111 ] R. Martin. “Finally, fusion takes small steps toward reality,”  MIT Technology Review ,   September  14,  2015. Available:  https://www.technologyreview.com/s/541286/finally-fusion-ta kes-small-steps-toward-reality/"
"338" "[112 ] Tri Alpha Energy,  “Former US  Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz joins Board of Directors for fusion energy l eader  Tri Alpha Energy,”  PR Newswire , May  18,  2017.   Available:  https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/former-us-energy-secretary-ernest-moniz-joins-board-of-directors-for-fusion-energy-leader- tri-alpha-energy-300459608.html ."
"339" "[113 ] A. Boyle, “ Commercial fusion ventures learn lessons about engineering and expectations ,” Geekwire. February  14 , 2018 . Available:  https://www.geekwire.com/2018/commercial-fusion-ventures-learn-lessons-engineering-expectations/ ."
"340" "[114 ] S. Hsu , private communication,  Jul. ,  2019 ."
"341" "[1 15 ] B. Wang, “ Helion Energy got funding for possible breakeven fusion device this year ,”  Next Big Future , October 1, 2018. Available:  https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2018/10/helion-energy-got-funding-for-possible-breakeven-fusion-device-this-year.html ."
"342" "[116 ] A. Rathi, “ In search of clean energy, investments in nuclear-fusion startups are heating up ,”  Quartz , September 26, 2018. Available:  https://qz.com/1402282/in-search-of-clean-energy-investments-in-nuclear-fusion-startups-are-heating-up/ ."
"343" "[117 ] K. Von Gehlen, M. Holtgrave, A.-M. Nienaber ,and  G. Schewe, “Trust in entrepreneur-venture capitalist relationships: A bilateral perspective,” in Proc. PICMET 2018 - Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology: Managing Technological Entrepreneurship: The Engine for Economic Growth, Article number 8481848, 10.23919/picmet.2018.8481848."
"344" "[118 ] M. Islam, A. Fremeth, and A. Marcus, “Signaling by early stage startups: U.S. government research grants and venture capital funding,” J. of Bus.  Vent.,  vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 35-51, 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2017.10.001."
"345" "[1 19 ] N. Jaakola, “ Carbon tax ation, OPEC and the end of oil,”  J. of Env. Econ.  and  Man. ,   vol. 94, pp. 101-117, Mar.  2019 ,  10.1016/j.jeem.2019.01.011 ."
"346" "[120 ] G. van der Meijden  and  C. Withagen,   “ Limit pricing, climate polic ies, and imperfect substitution,”  Res. and En . Econ. ,   vol. 58, p.  101118, Nov.  2019 ,  10.1016/j.reseneeco.2019.101118."
"347" "[1 21 ] E. Rebhan, “Challenges for future energy usage,”  Eur. Phys. J. , vol. 176, no. 1, pp. 53-80, Sep.  2009 ,  10.1140/epjst/e2009-01148-9 ."
"348" "[122 ] A. T. Price-Smith.   Oil, Illiberalism, and War . Cambridge ,  ma, u.s.a. : MIT Press ,  2015."
"349" "[123 ] L. G.  Ge rber,   “ The Baruch Plan  and the origins of the Cold War,”  Dipl. Hist. , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 69-96,  1982 ,  10.1111/j.1467-7709.1982.tb00364.x ."
"350" "[124 ] J. Draper and B. Bhaneja, “Fusion energy for peace building - A Trinity Test-level critical juncture,” SocArXiv, Paper MRZUA. Available: 10.31235/osf.io/mrzua."
"351" "[125 ] V. A.  Panteleev,   M. D. Segal’ ,  and A. V. Simonov, “Radiation r isk and  features of its p erception ,”  Atom.   En .,  vol.  125,  no. 4,   pp.  265-268 ,  Feb. 2019 ,  10.1007/s10512-019-00478-5 ."
"352" "[ 126 ] Y.  K im ,  M. Kim, and W.   Kim, “ Effect of the Fukushima nuclear disaster on global public acceptance of nuclear energy ,”  En.  Pol. .  vol.  61,  pp.  822-828 ,  Oct.  2013 ."
"353" "[127 ] J. C. H. Lindberg, “The nuclear cage: Path dependencies in fission and fusion innovation,” Nuc. Fut., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 46-49, 2018."
"354" "[128 ] ITER, “World’s most complex machine is 50 percent completed. Saint-Paul-lès-Durance,” 2017. Available: http://newenergytimes.com/v2/sr/iter/website/20171206-ITER-press-release.pdf."
"355" "[129] T. Rider, “Fundamental limitations on plasma fusion systems not in thermodynamic equilibrium,”  Phys. of Plas. , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1039-1046, Apr. 1997, 10.1063/1.872556 ."
"356" "[130 ] T. Pedersen,   et al. ,  2016.  “ Confirmation of the topology of the Wendelstein 7-X magnetic  field to better than 1:100,000,”   Nature Communications , vol.  7 , no. 1, p.  13493 , Dec. 2016,  10.1038/ncomms13493."
"357" "[131 ] T. Rider,   “ Is there a b ett er route to f usion?”  unpublished . Available:  http://fuelr future.com/pdfs/FusionRoute.pdf ."
"358" "[132 ] Department of Energy. 2015.  Applications of Fusion Energy Sciences Research: Scientific Discoveries and New Technologies beyond Fusion. Washington .  Washington, DC, U.S.A.: U.S. Department of Energy. Available:  https://science.energy.gov/~/media/fes/fesac/pdf/2015/2101507/FINAL_FES_NonFusionAppReport_09 0215.pdf ."
"359" "[133 ] Department of Energy Office of S cience (Fusion Energy Sciences) .  Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory Committee Report. Transformative Enabling Capabilities for Efficient Advance toward Fusion Energy .  U.S Department of Energ y: Washington, D.C.,  2018 . Available:  https://science.energy.gov/~/media/fes/fesac/pd f/2018/TEC_Report_15Feb2018.pdf ."
"360" "[1 34 ] S.  Woodruff,  et al. ,  2012.  “Path to market for compact m odular  fusion power cores,”  J. of Fus.  En . ,   vol.  3 1, no. 4, pp.  305-316, Aug. 2012,  10.1007/s10894-011-9472-6 ."
"361" "[135 ] A. Sykes,  et al. ,   “Compact fusion energy b ased on the  spherical tokamak,”  Nuc. Fus.  vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 016039,  Nov. 2017."
"362" "[13 6 ] L. Zhu, H. Liu, and X. Wang,   “ Particle confinement property in the cusp-mirror field of a compact fusion reactor ,”  Phy.  Scrip. ,  vol. 91 (9):095604,  2016 ."
"363" "[13 7 ] D. Clery,   “Dark horse scores a fusion coup,”  Science , vol.  349 , no.  6251, pp. 912-913, Aug. 2015,  10.1126/science.349.6251.912 ."
"364" "[138 ] J. Tollefson,  “MIT launches multimillion-dollar collaboration to develop fusion energy ,”  Nat . ,  vol. 555, no. 7696,   pp. 294- 295 , Mar. 2018,  10.1038/d41586-018-02966-3 ."
"365" "[139 ] N. Alexander,  et . al. ,   Fusion 2030: Roadmap for Canada .  Toronto, ON, Canada: Canadian Nuclear Society,  2017 .  Available :  https://www.cns-snc.ca/media/uploads/dir_58/Fusion-2030---Roadmap-for-Canada.pdf."
"366" "[140 ] J. Trevithick, “Skunk Works' exotic fusion reactor program moves forward with larger, more powerful design,”  The Warzone , July 19, 2019. Available: https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/29074/skunk-works-exotic-fusion-reactor-program-moves-forward-with-larger-more-powerful-design>."
"367" "[ 141 ] F. P. Adams, B. P. Bromley, and M. Moore, “Assessment of disruptive innovation in emerging energy technologies,” in  Proc. 2014 Electrical Power and Energy Conference, EPEC 2014, 7051685 , pp. 110-115. New York, NY, U.S.A.: IEEE, 2014, 10.1109/EPEC.2014.20."
"368" "[1 42 ] B. Ri hardson,  2008.  “ A  new realism: A  realistic and principled  foreign policy,”   Fo r . Aff.  87 (1):142-154."
"369" "[ 143 ] G. Christoffersen . 2015.  “ U . S . -China  relations in A sia- Pacific energy regime complexes,” i n  Conflict and Cooperation in Sino-US Relations: Change and Continuity, Causes and Cures , J-M.  F. Blanchard a nd S,  Shen  Eds. ,  pp. 257-280. New York, NY, U.S.A.: Routledge, 2015."
"370" "[144 ] G. Christoffersen,  2016.  “ The  role of C hina in  global energy governance,”  Chin.  Persp. ,  vol. 2016,   no. 2, pp. 15-24, Jun  2016 ,  10.4000/chinaperspectives.6968."
"371" "[145 ] C. F. Bergsten,   “ China and the United States: The Contest for Gl obal Economic Leadership,”  Chi. & World Econ. ,   vol.  26 , no. 5, pp.  12-37, Sep. 2018,  10.1111/cwe.12254 ."
"372" "[146 ] E. G. Carayannis and D. F.J. Campbell .  “Open innovation diplomacy and a 21st century fractal research, education and i nnovation (FREIE) e cosystem: Building on the  quadruple and quintuple helix innovation concepts and the “mode 3” knowledge p ro duction system,”  J. of the Knowl. Econ. ,   vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 327-372, Sep. 2011,  10.1007/s13132-011-0058-3 ."
"373" "[1 4 7 ] V. Nian,   “Technology p ers pectives from 1950 to 2100 and policy i mplications for th e global nuclear power industry,”  Prog.  in  Nucl.  En . ,  vol.  105,  pp. 83-98, May   2018 ,   10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.12.009 ."
"374" "[14 8 ] Q.  Perrier,  “The second French nuclear bet,”  En . Econ. , vol. 74, pp. 858-877, Aug.  2018 ,  10.1016/j.eneco.2018.07.014 ."
"375" "[149 ] M. Marinelli,   “ How to Build a ‘Beaut iful China’ in the Anthropocene,”   J. of Chin. Pol. Sci. ,  vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 365-386, Sep.  2018 ,  10.1140/epjst/e2009-01148-9 ."
"376" "[150 ] P. Xiang-Chao,   “Research on Xi Jinping's thought of ecological civilization and environment sustainable d eve lopment,”  Earth and Env. Sci. ,   vol.  153 , no.  6 , p. 062067, May  2018 ,  10.1088/1755-1315/153/6/062067"
"377" "[151 ] J. Nyman and J. Zeng,   “ Securitization in Chinese  climate and energy politics,”  Clim. Chan. ,   vol.  7 , no. 2, pp. 301-313,   Mar.  2016 ,  10.1002/wcc.387 ."
"378" "[152 ] U.S. Department of Energy.  Innovation Network for Fusion Energy . Oak Ridge, TN, U.S.A.: Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Available:  https://infuse.ornl.gov/ ."
"379" "[153 ] Fusion Industry Association.   “INFUSE Program a war ds Fusion Industry Association members grants for r esearch ,”   June 5,  2019 . Available:  https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/post/infuse-program-awards-fusion-industry-association-members-grants-for-research ."
"380" "[154 ] Wang, Qiang, Rongrong Li, and Gang He. 2018.  “Research s tatus of  nuclear power: A review,”   Ren.  and  Sust. En . Rev. ,  vol. 90, pp. 90-96,  10.1016/j.rser.2018.03.044"
