"x"
"1" "Critical review of the goals for financial literacy"
"2" "Abstract:"
"3" "Financial literacy is an emerging field that is still in a phase of transition into K-12 schools.  The importance of teaching financial literacy in schools is now highly recognized (Lusardi & Mitchell, 2014). Not only is financial literacy education implemented in many curricula around the world, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has administered a financial literacy assessment in 2012 and 2015 via their triennial Program for International Student Assessment (PISA). This sent an important message around the world about the importance of  financial literacy  in schools .  The field has not had all its parameters defined and there  is a need to identify what is meant by “financial literacy” and what are the goals of this new emerging field.  Thus,  this review seeks to  synthesiz e  and summariz e  common themes and trends among financial literacy   literature  to  shed light on the  goals and definitions  of  financial literacy. An exploration of how this field is defined within mathematics and   the goals for teaching this within the discipline of mathematics will  explored . Further, this review will explore how financial literacy  tasks are used in the mathematics   classroom and how researchers  design and implement these task s ."
"4" "Motivation problem:"
"5" "The importance of Financial Literacy Education  has been fueled  by the most recent financial crisis  in  2008 . This l ed many of scholars to recognize how financial literacy education can contribute to sustainable economic development and individuals’ economic well beings (Arthur, 2012). It maintains that financial literacy is a competency combined from life skills, thinking skills, financial knowledge and empowerment (Arthur, 2012). Scholars have since argued that this competency should be integrated in  K-12  curriculum as financial struggles have been on the rise with an increasing number of international financial crises (Arthur 2012).  With these struggles, there has been an increase in demand for financial education in hopes of addressing these financial crises by educating citizens to make more sound financial decisions. As stated in the Journal of Consumer Affairs, “. . . young people are leaving school without the basic skills to manage their personal financial affairs, putting them at a high risk for not being able to plan responsibly for their financial  future”( Howlett,  Kees , & Kemp, 2006, p. 240). The importance of teaching financial literacy in schools is now highly recognized (Lusardi & Mitchell, 2014). Not only is financial literacy education implemented in many curricula around the world, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has administered a financial literacy assessment in 2012 and 2015 via their triennial Program for International Student Assessment (PISA). This sent an important message around the world about the importance of FL in  schools. The  Programme for International Student  Assessment( PISA) is an international survey which evaluates the skills and knowledges of 15 -year- old students from participating countries across mathematics, science, and reading. In 2012, the PISA added a Financial Literacy as new discipline to be evaluated during their assessment (OECD, 2012). With this demand for financial  education,  we must examine the role that this new proposed subject area could have in our mathematic s  curriculum.  In this review , we will explore (1) how financial literacy education is defined, (2) what are the goals of financial tasks in mathematics"
"6" "What is F inancial  L iteracy :"
"7" "Literacy is a concept that can be applied to many subjects , for example:  science literacy, mathematical literacy, reading literacy.   As  Scribner ( 1984) describes ,  in spite of ongoing efforts to increase literacy rates, few have been able to say  or define  what is meant by  “ literacy ” . The concept of literacy is difficult because it entails different meaning through various social, political, cultural, and historical contexts. For instance, what it means to be literate has changed over time .   S c r i b ner( 1984)  illustrates this with an example;  literacy in 1930 meant 4 th - grade writing skills whereas literacy in earlier times meant the ability to write your name. The definition of literacy changes through time and social setting. The definition of literacy is fluid through social, cultural and political context. (Sc rib ner 1984) .  This  ambi guous definition   of  literacy is  also present   in the literature about  financial literacy. Even if there is no overarching consensus about the formal definition, many researchers belonging to different  fields ( economics, social studies, education, and mathematics) have tried to define a financially literate citizen."
"8" "Financial literacy education has been defined over time as a set of financial  knowledges  and  behaviors  (Huston 2010). For instance, Hogarth (2002) described three consistent themes that emerged from the literature to define individuals who are financially literate:"
"9" "1) are knowledgeable, educated and informed on the issues of managing money and assets, including banking, investments, credit, insurance and taxes"
"10" "2) understand the basic concepts of managing money and assets;"
"11" "3) use that knowledge and understanding to plan and implement financial decisions"
"12" "According to the  OECD ( 2017) financial literacy is knowledge and understanding of financial concepts and the skills, motivation, and confidence to apply such knowledge and understanding  in order to  make effective  decisions  across a range of financial contexts to improve financial well-being of individuals and society to enable participation in economic life. Their definition puts a strong emphasis on the processes associated with confronting a problem in a real-world context   ( Sawatski  2016).   Giving our students the opportunity to develop this competency will empower them to not only develop their understanding of debts, saving and budgeting but allow them to reflect on their own consumption, resources, and independence and how their choices affect society, the environment and the world.  It is important to recognize that financial literacy education is not only concerned with personal finance, it is a  competency  that  also  has societ al  and environmental implications. Financial literacy , as a discipline,   has a  goal for creating financial literate citizens. This combination of financial skills and behaviors define what makes a “financially literate” individual, however there are different goals that have emerged across authors researching financial literacy ."
"13" "Theoretical perspective:"
"14" "Gutiérrez ( 2013) discusses the recent sociopolitical turn in mathematics education that has occurred over the last decade.  This shift  is  in reference to  a growing body of research conducted in mathematics education whose theoretical perspective  consider  “knowledge, power and identity as interwoven and stemming from social  discourse” ( Gutiérrez  2013, p.40).  This sociopolitical turn deals with two main ideas, identify and power ( Gutiérrez ,  2013).  These guiding perspectives seek to transform mathematics education  into more socially just practices.  Gutiérrez  ( 2013)  identifies three of these perspectives: critical theory, critical race theory, and post-structuralism .  Based on some of the literature surrounding financial literacy  education ( Arthur 2012 ,  Atkinson 2012,  Sawatzski  2016,  Pinto  & Coulson 2011)  it appears that “critical theory” is a guiding perspective  authors in financial literacy research are  prescrib ing  to. Critical theory, as  Gutiérrez  ( 2013)  discusses ,  is  inspired  by Freire’s critical pedagogy.  Freire ( 1968) argues that education should teach students to view the world critically, he calls this type of thinking critical consciousness. Critical consciousness encourages individuals to effect change in the world through political action and social critique.  Arthur ( 2012)  argues  that financial literacy education can promote this sense of critical consciousness.  It informs students about the way the world works and empowers them by giving them the tools to “manage” in this world. If they understand the way this system works, they  are able to  affect change and fight against the oppression ."
"15" "Goals for F inancial Literacy :"
"16" "To frame how the literature defines these skills and knowledges,  we need to define the goals for this type of literacy. Scribner provides three metaphors for literacy that outline the goals of literacy: literacy as adaptation, literacy as power, and literacy as a state-of- grace ( Scribner 1984).  These three definitions of literacy can be used as a lens to explore financial literacy, however, in line with our theoretical framing of  Gutiérrez ( 2013), adapting  DeBoer ( 2000) goals for science literacy would be more suitable. The goals described  DeBoer (2000)  framework are more specific and less general, thus, allowing me to highlight what authors in the field are saying in a more specific manner.  I will build off  and adapt  DeBoer   (2000) proposed “goals for the teaching and learning of science literacy”.  This framework  established 9 different perspectives o f  the  goals   science literacy throughout history. After having reviewed the literature surround financial literacy education,  there is a clear link between  two ( 2) of the goals   presented in the DeBoer   (2000) framework that can be linked with those prominent in financial literacy literature. The goals for financial literacy  will give me a lens to identify the goals of certain skills or knowledges targeted in  mathematic s . I will use two  ideas ( l iteracy for everyday  living ,  l iteracy for citizenship) from  DeBoer ( 2000) for analyzing what different authors define are the goals of financial tasks and what defines a “financial literate” individual. The three ideas that I will use for my lens are that of:"
"17" "(1)    Teaching and Learning About Science That Has Direct Application to Everyday Living."
"18" "DeBoer   (2000) explains that the goal of learning about science is that knowledge of science is useful for everyday living. Science should be taught with a focus on how students can use their understanding of scientific concepts and principles in daily life. I will reframe this goal and apply it to financial literacy by calling  it “ Teaching and learning about financial literacy that has a direct application to every day living” . The idea of teaching financial literacy in mathematics  in order to  see the direct application to everyday living can be seen from several  authors ( Attard ,  2018 ;  Bush , 2012;   Sawatzki ,  2016 )"
"19" "(2)    Teaching Students to be Informed Citizens."
"20" "DeBoer ( 2000) discusses the goal of literacy in terms of promoting citizenship through science education  to  develop informed citizens who are prepared to deal intelligently with science-related social issues. As  DeBoer( 2000) discusses the success of a democratic society depends on active citizen participation. I will reframe this for financial literacy and define it as “Teaching Financial literacy to create informed citizens” . This kind of goal for financial literacy can be seen in the work of (Arthur 2012 ;  Blue 2018 ;  Silva & Valer o,  2018)  Based on the literature,  t here is a reoccurring theme in the literature regarding financial literacy with a focus on social  justice  and  citizenship  ( Arthur 2012 ;   Atkinson ,  2012 ; &   Sawatzski  2016) .  These authors argue the importance of financial literacy to imbue elements of social justice  and forming “critical citizens” ."
"21" "Theme 1:  Teaching and learning about financial literacy that has a direct application to every day living"
"22" "The idea of classroom mathematics not being useful in everyday living is a notion shared by many who have been through the education system.  Boaler  (1998) identified a growing concern in mathematics education  which  is that students are not able to use school-learned mathematics in real-world mathematical situations. Students often feel mathematics, as traditionally taught, have no connections to real life, and there has been a call for by curriculum developers ( Bosshardt  &  Walstad  2014 ) for more mathematics curriculum to solve more real-life and authentic problems (Wiest   & Vega ,  2016) .   The  goal of  incorporati ng  financial literacy in mathematics education  can be to  fuse  the disconnect that students face during traditional mathematics teaching. The goal of financial literacy in mathematics could  present students situations that are relevant to their real - world  lived experience and show them the value of learning this type of content for the “real world” applications (Attard, 2016; Batty, Collins, &  Odders -White, 2015; Wiest   & Vega ,  2016;  Sawatzki , 2016). Specific recommendations made by (Attard, 2016 ;   Sawatski , 2016) call for more mathematical tasks that use of money and financial mathematics embedded into realistic and authentic problems.   Attard ( 2018) mentions that  financial literacy tasks must be driven by student interests and be authentic in order to help improve  students  engagement with mathematics, as proven in her study.    Sawatzski ( 2016) suggests that  financial literacy  mathematic al  tasks  should  be authentic, imaginable, and useful ."
"23" "In the  Sawatz s ki ( 2016) ,  study, in which data were collected from 14 teachers and more than 300 grade 5 and 6 students , used financial literacy task as an educational intervention in the mathematics classroom.   Her results  found that students viewed  financial literacy  task s  as challenging but  they saw the value  realistic contexts  as  useful “when you grow  up”( p.15). The students reported about their process of learning through problem - solving as valuable and they preferred task that were relevant to their everyday observation. The findings from the student s  reveal that they enjoyed the challenge presented in the tasks and were able to see the merit of these tasks beyond just in their school. The implications for practice are that teachers are best suited to modify existing task to their local setting to promote more  authentic  and  accessible  tasks."
"24" "The one - size-fit s -all model of task design is not ideal  when incorporating financial literacy into mathematics. The tasks must be authentic and situated to local settings to be effective .  One examples of   such  a task  can be illustrated by  Sawatz s ki  (2016) when designing tasks for her intervention, she went to the local shopping areas to understand the local life of Darwin, Australia. One of the local entertainment venues, offered Laser Tag. She researched the pricing at the two local locations offering  l aser tag and designed a mathematical task using the real prices of these two locations to create a mathematical ta s k ( Sawatz s ki , 2016).  The tasks compared the price per game for the two locations as well as the rebates, discounts and memberships they offer for multiple games ( Sawatzski , 2016) . I n her task design, she sought to understand local life, create an authentic task situated in reality and that is relatable to  students  everyday life and lived experiences."
"25" "Thus,  the goal of financial literacy, can act as knowledge that connect s  the real world with “in-class” mathematics and provide students the opportunity to use acquired knowledge in school in the real world.  This can then provide them with “power”  and knowledge  of how everyday transactions work and shape their identi ties  by developing their abilities to critically reflect  on financial situation .   This critical reflection is done through everyday financial choices that they are presented with through the form of mathematical tasks  Criticism of existing mathematics curriculum as pointed out by  Boaler   (1998) show the disconnect between school mathematics and the real world.  Students are going  through  the  school ing  without the basic knowledge of taxes, mortgage, insurance, cell phone plans, and financial contracts . This  type of knowledge can also imbue with students, elements of critical consciousness by framing and shaping tasks that  reflect  real - world inequalities or realities."
"26" "Theme 2:  Teaching Financial literacy to create informed citizens"
"27" "DeBoer ’s ( 2000)  goal for science literacy as informed citizens is described as  “citizens need to have an  awareness  of these issues, an u nderstanding  of the way decisions regarding them are made in society, and the skills to i nvestigate  them on their own so they can intelligently influence policy that affects  them  and their  community ” (p. 592). This type of discourse  surrounding citizenship  is seen throughout the literature in financial  literacy ( Arthur ,  2012 ;  Blue ,  2018 ;   Henning ,  2017 ;   Masnan ,  2016 ;  Silva & Valero   2016  ) .  The word “citizen” is very often cited in the literature as  a goal of financial literacy to create financially literate citizen s .  Looking  at the Ontario Curriculum, you can see that their mandate for teaching financial literacy is pushing this notion “ Ontario students with the knowledge and skills needed for responsible financial decision making in the twenty-first century is also to equip them for success as involved and responsible  citizens ” (Ontario Ministry of Education, 2010, p. 2)"
"28" "This notion of creating financial literate citizens is prominent  in the literature  and  authors  promote the idea that to become active participants in our economy, citizens must be financially literate.   Blue ( 20 18 ) stresses that the importance of financial literacy is that it can provide students the tools to become concerned and reflective citizens. This idea of  being financially literate, as  Henning ( 2017) argues , is  “critical to citizenship” and it is crucial aspect of citizenship.   PISA ( 2015)  argues that  it ' s not only  about  creating informed citizens but its of creating critical conscious citizens.  Financial literacy should aim to produce critical citizens endowed with a “radical habitus” who can more consciously and responsibly alter the conditions that support our actions and  acculturation  ( Crossley, 2003) .  Thus, this notion of critical citizens through financial literacy provides opportunity to  emancipate  the oppressed and to overcome  in equalities that exist in this world."
"29" "In line with the sociopolitical turn in mathematics   educations   ( Gutiérrez ,  2013) ,  authors  in financial literacy   seek to  transform mathematics  to become  more socially just.  Their emphasis on real - world application and illuminating existing  injustices help  promote the notion of emancipatory mathematics.  For example, the author s  Pinto and  Coulson ( 2011) argue that without social justice “ f inancial literacy education is reduced to replicating inequities and continuing to marginalize already vulnerable low socioeconomic populations”   (p.26) .  This narrative of including social justice and the impact of financial literacy education on marginalized group act ing  as a tool for empowerment  in salient in the literature .   Silva &  Valero ( 2018) explore Brazilian  h igh  s chool textbooks and explore the power that tasks from textbooks have and how tasks are framed to promote “good citizen behavior”.  O ne task that was analyzed  in these textbooks  presented a mathematics situation about water use but included information such as “do not leave the faucet leaking, it can cause water waste of approximately 50 lit er s of water per day”   (Silva & Valero 2018). They conclude that tasks have the power to go beyond mathematics have the power to govern people. The tasks that were analyzed promot ed  good citizen values and acted in line with government regulations that outline good behavior. These textbooks task s  were about politics, culture, and power, and task were designed in a way to highlight and reflect current government regulation on citizenship and morality and ways of  life ( Silva & Valero 2018) . This highlights the political power that textbooks possess."
"30" "A view of financial literacy through the lens  of critical  theory   is  warranted since authors have argued that it provides   students  the tools and freedom to develop their own critical consciousness to affect change in the  world ( Arthur  2012 ) .  Freire ( 1968)  proposes  that education should teach students to view the world critically, he calls this type of thinking critical consciousness. Critical consciousness encourages individuals to effect change in the world through political action and social critique.   It informs students about the way the world works and empowers them by giving them the tools to “manage” in this world. If they understand the way this system works, they  are able to  affect change and fight against the oppression. However,  Arthur ( 2012 ) argues that too often, financial literacy education promote s  the  individualization  of economic risks and autonomy of the consumer over that of developing critical citizens   (Arthur ,   2012 ).   T he norm in financial literacy programs is a neo-liberal form of financial literacy  education which promotes individual consumerism without concern with the wider political  sphere  ( Arthur ,  2012) . Many existing financial literacy education programs make a claim to promote not only personal money management but also improving citizens’ civic responsibility, civic equality, and political  engagement ( Arthur ,   2012 ). The role of civic financial literacy is to teach students to be responsible consumers and improve the economy through their self-interested civic consumption.   Arthur ( 2012 ) however critiques these ideas of an idealistic financial literacy education that is being proposed and pushes for a different perspective when it comes to establishing the parameters of this discipline.  He calls for critical financial literacy to help promote citizens to become what he  calls, “ consumer-citizens”. This idea follows the school of thought of critical pedagogy by  Freire ( 1968), which  Arthur ( 2012 ) calls  critical financial literacy education.  He says that it should support students in “analyzing and enacting different articulations of freedom and responsibility” ( Biesta  2011). Critical financial education should support critical citizens to not only discuss how to “purchase a cell phone plan but also why certain economic choices are created and who benefits from the particular choices we  face” ( Arthur ,   2012 )."
"31" "This type of  dialogue  and social discourse  is crucial to promoting critical citizens by having them question and understand how oppressive the existing systems are and to begin a dialogue around concrete  actions. ( Arthur  2012 ). The critical financial literacy education should encourage students to think for themselves and question how they can actively and collectively recreate the social world (Arthur ,   2012 ).  In order to  support this type of dialogue in classroom and to support critical and active citizenship,  Arthur ( 2012 ) calls for a more open-ended approach to financial literacy curriculum. Th is type of curricular approach  would give students the opportunity to develop a critical stance by encouraging them to view economic and financial issues from a variety of perspectives and to encourage critical debate   (Arthur ,   2012 ).  F inancial literacy is more than creating better consumers; it is about citizenship and the development of civic disposition. Civic disposition includes going beyond self-determination by being critical toward choices made. People constantly call upon their financial knowledge  in order to  make decisions for the collective as well as the individual. Thus,  Arthur ( 2012 ) says that financial literacy advocates should not only be concerned with the financial literacy and illiteracy of students but, enable students to develop an understanding of the existing economic system that promotes “alienation, insecurity, and exploitation” and to collectively alter this economic system."
"32" "Conclusion:"
"33" "Financial literacy is rapidly being recogni z ed as an essential skill and the demand for financial education has been seen around the world as many countries have begun adapting financial literacy in their curriculum (Atkinson 2012). Financial literacy education is a new and emerging field that is  still in the process of being integrated into K-12 schools .  With this demand for financial education, we  reviewed the literature to explore the trends in  the  definitions and goals for this new discipline. We  uncovered  two different themes among the literature for the goals for financial literacy.  First,  teaching and learning about financial literacy that has a direct application to every day living  and t eaching  f inancial literacy to create informed citizens ."
"34" "Financial literacy as a direct application of every day living saw that financial literacy  can act as knowledge that connects the real world with “in-class” mathematics  and erase the narrative that classroom mathematics are not useful for real life. Further, within this goal for financial literacy, we can p rovide students the opportunity to  explore real - life financial situations through the lens of mathematics . This can then provide them with power and knowledge of how everyday  living  work s in the financial world. The goal is to  shape  their  understanding  of the financial landscape  by developing their abilities to critically reflect on financial situation . This type of knowledge can be transferred through tasks which are situated in authentic contexts that are driven by student interest  as a way to  promote student engagement  with mathematics ."
"35" "Financial literacy to create informed citizens is the second goal for financial literacy identified in this review. In the literature, there is a prominent emphasis on creating financially literate citizens as a goal .  This lens of financial literacy promotes the idea of students  become active participants in our economy  and  provid ing them to  the tools to become concerned and reflective citizens. PISA (2015)  argues that  it ' s not only  about  creating informed citizens but its of creating critical conscious citizens.  this notion of critical citizens through financial literacy provides opportunity to emancipate the oppressed and to overcome  in equalities that exist in this world.  Arthur (2012)  proposes a new framework called critical financial literacy which pushes  for a more critical approach to this domain by advocating for less focus on the individualistic nature of the discipline and pushes for a curriculum which  promotes critical consciousness.  Thus, this notion of critical citizens through financial literacy provides opportunity to emancipate the oppressed and to overcome  in equalities that exist in this world."
"36" "This field is still an emerging one and we have yet to see the impacts of this type of educational reform on the global  economy,  but scholars have argued that it is an essential skill to develop to become an active participant in our increasingly globalized world."
"37" "Limitations of this review:"
"38" "I have review approximately  twenty( 20) articles and have attempted to draw themes that emerge from the literature. Many articles explore pre-service teachers’ perceptions, teacher education programs, and pre- and post-test financial literacy intervention on  student’s  knowledge. This limits the potential arguments made in this review since I am drawing on several research studies conducted with students and teachers and exploring their results to draw conclusion about  their goals and definitions of financial literacy . This meant, exploring their  context of their research design ,  guiding perspectives, research questions, and implications   in order to  draw conclusions about their intentions and recommendations  for the field .  Further, the lens I chose was based on my interpretation and analysis of the literature. There is an argument to be made to have chosen any of  Scribner’s ( 1984)’s  goals for literacy and one of the limitations of this review is my hand-picked choice and adaptation of DeBoer(2000)’s framework. I could have also put  Gutiérrez ( 2013) sociopolitical turn in education as a more focal point of discussion given the nature of many of the articles I have read."
"39" "Given more time,  I would like  a more thorough review of the literature would be warranted that would explore more deeply those few articles that discuss task design principles. Since this is a new field of education, more and more research papers that discuss task design will be written, thus allowing for a more throughout exploration of this topic.   One of the implications of this kind of review, is that of the teacher practitioner. Much of this review is written with an academic focus and I am calling for a more teacher-friendly summary and recommendations for financial literacy.  Future work that would explore include going more in - depth about best practices for task design in financial literacy mathematics with concrete examples would be better suited for a practitioner’s audience. There is a need for future work that would spark the transition of financial literacy outside of the academic circles and promote its integration in classrooms through workshops, conference presentations, or teacher education."
"40" "References:"
"41" "Arthur, C. (2012). \"Consumers or critical citizens? Financial literacy education and freedom. Critical Education.\"  Critical Education   3 : 25."
"42" "Atkinson, A. and F.-A. Messy (2012). Measuring Financial Literacy, OECD :  1-73."
"43" "Attard, C. (2018). \"Financial literacy: Mathematics and money improving student engagement.\"  Australian Primary Mathematics Classroom   23 (1): 9-12."
"44" "Batty, M., et al. (2015). \"Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Financial Education on Elementary School Students' Knowledge, Behavior, and Attitudes.\"  Journal of Consumer Affairs   49 (1): 69-96."
"45" "Blue, L. E., et al.  (2018). \"Exploring the classroom practices that may enable a compassionate approach to financial literacy education.\"  Mathematics Education Research Journal   30 (2): 143-164."
"46" "Boaler , J. (1998). \"Open and Closed Mathematics: Student Experiences and Understandings.\"  Journal for Research in Mathematics Education   29 (1): 41-62."
"47" "Bosshardt , W., &amp;  Walstad , W. (2014). National standard for financial literacy: Rationale and"
"48" "content. The Journal of Economic Education, 45(1), 63-70. doi:10.1080/00220485.2014.859963"
"49" "Brown, N. and K. Ferguson (2017). \"Teaching Financial Literacy  With  Max and Ruby.\"  Childhood Education   93 (1): 58-65."
"50" "Bush, S., et al. (2012).  Invest in Financial Literacy ."
"51" "DeBoer, George E. (2000) \"Scientific literacy: Another look at its historical and contemporary meanings and its relationship to science education reform.\" Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching 37, no. 6 p.582-601."
"52" "Freire, P. (1968). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Bloomsbury USA Academic."
"53" "Howlett, E.,  Kees , J., & Kemp, E. (2008). The role of self-regulation,  future  orientation, and financial knowledge in long-term financial decisions. Journal of   Consumer Affairs, 42, 2. p.223(20). Retrieved February 22, 2009"
"54" "Guidelines for Assessment and Instruction in Mathematical Modeling Education (GAIMME)."
"55" "2016. Consortium of Mathematics and Its Applications (COMAP), Bedford, MA, and"
"56" "Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, PA.  http://www.siam.org/reports/gaimme.php"
"57" "Gutiérrez, Rochelle. \"The sociopolitical turn in mathematics education.\" Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 44, no. 1 (2013): 37-68."
"58" "Go, C. G.,  Varcoe , Karen., Feng, Tina., Pho, Wilson., Choi, Laura. (2012). \"Money savvy youth: Evaluating the effectiveness of financial education for fourth and fifth graders.\"  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco: Community Development   Working Paper 2012-02 ."
"59" "Henning, M. B. (2017). \"Elementary Preservice Teachers' and Teacher Educators' Perceptions of Financial Literacy Education.\"  Social Studies, The   108 (4): 163-173."
"60" "Hogarth, J. M. (2002). \"Financial literary and family & consumer sc i ences.\"  Journal of Family and Consumer Sciences   94 (1): 14-28."
"61" "Huston, S. J. (2010). \"Measuring Financial Literacy.\"  Journal of Consumer Affairs   44 (2): 296-316."
"62" "Lusardi, A. (2015). \"Financial Literacy Skills for the 21st Century: Evidence from PISA.\"  Journal of Consumer Affairs   49 (3): 639-659."
"63" "Masnan , A. H. and A. A.  Curugan  (2016).  Financial Education Program for Early Childhood Education ."
"64" "OECD (2017), \"What do 15-year-olds really know about money?\", PISA in Focus, No. 72,"
"65" "OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/21dc1a9a-en."
"66" "Pinto,  L.,   &  E .,  Coulson ( 2012)  Social  j ustice and the  g ender  p olitics of  f inancial  l iteracy  e ducation. Vol. 9, 2012."
"67" "Michael Collins, J. and E.  Odders -White (2015). \"A Framework for Developing and Testing Financial Capability Education Programs Targeted to Elementary Schools.\"  Journal of Economic Education   46 (1): 105-120. Pinto, Laura, and Elizabeth Coulson.  Social Justice and the Gender Politics of Financial Literacy Education.  Vol. 9, 2012."
"68" "Sawatzki , C. (2017). \"Lessons in financial literacy task design: authentic, imaginable, useful.\"  Mathematics Education Research Journal   29 (1): 25-43."
"69" "Scribner, Sylvia. (1984) \"Literacy in three metaphors.\" American journal of education 93, no. 1 (1984): 6-21"
"70" "Sherraden , M. S., et al.  (2011). \"Financial Capability in Children: Effects of Participation in a School-Based Financial Education and Savings Program.\"  Journal of Family and Economic Issues   32 (3): 385-399."
"71" "Silva, M. and P. Valero (2018).  Brazilian High School Textbooks: mathematics and students' subjectivity ."
"72" "Suiter, M. and B. T.  Meszaros  (2005). \"Teaching about saving and investing in the elementary and middle school grades.\"  Social Education   69 : 92+."
"73" "Valero, P. (2017). Mathematics for all, economic growth, and the making of the citizen-worker."
"74" "Wiest, L. R. and S. Vega (2016). \"Teaching Middle-Grades Mathematics Through Financial Literacy AU - Crawford- Ferre , Heather Glynn.\"  Kappa Delta Pi Record   52 (2): 79-82."
