Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.6

Pp. 65-77

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations in Enhancing Teaching Practices: Teachers’
Perceptions and Use of Learner-centered Approach in EFL Classrooms
Mustapha BOUDJELAL
Department of English
Abd Elhamid Ibn Badis-Mostaganem University, Algeria

Abstract
Undeniably, the realm of teaching English as a foreign language still embraces active research that
continuously looks for approaches and methods which may contribute to a more efficient instruction
of the target language. These theoretical foundations enable the instructor to appropriately
implement the outlined approach along its salient features to achieve the desired outcomes. Despite
this tight rapport, teachers of English at the University of Mostaganem tend to rely on their
common-sense teaching practices that are mainly informed by their experience of teaching EFL.
The gap between the two extremes theory and practice, the premise of this paper, may be widened
as teachers do not develop accurate and scientific understandings of certain pedagogical concepts,
in this case, learner-centeredness as agreed on by professional academics, let alone to apply it along
its proper standards. The pedagogical sequel of such misunderstanding mainly relate to random
references to both teacher and learner-centered approaches in classroom teaching practices. The
study via a detailed teachers’ questionnaire revealed that teachers of English, in addition to the
cursory understandings they develop in relation to the very meaning of a learner-centered approach,
tend to eschew developing learners’ metacognitive skills in their teaching practices. Most
importantly, they are likely to rely on traditional ways of assessment instead of authentic
frameworks, a cardinal feature within the current paradigm.
Keywords: Authentic assessment, constructivism, learner-centered approach, metacognition,
teacher-centered approach
Cite as: BOUDJELAL, M.(2019) The Significance of Theoretical Foundations in Enhancing
Teaching Practices: Teachers’ Perceptions and Use of Learner-centered Approach in EFL
Classrooms. Arab World English Journal, May 2019 Chlef University International Conference
Proceedings. 65-77. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.6

65

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

Introduction
Teaching English as a foreign language has never been a static and rigid practice whereby one
approach fits every contextual variable. On the contrary, the history of EFL teaching has known
several teaching paradigms nurtured by different schools of thought. The flexibility of the debated
practice coped with the changes the world has witnessed, namely the technological boom which
altered the very meaning of teaching English in the 21st century. Given that the witnessed
metamorphosis required learners’ autonomy, a learner-centered approach has been adopted to
refine the nature of learning and as well as the roles of the main pedagogical agents.
The Significance of Theory for Practice
An effective teaching practice necessitates establishing of a tight rapport between theoretical
grounds and practical platforms. This is evident in the very nature of theory whose definition goes
as follows: “a theory is an organized body of concepts and principles intended to explain a
particular phenomenon’’ (Leedy & Ormrod, 2005). This citation lucidly underscores the
significance of theory in relation to different life practices be they in scientific laboratories,
educational settings, or ordinary life routines. Most importantly, its cardinal role springs from its
explanatory mechanisms which are required to understand the subject at hand (Johnson &
Christensen, 2007). Following the same line of thought, the universality of theories with regard to
different fields of study is another argument to establish its legacy in teaching practices.
Despite the fact that theoretical foundations are needed for heterogeneous research
practices, a contract between natural sciences and social sciences is worth an explanation. Thus,
while the former displays approximately fixed theoretical frameworks that stem from clear –cut
standards, the latter displays an unstable nature that accounts for contextual variables and as such
opens room for various options of interpretation processes. By contrast to natural science whose
theories are approximately fixed, social sciences comprise competing theories and multiple
theoretical perspectives which do not share the same consensus (Anfara & Mertz, 2006). Most
importantly, educational research denies the fallacy of a well-established unified theory of
education. On the contrary, theories differ since they echo divergent schools of thought, co-exit
along oppositions and contradictions. These qualities make theories in social science and
educational research context-bound.
Learner-centered Learning
The metamorphosis of the realm of education, witnessed over the past years, did not flip the roles
of both teachers and learners only, but it redefined the very mechanisms of teaching practices,
touching namely on the construction of knowledge in the classroom, the rapport between the two
main agents, metacognition, collaborative learning and assessment. The discussed shift gave birth
to a learner-centered learning. Barr & Tagg (1995) elucidate the nature of the new paradigm as
they contrast between an instruction paradigm and a learning paradigm. While the former depicts
the process of transferring knowledge to the students, the latter alludes to learners’ discovery and
construction of their knowledge.
Distinguishing Features of Learner-centered Learning
The new paradigm of learning and teaching- which initiated a shift at multiple levels- displays
certain features that distinguish it from previous approaches to English language teaching. Johnson
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

66

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

et al. (1991) stress the fact that this metamorphosis has altered cardinal aspects of the whole
process of learning such as the very concept of knowledge, aims of learning and pedagogical
relationships. These traits mainly relate to knowledge construction, creativity, metacognition,
collaborative work, the rapport that brings both the teacher and the learners together, and authentic
assessment frameworks, to boot.
To begin with, the new paradigm stressed the significance of knowledge development, but
at the same time, redefined the route teachers and learners were accustomed to take when chasing
it. The perspective, adapted to knowledge, sanctifies learners’ prior knowledge and its essence in
organizing and representing new information (Murphy & Alexander, 2000). Most importantly, the
fabric of classroom knowledge is no longer solely owned by the teacher as its provider and
controller. On the contrary, learners have become co-creators and discoverers of knowledge in the
learning environment As such; the purpose of education, which in its turn embraced a certain
metamorphosis, shifted to developing students’ competencies (McCombs & Whistler, 1997).
The constructivist perspective, adopted by a learner-centered approach, emphasises the coconstruction of knowledge within a social group (s) and along collaboration mechanisms. In
relation to this, classrooms constitute a social environment where every learner may contribute to
the fabric of knowledge. Thus, the discussed approach downplays the sole reliance on lecturing,
which is believed to disregard the social essence of learning, and as such supports collaboration
which provides learners the opportunity to learn from classmates, and most importantly, to
acquire certain skills necessary for outside classroom settings, too.
A learner-centered approach underscores learners’ autonomy since it stresses the
importance of metacognitive skills along the learning processes. This practice of self- reflection is
believed to create a learning setting that fosters learners’ taking responsibility over their learning.
By the same token, the afore-mentioned dexterity would allow learners to monitor their learning
process (Darling-Hammond, et al., 2008). Within this cognitive vista, the success of a learner may
be measured in relation to certain features such as learners’ engagement in their learning activity,
the ability to manage thinking processes, interrogating learning practices, and most importantly,
to attain a stage of responsible learners (Lambert & McCombs, 2000).
Another salient feature of a learner-centered approach relates to the rapport that brings both
the teacher and the learners together in English language classes. Relationship building is highly
advantageous since it develops among the involved agents the sense of cooperation, teamwork and
many other pedagogical boons. By contrast, within a teacher-centered approach, the two main
pedagogical agents used to occupy distinguished roles. The former being the controller of the
classroom and the latter being the recipient of knowledge. The distance between the teacher and
the learner had been among the criteria of conventional understandings of quality teaching.
However, within the current paradigm, the rapport had been redefined. In todays’ settings, the
learner is the partner of the teacher. This flexibility would allow the teacher to develop an
understanding about learners’ characteristics that enable them to manage an effective instruction.
Most importantly, this sociable fluidity would give the learners a say in classroom decision
making.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

67

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

Due to the significance of assessment in any learning process, it has accompanied many
approaches to teaching English as a foreign language. Howbeit, within the discussed pedagogical
vista, authenticity has been the most distinguishing factor. To shift away from paper and pencil
exams, this trait merges along classroom activities to generate learners’ motivation and
engagement (National Research Council, 1999). Authenticity is believed to be clearly identified
along performance assessment, a practice processed along certain activities, which stress learners’
demonstration of certain performance skills along pre-determined quality standards. The targeted
assessment may achieve effectiveness along teachers’ continuous search for ways of designing
meaningful assessment frameworks.
Methodological Framework
This study had been motivated by the author’s modest experience of teaching English at the
University of Mostaganem, an experience that is continuously open to improvement and
enhancement. By means of discussing teaching practices with colleagues, certain pedagogical
anomalies had been identified. The main one being that teaching practices are- most of the time
more informed by teachers’ experiences in teaching the language ( common sense) than by
theoretically solid foundations. The outcome of this- the rationale of the study- being teachers
misunderstanding certain pedagogical concepts – in this case a learner-centered approach and,
most importantly, random teaching practices along the shadow of a teacher-centered approach.
The Study Sample
The participants of this study were twenty teachers of English from the University of Mostaganem
(Department of English). The teachers involved both sexes (males and females) and represented
varied age categories. These participants had different teaching experiences (7-22 years of
service). Their specialties were also varied including civilization, didactics literature, and
psychology, among other fields. The table 1 showcases the sample of this study:
Table 1. The study sample
Gender
18 females
Age
25-30 (years old)
7
Teaching experience

2 males
30-40 (years old)
13

5-10 years
5
Specialty
Literature
Civilization
Educational psychology
Phonetics
Linguistics
Didactics
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

10-20 years
15
3
3
6
2
3
3
68

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

Teachers’ Questionnaire
The conducted study referred to a detailed questionnaire administered to the teachers. This
methodological instrument had been designed on the basis of extensive readings in relation to the
main qualities of a learner- centered approach. It embraced different sections, each one aiming at
covering a particular aspect of the educational theory being debated. These sections comprised
some open-ended questions whose purpose was to gather qualitative data. They also included
statements which can be approved or falsified, a means that allowed the researcher to gauge certain
understandings and misconceptions of pedagogical practices.
Section One: Teachers’ Attitudes towards Education Theories and Teaching Practices
The Rapport between Theory and Practice
The first section of the questionnaire aimed at exploring teachers’ attitudes towards theories and
their significance in relation to their teaching practices, with the focus being on the theoretical
foundations of a learner-centered learning. The first question administered to the interviewed
teachers related to the significance of theory for teaching practices. The results are displayed in
table 2:
Table 2. Teachers’ attitudes about the significance of theory for teaching practices
Statements
Percentage
The superiority of practice over theory
The importance of theories in teaching
practices
Supporting
teaching
practices
along
theoretical frameworks

10%
90%
80%

The minority of the teachers (10%) argued for the superiority of practice over theory made it clear
in the ensuing comment: ‘It (practice) is more effective than learning more about the theory’. Most
of the teachers (90%) claimed the cardinal role theories play in the teaching processes. They
acknowledged the fact that their teaching practices had been being influenced by theoretical
frameworks. The minority of them (20%) suggested that they did not support their teaching
practices along theoretical frameworks. ‘How would you describe a teaching practice which is not
theoretically founded?’ To this question, they provided the following statements: ‘fruitless and
unproductive; not that effective, poor; it is simply intuitive and not sound, impulsive not in the
norm’.
Locating Teachers’ Teaching Practices within a Paradigm
The next open ended question aimed at knowing whether or not teachers of English are aware of
the paradigm shift that the educational landscape has adopted in recent years. The question was
the following: What is the difference between the bygone paradigm of learning/teaching and the
actual one? The results are displayed in table 3:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

69

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

Table 3. Teachers’ awareness about paradigm shift
Statements
Knowledge about the past and new paradigm
of learning/teaching.
Disregarding the shift of roles of teachers and
learners
Close understandings of learner-centered
learning

Percentage
40%
30%

20 %

A good percentage of teachers (40%) claimed they had no idea about the past and new paradigm
of learning/teaching. However, some teachers (30%) alluded to the teacher-centered paradigm and
sidestepped the shift which altered the roles of both teachers and learners in the classroom and
underlined the use of technology and ICTs in today’s teaching practices. This view is echoed in
the following statement: ‘Learning process is still the same as that of the preceding years.
Teachers and learners follow a standard syllabus; use written texts to evaluate, etc. The only
change is the use of technology which makes a shift from a traditional way of teaching / learning
to an active one. The minority of teachers (20%) provided answers closely related to the learnercentered learning paradigm. A teacher stated: ‘The teacher was the source of knowledge and
learners were receivers. In the actual one teacher should be a facilitator, he orients learners who
should be partners in the process.
Teachers’ Understandings of the Theoretical Foundations of Learner-centered Approach
The following question targeted teachers’ understandings and knowledge about the definition and
nature of learner-centered learning. The purpose of the researcher was to see whether or not
teachers of English were knowledgeable about the main features which distinguish this approach
from the bygone paradigm. Before dealing with teachers’ responses, the ensuing characteristics of
a learner-centered learning, advanced by The European Student Union, had been taken as the
backdrop against which teachers’ answers had been tested.
•
•
•
•

It relates to a constructivist paradigm;
It promotes learning via communicative practices;
It considers learners as active participants in learning process;
It develops transferable skills such as problem-solving, critical thinking and reflective
thinking. (Time for a New Paradigm in Education, n.d.)

The majority of the interviewed teachers (80%) argued they were familiar with a learner-centered
approach. Howbeit, by means of contrasting the above mentioned definition with those of the
teachers, it becomes clear that their understandings tend to miss many salient features such as its
constructivist perspective, innovation, developing skills, and fostering reflection. A teacher
claimed: ‘It improves participation, and provides opportunity to collaborative learning’. Another
teacher added: ‘The learner takes an active role in the learning processes.
Teachers’ Knowledge about Constructivism
The very fact that a learner-centered learning is grounded on different social and cultural variables,
Arab World English Journal
70
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

makes developing an accurate understanding of constructivism necessary. Since this would allow
teachers to fully grasp the different features that accompany the learning process which transcend
a mere direct and rigid rapport between the teacher and the learner. The question directed to the
teachers was: ‘What do you know about constructivism and its importance for learning? To
decipher whether or not teachers of English were aware of the nature of the targeted theory and its
significance for learning, the following features of constructivism advanced by Piaget & Vygotsky
had been taken into account:
-

It designates a learning process that seeks the construction of knowledge along various
contexts;
it argues that personal experiences constructs one’s knowledge ;
it enables the learners to negotiate and the generate hypotheses all along the process of
knowledge construction;
it underscores the significance of past experiences in knowledge construction ( cited in
Ertmer & Newby, 1993)

The results of generated from the question administered to the teachers are mentioned in the graph
below:

40%
60%

Yes
No

Figure 1. Teachers’ understandings of constructivism
Most of the interviewed teachers (60%) suggested they had no idea about what constructivism
was. As mentioned in the quote, constructivism stresses the active aspect of learning, the
significance of context in relation to constructing knowledge, and most importantly personal
experiences and the various ways they shape the whole learning process. As opposed to this
covering understanding, a considerable percentage of teachers’ (40%) responses identified certain
features and sidestepped others. A teacher advanced the following feedback: ‘It is a theory based
mostly on observation constructing and co- constructing meaning i.e. learning is to construct
knowledge by experience. Another teacher argued: ‘Constructivism is that knowledge must be
constructed by the learner. He must be active and construct his own learning within a suitable
environment created by the teacher’.
Section Two: Teachers’ Application of Learner-centered Approach in their Classroom
Practices
The second section aimed at exploring whether or not teachers of English at the University of
Mostaganem developed awareness about the main founding factors that scaffold the targeted
learner-centered paradigm and the extent to which they had been reflected in their actual teaching
practices. These features are briefly reviewed as follows: co-construction of knowledge in the
classroom, metacognitive skills, teacher-learners’ relationship, collaborative learning and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

71

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

authentic and meaningful assessment frameworks.
Co-construction of Knowledge
This part comprised a set of diverse statements whose main purpose was to identify certain
ambiguities in relation to how teachers perceived the construction of knowledge in EFL
classrooms. Being aware of the mechanism of knowledge co-construction necessitated a
cognizance of the fallacy that the traditional approach of teaching sanctified. It states that ‘learning
is automatic, inevitable outcome of good teaching.’ Most of the interviewed teachers (62, 5%)
supported the statement arguing that effective teaching relies on how good the teacher was. The
graph below elucidates the point:
37,5%
Good
teaching
Other
variables
62,5%

Figure 2. Learning and the traditional teaching fallacy
By contrast, the current paradigm highlights the fact that learners are no longer empty vessels and
that dealing with them as doers becomes cardinal for the making of knowledge. Table 4 identifies
teachers’ attitudes towards co-construction in the classroom:
Table 4. Teachers’ attitudes about co-construction of knowledge
Statements
Learners as active agents
Learners as listeners
Learners’ prior knowledge
Learners as co-creators of knowledge

Percentage
75%
12,50%
75%
87,50%

In relation to this, a great majority of teachers (75%) underscored the active roles of their learners
in the classroom. Only the minority of them (12, 50%) claimed learners to be listeners. Taking
learners’ prior knowledge is important when it comes to developing a shared knowledge and
understanding in the classroom. Most of the teachers (75%) acknowledged the importance of doing
so and provided the following feedback: The learners’ prior knowledge can help in the process of
teaching and learning. ‘My learners are co-creators ( co-construct)in the learning process’ had
been the statement which clearly showcased teachers’ awareness of the contribution learners make
in the classroom. Most of the teachers (87, 50%) agreed they considered the learners as co-creators
of knowledge and suggested the ensuing ideas: They come prepared, contribute to the debate, and
sometimes raise new issues; when they collaborate or given the opportunity to interact they are
so’.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

72

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

Metacognitive Skills
Developing learners’ metacognition is said to be a distinctive feature of a learner-centered
approach. Howbeit, the application of such skill would be ineffective given the fact that teachers
are not aware of what its meaning and its scope are. Table 5 displays teachers’ understandings of
metacognition:
Table 5. Teachers’ understandings of metacognition
Statements
Cursory understandings of metacognition
50%
Showing its importance to the learners
87%
Developing learners’ capacities to control and 75%
to monitor their learning practices

Percentage

The interviewed teachers had been asked to define the concept of metacogniton. While (50%) of
them provided cursory understandings of it, the rest of the teachers (50%) claimed they had no
idea. The former category provided the following understandings: ‘Thinking about thinking; think
(the process of thinking); rethinking the way you think’. An awareness of the significance of
metacognition can be boosted along developing learners’ cognizance of it. Most of the teachers
(87%) argued they showed their learners the importance of metacognition and taught it to them by
means of providing learners with opportunities to reflect on their thoughts, behaviour, and how to
think about their own thinking. The teachers suggested the following ideas’. ‘Sometimes, this
shows learning is easy and simple while it seems not as such according to them ; through thinking
they will become masters of their minds and learn how to make sense and choices’. Developing
learners’ capacities to control and to monitor their learning practices would undeniably foment the
targeted skill. In here also, a great majority of the teachers (75%) claimed they do so due to the
following reasons: ‘this leads to creativity to avoid imitation; it allows them to have and
independent thinking’. By the same token, controlling their learning would enhance their learning
process at different planes. This control over learning, teachers believe ‘… will lead them
(learners) to become more active; this develops self-confidence’.
Teacher-learners’ Rapport
The traditional English language classes, it is important to note, had been featured by a rigid
relationship between the two main pedagogical agents: teachers and learners. The hierarchical
rapport established a visible distance between them in relation to certain duties and rights. The
current learner-centered paradigm, however, substituted this for a more flexible rapport whereby
teachers and learners have become partners. The features of the rapport between teachers and
learners are showcased in table 6:
Table 6. Teacher-learners’ rapport
Statements
Percentage
Learners as companions
62%
Involving learners in decision making
50 %
Helping learners to become responsible for 62,50%
the learning
The first statement investigated the debated issue as it stated: ‘I see my students as companions’.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

73

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

To this, most of the teachers (62%) agreed they supported, while the minority either disagreed or
suggested that teachers should not consider learners as companions in every class. This peaceful
rapport can be strengthened as learners are being involved in the process of decision making in the
classroom, a view (50 %) of the teachers positively reacted to. They provided the following reasons
why it was important to do so:‘ This is necessary for the students who should think about how and
what they learn; this encourages the learner to participate and show interest; this encourages
them to hold control over their learning and learning more. Under the same line of thought, most
of the interviewed teachers (62, 50%) claimed they helped their learners to become responsible for
their own learning. This, according to them, would allow them to ‘to be autonomous learners by
doing research.’
Collaborative Learning
Learning is not a mere pedagogical practice, but it also entails certain social skills that enable the
learners to acquire knowledge and to develop their sense of social being. This social dimension
can be achieved by means of collaboration between the learners and the teacher. Teachers’
perceptions about collaborative learning are displayed in table 7:
Table 7.Collaborative learning
Statements
People are social and the brain grows in a 50%
social environment
Collaboration in the classroom
75%
Encouraging collaborative learning in the 87, 50%
classroom

Percentage

The first two statements targeted this aspect of language learning. ‘People are social and the brain
grows in a social environment’, was the statement that (50%) of the teachers approved while and
(50%) of them saw it as one among many aspects of learning. Teachers provided the following
feedback: ‘Things whose understanding is not possible through lectures can be clear from friends,
Facebook groups, movies ; we evolve according the environment we live in ; students learn
through collaborating and interacting with others’. In fact, collaboration in the classroom tends to
develop new meanings along social interaction, the idea that most of the teachers (75%)
embraced and made clear along these ideas : ‘acts of communication give new insights, ideas are
exchanged mistakes are corrected and learning is likely to get enhanced ; new data may be
acquired through interaction. This awareness of the significance of collaborative learning made
teachers use other strategies of teaching rather than an utter reliance on monotonous lecturing
processes. Most of the teachers (87, 50%) encouraged collaborative learning in the classroom
since, teachers argued, ‘this encourages teamwork; it pushes students to become competitive and
active and learn from each other’.
Authentic Assessment Frameworks
In addition to the before-mentioned factors which characterise a learner-centered approach and
which clearly distinguish it from traditional teacher-centered teaching paradigms, authentic
assessment plays a cardinal role as to how learners’ performances are being tested. It is important
to note that such type of assessment is reinforced along designing activities that generate learners’
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

74

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

authenticity, using performance frameworks to assess learners’ academic achievements, the use of
different real world assessment tools, and most importantly, a continuous search for novel ways
of authentic and befitting assessment mechanisms. Table 8 identifies teachers’ use of authentic
assessment frameworks in classrooms:
Table 8. Teachers’ use of authentic assessment tools in classroom
Statements
Percentage
‘I rely on paper and pencil tests
75%
to engage students in activities that result in 62, 50%
authentic and challenging applications
As to the use of a combination of real -world 37, 50%
assessment tools
performance assessment,
62, 50%
The active search for new ways of assessment, 37, 50%
To explore this part, the interviewed teachers had been asked to respond to the following statement
peculiar to traditional assessment frameworks. It goes as follows ‘I rely on paper and pencil tests’.
The data collection and analysis revealed that most of the teachers (75%) are imprisoned in the
shadow of the traditional assessment landscape where paper and pen tests are relied on.
Paradoxically, most of the teachers (62, 50%) are likely to engage students in activities that result
in authentic and challenging applications. Teachers provided the following incentives: ‘since this
set them to real work; this encourages and motivates them, help them think and produce. As to the
use of a combination of real -world assessment tools, many teachers (37, 50%) tend to refer to but
very often. A teacher commented: ‘I apply it a lot in oral classes, simulation; this depends on the
learners’ level. The minority (12, 50%) suggested they did not. In relation to the use of
performance assessment, most of the teachers (62, 50%) claimed they used such type of assessment
since ‘it supports students to collaborate; the motivation to learn will increase; because
performance shows the result of learning. The active search for new ways of assessment, many
teachers believe (37, 50%) is important. Despite this fact, some other teachers (25%) claimed they
keep to certain assessment frameworks, they believed, they mastered.
Discussion
The two sections of the study (theory and practice) had the aim of exploring teachers’ awareness
of the theoretical foundations of a learner-centered approach and their undeniable influence as to
actual classroom teaching practices. The first section revealed that teachers of English at the
University of Mostaganem recognize the significance of theory in relation to their teaching
practices. However and paradoxically, they tend to be unfamiliar with a learner-centered approach
since the understandings they provided miss certain salient features such as its constructivist
perspective, innovation, developing skills, and fostering reflection. Under the same line of thought,
most of the teachers were unable to identify the current teaching-learning paradigm and to contrast
it with the bygone one. Under the same line of thought, most of the interviewed teachers are likely
to misunderstand the very constructivist foundations of a learner-centered approach.
The second sections that shed light on teachers’ actual teaching practices explored whether
or not the afore-mentioned misconceptions influenced the very instructive practices. Most of the
teachers tend to adhere to the traditional pedagogical fallacy that states that good teaching depends
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

75

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

how good the teaching practice is! By contrast, they supported the co-construction of knowledge
in their classes. Among the salient features of the targeted approach and to which most of the
teachers tend to develop a cursory understandings, in other cases have no idea about, is
metacognition and the cardinal role it plays in developing learners’ autonomy. The rapport teachers
develop towards their learners is favorable for engaging learner-centered classes, a rapport that
considers learners as companions. Collaborative learning accompanies teachers’ practices due to
the boons, most of the teachers acknowledge, it develops. Nevertheless, authentic assessment that
distinguishes the current paradigm from the teacher-centered approach seems to be mingled with
certain traditional teaching practices whereby paper and pen tests are relied on.
Recommendations
The study has clearly shown that learner-centered approach and its use in higher education
(University of Mostaganem) represents a pedagogical case whereby various shortcomings may be
identified. These shortcomings mainly relate to the lack of solid theoretical backgrounds and
common sense practices of teaching that stem from experience of teaching. Therefore, the study
puts the following recommendations forward so as boost an effective use of the targeted approach:
-

Teachers need to be aware of the distinctive features of both teacher-centered and learnercentered approaches.
Theoretical foundations of approaches should occupy a significant locus as to teaching
practices.
Teaching experiences should be supported by theoretical backgrounds.
Cursory understandings need to be avoided.
Teachers need to develop background knowledge about past teaching approaches and to
be aware of paradigm shifts.
They need to develop a deep (concise) understanding of learner-centered approach.
A readiness to embrace change and to challenge beliefs should be generated.
Teachers should develop their understandings about the constructivist backgrounds of
student-centered learning.
They should develop deep understandings about metacognitive skills and apply them.
Teachers should adopt authentic assessment frameworks.

Conclusion
An effective application of a learner-centered approach necessitates teachers’ awareness of its
theoretical foundations and the main features which distinguish it from a teacher-centered
paradigm. The study proved this interplay as it showed certain conceptual confusions teachers of
English at the University of Mostaganem develop in relation to the very meaning of the debated
approach. A clear understanding would undoubtedly enhance teachers’ teaching practices and their
learners’ classroom performances as well. The study underscored the significance of two main
features which teachers tend to be unfamiliar with and that would boost the whole learning process.
Developing learners’ cognitive skills would generate a sense of autonomous learning whereby
learners acquire the skill of self-assessment of the learning processes. Most importantly, authentic
assessment requires teachers’ attention and focus since it enables the learners to engage in the real
world as opposed to traditional ways of assessment that are limited to a rigid instrumental
motivation.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

76

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

The Significance of Theoretical Foundations

BOUDJELAL

About the author:
Mr. BOUDJELAL Mustapha (Ph.d) is a lecturer of applied linguistics at the University of Abd
Elhamid Ibn Badis- Mostaganem. His fields of study are (but not limited to): intercultural studies,
applied linguistics, didactics of English as a foreign language. His passion goes along reading
literature, creative writing, and every Friday evening, he likes to enjoy the sunset while jogging.
ORCiD: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4499-8733
References
Anfara, V. A., & Mertz, N. T. (Eds.) (2006). Theoretical Frameworks in Qualitative Research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Barr, R. B., & Tagg, J. (1995). From Teaching to Learning: A New Paradigm for Undergraduate
Education. Change, 27, (6), 12–25.
Darling-Hammond, L.et al. (2008). Powerful Learning: What we Know about Teaching for
Understanding. San Francisco; Jossey-Bass.
Ertmer, P. A., & Newby, T. J. (1993). Behaviorism, Cognitivism, and Constructivism: Comparing
Critical Features from an Instructional Design Perspective. Performance improvement
quarterly, 6, (4), 50-72.
Johnson R. B., & Christensen L.B. (2007). Educational Research: Quantitative, Qualitative and
Mixed Approaches. NY: Sage Publications.
Lambert, N., & McCombs, B. (2000). Introduction: Learner-centered Schools and Classrooms as
a Direction for School Reform. In Lambert, N., & McCombs, B. (Eds.), How Students Learn
(pp. 1- 15). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Leedy, P. D., & Ormrod, J. E. (2005). Practical Research: Planning and Design (8th ed,). Pearson
Educational International and Prentice Hall: New Jersey.
McCombs, B., & Whistler, J. (1997). The Learner -centered Classroom and School: Strategies for
Increasing Student Motivation and Achievement. San Francisco: Jossey -Bass Publishers.
Murphy, P. K., & Alexander, P. A. (2000). A Motivated Look at Motivational Terminology.
[Special Issue]. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 3-53.
National Research Council. (1999). How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Time for a New Paradigm in Education: Student Centered Learning. (2016). Available at: http://
www.esu -online.org/projects/archive/scl/.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

77

