AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019

Pp. 22-36

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.3
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Noureddine Friji
English Language Institute
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Utilizing Herbert Marcuse’s One-Dimensional Man (1962) and Counterrevolution and Revolt
(1972) as a theoretical backdrop, this article seeks to gauge the extent to which the teachings of
the German philosopher and political theorist lay the groundwork for the protests mounted by the
university students in David Lodge’s campus novel Changing Places (1975). Admittedly, the
Student Revolution spilled over into numerous fields. However, given space restrictions, only its
cultural manifestations will be examined. It will be clear that at the root of Lodge’s students’
uprising lies an overpowering urge to break with the cultural heritage and with the academics
upholding it. It will be equally clear, nonetheless, that these young activists’ faith in Marcuse’s
political doctrine is unwelcome to conservative academics on the ground that it has diverse adverse
effects on universities. Not only are politically oriented texts and discourses given precedence over
traditional ones but also teachers and administrators are, at times, hindered from doing their duties.
The plausible conclusion to draw, in the light of the research’s findings, is that although cultural
revolutions undeniably pave the way for a number of personal and collective achievements and
help us modernize many aspects of life, they should not blind us to the enduring significance of
previous cultural traditions and of the aesthetic value of literary works.
Keywords: cultural revolution, david lodge, herbert marcuse, the new left, proletarian, radical
Cites as: Friji, N. (2019). The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places. Arab
World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (2) 22-36.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.3

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

22

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Introduction
General background
The 1960s witnessed an explosion of changes in Western societies. Gitlin (1993) finds historical
precedence for these events in the sixteenth-century Reformation, which took place in Germany,
where “the urgent young, disgusted by the corruption of values, beat on the doors of established
power in the name of reform” (p. xxii). Chief among these movements is the Student Revolution,
which started in 1963 as a “ ‘minor counterrevolt’ ” (Kerr, 2001, p.101) but soon “materialized
into a series of cyclones’’ (p.101). New Left campus activists, disappointed with the political and
moral failure of the fifties’ Old Left (Gitlin, 1993) and, inspired by Herbert Marcuse’s ideas
(Kellner, 1991; Heineman, 2001), emerged “in the guise of single-issue movements: civil rights,
civil liberties, campus reform, peace” (Gitlin, 1993, p. 83). They challenged the dominant
ideology; disapproved of the Bomb, which they saw as a threat to the affluent society and to
humanity; and discredited mainstream culture, which valorised middle-class norms. Predictably,
they collided with “a leftover segment of the moribund social-democratic segment of the Old Left,
huddling around its embers” (p. 110).
As the war in Vietnam intensified, the New Left identified with revolutionary movements
and heroes abroad and drew inspiration from the Cultural Revolution in China (Gitlin, 1993), the
National Liberation Front in Vietnam and revolutionary movements in developing countries. This
accounts for the rapid rise of militancy among student activists, as illustrated by the huge May1968 movement in France and Prague. Militancy grew more prominent as pickets, petitions, sitins, marches, and protests escalated among students. Not unexpectedly, violence broke out more
frequently. At Columbia University, for example, students occupied a number of buildings; messed
up things, including books; had sex; and consumed drugs during the occupation.
It is little marvel that this decade was called the “psychedelic years” (Byatt, 1991, p. 13)
and that it saw the contagious spread of the ‘‘Three Ds’’ (divorce, drinking, drugs) (Jones, 1993,
p. 11) and the rise of a deracinating counterculture, or rather “encounter culture” (Gitlin, 1993, p.
xviii). As a legacy of the beatnik culture of the fifties and a hybrid of “black culture and American
Indian tradition, eastern religions and American utopianism” (Fraser, 1988, p. 113), the
counterculture had its genesis in San Francisco, where several young people lived together in
poverty, had their own style and experimented with LSD and marijuana, and it spread fast thanks
to Rock ’n roll music, among other things. Premised on the “idea that the personal was political,
that personal liberation was an essential part of creating a new and better society” (Fraser, 1988,
p. 121), the counterculture gave an impetus to the transformation of sexual mores. Notwithstanding
the wide-scale spread of sexually transmitted diseases (Heineman, 2001), women activists called
for more sexual liberation and for the right to unwedded sex and abortion (Kurlansky, 2005).
In view of these all-encompassing changes, students were no longer the “Silent
Generation,” the “listeners,” and the “goalkeepers” (Anderson, 1996, p. 19) of the previous decade.
Indeed, they strongly objected to parental rules and to universities’ tendency to act in loco parentis
with respect to their personal lifestyles (Fraser, 1988; Heineman, 2001). The phrase “Don’t trust
anyone over thirty” (Heineman, 2001, p. 107), which was coined by a mathematics graduate
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

23

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

student at Berkeley, adumbrates the young generation’s distrust of their seniors. Traditional
curricula and literary subjects were prime targets for the Student Revolution. American students
objected to being taught subjects based on European civilization alone and requested that studies
related to Native Americans, African Americans, Jews and women be included in the curriculum
(Anderson, 1996). These changes challenged the authority of administrators and teachers. Lionel
Trilling, among other conservative American academics, grew increasingly concerned about the
fate of departments and of traditional curricula as dissent swept across campuses. He also feared
that modernist writers, whose novels allegedly contained and maintained general truths, fell out of
favour with the rebelling students on the ground that they were supposedly hostile to civilization
and that they engendered a sense of alienation by stressing the primacy of style over ethics
(Kernan, 1990).
Literature review
Several critics have investigated Lodge’s Changing Places from different critical perspectives
along with other (academic) novels by Lodge (Ammann, 1991; Bergonzi, 1995; Li, 1998; Martin,
1999; Sant, 2006; Sava, 2006) or along with other (academic) novels by other writers
(Ommundsen, 1985; Wiegenstein, 1987; Morace, 1989; Fullerty, 2008). Notwithstanding the
useful insights they give into the novel in question, these studies fail to have an in-depth look at
its most absorbing themes as they have to allot equal attention to other novels. Arizti (2002),
however, stands out in the critical crowd in this regard, as it were, thanks to her comprehensive
analysis of the engaging themes of intimacy and sexual liberation in Lodge’s Changing Places and
Small World through Herbert Marcuse’s combination of Marxism and Freudian psychoanalysis to
underline and undermine the repressive nature of capitalism. She holds that Marcuse’s theory of
‘‘over-repression’’ (p. 66) reveals the excess of repression in sexual as well as economic areas and
the necessity of rejecting heterosexuality and achieving the eroticization of society through
polymorphous sexuality as manifested in experimentation with sex, explicit sexual images,
premarital sex and pornography. Preoccupation with intimate love relationships and adultery in
Changing Places, Arizti goes on, is meant to divert attention away from potential social rebellion
in that it identifies “emancipation almost exclusively with sexual liberation and thus conforming
to Marcuse’s theory of the repressive desublimation of genital eros” (p. 165).
It is obvious from the above that Arizti’s book somehow treads the same theoretical turf as
my present paper. Although it undeniably makes a valuable contribution to the field of study under
consideration, it falls short of an analysis of the cultural and intellectual aspects of the Student
Revolution because it mainly focuses attention on such issues as comedy, love, marriage, romance,
private versus public relationships, gender roles, and intimate mores from the sixties to the eighties.
For instance, it traces the radical changes in these mores to the Industrial Revolution and the French
Revolution, which heralded the birth of ‘‘Liberty, Equality and Fraternity” (Arizti, 2002, p. 61).
Postmodernism, Arizti claims, has helped change the moral and cultural scenes by prioritizing the
particular over the universal. As the latter was the cornerstone of the Enlightenment and
metanarratives, its decline expedited the collapse of all the values and institutions connected with
it:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

24

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Postmodernity’s radical individualism and antiessentialism have challenged the dominant
discourse of sexuality, declaring the obsolescence of the institutions based on dated
metanarratives. Tradition, the family, the state, society in general, are divested of their
normative power. There is no grand narrative of sexuality but a myriad of models of
intimacy. Its positive and liberatory politics of desire have questioned the traditional
epistemology of sexuality, helping to empower dissident sexual minorities. From queer
theory, the well-established hetero/homo divide has been subverted, and the new
nomenclature of the sexual points at the existence of gladly assumed identities where
before there were only shame-faced attitudes. (pp. 81-82)
Now, given the dearth of research on the Cultural Revolution in Lodge’s Changing Places, this
study, building on Herbert Marcuse’s One-Dimensional Man and Counterrevolution and Revolt,
will try to determine the extent to which his call for radical cultural changes finds favour with
Lodge’s fictional students. It will also argue that the reactions, actions and frictions generated by
Marcuse’s arguments, one way or another, challenge the venerated literary tradition universities
have always boasted and boosted. Another aim of this paper’s author is to demonstrate how
Changing Places, casting a retrospective look at the sixties’ Student Revolution and cleaving
closely to Lodge’s academic experience, ventures into the controversial territory of politics instead
of confining itself to well-trodden ground such as the publish or perish dilemma, promotion,
tenure, academic power, the ups and downs of academic marriages, teacher-student relationships,
and so on.i Finally, the article’s writer emphasises the need to strike a balance between past and
present cultures and the reasonableness of fostering constructive criticism and mutual respect in
academic circles.
Methodology
Mounting a scathing attack on capitalism, Marcuse (1972) theorises that it can be combated only
through a “Cultural Revolution” (p. 79) and through the subsequent transformation of “the entire
traditional culture” (p. 79). Premised on the assumption that arts have an unmistakable “political
potential” (p. 79), this radical revolution aspires to create alternative languages, arts and images
with a view to helping man’s body and mind break free from the “domination, indoctrination, and
deception” (p. 79) imposed on them by “the established language and images” (p. 79). The
alternative languages, Marcuse hypothesises, exist in arts such as literature and music and in “the
folk tradition (black language, argot, slang)” (p. 80). The tradition of protest negates what is taken
for granted and subverts it:
The subverting use of the artistic tradition aims from the beginning at a systematic
desublimation of culture; that is to say, at undoing the aesthetic form. “Aesthetic form”
means the total of qualities (harmony, rhythm, contrast) which make an oeuvre a selfcontained whole, with an order and a structure of its own (the style). By virtue of these
qualities the work of art transforms the order prevailing in reality. The transformation is
“illusion,” but an illusion which gives the contents represented a meaning and a function
different from those they have in the prevailing universe of discourse. (p. 81)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

25

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Challenging the main features of the aesthetic form, namely the illusion of harmony, “idealistic
transfiguration” (Marcuse, 1972, p. 81) and the disconnection between the word and the world
necessitates the inauguration of “immediate” (p. 82) art forms which activate a “ ‘natural’ ” sense
experience freed from the requirements of an obsolescent exploitative society” (p. 82). Thanks to
this “sensuous culture” (p. 82), the body and the soul are treated as means of emancipation rather
than as victims of labour and as guarantors of productivity. While emphasizing the possibility of
achieving the long-awaited deviation from serious and popular bourgeois art forms, Marcuse urges
the creation of a “proletarian literature” (p. 123) or a “working class literature” (p. 123) marked by
“anti-intellectualism” (p. 126) to maintain “the progressive function of art and develop a
revolutionary consciousness” (p. 123) that is of the essence in class struggle.
While society and high culture have always inhabited separate spheres, with the former
having its own ideals which only a privileged few enjoyed and boasting the ability to preserve
truth through its idiosyncratic sublimations, Marcuse (1991) explains, today’s situation has
changed drastically:
Today’s novel feature is the flattening out of the antagonism between culture and social
reality through the obliteration of the oppositional, alien, and transcendent elements in the
higher culture by virtue of which it constituted another dimension of reality. This
liquidation of two-dimensional culture takes place not through the denial and rejection of
the ‘cultural values,’ but through their wholesale incorporation into the established order,
through their reproduction and display on a massive scale. In fact, they serve as instruments
of social cohesion. (p. 57)
Like a number of ideals in society, higher culture, Marcuse (1991) adds, has undergone a process
of “materialization” (p. 58) and has, as a result, lost a great deal of its truth. In fact, it is, lamentably,
associated with a pre-technological world which cannot be recaptured. Additionally, Marcuse
(1972) calls upon educated people to rally behind the cause of the downtrodden and to help them
“realize and enjoy their truly human capabilities” (p. 47) by organizing their spontaneous protests.
This task can be achieved, among other things, through the establishment of “an intensive countereducation and organization” (p. 47) and through a complete break with the “intensive
indoctrination” (p. 47) applied by the system. Radical Left revolutionaries, Marcuse goes on, can
use the university to train their “future counter-cadres” (p. 54). They also need to set up their own
“counterinstitutions” (p. 55) and their own radical media in order to disseminate their ideas.
This is prompted by the fact that mainstream mass media are at one and the same time
means of information and entertainment and “agents of manipulation” (Marcuse, 1991, p. 8).
Together with political decisions, they enhance one-dimensional thought through a discourse
saturated with “self-validating hypotheses which, incessantly and monopolistically repeated,
become hypnotic definitions and dictations” (p. 14). Market values are also believed to infiltrate
the field of mass media:

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

26

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

If mass communications blend together harmoniously, and often unnoticeably, art, politics,
religion, and philosophy with commercials, they bring these realms of culture to their
common denominator—the commodity form. The music of the soul is also the music of
salesmanship. Exchange value, not truth value counts. On it centers the rationality of the
status quo, and all alien rationality is bent to it. (p. 57)
Having mined two books of Marcuse’s for arguments that lie within the present paper’s scope, the
paper’s writer now sets out to analyse how the students in Lodge’s Changing Places, armed with
the German philosopher’s teachings, embark on a cultural revolution on their campuses by
employing a variety of cultural tools such as radical media - newspapers and radio shows,
proletarian literature, unconventional literary genres, music and dance.
Analysis
Radical media
Aboard the plane bound for the United States, a British student called Charles Boon informs Philip
Swallow, his compatriot and former teacher at Rummidge University, that there is an underground
paper called Euphoric Times at Euphoric State University and that he does a weekly column in it
(Lodge, 1992). He also boasts that the students want him to be the main editor and that he is,
however, considering starting a rival paper. Of course, Boon is not unused to newspapers of this
kind. While still an undergraduate student at Rummidge, he edited a student newspaper called
Rumble and “involved” it “in an expensive libel suit brought by the mayoress of Rummidge” (p.
36). Taking this student’s radical leanings into account, his last name, Boon, may safely be said to
evoke the word bomb rather than the positive connotations of the word boon. The chapter
“Reading” (pp. 153-166), featuring extracts from a number of newspapers, among other things,
reveals the extent to which students’ media can enhance their revolutionary cause. Advertising the
People’s Garden in Plotinus, Euphoric Times refers to it as a “new Eden” (p. 155) and as “the most
spontaneous and encouraging event so far in the continuing struggle between the UniversityIndustrial-Military complex and the Alternative Society of Love and Peace” (p. 155). It soon later
reiterates the need to guard the Garden and to stand united against police authorities’ oppressive
policies:
Our land is desecrated, but the spirit of the Garden is alive . . . . The people of Plotinus are
united against the pigs and tyrants. The bull-shit barriers are coming down, the barricades
of love are going up against the pigs. (p. 162)
Finally, it accuses Chancellor Binde, Sheriff O’Keene and a “nameless pig” (p. 161) of having
killed the student John Roberts while he was taking part in a riot. The Charles Boon Show is bathed
in the same radical light, in a manner of speaking.
Boon’s journey to the States does nothing to excite his interest in study. He confides to
Swallow that he is still doing a Master’s, a kind of course work, “a little baby dissertation” (Lodge,
1992, p. 49), that he has no time for study and that he is chiefly preoccupied with the Charles Boon
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

27

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Show, “a late-night phone-in programme” (p. 50) on the radio in which callers discuss a wide
range of topics. In addition, the programme is “free from business and political pressures” (p. 74)
in that it is publicised by the non-commercial network, QXYZ, “which was supported by listeners’
subscriptions and foundation grants” (p. 74). Not unexpectedly, it points an accusing finger at
capitalist policies and glorifies revolutions. For example, Swallow hears the Black Pantheress
“explaining to a caller the application of Marxist-Leninist revolutionary theory to the situation of
oppressed racial minorities in a later stage of industrial capitalism” (p. 103).
The association between such programmes and youthful enthusiasm is articulated through
the fact that when Désirée, Zapp’s wife, expresses her aversion to the Charles Boon Show, Boon
counters, “If someone your age liked my show, I’d know I had failed” (Lodge, 1992, p. 145). The
casual character of the programme finds further illustration in Boon’s tendency, at times, to start
it by reading a poem of his own composition. It is not insignificant, therefore, that “the death of
the novel” (p. 198) is one of the concerns Swallow discusses on the phone with the audience of
the Charles Boon Show alongside burning issues like “the Garden, drugs, law and order, nuclear
testing, abortion, encounter groups, the Underground press . . . the Sexual Revolution . . .” (p. 198).
The mounting pressure exerted by the spread of such means of communication goes hand
in hand with the enthusiastic welcome given to their champions at a time when the representatives
of traditional literary culture are receding into the background. To Swallow’s “considerable
mortification” (Lodge, 1992, p. 73), for instance, his “chief social asset at Euphoric State turned
out to be his association with Charles Boon” (p. 73). Worse still, people are eager to be acquainted
with him merely “for the sake of some anecdote of Charles Boon’s early life” (p. 73). When the
British professor arrives at Luke Hogan’s house to attend a party, Mrs Hogan asks him if Boon is
with him. As soon as Boon shows up, everybody turns to see him. Meanwhile, Swallow, “who had
counted on being himself the evening’s chief focus of attention, found himself standing neglected
on the fringes of this little court” (p. 77). In a letter to his wife, he complains that Mrs Hogan
“enlisted my help in coaxing Charles Boon to come and be lionized, an irony I could have done
without” (p. 123).
Proletarian literature
The ghetto novel which the campus militant activist Wily Smith is working on (Lodge, 1992) may
be said to fall within the scope of Marcuse’s category of proletarian literature in that ghetto
inhabitants are, by definition, at the bottom of the social hierarchy. It is both relevant and revealing
that when this student bursts into Swallow’s office to escape the police, the British professor is
reading John Milton’s Lycidas. Smith’s sudden and unbidden appearance may, in other words, be
said to symbolise the encroachment of emergent genres like the ghetto novel on traditional literary
works like Milton’s above-mentioned text; on Jane Austen’s works, on which Swallow has written
an MA thesis; and on other literary works for which Swallow has “a genuine love” (p. 17), namely
those of Beowulf and Virginia Woolf as well as “medieval sermons, Elizabethan sonnet sequences,
Restoration heroic tragedy, eighteenth-century broadsides, the novels of William Godwin, the
poetry of Elizabeth Barrett Browning . . . ” (p. 17).
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

28

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

The surname Smith itself brings to mind the working-class job blacksmith. Smith’s
insistence that he is black although he is not so (Lodge, 1992) adds more credibility to this
conjecture. A name like Black Smith, one may surmise, would be of immense significance in that
it brings together racial and working-class aspects and, by so doing, it subverts not only
conventional names but also the positive characteristics associated with them. This is consonant
with Smith’s antagonism to traditional courses and educational policies on the whole. When
Swallow first meets him, he is, significantly enough, wearing “some kind of army combat jacket
with camouflage markings” (p. 66). As he puts his hand in his jacket’s pocket, Swallow fears that
he is going to produce a bomb, but it turns out to be only a catalogue of courses. Once again, this
opaque analogy is suggestive of the potentially explosive nature of radical ideas. Smith’s adoption
of confrontational tactics finds its best expression in the fact that when Swallow allows him to
enrol in his creative writing course, he urges his fellow students to boycott not only this course but
also other classes, by way of supporting the strike.
This occurs at a time when minorities’ increasing demands for reform oblige universities
to make concessions in matters pertaining to curricula and recruitment (Lodge, 1992). For instance,
Luke Hogan, the Head of the English Department, advises Swallow to write a book or two in order
to secure a job at Euphoric State and confides to him that if he were a black man or an Indian, he
would be offered a job because the University, like a number of other academic institutions across
the nation, has made a settlement to employ more Third World faculty as a result of the pressure
triggered by strikes. Universities are also aware of the sharp rise in the number of radicals and of
the influence they may have exerted on students, several of whom purchase their books from such
places as “the Beta Bookshop, a favourite gathering-place for radicals” (p. 193). Strolling across
Howle Plaza after taking part in a faculty vigil, Swallow is left in no doubt as to the ballooning
fame of political activism in the States. The area is depicted as “a kind of ideological fair” (p. 192)
where “you . . . buy the literature of the Black Panthers . . . and express yourself in a hundred other
interesting ways” (pp.192-193). Obviously, Smith’s novel is not the only instance of proletarian
literature. Nor is it the only living witness to the snowballing popularity of emergent radical genres.
While Charles Boon is apprising him of the agitations on the Euphoric State campus,
Swallow notices that his former student’s lapel buttons carry several slogans adumbrating the
situation in question (Lodge, 1992). Interpreting this as irrefutable evidence of the birth of “a new
literary medium, the lapel button, something between the classical epigram and the imagist lyric”
(p. 49), he presumes that a postgraduate student may one day write a thesis on it and that Boon
may already be doing so as part of his MA research. The proletarian orientation of the aforesaid
genre is attributable to the working-class background of its adherents, namely Bates and Smith.
Swallow recalls that Bates:
belonged to a category of students whom Philip referred to privately (showing his age) as
‘the Department’s Teddy-Boys’. These were clever young men of plebeian origin who,
unlike the traditional scholarship boy (such as Philip himself) showed no deference to the
social and cultural values of the institution to which they had been admitted, but maintained
until the day they graduated a style of ostentatious uncouthness in dress, behaviour and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

29

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

speech. They came late to classes, unwashed, unshaven, and wearing clothes they had
evidently slept in; slouched in their seats, rolling their own cigarettes and stubbing them
out on the furniture . . . answered questions addressed to them in dialect monosyllables,
and handed in disconcertingly subtle, largely destructive essays written in the style of F.
R. Leavis. (pp. 35-36)
Swallow will soon later note a note reading “KEEP KOOP” (Lodge, 1992, p. 65) printed on a
button on Wily Smith’s lapel. Soon later, he learns that this subgenre is being publicised in support
of Karl Kroop, an Assistant Professor in the English Department who has recently been denied
tenure. The intrigued British professor intimates to Luke Hogan that he cannot wait to meet Kroop,
having “read so much about him, in buttonholes” (p. 75). Kroop will later continue wearing “a
KEEP KROOP BUTTON in his lapel, as a veteran might wear a combat medal” (p. 183).
Emphasising the potentially violent nature of radical genres, this analogy brings us back to the
disguised resemblance between the catalogue of courses held by Smith and the bomb. Having
witnessed the importance of enlisting the help of the students and the academic staff through this
so-called genre, Howard Ringbaum, a teacher of Augustan pastoral, fears that no one will support
him during his upcoming tenure campaign by wearing “RETAIN RINGBAUM buttons” (p. 76).
To be sure, the cultural climate in America, as depicted in the novel, is hospitable to the rise of
unconventional genres of this kind. Indeed, American students have “read the most outlandish
things and not read the most obvious ones” (p. 123), as Swallow puts it in a letter to his wife. One
of his students, for example, has read such unknown writers as Gurdjieff and Arismov but, oddly
enough, he is not conversant with E. M. Forster’s works.
Music and dancing
Having got into the habit of watching TV programmes such as Top of the Pops, Swallow envies
“the Dionysian horde” (Lodge, 1992, p. 28) their infinite enjoyment of the “deliciously mindless,
liberating” (p. 27) atmosphere. Later, the narrator zeroes in on the dance in which Melanie Byrd,
Morris Zapp’s daughter, and her friends engage, paying special attention to the effect music has
on their senses and responsive bodies and to their clever way of keeping up with the pace of the
“accelerations and slowings” (p. 99) of the rhythm. The liberating character of the dance is
articulated through the attendant actions and through the excitement they generate:
Then the tempo became faster, the twanging notes louder, faster and louder, and they
moved more violently in response to the music, they writhed and twitched, stamped and
lifted their arms and snapped their fingers and clapped their hands. Eyes rolled, sweat
glistened, breasts bounced, flesh smacked flesh; cries, shrill and ecstatic, pierced the
smoke. (pp. 99-100
In the light of its reaction to and interaction with music, the body assumes an expressive function.
As a student called the Cowboy instructs Swallow, “What you have to do is communicate by
rubbing against each other . . . Through your spine, your shoulder-blade” (Lodge, 1992, p. 99).
Significantly, when the middle-aged professor joins the group of students in “the free, improvised,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

30

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Dionysian dancing he had hankered after” (p. 99) and presses himself against Melanie, she asks
him, “Hey, Philip, what are you trying to tell me with those shoulder-blades?” (p. 99).
Rock music, of all the musical subgenres mentioned in the novel, seems to be the most
closely connected with revolutions; while students’ protests are gathering pace in Plotinus, “the
record shops were playing the latest rock-gospel hit Oh Happy Day through their external
speakers” (Lodge, 1992, p. 193). It is small wonder that “rock bands and topless dancers” (p. 248)
take part in the March on Plotinus. It is also not insignificant that the same musical subgenre is a
firm favourite with striptease clubs in Soho, where the idiosyncratic treatment of the body betrays
an overwhelming desire to break loose from conventional moral constraints. Granted its
revolutionary character, rock music is associated with the younger generation. By contrast, the
older generation have a liking for other types of music. Désirée, for example, spends her free time
reading and listening to classical romantic music. Similarly, invited by Zapp to dinner in a small
club called Petronella on the occasion of her birthday, Hilary, Swallow’s wife, settles herself into
the comfortable grip of “the entertainment . . . provided by a so-so folk-blues group called Morte
D’Arthur with a wistful girl singer who sang pastiches of recordings by Joan Baez” (p. 201). This
accords with the club’s custom of playing “decent music” (p. 201). The celebration would have
been spoilt, however, if the entertainment had been provided by “a heavy rock band for instance”
(p. 202).
Discussion
All the aforementioned tools of the Cultural Revolution seem to have had a few dramatic effects
on the academic scene. Chief among these is the decline of literature. In actual fact, the course
taught by Karl Kroop is entitled “English 213. The Death of the Book? Communication and Crisis
in Contemporary Culture” (Lodge, 1992, p. 68). Worse still, by ultimately removing the question
mark, he seems to announce the death of literature rather than simply posing questions about its
imminence. As Swallow resignedly concedes towards the end of the novel, “Well, the novel is
dying, and us with it. No wonder I could never get anything out of my novel-writing class at
Euphoric State. It’s an unnatural medium for their experience” (p. 250). What is more, students’
rejection of traditional teaching approaches and traditional genres root and branch explains why
they consider Howard Ringbaum “[d]ull, dull, dull” (p. 68) and why Zapp, like Lionel Trilling,
finds it difficult to teach. Being sick and tired of “student intimidation” (p. 39), “the Student
Revolution, its strikes, its protests, issues, non-negotiable demands . . . ” (p. 39), the American
professor decides to fly to Rummidge and to “condemn himself to six months’ hard labour” (p.
39). When he pleads with the Dean of Faculty at Euphoric State to give him a chance to go
somewhere to Europe, the Dean rightly guesses, “Students getting you down?” (p. 43). Indeed,
Zapp finds it hard to apply his teaching style and to teach his favourite subject and writer as
students are:
openly contemptuous of both the subject and his own qualifications. . . . Jane Austen was
certainly not the writer to win the hearts of the new generation. Sometimes Morris woke
sweating from nightmares in which students paraded round the campus carrying placards
that declared KNIGHTLEY SUCKS and FANNY PRICE IS A FINX. (p. 46)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

31

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Naturally, this comes as a shock to the renowned champion of the works of Jane Austen, one of
the twenty-six writers the American critic Bloom (1995) greets as the vanguard of an impregnable
literary canon whose aesthetic value has stood the test of time.2 With four books on Austen to his
name, Zapp embarks “with great enthusiasm on an ambitious critical project: a series of
commentaries on Jane Austen which would work through the whole canon, one novel at a time,
saying absolutely everything that could be said about them” (Lodge, 1992, p. 44). He looks forward
to exhausting these novels by applying a variety of critical approaches to them with an eye to
putting “a definitive stop to the production of any further garbage on the subject” (p. 44). 3 The
American scholar’s obsession with Austen is common knowledge. In a letter to his wife, for
example, Swallow, Zapp’s opposite number, reveals that Zapp’s twins are called Elizabeth and
Darcy because Zapp is “a Jane Austen man, of course – indeed the Jane Austen man in the opinion
of many” (p. 123).
After learning that Hilary wants to send a book entitled Let’s Write a Novel by A. J.
Beamish to her husband, Swallow, Zapp presumes that this book will not stir the attention of the
students in English 305 at Euphoric State, “lazy, pretentious bastards, most of them, who thought
they could write the General American Novel by just typing out their confessions and changing
the names” (Lodge, 1992, p. 88). As they wage war on the traditional curriculum, British students,
too, show disrespect for the individuals associated with it. Hilary stresses the stresses and strains
generated by the news of the impending sit-in at Rummidge, especially as far as the older staff
members are concerned. Gorden Masters, the Head of the English Department, is the chief victim
in this respect. The students’ protests do not only precipitate his resignation but also impair his
physical and mental health, hence his being treated at a private psychiatric clinic. Driven to despair,
he later leaves Rummidge “for a period of rest and recuperation” (p. 162).
Given its disruptiveness and its aftermath, the Revolution comes under fire from many
circles. The narrator seems to indict the students’ behaviour and to caution that by ousting
academic leaders like Masters, revolutions are bound to plunge universities into endless chaos
(Lodge, 1992). The Rummidge English Department is thus likened to a sinking ship which cannot
be rescued because its captain took the “sealed instructions about the ship’s ultimate destination”
(p. 214) with him as he fell aboard. Having joined the chorus of protests by taking part in the
faculty vigil and by siding with and guiding the students, as per Marcuse’s teachings, and having
experimented with music and dance, Swallow finds rebelliousness too hard to swallow and sees
sense. The change he undergoes towards the end of the novel belies his wife’s charge that he seems
to have turned into “one of these violent snobs, who think that nothing’s important unless people
are getting killed” (p. 247). Watching the Plotinus March on TV, he launches into a passionate
argument for liberal humanistic ideals. He would not choose to be with the marchers, he insists,
because “ ‘[t]hat is no country for old men . . .’ ” (p. 249) and because he would simply “be an
imposter there” (p. 249).4 His generation, he adds, observe “the old liberal doctrine of inviolate
self” (p. 250) as represented by the realistic novels of Jane Austen, which attach great weight to
private life while relegating history to the background and dismissing it as “a distant rumble of
gunfire, somewhere offstage” (p. 250). This probably explains why he earlier turns off the radio
after hearing the Black Pantheress speaking about the way Marxism can inspire revolutions.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

32

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Austen’s ahistorical perception of reality is confirmed by Zapp. Having succeeded in ending the
sit-in at Rummidge, in bridging the divide between the students and the staff and in winning his
colleagues’ respect, he tells his students that Austen:
came down on the side of Eros against Agape – on the side, that is, of the private
communion of lovers over against the public communion of social events and gatherings
which invariably caused pain and distress (think for instance of the disastrous nature of
group expeditions, to Sotherton in Mansfield Park, to Box Hill in Emma, to Lyme Regis in
Persuasion). (p. 215)
The implication, one may suggest, is that Austen’s novels, like other canonicals works, teach and
preach discipline and peace, as against the emergent literary genres and the other means of
expression connected with radical thinkers, which seem, to conservative academics like Swallow
and Zapp, to leave only distraction and destruction in their wake. Indeed, they may be said to
challenge the conventional stability of the cultural and literary scenes by bringing political
ideologies to bear on time-honoured works of art in the name of righting wrongs and addressing
and redressing injustices when they may, if indirectly, encourage suggestible youths to adopt
confrontational tactics and violent demeanour.
Predictably, the students’ revolt somehow revolts not only academics but also some
students. For instance, a student at Rummidge submits a notice to Rumble, indicting students’
protests and dismissing the protesters as “big fools” (Lodge, 1992, p. 164) who are wasting the
University’s as well as policemen’s time and pointing out that when they grow up, they will realise
that the University was run in a good way. To him, most of these activists are “hippeys” (p. 164)
and “stupid” (p. 164) people who have not showered for a long time and “a load of old tramps with
their long dirty hair” (p. 164). He winds up by reiterating that he loathes students and that he would
hang them if he could.
Additionally, the peacefulness of the long-awaited march is in tune with the novel’s opaque
call for peace. The TV channel’s commentator expresses his surprise at the fact that no violence
has erupted by stating, “And it certainly looks as though the great march is going to pass off
peacefully after all . . .” (Lodge, 1992, p. 247) and by adding, “. . . a lot of people feared blood
would run in the streets of Plotinus today, but so far the vibrations are good . . . .” (p. 248). This
climate climaxes in the marchers’ throwing of flowers instead of rocks at the guardsmen, who
merely stand by and wave at the passing crowd.
It is also enlightening that Swallow’s abandonment of his revolutionary zeal takes place at
a time when he and his wife as well as Zapp and his wife are having a “summit meeting” (Lodge,
1992, p. 236) in New York to resolve their marital conflicts. Given that the novel does not offer
any clear clue as to the end of this state of affairs, we can only guess that each couple will
reconstruct their marriage and start afresh. In point of fact, in the sequel to his Changing Places,
Lodge (1984) reveals that the two couples are still married notwithstanding the ups and downs
marking their matrimonial relationships. This could be considered further proof of the survival of
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

33

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

the bourgeois family ideals preached by novelists like Austen in the face of the changes and
challenges sweeping society.
Be this as it may, it may be better to ply a middle ground between the radical and
conservative positions. As the university is an honourable and vulnerable institution which is
populated by educated people, it would be more reasonable to have a debate based on mutual
respect to settle quarrels and to reach a compromise between the students on the one hand and
between the administrative and academic staff on the other. What is more, students should be
encouraged to help bring about fruitful social and cultural changes. They should also be allowed
to enjoy the fruits of their revolutionary labours, to have a say in the curriculum and assessment
and to have their own media of expression and communication. At the same time, they should not
assault or insult their teachers. Nor should they reject the cultural heritage and the aesthetic aspects
of literary texts offhandedly as they are eternally informative and appealing.
Conclusion
Investigating the extent to which Marcuse’s ideas fire the university students in David Lodge’s
Changing Places with enthusiasm for change and inspire them to a cultural revolution, among
other things, the present study has sought to illuminate the clash between canonical and
iconoclastic trends of thinking. It has been demonstrated, for instance, that students’ impatience of
discipline and of established disciplines is frowned upon by conservative scholars on the ground
that it expedites the rise of politically oriented discourses and sparks off unwanted and unwonted
changes. Once again, however, it is useful to emphasise that student activists should not be
demonized. Given the proliferation of global cultural and social changes, they cannot help hitching
their wagon to the zeitgeist. They cannot, in other words, keep pace with the modernization of life
and academic standards while drawing inspiration from past texts and contexts only. To achieve
the desired goals, therefore, it may be useful for them to work towards more cultural innovation
without breaking with precedent irrevocably. On the other hand, the literary tradition’s enthusiasts
had better reconcile themselves to the impossibility of imposing their own lifestyle as well as their
presumably unassailable cultural values and ideas on new generations. They should not also lose
sight of the fact that several achievements in the fields of civil rights, work, gender, politics and
education are generally credited to the struggle of post-war radical activists and political theorists
(Gold & Villari, 2000; Ezra, 2009; Hoefferle, 2013).
It may, at the same time, be helpful for these advocates of the literary canon to give it a
new lease of life by organizing conventions like the one held by the literary characters in
Textermination, a novel by Brooke-Rose (1992). Flocking to the Hilton Hotel in San Francisco on
the occasion of the ‘‘annual Convention of Prayer for Being’’ (p. 25), they hope that their prayer
for the revival and survival of literature will bear fruit in the face of the all-encompassing rise of
television and cinema and of the decline of readership. Although their efforts come to nought, their
unflagging enthusiasm should be an inspiration to the fans of traditional literary works.
Lastly, the author of this paper hopes that the foregoing investigation of Lodge’s Changing
Places from Marcuse’s angle of vision has helped in cutting across the lines of fact and fiction, or
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

34

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

rather history and story. It is also hoped that this study will stimulate more interest in Lodge’s
novel, whose rich thematic structure fosters myriad interpretations. It would be useful, for instance,
to draw on Mikhail Bakhtin’s concepts of dialogism and polyphony to detect and inspect the
diverse narrative choices and voices used therein.
Endnotes
1
See also Bradbury (1981) and Cross (2001) for further fictional handling of the Student
Revolution.
2
The list of canonical writers, Bloom (1995) suggests, includes, among others, Dante,
Shakespeare, Wordsworth, Chaucer, Cervantes, Goethe, Dickens, Tolstoy and Joyce. What sets
them all apart from the less distinguished writers is their authoritativeness, “sublimity” (p. 2),
“strangeness,” “originality,” “uncanniness,” and “aesthetic supremacy” (p. 3).
3
Zapp later boasts that he has written five books about Jane Austen and that he has exhausted her
works from all angles, leaving other scholars nothing to say on the subject (Lodge, 1984, p. 24).
4
Swallow is here quoting from Yeats’s poem “Sailing to Byzantium,” which opens with the line
“That is no country for old men” (Yeats, 1994, p. 163) and glorifies youth while accentuating old
people’s desperateness
About the author:
Noureddine Friji has a PhD in English language and literature. His research interests include
contemporary and old Anglo-American literature, literary theory and criticism, translation,
historiography and critical discourse analysis. He is currently an English language instructor at the
English Language Institute, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4418-3542
References
Ammann, D. (1991). David Lodge and the Art-and-Reality Novel. Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Anderson, T. H. (1996). The Movement and the Sixties: Protest in America from Greensboro to
Wounded Knee. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arizti, M. B. (2002). Textuality as Striptease: The Discourses of Intimacy in David Lodge’s
“Changing Places” and “Small World.” Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Bergonzi, B. (1995). David Lodge. Plymouth, Mass: Northcote.
Bloom, H. (1995). The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages. New York: Riverhead.
Bradbury, M . (1981). The History Man. London: Arrow.
Brooke-Rose, C. (1992). Textermination. New York: New Directions.
Byatt, A. S. (1991). Possession: A Romance. New York: Vintage.
Cross, A. (2001). Poetic Justice. New York: Ballantine.
Ezra, M. L (Ed.). (2009). Civil Rights Movement: People and Perspectives. Perspectives in
American Social History Series. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO.
Fraser, R. (Ed.). (1988). 1968: A Student Generation in Revolt: An International Oral History.
New York: Pantheon.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

35

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Cultural Revolution in David Lodge’s Changing Places

Friji

Fullerty, M. H. G. (2008). The British and American Academic Novel. The “Professorromane”:
The Comic Campus, the Tragic Self (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3297121).
Gitlin, T. (1993). The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage. (rev. ed.). New York: Bantam.
Gold, J & Villari, S. (Eds). (2000). Just Sex: Students Rewrite the Rules on Sex, Violence, Activism,
and Equality. Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield.
Heineman, K. J. (2001). Put Your Bodies upon the Wheels: Student Revolt in the 1960s. Chicago:
Evan R. Dee.
Hoefferle, C. M. (2013). British Student Activism in the Long Sixties. New York: Routledge.
Jones, D. J. H. ( 1993). Murder at the MLA. Georgia: University of Georgia Press.
Kellner, D. (1991). Introduction. In Herbert Marcuse. One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the
Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society (pp. xi-xxxix). (2nd ed.). Boston: Beacon.
Kernan, A. (1990). The Death of Literature. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press.
Kerr, C. (2001). The Uses of the University. (5th ed.). Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Kurlansky, M. ( 2005). 1968: The Year That Rocked the World. New York: Random.
Li, W. (1998). David Lodge’s Fiction of Negotiation: Re-mapping the Condition of England
(Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI
No. 9818990).
Lodge, D. (1984). Small World: An Academic Romance. London: Secker and Warburg.
Lodge, D. (1992). Changing Places: A Tale of Two Campuses. New York: Penguin.
Marcuse, H. (1972). Counterrevolution and Revolt. Boston, Mass: Beacon.
Marcuse, H. (1991). One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial
Society. (2nd ed). Boston: Beacon.
Martin, B. K. (1999). David Lodge. New York: Tayne.
Morace, R. A. (1989). The Dialogic Novels of Malcolm Bradbury and David Lodge. Carbondale,
Ill: Southern Illinois University Press.
Ommundsen, W. (1985). Self-Conscious Fiction and Literary Theory: David Lodge, B.S. Johnson,
and John Fowles (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.
Sant, T. D. (2006). David Lodge: Narrative Values (Doctoral dissertation). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3208388).
Sava, R. (2006). Quest and Conquest in the Fiction of David Lodge (Doctoral dissertation,
Würzburg
University).
Retrieved
from
https://opus.bibliothek.uniwuerzburg.de/opus4wuerzburg/frontdoor/deliver/index/docId/1986/file/quest_and_conqu
est.pdf
Wiegenstein, S. C. (1987). The Contemporary Academic Novel: A Study in Genre. (Doctoral
dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No.
8818979).
Yeats, W. B. (1994). Sailing to Byzantium. In William Butler Yeats. The Collected Poems of W.
B. Yeats (p. 163). Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Poetry Library.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

36

