Paper published in the Journal Ageing International, 2017
The publication is available at: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12126-017-9298-2
Open Access (read-only): http://rdcu.be/ub6J

Cruz-Martínez, Gibrán (2017). Revenue-Generating Potential of Taxation for Older-Age
Social Pensions. Ageing International. DOI: 10.1007/s12126-017-9298-2

Revenue-Generating Potential of Taxation for Older-Age Social Pensions1
Gibran Cruz-Martinez
gibrancm@uia.no

Abstract
Social security and taxation operate jointly to overcome individual deprivations, reduce income inequality and
promote development, bringing ‘taxation into social protection analysis and planning’. There are several ways in
which governments can create fiscal space to finance social protection programmes (e.g. social pensions). The
idea is to create new sources of revenue –sustainable in the long-run – which can be used to finance social
pensions, without building new liabilities and without distorting macroeconomic stability. The literature
specifically addressing the potential fiscal space that could be created to finance social pensions is limited. This
paper aims to begin filling some of those gaps and identify sources for creating fiscal space for social pensions
through the revenue side (i.e. examine the revenue-generating potential of taxation for social pensions).
Specifically, examine the potential funding power of three types of taxes (income tax, corporate tax, and trade
tax) using cross-country tax revenues and tax rate data in a global perspective. The paper demonstrates that the
three taxes have a revenue-generating potential to finance social pensions in several countries. There is not a
magic prescription useful for every country, but there are numerous options to design a tailored mix of sources to
create fiscal space.

Keywords: social pensions; fiscal space; social protection; tax revenue; taxation; cash transfers; poverty
reduction

1

This study was funded by Help Age International, while the author was a Research Fellow.

