"x"
"1" "The  Continued   Relevance  of Ego Network Data"
"2" "Jeffrey A. Smith"
"3" "University  of Nebraska-Lincoln"
"4" "Abstract :"
"5" "Ego network  data  have a  long history in the social sciences,   acting as a bridge between traditional statistical techniques and network analysis.  Ego network data provide personal network information,  as the data are based on a sample of individuals.  This chapter details the basic features of  such  data, describing the advantage s , disadvantages and potential applications of  using   ego  network data.  Ego network data remain a p opular choice, despite the growing availability of full network s   fr om automated sources  ( such as  cell phone records ) .  This is  in  large part because ego network data are easy to collect  but still  provide a surprisingly  large amount of  network  information .   Ego network data are  also quite flexible,  with past work using the same basic data structure for widely different purposes:  from measuring  social  support and social boundaries;  to infer ring  global network features from a sample ;   to  acting as a c orrective for  other sampling techniques  (such as respondent-driven sampling) .   E go network data are  thus  easy to collect and useful for  a  wide variety of substantive and methodological  problems.   Given  the ease of collection and the flexibility of use , t here is every reason to believe that ego network data will continue to be a useful option for network scholars.  I end the chapter by  discussing possible avenues for future work ."
"6" "Introduction"
"7" "Ego network data have a long history in the social sciences,   acting  as a kind of bridge between traditional statistical  techniques  and network analysis  (Perry,  Pescosolido  and  Borgatti  2018) .  Ego network data  continue to be collected and analyzed and  are widely used in  studies of  health , organization s  and   stratification ( Cornwell,  Laumann  and  Shumm  2008;  Kadushin  2012 ; Smith, McPherson, Smith- Lovin  2014 ) .   Researchers continue to use e go network data  because: a)  the data  are (relatively) easy to collect ;  and b)  the  data provide a surprisingly large amount of relational, or network, information  ‘on the cheap’  (Smith 2012) .  Ego network data are  also  quite flexible, with potential applications varying greatly in scale (individual to full networks) and type . For example, ego network  data  are often used to measure  the  social support available to  individuals  ( Fischer  1982;  Wills and Shinar 2000;   Cornwell et al.  2009 ) ; the same basic data structure has, however ,  also been used as a purely methodological tool, used to correct the estimates of non-traditional sampling schemes , such as respondent-driven sampling  ( Lu  2013 ) .   With its ease of collection, depth of information, and flexibility in use, t he view here is that ego network data are, a nd will continue to be, useful for network scholars, even in the face of new and more widely available complete network data sources, such as from  cell phone databases  and  online platforms."
"8" "Ego network  data  are  generally   defined  in  contrast  to full  network  data  (Marsden 2011) . With full network data ,   a  researcher has information  on all actors in a setting: one  can identify each actor and determine whe ther  a tie  exists between each pair of actors .  Under such ideal conditions ,  it is straightforward to calculate global  measures  of interest, such  as  group  divisions  and cohesion, as well  individual  measures, like centrality  ( an  individual’s  position in  t h e  network)  ( Freeman 1979;  Moody and White 2003 ) .  Often, however,  it is impractical to collect full network data on the population of interest  (Frank 1971; Smith 2015) .  The network may be too large and the resources available too scant to interview everyone in the population ,  while an appropriate elect ronic data source may not exist .   A   researcher  may be interested in the entire U . S .  population, for example, where collecting a full census on a particular rel ationship of interest  (which may not exist in online sources) is not  generally  p ossible .  It would also be difficult (although not impossible) to collect full network data across many different contexts, such as schools or  neighborhoods ."
"9" "Ego network data offer  an alternative, basi ng the network information  on a sample of  individuals   (e.g., McPherson, Smith- Lovin , and  Brashears  2006). The survey randomly samples individu als from a known population  (generally assumed to have a known  a sampling frame ) , gathering  information about the respondents  and their local social network  ( Marsden 1990 ) .  The data yield per sonal networks, where the focus is on ego, the focal node/respondent, and ego’s immediate social neighbors , or alters (i.e., the people that ego is connected to).    For example, a researcher may ask the respondent who they talk  with a on regular basis, collecting data on each named  alter ;  we would  know the number of alters as well as the characteristics of  each   alter .  The data will also often include the social connections betw een  alters ,  although  this is  not always  the case ."
"10" "Figure 1 depicts a set of example ego networks.  Ego represents the sampled respondent, from  which  the rest of the network information is derived.  Dark  black  lines represent ties between  ego  and alter, while the dotted lines  represent ties between alters. We c an see in the  top left corner that  ego  has  2   alters ,  who are not tied to each other .  Or,  in  row 2 ,  the far right   ego  has  3  alters   where   every alter  is connected to every other alter .  It is important to  remember  that the ego  networks  are  s ampled separately, with rep orts on immediate contacts only. There is no information on the alters of the named alters.  Similarly , e go network surveys do not collect identifying i n formation on the named   alters  and  there  is  n o  (simple)  way of knowing if the sample  respondents  themselves  are  connected.  Thus, t he sampled parts of t he network (collected within an ego network survey) cannot be connected.  This also means that the ego network data  cannot  be used to map particular edges in the network. The researcher may know if ego has a dense personal network, but they cannot tell which  specific actors  are friends.  In that sense,  one can  think of ego network  sampling as capturing p ieces of  the  whole network,  w ith each ego network representing  a   different piece  of  the puzzle  (Smith 2012 ; Smith et al. 2014 ) ."
"11" "Advantages and  Disadvantages  of Ego Network Data"
"12" "There are  many positive characteristics  associated with  personal network data ,  as well as  a  number of potential drawbacks .  I begin with the advantages of ego network data before turning to the  disadvantages ."
"13" "Advantages"
"14" "T he data are, first and foremost, e asy to collect. Rather than require information on every node and every tie between nodes,  ego network data are  only based on  an individual’s social network . This means that we do not  need a census of all cases ,  but can, instead, simply collect a sample of respondents.  O ne need  not  have data on all Americans to collect useful, representative network data on the country  ( e.g.,  Marsden 1987) .   Moreover, the ego networks are treated as independent, with no  identifying  information needed to link the ego networks.  This greatly reduces the  collection burden of the r esearcher ."
"15" "Second, ego network data are e asy to embed in   traditional survey s .  Ego network data are based on a random sample of the population. This makes  it easy to add to an existing, typical survey. A researcher would still begin by taking  a random  sample  of   individual s  and  ask ing  questions about demographics , SES , health , and  the like. The only difference here is that one adds  network   questions , eliciting information about the respondents’ social contacts.  In fact ,   national  survey s , like  the General Social Survey (GSS) , will periodically include ego network sections within the larger questionnaire ( Burt 1984 ) .  This embedding of ego network questions within larger surveys means that network data can be collected along side  (and thus used as a predictor of)  measures of health, income and the like."
"16" "Third,  ego network data are e asy to combine with alternative data collection strategies .  For example,  it is possible  (and often very useful) to pair   Respondent  Driven S ampling  (RDS)   data with ego network surveys  ( Lu 2013 ) . With RDS ,  individuals  from hidden populations (such as  female sex workers)  recruit others into the study, thus creating a chain of  referrals  that serve as the base sample  ( Salganik  and  Heckathorn  2004 ) .  Additional ego network data  can be collected on the recruited individuals, supplementing the RD S chain data in important ways  ( Lu 2013 ;  Verdery  et al. 2015 ) .  Ego network  data  c an also  supplement  more automated data sources  like cell phone data, co-locatio n Bluetooth data or online data,  fleshing out the local network  characteristics  of the sampled respondents  ( Golder  and Macy 2011;  Oliver,  Matic  and  Frias -Martinez   2015 ) ."
"17" "Fourth, ego network data can be collected on sensitive relations, where  it is difficult  or im possible to have respondents   identify  their  alters  on the relation of interest.  Fo r example, it may be difficult  to ask respondents to  name  their sexual partners ,   making it hard  to collect complete networks  ( Krivitsky  and Morris 2015) .  Respondents may be reluctant , while  no  list (or roster) may exist for them to identify  the partner .  Similarly, given the confidential nature of the data, such collection efforts  (on a third party , the named alter) may be met  with  IRB complications.   An ego network s urvey offers a nice alternative, as  it does not require  identifying  the named partners , only the number of partners and their  characteristics .  The researcher can thus collect network information without broaching difficult confidentiality issues, making  it  easier  to elicit network information on sensitive  relations  like sexual contact and drug use  ( Morris and  Kretzschma  2000;   Merli  et al. 2015 a ) ."
"18" "Fifth,  ego network surveys contain a g reat deal of information:  including the characteristics of ego, the  characteristics  of the alters (or the people ego interacts with), the structural features of the personal network  (e.g., size) , and even something about the nature of the relationship between ego and each alter  (closeness, frequency of contact, etc.).  More  subtlety ,  ego network data offer information a t  both the micro and macro levels.  At the micro level,  there is  information about the individual respondent and the people they int eract with. This local information can then be aggregated to infer  characteristics  about the population-level network structure from which the respondents were sampled , thus offering information about the macro level  (Smith 2012 ;  Gjoka ,  Smith and Butts 2014 ) ."
"19" "Disadvantages"
"20" "Such  advantageous  characteristics come at a cost .  First, the data are based (typically) on self-reports.  Ego (the focal respondent) reports on the characteristics of the  alters  and the ties between alters.  There could be biases in such reporting, as the respondent may be unable to report on their  alters with complete accuracy  ( Feld and Carter 2002; Brewer et al. 2005 ) ;  while  demographic characteristics like  gender and education  are unlikely to cause many problems, the  respondent  may (for  example) be   un able to  accurately  report on the political attitudes of their alters  (Marsden 1990) .  There may also be cognitive biases in the repo rting of the  alter-alter ties  ( Almquist  2012 ) ; for example,  respondents  may assume their alters know each other based on a cognitive desire to minimize conflict or divides within their ego network ( Krackhardt  and  Kilduff  1999 ) ."
"21" "Second,  respondents must be treated as  independent. Ego  netw ork data capture purely personal  networks, based on  an independent sample  of respondents.  The egos themselves are thus assumed to be independent ; and in fact ,  must be treated so as there is  (generally)  no  way to tell which egos are  tied to each other.  Such assumptions work well in nationally  representative  surveys, where it is extremely unlikely that  any two selected  respondents  know each  other  ( Smith et al. 2014 ) .  This works less well in   smaller,  bounded settings where a large number of respondents within a school or organization are sampled.  If sampled egos are, in fact, tied together ,  then models that as sume they are independent may have  biased estimates and  deflated  standard errors  ( Ebring  and Young 1979 ) ."
"22" "Third,  the data do a rather poor job of capturing asymmetries in social relations,  as the relations  are  based  only  on ego’s report of a tie. Many social connections must assumed to be symmetric (such as friendship), even if an underlying asymmetry actually exists  (where a like s  b much more than b likes a)  (Gould  2002;  Smith and  Faris  2015) . Additional data would have to be collected or the relation of interest must be concrete enough to allow for clear asymmetries in the interactions (e.g., did you borrow money from each alter? did they borrow money from you?)"
"23" "What can  be   Extract ed  from Ego Network Data?"
"24" "Table 1 summarizes the  information a vailable from ego network data.   While  one  must weigh the potential drawbacks  of using sampled data , the upside, in terms of information collected, is higher than one might expect.   The first column  in Table 1  describes the information collected from the  survey  itself. The second column lists the measures associated with each piece of information, while the third column offers example applications."
"25" "Respondents are first asked to list a  set of social contacts, the  alters .  Practically,  studies will often ask respondents to list a limited number of  alters (up to 10 for example)  but it is generally best not to truncate the data in any way  (Smith 2015) .   Similarly , it is generally a good idea to ask more than one question to elicit the initial list of  alters  ( Marin and Hampton 2007 ) .  The person you hang out with may be different than the person you discuss health matters with.  Multiple  relations  capture  a fuller  picture  of  the  local personal network . The exact   relation (s) depends on  the  question of interest.  Questions  are typically either  general (“ Looking back over the last six months who are the people with whom you discussed an important personal matter? ”), behavioral ( Who have you s lept  with in the last 6 months?) or capture support relations ( If you were sick, who would be willing to accompany you to the hospital? )"
"26" "Such data,  at  the individual level, offer  an  estimate  of the number of contacts for ego ,  or  individual degree . More generally,  the listing of alters (aggregated over all respondents) offers an estimate of the degree distribution, equal to the number of alters per respondent.  The alter list also offers information on differential degree, or the mean degree across demographic groups.  This is inferable as there is information on deg r ee and the demographic characteristics of the respondents. For example,  those with higher levels of education may have more social ties than those  with  less education  (e.g.,  Lizardo   2006; McPherson, Smi th- Lovin , and   Brashears   2006 )."
"27" "The second row in Table  1  summarizes the information  surrounding the alter characteristics. A  researcher may ask  the respondent to report on the  race, gender, and ag e of the named   alters (often only a subset of the total list ).   This information can be used in a number of ways.   For example, w e can ask if the respondents are si milar to their social contacts.  The respondent provides information on both their characteristics and their  alters ’ characteristics; this makes it possible to ask if ego is the same/different than the alters  (e .g . ,  what proportion  of the alters  are the same gender as ego ?) .  We can also ask if the  alters  are themselves diverse or homogenous  ( Marsden 1988 ) .  For example, what prop ortion of the  alters  are female?   W hat proportion  of the  alters (or alter-alter dyads)  are the same gender ?  Similarly , we can ask how ego network composition is associated with  different outcomes ;  for example, the strength of an ethnic identity  ( Lubbers, Molina, and McCarty  2007 ) ."
"28" "Ego network data also include information about the tie itself.  This is summarized in row 3 of Table 1.   The survey may ask respondents  to report on the f requency of contact  between themselves and  the alter  (daily, weekly, monthly, etc.) , as well as the closeness and duration of the relationship. A survey may also capture whether the named alter is kin (mother, father, brother, etc.) .  A detailed survey could even ask where and under what  circumstances   the two met.  Such information is useful in  fleshing  out  the picture of an  individual’s  social network  (e.g., showing proportion kin,  how often ego sees their alters, etc . ) ."
"29" "The fourth row summarizes the information surrounding the alter-alter ties. A researcher will ask the respondent to report on the ties that exist between alter 1 and 2, 1 and 3, 2 and 3, etc. (typically limited to a subset of all alters to curtail respondent burden) .   The alter-alter tie data captures the local structural patterns in the ego network.   Are individuals socially connected to ego (the respondent) also connected to each other? Or, is a friend of a friend (the respondent) also a friend? The simplest structural measure based on the  alter-alter ties is density, showing the proportion of ties that exist  relative to the total number  possible , but more complicated measures are possible (see Smith 2012) .   Substantively, density shows to what extent people tied to ego are also tied to each other."
"30" "Applications of Ego Network Da ta"
"31" "Ego network  data  thus  contain   information about  the  number of  alters ,  the  characteristics  of  the  alters and  the  structure of  the  ego network.  Different research traditions employ this  information  in  very  different ways, depending on t he question of interest and the scale of the analysis."
"32" "Using ego network properties  to predict  individual level outcomes"
"33" "Ego network data are commonly used to measure individual-level network properties, which are then used as predictors of various outcomes, like health, mental health, job placement, cultural consumption, and the like  ( House, Landis and  Umberson  1988 ;  Dimaggio  and  Louch  1998 ) .   Scholars in this tradition are most likely to collect and analyze ego network data  as part of  a  traditional ,  (often)  national -level  survey ."
"34" "The m ost common usage  of ego net work data is  still  as a means of measuring social support  ( Luke and Harris 2007;   Umberson  and Montez 2010 ) .  Social support is then used to  predict  health outcomes, such as  mental health, health status, recovery from illness, etc.  ( Cornwell and  Laumann  2015;  Perry and  Pescosolido  2015 )   The simplest measure  of social support  is  the degree  of the respondent: f or example,  the  number of people they can rely on  for  aide, provide specific health information , or provide emotional support .  Generally, the more people one can rely on,  the better the health outcomes ( although this has its limits and having too many associates may be a stressor in itself ) .   It is also  possible   to use the  characteristics  of the  alters  to measure social support .  Here, different   alters  offer  different   resources from which ego can  potentially draw.    Ego network s   comprised of alters with higher income ( financial   resources ) ,  education (informational  resources ) and more kin ( emotional  resources) may lead to better outcomes ."
"35" "Ego network data are useful, in part, because of the  wide   range of relational information that can be collected.  For example,  it is clear that not all connections are ‘good’ or act as  resources  for ego. Social connections can also represent risks and potential stressors, and ego network data  can just as easily capture  such  negative influences  ( Portes   and  Landolt  1996 ) .    For example,  if the relation of interest is  drug partners ,  then those with higher degree (i.e. more  drug partners) are actually  at  higher  risk for engaging in risky behavior than those with lower degree  ( Lovell 2002;  Baily et al. 2007 ) .    Similarly ,  the alter characteristics can capture  potential stressors  and risks  that  ego faces. For exampl e, the distribution of (chronic)  illness among named alters can be an important predictor of one’s own health status, as  dealing with an  ill relative  or friend  may be a stressor, both  physically  and  emotionally  ( Moreman  2008 )."
"36" "The structural characteristics of the ego network  (or the alter-alter ties)  can also be used  to   predict individual level outcomes. The basic idea is that norms are  easier to main tain in a tight knit network, w h e r e everyone knows everyone else (as s oci al control is  easier to  maintain ) .   For example,  past work by  Haynie  ( 2001 )  explored  adolescent delinquent behavior .  She  predicted delinquent  behavior  as a function of personal network features, including  both  composition and  structure.  Delinquency increased as friend’s delinquency increased, but this relationship was clearly dependent on the density of the friendships: the rate of increase in delinquency was considerably higher in ego networks with  high  density. In such cases,  a tight knit network made  it easier to maintain social control, making friend’s delinquent behavior  seem  normative."
"37" "Ego network data not only provide information on risks and support, they  can  also be used to proxy the availability and diversity of information available to ego. Here the focus is on the flow of information from outside sources to the focal respondent.   T he basic notion underlying such work is a powerful but simple one: that an individual  who is  receiving  a diverse, non- redundant  set of i nformation is in an advantageous  position  ( Burt 1992 ) . They would  (potentially)  hear about a wider range of job opportunities, new health informat ion, new consumption goods, etc . ,  while, importantly ,  having infor mation that others do not have ( Lin 1999 ;  Burt 2004 ) ."
"38" "Past work has used ego network data as a means of measuring the information  flow surrounding  ego.  We  might  expect that individuals who have   large r  ego  networks  to r eceive more diverse information , as they  are pulling from more sources.  For example, more  highly educated  people tend to have larger networks and more  diverse cultural consumption patterns  ( Dimaggio   1987 )   (although more recent work has also argued that individuals with diverse taste join many groups, thus creating larger, more diverse networks ; see  Lizardo   2006 )."
"39" "A long lite rature  has  alternatively focused on the  relationship(s)  between  ego  and the named alters . Here, the question is  whether those with more weak connections are more likely to find better positions , have more d iverse consumption patterns, et c .  ( Granovetter  1974) .  The  argument is that   weak ties are  more likely to bridge loosely connected parts of the  network , and thus  provide  more  unique information compared to strong ‘redundant’ connections ; i.e. the strength of weak ties hypotheses  (although  note   t he evidence is mixed here)  ( Granovetter  1973) .   Work in the organizational literature has focused more on the strategic aspects of  such processes,  arguing  that an individual who fills a ‘structural hole’ is likely to  have informational  and brokerage  advantages ,  as they connect two groups with  few  ties between them  ( Burt 1992 ) .  Burt has a suggested a number of  ego network  measures to capture these  features ,  including  effective size, efficiency, and constraint  ( Burt 1992 ) .   See Table 1."
"40" "Using ego network data to me asu r e   s ocial  b oundaries"
"41" "Ego network data  can also be used to  study the  social boundaries that exist in a population of interest ,  in addition to measur ing individual level predictors .     Ego network data contain information on the demographic characteristics of  both  the  respondents   and alters; for example, offering information on education, gender, age, etc. Taken together, the respondent and alter characteristics can be used to explore homophily, or the tendency for similar individuals to interact  ( Mcpherson , Smith- Lovin  and Cook 2001 ;  Brashears  2008 ;  Smith et al. 2014 ) .  A ggregating over all respondents  y ields the frequency of social ties between different demographic groups.  One c an ask how many ties exist between people of the same  characteristics , or in-group ties  (Male-Male; Female-Female) ,  versus ties between people of differ ent   characteristics , or out-group tie s  (Male-Female) .     For example,  how  frequently do  individuals  form  social connections with someone of a  different race ,  education or gender?"
"42" "E go network data  thus  offer a means of measuring   the  salience of  a  demographic  dimension  ( Laumann  1966;  Blau  and Schwartz 1984) .  A low salience, or unimportant, dimension will exhibit low  levels of homophily,   as  the social boundaries are porous and individuals are able to freely form close social ties with members of a different social group.  One can then  use ego network data to tease  out   which demographic dimensions are more salient,  or are  more important in  organizing  a  social system  ( Marsden 1987 ) .   Importantly, this can be done at a national level  (as the data are easy to collect as part of a traditional national survey) .   One can ask (for example) if race/ethnicity is a more important demographic divide than religion, age or gender  (Marsden 1988 ; Rosenfeld 2008 ) . If collected over time, it is possible to ask how the salience of  different  dimensions  increase/decrease  in light  of larger macro structural shifts, such as demographic change s  (e.g., the country is more racially diverse) , increasing inequality and changes to residential segregation (Smith et al. 2014) .  It is also possible to make cross-national comparisons, where different  countries , with very  different   political  and economic systems, may be soc ially divided in  different ways  ( Kalmijn  1994 ) ."
"43" "E go net work data also make  it possible to look at the  specific divides between social  groups . Are college graduates parti cularly unlikely to make out- group ties?  Similarly ,  are ties between  college graduates and high school  graduates  more/less likely than ties between college graduates and PhD holders  (Smith et al. 2014) ?  This can be represented by a frequency table, or  mixing  matrix, capturing the frequency of ties between each pair of categories  (e.g.,  Merli  et al. 2015 a ) .   Such analyses can shed light on which  social  divide s  are  particularly  salient ."
"44" "Analytically , a  researcher can examine  the raw ,  or absolute , rate of contact between demo g raphic groups, as well as  the rate of contact   relative to  some baseli ne model of chance expectations;  e.g.,  based on  the demographic composition of the population of  interest .  T he raw rates show the actual level of contact between groups  ( Blau ,  Beeker  and Fitzpatrick 1984 ) . How likely is someone with  a high school  degree to know someone with  a  college  degree ? The relative rates capture the salience of the  demographic  dimension more directly, by asking the same question net of what we expect by chance, just based on the size of different groups (i.e., we would expect  more   ties between two large groups just by chance).  A number of models can be employed to  handle  the relative to chance analysis:  including  t raditional log-linear models ,  case-cont rol models, and e xponential  random   graph m odels  ( Koehly ,   Goodreau ,  and  Morris  2004;  Krivitsky ,  Handcock , and Morris 2011;  Smith et al. 2014 ) .   It is also possible to employ latent social space models to test hypotheses (Smith 2017)."
"45" "Using ego network data to improve   RDS estimation"
"46" "Ego network data have also recently been applied to more technical problems, serving as a useful corrective for  other sampling traditions— most notably  acting as a means of adjusting RDS  estimates .  RDS is a widely used sampling strategy, appropriate for  conditions where no  clear sampling frame exists, such as with hidden, vulnerab le populations like drug users and female sex workers ( Salganik  and  Heckathorn  2004 ) .  RDS begins with  a small  number o f seeds,  ofte n selected based on convenience ;   the initial seeds the n  pass on a coupon inviting other drug user s (for example) into the study. These invited cases are brought into the study and the process is repeated again.  Typically ,  each respondent will recruit 2-3 other people in to  the study."
"47" "The sampling process is thus based on personal referrals, and a researcher must make strict assumptions about this recruitment process to arrive at  valid  estimates (e.g., proportion of female sex workers with syphilis)  ( McCreesh  et al. 2012;  Merli  et al. 2015 b ) .   For example, one must assume that respondents refer new  participants  into the study by making a random selection amongst their network alters;  or ,  one must  assume  that  there is no preferential recruitment.  When the  assumption s of the estimators do  not hold, the estimates may be biased  and have inflated variances  ( Goel  and  Salganik   2010;  Lu 2013 ) .    In practice, this  is  often the case, as participants differentially recruit certain types of people into the study   (e.g., female sex worker s may be  more/less likely to pass  the  coupon to people in same physical venue).  The proble m is that such biases are  difficult to adjust for, as traditional estimators only use information from the RDS chain itself."
"48" "Recent work by Lu  (2013)  suggests that traditional  RDS  estimators can be greatly improved by incorporating  ego network  information  from the  recruited respondents.  The basic idea is to   collect ego network data on the  individuals  recruited into the study.  The  alter characteristics (from the ego network survey)  are then used  to adjust for any violations of the assumptions, such as differential peer recruitment. This is possible  as one can compare the characteristics of the recruited peers (i.e., those they passed the coupon to) to the characteristics of the full list of  alters , including those that did not receive the coupon. One can then adjust  for any biases in recruitment.    Lu  found that  using  the  ego network data greatly improved the  estimates , with lower  bias and variance  than estimates based  only  on the  RDS data itself  (s ee also  Verdery  et al.  2015 ) .   M ore generally, this hints at the potential  payoff from combining ego network data with other data sources."
"49" "Using ego network data to infer  full network features"
"50" "Ego network data  can also be used  to   infer global network features when full network data cannot be collected  (Smith 2012; 2015) .   A researcher may be interested in the  net work  features  of a population , such as distance or cohesion,  where  it  is in feasible to collect information  on all actors and all ties b etween actors (e.g.,  t he network may be too large or  the relationship of interest too  sensitive  to collect  directly ) . It may, however, be  possible to collect sampled ego  network data  in cases where a census cannot be collected.  If it is possible to  make inference abo ut the full network structure f r o m  independently  sampled ego network data, then  there is a potentially radical shift in the way we thin k about doing network analysis— as one could collect a sample (instead of a census) and still measure the network features of a given population  (e.g.,   Handcock  and  Gile  2010;  Krivitsky  et al. 2011 ) . T his would , for example,  make it easier  to move beyond small, inst itutionally bounded populations ."
"51" "Using sample d  network data makes data collection easier but also raises difficult  inference   problems. It is difficult to capture network level measure like cohesion, group structure or diffusion potential if we cannot map out the direct and indirect connections among all actors in  a  network.  T he sampled data offer only  independent  pieces  of the network , thus offering   no direct way of   measuring  global  network  features.   Instead, a researcher must infer what the full network structure looks just based on the local information found in the ego network data."
"52" "P ast work has used  simulation  as a solution,  where the goal is to generate complete  networks that are consistent wit h  the local information found in the sampled data  ( Morris et al.  2009 ;  Smith 2012 ) .  As the ego networks are drawn randomly from the population, any network consistent with the sampled information is a possible realization of the true network.  The basic idea  is to  gather information from the ego networks ,  generate full networks that have those properties ,  an d  use the  generated  network s  to answer substantive questions about the population of interest."
"53" "M uch of the literature using ego network data  to generate full networks has  focused on sexual networks  ( Morris et al. 2009;  Merli  et al. 2015 a ) . Sexual networks are a prime candidate for such  analyses :  it is difficult to collect full  network  data  on sexual relations  but it is  necessary to know something about the global network features in order to characterize the epidemic risk in a population.  A typical study will take  information on  the  degree distribution , differential degree, and homophily (i.e.,  sexual mixing between groups)  and generate a  full  network that is consist ent with what is observed  in  the  actual ego network data.  This is generally accomplished  using  exponential random graph models (ERGM)  or similar approaches.  Once the  network is g enerated, it is possible to explore the potential for   infectious diseases  such as HIV or HCV to spread through the network  ( Morris and  Kretzschma  2000 ) ."
"54" "Recent work has also use d  ego network data and simulation to explore the properties of  spatially-embedded   networks .  An unbounded network (i.e., not bounded by school walls or organizational affiliation) can range over a wide geographic area, while still having properties that are shaped by  geography ; for example, interaction decreases as physical distance between two  individuals  increases ( Spiro,  Almquist  and  Butts   2016 ).  Ego network  data  are useful for capturing the spatial-network  properties  of unbounded populations.  A researcher c ould  randomly sample respondents,  collecting information on the  neighborhood ,  city, state, etc. of the respondent s  and  alters.  If  physical  location cannot be collected,  it is possible to  ask how far  (or how long)  each  alter is  from ego .   This information could then be used t o inform the simul ation  o f  the full network,  simulating ties based on the observed  physical distance between ego-alter pairs  in the data  (e.g.,  Butts et al.   2012 ;  Merli  et al. 2015 b ) ."
"55" "It is important to note that s tudies in the sexual network tradition  (as well as the spatial tradition)  typically do not incorporate the alter-alter ties  into the analysis :  the alters are unlikely to have sexual relations with each other and it is difficult to ask about the sexual partners of the alters.  A number of recent studies  have developed models that  make explicit use of the alter-alter ties  (Smith 2012; Smith 2015) .     This will be particularly important in settings whe re  one’s associates  are likely to know each other, the case for most (non-sexual) network ties."
"56" "The  goal  of such work   is to incorporate the structure of the ego networks into a simulation that infers global network features from sampled data.   The approach of S mith (2012), for example, offers a  unique means of measuring  (local) structural features from the alter-alter tie data , and then generating networks based on those local features.  Specifically, t he alter-alter tie data  are used  to construct  a distribution of ego network configurations.  An example ego network configuration distribution is plotted in Figure 2  (limited to configurations with 4 or less alters for space considerations).  The  x-axis plots the  different configurations that ego can fall into, based on the size of the ego network and the pa t tern of ties between alters .  The y-axis captures the  proportion of egos in a  hypothetical sample  that fall into each  configuration."
"57" "The basic idea is  then  to look for full networks with the same distribution of ego network configurations   as the sampled data  (the simulation is also conditioned  on  the  degree distribution, differential degree and homophily found  in the sample) .  A network consistent with this local information is likely to have similar global features as the actual (unknown) network. The simulation is heavily constrained by the empirical data, making it more likely that the generated network approximates the true network.  In a test of the method, Smith (2012; 2015) found that the simulation approach offers estimates of  global  network  features  (like distance and modularity) that closely approximate the values from the true network. This s uggests that  a  researcher  could collect sampled ego network data  and still make plausible claims about th e structure of the full network ."
"58" "Conclusion :  future  uses of ego network data"
"59" "Ego network  data  have a  long history in the social sciences,  traditionally  acting as a means to measure social support and social boundaries, and more recently being employed  to infer global network features from a sample , as well as acting as a corrective to other sampling techniques.  This long and varied history suggest s  something about the utility of this seemingly ‘too simple’ network data structure.  The evolution of use als o suggests that  ego network data  might be used in very different ways in the future .  We should expect innovations in  methods , approaches and substantive concerns.    Here,  I highlight  a number of possible avenues for future work."
"60" "First,  there is an opportunity to push the ego network sampling/simulation approach much further,  making  it  a general option for network scholars.  For example, one possible application is estimating contextual network effects; contextual network effects capture the relationship of global network properties, like cohesion (i.e. percent in the largest  bicomponent ), on individual outcomes, like mental health ( Bearman  and Moody 2004).   For example, do more socially cohesive schools have lower rates of depression ?   The question is whether one can estimate such  relationships  using sampled data,  rather than having to collect census data in every context .   A researcher  would first collect sampled ego network data in different contexts (schools, organizations, etc.).  They would then use the sampled data to infer   global network structure, yielding an estimate  of cohesion (for example)  across  context s . Cohesion would then be used as a contextual-level predictor of mental health,  sucidality , and so on  ( Wray,  Colen  and   Pescosolido , 2011 ) . The larger goal would be to make it easier to incorporate  global  network structure into traditional analyses in the social sciences, with data limitations  no longer acting as an obstacle.    The open  question, of course, is  whether  sampled data will actually yield  empirically valid, accurate estimates  of contextual  network  effects."
"61" "In a similar way,  there is an opportunity   to combine network sampling with agent-based models, with the goal of specifying agent-based models that are more f ully grounded in empirical data  (Smith and  Burow  2018) .   Agent-based models are based on simulated worlds  where actors interact  bas ed on a  set of pr e-specified rules;  these models are used to  explore/test social theories under controlled conditions.  A gent-based model s are  (generally)  based on a stylized hypothetical world , where the conditions of the simulation are not informed by empirical data.   Purely theoretical  models, while potentially useful, are also easier to dismiss, and recent  work has pushed for agent-based models to be more empirically grounded  ( Bruch and Atwell 2015 ;  Hedström  and  Manzo  2015 ) .  One way of satisfying this call would be to incorporate ego network data into agent-based models; most obviously  in models based on network processes, such as diffusion  (e.g.,  diffusion of culture through a network ) .    A researcher would use sampled ego network data to generate re alistic full networks, which could  then be us ed within the agent-based model as the base  substrate  for the simulation . The advantage of such an approach is that the data are easy to collect but  the simulations are still conditioned on  a realistic network structure."
"62" "There is also room to push the modeling of ego network data. For example, there is current work ( Krivistky  and Morris 2015 ) on using ego network data to estimate ERGMs (where the researcher predicts the network of interest,  the  ties between all  i ,j  pairs, as a function of  different networks counts) . Thus, one would only need to  collect  sampled data to estimate these increasingly popular statistical  network  models.  More work on the statistical properties of these models, as well as more practical applications ,  is needed."
"63" "F uture work should also  grapple more explicitly with the  limitations of ego network data.  For example, respondents may forget to name  alters  that should have been part of their ego network ( Marin 2004 ). This can distort the number of  alters  listed (degree), as well as the characteristics of the alters.  More work  is needed to describe the  biases that  exist . More work is also needed on the survey side, showing what  survey protocols  can limit threats to validity.  For example,  Marin  and Hampton ( 2007 ) suggest using multiple name generators, as certain questions may prime different associations for the respondent. It would also be useful to explore the benefits of using specific exchanges (borrow money; get a ride from, etc.) instead of more general name generators (who m  do you discuss important matters with?).   Similarly , there is much work to be done on fully  incorporating  multiple relations into the analysis of ego network data.  Ego network data based on multiple relations has many advantages: methodologically, the data are less prone to recall bias (as the respondent has more than one chance to name an alter); substantively,  multiple relational  data open up new avenues for analyses — for example, making it possible to enumerate  social  roles . Finally, future  work should continue to   explore the   costs and  benefits  of  using   different   collection  technologies   when  eliciting contacts."
"64" "Finally, there is much work to be done on combining ego network data with other data  sources .   We saw above h ow ego network data can improve RDS  estimat es, but there are a number of  other  ways that ego network data can  be pa i red with  additional  data  sources  to create a unique, robust set of information.   For example, it is possible to supplement ego network data with a very limited snowball sample .  With a snowball  sample, a researcher will contact a random sub-sample of all named  alters,  interviewing those selected  alters in a separate interview .   Even going  out  one step into the network   offer s a great deal of supplemental information .   B y interviewing the  alters , one receives first hand reports on  their characteristics; this  serve s  as a  robustness  check on the original  reports from ego on the alters.  The alter interviews also make it possible to measure asymmetry in relationships,  as one can see if  the named alter reports the tie  as  being  equally strong as the respondent did.  Another possibility is to supplement the ego network data by matching the named alters to the interviewed respondents, using nicknames and descriptions (but not actual ids) as a means of identifying the alter in the list of respondents ( Mouw  et al.  2014 ). This matching process would make it possib le to fill in some of the  ties between the isolated ego networks."
"65" "Similarly , ego network data can be combined with automated dat a sources, like cell phone records  and social media websites .  For example, recent studies have used Bluetooth signals on cell phones  to generate co-location networks (i.e., are person  i  and person j in the same location at the same time?)   ( Oliver  et al.  2014 ) .   Such data have the potential to reveal the social network structure on the population of interest. Unfortunately, unless the  researcher  can give cell phones to everyone in the population of interest, the data only reveal  a  sub g raph  sample on the network (i.e., only showing the ties between the sampled respondents) .  The problem with this approach  is the likely sparseness of the  data. Any two individuals in the network are  unlike ly  to interact.  A  subgraph  sample on a large network may yield very few ties between the sampled respondents unless the  sample is quite large  or the network is very dense. A  subgraph  sample with few ties indicates that the network is not very dense, but is otherwise uninformative.   A researcher can add to the cell phone  (co-location)  data by asking the respondents to directly describe their social contacts, or elicit their ego network. Such data can serve as a means of fleshing out whatever network structure emerges from the co- location  data."
"66" "In short,  ego network data are easy to collect and useful for  a  wide variety of substantive and  methodological  problems.  Given this flexibility and ease of  use,  there is every reason to believe that ego network data will continue to be a useful option for network scholars."
"67" "Works Cited"
"68" "Almquist , Zack W. 2012. \"Random Errors in Egocentric Networks.\"  Social networks  34(4) :493 -"
"69" "505.  doi : 10.1016/j.socnet.2012.03.002."
"70" "Bailey, Susan L, Lawrence J  Ouellet , Mary Ellen  Mackesy-Amiti , Elizabeth T  Golub , Holly Hagan, Sharon M Hudson, Mary H  Latka ,  Weihua   Gao , Richard S  Garfein  and DUIT Study Team. 2007. \"Perceived Risk, Peer Influences, and Injection Partner Type Predict Receptive Syringe Sharing among Young Adult Injection Drug Users in Five Us Cities.\"  Drug and Alcohol Dependence  91:S18-S29."
"71" "Bearman , Peter S and James Moody. 2004. \"Suicide and Friendships among American Adolescents.\"  American Journal of Public Health  94(1) :89 -95."
"72" "Blau , Peter M., Carolyn  Beeker  and Kevin M. Fitzpatrick. 1984. \"Intersecting Social Affiliations and Intermarriage.\"  Social Forces  62(3) :585 -606 ."
"73" "Blau , Peter M. and Joseph E. Schwartz. 1984.  Crosscutting Social Circles . Orlando: Academic Press, Inc."
"74" "Matthew E.  Brashears . 2008. “Gender and homophily: Differences in male and female"
"75" "association  in  Blau  space”  Social Science Research .   37:400-415."
"76" "Brewer, Devon D, Giovanni  Rinaldi , Andrei  Mogoutov  and Thomas W Valente.  2005. \"A"
"77" "Quantitative Review of Associative Patterns in the Recall of Persons.\"  Journal of Social Structure  6(1)."
"78" "Bruch, Elizabeth and Jon Atwell. 2015. \"Agent-Based Models in Empirical Social Research.\"  Sociological Methods & R esearch  44(2) :186 -221.  doi : 10.1177/0049124113506405."
"79" "Burt, Ronald S. 1984.  \"Network Items and the General Social Survey.\"  Social Networks  6(4) :293 -339."
"80" "Burt, Ronald S. 1992.   Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition . Cambridge: Harvard University Press."
"81" "Burt, Ronald S. 2004.  \"Structural Holes and Good Ideas.\"  American Journal of Sociology  110(2) :349 -99.  doi : 10.1086/421787."
"82" "Butts, Carter T, Ryan M Acton, John R  Hipp  and Nicholas N Nagle.  2012. \"Geographical Variability and Network Structure.\"  Social Networks  34(1) :82 -100."
"83" "Cornwell, Benjamin and Edward O  Laumann . 2015. \"The Health Benefits of Network Growth: New Evidence from a National Survey of Older Adults.\"  Social Science & M edicine  125:94-106."
"84" "Cornwell, Benjamin, Edward O.  Laumann  and Philip L.  Schumm . 2008. \"The Social Connectedness of Older Adults: A National Profile.\"  American Sociological R eview  73(2) :185 -203."
"85" "Cornwell, Benjamin, L Philip  Schumm , Edward O  Laumann  and Jessica Graber. 2009. \"Social Networks in the  Nshap  Study: Rationale, Measurement, and Preliminary Findings.\"  The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences  64( suppl  1) :i47 -i55."
"86" "DiMaggio, Paul. 1987. \"Classification in Art.\"  American Sociological R eview  52:440-55."
"87" "DiMaggio, Paul and Hugh  Louch . 1998. \"Socially Embedded Consumer Transactions: For What Kinds of Purchases Do People Most Often Use Networks.\"  American Sociological R eview  63:619-37."
"88" "Feld, Scott L and William C Carter.  2002. \"Detecting Measurement Bias in Respondent Reports of Personal Networks.\"  Social networks  24(4) :365 -83."
"89" "Fischer, Claude S. 1982.   To Dwell among Friends: Personal Networks in Town and City : University of Chicago Press."
"90" "Frank,  Ove . 1971. \"Statistical Inference in Graphs.\" Ph.D . ,  Stockholm University Stockholm, Sweden."
"91" "Freeman, Linton C. 1979. \"Centrality in Social Networks: Conceptual Clarification.\"  Social Networks  1:215-39."
"92" "Gjoka , Minas, Emily Smith and Carter Butts. 2014. \"Estimating Clique Composition and Size Distributions from Sampled Network Data.\" Pp. 837-42 in  Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2014 IEEE Conference on : IEEE."
"93" "Goel ,  Sharad  and Matthew J  Salganik . 2010. \"Assessing Respondent-Driven Sampling.\"  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  107(15) :6743 -47."
"94" "Golder , Scott A and Michael W Macy.  2011. \"Diurnal and Seasonal Mood Vary with Work, Sleep, and  Daylength  across Diverse Cultures.\"  Science  333(6051) :1878 -81."
"95" "Gould, Roger V. 2002. \"The Origins of Status Hierarchies: A Formal Theory and Empirical Test.\".  American Journal of Sociology  107:1143-78."
"96" "Granovetter , Mark. 1974.  Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press."
"97" "Granovetter , Mark S. 1973.  \"The Strength of Weak Ties.\"  American Journal of Sociology  78:1360-80."
"98" "Handcock , Mark S. and Krista J.  Gile . 2010. \"Modeling Social Networks from Sampled Data.\"  Annals of the Applied Statistics  4:5-25."
"99" "Haynie , Dana L. 2001. \"Delinquent Peers Revisited: Does Network Structure Matter?\".  American Journal of Sociology  106(4) :1013 –57."
"100" "Hedström , Peter and  Gianluca   Manzo . 2015. \"Recent Trends in Agent-Based Computational Research a Brief Introduction.\"  Sociological Methods & R esearch  44(2) :179 -85."
"101" "House, James S., Karl R. Landis and Debra  Umberson . 1988. \"Social Relationships and Health.\"  Science  241(4865) :540 -45."
"102" "Kadushin , Charles. 2012.  Understanding Social Networks: Theories, Concepts, and Findings . New York: Oxford University Press."
"103" "Kalmijn ,  Mattijs . 1994. \" Assortative  Mating by Cultural and Economic Occupational Status.\"  American Journal of Sociology  100(2) :422 -52."
"104" "Koehly , Laura, Steven M.   Goodreau  and Martina Morris. 2004. \"Exponential Family Models for Sampled and Census Network Data.\"   Sociological Methodology  34:241–70."
"105" "Krivitsky ,  Pavel  N., Mark S.  Handcock  and Martina Morris. 2011. \"Adjusting for Network Size and Composition Effects in Exponential-Family Random Graph Models.\"  Statistical Methodology  8(4) :319 -39.  doi : http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stamet.2011.01.005."
"106" "Krivitsky ,  Pavel  N. and  Martina  Morris . 2015. “Inference for Social Network Models from Egocentrically- Sampled Data, with Application to Understanding Pers istent Racial Disparities in HIV  Prevalence in the U.S.” .   University of Wollongong, National Institute for Applied Statistics Research Australia, http://niasra.uow.edu.au/publications/UOW190187."
"107" "Laumann , Edward O. 1966.  Prestige and Association in an Urban Community .  Indianapolis:  Bobbs -Merrill."
"108" "Lin, Nan. 1999. \"Social Networks and Status Attainment.\"  Annual Review of Sociology  25:468-87."
"109" "Lizardo , Omar. 2006. \"How Cultural Tastes Shape Personal Networks.\"  American Sociological R eview  71:778-807."
"110" "Lovell, Anne M. 2002.  \"Risking Risk: The Influence of Types of Capital and Social Networks on the Injection Practices of Drug Users.\"  Social Science & M edicine  55(5) :803 -21."
"111" "Lu,  Xin . 2013. \"Linked Ego Networks: Improving Estimate Reliability and Validity with Respondent-Driven Sampling.\"  Social Networks  35(4) :669 -85."
"112" "Lubbers, Miranda J, José Luis Molina and Christopher McCarty.  2007. \"Personal Networks and Ethnic Identifications the Case of Migrants in Spain.\"  International sociology  22(6) :721 -41."
"113" "Luke, Douglas A and  Jenine  K Harris.  2007. \"Network Analysis in Public Health: History, Methods, and Applications.\"  Annual Review Public Health  28:69-93."
"114" "Marin, Alexandra. 2004. \"Are Respondents More Likely to List Alters with Certain Characteristics ?:  Implications for Name Generator Data.\"  Social Networks  26(4) :289 -307."
"115" "Marin, Alexandra and Keith N. Hampton. 2007. \"Simplifying the Personal Network Name Generator.\"  Field Methods  19(2) :163 -93.  doi : 10.1177/1525822x06298588."
"116" "Marsden, Peter V. 1987. \"Core Discussion Networks of Americans.\"  American Sociological R eview  52:122-31."
"117" "Marsden, Peter V. 1988. \"Homogeneity in Confiding Relations.\"  Social Networks  10(1) :57 -76."
"118" "Marsden, Peter V. 1990. \"Network Data and Measurement.\"  Annual Review of Sociology  16:435-63."
"119" "Marsden, Peter V. 2011. \"Survey Methods for Network Data.\"  Pp. 370-88 in  The Sage Handbook of Social Network Analysis , edited by J. S. a. P. J. Carrington.  London."
"120" "McCreesh , Nicky, Simon Frost, Janet Seeley, Joseph  Katongole , Matilda  Ndagire   Tarsh , Richard  Ndunguse , Fatima  Jichi , Natasha L  Lunel , Dermot Maher and Lisa G Johnston. 2012. \"Evaluation of Respondent-Driven Sampling.\"  Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.)  23(1) :138 ."
"121" "McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith- Lovin  and Matthew E  Brashears .  2006. \"Social Isolation in America: Changes in Core Discussion Networks over Two Decades.\"  American  Sociological R eview  71(3) :353 -75."
"122" "McPherson, Miller J.,  Lynn Smith- Lovin  and James M. Cook.  2001. \"Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social Networks.\"  Annual Review of Sociology  27:415-44."
"123" "Merli , M Giovanna, James Moody, Joshua Mendelsohn and Robin Gauthier. 2015. \"Sexual Mixing in Shanghai: Are Heterosexual Contact  Patterns Compatible with an HIV /Aids Epidemic? \".   Demography  52(3) :919 -42."
"124" "Merli , M Giovanna, James Moody, Jeffrey Smith, Jing Li, Sharon Weir and  Xiangsheng  Chen. 2015. \"Challenges to Recruiting Population Representative Samples of Female Sex Workers in China Using Respondent Driven Sampling.\"  Social Science & M edicine  125:79-93."
"125" "Moody, James and Douglass R. White. 2003. \"Structural Cohesion and  Embeddedness .\"  American S ociologica l R eview  68:103-27."
"126" "Moremen , Robin D. 2008. \"The Downside of Friendship: Sources of Strain in Older Women's Friendships.\"  Journal of Women & A ging  20(1-2) :169 -87."
"127" "Morris, Martina and  Mirjam   Kretzschma . 2000. \"A Micro-Simulation Study of the Effect of Concurrent Partnershi ps on HIV  Spread in Uganda.\"   Mathematical Population Studies  8(2) :109 -33."
"128" "Morris, Martina, Anne E.  Kurth ,  Deven  T. Hamilton, James Moody and Steve Wakefield. 2009.  \"Concurrent Partnerships and HIV  Prevalence Disparities by Race: Linking Science and Public Health Practice.\"  American Journal of Public Health  99(6) :1023 -31."
"129" "Mouw , Ted, Sergio Chavez, Heather  Edelblute  and Ashton  Verdery . 2014. \" Binational  Social Networks and Assimilation: A Test of the Importance of Transnationalism.\"  Social P roblems  61(3) :329 -59."
"130" "Oliver,  Nuria ,  Aleksandar   Matic  and Enrique  Frias -Martinez. 2015. \"Mobile Network Data for Public-Health: Opportunities and Challenges.\"  Frontiers in Public Health  3.   doi : 10.3389/fpubh.2015.00189."
"131" "Perry, Brea L and Bernice A  Pescosolido .  2015. \"Social Network Activation: The Role of Health Discussion Partners in Recovery from Mental Illness.\"  Social Science & M edicine  125:116-28."
"132" "Perry, Brea L., Bernice A.  Pescosolido , and Stephen P.  Borgatti .   Egocentric network analysis: Foundations, methods, and models .  Cambridge University Press, 2018."
"133" "Portes , Alejandro and Patricia  Landolt . 1996. \"The Downside of Social Capital.\"  The American Prospect  26:18-22."
"134" "Rosenfeld, Michael J. 2008. \"Racial, Educational and Religious Endogamy in the United States: A Comparative Historical Perspective.\"  Social Forces  87(1) :1 -31.  doi : 10.1353/sof.0.0077."
"135" "Salganik , Matthew J and Douglas D  Heckathorn .  2004. \"Sampling and Estimation in Hid den  Populations Using Respondent ‐ Driven Sampling.\"  Sociological Methodology  34(1) :193 -240."
"136" "Smith, Jeffrey A. 2012. \"Macrostructure from Microstructure: Generating Whole Systems from Ego Networks.\"  Sociological Methodology  42(1) :155 -205.  doi : 10.1177/0081175012455628."
"137" "Smith, Jeffrey A. 2015. \"Global Network Inference from Ego Network Samples: Testing a Simulation Approach.\"  The Journal of Mathematical Sociology  39(2) :125 -62.  doi : 10.1080/0022250X.2014.994621."
"138" "Smith, Jeffrey A. 2017. “ A Social Space Approach to Testing Complex Hypotheses: The Case of Hispanic Marriage Patterns in the U.S. ”  Socius  3:2378023117739176.  doi : 10.1177/2378023117739176."
"139" "Smith, Jeffrey A. and Jessica Burrow.  2018. “Using Ego Network Data to Inform Agent-Based Models of Diffusion”  S ociological Methods & Research.   doi : 10.1177/0049124118769100."
"140" "Smith, Jeffrey A. and Robert  Faris . 2015. \"Movement without Mobility: Adolescent Status Hierarchies and the Contextual Limits of Cumulative Advantage.\"  Social Networks  40:139-53.  doi : http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2014.10.004."
"141" "Smith, Jeffrey A., Miller McPherson and Lynn Smith- Lovin . 2014. \"Social Distance in the United States: Sex, Race, Religion, Age, and Education Homophily among Confidants, 1985 to 2004.\"  American Sociological R eview  79(3) :432 -56.  doi : 10.1177/0003122414531776."
"142" "Spiro, Emma S., Zack W.  Almquist  and Carter T. Butts.  2016. \"The Persistence of Division: Geography, Institutions, and Online Friendship Ties.\"  Socius : Sociological Research for a Dynamic World  2.  doi : 10.1177/2378023116634340."
"143" "Umberson , Debra and Jennifer  Karas  Montez. 2010. \"Social Relationships and Health a Flashpoint for Health Policy.\"  Journal of H ea lth and Social B ehavior  51(1  suppl ) :S54 -S66."
"144" "Verdery , Ashton M., M. Giovanna  Merli , James Moody, Jeffrey A. Smith and Jacob C. Fisher.  2015. \"Brief Report: Respondent-Driven Sampling Estimators under Real and Theoretical Recruitment Conditions of Female Sex Workers in China.\"  Epidemiology  26(5) :661 -65.  doi : 10.1097/ede.0000000000000335."
"145" "Wills, Thomas A. and  Ori  Shinar. 2000. \"Measuring Perceived and Received Social Support.\"  Pp. 86-135 in  Social Support Measurement and Intervention: A Guide for Health and Social Scientists , edited by Sheldon Cohen, Lynn G. Underwood and B. H. Gottlieb.  New York: Oxford University Press."
"146" "Wray, Matt, Cynthia  Colen  and Bernice  Pescosolido . 2011. \"The Sociology of Suicide.\"  Annual Review of Sociology  37(1) :505 -28.  doi : doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-081309-150058."
"147" "Table 1. Information, Measures and Applications Associated with Ego Network Data"
"148" "Information Collected"
"149" "Example  Measures"
"150" "Example Substantive Applications"
"151" "1. List of Alters"
"152" "Degree"
"153" "Degree distribution"
"154" "Differential degree"
"155" "Social support; Risk factors"
"156" "Global network inference"
"157" "Global network inference"
"158" "2. Alter Characteristics"
"159" "Proportion same as ego"
"160" "Mixing matrix"
"161" "Distributional summaries (e.g., proportion female)"
"162" "Social boundaries"
"163" "Social boundaries; Global network inference"
"164" "Adjust RDS estimates; Social support; Risk factors"
"165" "3. Tie Characteristics"
"166" "Distributional summaries (e.g., proportion kin)"
"167" "Social support"
"168" "4. Alter-Alter Ties"
"169" "Density"
"170" "Efficiency"
"171" "Ego network configurations"
"172" "Social support; Risk factors"
"173" "Information flow and brokerage"
"174" "Global network inference"
