Performative Data: Cultures of Government
Data Practice
Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu
08.13.19
Peer-Reviewed By: Performative Data: Cultures of Government Data Practice
Clusters: Data
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.045
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu, “Performative Data: Cultures of Government Data Practice,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. August 13, 2019.

Most of the current academic literature on open data looks outward at the
data’s reuse by the public. This article describes, rather, the cultural practice of
open data inside city governments. Hand-in-hand with the launch of open data
policies, city governments have embraced data analytics to track performance,
set goals, justify budget expenditures, direct public services, and represent their
work to the public. Through an increased need to data-fy, or to transform records
or actions into digital data, staff considers the analytical possibilities of existing
administrative records both as economic evidence of government activities and
as reusable assets with statistical and machine-actionable functions. These data
practices provide a legitimized way for municipal governments to know and
govern the city and manage its resources. Contended as performative acts, local
governments’ data practices help the city perform aspects of its functions and
values such accountability, transparency, and democracy.
For evidence of this shift, the authors draw on an in-depth empirical study of Los
Angeles’s open data program from 2013 to 2018. This research entailed participant observations, field visits, and interviews with city staff to describe the largely
1

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

invisible cultural processes and technical work that produce and use Los Angeles’s administrative datasets. To analyze these observations, the authors describe
three aspects of the datafication of records as they unfolded in the Department
of Cultural Affairs: 1) the work of producing economic data to evaluate government program output and perform effective usage and investment of government
resources; 2) the practice of aggregating and mapping programmatic data with
community wellbeing indicators to identify gaps in services and enact equity;
3) the engagement with members of the public using government data to spur
dialogs and ideas and demonstrate the democratic value of participation in collaboratively designing a service delivery ecosystem. The article contributes to
the much-needed understanding of how governments are adapting managerial,
analytic, and public engagement practices in an increasingly data-driven society.

Introduction: Quantifying Culture
Quantifying arts and culture became a heralded concept in the last century,
when, as early as 1967, futurist and businessman Alvin Toffler recommended
a “cultural data system” to undergird policy-making and to understand the
impacts of a booming post-industrial arts sector.1 The rise of the arts index,
however, is largely a 21st century phenomenon. North American urban policy
scholar Maria Rosaria Jackson proposed the use of data to measure cultural
vitality in 2006, thus inspiring a number of municipal and state level cultural
data collection and metrics efforts involving cultural indicators.2 Indexes used
to quantify arts impact, including the economic effects of cultural support and
so-called “creative classes,” have since been on the rise.3 These indexes largely
import ideas from the field of management studies to gauge the “performance”
of a country’s or municipality’s cultural sector by gathering metrics on economic
and administrative goals such as high audience participation, financial support,
and increased market share.4 The U.S. non-profit DataArts, for instance, began
collecting longitudinal metrics on non-profit cultural organizations in cities in
2004, while another U.S.-based non-profit, Americans for the Arts, initiated
1 Toffler, Alvin. ”The Art of Measuring the Arts,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science 373, no. 1 (September 1, 1967): 141-55.
2 Maria Rosario Jackson, Florence Kabwasa-Green, and Joaquin Herraz, “Cultural Vitality in Communities: Interpretation and Indicators,” The Urban Institute, 2006.
3 Brendan Rawson, John Kreidler, and Philip J. Trounstine, Creative Community Index [Silicon
Valley, 2002 and 2005]. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2015-05-27. https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR35580.v1
4 Kushner and Cohen, 2017. For instance, the U.S. National Arts Index drew on Robert Kaplan and
David Norton’s Balanced Scorecard model, which emphasized a business’s financial success, internal
processes, learning and growth, and customer satisfaction.

2

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

its National Arts Index project in 2010, using 81 variables to capture arts and
culture vitality between 1998 and 2013.5 The trend continues outside the U.S; for
instance, the United Kingdoms’ Arts Index has tracked arts-based variables at
global scales since 2007.6 UNESCO’s framework for cultural statistics links the
cultural sector with a nation’s economic development and captured international
data from 2009 and 2013 on cultural heritage sites, visual arts, performance, and
the creative services.7
While most of these indexes are conducted at the national level, municipal arts
agencies influenced by open data and evidence-based policymaking have also
begun to approach their services in terms of data: number of public artworks,
attendance at live performances, amount of grants funding, or the location of
arts centers. This shift puts city-level cultural affairs agencies on track to undertake quantitative and geospatial analyses of their services. These methods may
be familiar to other departments, such as Engineering, Planning, or Transportation, but are not the traditional approach for agencies that fund and support the
cultural arts. Writing back in the 60s, Toffler complained that staff at arts institutions came mostly from artistic, rather than administrative, backgrounds; for
these organizers, counting occurrences was not the way to evaluate the quality of
a city’s cultural life because a city’s qualitative experience of its arts and culture
could not be measured. Indeed, what the quantification of culture attempts to
capture are phenomena that city agencies traditionally evaluate as experiential,
interpretive, subjective dimensions of a city’s cultural life. Shared cultural codes,
variances in aesthetic expressions and practices, and intricacies of the experiential dimension of arts and culture generally defy quantification. Toffler, however,
was prescient8 —over the past two decades cities have warmed to the concept of
‘evidence-based policy making’ in all corners.
This article analyses a shift in bureaucratic cultures within one city arts agency
as it adopted processes of quantification and datafication to assess the efficiency
and impact of its services. To describe this shift in finer detail, we draw from participant observations at the City of Los Angeles Department of Cultural Affairs
(DCA) from 2014-2018. The first author volunteered in the department for six
months from April to October 2016. The second author is a staff member lead5 Roland J. Kushner, and Randy Cohen, “Creating a Policy Index for the Arts (SSIR),” Stanford
Social Innovation Review, Fall 2017, 48-53.
6 Retrieved November 14, 2018 from http://forthearts.org.uk/publications/arts-index-20072016/
7 Retrieved November 14, 2018 from http://en.unesco.org/creativity/
8 Toffler, however, wanted to devise quality indicators that tried to measure such phenomena as
‘sophistication of audience,’ ‘appearance of genius’ and number of ‘works of excellence’—criteria that
now would be seen as largely cultural constructs that are too laden with contestable class and sociopolitical values to have much meaning.

3

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

ing design strategy and data initiatives at the DCA and has been a participant
observer at the agency since 2013. This paper also draws on interviews by the
first author conducted with 33 city staff members as well as the Mayor’s office.
We frame the analysis of fieldwork and interview data through linguistics and
cultural theory; drawing on this set of literature we theorise the performativity
of data in shaping the bureaucratic culture of this city department. Through an
analysis of the case study, we find that datafication encourages a shift towards
economisation of cultural data, new forms of citizen participation that give rise
to data publics, and a geospatial understanding of equitable access to city services
through the visual and statistical identification of ‘arts deserts’. To begin, however,
we will describe the recent trends of datafication among city governments as a
historical context of our theorisation on data performativity.

Datafication in City Government
Datafication within government is in no way a novelty. Historians Ted Porter,
Alain Desrosieres, and Patricia Cline Cohen have all described in rich detail the
link between democratic governance and quantified information collected about
populations on their health, housing, work, and education.9 What we note, however, is the acceleration of new practices of datafication in city agencies that have
appeared since the mid-2000s. The Open Data initiative started by U.S. President Barack Obama in 2006, for instance, launched a world-wide trend for governments to release vast troves of machine-readable, standardized data into the
public sphere.10 Cities have also turned to existing databases and documents
to discover what can be newly rendered as value-added secondary data, often
to measure agency performance, determine service allocation, or make predictions about housing conditions or crime. According to a 2018 Pew Foundation
report, ”states have begun harnessing existing information through data analytics—procedures that review data to identify meaningful information and correlations,”11 in addition to collecting statistical records for the express purpose of
9 Theodore M. Porter, Trust in Numbers, Reprint edition (Princeton University Press, 1996); Alain
Desrosières, The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2002); Patricia Cline Cohen, A Calculating People: The Spread of Numeracy in Early
America (Psychology Press, 1999).
10 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, ‘Executive Order—Making Open and Machine
Readable the New Default for Government Information’, Whitehouse.Gov, 2013 [accessed 12 October
2016]
11 Sallyann Bergh, Alyssa Davis, Amber Ivey, Dan Kitson, and Jennifer Thornton, ”How States Use
Data to Inform Decisions,” The Pew Charitable Trusts, February 2018, p. 1. Emphasis by the authors.

4

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

quantification, as states have done throughout the 20th century.12 In this regard,
governments are following other industries, such as commercial bibliographic
systems and open science data repositories, that have long tapped economic and
social value in public records by creating secondary statistical objects. Similar
to these “big data” systems in science and industry, datafication in government
finds new value from aggregating records of cases filed and completed, permits
approved, financial transactions made, even stray animals processed. These data
lead to additional functionality when they are fed into algorithms that drive city
services, from trash pick-up to policing to child services.13
To further tap into this secondary value, digital records that automate decisionmaking may be structured for multiple stakeholders and technical platforms beyond the databases they were designed for, for instance as part of open data portals or sharing contracts with private companies such as Google and Waze, the
GPS navigation app.14 Certain types of bureaucratic agencies are accustomed
to multi-purposing their own data—particularly in engineering and transportation departments, which have long collected data and integrated them into electronic territorial maps or dashboards. These practices by departments that were
not accustomed to sharing data with external platforms have ramped up in the
last decade. For instance, the City of San Francisco worked with Yelp to create
a format for accessing public restaurant health scores that Yelp publishes on its
restaurant pages.15
The datafication of city government is not only a technical but also a cultural shift
in how staff comes to understand urban processes as solvable through data. Jose
van Dijck calls this epistemological shift dataism, or ‘big data thinking’ that relies on “the objective quantification and potential tracking of all kinds of human
behavior and sociality.”16 City governments, however, primarily track services
and infrastructure, not social activities. Yet a belief in data as a powerful solution to problems of service logistics and public infrastructure drives many cities’
administrative process. Los Angeles Mayor Garcetti evoked this line of thinking at a civic tech event in 2014: “Can an app or an algorithm help traffic move
more quickly, for instance through traffic light sensors? Can we revitalize Holly12 Sallyann Bergh, Alyssa Davis, Amber Ivey, Dan Kitson, and Jennifer Thornton. ”How States Use
Data to Inform Decisions,” The Pew Charitable Trusts, February 2018, p. 1. Emphasis by the authors.
13 Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the
Poor (St. Martin’s Press, 2018).
14 Bradley, R. (2015, June 2). Waze and the Traffic Panopticon. Retrieved November 14, 2018, from
http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/waze-and-the-traffic-panopticon.
15 Local Inspector Value-Entry Specification. Yelp.com. Retrieved November 14, 2018, from https:
//www.yelp.com/healthscores.
16 Jose van Dijck, “Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data between Scientific Paradigm
and Ideology,” Surveillance & Society, 12 (2014), 197-208

5

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

wood through an innovative app that will help people find a way to park, through
a mesh network of real time parking information?”17 Public servants proclaim
data to play a powerful role in managing complex urban systems.
Consequently, staff saw city data as wielding a certain form of epistemic power:
The power of records is traditionally indexical and evidentiary; the U.S., for instance, defines a record as any recorded information made by a Federal agency,
and it acts as official evidence of a government action, grounding legal and policy
claims.18 The power of data, on the other hand, can include these uses but also
those of statistical analysis, mapping, visualization, and algorithmic processing.
From this perspective, the indexicality and provenance of a record—reflecting its
original context as part of past government activities19 —becomes less a matter of
focus than creating secondary data with operational functionalities that can help
manage the city through numbers and graphs.
As a result, the role played by new data analytic services is symbolically quite
large, since it taps directly into the broader imaginary about big data—sending a
message that public service delivery can be imagined more effectively and equitably. Many city staff members we spoke to saw public data as an at-hand asset
from which new civic or monetary value can be extracted at little cost. According to an employee in the mayor’s office, for instance, in the old paradigm, the
lifecycle of information is “valuable, then tapers down after use… to a plain old
toothbrush toothpaste commodity.” With new data practices, information instead is “something that produces increased efficiency. Something to figure out
is: What’s the highest value in-house to look at?”20 This technocultural shift in
how departments understand and use their information products has begun to
reshape department roles and instigate new institutional practices.
Many scholars have pointed out the work of data to produce, as much as represent, phenomena.21 As we discuss next, we consider this force of data its performative dimension. This transformative power of data affects accounting routines,
provides new modes of engagement with the public, and shapes the design of city
17 Quoted

at Tech LA, May 31, 2014.
U.S. Code § 3301—Definition of records
19 Anne J. Gilliland-Swetland, Enduring Paradigm, New Opportunities: The Value of the
Archival Perspective in the Digital Environment. CLIR, February 2000. Available online at
http://www.clir.org/pubs/abstract/pub89abst.html.
20 Interview conducted February 27, 2014.
21 Theodore M. Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life
(Princeton University Press, 1996); Lisa Gitelman, ed. Raw Data Is an Oxymoron (MIT Press, 2013);
Geoffrey C. Bowker, and Susan Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences
(MIT Press, 2000); Alain Desrosières, The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning (Harvard University Press, 2002); Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and
Engineers Through Society (Harvard University Press, 1987).
18 44

6

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

services. In the next section, we theorize the performative function of data, before providing the case study of the Los Angeles Department of Cultural Affairs.

The Performativity of Data
To describe the performative dimensions of data, we turn to J. L. Austin’s classic
linguistic theory. In his work How to Do Things with Words, Austin observes the
transformative and productive power of speech acts beyond describing reality.
He terms constative speech to describe factually based speech acts, which are typically evaluated for how well they represent what they aim to portray. He uses the
term performative to refer to speech acts that perform an action, such as promising or declaring (“I swear I won’t do that again,” “I now pronounce you husband
and wife”). Performative sentences not only describe reality but change it in the
act of an utterance. Such sentences are neither true nor false but have force in
the world beyond their ability to represent.22 Many scholars have taken the idea
of performativity beyond its linguistic context to describe the performativity of
other phenomena, including the reproduction of gender over time through the
historical practice and institutionalization of the “stylization of the body.”23
For our purposes, we apply the concept of performativity to data. In “A Sociology of Numbers”, Espeland and Stevens take a similar approach, pointing out
that numerical quantification is not only an act of representing the empirical accuracy of a phenomenon. Quantification also has a force to call new things and
categories into being, to signal institutional legitimacy, and to shape the distribution of power and resources. Numbers can alter the very things they purport to
represent;24 for instance, Donald Mackenzie describes how economic models do
not simply express price patterns that were already existing, but actively change
them.25 Data also perform to the extent that they produce as much as they portray subjects and objects. Rita Raley points out the performative consequences
of the data by-products of search engine browsing: for some, “the composition
of flecks and bits of data into a profile of a terror suspect, the re-grounding of abstract data in the targeting of an actual life, will have the effect of producing that
22 John L. Austin, and John Langshaw Austin. How to Do Things with Words (Harvard University
Press, 1975).
23 Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (Routledge, 2006).
24 Wendy Nelson Espeland, and Mitchell L. Stevens, ”A Sociology of Quantification*,” European
Journal of Sociology / Archives Européennes de Sociologie 49, no. 3 (December 2008): 401-36.
25 Donald Mackenzie, ‘Is Economics Performative? Option Theory and the Construction of Derivatives Markets’, Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 28 (2006), 29-55

7

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

life, that body, as a terror suspect.”26 In contexts of surveillance, the mass collection and processing of data about people can produce the idea of a person as a
suspect such that their statistical profile comes to stand in for the actual person.27
This ‘reactivity’ of data to intervene in the social world can be seen when data
transform the amorphous complexity of phenomena into stable categories—
giving rise to many sociological concepts we now take for granted such as
‘unemployment’, ‘IQ’, and ‘public opinion’;28 as we show in our case study, data
give rise to new concepts—the notions of ‘arts deserts’ and ‘arts oases’—that
have subsequent effect on City policy. Beyond creating categories, standardizing
numerical data can subject phenomena to measurement and comparability and
to predictions and monitoring. These treatments of data can help determine
the distribution of resources and power. In the case study below, we detail how
administrative data make departmental activities visible and measurable, and
hence subject to decisions and policies around funding and service goals.
Data’s power of producing opportunities for actions can lead to organizational
and cultural change. Scholars have written about the force of data to transform
bureaucratic cultures. Fiore-Silfvast and Neff, for instance, write about the “social performance of data” in the context of medical records, where data sometimes “come to represent a notion of actionability,” of change based on supportive evidence.29 Here data play a legitimating function because of how they are
thought of culturally—their ‘social valences’ as Fiore-Silfvast and Neff put it—
the association of data with efficiency, objectivity, and accountability primarily
within private sector accounting practices. In a similar example, Michael Power
describes the performative role of audits. Here, official ideals about the potential of audits to create efficient, accountable, and cost-effective institutions have
force. In this way audits are not simply descriptive “but performative, projecting
and enacting ideals of their capability which legitimate the field of knowledge as
a whole.”30 Managerial conceptions of accountability mean that simply enacting
a certain style of administration can confer legitimacy, irrespective of practical
results. Similarly, as we show, in city government agencies, datafication promises
a business intelligence of administration that encourages growth and efficiency;
it also calls on agencies to enact a more collaborative notion of governance by
26 Rita Raley, ”Dataveillence and Countrveillence,” In The World of Indicators, edited by Richard
Rottenburg, 34-55 (Cambridge University Press, 2015), p. 121-146.
27 Matzner, Tobias. “Beyond Data as Representation: The Performativity of Big Data in Surveillance,” Surveillance & Society; Newcastle upon Tyne 14, no. 2 (2016): 197-210.
28 Espeland and Stevens, 2008.
29 Fiore‐Silfvast, Brittany, and Gina Neff, ”What We Talk about When We Talk Data: Valences
and the Social Performance of Multiple Metrics in Digital Health,” Ethnographic Praxis in Industry
Conference Proceedings 2013, no. 1 (n.d.): 74-87, p. 74.
30 Michael Power, The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification (OUP Oxford, 1999), 9.

8

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

engaging with what Ruppert calls “data publics”.31
All of these types of data performativity—the production, analysis, and tracking of data objects and subjects and the enactment of bureaucratic legitimacy
through datafication—are non-representational effects of data with transformative force. When a department represents its work through data—through maps,
metrics, and digitised objects—this constitutes the social and technical practices
that in turn substantiate its status and institution as a bureaucracy. In city agencies, datafication creates new processes of resource allocation, new relations between governed and governors, and generates new objects that affect the distribution of public goods. “Data are deeds” that act on the very things they quantify.32
In the next section we introduce the Department of Cultural Affairs (DCA) before describing in greater detail how these performative data practices evolve at
DCA.

The Culture of Bureaucracy in Los Angeles: The Case of Cultural
Affairs
In 2014 Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti used his third executive directive in office to mandate departmental participation in the city’s open data portal.33 The
policy required departments to publish useful datasets on a public portal and to
begin submitting metrics gauging their municipal performance to the Mayor’s
Office (metrics that could also be published as open data). The open data initiative was one dimension of a larger plan to bring city government more in line
with the technology industries that had begun to dominate twenty-first century
economies, especially as Silicon Valley cast its shadow over the U.S. west coast.
One outcome of these policies is that their implementation revealed highly uneven data cultures across city departments. As departments enacted the policies,
some underwent more “data frictions”, a term we borrow from Paul Edwards to
describe “the great difficulty, cost, and slow speed of gathering large numbers of
records in one place in a form suitable for massive calculation.”34 There were
31 Evelyn Ruppert, “Doing the Transparent State: Open Government Data as Performance Indicators,” in A World of Indicators: The Making of Governmental Knowledge through Quantification,
edited by R. Rottenburg, S. E. Merry, S.-J. Park, and J. Mugler (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2015), 127-50.
32 Espeland and Stevens, 2008, 431.
33 Garcetti, Eric, ‘Executive Directive No. 3’, Office of Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti, 2013.
Retrieved November 14, 2018 from http://www.lamayor.org/garcetti_directs_city_departments_to_
collect_data_for_open_data_initiative.
34 Paul N. Edwards, A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data, and the Politics of Global

9

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

sharp differences across city department as new data policies met the on-theground material realities of existing resources differently dispersed across the
city.
The Department of Cultural Affairs (DCA) experienced more data frictions than
was the norm across other departments. DCA maintains a wealth of records on
its three programmatic areas: Grants Administration Division supporting artists
and non-profit arts organizations; its Percent for Art Public Art programs, which
set aside one percent of costs of any development project in the city as an investment in the art in the public realm; and community art centers and theaters
embedded throughout neighborhoods to deliver arts education, exhibitions, festivals, and performing arts events. At the start of this research project, little of
this data was stored electronically and organized centrally. The department is
small relative to others in the city and has no dedicated IT staff. Said the DCA
data coordinator in 2016:
We don’t have the time and resources to digitize our data. Most of what we
have exists within semi-analog systems. Some parts are in paper form, nonsearchable PDFs; other records are stored in disparate spreadsheets. Our workflow involves lots of wrangling and transmissions of government memorandums
as PDFs. Sometimes it’s hard to see the organizational and transmission paths of
our data. Not all of us know the structure of the filing cabinets and digital file
directories on the intranet that are meant to store our records. The arts sector in
the US is under-resourced. Like other arts agencies, we don’t have the resources
to rebuild or update our filing and data systems. We’re just pulling records as
needed.35
Our liaison there told us that rethinking services in terms of statistical measurements and outputs was challenging. The department had not been accustomed
to thinking of its work solely in terms of quantitative measurement. The question
of defining a metric that would not reduce the quality of art experience, which is
primarily social, emotional, and cultural, had been a topic of conversation among
staff. This question led to further discussion regarding the appropriate methods
of capturing evaluative metrics that ascertain the relationship between arts access
to and community well-being.
In contrast, data friction occurred less in departments that already produced public machine-readable data. The Bureau of Engineering (BoE), for instance, has
been handling machine-readable geographic data since becoming one of the first
customers of ESRI, the most widely used GIS software, in the mid 1980s. BoE is a
Warming (Mit Press, 2010), 90.
35 Interview conducted on February 22, 2016.

10

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

large, resource-rich, technocratic haven where dense, customized electronic systems for internal and public use are the standard; it is responsible for providing
an accurate record of all the land activities that occur within the city, providing
the legal basis for the formation of boundaries and locations of public and private properties. The records are kept in an internal electronic database and are
also accessible to the public on a dynamic web map of 527 layers of data (not all
of which comes from Engineering). In addition to the ESRI-based map, the department also maintains an electronic vault of all past permits and an electronic
permit filing system.
Because of this robust legacy system of public, machine-readable data, the new
data policy presented a minimal burden for BoE. The department already had
staff devoted to maintaining and circulating electronic records internally and to
the public. The staff members I spoke with, for instance, were enthusiastic about
open data. The department’s principal civil engineer told me, “I was supportive
of [open data], because we’ve always had that general mindset anyway.”36 Data
publishing was already a default mode of the department.
DCA’s differences from BoE illustrate the degree to which datafication relies on
an existing bedrock of information infrastructures: not only robust electronic
records systems but also platforms for public data access. When the Mayor’s Office launched the open data executive directive, DCA had few modern data practices in place and no dedicated data staff to enact it. In contrast, as a lucrative
agency that brings in money to the city through permit fees, BoE has the means
to build customizable databases and websites, and it retains ownership of all of
its data. As a result, the Mayor’s data policies made little operational difference
to the Department of Engineering.
The performativity of datafication at BoE was still in play as the new data policies
affected BoE’s view on the affordances of its records. The City’s new data policies
exemplified a shift in how BoE staff considered data from the data’s original indexicality towards circulation and reuse. One engineer I spoke now saw BoE’s
records in relation to new data publics; he speculated on how the open data’s
release might inspire people to build applications with BoE data:
Now by putting it out there in an open format, sure, we’re inviting other people to
look at that same data differently, present it differently, create new tools. I mean,
who knows? There may be supplements to NavigateLA that they can say, ‘Hey,
we’ve developed this cool module for you, and we’ll give it to you guys free to
make NavigateLA that much better.’”37
36 Interview
37 Interview

conducted August 15, 2014.
conducted August 15, 2014.

11

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

While datafication subtly transformed BoE’s views of its record practices, but little else, the effect on DCA was much starker. In part because DCA had to create
new digital systems to respond to the Mayor’s data policies, rather than tying existing systems to the new demands, DCA has embraced datafication more fully
and resourcefully than many other departments in the city. In the next three sections we outline cultural and technical shifts that have taken place in DCA over
the four years since the department started enacting new data practices and policies. These changes include economising, building data publics, and creating a
new method to identify ‘arts deserts’ and ‘arts oases’ to guide equity-based programming and policy-making. In each instance, we discuss how data perform
by creating new quantitative objects used to evaluate the department, shape its
policies, and interact with the public.

Economizing
In 2014, as a part of the Mayor’s Executive Directive No. 3, the Mayor’s Office
asked all departments to establish and report performance metrics related to their
service goals and to publish these metrics on the open data portal soon after the
website’s launch. In addition to the web portal, the Mayor’s Office created a dashboard for citizens and residents to see recent counts on housing permits issued,
numbers of police officers on force, number of lane miles paved, and percentage
of graffiti cleaned within 48 hours. The dashboard demonstrates whether or not
the metric achieves the goal set through a color scheme—green for above the goal
and red for below.38
By quantifying features of their services and evaluating these service outputs
against related resources in numerical terms, staff members come to see the work
they do through an economic lens. Quantification is seen, that is, to have a future
impact on how they operate and on budgets. As Kurunmaki et al. define it, such
metrics play a role in economizing governments: in constituting departments as
economic entities that must often compete for limited resources.39 To demonstrate effectiveness, departments must tie their work to economic concepts such
as cost efficiency and return on investment—to whether the money allocated and
spent has yielded calculable results. Economizing follows the logic of New Public
Management, a style of administration from the 1980s that requires departments
to justify their budgets and salaries based on output measures—on actual pro38 Retrieved

on November 14, 2018, http://dashboard.lamayor.org
Kurunmäki, Andrea Mennicken, and Peter Miller, ”Quantifying, Economising, and Marketising: Democratising the Social Sphere?” Sociologie Du Travail 58, no. 4 (October 1, 2016): 390402.
39 Liisa

12

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

grammatic performance—rather than pre-set rules and standards or based on
the institutional knowledge of experts. NPM is meant to create a culture of selfmanagement that is more federalized than top-down: each agency sets its own
explicit, measurable performance standards to demonstrate the effectiveness of
its service delivery.40 Taking a similar approach, managerial staff in the City of
Los Angeles often described data as a resource of economic and institutional capital that may create cost efficiencies. Said an employee from the Mayor’s Office,
It’s a time of less resources. We’re never going to get pre-2008, prebubble staffing levels, so now it’s finding out how to do things better
and easier, but the old ways and old silos of structures of government
that had been built in LA [are] cumbersome . . . so we’re hoping this
[open data] can unlock ideas between general managers and how the
city runs.41
The economization practice can encourage city staff to work across the bureaucratic silos. However, this management style can also create a culture that privileges public services that produce easily measurable output, such as graffiti removal and trash pickup.
Within DCA specifically, the new policy has led, in consequence, to the economization of cultural data. Performance management turns cultural analytics into
transactional data, following in the footsteps of national cultural indexes such
as DataArts, which helps arts organizations build funding profiles, and National
Center for Arts Research, whose Vibrancy Index measures “vibrancy” in terms of
market share and supply and demand. To comply with the performance management directive, DCA turned to available and quantifiable output data such as the
number of participants and activities at DCA Community Arts and Performing
Arts programs, the number of non-profit arts organizations and individual artists
receiving grants from the department, and the amount of grants and corporate
donations raised.42 Since 2015, DCA’s data staff worked to establish a broader
and detailed metric model with the input of each of the department’s various division directors, such that the data definition is supported and informed by their
understanding of divisional goals. The exercise demonstrated the need to update
and digitize the systems that catalog DCA’s programmatic efforts—for instance,
databases of records of organizational and artist grantees and arts class registration—as well as the enormous effort of collecting, standardizing, and centralizing
40 Hood, Christopher, ”The ‘New Public Management’ in the 1980s: Variations on a Theme,” Accounting, Organizations and Society 20, no. 2 (February 1, 1995): 93-109.
41 Interview conducted February 27, 2014.
42 https://data.lacity.org/A-Livable-and-Sustainable-City/Cultural-Affairs-PerformanceMetrics/e3gp-gx53

13

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

these records.
Data work has ultimately played a role in causing DCA to re-evaluate its recordskeeping processes, some of which are now articulated in terms of standardized
statistical outcomes and goals. At the same time, data work has introduce new
modes of internal governance and oversight driven by considerations of economic efficiency and staff capacity. Said DCA’s data coordinator, “We want to
make sure our programmatic output reflects a need of investment in the area.
It’s […] about sustaining the organization through an economic lens.”43 These
accounting practices have the effect of changing DCA’s practices to the extent
that staff strives to maintain or improve these indicators, giving these numbers—
which only count what is countable, and not the unquantifiable effects of DCA
service such as quality of service—a degree of control over shaping DCA work.
As such, “measures become aspirations,” and numbers that initially are created
to depict wind up disciplining.44
Quantifying programmatic numbers also means the development of a standard,
discrete unit that cuts across different types of programmatic work. This data
standardization practice reduces arts experiences into economic units that can
only represent one particular dimension of the service; it turns arts services into
a product with an ascribed market value poised for economic examinations such
as cost-benefit analysis. This practice of commensuration, collapsing different
qualities into a common unit for the sake of comparison,45 takes the value of service experience out of the social and cultural context intended in the program.
For example, with the intention to meet the needs and interests of each neighborhood, Community Arts programs are designed with varying qualities, such
as depth of engagement and choices in artistic discipline, aesthetic approaches,
and cultural subject matters; these choices are relevant to the community’s concerns in a given time. The design of programs is also intentional in terms of
quantity, frequency and duration of engagement. To serve neighborhoods with
families and youth, for instance, arts classes are offered two to three times a week
to young students. These students receive up six hours of arts classes, each season
for 10 weeks. A continual engagement is critical to the learning and developmental goals, especially for youth who lack social or economic stability in other areas
of life. These highly scaffolded educational interactions are forced into units that
are commensurate with other types of lighter-touch arts programming for adults
and professionals, such as public programs that accompany a contemporary art
43 Interview

conducted September 8, 2017.
and Stevens, 2008, 416.
45 Alexander Styhre, “The Economic Valuation and Commensuration of Cultural Resources: Financing and Monitoring the Swedish Culture Sector,” Valuation Studies, No. 1(1) 2013: 51-81. DOI
10.3384/vs.2001-5992.1131151
44 Espeland

14

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

gallery exhibition in the format of a singular artist talk or an annual day-long musical festival that draws more than 20,000 audience members. These “apples-tooranges” comparisons can be even more jarring if cultural analytics were placed
side by side with metrics from other, non-cultural public service contexts, such
as voter registration drives or drought management educational sessions.
The numerical output unit of an “arts event or activity” removes the depth of
content and audience appropriateness, stripping the data from the context of its
programmatic cycle. In aggregated form, these output numbers form a cost analysis that represents the City’s “return on investment” in the arts and culture. Reducing the value of arts experience to a transactional representation is a logical
administrative response to policies under the NPM mindset. This representation
is demonstrative of the City’s cost-effectiveness in delivering its services to constituents. The effect of this type of data performativity will be seen in the way it
reconfigures, rather than simply represents, the department’s activities and services.

Geographic Equity and “Arts Deserts”
Government datasets appeal to their proponents as sources of objectivity, a
derivative of bureaucratic systems divorced from subjective insights under the
sway of political motivations, conscious or not.46 Indeed, staff members we
spoke to view their data as a source of legitimacy and accountability that justifies
the allocation of public resources. According to a staff member in the Mayor’s
Office: ”
A lot of times political problems can be challenged and questioned… If we do
data-driven decision-making, we can take the politics out of decision-making
and be more responsive to the public good and public demands versus if we
don’t.”47
That data can create a neutral ground for consensus formation with the public
is a very common perspective among staff we spoke with. Governing through
numbers can demonstrate public responsibility through rationalization; it follows in the sociological tradition of subjecting problems of governance to statistical methods to render the state “knowable.”48 By simplifying complexity and
following collectively established procedures, these authoritative methods have
46 Desrosieres,

2002. Porter, 1996.
conducted February 8, 2016.
48 Nikolas Rose and Peter Miller, ”Political Power beyond the State: Problematics of Government,”
The British Journal of Sociology 43, no. 2 (1992): 173-205.
47 Interview

15

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

the power to shape and intervene in a governed territory.
Following these sentiments, DCA has recently begun using data to guide and
justify its service delivery in a manner that reflects its mission to support and
provide access to arts and culture. In early 2018, DCA created a “Neighborhood
Arts Profile,” a data tool to allow staff to measure cultural vitality in the city’s
neighborhoods.49 The map pinpoints the offices of non-profit organizational recipients of the city’s arts and cultural grants programs, locates city-managed theatres and community arts centers, and tracks cultural events and festivals through
extracting data from online calendars and web apps of cultural events such as DiscoverLA. The map also puts these cultural programs in visual adjacency to other
cultural institutions such as museums, public libraries, historical cultural monuments, as well as in relation to youth and wellbeing indicators, including the
California Human Development Index; Census data such as poverty ratio; and
the Arts Equity Index, which ranks quality of arts education programs at the local
school district.
In addition to mapping the location of arts venues and city-managed cultural
infrastructure, DCA began to collect and aggregate cultural activity data to evaluate the event-level cultural vibrancy of different neighborhoods. These cultural
events analytics are ranked based on an indexical scoring system informed by the
department’s mission of access and equity. DCA privileges events that are free
or low cost in the ranking system, since the department forward its mission to
increase access to the arts. The map also prioritizes events with access points to
public and mass transportation. The interactive data map has helped the staff
gain access to “fingertip information” about the communities and people the department is serving, bringing together empirical and up-to-date data that can
inspire conversations and programmatic decisions toward the department’s mission.50 The coordinator hopes that by “putting dots on map … maybe the points
will form patterns that can give us basic insights. Is there an area of concentration
or scarcity?”51 The project will eventually drive programming with up-to-date geographic and demographic data to show how the multitudinous neighborhoods
of the city are evolving, especially as the city faces rapid growth and demographic
shifts.
Maps both simplify and select from a complex reality. A visual medium, they
surface patterns and can act as evidence; as such, they have the power to sway
public opinion and shape the spaces they represent. In a clear example of the
performativity of data, the map has produced a newly visualized and soon-to-be
49 Neighborhood

Arts Profile. http://neighborhoodartsprofile.org.
conducted September 8, 2017.
51 Interview conducted September 8, 2017.

50 Interview

16

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

calculable phenomenon, the concept of the “arts desert.” Arts deserts are the department’s term for areas with an impoverished access to publicly available arts
and cultural services. After seeing the results of this mapping exercise and reflecting on the spatial and geographical patterns within the public-serving arts
delivery ecosystem, department staff derives insights about areas of concentration or scarcity within the City. At a staff meeting, a map of Los Angeles poverty
rates was shown in spatial proximity to DCA’s community arts facilities. This
visual proximity confirmed staff ’s assumption of need in serving in areas where
DCA’s arts centers have been established.
Revealing ‘arts deserts’ (or ‘arts oases’) provokes administrators to consider service delivery in light of the department’s mission to provide geographical equity
of arts programming, now made visible on the map. Seeing this delivery pattern
within socioeconomic context of each neighbourhood, community indicators of
poverty and youth density can further the goal of a place-based equity by motivating staff decisions. Visual abstractions of service needs—the who and where
that matters to the agency—can help staff generate a picture of its service goals
and advocate for change. This type of data performativity entails the ability for
a graphic representation of culture and socioeconomics to surface a new way of
looking and thinking that contributes to eventual actions toward the values being
represented.

Data Publics and Momentary Civics
Data practice for DCA is also about two-way exchange. While the city’s older
public interfaces, such as the BoE’s public-facing map, were seen as increasing
efficiency and transparency, DCA’s approach to datafication also retools democratic engagement in government service design and delivery. The department
has instigated a type of civic participation through sourcing data work from community members. Arts data create new visions of the civic subject.
In 2017, the City of Los Angeles and Los Angeles County held an inaugural “Arts
Datathon,” a public event that invited residents and administrators to explore the
region’s arts and culture assets through datasets.52 In one day, the event drew
over 150 participants and crowd-sourced data-informed cultural strategies and
programs. Organizers scattered tables with zines entitled “Guide to Spreadsheets
for the Spreadsheet-phobic.” Arts practitioners, administrators, arts enthusiasts,
and data-savvy professionals worked in small groups, each focused on a specific
52 Scott Reed, “Arts Access Datathon Final Report.” 2017. Artsdatathon.org. Retrieved November
14, 2018 from http://artsdatathon.org/documentation/final-report/.

17

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

topic chosen by the team, from correlating values between a city Displacement
Index and a list of non-profit arts organizations, to mapping spatial relationships
between independent book stores and Metro transit stops. Participants turned to
data to divine how the region’s arts ecosystem might be improved by increasing
access to arts and culture around a vast, teeming metropolitan area of over 10
million people.
Datathon participants prototyped eleven projects of apps and services built on
existing data. Said DCA’s data coordinator, the event helped DCA formulate a
“data agenda” by ”aggregating data, finding data, establishing data relationship
with other departments and the County—all of this was able to come together
as a by-product of Datathon.”53 As a result of the event, DCA was able to track
down data on arts freelancer businesses from the City’s Office of Finance and historic preservation data from the Planning Department. In all DCA compiled and
presented a list of 33 datasets, which became critical in the department’s development of the Neighborhood Arts Profile.54
In this instance, arts data perform a new relationship between a public agency and
its constituents by calling new civic practices and subjects into being. Through
participatory datathon events, DCA instigates citizen collaboration through data
work. At the Arts Datathon, staff learned from members of the arts-engaged public about their values and perspectives on arts access; it promoted a hands-on, material form of engagement through data analysis and application programming
that took place alongside inquiries, discussions, and deliberation.
Datathons enact momentary civics, in that their publics come together in an extremely short time span for the purpose of collective ideation. These event-based
publics are strong but temporary. The experimental ethos, along with the ideas
and prototypes generated, however, rarely coalesce into stable long-term organising. These events allow the public to explore and learn about administrative tasks
and policy-making—which can potentially improve public understanding of the
mechanics of governance; despite that they do not bring about sustained participation in administrative tasks or policy. Through a high concentration of social
energy and dialog on civic concerns, these datathon events instead can catalyze
or rekindle civic spirit and interests in the public sphere, which, in a time of political apathy and civic stagnation, can be an asset toward augmenting democratic
53 Interview

conducted September 8, 2017.

54 The event also sparked programmatic and strategic conversations between municipal, nonprofit,

cultural institutional staff to examine access to the arts by mapping data on City and County data
portals. Producing data led to City-County data partnership with a steering committee co-chaired
by members of City and County arts agencies and the need for regionwide data governance in Los
Angeles. Most recently, the second Arts Datathon led to partnerships with the LA County Public
Library and USC Libraries with a focus on improving infrastructure to arts collections data.

18

Cultural Analytics

Performative Data

participation. This new mode of civic formation exposes the inner workings of
government bureaucracy and strives to increase the proximity between local government administration and its constituents through its data. Datafication in city
governance can bring about a new mode of ephemeral but energetic democratic
involvement. This type of data performativity could have a long-term effect that
will take time to unfold within the larger democratic social sphere.

Conclusion
DCA’s new data practices illustrate a noteworthy tension between reductive and
more productive uses of data. As noted earlier, datafication manifests differently
across departments, depending on available resources and the types of services
and programs offered. DCA is a public agency whose services are experiencedriven and less infrastructurally focused. The notion of measuring culture necessarily rules out the intangible qualities of DCA’s services. The agency has struggled with counting while staying true to its quality-oriented mission. One DCA
staff member said, “So much of the data isn’t just fixing a sidewalk and making
sure light works, but it’s quality of experience, qualities that are social, emotional
and cultural. That’s the hardest to measure.”55 The removal of cultural data from
their experiential and programmatic context and their subsequent recontextualization requires ongoing engineering of methods, systems, and articulations, in
order to stay responsive to the city’s administrative shift toward workforce efficiency and process automation.
DCA’s example offers a nuanced understanding of how data is used and represented, reflecting a host of ideologies common in the public sector in the big data
era: private sector models of financial management, scientific reasoning from the
sociological traditions, and democratic participation in governance. Each context reveals how data practices evolve flexibly in order to adapt and transform a
constellation of organizational and policy agendas that sometimes present contradicting ideologies. For instance, while data quantification serves the purpose
of measuring the effectiveness of city resource management, this kind of costbenefit analysis narrows the focus of the department’s work to be put in comparison with other city departments in terms of performance measures. This level
of analysis can present a tension with the agency’s higher mission of equity, as
instantiated in the practice of mapping and visualizing publicly available cultural
resources. Municipal governments have to strike a delicate balance between cost
savings for the sake of business viability and their public mission of providing
55 Interview

conducted September 8, 2017.

19

Morgan Currie and W. F. Umi Hsu

Cultural Analytics

access to meaningful city services and experiences.
Furthermore, economizing the experience of arts services by assigning numerical values to exhibition or music classes also poses dissonance with the richness
and creativity of co-designing the arts ecosystem with members of the public, as
in the case of the datathon event. In the former case, data are compared to raw
materials representing culture as economic resources that can be expended, consumed, parsed, or substituted for other programmatic services. In the latter case
of data collaboration as a form of collective ideation, agencies treat, visualize, and
recontextualize data as raw creative materials to co-develop a more accessible arts
ecosystem.
The performative framework sets the stage for a critical analysis of data as a cultural practice. Locating this human practice within the environment of government bureaucracy, we hope, has begun to illuminate the cultural logic behind
the intricate administrative systems of record keeping, tools, habits, values, and
politics. Governments exist in a larger cultural and financial ecology comprised
of capital and information flow. Within 21st century manifestation in the United
States, data practices are responses to historical shifts in technology, labor, and
epistemology. City staff come into this historical moment with various relationships to data depending on their organizational position and mission. These social particularities render the many multidimensional implications of datafication in government.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

20

