Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.29

Pp. 392- 406

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s Spoken English during a Thesis
Supervision Session
Ahmed Abdoualzhraa Yaseen
Centre for Rehabilitation & Special Needs, Faculty of Health Sciences
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Kemboja Ismail
Centre for Literacy and Sociocultural Transformation, Faculty of Social Sciences and
Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Mohamad Subakir Mohd Yasin
Centre for Literacy and Sociocultural Transformation, Faculty of Social Sciences and
Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Abstract
This study investigates the syntactic errors in speaking among an Arab L2 post-graduate student
in an academic speaking context. Specifically, the objectives are to describe the syntax error
patterns committed by the student while engaging in speaking and to explore the contributing
factors that may affect the errors. To address these objectives, a qualitative research method is
employed. Data was collected through audio-tape recordings and a face-to-face interview with the
participant. The recorded data was transcribed and coded based on Noor Hashim's (1996) seven
categories of errors. The findings indicate that some of the first language (L1) negative transfer
errors fall into five out of seven categories of Noor Hashim's classification; however, new
categories are discovered, such as wrong verb choice, noun forms, overly restricted use of
pronouns, and omission of necessary complementizers. These errors can be explained by
interference from the L1 and another contributing factor is the limited use of some strategies, such
as repetition and confirmation. The significance of this study is a direct pedagogical implication
to expose post-graduate students to academic spoken English. This is to avoid miscommunication
between students and their academic supervisors. It is recommended that future research examine
new teaching and learning techniques of academic spoken English to be incorporated into the
classrooms.
Keywords: Academic conversation, Arab L2 speakers, L1 interference, syntactic errors, thesis
supervision
Cite as: Abdoualzhraa , A. Y., Ismail, K., & Yasin, M. S. M.(2018). Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL
Postgraduate Student’s Spoken English during a Thesis Supervision Session. Arab World English
Journal, 9 (4), 392- 406. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.29

392

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

Introduction
Speaking involves constructing meaning that involves producing, receiving and processing
information (Brown, 1994; Burns & Joyce, 1997). Being proficient in a language, for example
English, as a second/foreign language involves speaking it well. Knowing the grammar of the
language or the rules of writing or possessing a native speaker-like accent may not qualify one to
be a proficient speaker unless one is able to express the intended ideas or meaning clearly, and in
turn to understand others. Therefore, to communicate well, one requires both linguistic and
communicative competence.
Speaking requires both of the linguistic and sociolinguistic competences. Additionally,
spoken language is different from written because it requires specific skills and conventions (Burns
& Joyce, 1997; Carter & McCarthy, 1995; Cohen, 1996). A proficient speaker knows when to
synthesize these skills and knowledge in order to succeed in any academic exchange. This is
important for post-graduate students at the tertiary level to avoid any miscommunication and
misunderstanding during academic conversations.
In spite of having linguistic and sociolinguistic competence, students frequently face
numerous problems and commit errors regardless of their proficiency level. In a second language
(L2) learning situation, linguists like Corder (1967), Selinker (1972), Dulay and Burt (1974),
Richards (1971) and James (1998) investigated these errors and how they contributed to our
understanding of the language learning. It was found that errors made are the result of using the
same patterns from the first language, expanding patterns from the second language and using the
same vocabulary and structure to express meanings (Richards et al., 1992). An important feature
of speaking is real time. Speech production requires real-time processing, which means there is
limited planning time (Thornbury, 2005). The real-time factor is one of the several reasons
language learners find speaking difficult regardless of their level. Crystal and Davy (1979) refer
to real-time processing as the main factor which differentiates spoken from written language.
This study concerns the syntactic errors made by a post-graduate during thesis supervision
session. Generally, Arab L2 students have problems in acquiring fluency in using English, whether
in speaking, writing, listening or writing. Rababah (2005) attributes this to the absolute lack of
English use in the English as a Foreign Language/English as a Second Language EFL/ESL
classroom in Arab schools or colleges. Besides lacking linguistic knowledge, the students also lack
self-confidence because of their lack of practice and exposure in using English. They also have
little knowledge of different cultures which increases their anxiety level in speaking English with
non-Arabic speakers. Factors such as motivation, attitude, self-esteem, anxiety, and experience
generally play a role in language learning and are particularly crucial in students’ oral production
(Brown, 2007; Xiaoyan, 2009).
In addition, the Arabic language has a different language system and orthography from
English which could contribute to particular oral speaking issues. Munaif (2012) also asserts that
the teaching of English to Arab ESL students tends to focus on grammatical accuracy than on
writing and speaking communicatively. The Grammar-Translation method is the dominant
approach in the teaching of EFL in some Arab countries, and is still widely used despite the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

393

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

outdated theoretical basis. This paper seeks to address the syntactic errors of one Arab speaker of
English Language in academic conversation.
Literature review
Syntax errors
Knowing the syntax of a language is defined as having the knowledge of its sentences and
structures. In addition, the rules of syntax require a grouping of words into phrases and phrases
into sentences. These rules dictate the right word order of a language. English is a Subject-VerbObject (SVO) language hence a sentence in English is considered grammatical when the words
are in the right order and ungrammatical when the words are in the wrong order. Furthermore,
another significant role of syntax is, it describes the relationship between the meaning of a specific
group of words and its arrangement and the grammatical relations of a sentence, for example the
subject and direct object. It shows who is doing what to whom which is vital in our understanding
the meaning of a sentence.
Thus, any language production, either written or spoken, that is in disagreement with the
syntactic rules is said to have syntactic errors. In other words, it does not possess the structural
sentence according to the rules of syntax. Speakers must ensure that their utterances accord with
the rules of the grammar of that language (Branigan et al., 2006).
Academic speaking
Speaking in academic contexts is different from speaking in non-academic contexts. It involves
interaction that goes beyond basic question-response, and the exchanges require the interlocutors
to use more specific and precise language. In an academic exchange, turn-taking may be longer,
as planning and processing of information has to be more carefully done. Additionally, its contexts
are in semi-public areas such as lectures and seminars where other participants or interlocutors
participate in the interaction. A non-academic context is informal; conversations tend to center on
personal and social information to maintain the social relationship, with shorter turn-taking
(Basturkmen, 2002). In academic contexts, he argues that language use is more complex and
indirect due to its features that are not apparent to non-native or EFL/ESL speakers. Second
language learners who further their tertiary education in English speaking countries or universities
often face difficulties in adjusting and adapting to using English although some of them would
have had some years of formal English education or would have attended English medium schools
in their home countries. It can be an overwhelming experience moving into a different academic
context outside one’s home country, having to adjust to a more formal manner of speaking. In a
survey of 768 ESL students of different L1 at three different colleges in the United States, focusing
on their listening and speaking skills, Ferris (1998) found that only 8% of the students reported
that they had no difficulty asking questions in class. This shows that a high percentage of students
had problems in listening and speaking in academic contexts even if they had studied in an English
speaking country.
Past studies showed difficulties faced by Arab EFL learners in learning the four language
skills of English (Mourtaga, 2004; Abdul Haq, 1982; Wahba, 1998; Abbad, 1988; Rabab’ah,
2003). Studies were carried out among these students to investigate words, phonological, and
syntactic errors made by Arab EFL learners (Abdul Haq 1982; Wahba 1998; Zughoul & Taminian
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

394

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

1984). In the area of speaking and writing, Abdul Haq (1982), Wahba (1998) and Abbad (1988)’s
finding showed that these learners encountered difficulties. Muortaga (2004), Mohammed (2005)
and Zahid (2006) conducted studies to investigate Arab learners’ syntactic errors and they found
that Arab learners were weak in their use of verbs and prepositions. Although these studies were
conducted mostly in the area of writing and reading, the findings were connected to speaking as
the same errors may occur in speaking. This study seeks to identify the syntactic errors and in
academic conversation during thesis supervision.
Accordingly, Hughes (2011) argues that speaking is “fundamentally transient and words
are produced within the co-ordinates of a particular place and moment” (p.10), thus, speech is
context-dependent. Nunan (2010) defines context as: “The linguistic and experiential situation in
which a piece of language occurs. The linguistic environment refers to the words, utterances, and
sentences surrounding a piece of text” (p.304).In other words, spoken texts are produced
dependently in various environment, situation or listeners. These participants create the final form
of a spoken text which makes it easier for the listener to participate in a conversation when the
context is further enlarged.
Arabic and English speech conventions are different in terms of language varieties,
geographical locations and historical and cultural backgrounds. Present day Arab speaking
countries have closed the gap between the Arab and Western worlds. This has led to the importance
of communication between Arab and English speakers, and unsurprisingly there is an increase in
number of Arabic learners deciding to study English as a foreign language abroad.
Features of academic speaking
Spoken language is different from written language for many reasons. One important reason is that
it needs to be understood instantly whereas written language can be read and re-read. Academic
speaking and academic writing share similar features as both are linear, explicit, centers on a main
idea and uses standard language. Moreover, academic spoken style is formal, explicit, hedged, and
responsible. Unlike written language, it is less complex and more objective. In a formal situation,
the speaker should avoid colloquial words and expressions. Although academic spoken English is
less formal than academic written English, in general in a formal academic presentation, colloquial
words and expressions like stuff, a lot of, thing, sort of and two-word verbs like put off and bring
up are avoided. The speaker’s responsibility is to be clear to the listener by using connections
which can be made explicit by using different signal words. Thus, being precise is important in an
academic context. Hedging is another feature the speaker uses as different speakers use hedges
differently. In academic speaking, the speaker is accountable for, and must be able to provide proof
and justification in making claims. Academic speaking employs specific words with narrow
specific meanings unlike general English thus it is less complex than written language.
Previous researches have shown that ESL students experienced difficulties in learning
English at various levels and with different skills (Hoffman, 2001; McCardle & Hoff, 2006).
However, most of them referred to the Commonwealth experience not the Arab region where
English is a foreign language (Seargeant & Swann, 2011; Mayor & Allington, 2012; Tagg &
Hewings, 2012). Al-Shormani (2010) investigated semantic errors and the causes of L1 and L2
errors made by Arabic speaking learners of English. He posits that “the sources of these errors
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

395

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

vary between following different strategies such as translating from Arabic as in the case of some
categories in lexical choice and collocation errors, applying Arabic rules to English as in
derivativeness, the Arabic sound system as in the case of the absence of /p/ and /v/ in distortion
due to spelling errors, among others” (p.26). He also found that it is the lack of knowledge Arab
students have about the L2 semantic system caused such errors. Although his study focused on
semantics, it gives us an understanding of the role of syntax in giving meaning.
At present, many Arab students in universities outside of their own countries are
experiencing problems with speaking and writing in the English language. Fadi (2010) noted,
unsurprisingly, that “Like any second language learners, Arab learners face many problems in
acquiring and communicating in English.” (p.2)
Generally, standard Arabic and standard English share some linguistic features in
phonological, morphological, syntactical, semantics, and pragmatics. The syntactical systems are
diversely different. There are two major types of English and Arabic Basic Sentence Structure:
nominal and verbal. One of the major differences between Arabic and English grammar is that
English has verbal sentences only whereas Arabic has both nominal and verbal sentences. Even in
the simplest sentences in English there should be at least one verb: In Ahmed is a teacher, the verb
is, but in Arabic it is enough to say Ahmed teacher indicating the same meaning.
In Arabic, the nominal sentence does not have any verb. In general, it consists of two parts,
the first is called 'Subject' (‫)المبتدأ‬, and the second is called 'Predicate' (‫)الخبر‬.
To understand sentence structures in the English language, we should first have a general
understanding of the types of words used to structure the sentences. Any English sentence consists
of three basic components or parts. The basic structure of the English sentence is (S + V + O/C)
as follows:
S= Subject: the person or the thing that does something. He eats cake. ("he"
is the subject, and it is a pronoun, functioning as a noun)
V= Verb: a word that expresses an action, occurrence, or a state of being.
("eats" is the verb) O= Object: the person or the thing that receives the action
of the verb. ("cake" is the object).
Arabic has different types of sentences and different structures. The four types of Arabic sentences
are: verbal sentences (‫)الجملةالفعلية‬, nominal sentences (‫)االسممممميةالجملة‬, functional sentences ( ‫التي لها‬
‫ )الجملمحل من االعراب‬and, non-functional sentences (‫)الجمل التي ليس لها محل من االعراب‬.
The structure of the Arabic verbal sentence is (V + S + O/C). So while the order is different
from an English sentence, the components are the same. There are variations on verbal sentence
types in Arabic like the 'kaanna' sentence, the conditional sentence, the imperative sentence, and
so on. The structure of the nominal sentence is (Topic + Comment), without a verb. Also there are
variations on nominal sentence types in Arabic like the 'Inna’ sentence, the prepositional sentence,
the adverbial sentence, and the fronted comment and belated topic sentence. The verb in verbal
sentences usually precedes the subject but when it follows the subject, the sentence is a nominal
one.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

396

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

The difference between a verbal and nominal sentence is that the former refers to an act or
event, whereas the latter gives a description of a person or thing. The same English sentence can
be translated into Arabic in two different ways: As a Nominal sentence: ‫أحمد يلعب القدم كرة‬, it can be
translated this way and be grammatically correct. ''‫ أحمد‬here is a topic not a subject. As a Verbal
sentence: ‫ يلعب أحمد كرةالقدم‬We change the order of the verb and the subject making the structure: V
+ S + O Ahmed plays soccer. Although this sentence starts with a noun, this noun is the subject of
the verb that comes after but this does not make the sentence Nominal. English has only verbal
sentences so this sentence is verbal. The structure, S + V + O is the same in all grammatically
correct English sentences. The most common mistake that students make is to translate sentences
from Arabic into English in the same order neglecting the rules of English grammar and syntax.
Although it is a simple rule that each of them has its own structure and order, students still often
make this mistake. For example: the English sentence: Hend studies History, is translated into
Arabic this way: Studies Hend History. This is a huge mistake because simply duplicating the
Arabic sentence structure makes it incomprehensible. Words should not be literally translated;
attention should be paid to the set of rules, or grammar of each language. So, the correct translation
is: Hend studies history. S + V + O ‫ التاريخهند تدرس‬V + S + O.. Errors occur when learners translate
from L1 to L2 (this could be caused by interference). When they speak L2, they apply the rules of
L1 and translate either the rules or the content (Moubaiddin et al., 2014). Thus, the different
linguistic rules can cause students of a L2 to commit errors in speaking.
When a learner attempts to communicate in the target language, he may use a linguistic
system different from the source and the target language. This is called ‘interlanguage’. It refers
to an independent second language learner’s system that has an intermediate link between the first
and target language. It is a system based on the best attempt learners use to provide order and
structure to the linguistic stimuli surrounding them. Through trials and errors, learners gradually
succeed in creating closer approximations to the system used by L1 speakers of the language
(Selinker 1972). Thus, interlanguage is a system that compromises and approximates the learner
language.
The term ‘interlanguage’ (Selinker, 1972) refers to the systematic knowledge of an L2
which is independent of both the learner’s L1 and the target language. It also refers to the series of
interrelated systems which describe acquisition, the system that is noticed at a single stage of
development and a particular L1/L2 combination (for example, L1 French/L2 English v. L1
Japanese/L2 English) (Ellis, 1994). Other related terms are the same basic idea of ‘approximative
system’ (Nemser, 1971) and ‘transitional competence’ (Corder, 1967).
There is a continual process experienced by the learner from L1 in acquiring the target
language. For each stage there is an interlanguage, the learner makes attempts to communicate in
the target language until he/she creates a system from the source language that represents the frame
of the target language.
Conceptual framework
Conceptually, this study concerns the academic exchanges between two people; the student and
the supervisor. According to Van Duzer (1997), a successful exchange requires speakers who have
good skills and speech habits. This will enable them to participate in anticipated patterns of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

397

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

academic discourse situations. According to Burns & Joyce (1997) usually these speakers can
handle turn-taking, rephrasing, providing feedback, or redirecting because knowing the usual
patterns of the exchanges is important to expand further interaction and accumulate knowledge as
the exchange progresses. They outline the following features for exchanges to take place. The
speaker must be able to:
i.
ii.

iii.
iv.

using grammar structures accurately;
assessing characteristics of the target audience, including shared knowledge or shared
points of reference, status and power relations of participants, interest levels, or differences
in perspectives;
selecting vocabulary that is understandable and appropriate for the audience, the topic
being discussed, and the setting in which the speech act occurs;
applying strategies to enhance comprehensibility, such as emphasizing key words.

Methodology
Case studies are defined in different ways depending on the context and background of the
research. Merriam (1988) for instance states that: “Case study can be defined as an intensive,
holistic description and analysis of a single entity, phenomenon, or social unit. Case studies are
particularistic, descriptive, and heuristic and rely heavily on inductive reasoning in handling
multiple data sources” (p. 16). Thus, using Merriam’s definition of a case study, this study focusses
on one participant selected based on purposeful sampling. One of the key aspects of using a case
study is the fact that the phenomenon is studied in a context. This allows the researcher to view
the reality of speaking of the academic exchanges during thesis supervision (Ferris & Tagg, 1996a,
1996b) and Mason (1995). The time frame for this study was within a semester or fourteen weeks
of an academic calendar.
Selection of participant
Selecting a sample in a qualitative research is crucial to ensure the validity of the sampling.
Purposive sampling method was employed in this study where one post-graduate student who
fulfilled sampling criteria was selected as the participant. This was in line with Creswell’s (2005,
p. 204) “researchers intentionally select individuals and sites to learn or understand the central
phenomenon. The standard used in choosing participants and sites is whether they are rich in
information.” The case was a 42- year-old Arab Jordanian postgraduate student who had been in
Malaysia for three years. The participant started learning English formally for a total of eight years
with six years at the primary level and two years at the secondary level. In terms of English
requirement, the participant’s IELTS score was 6.5 which qualified the participant to be admitted
to the postgraduate programme at the university. The participant communicated in English only
with the supervisor and non-Arabic speakers.
Research instruments
Audio-tape recording
Two types of data elicitation procedures were used: 1) audio-tape recording and 2) face-to-face
interview. To achieve the first part of the research objectives, data was collected through audiotape recording. The primary purpose of carrying out the audio-tape recording was to capture the
reality of a case in a natural setting which was the academic exchanges between the supervisee
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

398

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

and the supervisor. Ideally, the researcher wanted to conduct three meetings; however, it was
difficult to arrange for the third meeting as the supervisee was not available due to field work. The
scheduled meetings took place at the end of April and end of May, and the duration of recording
agreed upon by the researcher and the supervisor was 30 to 60 minutes. A digital audio-tape
recorder was used to record the conversations throughout the sessions. The first meeting of the
audio-taping was completed in 30 minutes and the second was in 35 minutes. The researcher was
a non-participant observer during both meetings.
Research Procedure
The data was collected within the time frame of 14 weeks of the second semester as agreed by the
supervisor. Before the researcher selected the supervisor for the research, he identified five
supervisors at the school using purposeful sampling. These supervisors were approached by the
researcher’s main supervisor who was their colleague at the school. One supervisor asked his
student to participate in the study based on some criteria. A consent form was completed by the
selected student in fulfilment of the ethics requirement. A schedule for recording the meetings was
then agreed upon. The duration allotted for each session of data collection was 30 to 60 minutes.
Stage 1: Data collection
The two supervision sessions were audio-taped for a duration of between 30 to 60 minutes each.
This took place in the month of May. The meetings were held in the supervisor’s office at the
School. The researcher’s role was a non-participant observer throughout the scheduled meetings.
Stage 2: Data transcription
The next stage was data transcription. The researcher transcribed the data immediately after each
meeting. Through repeated careful listening, the recorded conversations were transcribed verbatim
for closer study. Throughout the transcribing process, the researcher used reduction, interpretation
and representation to make the written text readable and meaningful. Using Gumperz and Berenz
(1993), the researcher marked out boundaries to indicate different exchanges that took place.
Stage 3: Coding
Next, the data was coded and put into tables based on Noor Hashim’s (1996) categories of syntactic
errors. Thus, there were seven columns for the seven categories comprising verbal errors, relative
clauses, adverbial clauses, sentence structure, articles, prepositions and conjunctions.
Next the portions of the conversations with errors were identified accordingly in each column
with a tick. For example, the first type of error which is ‘verbal error’ was coded as VE. ‘Tense’
is an error that falls under VE thus, it was coded T, hence any tense error was coded as VE-T.
Stage 4: Frequency count
The errors were identified by ticking each respective category from the seven categories. Using an
Excel file, a frequency count was done to find out which types of errors occurred most frequently.
Face-to-face interviews
Semi-structured face-to-face interviews were conducted with the participant. Berg (2007) defines
an interview as a conversation with a purpose. Any conversation that aims to gather information
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

399

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

is considered an interview by standard definition (Denzin, 1978; Spradley, 1979; Patton, 2001).
Three main questions guided the interview with reference to the conversations and syntactic errors
identified: 1) What do you think of this sentence structure? 2) Do you see any problem with this
sentence structure? Yes/no? Why? 3) How would you rectify or improve it? These questions were
based on Hymes’ (1980) Communicative Competence theory. The researcher used a digital audiotape recorder to record the informal interview which was completed in 30 minutes.
Data Analysis
The data was prepared for analysis in two ways: categorization based on coding and frequency
count and interpretive analysis. For coding, the seven categories as identified by Noor Hashim
(1996) comprised: Verbal errors (VE), Relative clauses (RC), Adverbial clauses (AC), Sentence
structure (SS), Articles (A), Prepositions (P) and Conjunctions (C). Besides the main headings; a
sub coding was created for the sub-headings, hence the researcher used abbreviations to mark the
categories as follows (the following two categories shown are examples taken from the seven
categories):
i.
a.
b.
c.
ii.
a.
b.

Verbal errors (VE)
Codes
Tense T
VE-T
Tense sequence TS
VE-TTS
Tense substitution TSubs
VE-TTsubs
Relative clauses
RC
Interlingua errors of relative clauses IERC
Relative Pronoun Deletion
RPD
IERC-RPD

RC-IERC
RC-

Findings of the study
To fulfil the first part of the research aim, which is identifying the syntactic errors, data from the
transcribed audio-tape recordings was analysed. The results show that the participant committed
errors in six categories during the first meeting: sentence structure, verbal errors, prepositions,
relative clauses, articles and adverbial clauses. In the second meeting, the participant committed
errors in five categories: verbal errors, sentence structure, preposition use, relative clauses and use
of articles. For this purpose, a frequency count was done to show the spread of the overall errors
as shown in the table below:
Frequency count
Table 1. Frequency count of the errors
Types of errors
Errors
Errors occurring
occurring in meeting 2
meeting 1
Verbal errors
14
25
Relative clauses
5
2
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

in Total number
of errors
39
7
400

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

Adverbial clauses
1
0
1
Sentence structures
25
18
44
Articles
3
1
4
Prepositions
8
10
18
Conjunctions
0
0
0
Following are some examples taken from the three most frequent errors identified
during the first meeting, which are sentence structures, verbal errors and prepositions
respectively.
Meeting 1
1. Sentence structures
(L007): No, this what according to UKM Gaya (SS-WO)
*No, this one was done according to UKM Gaya.
(L055): What about chapter 5 is ok? (SS)
*Is chapter 5 ok?
(L071: You told the last time that it is the form should fill in. (SS-WOMC)
*You said the last time that it was the form that I should fill in.
Meeting 2
(L016): She said, she told just this the only page you have to print out. (SS-WO)
*She said that it was the only page I had to print out.
(L185): Yah, may be may be one thing I may change it, ok? (SS-WOMC)
*Yah, I might change one thing, is it ok?
(L051): this is I think the part for you, I fill my own. (SS-WO)
*I think that this part is for you. I filled in mine already.
Meeting 1
2. Verbal errors
(L069): I think you. (VE-VFAD)
*I think it is you.
(L147): DM focus in what? (VE-CDTPSM)
*What does DM focus in?
(L149): I read articles for DH. (VE-TTSUBS)
*I have read articles for DH.
Meeting 2
(L018): But all of them the same percentage. (VE-VFAD)
*But, they are all of the same percentage.
(L022): She send me an email, yah, one hour. (VE-TTSUBS)
*She sent me an email, yah, one hour before.
(L039): Yes, in the system, she told me that the similarity in the system.
*Yah, she told me that the similarity is in the system.
Meeting 1
3. Prepositions
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

401

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

(L031): Yah, I put this my computer. (P-PD)
*Yah, I put this on/in my computer.
(L045): I am classic in every day. (P-PR)
*I am classic every day.
(L063: To you, you have sign that and DZ should. (P-PD)
*To you, you and DZ have to sign this.
Meeting 2
(L041): Yah, may be on your paper. (P-PS)
*Yah, may be in your paper.
(L049): Aaaa, this is the final form I have to with the four copes(copies)…(PD)
*Aaa, this is the final form that I have to hand for four copies.
(L189): I found difficulty in convince this participant to take part in my study.
PR)
*I found difficulty to convince the participant to take part in my study.

(P-

From the above examples, the frequency of the errors committed might be influenced by many
causes and strategy use. It also shows the interference of the first language L1 in interpreting or
translating to second language. Interestingly, most errors occur in the ‘sentence structure’ category.
A closer analysis shows that within each category, the participant committed errors in the same
sub category, for instance, for both meetings, in the ‘sentence structure’ (SS) category, the subcategory was word order (WO) for both. In the ‘verbal errors’ (VE) category, the sub-category
was tense substitution (TSubs) for both meetings. Next, for ‘preposition’ (P) category, more errors
were committed in preposition omission in meeting 1 but fewer in meeting 2. For ‘relative clauses’
(RC), more errors were committed at structural misinterpretation of relative clauses category –
missing antecedents (RC-SMRC-MA). More errors in the ‘article’ category, redundancy of the
indefinite article (A-DARDA), were committed more at the first meeting.
Face-to-face interview
The aim of the interview was to get the participant’s explanation for some of the errors committed
based on the transcribed data. When asked about the errors committed, the participant responded
as follows:
i.
ii.
iii.

“I keep repeating the mistakes unconsciously, I know that those are mistakes but when I
keep speaking something sticks to my mind.”
“I depend always the easiest way even when mentioning the numbers, there is no need to
focus and differentiate between ordinal numbers.”
“I use some words instead of one other like using (tell) instead of (say) in some positions
because I like using that word much more than the other.”

The above samples of the interview data show that the participant was aware of the errors
committed but did not have control over making them. This seems to suggest that the errors have
been fossilized. The participant resorted to an easy way when referring to numbers which could
be a strategy adopted. The participant’s preference for certain words could mean that there was
confusion between the verb ‘tell’ and ‘say’ in English.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

402

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

Next, the participant was asked whether there was any problem with some of the sentences.
The responses were as follows:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

“When I speak English, it is obviously that my L1 interferes into the L2.”
“I keep emphasizing the words to make sure that I deliver my message to whom I talk to.”
“I use my language according to the state I feel for example when I am worried I keep
using the word (worried).”
“I skip focusing on the grammar and the right way of speech.”

The above samples show that the participant was conscious of the problems in the sentences but
preferred not to correct them as in (c), as it reflected the participant’s mental state at the time of
speaking. In other words, the errors were committed without concerning about the rules.
The last question asked was whether the participant would rectify the errors in the
sentences, and the responses were as follows:
i. “It would be better if I focused on training in English rather than focusing on grammar.”
ii.
“Grammar focusing way makes us making mistakes, not like when we use the
Communicative approach.”
iii. “I don’t care for my language as long as the addressee knows what I talk about although
I know the correct way. It is a strategy called “safe plan strategy”.”
The above samples indicate that the participant is critical of the way the participant had learned
English which was through the grammar-based approach, and would have preferred to have been
taught using the communicative approach.
Discussion
The findings highlight the syntactic errors in two academic exchanges of an Arab EFL
postgraduate student with her academic supervisor, this answers the first objective. A face-to-face
interview reveals the factors contributed to these errors which answers the second objective. The
errors are can be explained by L1 interference on the L2 (English) oral production. The academic
exchanges follow the usual conversation patterns which allow both the participant and the
supervisor to share the knowledge and information of what being discussed. This can be explained
by the shared context as posited by Nunan (2010). Although the participant did not use the
grammar structures accurately, some efforts were made by the participant to sustain the interest
levels and differences in views of the supervisor. Appropriate vocabulary or choice of words
seemed to be a challenge for the participant at times however the participant used some repeated
words for clarification to ensure that the communication took place. This concurs with Burns &
Joyce (1997)’s description of a good speaker.
Conclusion
Taking this research further on implication for teaching, teachers should give appropriate feedback
after checking the inaccuracies in the learner’s interlanguage. Unlike the behaviourist approach
which advocates the use of drills and considers errors as signs of failure in their teaching methods,
the concept of interlanguage does not restrict language teaching and paves the way for
communicative teaching methods or CLT. Since errors are considered a reflection of the students’
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

403

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

temporary language system and therefore a natural part of the learning process, teachers could now
use teaching activities which do not call for constant supervision of the student‘s language. Group
work and pair work can be incorporated in the classrooms to maximize students’ participations.
The use of information and communication technologies (ICT) may be adopted in language
teaching and learning. In doing so, it can assist students to cope with their academic demands and
to perform in their disciplines and professional contexts successfully.
About the Authors:
Ahmed Abdoulzahraa Yasin received his Bachelor degree in Education, Department of English
from Basra University-Iraq. He is currently doing his master degree by research in Health Sciences,
Speech and Hearing Department, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. His current research is in
English language syntax. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8633-9720
Kemboja Ismail,Ph.D, is a senior lecturer at the Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. She was the Head of English Language Studies Programme at
the Center for Literacy and Sociocultural Transformation from 2014 to early 2018. Her research
interests include Academic Reading and Writing, Assessment, e-Learning and multimodality in
teaching and learning. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7851-0818
Mohammad Subakir Mohd Yasin, Ph.D, teaches syntactic theories to both undergraduate and
postgraduate students at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. His current research interests are in
endangered languages, gender related issues, and identity. He welcomes collaborative works in
these areas. Dr Yasin is also a member of an editorial board in two indexed journals based in UKM.
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2135-7271
References
Abbad, A. T. (1988). An analysis of communicative competence features in English Language texts in
Yemen Arab Republic. PHD Dissertation.University of Illinois, Urbana- Champaign.
Abdul Haq, F. (1982). An analysis of syntactic errors in the composition of Jordanian secondary students.
Unpublished MA Thesis. Jordan, Yarmouk University.
Al-Shormani, M. Q. & Al-Sohbani, Y. A. (2010). Semantic Errors
Committed
by
Yemeni
University Learners: Classifications and sources. International Journal of English Linguistics, 2,
(6), 2012.
Basturkmen, H. (2002). Learner Observation of, and Reflection on, Spoken Discourse: An approach for
teaching academic speaking. TESOL Journal, 11, (2). 83-91.
Berg, B.L. (2007). Qualitative Research Methods for the Social Sciences. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J, McLean, J.F., & Stewart, A. (2006). The Role of Local and Global
Syntactic Structure in Language Production: Evidence from syntactic priming. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 12, 974-1010.
Brown, H. D. (2007). Principles of Language Learning and Teaching. (Fifth Edition). New York: Pearson
Education.
Burns, A., & Joyce, H. (1997). "Focus on Speaking." Sydney: National Center for English Language
Teaching and Research.
Carter, R. & McCarthy, M. (1995). Grammar and Spoken Language. Applied Linguistics, 16 (2), 141-158.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

404

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

Cohen, A. D. (1996). Speech Acts in Second Language Learning Contexts. In McKay, S. & Hornberger,
N. (Eds.), Sociolinguistics and Language Teaching (pp. 383–420). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Corder, S. P. (1967). The Significance of Learners’ Errors. International Review of Applied Linguistics in
Language Teaching, 5, 161-170.
Creswell J.W. (2005). Educational Research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and
qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill.
Crystal, D. & Davy, D. (1979). Advanced Conversational English. London: Longman.
Denzin, N.K (1978). The Research Act. Chicago: Aldine
Dulay, H. & M. Burt. (1974). Natural Sequences in Child Second Language Acquisition. Language
Learning, 24, 37–53.
Ellis. R. (1994). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fadi, M.S.A. (2010). Writing for Academic Purposes: Problems faced by Arab postgraduate students of
the College of Business, UUM. ESP World 9, (28), 1-23.
Ferris, D. (1998). Students’ Views of Academic Aural/Oral Skills: A comparative needs analysis. TESOL
Quarterly, 32, 289–318.
Ferris, D.& Tagg, T. (1996a). Academic Listening/Speaking Tasks for ESL Students: Problems,
suggestions, and implications. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 297–320.
Flick, U. (2007). Designing Qualitative Research. London: Sage Publications.
Gazalah .H. (1995). Translation as Problems and Solutions: A text book for university students and trainee
translators. (pp. 46). Jeddah, JED: Konooz AL-Marifa.
Gumperz, J. J. & Berenz, N.B. (1993). Transcribing Conversational Exchanges. In talking data:
Transcription and coding in discourse research. (Ed). Jane A. Edwards and Martin
D.
Lampert. 91 121. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hughes, R. (2011) Teaching and Researching Speaking. (2nd edition). Harlow: Longman.
Hymes, D. H. (1966). Two Types of Linguistic Relativity. In Bright, W. Sociolinguistics. (pp. 114–
158). The Hague: Mouton.
Hymes, D. H. (1972). On Communicative Competence. In Pride, J.B.; Holmes, J. Sociolinguistics: selected
readings. (pp. 269–293). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
James, C. (1998). Errors in Language Learning and Use: Exploring error analysis. London: Longman.
Magnan, S.S. (2007). Presenting the Focus Issue. The Modern Language Journal, 91, Focus Issue, 733734.
Marshall, C. & Rossman, G. (2016). Designing Qualitative Research. 6th Edition, SAGE, Thousand Oaks.
Mason, A. 1995. By Dint of: Student and lecturer perceptions of lecture comprehension strategies in firstterm graduate study. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research Perspectives (pp. 199–
218). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayor, B. and Allington, D. (Eds.) (2012). Communicating in English: talk, text, technology. Abingdon:
Routledge
Mc Arthur, T. (2002). English as an Asian language. ABD 33, (2), 3-4.
McCardle, P & E. Hoff. (2006). Childhood Bilingualism: research on infancy through school age.
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A qualitative approach. San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Mohammad, A.M. (2005). Collocation Errors Made by Arab Learners of English. Asian EFL Journal
Teachers Articles, 5, (2), 117-126.
Moubaiddin, A., Tuffaha, A., Hammo, B. & Obeid, N. (2014). Paper presented
at
the
First
International Conference on Communications, Signal Processing,
and their Applications
(ICCSPA'13). Investigating the Syntactic Structures of Arabic Sentences.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

405

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Syntactic Errors in an Arab EFL Postgraduate Student’s

Abdoualzhraa, Ismail & Yasin

Mourtaga, K.(2004). Investigating writing problems among Palestinian students studying English as a
foreign language. PHD Dissertation. Indiana University, USA.
Munaif, D. (2012). Metacognitive awareness and use of reading strategies on the narrative text by Iraqi
EFL college students. MA Thesis. Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang.
Nemser, W. (1971). Approximative Systems of Foreign Language Learners. IRAL, 9, 115-123.Available
at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/iral.1971.9.2.115.\
Noor, Hashim H. (1996). English Syntactic Errors by Arabic Speaking Learners: Reviewed. Available
at:https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED423660
Nunan, D. (2010). Second Language Teaching & Learning. Boston, Mass.: Heinle & Heinle.
Patton, M. Q. (2001). Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods (3rded.). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Rababah, G. (2005). Communication Problems Facing Arab Learners of English. Journal of Language and
Learning, 3, (1), 180-197.
Richards, J. C. (1971). A Non-Contrastive Approach to Error Analysis”(originally in English Language
Teaching, 25, (3). OUP, London). Reprinted in J.C. Richards (Ed.) (1974, 1984) Error analysis:
Perspectives on second language acquisition (pp. 172-188). London: Longman,
Richards, J. C., P. Tung & P. Ng (1992). The Culture of the English Language Teacher: A Hong Kong
example. RELC Journal, 23 (1), 81−102.
Seargeant, P & Swann, J. (2012). English in the World: History, diversity, change. Abingdon: Routledge.
Selinker, L. (1972). Interlanguage (originally in International Review of Applied Linguistics, 10/3)
Reprinted in J.C. Richards (ed.) (1974, 1984) Error analysis: Perspectives on
second
language acquisition (pp. 31-54). London: Longman.
Spradley, J.P (1979). The Ethnographic Interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Tagg, C. & Hewings, A. (Eds.) (2012). The Politics of English: conflict, competition, co-existence.
Abingdon: Routledge.
Thornbury, S. (2005). How to Teach Speaking. Harlow: Longman.
Tannen, D. (2007). Talking voices: repetition, dialogue, and imagery in Conversational Discourse. 2 nd
edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wahba, E. (1998). Teaching Pronunciation-Why? Language Teaching Forum 36/3:32.
Xiaoyan, Du. (2009). The Affective Filter in Second Language Teaching. Asian Social Science, 5, (8), 162.
Zahid, C. (2005). Righting Writing Errors. The Seventh Annual UAE. University Research Conference
UAE. University Al-Ain.
Zughoul, M. (1983). The Unbalanced Program of the English Department in The Arab World in Dihayat
and Ibrahim (Eds.) Papers from the First Conference on the problems of Teaching English
Language and Literature at Arab Universities, University of Jordan, Amman-Jordan.
Zughoul, M. & Taminian, L. (1984). The Linguistic Attitude of Arab University Students: Factorial
Structure and Interviewing Variables. The International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 50.
28-45.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

406

