Erschienen in: Multilingual Margins ; 2 (2015), 1. - S. 67-82

67

Multilingual Margins 2015, 2(1):67-82

Between phatic communion
and coping tactic. Casamançais
multilingual practices
Tilmann Heil

University of Konstanz
Abstract

This paper enquires into the role of multilingual practices in conviviality in shared,
socially and culturally mixed localities. I ask how Casamançais use diverse repertoires
to get by in everyday life in both Casamance, Senegal and Catalonia, Spain. The
concept of conviviality stresses fragile, dynamic processes characteristic of everyday
ways of living together with maintained difference. I argue that minimal, but diversified
language practices, which compose linguistically diverse repertoires, are central in
facilitating conviviality among local residents. Minimal interactions and ‘small talk’,
or phatic communion, cushion potentially conflictual socio-cultural differences and
inequalities. Firstly, I will evaluate discourses on multilingual practices of Casamançais
in both contexts. Second, I will critically explore the reasons for and quality of the
widespread use of diverse repertoires. I conclude that multilingual practices facilitate
phatic communion sometimes playfully and sometimes as part of coping strategies in
situations in which structural forces determine which choices will be more successful
than others. The process of conviviality spans both these aspects describing everdynamic and ever-fragile ways of living with difference.
Keywords: everyday; conviviality; phatic communion; tactics; inequality; Casamance;
Catalonia; multilingualism; polylanguaging

1. INTRODUCTION

I

n shared, socially and culturally mixed
localities truncated multilingual practices
are a central element of conviviality, a mode
of minimal sociality among people who
maintain differences.1 In both Catalonia
and Casamance, where I conducted
ethnographic fieldwork among Casamançais
migrants and their families and friends,
diverse linguistic repertoires are used to get
by in everyday life. To an extent, this reflected
the linguistically diverse local population.2
Catalonia’s everyday bilingualism of Catalan

and Castilian has seen further diversification
due to immigration and Catalan is politically
promoted as the shared lingua franca; in
Casamance, various linguistic preferences
persist alongside local, regional, and national
linguae francae. In both localities, inhabitants
use diverse linguistic repertoires to get by
in everyday life. I will argue that truncated,
but diversified language practices, which
compose linguistically diverse repertoires,
are central in facilitating conviviality among
local residents. Minimal interactions and
‘small talk’ cushion potentially conflictual
cultural differences and social stratification.

© Heil and CMDR. 2015
Konstanzer Online-Publikations-System (KOPS)
URL: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:352-0-302497

68
Well aware that minimal interactions
change over time and according to wider
social contexts (cf. Heil 2013), here I discuss
the significance of ‘knowing just enough’,
i.e. developing a truncated multilingual
register needed to sustain minimal
interactions. I ask how such truncated
multilingualism facilitates conviviality by
way of ‘phatic communion’ (cf. Malinowski
[1923] 1994), which I define as a sequence
of situations in which people communicate
using minimal, mutually intelligible semiotic
resources. Truncated multilingualism
refers to repertoires which vary in degrees
of diversity but result from ‘creatively
appropriat[ing] the voices of others across
language boundaries, while [potentially
only] possessing a very limited knowledge
of the languages being appropriated’
(Blommaert, Collins, and Slembrouck
2005: 199). I use this interchangeably
with polylanguaging which describes ‘the
use of features associated with different
“languages” even when speakers only
know few features associated with (some of)
these “languages”’ (Jørgensen 2011: 33).
In the cases discussed in this paper, some
interlocutors exhibited quite sophisticated
linguistic knowledge, yet they often had
proven to be specialists in ‘knowing just
enough’ of particular languages and further
cultural practices which they had ‘learned
in passing’. I am particularly interested
in the moments of phatic communion
as a form of ritualised interaction, which
in (super)diverse contexts requires both
truncated multilingualism and cultural
translation. Additionally, I question which
social differentiations are related to diverse
linguistic repertoires and how hierarchies
and power discrepancies are negotiated in
phatic communion and thus, conviviality. I
will therefore account for both the language
ideologies and the use of (conflicting)
linguae francae in various social situations.
My aim is to engage with the tensions
between a playful practice and attitude,

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
and people coping with situations in
which structural forces determine which
(linguistic) choices are more successful
than others. I will explore this dialectic
relationship via ethnographic case studies
of a Jola, a Mandinka, and a Fula, who only
to varying degrees perceive multilingualism
as something positive and/or necessary.
I will show when the logic of economic
interactions obliges them to use various,
dominant repertoires beyond their
individual linguistic aspirations. Next, I will
give some crucial empirical background
paying particular attention to the Catalan
language policy and the cosmopolitan selfrepresentation and multilingual practices
in Casamance.

2. FRAMING ENCOUNTERS
WITH DIFFERENCE
Although there were common features in
the migration trajectories of the mainly
male Casamançais I worked with in
Catalonia, the cases varied in terms of
migration trajectory, the economic means
available to them, methods of entry, and
living situation upon arrival. The cases of
my interlocutors also differed according
to places of origin, rural or urban place of
residence, ethnic and religious background,
formal education, and age. As one
important consequence of this diversity of
life trajectories, Casamançais over the years
had been exposed to variously configured
linguistic landscapes. Accounting for
this complexity where necessary, both
regional contexts nevertheless possess
some distinctive features to which my
interlocutors referred and which provide
frameworks to their multilingual practices
and their interpretation.3
Both Casamance and Catalonia show
diverse linguistic configurations in which I
observed a two-sided process. Firstly, diverse
linguistic repertoires are commonplace to

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
local residents due to complex histories of
migration and longstanding ethnic and
linguistic plurality. Secondly, this situation
is complemented by the role of various
languages which assume the role of the
regional or situational lingua franca (cf.
Juillard 1991; Dreyfus and Juillard 2005;
Juillard 2005; Pujolar 2009; Gal 2013;
Pujolar and Gonzàlez 2013; Woolard and
Frekko 2013). The regional perspective
is conducive to the present endeavour
since it helps shifting our focus away from
a focus on national languages and local
mother tongues (cf. Heil 2012). It avoids
methodological nationalism as well as an
ethnic lens (Wimmer and Glick Schiller
2002; Wimmer and Glick Schiller 2003;
Glick Schiller, Çağlar, and Guldbrandsen
2006). Taking subnational regions as an
entry point, further categories, such as the
national, ethnic, and social ones, continue
to play out alongside each other; I will
consider them in the following section.

Diversifying Catalonia
Catalonia is an autonomous region in
the northeast of Spain. Not least because
of the distinctive language and culture of
Catalonia, various political movements
and regional institutions have claimed its
distinctiveness and relative autonomy from
the Castilian-dominated Spanish nation
state. After the subaltern endurance of
Catalan during the Franco period (May
2012: 257), today Catalan ought to play
the role of the ‘common public language’
(Generalitat de Catalunya 2009: 69), or,
put simply, the lingua franca embedded
in a policy of active multilingualism.
Apart from the Franco legacies, Castilian
influences in Catalonia derive from the
large internal labour migration from the
south of Spain to the north since the 1950s
(Castells 2009: 51). They settled in the
suburbs of Barcelona and the surrounding
industrial towns, where I conducted

69

fieldwork. A further layer of complexity
consists of the rapid and significant
immigration of international and cheap
labour since the early 2000s, which in
2010 locally accounted for 17.5 per cent
of the population (Instituto Nacional de
Estadística 2011). This immigration is
often concentrated in the neighbourhoods
built by the southern Spanish arrivals
at the periphery of the old Catalan
city centres. Currently, this share of the
population comes from over 120 different
countries of origin (Instituto Nacional de
Estadística 2011) and speaks 250 different
mother tongues (Generalitat de Catalunya
2009: 69). Independent of their skill level,
most international immigrants in the
2000s, certainly those from sub-Saharan
Africa, worked in agriculture, factories,
construction, the service industries or the
informal sector (Díez Nicolás 2002: 266).
Mataró, a medium sized, industrial
town some 50 kilometres away from
Barcelona, was one of my fieldwork sites
and confirms the general picture. In the
neighbourhoods at the periphery where
I worked, around 50 per cent of the
population is born outside Catalonia, all
of whom exhibit distinctive, and often
multiple diverse linguistic repertoires
(Ajuntament de Mataró 2010). Around
half of them speak Castilian, often of a
Southern Spanish variety. The remaining
are international immigrants from other
parts of the world and continue to maintain
their respective linguistic repertoires.
In such a situation of diversification,
the Catalan migration and language
policies become particularly apparent. In
the renewed Statute of Autonomy in 2006
(Generalitat de Catalunya 2006), which can
be regarded as one of the hallmarks of the
Catalan independence ambitions, Catalonia
emerges as a nation due to its culture and
language. It stylises the Catalan culture
as mixed and cosmopolitan, facilitating
the inclusion of foreigners. ‘Un pacte per

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

70
viure junts i juntes. Pacte Nacional per a la
Immigració’4, which followed the Statute in
2009, more generally formulates a regional
policy on migration and integration and
applies some elements of immigration
management and control so far dealt with
on the state level. Consequently, in 2010
Catalonia was granted the right to issue its
own residency and work permits.
The promotion of Catalan language
continues in both this National Agreement
and its practical application, the Citizenship
and Immigration Plan, now also concerning
immigrant reception and as a means of
bridging the practice of everybody’s distinct
mother tongue (Generalitat de Catalunya
2009: 69; Generalitat de Catalunya 2010b:
68). The stated aim of the Citizen and
Immigration Plan is ‘… to foster knowledge
of Catalan among the entire population
of Catalonia, especially among foreigners,
and also extend the use of Catalan in
all community and social relationship
environments.’ (Generalitat de Catalunya
2010a: 68).
Eight million Euros have been
earmarked
for
‘Catalan
language
normalisation’ compared to just slightly
over 100 thousand Euros for language of
origin classes (Generalitat de Catalunya
2010a: 146–48). The imbalance could not
be expressed more strongly. In a first step,
these policies had mitigated the bilateral
political opposition of Castilian and
Catalan by embedding it in the practised
multilingualism in Catalonia. Yet, as a
second step, no doubt remained that
Catalan profited as the only lingua franca.

Casamançais linguistic diversity
In contrast, Casamance is a region of longstanding diversity in the south of Senegal.
The national census of 2002 gives 19
different ethnic groups, leaving some to the
category of ‘other’. Focusing only on the
Lower and Middle Casamance where I did

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
fieldwork, those administrative departments
with urban agglomerations, Ziguinchor
and Sédhiou are very heterogeneous
(Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de
la Démographie 2008, 2009). Most of the
ethnic groups categorised in the census
speak recognised national languages. In
1972, Senegal’s first president, Léopold
Sédar Senghor had officially granted
six languages equal status as national
languages of Senegal, in contrast to French
as the official one. He had envisioned this
configuration as a way to foreclose ethnic
group-based conflict guaranteeing equal
recognition. In 2001, President Wade
expanded the ‘national’ status to all codified
local languages which raised the number to
currently 24 languages listed as national
ones (Diallo 2010).
While many of the linguistic and
cultural diversity arguments could be
made for Senegal as a whole, Casamançais
often claim their home region to be
different from the rest of Senegal for its
more comprehensive ethnic, linguistic,
and religious diversity. The Casamançais
distinctiveness was dressed up as
cosmopolitan in contrast to the Wolofdominated north. While the reasons for the
Casamançais independence movement are
complex and multiple (e.g. Lambert 1998;
Foucher 2003; de Jong and Gasser 2005;
Evans 2005; Marut 2010; Foucher 2011),
the cultural specificity of Casamance
frequently came to stand next to the more
important developmental gridlock and
the political marginalisation of the region
(Foucher 2002).
While for political purposes the
Northerners and Wolof remain the
quintessential other of the Casamançais,
the Wolof language increasingly plays
a role in Casamance as a language of
commerce and among youth (Dreyfus
and Juillard 2005). According to the 2002
census, in Ziguinchor around 15 per cent
speak Wolof as their first language and 53

71

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
per cent as their second, which confirms it
as an important, widely spoken language
(Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de
la Démographie 2008, 2009). However,
the census gives no information on
further languages spoken, which would
be crucial to grasp language dynamics in
Casamance. Thus, the picture is already
very different in Sédhiou, the second
regional capital. 45 per cent name
Mandinka as their first language and
another 52 per cent as their second one.
In Middle Casamance, Mandinka clearly
remains the lingua franca. Insights from
peripheral markets in Ziguinchor also
shows that they mainly operate in local
languages, but interactions are often
multilingual (Dreyfus and Juillard 2005).
In the centre of Ziguinchor and at the
main market, multilingual interactions
are even more frequent accounting for
up to 70 per cent of all interactions. Only
in the centre is Wolof used in over 70
per cent of all interactions (ibid.). These
aggregate findings already emphasise the
need to closely study the local contexts
to understand multilingual practices and
their representation. The multilingual
Ziguinchor configuration sets the context
for the linguistic practices of Augustin
Sambou5, which I discuss next.

3. BETWEEN A ROCK AND A
CONVIVIAL PLACE
From the outset, Casamançais were exposed
to multiple local languages and often
had diversified, if truncated multilingual
repertoires. To better comprehend the
linguistic dynamics in Casamance, I first
turn to Augustin Sambou’s language
practices before introducing the lives of
two Casamançais migrants in Catalonia.
In contexts of obvious linguistic diversity,
I enquire what the reasons are for
situationally choosing a specific language

or getting on with mixed linguistic
practices. How do people relate to the
everyday occurrence of polylanguaging?
How do they judge multilingual practices?
I will arrive at answers to these questions by
way of focusing on the various multilingual
practices and social processes, which the
three distinct cases offer.

Augustin Sambou
In the local context of Casamance,
one does not need to migrate far, if at
all, to develop a very varied linguistic
repertoire. Augustin came to Casamance
in the 1970s as a refugee from Guinea
Bissau. He had finished high school
in Ziguinchor, had become a primary
school teacher, and prepared for an
exam for a higher administrative
position. One of my close confidants,
Augustin had a wide range of linguistic
registers from which to choose. He was
Jola, the largest ethnic group in Lower
Casamance; however, people could tell
his dialect was Bissau Guinean. He had
only spent a short time in Dakar and,
when we met, mainly commuted between
various villages in the Casamance-Bissau
Guinean borderlands. Following a
general trend, he mainly used Wolof in
everyday encounters with people of his
age. With his more distant relatives from
Guinea Bissau, he spoke Creole, with
his family members his home dialect of
Jola, and with his landlord he spoke Jola
Fogny, the most widely used variety. He
also handled encounters in Mandinka
and some aspects of conversations in
Fula. With his colleagues, he conversed
in French, while with me he sometimes
coquetted in English. Finally, he also
understood Portuguese.
Mirroring
Augustin’s
linguistic
repertoire, the peripheral neighbourhoods
of Ziguinchor were perceived as a similarly
diversified linguistic landscape. Despite

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

72
the increasing importance of Wolof, people
did not perceive a single language to
dominate public interactions and showed
an immense linguistic flexibility. People
disagreed over situationally dominant
linguae francae and the distinctions both
among local inhabitants’ ethnic origins
and linguistic practices were vague,
shifting, and constantly evaded efforts to
generalise. Sometimes, people spoke of
specific ethnic groups or they mentioned
which languages were mostly spoken, at
other times people just mentioned the
great diversity among the inhabitants.
Living in spaces in which their
mother tongues were often not the
dominant ones, many Casamançais of
various ethnic and linguistic backgrounds
tended to portray their multilingual
practice as a competence and expression
of their cosmopolitan attitudes (cf.
Heil 2012). This also emerged from
the playful, skilful, and easy-going
use of diverse repertoires by which
Casamançais creatively engaged with the
given situation and exchanged nothing
more than non-propositional language.
At its basis, I witnessed the Casamançais
discourses on multilingual practices in
both Casamance and Catalonia. In being
particularly apt, Augustin embodied
both the ideal-typical competence
and the aspired cosmopolitan attitude
of many Casamançais with whom I
interacted. While others just staked
a claim to speak many languages,
Augustin was more differentiated in his
assessment of his language repertoire.
He knew his qualities and deficiencies
well and humbly put his everyday
language practices into perspective. He
liked to portray it as the normal way of
living, which referred to the expectations
of good neighbourliness and thus
conviviality (Heil 2014a).
On many days, I could accompany
Augustin during his everyday business. On

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
the back of his motorbike or walking with
him through Ziguinchor neighbourhoods,
he linguistically adapted quite aptly to
the changing situations. Contrary to his
humble reflections, it seemed that he
effortlessly faded in and out of situations
and the necessary registers to facilitate
interaction. The underlying principles of
interaction that Augustin and others stated
were the respect for those encountered
and the wish to receive difference openly.
They portrayed their linguistic skills
as a chosen and positively connoted
aspect of their everyday social relations.
Augustin underlined this point by happily
translating for me the discussions that
were on-going. More importantly, people
would even switch to French for substantial
parts of the conversation to have me
participate. At the same time, they trained
my own expending linguistic repertoire
in practising those skills I had acquired in
local languages.
On the other hand, most of the time
nothing particularly surprising seemed
to be said in fleeting encounters. The
showing of interest in the neighbour’s
well-being prescribed by cohabitation in
Casamance resembled more ritualised
practice than real concern for the other’s
well-being. Many Casamançais read such
forms of politeness and recognition as
signs of respect, which were needed, as
they argued, since this was Africa. Using
merely familiar phrases that pleased
those encountered exemplifies a practice
which Malinowski described in the 1920s
as phatic communion:
A mere phrase of politeness, in use
as much among savage tribes as in
a European drawing room, fulfils
a function to which the meaning
of its words is almost completely
irrelevant. … There can be no doubt
that we have here a new type of
linguistic use —phatic communion …
[T]his is in fact achieved by speech,

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
and the situation in all such cases is
created by the exchange of words,
by the specific feelings which form
convivial gregariousness, by the give
and take of utterances which make
up ordinary gossip. (Malinowski
[1923] 1994: 9-10, emphasis in the
original)

In a situation of linguistic diversity such as in
Casamance, Malinowski’s focus on spoken
interaction needs some qualifications.
The literal meaning of words indeed was
irrelevant for Casamançais, yet language
ideologies prescribed a need to utter them
in (one of) the language(s) accepted or
preferred in a given social situation. Often,
Casamançais addressed the language
ideologies playfully maintaining phatic
communion. In situations of unequal power
relations, however, their multilingualism
presented itself as a tactical choice.
When I went with Augustin to inquire
at a mechanic if he had repaired and sold
Augustin’s old motorbike, Augustin’s
tactic of using his multilingual repertoire
and speaking Wolof failed to establish
phatic communion and achieve a positive
outcome for the negotiation. While he
seemed fluent in Wolof speaking to his
friends, he audibly struggled to argue
his case to the mechanic. Instead of
maintaining his playfulness, his sentences
broke up into clumsy junks whenever he
had to think of the right technical terms
which he frequently could not help but
replace with French words. In principle
this is not remarkable since Urban Wolof
incorporates many French words (Juillard
1994; Swigart 2000; McLaughlin 2008)
and ‘Wolof only works with a little bit of
French’, as one of my other informants
once explained to me. Augustin, however,
later admitted that he had struggled
to find appropriate Wolof expressions.
The mechanic had also noticed this.
As a consequence, Augustin had not
convincingly used Wolof features since he

73

neither achieved phatic communion with
the mechanic nor his pertinent economic
objective of quickly selling his bike. Yet, he
had felt under pressure to use Wolof since
he envisioned the chances of settling a
good deal to significantly increase.
All of a sudden, Wolof was no longer
a choice but a way of coping with the
situational opportunity structures. They
need to be understood as multidimensional
hierarchisations, which result from the
situational significance of various language
registers which people activate, as well
as from the perceived social statuses
of the people present. The mechanic
had been in the centre of town where
Wolof increasingly prevailed as a means
of interacting commercially. Augustin
had chosen a central mechanic despite
his difficulties to relate to him due to
the language barrier. Yet he needed
the services that only this mechanic
could offer as a rare specialist. While he
previously had had good experiences,
this time Augustin’s tactic failed. In need
of money, he assumed a powerless social
position which his meagre attempts at
Wolof did not cushion. Judging his own
linguistic competences, Augustin knew
that he could have been more competent
in Jola or French than in Wolof since he
had not grown up with it nor used it under
such circumstances before. However, the
mechanic’s situationally superior position
based in his professional competence
and central location in town had let him
dictate the terms of interaction. At least,
this must have been Augustin’s perception
of the situationally specific opportunity
structures according to which he had acted.
As a consequence, Augustin’s difficulties to
satisfactorily blend in linguistically and his
economically weak position had prevented
his successful negotiation.
His intended strategic choice of
dealing with his own subject position had
not resulted in the expected outcome.

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

74
Put differently, his own Casamançais
language ideology of multilingualism
had been brought to a limit entering an
economic field in which rules governed
that he did not master to the required
level. Augustin failed at using Wolof as a
commodity, which it was intended to be
in this economic exchange. Language
here needs to be understood from the
economic angle (Irvine 1989), from which
it could appear as either a strategically
applied resource or coping tactic.
In addition to their multilingual selfrepresentation, the linguistic flexibility
and creativity of Casamançais thus is,
in certain situations, a way of dealing
with situational power structures in the
attempt to make economic ends meet.
Truncated multilingualism and the
convivial effects of phatic communion
thus may become a currency to cope
with real socio-economic disparities.
Rather than free play, I argue that
Casamançais tried to tactically influence
this exchange on the outcome of which
they were dependent. Such a situation, I
will show next, became more frequent in
the emigration context.

Aboubacar Diao
Aboubacar Diao, a Fula in Catalonia, had
felt constrained in his choice of language
in interactions on the labour market and
in everyday life in Catalonia. He had
grown up in an ethnically diverse village
of the Sédhiou region, where unlike many
other villages in Middle Casamance,
the predominance of Mandinka was
contested, most fiercely by the locally
resident Fula. Meeting him in Catalonia,
Aboubacar claimed to have already
started to forget Mandinka. Instead,
he actively only maintained Wolof and
Fula from his Senegalese repertoire. In
Catalonia, he had first learned Castilian
but quickly changed to Catalan. His

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
young Fula wife from the same village
of origin, who had recently arrived and
given birth to their child, also took
Catalan language classes. Contrary to
other migrants, they neither shared their
house with family or friends, nor had
direct African neighbours. The few Fula
living close-by, they hardly visited.
While there were some Casamançais
immigrants that felt an immediate
interest in the Catalan language as an
expression of a regional specificity and
diversity much like in Casamance, others
like Aboubacar had initially set out to
learn Spanish since their work trajectories
would not be limited to Catalonia alone.
Back then, Aboubacar had reasoned that
Catalan was of no use in the rest of Spain
and Europe. This rational argument
ranking languages paralleled a similar
practice in Senegal. In general, Fula and
Mandinka speakers discredited Wolof
since they thought its geographical reach
was limited to Senegal and Gambia alone.
In contrast, both Mandinka and Fula were
languages with a trans-regional or—as
some liked to claim—a pan-African
reach. Neither Catalan nor Wolof could
claim such a significance. Yet, reasons
beyond possible onward migrations led
to a re-evaluation of specific language
ideologies. For example, Aboubacar
preferred Wolof to Mandinka due to
his direct confrontation with Mandinka
in his village of origin. Casamançais
entextualise their own situation in
the contexts of (competing) language
ideologies. Therefore, Aboubacar had
started to care for Catalan.
The first day I met Aboubacar and
his wife, he had just come back from a
Catalan class. Being reluctant to learn
Catalan at first, the Diaos had observed
three practical reasons for positively
engaging and learning Catalan. On the
labour market and in public institutions,
Catalans would increasingly assume

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
Catalan as the lingua franca and not switch
to Castilian automatically, thus limiting the
access of those not able to speak Catalan.
To participate locally and to achieve one’s
own goals it was necessary to avoid such
situations. Second, knowing that someone
only understood Castilian, Catalans
could speak about him or her in Catalan
unnoticed. Since this was potentially
dangerous, it needed to be prevented at
all costs. Finally, the Diaos noticed that a
group of locals would receive someone well
if addressed in Catalan.6 While this applied
to all immigrants, sub-Saharan Africans
frequently earned a lot of respect from the
Catalans for their high linguistic sensibility.
Among them, all three dimensions
had been recurrent themes reiterating
the importance of Catalan. Those not
knowing Catalan risked being excluded
and potentially discriminated against. To
prevent this, the Diaos regularly attended
Catalan classes and did not rely on the
vernacular everyone else picked up on the
street.
Taking classes in Catalan contrasted
with Aboubacar’s attitude to Castilian
that he only continued to pick up on the
streets and at work. The working class
street register of Castilian and some
minimal knowledge of Catalan would
have sufficed for Aboubacar to work in
low-skilled employment and maintain
phatic interactions as many Casamançais
did. Indeed, some Casamançais without
formal education sounded like their
Andalusian neighbours and work
colleagues, and thus succeeded in
creating phatic communion and earning
their living. Aboubacar, however, aspired
to more, he envisioned himself upwardly
mobile for which he needed to extend his
proficiency in Catalan. Seemingly as a
side product of this aspiration, the Diaos
had bought into the autonomy narrative
of Catalonia with its own culture and
language, which for them was a legitimate

75

explanation of the increasing pride of
Catalans and their efforts to promote
Catalan. Apart from being a sign of
respect for regional specificity, plenty of
Casamançais furthermore sympathised
with the Catalan minority concern similar
to that of the Casamançais in Senegal,
and the symbolic role of Jola, Mandinka,
and other even smaller language groups
therein. Quite literally, they compared
and translated the cultural dynamics
of the two regions, thus making them
intelligible.
As the dominant narrative, however,
Aboubacar portrayed his efforts to speak
and understand Catalan as a tactical
choice, which was facilitated by some
sympathy for a minority language. He
felt a need for Catalan to approach
people and to find work; he tactically
tried to comply with the requirements set
by those who could either grant or deny
access to employment and services. In
contrast to others who had transplanted
some of their linguistic playfulness to
Catalonia, his engagement with Catalan
showed little of such an attitude. To
achieve his own goals, Aboubacar
seemingly did the necessary by using the
resource of the dominant local lingua
franca.
Language ideologies promoting a
single lingua franca thus have the potential
to challenge truncated multilingualism
as the basis of phatic communion. The
imposition of regionally dominant or
politically favoured linguae francae
like Catalan, Mandinka or Wolof puts
the relative equality among interacting
parties and their linguistic repertoires
and registers at risk. This can result
in spaces being claimed by some local
residents who then intend to impose their
language preferences on others. In large
shares of the public and economic sphere
of Catalonia, Catalans occupied such a
position. Nevertheless, most Casamançais

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

76
(seemingly) playfully maintained phatic
communion for either normative or
tactical reasons, or both.
None of the aspects facilitating
phatic communion in a local social
field can thus be taken for granted. For
many Casamançais, cultural translation
and sustaining the local style of address
are in general a morally correct tactical
choice.7 However, normative evaluations
of social, cultural, and religious
collective and individual aspirations,
and of local configurations of language
ideologies challenge its feasibility.
Some Casamançais struggled with
differences in what constituted phatic
exchange. For example, rushing social
encounters or reducing them was
hardly translatable for Casamançais
who believed in the importance of
making time for encounters as part of
Casamançais cohabitation. Additionally,
educated Casamançais interacting with
working-class Andalusian neighbours
found it hard to generously equate
their different practices due to the
class differences; they were appalled by
unpleasant working-class small talk. Yet
this emotionally trapped them between
their disdain and mockery of their
neighbours’ repertoires, and their own
lack of respect this portrayed.
Indeed, Aboubacar had been
struggling to cope with the local forms
of creating phatic communion. Despite
learning the language, he stated his
preference at work and outdoors to
interact as little as possible, mainly to
avoid trouble. While he would watch and
listen, he never commented or joked. To
him local ways of joking were frequently
insulting rather than funny. Apart from
speaking as little as possible, Aboubacar
also explained to keep his bodily
expressions to a minimum, for example
not looking into the eyes of passers-by.
Aboubacar’s limited engagement

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
at work and in public, as well as his
multilingual choices mirror his constant
evaluation of how to most efficiently deal
with current conditions. From the outset
in Casamance, he had only picked up
language repertoires that were useful to
know. Thus, he stopped at the level of
greeting in Castilian but invested more
in Catalan after he had seen possible
pitfalls in case he did not. He quickly
invested in the latter to access realms of
society from which he otherwise found
himself excluded. Part of this logic
was also, to keep the encounters to a
minimum of acknowledging each other’s
presence and distinctiveness.
Like in Casamance, Aboubacar had
used the suitable registers and forms of
interaction to the necessary extent. To
recognise such locally specific forms of
interaction was also part of the process
of cultural translation, i.e. the successful
translation between multiple systems of
meaning, making them intelligible and
moving between them. Casamançais
expressed their disposition towards such
practices through a close observation
of local sociality which they compared
to their previous social experiences
and to the information gained from comigrants in the new place. In contrast
to Aboubacar, who tactically reacted
to changing circumstances, we will see
next how Idrissa Samaté believed in the
genuine usefulness of multiple languages
and how he mastered the fine-tuning
of situational styles and registers with a
certain playfulness.

Idrissa Samaté
Idrissa Samaté, a Mandinka from
Sédhiou town, had been politically well
connected in a socialist-Marxist party
which had ceased to exist leaving various
splinter groups behind. As a result,
Idrissa felt that his future in Senegal

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
had waned and decided to try migration
inspired by his foster brother, whom he
eventually joined in Spain. He had left
his wife and children behind to start
the life of a migrant exposed to the
vagaries of an uncertain future, which
was in contrast to his initially promising
outlook in Senegal.
Explaining his linguistic repertoire,
he stressed his secure family background
and formal education in Senegal at the
University of Dakar. His whole family
was at least fluent in French, Wolof, and
Mandinka. Idrissa himself was a recognised
language authority for Mandinka, his
mother tongue, both in Casamance and
Catalonia. The Casamançais advertising
his language proficiency often implied
more than just language: they meant
a profound knowledge of Mandinka
cultural practices and their texts. For
this reason, Idrissa regularly received
visitors on weekends who came from
neighbouring towns to attend his
gatherings or causeries. Furthermore, they
demanded his guidance in rituals at any
kind of cultural event that was held in and
around his current place of residence.
Idrissa’s
extensive
knowledge
of home combined with an active
engagement with the Catalan locality.
Like many others, Idrissa believed in the
centrality of being able to communicate
in a new context in which he invested a
lot from the start. Although he dedicated
most of his time to migrant associations,
he had shown an interest in local
associations and always participated
in associational meetings on the
municipality level. When I met him
seven years after his arrival in Catalonia,
he furthermore had become a relatively
well-known and respected figure in the
trade unionism of Catalonia.
Working for one of the main trade
unions in the field of migrants’ rights, he
spent his days using the full scope of his

77

linguistic repertoire. In campaigns, he
emphasised the importance of interacting
with Moroccan and Latin American
workers as well as sub-Saharan ones. In the
office block, however, his Catalan register
proved important. On the corridors
and in casual meetings he constantly
exchanged the odd question and short
commentary with his co-workers. In style
he adjusted to the union environment,
addressing most people as compañera/o,
company/a, or camarada.8 Which one of
the Castilian or Catalan union forms of
address he used remained often unclear
since he kept a low voice throughout
the day. Speaking softly was one major
difference he had previously identified
between here and there, referring broadly
to Catalonia, Spain, or Europe on the
one hand, and Casamance, Senegal, or
Africa on the other. Apart from scripted
responses, he most of the time earned
a recognising smile. By the time I met
him, Idrissa had become a widely known
person throughout the office block and
had secured his social position. While
this was partly due to being one of the
few migrants working there, his efforts
put into knowing enough Catalan and
fitting in stylistically had their effect
and facilitated phatic communion and
everyday conviviality.
To get on in multiple languages had
always been helpful to him. Knowing
Wolof and French had been useful
resources in Senegal and continued to
be in Spain. In Catalonia, Idrissa assured
me that knowing either some Catalan or
Castilian was a mandatory first step to
integrate, as he phrased it. However, he
himself made use of them both. Catalan
was important at the office and in dealing
with the municipality, but Castilian
was a central means to get by in the
neighbourhood. Apart from the many
Moroccans and Latin Americans with

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

78
whom Idrissa used español or ‘Spanish’,
it also served with the Anglophone and
Lusophone sub-Saharan immigrants.
With fellow Africans little or unknown,
the geographical scope of Mandinka,
Wolof and French was simply too limited
to facilitate communication.
Despite knowing the value of linguae
francae, in our discussion Idrissa made
the case for the general desirability of
polylanguaging. He repeatedly stated
that it was desirable to learn further
languages such as his mother tongue,
Mandinka, or Jola.9 His support of
various co-existing language ideologies
demonstrates the multiple allegiances
with which multilingualism plays. The
lingua franca of a place is crucial, but
being able to situationally draw from a
wide repertoire certainly had a positive
effect on facilitating conviviality. Thus,
Idrissa would use ‘union-Catalan’ at
work, ‘Spanish’ with strangers, Wolof
with Senegalese, and Mandinka with the
people who knew him and at home. Even
Idrissa did not always seek proficiency
in the standard register. Especially the
proximity of Castilian, Catalan, and
French invited creative improvisations,
a skill many Casamançais had. Idrissa
regularly experienced that this would
work since in phatic communion
language
ideologies
were
easily
satisfied by partial and fragmentary, yet
appropriate language practice.
Idrissa embraced multiple languages
more than most of my informants. To be as
successful as he was in both keeping a high
social standing in the migrant community
and among co-workers, he had developed
an advanced sense of appropriate registers
and styles. Whether in the trade union,
in migrant associations, in public spaces
or at home, Idrissa consciously adjusted
to every encounter. Although he had
achieved more than most Casamançais
and he seemingly enjoyed himself, he

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
occasionally portrayed his life and with it
the language choices as a way of coping as
an immigrant. Drawing on this migration
discourse and alluding to the necessary
efforts of the apprenticeship on which
he had embarked was just another way
of engaging with political dynamics at
hand. While Idrissa genuinely believed in
the appropriateness of polylanguaging,
he also was strategic enough to dress
it up as a coping tactic specific to a
migrant’s life, which was convincing
in times of increasingly dominant and
exclusivist language ideologies as in the
case of Catalan. Idrissa’s case thus offers
a reading of a generally embracing
engagement with polylanguaging for
the sake of phatic communion and, in
consequence, conviviality; however, it
also raises an awareness for the tactical
use of polylanguaging within the wider
discourse of immigration.

4. CONCLUSIONS
In the introduction, I asked to what
extent
Casamançais
polylanguaging
is a way of playfully facilitating phatic
communion and conviviality, and how
far is it a result of a wider coping tactic of
people who often hold a comparatively
powerless subject position. It is worth
remembering that multilingual practices
of the same people play out in a number
of situations, for example, (seemingly)
unintentional
everyday
encounters
in public space, meetings in political
contexts, and economic interactions.
In this regard, multilingualism is both
intended and practised in various ways
depending on the overall configurations
of the context and the social situation itself.
The three examples have shown that it is a
process found among people of disparate
socioeconomic backgrounds. Depending
on all of these factors—the actual situation,
the structural context, and the subject

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
position of the speaker—multilingual
practices facilitate phatic communion
sometimes playfully and sometimes as part
of coping tactics.
Looking at the regional contexts,
Casamance and Catalonia are structured
by quite different configurations of
language ideologies. While in Casamance
multilingual practices were part of
the regionally dominant discourse, in
Catalonia the Catalan language ideology
supported Catalan as the main lingua
franca. Catalan dominated in the political
sphere and in Catalan work environments.
Both Aboubacar and Idrissa alluded
to this; yet, their cases also showed
that it was often enough to know some
Catalan features to achieve conviviality.
Moreover, Castilian regularly proved
equally important, yet in different social
situations, such as in neighbourhoods
and while doing manual labour alongside
Spaniards from the South and other
immigrants. In contrast, the need to
speak Wolof, increasingly the Senegalese
lingua franca in politics, trade, and youth
culture, demonstrated the limits of the
multilingual ideology in Casamance.
The case studies have shown how
the process of conviviality happens at
the interplay of multiple dimensions of
difference, which was reflected in both
the configuration of the social fields, and
the people’s practices of polylanguaging
and translation. Often strong supporters
of multilingual repertoires, Casamançais
normatively justified the equality and coexistence of multiple languages, styles,
and registers in a local social field, yet at
the same time situationally accepted, and
creatively made use of, a lingua franca, as
well as the appropriate styles and registers.
Despite some like Aboubacar Diao who did
not positively relate to multilingualism,
many Casamançais valued (truncated)
multilingualism since it facilitated
the process of living with maintained

79

differences.
They
saw
themselves
contributing to embracing linguistic and
semiotic differences in translation, thus
facilitating communication or, more
generally, interaction. In practice, this
often only involved features ‘learned
in passing’, which is characteristic of
phatic communion and thus temporary
conviviality.
This observation is highly relevant
for the question of multilingualism
in relation to social hierarchies. As in
Augustin Sambou’s case, disempowered
subject positions are situational. While
he kept afloat in most social situations
applying his wide repertoire, with the
mechanic he failed at achieving both
phatic communion and the desired
economic outcome. Thus, while in the
economic field multilingualism is a
tactical choice to mediate unfavourable
structural conditions and it may fail, in
public spaces phatic communion can be
created by the same people through the
playful exchange of non-propositional
language drawing on wide repertoires.
In the latter case, conviviality, peaceful
living with maintained difference, and
the experience of relative situational
equality are at stake, while in the former,
truncated multilingualism resembles an
economic investment.
Substantial differences and power
disparities always entail the possibility
of failure impeding the inherent
translation process of polylanguaging.
Cultural differences deriving from ethnic
competition or competing language
ideologies are closely related to, and mask
questions of power. This was the case of
the mechanic implicitly imposing the use
of Wolof in Casamance, and the tactical
use of Catalan by both Aboubacar and
Idrissa. However, when phatic communion
is established by creatively drawing from
a wide repertoire and skillfully handling
language ideologies, the situational

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

80

HEIL

salience of social hierarchies is temporarily
reduced. For continued conviviality,
Casamançais were adjusting to changing
situations and contexts, which their
truncated multilingualism reflected. While
in this paper I have stressed the importance
of language ideologies which emphasise
underlying cultural, national, and ethnic
differences, practising multilingualism
and achieving phatic communion depends
on competently addressing further social
and economic differences. Variations in
registers and style which Idrissa combined,
for example, offered initial, but important
insights into these dynamics.
Exploring multilingual practices
and representations on a spectrum
between coping tactic and phatic
communion taking the crucial role
of language ideologies into account
has proven a productive way of
understanding the polylanguaging of
residents who live in diversified localities
and remain different, yet often maintain
conviviality. The process of conviviality
spans both these aspects describing everdynamic and ever-fragile ways of living
with difference.

3

4
5

6

7

8
9

in my fieldnotes, which explains the lack
of direct quotations.
To also systematically take transit spaces
as further influencing contexts into
account could be promising, but lies
beyond the scope of my material.
‘Agreement to live together. National
Agreement on Immigration.’ (from
Catalan).
All names have been changed. However,
the first name shows the Christian or
Muslim faith of an informant, while
the last name indicates the real ethnic
origins of the person. Where the latter
is crucial for the analysis, the ethnicity is
additionally mentioned separately.
Interviews of a Moroccan and subSaharan African published online
support this fact (http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=RkA2CJASaiY [accessed
09/11/2012]).
Elsewhere, I more extensively discuss the
aspects of cultural translation and the
inherently comparative perspectives of
migrants (cf. Heil 2013, 2014b).
Compañera/o is Castilian, company/a
Catalan, and camarada exists in both.
It is likely that he consciously mentioned
Jola well aware of the local rivalry of Jola
and Mandinka speaking Casamançais in
both Casamance and Catalonia.

NOTES

REFERENCES

1

Agence Nationale de la Statistique et
de la Démographie. 2008. Troisième
recensement général de la population et de
l’habitat (2002). Rapport national de
présentation. Dakar: Agence Nationale
de la Statistique et de la Démographie
(ANSD).
Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de
la Démographie. 2009. Recensement
général de la population et de l’habitat 2002.
Personal communication. Ziguinchor:
Service Régional de la Statistique et de la
Démographie de Ziguinchor.
Ajuntament de Mataró. 2010. Estudi de
la Població. Mataró: Servei d’Estudis i
Planificació.

2

I wish to thank participants at the
conference Language practices, migration
and labour: ethnographing economies in
urban diversities at the University of the
Western Cape, Cape Town, 9-10/10/2012
for very helpful and constructive
comments on earlier versions of this
paper. Errors remain all mine.
I matched a sample of mainly male
migrants and their relatives and
friends. The fieldwork lasted for
about 18 months between 2009 and
2010, equally split between Catalonia
and Casamance. While I recorded 66
open-ended interviews, much of the
presented material stems from informal
conversations that are only documented

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

Between phatic communion and coping tactic
Blommaert, Jan, James Collins, and
Stef Slembrouck. 2005. Spaces
of Multilingualism. Language &
Communication 25 (3): 197–216. doi:
<10.1016/j.langcom.2005.05.002>.
Castells, Manuel. 2009. The Power of Identity.
Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
De Jong, Ferdinand, and Geneviève
Gasser. 2005. Contested Casamance:
Introduction. Canadian Journal of African
Studies 39 (2): 213–29.
Diallo, Ibrahima. 2010. The Politics of
National Languages in Postcolonial Senegal.
Amherst: Cambria Press.
Díez Nicolás, Juan. 2002. Las dos caras de
la inmigración. Madrid: Ministerio de
Trabajo y Asuntos Sociales.
Dreyfus, Martine, and Caroline Juillard.
2005. Le plurilinguisme au Sénégal:
Langues et identités en devenir.
Dictionnaires et langues. Paris: Karthala.
Evans, Martin. 2005. Insecurity or isolation?
Natural resources and livelihoods in
Lower Casamance. Canadian Journal of
African Studies 39 (2): 282–312.
Foucher, Vincent. 2002. Cheated pilgrims:
Education, migration and the birth of
Casamançais nationalism (Senegal).
Unpublished PhD dissertation. London:
University of London.
Foucher, Vincent. 2003. Pas d’alternance
en Casamance? Le nouveau pouvoir
sénégalais face à la revendication
séparatiste casamançaise. Politique
Africaine 91: 101–19.
Foucher, Vincent. 2011. On the matter
(and materiality) of the nation:
Interpreting Casamance’s unresolved
separatist struggle. Studies in Ethnicity
and Nationalism 11 (1): 82–103. doi:
<10.1111/j.1754-9469.2011.01098.x>.
Gal, Susan. 2013. Registers, schools and
scales: Comments on language and
identity in twenty-first century Catalonia.
International Journal of Bilingual Education
and Bilingualism 16 (2): 225–29. doi:<10.
1080/13670050.2012.720671>.
Estatut d’autonomia de Catalunya 2006.
Generalitat de Catalunya. 2006. <http://
www.parlament.cat/porteso/estatut/
eac_ca_20061116.pdf>.

81

Generalitat de Catalunya. 2009. Un pacte
per viure junts i juntes: Pacte nacional
per a la immigració.
Generalitat de Catalunya. 2010a. Citizenship
and Immigration Plan 2009-2010.
Unpublished manuscript, last modified
March 31, 2011. <http://www20.gencat.
cat/docs/dasc/03Ambits%20tematics/05
Immigracio/03Politiquesplansactuacio/
03placiutadania09_012/01Presentacio/
pla_angles.pdf>.
Generalitat de Catalunya. 2010b. Pla de
ciutadania i immigració 2009-2012.
Unpublished manuscript, last modified
March 31, 2011. <http://www20.gencat.
cat/docs/dasc/03Ambits%20tematics
/05Immigracio/03Politiquesplansact
uacio/03placiutadania09_012/01Pres
entacio/pla_ciutadania_immigracio_
vcat_2010_06_03.pdf>.
Glick Schiller, Nina, Ayşe Çağlar, and
Thaddeus C. Guldbrandsen. 2006.
Beyond the ethnic lens: Locality,
globality, and born-again incorporation.
American Ethnologist 33 (4): 612–33.
Heil, Tilmann. 2012. Fragile convivialities:
Everyday living together in two stateless
but diverse regions, Catalonia and
Casamance. MMG Working Papers 12-100.
Unpublished manuscript, last modified
April 04, 2013. <http://www.compas.
ox.ac.uk/publications/working-papers/
wp-12-100/>.
Heil, Tilmann. 2013. Cohabitation and
convivencia: Comparing conviviality
in the Casamance and Catalonia.
Unpublished PhD dissertation. Oxford:
University of Oxford.
Heil, Tilmann. 2014a. Are neighbours alike?
Practices of conviviality in Catalonia
and Casamance. European Journal of
Cultural Studies 17 (4): 452–70. doi:
<10.1177/1367549413510420>.
Heil, Tilmann. 2014b. How and why does
it matter to understand diverse urban
engagements from the migrants’
perspective? MMG Working Papers 14-03.
Unpublished manuscript, last modified
April 01, 2014. <http://www.mmg.mpg.
de/publications/working-papers/2014/
wp-14-03/>.

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

82
Instituto Nacional de Estadística. 2011.
Revisión del padrón municipal 2010:
Datos a nivel nacional, comunidad
autónoma y provincia. <www.ine.es>.
Irvine, Judith T. 1989. When talk isn’t
cheap: Language and political economy.
American Ethnologist 16 (2): 248–67.
Jørgensen, Jens N., Martha S. Karrebæk,
Lian M. Madsen, and Janus S. Møller.
2011. Polylanguaging in Superdiversity.
Diversities 13 (2): 23–38.
Juillard, Caroline. 1991. Le plurilinguisme
au quotidien: Ziguinchor au Sénégal.
Afrique Contemporaine 30 (158): 31–52.
Juillard, Caroline. 2005. Plurilinguisme et
variation sociolinguistique à Ziguinchor
(Sénégal). VALS/ASLA 82: 117–32.
Juillard, Caroline, Marie-Louise Moreau,
Pape Alioune Ndao, and Ndiassé
Thiam. 1994. Leur wolof dit-il qui ils
sont? La perception des appartenances
régionales et ethniques au travers du
wolof urbain parlé par les adolescents.
Langage et Société 68 (1): 35–62.
Lambert, Michael. 1998. Violence and the
war of words: Ethnicity v. nationalism in
the Casamance. Africa 68 (4): 585–602.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. (1923) 1994. The
problem of meaning in primitive
languages. In Maybin, Janet (ed).
Language and Literacy in Social Practice: A
Reader. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
1–10.
Marut, Jean-Claude. 2010. Le conflit de
Casamance: Ce que disent les armes.
Hommes et sociétés. Paris: Karthala.
May, Stephen. 2012. Language and Minority
Rights: Ethnicity, Nationalism and the
Politics of Language. New York: Routledge.
McLaughlin, Fiona. 2008. The ascent
of Wolof as an urban vernacular and
national lingua franca in Senegal.
In Cecile B. Vigouroux and Salikoko

© Heil and CMDR. 2015

HEIL
S. Mufwene (eds). Globalization and
Language Vitality: Perspectives from Africa.
London: Continuum. 142–70.
Pujolar, Joan. 2009. Immigration in
Catalonia: Marking territory through
language. In James Collins, Stef
Slembrouck, and Mike Baynham (eds).
Globalization and Language in Contact:
Scale, Migration, and Communicative
Practices. London: Continuum. 85-105.
Pujolar, Joan, and Isaac Gonzàlez.
2013. Linguistic ‘mudes’ and
the de-ethnicization of language
choice in Catalonia. International
Journal of Bilingual Education and
Bilingualism 16 (2): 138–52. doi:
<10.1080/13670050.2012.720664>.
Swigart, Leigh. 2000. The limits of
legitimacy: Language ideology and shift
in contemporary Senegal. Journal of
Linguistic Anthropology 10 (1): 90–130.
doi: <10.1525/jlin.2000.10.1.90>.
Wimmer, Andreas, and Nina Glick Schiller.
2002. Methodological nationalism
and beyond: Nation-state building,
migration and the social sciences.
Global Networks 2 (4): 301–34. doi:
<10.1111/1471-0374.00043>.
Wimmer, Andreas, and Nina Glick Schiller.
2003. Methodological nationalism,
the social sciences, and the study
of migration: An essay in historical
epistemology. International Migration
Review 37 (3): 576–610.
Woolard, Kathryn A., and Susan E.
Frekko. 2013. Catalan in the twentyfirst century: Romantic publics and
cosmopolitan communities. International
Journal of Bilingual Education and
Bilingualism 16 (2): 129–37. doi:
<10.1080/13670050.2012.720663>.

