CA

Journal of
Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive: Documentary Records,
Narrative Construction, and Predictive Risk
Assessment
Tonia Sutherland
06.04.19
Peer-Reviewed By: Anon.
Clusters: Data
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.039
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Tonia Sutherland, “The Carceral Archive: Documentary Records, Narrative
Construction, and Predictive Risk Assessment,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. June
4, 2019.

Over the past three decades, scholarship in sociology, criminology, law, public
policy, history, science and technology studies (STS), and other allied fields has
addressed various areas of concern at the intersections of race and correctional
supervision in the United States. Some scholars have argued that the modern
day prison industrial complex is a transparent extension of chattel slavery, while
others have asserted that a ubiquity of carceral ideologies has contributed to a
broader social inequality—one so affecting as to prevent people from oppressed
and marginalized communities from full participation in American life.12 This
scholarship unambiguously attests to ongoing disparities in rates of incarceration calculated along the indices of race and ethnicity; with data cultures expanding—evidenced by growth in sectors such as big data, data science, and data analytics—in the sociocultural landscapes and sociotechnical environments of the
United States, more recent scholarship has focused on the ways that technology
1

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

also contributes to—and often exacerbates—these disparities.1
Just as scholarship on correctional supervision was shifting to reckon with
data and its attendant technologies, archivists—those who appraise, manage,
preserve, and provide access to data—and archival studies scholars were
naturally also embracing technological concerns. More recently, however, a
body of archival scholarship has also emerged that speaks to concerns about
race, representation, and the evidential value of documentary records.2 Yet,
despite the many overlapping interests of scholars, archivists, and activists
working on data justice concerns, these two particular areas of inquiry—that
which investigates the relationships among race, data, and law enforcement and
that which sits at the nexus of race, data, and the documentary record—have
remained distinct. This paper interweaves these discussions, examining how law
enforcement data practices in the United States ( e.g. surveillant data mining,
algorithmic primacy in offender risk assessment) both draw upon and generate
documentary records and risk narratives that propagate a carceral archive, and
how this carceral archive in turn perpetuates discriminatory practices in the
criminal justice system.
I begin by introducing and defining the carceral archive, then argue that law enforcement data practices create and sustain the carceral archive by appropriating
and exploiting social media data cultures. Next, I interrogate how the carceral
archive draws upon, contributes to, and perpetuates the risk narratives that are
used by the state to justify the need for compulsory confinement. Connecting the
dots between our current system of mass incarceration and earlier forms of social
control, I argue that data cultures in contemporary policing have not been inaugurated by new technologies; instead, these ongoing practices are built on the
violent history of chattel slavery and appeals to white panic constructed around
notions of order and “safety.” Finally, I offer a vision for the liberatory potential
1 See for example: Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (The New Press: New York, 2011) and Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How
High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2018).
2 See for example: Kim Christen, “Does Information Really Want to be Free? Indigenous Knowledge Systems and the Question of Openness,” International Journal of Communication 6 (2012); Stacie
Williams and Jarrett M. Drake, “Power to the People: Documenting Police Violence in Cleveland,” in
“Critical Archival Studies,” eds. Michelle Caswell, Ricardo Punzalan, and T-Kay Sangwand, Special
issue, Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 1, no. 2 (2017): 1-27; Mario Ramirez, “On
‘Monstrous’ Subjects and Human Rights Documentation,” In Emerging Trends in Archival Science,
Karen F. Gracy, ed. (Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2017); Tonia Sutherland, “Archival Amnesty:
In Search of Black American Transitional and Restorative Justice,” Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 2 (2017); and Lae’l Hughes-Watkins, “Moving Toward a Reparative Archive: A
Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to Disrupting Homogenous Histories in Academic Repositories
and Creating Inclusive Spaces for Marginalized Voices.” Journal of Contemporary Archival Studies 5
(2018): 1-17. (1) https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6.

2

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

of archives—and the archive—in contraposition to the carceral archive.
To conceptualize the carceral archive specifically as it relates to data justice, I
engage critical archival studies, digital culture studies, and critical race theory
as analytical frameworks. To frame my discussion of carceral archives and “the
carceral archive,” I employ critical archival studies. Per archival studies scholar
Michelle Caswell, critical archival studies: “(1) explains what is wrong with the
current state of archival and recordkeeping practice and research and identifies
who can change it and how; (2) posits achievable goals for how archives and
recordkeeping practices and research in archival studies can and should change;
and (3) provides norms and strategies and mechanisms for forming such critique.”3 Caswell further asserts that, “Critical archival studies, like critical theory
in general, is unapologetically emancipatory in nature.”4 In critical archival studies, the transformation of archival practice and research is the ultimate goal. To
frame an understanding of the social media landscape in which the surveillance
of data cultures thrive, I employ digital culture studies. Digital culture studies
asks how new technologies reflect the wider social world offline, how they create new cultural interactions, and how those new interactions reshape the real
(non-virtual) world. Finally, throughout my analysis I employ critical race theory (CRT). CRT is a broad theoretical framework stemming from a synthesis of
scholarly work that challenges dominant understandings of race and the law. For
the purposes of this article, CRT provides the framework for a critique of the role
of race and racism in the criminal justice system; CRT also aids in creating space
for thinking about more liberatory data and archival praxes.

3 See for example: Kim Christen, “Does Information Really Want to be Free? Indigenous Knowledge Systems and the Question of Openness,” International Journal of Communication 6 (2012); Stacie
Williams and Jarrett M. Drake, “Power to the People: Documenting Police Violence in Cleveland,” in
“Critical Archival Studies,” eds. Michelle Caswell, Ricardo Punzalan, and T-Kay Sangwand, Special
issue, Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 1, no. 2 (2017): 1-27; Mario Ramirez, “On
‘Monstrous’ Subjects and Human Rights Documentation,” In Emerging Trends in Archival Science,
Karen F. Gracy, ed. (Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2017); Tonia Sutherland, “Archival Amnesty:
In Search of Black American Transitional and Restorative Justice,” Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 2 (2017); and Lae’l Hughes-Watkins, “Moving Toward a Reparative Archive: A
Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to Disrupting Homogenous Histories in Academic Repositories
and Creating Inclusive Spaces for Marginalized Voices.” Journal of Contemporary Archival Studies 5
(2018): 1-17. (1) https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6.
4 Caswell, “Critical Archival Studies,” http://escholarship.org/uc/item/75x090df.

3

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive
Scholarly considerations of carcerality are typically built upon the premise of
policing and prisons, with scholarship on the carceral routinely referencing
Michel Foucault’s 1975 text Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, in
which he dates the completion of the carceral system to 1840 and the establishment of the Mettray prison colony, a containment that Foucault deemed
disciplinary form at its most extreme. For Foucault, in Mettray was the
construction of a “carceral continuum” that included confinement and judicial
punishment as well as institutions of discipline.5
In her 2016 article, “Catching Our Breath: Critical Race STS and the Carceral
Imagination,” sociologist Ruha Benjamin argues for a more expansive understanding of “the carceral” that extends beyond the domain of policing. Benjamin advocates for scholarly engagement with carceral imaginaries as a conceptual lens applicable not only to those processes that are directly tied to policing
and prisons, but also to an ”expansive understanding of containment that trains
scholarly attention to the underside of technoscientific development—who and
what are fixed in place—classified, corralled, and/or coerced, to enable innovation[.]”6 Benjamin further asserts that “[i]n the postracial era, subjugation is
hardly ever the explicit objective of science and technology; instead, noble aims
such as ‘health’ and ‘safety’ serve as a kind of moral prophylaxis for newfangled
forms of classification and control.”7
Although Benjamin was not speaking specifically about archives, classification
and control are distinctly archival concepts. Classification involves assigning
codes and categories of restriction as well as of relationship and belonging, while
notions of control are concerned with management and oversight, measures
taken to ensure consistency, the production of evidence, and the safety and
security of archival records.8 Randall C. Jimerson, in his 2010 book Archives
Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social Justice, defines three types of archival
institutions: the temple, the restaurant, and the prison. Temple institutions are
collecting institutions where the archivist preserves the “original” interpretation
of items or collections; restaurant institutions, by contrast, are institutions where
the archivist guides the user, allowing them to make their own decisions and
5 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan, (New York:
Vintage Books, 1979).
6 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan, (New York:
Vintage Books, 1979).
7 Benjamin, “Catching Our Breath,” 150.
8 For specific definitions of these terms in an archival context, see Society of American Archivists,
“Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology,” https://www2.archivists.org/glossary.

4

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

allowing the collections and items to speak for themselves. In prison institutions,
the archivist serves only the interpretations of an oppressive higher power.9
Applying Benjamin’s carceral imaginary to archival studies, Jimerson’s prison
institutions might be likewise designated“carceral archives.” Carceral archives
are analogous to Jimerson’s prison institutions in that they are those archives—
wherein archives are simply and elegantly defined as “collections of records,
the institutions that steward them, and the processes that designated them
archival”—that fundamentally serve the interpretations of oppressive state
powers.10
A full analysis of state-sponsored archives as carceral institutions requires lengthy
discussion, and warrants full treatment in a separate work. However, because
the focus of this work is the carceral archive—in which carceral archives play
an important role—I will briefly outline three examples of archives as carceral,
paying specific attention to collections, institutions, and processes.
The defining characteristic of carceral archives is that they comprise records—
or collections of records—held by institutions, and that one or both work in
the service of oppressive state powers. To offer a simple but important example, state records often provide the evidentiary basis to legitimize the power to
punish.11 As I will discuss in more detail later, both the policing and prison
endeavors in the US use state records in risk assessment; recidivism and sentencing determinations; and pretrial decisions. These records are components of a
carceral system that both generates and draws upon carceral archives. Similarly,
recent archival studies scholarship has criticized American archives that decline
to collect and make available evidence of human rights abuses that would support
restorative and transitional justice, particularly for Black and Indigenous people.
Archivist Lae’l Hughes-Watkins argues that these carceral archives, in their refusal to collect in the service of justice, are effectively “coconsipirator[s] in the
violence against Black bodies.”12
9 Randall C. Jimerson, Archives Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social Justice, (Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2009).
10 For a clear and thoughtful delineation between “the archive” and “archives” please see Michelle
Caswell, “ ‘The Archive’ is Not An Archives: On Acknowledging the Intellectual Contributions of
Archival Studies,” Reconstruction 16, no. 1 (2016): 1-21. Specifically, Caswell notes that ”‘the archive’
denotes a hypothetical wonderland, the ‘first law of what can be said, the system that governs the
appearance of statements as unique events,’ according to Foucault, or a curious materialization of the
death drive and pleasure principle according to Derrida. … [A]rchives …
11 By invoking the idea of “state,” archives here, I am referring to the larger body politic, rather
than archives maintained by individual US states.
12 Lae’l Hughes-Watkins, “Moving Toward a Reparative Archive: A Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to Disrupting Homogenous Histories in Academic Repositories and Creating Inclusive Spaces
for Marginalized Voices,” Journal of Contemporary Archival Studies 5 (2018): 1-17. (1) https://

5

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

What is perhaps the most important impact of carceral archives is the justifications for oppression that are codified, reinscribed, and reinforced in these spaces,
from carceral records and recordkeeping practices to the narratives that emerge
from them. Both as institutions and as physical places, archives frequently read
as carceral spaces. Characterized by walls, gates, locked doors, surveillance cameras, and security checkpoints, this material carcerality rests upon appeals to societal ideals of “safety” and “risk,” wherein archives must protect humanity from
itself. Archival repositories are therefore constructed as closed spaces, and are
so frequently experienced as such by users that theory and practice related to
archival access—from concerns about archival custody and the ownership of evidentiary records, to closed stacks practices and cultures of surveillance in repository reading rooms—is a subject of some disciplinary critique.13
Records are more than data or information, they are also evidence of an activity or
decision. Determining the institutional, cultural, and historical value of records
based on their evidentiary, documentary, and informational value is part and
parcel of the archival endeavor, and one of many processes that render records
archival. Another such process is archival representation (the arrangement and
description of archival records), in which classification and narrative are key components. Archivists and the users of archives co-construct archival narratives
through processes of archival description and archival storytelling. Archival description, the process describing the materials in the archivist’s care, is a highly
political act. The narratives that are used to describe archival materials help to define the records themselves; description also plays a role in determining how the
records are used and by whom. The users of archives also construct narratives.
Indeed, from the archives emerge many of humankind’s stories. The stories that
emerge specifically from carceral archives can be thought of as carceral narratives.
Narrative construction—as well as the construction of counternarratives or counterstories—is a key methodological component of critical race theory. Similarly,
the use of counterstories in archives challenge the cultural dominance of the status quo, aid in community building, and are indicators of the need to reallocate
power.14 Thinking critically about narrative construction, incorporating Benelischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6. See also Tonia Sutherland, “Archival Amnesty: In Search
of Black American Transitional and Restorative Justice,” Journal of Critical Library and Information
Studies 2 (2017).
13 See for example: Barbara L. Craig, “Perimeters with Fences? Or Thresholds with Doors? Two
Views of a Border,” The American Archivist 66, no. 1 (2003): 96-101; Jeannette Bastian, “Taking
Custody, Giving Access: A Postcustodial Role for a New Century,” Archivaria 53 (2002):76-93; and
Jeannette Bastian, “A Question of Custody: The Colonial Archives of the United States Virgin Islands,”
The American Archivist 64 (2001): 96-114.
14 Anthony Dunbar, “Introducing Critical Race Theory to Archival Discourse: Getting The Con-

6

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

jamin’s thinking on carceral imaginaries, and extending Jimerson’s metaphor of
prison institutions (carceral archives), I offer a concept related to—but distinct
from—carceral archives: the carceral archive.
As is articulated above, archives are comprised of records, institutions, and processes. “The archive,” on the other hand, extends beyond the documentary record
to
“enclose in one place all times, all epochs, all forms, all tastes … a place of all times
that is itself outside of time.”15 The archive, then, is not temporally or materially
bound; it encompasses all things and all times. The carceral archive can be conceived of as a sociocultural imaginary—a vision of the archive as a kind of “temporal penitentiary in which oppressed people are locked in to a dystopic present.”16
The carceral archive represents the history and memory of human existence that
has been formed by and/or bound to captivity, ownership, domination, control,
imperialism, colonialism, hegemony, forced conformity, and white supremacy.
The carceral archive is one in which oppressed people cannot escape the historical memory and historical trauma that is codified, reinforced, reinscribed, and
reified in the documentary record as part of the work of maintaining dominant
cultural narratives. For oppressed and marginalized people, the carceral archive
is an embodied carceral reality—a lived experience that stands in opposition to
liberation and reinforces historical notions of inferiority and disposability in the
present. The carceral archive comprises all of human experience that can be defined as carceral, but here I will focus on archival data and the narratives that
emerge from them.

Carceral Data
It is important that a discussion of carceral archives begin by naming antiBlackness and other forms of racism as direct challenges to the evidentiary value of
state records. One central expression of neoliberal culture is an emphasis on
the state’s carceral functions, what Noah de Lissovoy has termed “the carceral
turn.”17 I contend that the use of archives the United States has taken a sharp
versation Started.” Archival Science 6 (2006): 115.
15 Michel Foucault, “Of Other Spaces,” Diacritics 16 (Spring 1986): 22-27.
16 Benjamin, “Catching Our Breath,” 150. See also: Sheila Jasanoff and Sang-Hyun Kim, eds.
Dreamscapes of Modernity: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2015): 4.
17 Noah de Lissovoy, “Conceptualizing the Carceral Turn: Neoliberalism, Racism, and Violation,”
Critical Sociology 39, no. 5 (2012): 739-755.

7

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

carceral turn, one in which the actual—and disproportionate—incarceration of
marginalized people is justified by invoking the documentary record: primary
source data (specifically, for this discussion, social media data) that has been appropriated for use by law enforcement and the criminal justice system.
Government agencies (including state and national archives) capture, produce,
and maintain a multitude of records and artifacts, including such things as founding documents, treaties, proclamations, records of conflict, and increasingly vast
amounts of primary source data on individual citizens that comprise the documentary record. When primary source data, regardless of form or format, is
deemed public, it becomes part of the public record. Evidence of the concept of
public records dates as far into history as ancient Babylon (where vital records
such as reports of births, deaths, and marriages were etched in cuneiform into
clay tablets), and is also associated with Native Hawaiian, Inca, and ancient Chinese cultures (in which records were kept as quipas, or talking knots). In the
US, records maintained by the state fall into several access categories, including
classified, confidential, and public. While access to and use of classified and confidential records typically requires permission and/or security clearance, public
records comprise an official reporting of facts that are accessible to any member
of the community.
US law and policy both dictate what types of information is considered public, where public information can be stored, how public information can be distributed, and, importantly what categories of information are included in the public record. Although public records laws vary in scope and application, most government entities define public records similarly, using broad classes that encompass all related information regardless of physical form or characteristics.18 These
classification schemas were designed to remain relevant as the form and format of
communication changed over time, and are inclusive of everything from parchment to paper to digital media. In most states, public records include documents,
papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, film or sound recordings, information stored or maintained electronically, and data-processed or image- processed documents. Importantly, in recent years, social media data has also come
to be considered part of the public record. In modern history, public records have
been generally understood to represent “the official reporting of facts;” however,
there has been a significant epistemic shift in how we understand the concept of
public records—and notions of fact, or authenticity—where social media data is
concerned.Whereas public records were historically just that—records of public
activity—social media data exists to serve the private corporate and commercial
18 Many government entities have formally revised the language of their statutes to offer specific
guidance on social media and public records.

8

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

interests of the company. Although they might be considered shareholders, the
user is not the customer on social media platforms. They are the indirect, rather
than the direct source of revenue; rather, those that purchase user data and advertising space are the customers.
Social media can be beneficial in a multitude of ways. It allows people to build
professional and personal networks; exposes new ideas; amplifies voices; allows
for greater advocacy; and has the potential to act as an equalizer, creating space
for multiple voices. On the other hand, rather than solely being a mode of interpersonal communication, social media is part of the state record.19 Many social
media users have a (false) expectation of privacy and conduct themselves on social media platforms as though they are in the private sphere; the reality is, however, that social media users gain access to the means of data production (the
social media platform) by surrendering rights of ownership to their data, and by
extension, their privacy. Research has shown that in the private sphere of social
media, people construct identities that may not correspond to their more public
lived realities.20 Whether presenting idealized versions of themselves, or versions
that are larger-than-life, social media data are not necessarily reliable evidence of
a person’s actual beliefs, attitudes, or even conduct. This tension between the private and public spheres is critical to inquiries about the evidentiary value of social
media and its attendant data and metadata as public records, particularly in light
of law enforcement’s ongoing use of these data for criminal justice purposes.21
In addition to the tensions between the public and the private, the nuances of
the interplay between data and metadata and between narrative and counternarrative in social media data also raise questions about these data as reliable
evidentiary records. Archivists are concerned with issues of provenance and the
continuous chain of responsible custody; with preservation over interpretation;
and records as of evidence of decisions, activities, and policies. This is true of all
records and data, but thus far, the demonstrated use of social media data by law
enforcement agencies lacks the nuanced reading of data as archival evidence that
would make data justice possible.
19 State records, as I am using the term here, are analogous to and inclusive of public records and
government records.
20 See for example: Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd, “I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately:
Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and The Imagined Audience,” New Media & Society 13, no. 1 (2010):
114-133; Lisa Nakamura and P. Chow-White, eds. Race After the Internet (New York: Routledge,
2012); and Safiya Umoja Noble and Brendesha M. Tynes, eds. The Intersectional Internet: Race, Sex,
Class and Culture Online (New York: Peter Lang Publishing, 2016).
21 See for example: Ryan Pfeil, “Police Utilize Social Media to Track Down Sex Offender,” Mail
Tribune (Medford, OR), December 15, 2014; and The Associated Press, “Prison for Felon Who Posted
Machine Gun Photos on Instagram,” AP Regional State Report, California, May 03, 2018.

9

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

Increasingly used with predictive technologies to assess potential risk, social media data feeds the mechanisms that reinforce the carceral state. For example,
social media data is used in presentence investigation reports and by Homeland
Security in the context of border surveillance and control. This data is routinely
monitored, collected, and used by the FBI and other law enforcement agencies
as part of their justification for incarcerating immigrants at the US border.22 For
those who are already vulnerable, social media data—shared digital files; Twitter,
Instagram, Facebook, Reddit, Yelp! and other posts; uploads and downloads; participation in groups or other online communities; as well as the metadata such as
date, location, and time stamps generated by each of these activities—is carceral
data, evidence of activity open to interpretation by the state. Thus, every interaction on social media also becomes part of a person’s carceral archives, part of
the record that can be easily deployed to construct the narratives that are used
to justify the need for compulsory containment. By 2014, police were already using social media to apprehend criminals; today, largely as a result of increasingly
surveillant data cultures, these practices have evolved and expanded.23
In her 2018 article “Critical Surveillance Literacy in Social Media: Interrogating
Black Death and Dying Online,” critical race and digital studies scholar Safiya
Umoja Noble advocates for a developing a critical surveillance literacy for social
media, arguing that “increasing resources have been allocated in service of new
forms of record keeping by the state, as new federal and municipal commitments
to surveillance … [have escalated.]”24 Noble further emphasizes two carceral
concerns—commodification and political economy—in social media surveillance, arguing that “collecting and using social media records and digital artifacts
contributes to the persistent domination of Black Americans.”25 What follows
the construction of carceral archives by way of surveillance and data mining in
the modern criminal justice system is a process of narrative construction and
storytelling: the transformation of evidentiary information, data, and metadata
into legal evidence, and the furnishing of that evidence in hearings and trials in
support of carceral outcomes. These narratives, fashioned from the records of
state powers, easily lend themselves to the social and cultural construction of
the carceral archive, signaling a need to compose counternarratives.
22 See: National Immigration Law Center, “Untangling the Immigration Enforcement Web: Basic Information for Advocates about Databases and Information Sharing Among Federal, State,and
Local Agencies,” (September 2017), https://www.nilc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/UntanglingImmigration-Enforcement-Web-2017-09.pdf.
23 Ryan Pfeil, “Police Utilize Social Media to Track Down Sex Offender,” Mail Tribune (Medford,
OR), December 15, 2014.
24 Safiya Umoja Noble, “Critical Surveillance Literacy in Social Media: Interrogating Black Death
and Dying Online” Black Camera: An International Film Journal 9, no. 2 (2018): 147.
25 Noble, “Critical Surveillance Literacy,” 147.

10

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

At the inaugural Data for Black Lives conference at MIT in November 2016,
Charmaine L. Arthur, Director of Community Programs for Freedom House (a
Boston nonprofit), offered a compelling argument about the power of narrative
and the danger of one story. Arthur, in arguing that an individual story is not the
story of an entire community, noted that data allows for the telling of multiple
stories. At the same time, she expressed doubt that communities of color have
been empowered to control their own narratives. Rather, the narratives that have
historically emerged from data mined and produced by the state are oppressive
and racialized, frequently casting Black and brown people as savage, dangerous,
and worthy of fear.26 History also has many examples to offer in terms of the
use of surveillance tactics in producing data-based narratives about marginalized peoples. One such example is the FBI Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO), which in the 1950s and 1960s operated disruption and disinformation
campaigns aimed at discrediting and raising suspicion about people—including
many Black liberation activists—who were deemed subversive.
David Lyon, Director of the Surveillance Studies Centre at Queen’s University,
and credited with spearheading the field of surveillance studies, argues that
an appropriate focus in surveillance studies is to center attention on “sites of
surveillance,” and names government administration, policing and crime control, and consumer activity as three such sites.27 Centering social media as a “site
of surveillance” exposes the social media data being used by law enforcement
and the criminal justice system as the deeply problematic product of a carceral
archive that rests upon highly racialized cultures of surveillance (including
surveillance technologies). The history of policing as a site of surveillance also
offers important insights into the archive of contemporary US antiBlack risk
narratives and the carceral archives that are used to construct them.

Carceral Narratives
“Surveillance is nothing new to black folks. It is a fact of antiblackness.”
Simone Browne28
26 Safiya Umoja Noble calls this phenomenon “the legal right to fear Blackness.” See: Noble, Safiya
Umoja. “Teaching Trayvon: Race, Media, and the Politics of Spectacle.” The Black Scholar 44, No. 1
(Spring 2014): 12-29.
27 David Lyon, Surveillance Studies: An Overview (Cambridge: Polity, 2007): 9.
28 Browne, Dark Matters, 10.

11

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

In the United States, carcerality is a complex and racialized premise. The development of policing in the United States is closely aligned with the development
of policing in England. In the early American colonies, informal and communal
policing was known as “The Watch,” and private-for-profit policing, known as
“The Big Stick.”29 The watch system was a volunteer system in which the role of
watchmen, who often slept or drank on duty, was to warn of impending danger.
Augmenting the watch system was a system of constables, official law enforcement officers, paid on commission for warrants served. It was not until the 1830s
that the idea of a centralized municipal police department first emerged in the
United States, but by the 1880s all major U.S. cities had municipal police forces in
place.30 To articulate a critical race and critical archival counter-narrative of policing and crime control in the US is to acknowledge that these practices were—and
continue to be—inextricably tied to the violent history of chattel slavery.
In the southern United States the origin of modern policing organizations was
the slave patrol. Slave patrols had three main functions: to apprehend and return enslaved people who had taken flight; to provide a form of organized terror
in an effort to deter uprising; and to execute extrajudicial discipline (lynching
and other forms of vigilante justice) to enslaved people deemed to be in violation
of plantation rules. During Reconstruction, these vigilante organizations evolved
into Southern police departments, existing primarily to control freed Black people and to enforce Jim Crow segregation laws. In the days after the Civil War,
former enslaved people and their descendants were often arrested for minor violations, burdened with imposing fines, then incarcerated until the fines were
paid. In a system penal labor known as convict leasing, the only way by which
the fines could be paid was to either toil on the farms and plantations from which
they had just been freed, to toil in the deathly depths of coal mines, or to labor
in prisons that had been converted to work farms.31 Because convicts were too
meagerly compensated to pay their fines, this labor system effectively amounted
to (re)enslavement.
The resubjugation of Black men and boys was a saleable enterprise that white
Southerners could powerfully leverage in commercial endeavors. This “new”
Southern economy demanded the criminalization of Black life, which in turn
led to a long-term pattern of increased policing projects and new financial markets in security services. Incarcerating Black men became an exceptionally prof29 Stephen Spitzer, “The Rationalization of Crime Control in Capitalist Society,” Contemporary
Crises 3, no. 1 (1979).
30 Gary Potter, “The History of Policing in the United States,” Police Studies Online, Eastern Kentucky University, http://plsonline.eku.edu/insidelook/history-policing-united-states-part-1
31 Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (The New
Press: New York, 2011):156-157.

12

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

itable financial enterprise of its own. At the same time that slave patrols and
convict leasing were fiscally sound enterprises, they also proffered strict social
control, maintaining what Michelle Alexander terms the American “racial caste
system.”32 Present-day threats to this political and financial economy only intensify state efforts to uphold policing (and subsequent incarceration) as a means of
mitigating risk, which is ultimately seen as a public good.33
Risk can mean threat, the possibility of loss or injury, the suggestion of hazard,
the chance of peril. Patients might be at risk of infection, an investor risks the
chance that a commodity will lose value. Safety, on the other hand, implies protection from danger or injury. Protection from risk. The racialized and colonial
history of the concepts of risk and safety in America dates to the earliest days of
settler colonialism and the idea of the savage native. White European colonizers
met their demand for land by conquering the sacred ancestral lands of Indigenous
tribes. Indigenous people were seen as a threat to European progress, risking the
safety of the colonial project. Images of Indigenous people in books and newspapers painted them as savages to be feared, risks to be averted. As more Africans,
and then enslaved Africans, were brought to the eastern shores, Black men were
depicted as innately destructive, animalistic, and criminal. The Black “brute” was
a sociopathic and anti-social menace, a predator whose primary victim was white
women. Sociologist David Pilgrim writes that
The “terrible crime” most often mentioned in connection with the Black brute
was rape, specifically the rape of a white woman. At the beginning of the twentieth century, much of the virulent, anti-black propaganda that found its way
into scientific journals, local newspapers, and best-selling novels focused on the
stereotype of the Black rapist. The claim that Black brutes were, in epidemic numbers, raping white women became the public rationalization for the lynching of
[Black men].34
Slave patrols were not only deployed in the service of returning enslaved people who had run toward freedom, they were expressly deployed to maintain the
safety, security, and purity of white women. As the rhetoric of law and order was
mobilized in the American South in the 1950s, systematically linking Civil Rights
to crime—still embedded with notions of native savages, Black brutes, and the purity of white women—little effort was made to disguise the racial motivations behind rhetorics of safety and risk.35 Using an ahistorical understanding of risk and
32 Alexander,

The New Jim Crow,2.
A Blackmon. Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from
the Civil War to World War II (New York: Doubleday, 2008).
34 David Pilgrim, Understanding Jim Crow: Using Racist Memorabilia to Teach Tolerance and Promote Social Justice (PM Press: Oakland, 2015).
35 For further discussion of the history of the racialized rhetoric of law and order, see Michelle
33 Douglas

13

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

safety rhetoric to underpin contemporary thinking about risk analysis as a law enforcement tool is to understand that the omniveillance and mass incarceration of
Black and brown communities is part and parcel of a ritual and deeply racialized
performance a carceral archive, constructed around narratives of law and order,
safety and risk. The racist tropes of the native savage and the Black brute and
the racialized rhetoric of safety and risk contribute to a national carceral archive,
with long-lasting and potentially devastating human consequences.
More than crime, modern police forces in the United States emerged as a response to perceptions of disorder. In Dark Matters, scholar SimoneBrowne argues that oppressed people have long been imagined as out of place and that
technologies of control and order were developed in order to diagnose, map, and
correct these conditions.36 In the 19th century, social order was determined by
the interests of the mercantile class, who were more interested in social control
than crime control. In creating a police force, these mercantiles were interested in
protecting their own financial enterprises, and in making those costs the responsibility of the state.37 State-sponsored policing in the name of order and safety
has, from the beginning, claimed a demand for surveillance and social control.
That this history of policing is tied to commerce and chattel slavery is evident
in modern-day law enforcement. Statistically, the number of incarcerated Americans from communities of color in the United States continues to rise disproportionately, and resulting concerns about the human and social consequences
of mass incarceration at the current scale have led to calls for criminal justice
reform and the abolishment of prisons.
The fiscal landscape of the criminal justice system (alternately dubbed the “prison
industrial complex”) in the US has also shifted, not away from profit, but toward
even more complex and corrupt revenue streams. The United States government
holds many lucrative contracts with the private prison industry. Private prisons
receive a stipend from the government, the amount of which in most cases is determined based on the number of inmates housed in the penal complex. As with
most businesses, shareholder primacy demands perpetual growth, which means
that earnings for each fiscal year must supersede the year preceding. In order to
stay in business, private prisons need a nearly constant stream of incoming inmates to replace those that have completed their sentences. In simple terms, this
means that laws have to be enforced, and in some cases more strictly enforced.
By 2015, 33 states boasted privately funded prisons. That same year, mainstream
Alexander, The New Jim Crow, 40-42.
36 Browne, Dark Matters, 10.
37 Potter, “History of Policing,” http://plsonline.eku.edu/insidelook/history-policing-unitedstates-part-1.

14

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

media outlets reported multiple instances of judges accepting monetary incentives from private prisons for subjecting criminal defendants to stricter—and
longer—sentences in corporate, for-profit prison environments.38 In March 2018
the Prison Policy Institute reported that the American criminal justice system
holds almost 2.3 million people in state and federal prisons, juvenile correctional
facilities, local jails, and Indian Country jails as well as in military prisons, immigration detention facilities, civil commitment centers, state psychiatric hospitals,
and prisons in the U.S. territories. Another 3.7 million people are on probation
and 840,000 are on parole. Black, Indigenous, and other people of color are dramatically overrepresented in the nation’s prisons and jails. These racial disparities
are particularly stark for Black people, who comprise 40% of those incarcerated
despite representing only 13% of U.S population. Gender and age disparities matter as well: rates of incarceration have grown even faster for women and youth
than for men.39 Because the prison profit model depends on the continuity of
incarceration, and because of America’s structural, systemic, and institutional
racism, critics of the justice system have advocated taking sentencing, bail, parole, and recidivism decisions out of the hands of fallible human judges in favor
of “neutral” algorithmic tools known as Risk and Needs Assessment (RNA) algorithms.
Risk assessments have existed in various forms for a century, and courts have
used actuarial tools in the service of offender risk assessment for at least the past
30 years. Over the past two decades, however, these tools have become ubiquitous in the American justice system, driven in part by advances in the social and
computer sciences, and in part by the rapid uptake in human incarceration. Risk
and Needs Assessments (RNAs) are proprietary algorithmic tools used to inform
decisions at every stage of the U.S. criminal justice system from bail to parole.
RNAs try to predict the risk of recidivism using statistical probabilities that are
based on data extracted from public and other state records—a practice that I
have already argued is deeply flawed, contributes to and draws upon a carceral
archive, and that does not adjust or account for antiBlackness and racialized cultures of surveillance. Notions of risk and safety, as I discuss here, are also flawed
and racialized concepts in the United States.
Many scholars have addressed, from varying perspectives, how oppressive worldviews and racialized biases are built into modern tools and technologies. Safiya
38 See for example the Kids for Cash scandal in Pennsylvania: Eyder Peralta, “Pa. Judge
Sentenced To 28 Years In Massive Juvenile Justice Bribery Scandal,” NPR, August 11, 2011,
https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2011/08/11/139536686/pa-judge-sentenced-to-28years-in-massive-juvenile-justice-bribery-scandal
39 Prison Policy Institute, “Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2018,” https://www.prisonpolicy.
org/reports/pie2018.html.

15

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

Umoja Noble’s Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism
identifies data discrimination as a pressing social problem. In her book Breathing Race into the Machine historian Lundy Braun argues that cultural notions of
race are embedded in the architecture of ordinary instruments.40 Similarly, in
her book Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish
the Poor, political scientist Virginia Eubanks investigates the impacts of data mining, policy algorithms, and predictive risk models on economic inequality in the
United States. Others have discussed how the interview protocol that accompanies the RNA algorithmic tool also reinforce existing class- and race-based injustices and perpetuate cycles of incarceration. The data sets that feed the algorithms
that determine RNA scores, as data scientist Cathy O’Neil argues in Weapons of
Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy,
often includes data about nuisance crimes, like panhandling and vagrancy, that
are most common in poverty-stricken areas.41 Including this crime data skews
the algorithmic analysis; once the data is included in a predictive model, neighborhoods with high levels of nuisance (rather than violent) crime are subject to
increased policing which in turn leads to more arrests. Once a person has been
arrested once, the likelihood of subsequent arrest rises, and much like convict
leasing during Reconstruction, people who can’t afford to pay court fines, legal
fees, and other debt associated with the penal system, are re-incarcerated for failure to pay. As the organizers of the October 207 Data For Black Lives conference
stressed in writing about the event,
Tools like statistical modeling, data visualization, and crowd-sourcing, in the
right hands, are powerful instruments for fighting bias, building progressive
movements, and promoting civic engagement. But history tells a different
story—one in which data is too often wielded as an instrument of oppression,
reinforcing inequality and perpetuating injustice … Today, discrimination is a
high-tech enterprise.42
It is not surprising, given the racialized history of law and order in the US, that
when data wielded as an instrument of oppression, it is frequently cloaked in the
rhetoric of safety and risk. Carceral data, classed and sorted, classified and confidential, public and private is the cornerstone of contemporary omniveillance
campaigns—one that is closely tied to slavery era risk management and disorder
narratives.
40 Lundy Braun, Breathing Race Into the Machine: The Surprising Career of the Spirometer from
Plantation to Genetics, (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014).
41 Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens
Democracy (New York: B/D/W/Y Broadway Books, 2017).
42 Data 4 Black Lives, “Data 4 Black Lives Conference,” http://d4bl.org/conference.html.

16

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

Criminal risk assessments are used in sentencing, parole, and bail. Tools typically consist of a set of questions that guide face-to-face interviews with offenders,
probing behaviors and attitudes that are believed to be related to criminal reoffending, and as previously discussed, the questionnaire is supplemented with an
official records check, of public and other state records. Responses to the questionnaire are statistically weighted, based how strongly each item is thought to
correlate with recidivism. The tool then calculates an overall score that classifies
an individual’s risk of reoffending. This risk level and accompanying information
about an offender’s unique needs then inform decisions about bail, sentencing,
probation, parole, detention facilities, and other considerations. RNA tools can
be customized for use by different agencies at various decision points in the sentencing and corrections process.
There are typically at least seven dynamic risk factors closely associated with
criminal conduct that are assessed: antisocial personality pattern, pro-criminal
attitudes, social supports for crime, substance abuse, poor family/marital relationships, school/work failure, and lack of pro-social recreational activities.43 A
number of risk assessment instruments incorporate data about a defendant’s employment status, income, education, and job skills. In addition to other forms
of risk, these instruments calculate stated risks such as a defendant’s risk of not
showing up for court and risk of re-arrest. Arguably, there are many reasons that
a defendant might miss a court appearance—work, childcare, transportation—
all of which have financial and racial correlates, meaning the risks being measured are automatically higher for some. As evidenced by a sample RNA used by
the Correctional Offender Management Profile for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS), and the risk factors listed above, the interview protocols that accompany
RNA algorithms ask questions that are proxies for race and class, such as questions about gang affiliation, belief that the criminal justice system is rigged, welfare status, and parental incarceration. These questions create a feedback loop
wherein one’s place of birth or one’s current address might lead to a longer sentence, reduced chances for probation or parole, and assumptions about recidivism. Importantly, for the arguments set forth in this paper, the most widely
known source of data used to train RNA algorithms is state or government data,
specifically that which is deemed to be part of the public record. As previously
discussed, this data includes everything from vital statistics and demographic information to social media posts and neighborhood crime statistics.
There are six commonly used RNA tools: the Correctional Assessment and In43 Pamela M. Casey et al., “Using Offender Risk and Needs Assessment Information at Sentencing:
Guidance for Courts from a National Working Group,” National Center for State Courts, 2011, https:
//www.ncsc.org/.

17

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

tervention System (CAIS); the Level of Service Inventory-Revised (LSI-R) and
Level of Service/Case Management Inventory (LS/CMI); the Offender Screening
Tool (OST); the Ohio Risk Assessment System (ORAS); the Static Risk and Offender Needs Guide (STRONG); and, perhaps most well known, the Correctional
Offender Management Profile for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS). These tools
are now used at some stage of the criminal justice process in nearly every state
in America. Kentucky, for example, requires RNA results in presentence investigation reports to determine whether an offender is eligible for alternatives to
incarceration. Algorithmic RNAs are usually used in conjunction with interview
protocols and evaluations of defendant rehabilitation needs. The National Institute of Corrections, part of the Federal Justice Department, encourages these
combined assessments throughout every stage of the criminal justice process.
There have been several pieces of proposed RNA legislation introduced before
Congress in recent years. For example, Senate Bill 2123 (S.2123), the Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act of 2015, stipulates the development of a PostSentencing Risk and Needs Assessment System designed to determine recidivism
risk, determine the risk of violence, collocate low-risk offenders, assign prisoners activities based on risk level, determine the specific criminogenic needs of
each prisoner, determine a set schedule for reassessment, and provide best practices to lower the risk of recidivism. In developing the Assessment System, and
determining what records it will include, the Attorney General is encouraged to
consult with academics and criminal justice experts as deemed appropriate.44
Strikingly, this proposed legislation recommends that the Bureau of Prisons incorporate existing Inmate Classification Systems into federal RNAs. Inmate Classification Systems records, or Objective Jail Classification Systems, are designed
specifically to reduce escapes and escape attempts, suicides and suicide attempts,
and inmate assaults.45 Nothing in these systems or in proposed legislation speaks
to rehabilitation, individual and community health and growth, or the potential
for discriminatory design to embed racist beliefs and ideologiesinto the very architecture of safety and risk technologies such as RNAs. The ramifications are
critical because proposed legislation would not allow for the system to be challenged, leaving those incarcerated with no means of appeal:
Subject to any constitutional limitations, there shall be no right of review, right
of appeal, cognizable property interest, or cause of action, either administrative
or judicial, arising from any determination or classification made by any Federal
44 Introduced by Senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa, the text of the bill can be found here: https:
//www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/2123.
45 The United States Department of Justice National Institute of Corrections, “Objective Jail Classification Systems: A Guide for Jail Administrators,” https://nicic.gov/objective-jail-classificationsystems-guide-jail-administrators

18

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

agency or employee while implementing or administering the Assessment System, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this section.46
Although we cannot know for sure how much, there is evidence to suggest
that law enforcement databases also include robust data from the Department
of Homeland Security. In May 2010, the Secretary of Homeland Security
established a Policy for Integrated Risk Management (IRM), also known as the
2011 Homeland Security Risk Management Doctrine. Central to this policy
were the ideas that risk management should be collaborative, and that risk
management systems should be integrated with and sustained by federal, state,
local, tribal, territorial, nongovernmental, and private sector homeland security
partners, meaning that data could and should be extracted from all available
sources. The Doctrine stipulates that the Department of Homeland Security
should play an essential role in leading a unified effort to manage risks to the
United States from a “diverse and complex set of hazards.”47
Some of the most commonly used data sources for Homeland Security risk analysis include archival and other historical records (carceral archives); models and
simulations; and interviews with subject matter experts (typically done when historical records do not exist or are not deemed to be “appropriate”). The Doctrine
further stresses that ”structured techniques, such as value focused thinking (emphasis mine), can help the analyst determine which aspects of [the consequences
of a breach in security] should be included in the methodology” and that “the
gathered data and evidence should be carefully studied and compared to previous work” as part of validation and verification, further noting that, “In a broad
assessment, the decision maker will often have specific areas they are particularly interested in, and will ask the analysts to focus in on those areas.”48 As has
already been demonstrated, the “values,” “previous work,” “specific areas [of interest]” that fall under the purview of law enforcement are highly racialized and
frequently lead to further oppression and marginalization of black, Indigenous,
and other people of color.
The Department of Homeland Security U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(CBP) also operates the Automated Targeting System (ATS), a “decision support”
tool that compares traveler, cargo, and conveyance information against law
enforcement, intelligence, and other enforcement data using risk-based scenarios and assessments. ATS compares information about individuals (identified
46 United States Congress, “S.2123 Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act of 2015,” https://www.
congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/2123.
47 Department of Homeland Security, “Risk Management Fundamentals: Risk Management Doctrine,” April 2011, https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/rma-risk-management-fundamentals.pdf.
48 Homeland Security, “Risk Management Fundamentals,” 21.

19

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

as passengers, travelers, crewmembers, or persons appearing on documents
supporting the movement of cargo) against the Terrorist Screening Database
as well as against available data on outstanding wants and warrants.49 ATS
maintains an official record of license plate data; Department of Motor Vehicle
registration data; biographical data; law enforcement and/or intelligence data;
reports, and projects developed by CBP analysts that may include public source
information; and information obtained through memoranda of understanding
or other arrangements.
Finally, ATS maintains copies of or access to key elements of certain databases
including, but not limited to: border crossing information, special protected
classes data; student exchange and visitor information; the Enforcement Integrated Database, which includes—but is again not limited to—criminal arrest
records (including RNA analyses) and immigration enforcement records; secure
flight passenger data and master crew list data from the Transportation Security
Administration; the Department of Justice’s National Crime Information Center
and Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Interstate Identification Index; the Social
Security Administration (SSA) Death Master File; nonimmigrant and immigrant
visa data from the US Department of State; the National Insurance Crime Bureau’s private database of stolen vehicles; e3 Biometrics System data; DHS Automated Biometric Identification System; and, notably, commercial data aggregators. A person flagged by the Automated Targeting System for any reason stands
to be incarcerated and/or deported. Because of increased cultures of data sharing, and continuing rhetorics of safety and risk, access to these databases for any
criminal justice or law enforcement purpose is likely to be granted.
Given the opacity of RNAs; their proprietary nature; the capitalist and corporate
needs they serve; the carceral and racialized data practices that feed the algorithmic tools; and the racialized histories, surveillance cultures, and technologies
that produce them, the inability to challenge the results of risk and needs assessments raises serious concerns about modern-day correctional supervision. Also
given the history of policing from slave patrols and convict leasing to the enforcement of racist Jim Crow segregation laws, one would be remiss to not center
concerns about the discriminatory aspects of risk and needs assessments, risk
management, and algorithmic design. An algorithm is simply a set of guidelines
that describe how to perform a task. Just as, historically, those guidelines for
performing the task of policing were built on racist and oppressive beliefs and
practices, so too can today’s algorithms and computer models show bias against
49 Department of Homeland Security, “Privacy Impact Assessment Update for the Automated
Targeting System,” January 2017, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/privacy-piacbp006e-ats-april2017.pdf.

20

Cultural Analytics

The Carceral Archive

oppressed and marginalized people. Too frequently the very data used to train
those algorithms reflect existing cultural biases.
As I have already suggested, the for-profit prison industrial complex depends on
a constant stream of offenders to maintain profit margins. Notions of carcerality, deeply imbedded in American history and culture, must continually be
reinscribed and reinforced to serve the fiscal needs of the penal project and to
maintain the racialized norms of an oppressive and carceral society. This is the
function of carceral archives and, I would argue, what it means to live within the
carceral archive.

Toward Liberation
In this paper I have introduced and defined two new and interrelated terms:
carceral archives and “the carceral archive.” I have argued that mass incarceration, risk assessments, recidivism, sentencing determinations, and pretrial decisions are all components of a single carceral system that generates and draws
upon the carceral archive, and I have argued that the state has created and sustained carceral archives by appropriating and exploiting data cultures, particularly social media data culture. I have interrogated how carceral archives contribute to and perpetuate risk narratives that are used by the state to justify incarceration. I have also argued that contemporary state data and algorithmic
practices are not new, but are instead constructed around racialized, carceral narratives around order, risk, and safety.
Here, I will close by arguing that to take up a liberatory and decolonial position is to 1) insist that racism and colonialism no longer factor into sustaining
and reinforcing the intersecting data and algorithmic practices of the criminal
justice system, and 2) work to elucidate how sociocultural and sociotechnical
bias in data mining, algorithmic practices, and data production contribute to
the national epidemic of physical and socio-psychological incarceration of oppressed and marginalized people. I would like to suggest that if there is a carceral
archive—and there are carceral archives—then we must also construct liberatory
archives and attend to the archive of liberation. An archive of liberation, or the
liberatory archive requires understanding how people are positioned by data systems and data science. The state records and data practices that support and enable algorithmic risk assessment are enacted by knowledge creators who imbue
new types of technology with old social harms. These sociocultural biases, historically imbedded into unjust “justice” systems and fortified by capital enterprise,
21

Tonia Sutherland

Cultural Analytics

do not continue by social, cultural, technological, legal, or fiscal mandate. The
distribution of resources is a political decision, as is the allocation of billions of
dollars to policing and mass incarceration each year. So, too, is the decision to
rely on the carceral narratives constructed by algorithms from state records and
government-mined data. Richard Gray, Jr., Director of Community Organizing
and Engagement at Brown University’s Education Justice Network, noted at the
inaugural Data for Black Lives Conference in 2017 that “Every point of data is a
story about somebody’s life. It’s poetry. It needs to be told.”50 Presenting data
that respects the stories that it represents is liberatory praxis: it is a means to
dismantling the carceral archive in service of liberation.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

50 Data

4 Black Lives, “Data 4 Black Lives Conference.” http://d4bl.org/conference.html.

22

