1
Running head: SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

News Organizations’ Selective Link Sharing as Gatekeeping: A Structural Topic Model
Approach
Chankyung Pak
Amsterdam School of Communications Research, Universiteit van Amsterdam

Author Note
This paper is based on chapters 4 and 6 of my Ph.D. dissertation written in 2018 at
Michigan State University. Special thanks to my committee members, Rick Wash, Steve
Wildman, Johannes Bauer, and Esther Thorson. Financial support from the Graduate School
Dissertation Completion Fellowship at Michigan State University is gratefully acknowledged.
An online appendix is available at http://pakchank.com/wpcontent/uploads/2019/05/CCR_appendix.pdf

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
Abstract

2

To disseminate their stories efficiently via social media, news organizations make decisions
that resemble traditional editorial decisions. However, the decisions for social media may
deviate from traditional ones because they are often made outside the newsroom and guided
by audience metrics. This study focuses on selective link sharing as quasi-gatekeeping on
Twitter – conditioning a link sharing decision about news content. It illustrates how selective
link sharing resembles and deviates from gatekeeping for the publication of news stories.
Using a computational data collection method and a machine learning technique called
Structural Topic Model (STM), this study shows that selective link sharing generates a
different topic distribution between news websites and Twitter and thus significantly revokes
the specialty of news organizations. This finding implies that emergent logic, which governs
news organizations’ decisions for social media can undermine the provision of diverse news,
which relies on journalistic values and norms.
Keywords: selective link sharing, gatekeeping, Structural Topic Model

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

3

News Organizations’ Selective Link Sharing as Gatekeeping: A
Structural Topic Model Approach
Introduction
Many actors who control the news flow in the digital era (Barzilai-Nahon, 2008) have made
the privileged position of news organizations as a gatekeeper (Shoemaker & Vos, 2009) and
even the relevance of the metaphor of gatekeeper questionable (Thorson & Wells, 2015). This
theoretical withdrawal is not merely an academic word game. When the New York Times
eliminated the Public Editor position, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., a former publisher of the New
York Times acknowledged that news organizations have no role in filtering information that
emerges from social media users (Jackson, 2018). However, recently reported evidence
suggests that news organizations still occupy a differential position in the propagation of
news via social media. A research team at the University of Washington discovered that,
despite the distributed nature of the propagation of misinformation on social media (Lazer et
al., 2018), the official Twitter accounts of news organizations help stop the spread of
misinformation (Andrews, Fichet, Ding, Spiro, & Starbird, 2016). Explicitly examining the
relevance of the gatekeeper concept for news organizations, Welbers and Opgenhaffen
(2018b) showed that the Facebook posts of news organizations are a substantial determinant
of the news engagement of online readers.
The acknowledgment of the gatekeeper role of news organizations on social media does
not necessarily mean that the traditional mechanism by which gatekeeping decisions are made
simply extends to the new news dissemination platform. Although the modality and
functionality of news organizations’ decisions for social media closely resemble their
traditional editorial decisions, the newsroom or the desk are often involved in a limited way
with such decisions (Elizabeth, 2017). Further, those decisions are driven by audience metrics
rather than the normative evaluation of newsworthiness (Tandoc, 2016). In sum, news
organizations are now making extra decisions that potentially have a great impact on news
reading, but they are likely to be governed by a logic that is different from traditional norms
of journalism.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
4
In this paper, I label the news organization’s decisions for social media that resemble
the traditional journalistic practices as quasi-editorial decisions. I specifically investigate
selective link sharing – conditioning a link sharing decision on news content, as a new form
of gatekeeping (Welbers & Opgenhaffen, 2018b). This is important because if the new
gatekeeping deviates from the traditional pattern, it would be reasonable to question whether
the new logic behind the decisions is reliable enough to expect socially desirable provision of
news. However, because news organizations produce a prohibitively large number of news
stories and social media posts everyday, the random sampling and the manual coding for
analysis are nearly infeasible. This study presents computational data collection and machine
learning techniques that can overcome such a challenge. The suggested tools can further
provide infrastructure for constant monitoring of the emergent social media editing of news
organizations, which is still in flux.

The results from a Structural Topic Model (STM) (Roberts, Stewart, & Airoldi, 2016)
applied to 280 thousand news stories and 130 thousand tweets indicate that the deviation
between gatekeeping for publication and link sharing is indeed visible for several news
topics. Further, a comparison of selective link sharing across different media types shows that
topic selection differs, depending on a given topic’s popularity on Twitter and a news
organization’s specialty in the topic. The dominant momentum from selective link sharing
tends to suppress different specialties of news organizations, which either homogenize news
topic distribution on Twitter or make organizations invisible from their non-specialized
topics, rather than focusing on their specialized topics. This finding warns that news
dissemination via social media may un-diversify the provision of news information, which
calls for further public monitoring.

Social Media as a News Distribution Platform
Although there is a broad consensus that social media are fundamentally transforming
journalism, what they afford news organizations is still debatable. In previous years, media
scholars expected that the Web would afford news organizations a channel for the mutual
interaction between media and audiences (Chan-Olmsted & Park, 2000), and be an effective

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
promotion tool to attract younger audiences who do not regularly access traditional media

5

(Chan-Olmsted, Rim, & Zerba, 2013; Palser, 2009).
However, evidence that news organizations are using these opportunities is rather weak.
For example, Greer and Ferguson (2011) analyzed tweets from 488 local TV stations in the
U.S., and found that only 23.3% of 455 commercial TV stations tweet for interaction with
news readers. Similarly, Meyer and Tang (2015) analyzed tweets from 60 local news
organizations, and only 7.4% of the tweets from local television stations and 11.6% from
local newspapers were intended for interaction. Cleary, al Nashmi, Bloom, and North (2015)
reported a similar finding from tweets from the CNN International Channel. These studies
also generally conclude that traditional news companies are not engaged in promotion for
either their websites, or the organizations’ brands (Greer & Ferguson, 2011; Meyer & Tang,
2015). Armstrong and Gao (2010) concluded that traditional news organizations generally
extend their conventions to Twitter rather than adopting strategies that are customized to
social media.
Traditional news organizations use social media as an additional news distribution
platform. Greer and Ferguson (2011) found that 94.9% of the commercial TV stations tweet
to disseminate their news articles whereas only 17.6% tweet to promote their programs.
Similarly, Meyer and Tang (2015) reported that 94.4% of the tweets from TV stations and
96.3% from newspapers are for news link sharing. Further, news dissemination through social
media is often a profitable tactic although it also depends on how the platform companies
adjust and redesign their content curation algorithms (Rashidian et al., 2018). Hong (2012)
found that social media use and the number of tweets by news organizations induced more
traffic toward their news websites. According to Newman (2011), in 2011, the BBC switched
from an automatic feed to manual choice and editing optimized for Twitter, and the number
of followers has doubled since then. Recognizing this potential, Facebook published a
guideline for strategic news posts based on its own user news engagement studies in the same
year.1Therefore, news link sharing has become the main concern when news companies
contemplate their social media use.
Indeed, it is well understood that news organizations strive to increase Web traffic from
their social media posts, and boost virality on the platforms. Given the decline in the
traditional ways of disseminating news, digital advertising revenue in the U.S. market
reached 31% in 2017. This was an increase from 17% in 2011 (Barthel, 2018). Furthermore,
the majority of digital revenue comes from only a few platform companies, such as Facebook,
1

https://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook-journalists/study-how-people-are-engaging
-journalists-on-facebook-best-practices/245775148767840

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
6
Google, and Twitter (Barthel, 2018). Although better-resourced news organizations, such as
the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal, try to decouple from the giants and diversify
social media platforms through which they disseminate their news links, smaller outlets,
which take up a large proportion of news organizations, still focus on a few representative
platforms (Rashidian et al., 2018). Thus, news organizations adopt different kinds of social
media strategies to stand out on social media. As Tandoc (2016) illustrated, social media
editors and journalists widely adopt audience metrics to quickly determine which news stories
to expose to social media users and how (Roston, 2015; Welbers, Van Atteveldt,
Kleinnijenhuis, Ruigrok, & Schaper, 2016). This practice results in changes in what news
readers will see on social media. For example, García-Perdomo, Salaverría, Kilgo, and
Harlow (2018) showed that odd topics are prevalent on news organizations’ Twitter accounts,
and that news paraphrases to which Twitter users are exposed have writing styles that differ
from traditional news writing (Welbers & Opgenhaffen, 2018a).
Social media editing is often disconnected from traditional news editing in many news
organizations although the degree of separation differs across organizations.
Recent interviews and ethnographic works illustrate that two jobs are organized as separate
units in many organizations (Elizabeth, 2017; Roston, 2015; Tandoc, 2016). Further, using
social media as a news distribution platform and audience metrics for gatekeeping call for
renegotiating journalists’ job as ‘marketers’ (Tandoc & Vos, 2016). Analyzing big data often
entails open-source culture. Journalists trained for traditional newsroom culture tend to
struggle to adopt such a culture (Lewis, 2012; Lewis & Westlund, 2015). This heterogeneity
within a news organization that has been brought in by information technologies also creates
tension between different types of employees; social media editors feel that editors in the
newsroom are locked in their own routines or ‘comfort zone’ (Elizabeth, 2017). This
discrepancy explains the gap between journalists’ skepticism about news dissemination via
social media and its widespread practice (Rashidian et al., 2018; Welbers et al., 2016).

News Link Sharing on Social Media as Gatekeeping
The decisions about what to share also imply its flip side decisions about what not to share
(García-Perdomo et al., 2018). Indeed, as the recent TOW Center’s analysis about how news
organizations upload posts on different social media platforms (Rashidian et al., 2018) shows
that they share far fewer than all the news stories they publish. This is naturally explained by

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
7
an economic theory proposed by Anderson and De Palma (2012). In the face of competition
for the limited attention (of social media users), relative to the tremendous amount of
information on social media, simply pouring out more information is likely to cannibalize
their other news links, which might be able to draw more attention (Anderson & De Palma,
2013). Thus, under competition for limited attention, certain types of news stories are likely
to be ‘prioritized’ over others (Kalsnes & Larsson, 2018). As a result of the prioritization,
social media editors practically control the accessibility to news information, which has
traditionally been an exclusive function of the newsroom. This naturally raises the question of
whether to consider social media editors as a new type of gatekeeper (Welbers &
Opgenhaffen, 2018b).
Gatekeeping – the selection of messages to reach readers (Shoemaker & Vos, 2009),
has long been recognized as a function of journalism. Although it has often been considered a
practice to choose news stories from raw information in the context of mass communication,
recent conceptualization has attempted to encompass multiple gates, which exist between an
information source and final readers (Barzilai-Nahon, 2008). News organizations decide
whether to cover news stories discovered in an inter-media setting (Meraz, 2011; Vargo, Guo,
& Amazeen, 2017), and the algorithmic decisions of search engines to post links to news
stories can act as a gatekeeper (Bozdag & van den Hoven, 2015). In fact, in the past, the
concept of gatekeeping originated from an inter-media setting, in which a wire-editor selected
stories from a mass of wire copies from wire services (White, 1950). In the modern context,
hyperlinks are at the center of the development of the many steps of gatekeeping in online
news consumption. Dimitrova, Connolly-Ahern, Williams, Kaid, and Reid (2003) earlier
found that major American newspaper companies use hyperlinks as a gatekeeping tool to
control the number of external links to information sources. Further, bloggers and social
media users can participate in the gatekeeping process using hyperlinks as a facile path to
certain information (Meraz & Papacharissi, 2016).
Selective link sharing for social media by news organizations can be understood as
inter-media gatekeeping between news websites and social media within an organization.
Given stories published on a website, a news organization prioritizes news stories that should
be posted on its accounts. It is possible to criticize that the multiplicity of information ‘gates’
makes privileging news organizations as gatekeepers less accurate (Bruns, 2005; Thorson &
Wells, 2015). Nevertheless, Welbers and Opgenhaffen (2018b) showed that the decisions of
social media editors for Facebook have a significant impact on the news engagement of
online readers, thus validating selective link sharing as the gatekeeping practice of news

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
8
organizations. In other words, despite the secondary and networked multiple gates that prevail
on social media (Diakopoulos & Zubiaga, 2014), the decisions of news organizations still
matter as a substantial determinant in the diffusion of news.
Although the evaluation of news topics across different media platforms has been a
classical subject in the field of media study (Maier, 2010; Stempel, 1985), we have little
knowledge about how this influential new form of gatekeeping changes what we see on social
media as news readers. As discussed in the previous section, the organizational separation
(Elizabeth, 2017; Roston, 2015) of the task and audience-centric motivation (Tandoc, 2014,
2016; Welbers et al., 2016) indeed imply that news shared on news organizations’ social
media accounts is likely to deviate from what journalists publish on a news website. Building
on the previous finding that selective link sharing indeed has a power as gatekeeping
(Welbers & Opgenhaffen, 2018b), this study focuses on how the outcomes of the new
gatekeeping differ from those of the traditional outcomes. Thus, I pose the following research
questions:
RQ 1. To what extent does selective link sharing resemble or deviate from traditional
gatekeeping?
RQ 2. In which news topics is the deviation between selective link sharing and
traditional gatekeeping more significant?
The previous literature, which focused on how news stories on social media spread
among users hints at the deviation pattern; Berger and Milkman (2012) and Stieglitz and
Dang-Xuan (2013) found evidence that emotional arousal (intensity) is associated with
virality on social media. In a similar vein, Armstrong and Gao (2010) speculated that the
abundance of links to news stories with ‘sensational’ topics, such as crime, and many lifestyle news links by local media compared to national and regional media are a result of
consideration for the targeted demand. García-Perdomo et al. (2018) also found that
conflict/controversy, human interest and odd news categories are more likely to be shared by
Twitter users. Similarly, Kalsnes and Larsson (2018) showed that what is often categorized as
“soft news” tends to go viral although “hard news” was more popular on Twitter than it was
on Facebook. Thus, assuming that news organizations are adapting to such news demand on
Twitter, I suspect that news organizations will share news topics that are likely to contain
great emotional arousal, controversy, human interest, or oddity.
How news shared on Twitter deviates from the publication pattern may differ
depending on the organization’s audience base, internal structure, and financial status. For
example, whereas The New York Times’ social media strategy leans toward a marketing

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
9
approach as of 2015 (Roston, 2015), Elizabeth (2017) found that the Washington Post takes a
different path, which encourages social media specialists and news rooms to work together.
Further, because the emergent online news organizations have bigger stakes in social media
to disseminate their stories, they are likely to be more engaged in strategies to draw the
attention of social media users, which is likely to make them lean toward sharing sensational
news topics on their posts. It is harder to foresee the general tendency in the case of regional
newspapers because how social media editing is done within those organizations is irregular.
Sometimes a very limited number of staff members, even a single person, decides the social
media posting. But in other cases, social media editing is entirely dissipated among individual
reporters without the aid of social media specialists, due mainly to tight financial constraints.
Kalsnes and Larsson (2018) reported “the high degree of commonality for the most popular
news items across the majority of the studied news providers.” In sum, although it is very
likely that selective link sharing deviates from traditional gatekeeping decisions in general, it
is difficult to predict how the pattern differs across different organizations. Thus, I pose the
following research question.
RQ 3. Does selective link sharing differ depending on the types of news organizations?

Method
The analysis of the potential discrepancy between traditional gatekeeping and selective link
sharing poses methodological challenges, that mainly involve the scale of the data. To test
selective news link sharing, a researcher must have a sample of published news stories that do
not misrepresent the distribution of news contents because such a sampling bias will change
the estimated proportion of shared news content. However, it is impossible to distinguish
news contents before reading the news. That is, a researcher must first analyze the data to get
a good sample.
In addition, even though automated data collection allows for bypassing such a
sampling challenge by collecting all the data available online, the sheer amount of data also
prevents the use of a traditional hand-coding approach. For example, the data set used for this
study includes more than 280K news stories and more than 130K tweets that embed news
links. Further, the analysis requires the comparison of the pairs of news stories and tweets, as
well as separate stories and tweets on their own. Thus, answering the questions in this study
requires computational text analysis methods as well as the automated data collection.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

10

Data Collection Using Media Cloud
The essential information needed to uncover selective link sharing requires knowing whether
a news story published on a news website was shared on the social media accounts of news
organizations. To acquire this information, a researcher needs to know whether a hyperlink
attached to each news story published on news websites is also found on the news
organization’s social media account. Although many proprietary news databases, such as
Factiva or LexisNexis, are available, these databases often lack information that is needed to
link the two platforms. Thus, I instead used Media Cloud, an open sources database
developed and maintained by the Harvard Berkman Klein Center2. Media Cloud monitors the
RSS feeds of approximately 60,000 news organizations around the world every thirty
minutes, and provides meta-information of the news stories including news URLs.
Because Media Cloud does not provide the content of news stories, I developed a news
scraper using Python language, which opens all the news URLs from Media Cloud API and
downloads the news text. When news websites have a paywall, I used Selenium library to log
in through a JavaScript login interface. To collect data about which stories a news
organization shared, I also developed a Twitter scraper that collected tweets from official
news websites of organizations 3 via Twitter’s Search API.
Another piece of software, URL matcher, matches URLs of published news (from
Media Cloud) with URLs embedded in news tweets. Figure 1 visualizes the process. Because
URLs are ‘messy’ in the sense that they are shortened for the sake of saving space, and
include query terms to specify traffic sources, etc., the URLs had to be ‘normalized’
(Welbers & Opgenhaffen, 2018a). The normalization process took three steps: first, the URL
matcher sent HTTP HEAD requests using URLs from Media Cloud and Twitter API
recursively to get the final form of the URL. Although this is a relatively slow process
because it has to wait to receive responses over the network (potentially multiple times per
URL), this method avoids possibly different forms of a URL toward the same content. This is
because the process uses the same method that readers would use to read the news stories
through their browsers. Second, the query terms that mark redirecting histories were
removed. Finally, only the unique identifiers of each URL were retrieved. Because of the
common Search Engine Optimization (SEO) practice, the unique identifiers have forms of

2 Available at https://mediacloud.org
3 A news organization typically has more than one official accounts. See Appendix A for a list of the accounts
included in the list.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
11
abridged titles, e.g. “evans-calls-report-wayne-co-treasurer-extremely-troubling.” Because
how news URLs are structured differs across news organizations, the regular expressions to
detect the identifiers had to be customized for each news organization. After the identifiers
had been retrieved, 100 random samples from each news organization were manually
inspected to check that the retrieval had been correctly performed. Then, the URL matching
was conducted using only the identifiers within each news organization.
News organizations in the data set were collected from Alexa online traffic ranking. I
retrieved the top 200 websites from the Alexa news media section. I augmented this list using
a list of media that were influential during the 2016 US presidential election according to the
recent Harvard Berkman Klein Center report (Faris et al., 2017). Then, I chose only U.S.
news websites except the BBC, the Guardian, Reuters and Al Jazeera, which have potentially
substantial impact on news consumption in the United States. Among 116 news organizations
in the original list, I removed news organizations whose RSS feed is not well monitored by
Media Cloud (28 organizations), and whose online news stories were not parsed by the News
Scraper (15 organizations). This process resulted in 73 news organizations. These news
organizations are categorized as in Table 1. The U.S. media market provides an interesting
test case to gauge how social media editing evolves depending on the media competition
between diverse media species. Given the weak public media, the market competition is
likely to yield a strong drive toward audience-centric social media editing for more online
advertising revenue. Second, American news readers use social media as a news source more
often than those in other Western countries (U.S. 45%, U.K 39%, France 36%, Germany 31%
according to Newman, Fletcher, Kalogeropoulos, Levy, and Nielsen (2018)), which makes
social media editing more relevant for news organizations’ online revenue. Lastly, the U.S.
media ecosystem is composed of more diverse news outlets than many other countries; the
share of regional broadcasters and newspapers is relatively high in the readers’ media diet,
and news readers in the U.S. rely more on online-born outlets than other countries (Newman
et al., 2018). This heterogeneity particularly provides the valuable variation in our data that is
potentially associated with different practices of social media editing.
The data were collected between 2017/11/20 and 2018/01/01, and between 2018/01/09
and 2018/01/28, for 63 days. This data collection process resulted in 281,508 news stories.
Among them, 131,939 new stories were shared by news organizations on their Twitter
accounts, resulting in a 46.87% sharing proportion. The number of published news stories by
news organizations varied from 60 (factcheck.org) to 18,239 (Reuters). This variation stems
from a difference in their media types, from websites that grew from opinion blogs, such as

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
12
factcheck.org or townhall.com, to magazines, such as the Economist or Time. On the other
hand, daily news outlets with blogs as a part of their website such as the Washington Post, or
newswire services such as Reuters publish far more news stories on their websites. The
proportion of shared news stories also varied from 10.96% (MSNBC) to 95.43% (The
Economist). This variation depends partially on how many news stories they publish on their
own. Magazines tend to share a majority of what they publish whereas outlets with partnered
content and blog posts by journalists, such as Washington Post or The Press Democrat, tend
to share less. This relationship is visualized in Figure 2.
Figure 3 shows the daily pattern of the number of published online news stories by the
73 news organizations. It shows a clear fluctuation, in which the number of published news
stories is lower on weekends and holidays. That is, in addition to the lower number of
published news on Saturday and Sunday, the figure also shows that news organizations
published much less news on Thanksgiving (November 23, 2017), Christmas, and New
Year’s Day. Moreover, heading toward the end of 2017, the number of news stories took a
downward trend, which seems natural for the holiday season, and a sharp recovery after the
New Year. The graphical observation illustrates that the daily pattern is consistent with
weekly and seasonal working patterns, and provides a useful face validity of the data.

Structural Topic Model for Selective Link Sharing
To see if news organizations tend to share more popular topics on Twitter, I applied a
machine learning algorithm, Structural Topic Model (STM) to the collected data
(Roberts, Stewart, & Airoldi, 2016). STM is a recent extension of topic models (Blei &
Lafferty, 2006; Blei, 2012; Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003) that is designed to identify latent topics
from the co-occurrence of words. STM extends topic models by embedding a regression
model within a Correlated Topic Model (CTM). That is, it simultaneously finds topics and
regresses the topics to other observable variables. This allows for testing the association
between latent topics and the link sharing probability in this study. In other words, by
applying STM, I replaced the research question with a computational task that identifies
topics correlated with the link sharing decision to circumvent the implausible manual
approach.
Since STM was proposed by political scientists in 2013 (Roberts, Stewart, Tingley, &
Airoldi, 2013), it has been widely applied to news and social media text where observable
meta data are available. For example, Kim (2018) relates the information about whether an

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
13
automotive recall case is from a foreign automaker or a domestic one to the categorization of
news topics. Using the Youtube channel category as a label, Schwemmer and Ziewiecki
(2018) also found that particular categories of influencers play a significant role in product
promotion on social media.4 Compared to previous topic modeling methods, STM generally
produces better categorization results because (a) it is built on CTM that allows correlation
between different topics unlike standard LDA, and (b) it utilizes observable variables to
produce topics (Roberts, Stewart, & Airoldi, 2016). Although this model relaxation costs nonconjugacy and non-convexity of the optimization problem, more computational power and
systemized initialization help overcome these issues (Roberts, Stewart, & Tingley, 2016). In
the case of this particular study, I found no noticeable difference after multiple runs with
different initializations.
Categorizing news based on its content is a longstanding methodological issue of media
studies. Depending on news samples and the scope of research questions, some traditional
news categories may be irrelevant or collapsible, but other unusual categories may become
important (Sjøvaag & Stavelin, 2012). A class of topic models, including STM, overcomes
this challenge by using a bottom-up approach whereby topics are discovered from the cooccurrence of words across related documents rather than pre-supposing news categories.
However, that the topic models require researchers to pre-specify the number of topics
(i.e. news categories) poses a challenge to this study as well. The challenge is slightly
different, but conceptually similar to the traditional question for manual content analysis: are
the discovered topics based on the number of topic assumptions appropriate for the research
question? This is a harder question to answer when topic models are applied to a highly
heterogeneous corpus of text such as a body of news stories published by multiple news
organizations. If a researcher sets the number of topics too large, then the model is likely to
identify only types of news organizations, such as online, national, entertainment oriented,
Texas based, etc., using organization-specific textual traits rather than common topics. In this
case, a researcher will be unable to compare different behaviors for the same news topics
because topic overlap across different organizations would be limited. On the other hand, if
the number of topics is too low, a researcher is likely to miss interesting variations across
different news contents.
Researchers have suggested multiple indices to compare the performance of different
topic number assumptions from the perspective of the statistical model comparison, such as

4 The website maintained by the STM developers (http://www.structuraltopicmodel.com/) updates the full list
of academic research that adopted STM.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
14
the held-out log-likelihood approach (Blei et al., 2003), coherence criteria (Mimno, Wallach,
Talley, Leenders, & McCallum, 2011; Newman, Lau, Grieser, & Baldwin, 2010) and
exclusivity criteria (Bischof & Airoldi, 2012). However, these automatic procedures to
choose the optimal number of topics are not often adopted for applied work because they tend
to deviate from choices of human coders (Chang, Gerrish, Wang, Boyd-Graber, & Blei,
2009). Moreover, the different proposed indices are often inconsistent with each other, as in
this study, and theory does not dictate which index should be prioritized. As Schwemmer &
Ziewiecki (2018) illustrated, the different choices of topic number also resulted in
monotonically decreasing coherence and monotonically increasing exclusivity. After all, the
number of topics tends to be determined by the researcher’s careful choices based on his/her
research questions. In this case, the interpretation of topic models is “What is the best
categorization of news topics given the number of topics?”
For this study, I chose 25 topics. The primary reason for this choice was to not break
down topics to the level at which news topics belong solely to specific regional markets. This
is not to ignore regional topics; in fact, the motivation is the opposite. How different types of
news organizations treat regional topics differently is of a great interest to this study.
However, if the model categorizes news topics to finely, so that New York news is
distinguished from Texas news, one ends up with a trivial finding that, for example, New
York-based news organizations are likely to share New York news topics. Indeed, with 27
topics from this study’s data set, I found that STM begins to identify news about specific
regions. Thus, I decided to limit the number of topics to 25 so that the model can identify
regional topics that are more broadly labeled.
The regression within the STM model associates portions of the latent topics with
observed covariates – (a) whether a news story was shared on Twitter, (b) indicators of news
organizations (binary), and (c) interactions between the two. Thus, the estimated coefficients
for the covariates mean (a) how much more frequently a given topic is shared overall on
Twitter compared to the proportion of the topic among the total news stories published on
websites, (b) how much more frequently a given topic is published on a news website by a
news organization relative to other organizations, and (c) how much more frequently a given
topic is shared by each news organization relative to other organizations.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

15

Results
News Topic Categorization
Table 2 summarizes the identified topics and words with the highest FREX score in a given
topic. FREX score is a weighted average between word frequency in a given topic and the
degree to which the word appears only in the given topic (i.e. exclusivity)
(Bischof & Airoldi, 2012). I labeled each topic by inspecting the list of words with high
FREX scores and randomly chosen news stories among those estimated most likely to be
about each topic. For most cases, the high FREX words provide a straightforward
interpretation of each topic category. For example, the output is precise enough to distinguish
different sports: Sports/Basketball topic is associated with words such as ‘rebound’,
‘basketbal’ and ‘nba’ whereas ‘nfl’, ‘quaterback’, ‘touchdown’ represent the Sports/Football
topic. The sports-related topics will be particularly important for the regional media’s strategy
in what follows. Furthermore, the output distinguishes topics related to national politics – e.g.
Politics/President (‘trump’, ‘fbi’, ‘flynn’) and Politics/Election (‘moor’, ‘elect’, ‘vote’).
However, the manual inspection also revealed that the high FREX words did not
necessarily guarantee proper labeling. For example, although the high FREX scores of
‘attorney’, ‘complaint’, ‘’statement’, ‘lawsuit’ seemed to suggest topics related to legislation,
the news articles with a high chance of containing the corresponding topic category were
mainly about the sexual misconduct of high profile figures (Sexual Harassment Investigation
topic). Similarly, whereas the high FREX words, such as ‘amazon’, ‘store’, ‘shop’, ‘appl’,
‘app’ seemed to imply a topic related to shopping, the manual inspection suggested that
representative news articles in this category were mainly about cooking. This discrepancy
suggests that although FREX provides useful information about words that distinguish one
topic from another, it does not necessarily mean that those words represent the topic. This
emphasizes the importance of manual inspection. To show the importance of such a manual
validation process, Appendix B lists the titles of news articles with the highest probability to
contain each topic.
Figure 4 shows the frequency of each topic among all the news in the dataset. The
distribution shows a sensible mix of news topics: topics often classified as soft news such as
Life/Interview, Crime, and the sports related topics occupy top ranks of the list. However,
there is a good amount of hard news with the topics related to national politics, the economy
and international relations as well. Additionally, there are a few topics that are likely to

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
contain regional interests, such as Sports/Basketball, Sports/Football, Education,

16

Local/Outdoor.

Overall Patterns of Selective Link Sharing
Figure 5 presents the sharing propensity of each topic aggregated over all news organizations.
The zero in the middle is the normalized topic-wise proportion among all the news stories
published on websites, which in fact varies across different topics before the normalization.
The points represent the deviation of the 25 topics on Twitter from the proportions on
websites. For example, a point at approximately 0.05 for Crime topic means that, on Twitter,
there is 5% point more Crime news on Twitter than on websites, which, in turn, implies that
given Crime topic was published on websites, it is likely to be shared on Twitter.
These deviating patterns answer RQ 1 and RQ 2 about the extent to which selective
link sharing is different from traditional gatekeeping, and in what topics. Many topics seem
to have a proportion on Twitter similar to their proportion on websites, which is visualized as
points aligned on the vertical line at zero. This means that, for these topics, such as
Technology, Entertainment and Media, news organizations tend to share news stories
proportional to how many they published on their websites. However, there are a few topics
that significantly deviate from the publication pattern: stories about Crime and
International/Middle East related are very likely to be shared on Twitter given that they are
published. On the other hand, Economy/Business and Economy/Finance topics are far less
likely to be shared than other topics.
The observation that the chance of a topic being shared on Twitter does not necessarily
match with its frequency on news websites implies that the publication decision and the link
sharing decision do not necessarily follow the same logic (Tandoc, 2014; Welbers et al.,
2016). There is inertia by which traditional news organizations simply extend their
convention into social media as a new news distribution platform (Armstrong & Gao, 2010)
and attempt to integrate social media editing with traditional reporting and editing (Elizabeth,
2017). However, the observed topic deviation between the websites and Twitter shows that
the emergent logic from social media editing is indeed significantly different enough to result
in different news topic proportions.
However, types of news topics more likely to be shared do not simply fall back into the
traditional distinction between soft and hard news, and the relative popularity of the former.
Although Crime, a topic typically categorized as ‘soft’ is indeed very likely to be shared by

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
17
news organizations, the overall sharing propensity is not large for other soft topics such as
Sports/Basketball and Entertainment. On the other hand, there are a few ‘hard’ topics with a
high propensity for sharing, such as International/Middle East and Politics/President. There
are several possibilities that can explain this pattern. First, personnel who take charge of
social media postings have their own agendas or standards for ‘newsworthiness.’ Yet, the
previous literature generally indicates that the criterion they use to decide newsworthiness is
primarily audience reaction. Thus, a more convincing possibility is that the pattern reflects
the particular news preference of Twitter users. This interpretation accords with the Pew
Research Center’s report that Twitter has more highly politically engaged users than does
Facebook (Gottfried, 2014).

Differences across Organizations
The previous analysis of overall news link sharing reveals a few topics whose link sharing
pattern on Twitter deviates from their publication pattern on websites. This deviation may
differ depending on who is responsible for social media editing and how the task is organized
and distributed. This may in turn depend on the size of organization, its financial constraints,
target audience, ownership structure, etc. (Elizabeth, 2017). This possibility points to RQ 3
about the difference in the deviating patterns between selective link sharing and traditional
gatekeeping across different news organizations. To distinguish each organization’s social
media editing from its publication patterns, one needs to be able to separately measure (a) the
likelihood for each organization to publish each news topic, and (b) the likelihood for each
organization to share each topic given that the topic was published. As previously shown, the
organization indicator dummies and the interaction terms between the organization indicators
and the sharing decisions embedded in the STM model allow the measurement of (a) and (b)
separately.
To illustrate the result, I first estimated the expected proportions of each topic on each
news organization’s website and on its Twitter accounts, using the regression coefficients for
the two sets of dummy variables (e.g. the news organization indicators and the interaction
terms. Then, I visualized (a) how much each organization’s expected topic proportions on its
website deviated from the overall topic proportions aggregated over all news organizations
(Figure 4), and (b) how much each organization’s topic proportions on its Twitter accounts
deviated from those on its own website. The former deviations (firm-specific publication
propensity) represent each organization’s publication strategy, and the latter deviations (firm-

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
18
specific link sharing propensity) represent each organization’s selective link sharing strategy,
which is distinct from its own publication pattern.
Figure 6 shows the results. The firm-specific publication propensity (x-axis) and the
firm-specific link sharing propensity (y-axis) do not necessarily align. In addition, there are a
few cases in which the same type of news organizations behaves in a similar way. For
example, the purple cross dots concentrated on the fourth quadrants show that regional
newspapers publish more about Sport/Basketball topics than others, but they refrain from
sharing the links toward those news stories on Twitter. Using this visualization, I categorized
news organizations topic-wise publication and link sharing patterns:
News publishing patterns accord with organization type. The publication patterns on
websites (x-axis in Figure 6) accord with commonsense patterns; national media (green
triangle dots) tend to publish more about national politics, e.g. Politics/President and
international affairs, e.g. International/East Asia, than do regional media. And regional media
(purple cross dots) are located on the right hand side of graphs for sports topics, e.g.
Sports/Basketball and Sports/Football, and regional topics, e.g. Local/Outdoor and
Local/Weather, which means that they publish more about such topics compared to overall.
Online media tend to publish more about national politics, such as Politics/President and
Politics/Election. Unlike national media types, they do notably publish more about
international affairs. This observation is sensible given that offline born national media tend
to have a longer history, and are thus likely to have a more robust infrastructure for
international reporting.
A reversionary strategy is the most common. When it comes to individual organizations’
selective news link sharing patterns, the most common strategy across different media types
is a reversionary strategy, whereby news organizations share less about a particular news
topic when they publish a lot about the topic or vice versa. This strategy is visualized as dots
in the second quadrant (low publication/high link sharing) or the fourth quadrant (high
publication/low link sharing). For example, Figure 6 shows that magazines (red circle dots)
and online media (blue square dots) tend to publish more about the Politics/Congress topic
than overall, but they refrain from sharing news about the Immigration topic on Twitter. On
the other hand, regional media publish a lot about Sports/Basketball. This is probably because
data were collected during the winter basketball season, but they tend to share fewer of their

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
19
links on Twitter. A natural outcome of this strategy is to make different types of news
organizations look alike on Twitter, “reversing back to the average.”
This strategy is reasonable when news organizations compete on social media with
different types of news organizations rather than targeting a specific audience base via their
traditional media platform. For example, although the Wall Street Journal publishes far more
about finance than other news organizations do, an overwhelming number of general social
media users with the professional analysis of finance may not be a profitable approach
because, given the users’ limited attention, the Wall Street Journal is likely to miss a chance
to attract their attention with more broadly popular news topics. Indeed, the STM result
shows that the Wall Street Journal publishes 26% points more about Economy/Finance topic
than overall, but it shares 16% point fewer news links about the same topic on Twitter
compared with what it published. A similar explanation can be applied to regional media’s
reversionary strategy for the Sports/Basketball topic. Although their specialty is in covering
local issues, and they are likely to expect regional basketball fans to visit their websites, they
may have different incentives on Twitter, i.e. to reach out to broader social media users. If
this is the case, regional media are unlikely to share too much about regional basketball
games. The opposite motivation of the reversionary strategy is also plausible. When a news
organization is not specialized in a given topic, it may want to share more to attract a broad
range of social media users if the organization believes that the given topic is popular.
National and online media tend to use such a reversionary strategy for the Crime topic
whereas regional media tend to do so with Economy/Business topic.
In other words, a specialized topic without broad popular appeal is likely to gravitate
toward the average proportion by the force of the reversionary strategy on
Twitter. This corresponds to García-Perdomo et al. (2018)’s recent observation that topics on
social media accounts are amazingly similar across different organizations. This is also in
contrast with the common conclusion of economists that competition increases news diversity
(Gentzkow, Shapiro, & Stone, 2014). The finding that reversionary strategy is the most
common strategy implies that competition on social media acts as a homogenizing
momentum, at least in terms of news topics.
A strategic retreat is a strategy for non-specialized topics News organizations tend to share
even fewer non-specialized topics, whereas they often counter-balance specialized news topics
with less link sharing. This is visualized as dots in the third quadrant in Figure 6. For example,
regional media publish less about International/Middle East topics, and share even less than
that on Twitter. They also behave in a similar manner with International/Europe topic. This is

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
20
understandable because if a news organization does not have enough resources to cover a given
topic, and broad social media users are not particularly interested in a given topic, news links
about the topic are unlikely to attract either the specific target group or the broad news demand
on social media.
On the other hand, regional topics in which a limited pool of social media users are
likely to be interested, such as Local/Outdoor and Local/Weather, are topics from which
national and online media retreat. This finding is also sensible because covering these
regional issues is not in their specialty. Sharing news with those topics would not help appeal
to broad social media users compared to sharing national news. In addition, online news
media also tend to retreat from international topics, e.g. International/Europe and
International/East Asia presumably for a reason similar to that of the regional media.
Unlike the reversionary strategy, strategic retreat implies differentiation between
different types of news organizations, particularity in terms of locality/internationality. This
result speaks to what Berger (2009) described as a ‘paradox’ between the globalism of the
Internet and the hyperlocalism of news outlets. Online news distribution opens the door for
global competition for an international audience. Because of the openness of the Internet,
there is no such thing as true local media. However, local news organizations often lack
capital to compete against national media. Hence, hyperlocalism is often suggested as a
feasible sustaining strategy for regional papers (Lowrey & Kim, 2016). But the hyperlocalism
turn will widen the gap between national news organizations and regional news organizations
in terms of geographical coverage (Berger, 2009). The finding here suggests that news
dissemination via social media accelerates the gap from the distribution side.
A concentration strategy is used for specialized and popular topics.

There are few

topics about which news organizations publish more and share more links. For both national
and online media, Me Too is such a hot topic. Sexual Harassment Investigation was another
hot topic for online media, but not for national media. The finding that sexual misconduct
cases are hot topics might suggest greater attention to gender related topics, which may have
been intensified by the Me Too movement during the data collection period. This might be a
desirable change, but it can also pose a danger. As McDonald and Charlesworth (2013)
pointed out, the sexual misconduct issue is often susceptible to sensational/scandalous and
fight framing. If the popularity of these gender issues for news link sharing is merely an
outcome of social media optimization to attract more attention, the issues are not likely to be
covered in a socially desirable way, at least on social media. However, how the gender issues
were framed as a result of the social media editing is beyond the scope of this study, and thus
remains a future research question.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
21
In sum, the results of the structural topic model spotted three notable news link sharing
strategies on Twitter: (a) reversion to the average, (b) strategic retreat, and (c) concentration.
Choices from these strategies differ depending on the link between topics and types of news
organizations. The reversion strategy was common when a certain topic was a relative
specialty of the news organization (comparative advantage), but the topic’s popularity was
modest – e.g. Immigration for national media and Sports/Basketball for regional media.
When news organizations do not have a specialty in a certain topic, and the topic is not
particularly popular for the expected audience, news organizations seem to retreat from such
news topics – e.g. International/Middle East for regional media. However, when news
organizations are specialized in a certain topic, and it is popular, they will concentrate on
those hot topics.
The categorization of the topics by the different strategies is summarized in Table 3.
The numbers in parentheses indicate the number of topics that fall into each category. As
mentioned above, the reversionary strategy is the most common category. There is much
similarity between online and national media in regard to the reversionary strategy whereas
the regional media are disconnected from the two. There are fewer hot topics on which each
type of organizations concentrates. Again, regional media are disconnected from national and
online media. Regional media retreat from a few topics that are not their traditional focus of
coverage. It was harder to detect discernible patterns from magazines because fewer media
are included in the dataset compared to other types.

Conclusion
Although traditional editorial decisions have been considered to be governed by journalistic
norms (Hermida, 2010), there has also been a concern that economic incentives drive
traditional reporting toward popularity. This is especially true because Internet technology
greatly transforms the news industry (Lischka, 2014). However, the relatively high proportion
of several hard topics, such as Economy/Business, Economy/Finance and
International/Middle East, on websites illustrates that the market drive is not influential
enough to banish hard news from online news dissemination in general. Yet, the deviation of
news link sharing via Twitter shows that the different logic emerging from social media as a
news distribution platform, particularly spurred by the wide adoption of an audience metric
(Tandoc, 2017; Welbers et al., 2016) can greatly influence the kinds of news available to

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
readers. Although the results show that Twitter readers will see a fair amount of politics-

22

related hard news, such as International/Middle East and Politics/President topics, they are
likely to be exposed to far less news about the economy, such as Economy/Finance or
Economy/Business topics. The substantial deviation between websites and Twitter seems to
confirm the new logic that governs the quasi-gatekeeping that emerges from the decisionmaking process that is relatively separate from traditional editorial decisions (Elizabeth,
2017; Roston, 2015), and relies on audience metric technologies (Diakopoulos, 2017;
Tandoc, 2014, 2016). Further, the lack of economic reporting raises a concern that popularity
driven link sharing can exacerbate the watchdog function of financial journalism, which was
triggered by journalists’ failure to warn about the financial crisis (Strauß, 2018).
The organization-level analysis reveals more details of selective link sharing. The
finding that link selection differs across organizations shows that their criteria for selective
link sharing cannot be reduced to a one-dimensional degree of popularity on Twitter. Further,
the observation that the same type of news organization occasionally adopts a coherent
selective link sharing strategy implies that the inherent characteristics of an organization, as
well as its popularity as an external factor, are also significant determinants of the selective
link sharing strategy. I tentatively characterize the other dimension as a specialty of a news
organization. The publishing patterns of organizations seem to make the characterization
appropriate; national media publish significantly more about international topics and national
politics, and regional media publish more about sports and regional issues. I use the term
“specialty” to mean “what a news organization is good at.” It is related to a news
organization’s capabilities, such as the training of reporters at different levels of expertise, the
number of reporters, the expertise of editorial staffs, and its connections to certain news
sources, etc. Although these capabilities are changeable, they will characterize news
organizations at least in the short term because they tend to co-evolve slowly with the longterm expectations of readers.
The intersection of the popularity of a news topic and a news organization’s specialty
seem to determine specific selective link sharing strategies. The most conspicuous strategies
from this intersection were the reversionary strategy for specialized and non-popular topics
and the strategic retreat for non-specialized and non-popular topics. The reversionary
strategy acts as a homogenizing momentum for unpopular topics in the sense that different
news organizations will share similar proportions of a given topic under this strategy. The
strategic retreat makes the news organization invisible with respect to a certain topic. News
organizations may also concentrate on their specialized and popular topics, which can be

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
diversifying because different types of news organizations will share more about their

23

specialized hot topics. Thus, these three strategies imply that news on social media can be
diverse (specialized) only for popular topics. This prediction is visualized in Figure 7.
Overall, however, Twitter as a news dissemination platform seems to serve as a
homogenizing momentum rather than diversifying one. As Table 3 shows, there is only a
limited number of topics on which news organizations concentrate on Twitter. National and
online media concentrated on the Me Too topic, and online media also focused on Sexual
Harassment Investigation. Both are of great social importance, but also susceptible to
sensational or “horse-race” framing with clearly defined fighting counterparts (McDonald &
Charlesworth, 2013). On the other hand, news organizations adopt reversionary strategy or
strategic retreat for many topics, which make them look alike, or invisible for certain news
topics on Twitter. I suspect that this is because a selective link sharing decision converges to
what the broad Twitter users would like rather than what is important for a targeted audience.
Yet, less popular, specialized topics may include topics that are complicated enough to
require professional treatment to cover but do not stimulate interest from a broad audience.
Some argue that covering these topics helps readers easily understand those complex issues
and make informed decisions (Yankelovich, 1991). In that sense, the reversionary strategy
may indicate a socio-technical momentum that weakens the role of journalism that informs
public decisions. In other words, although news shared on social media includes a fair amount
of civic issues, the shared news is likely to highlight the sensational aspect of those
issues.
Selective news link sharing as a reaction to its environment has an implication for
the design of information curating algorithms on social media. The conclusion that selective
link sharing of news organizations is an outcome of their adaptation to inherent and external
situations implies that they will also adapt to potential changes in the demand for news on
social media caused by changes in an algorithm. This adaptation process is likely to become
quicker and smoother, determined by the data scientists, whom they hire (Rowan, 2014) and
the social media monitoring platforms, which they adopt (Diakopoulos, 2017). However,
quick adaptation is likely to make news organizations vulnerable because their demand
depends on how the platforms’ decision changes the news reading behavior of users. Based
on two-sided market theory, economists point out that the dependence on monopolized
platforms may suppress independent content providers, as was notable in the Microsoft case
(Evans, 2003). Indeed, there is evidence that Facebook’s algorithm change adds a great
impact on the online revenue of news organizations (Brown, 2018). Therefore, the discussion

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
of a desirable algorithm design should include consideration about the potential strategic

24

adaptation of news organizations as well.
In this work, I proposed a computational framework to monitor news organizations’
selective news link sharing. It leverages automated data collection using an open source
database and a recent development of topic modeling. However, the topic modeling approach
is also known to have innate limitations. First, the choice of the number of topics always
entails a certain degree of arbitrariness. The manual validation results provided high
confidence in the classification results for news stories clearly classified by the 25 topics.
However, the results may be missing information from news stories that do not fit well into
any of the 25 topics. The STM takes into consideration the uncertainty from the less clear
classification by giving less weight to those topics in the regression. However, the low
applicability of the automated process of choosing a topic number implies that it is innately
hard to know the best topic number to result in the optimal level of classification. In addition,
the concept of topics as in topic models does not distinguish news issues from tone and
framing. Thus, STM does not give us much information about the dependence between how a
news issue is stated and the link sharing decision. This challenge was the most visible in our
uncertainty about why gender issues are a hot topic. To address these issues, the use of
supervised learning methods that involve the development of a manual coding scheme and
distinguish tones and frames will be a fruitful extension of this work as a further
validation.
Finally, the results found in this study may be subject to a topic popularity cycle
although the dataset includes a fair amount of time – sixty-three days. For example, STM
identifies the Me Too topic as a separate topic. Thus, verification of the conclusions I draw
requires an analysis of a longer time period beyond time-sensitive issues. The data collection
scheme and the automated text analysis I apply here can be used as the infrastructure for the
constant monitoring of news organizations’ selective link sharing strategy.
Despite the limitation, STM provides a semi-supervised extension of topic models,
which enables the linking of observable link sharing-behaviors with automated topic
categorization. Further, STM provides a way to produce news topic categories that are
explicitly relevant to research questions by incorporating information from independent
variables whereas the supervised learning techniques requires ex ante topic categorization.
This approach provides an immediately reusable infrastructure to constantly monitor news
organizations’ emerging quasi-editorial decisions, which have a potentially significant impact
on everyday news reading. Given that the quasi-editorial decisions are still in flux, depending

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
on algorithm changes in social media platforms’ and the adaptation of a business model,
having such a handy monitoring framework will be useful for a future discussion.

25

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

26

References

Anderson, S. P., & De Palma, A. (2012). Competition for attention in the information
(overload) age. The RAND Journal of Economics, 43(1), 1–25. doi: 10.1111/j.17562171.2011.00155.x
Anderson, S. P., & De Palma, A. (2013). Shouting to be heard in advertising. Management
Science, 59(7), 1545–1556. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.1120.1682
Andrews, C., Fichet, E., Ding, Y., Spiro, E. S., & Starbird, K. (2016). Keeping up with the
tweet-dashians: The impact of ‘official’ accounts on online rumoring. Proceedings of
the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing, 452–465. doi: 10.1145/2818048.2819986
Armstrong, C. L., & Gao, F. (2010). Now tweet this how news organizations use twitter.
Electronic News, 4(4), 218–235. doi: 10.1177/1931243110389457
Barthel, M. (2018, June). State of the news media - data and trends about key sectors in the
U.S. news media industry. Retrieved from Pew Research Center:
http://www.journalism.org/fact-sheet/newspapers/
Barzilai-Nahon, K. (2008). Toward a theory of network gatekeeping: A framework for
exploring information control. Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, 59(9), 1493–1512. doi: 10.1002/asi.20857
Berger, G. (2009). How the internet impacts on international news: Exploring paradoxes of
the most global medium in a time of hyperlocalism. International Communication
Gazette, 71(5), 355–371. doi:10.1177/1748048509104977
Berger, J., & Milkman, K. L. (2012). What makes online content viral? Journal of Marketing
Research, 49(2), 192–205. doi: 10.1509/jmr.10.0353
Bischof, J., & Airoldi, E. M. (2012). Summarizing topical content with word frequency and
exclusivity. Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML-12), 201–208.
Blei, D., & Lafferty, J. (2006). Correlated topic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 18, 147–154. doi: 10.1214/07-AOAS114
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4),
77–84. doi:10.1109/MSP.2010.938079

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
27
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3, 993–1022.
Bozdag, E., & van den Hoven, J. (2015). Breaking the filter bubble: Democracy and design.
Ethics and Information Technology, 17(4), 249–265. doi: 10.1007/s10676-015-9380-y
Brown, P. (2018, April 18, April). Facebook struggles to promote ‘meaningful interactions’
for local publishers, data shows. Columbia Journalism Review.
Retrieved from https://www.cjr.org/tow_center/facebook-local-news.php
Bruns, A. (2005). Gatewatching: Collaborative online news production. Peter Lang.
Chang, J., Gerrish, S., Wang, C., Boyd-Graber, J. L., & Blei, D. M. (2009). Reading tea
leaves: How humans interpret topic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 288–296.
Chan-Olmsted, S., Rim, H., & Zerba, A. (2013). Mobile news adoption among young adults
examining the roles of perceptions, news consumption, and media usage. Journalism &
Mass Communication Quarterly, 90(1), 126–147. doi: 10.1177/1077699012468742
Chan-Olmsted, S. M., & Park, J. S. (2000). From on-air to online world: Examining the
content and structures of broadcast TV stations’ web sites. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, 77(2), 321–339. doi: 10.1177/107769900007700207
Cleary, J., al Nashmi, E., Bloom, T., & North, M. (2015). Valuing twitter: Organizational and
individual representations at CNN international. Digital Journalism, 3(6), 908–924.
doi: 10.1080/21670811.2014.990255
Diakopoulos, N. (2017). Computational journalism and the emergence of news platforms. In
B. Franklin & S. A. Eldridge II (Eds.), The Routledge Companion to Digital Journalism
Studies (pp. 176–184). New York, NY: Routledge.
Diakopoulos, N., & Zubiaga, A. (2014). Newsworthiness and network gatekeeping on twitter:
The role of social deviance. Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media.
Dimitrova, D. V., Connolly-Ahern, C., Williams, A. P., Kaid, L. L., & Reid, A. (2003).
Hyperlinking as gatekeeping: Online newspaper coverage of the execution of an
American terrorist. Journalism Studies, 4(3), 401–414. doi: 10.1080/14616700306488
Elizabeth, J. (2017, November 14, November). Social media teams today: A summary of
what we learned. Retrieved from American Press Institute:
https://www.americanpressinstitute.org/publications/reports/ strategy-studies/socialmedia-teams-today/

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
28
Evans, D. S. (2003). The antitrust economics of multi-sided platform markets. Yale Journal
on Regulation, 20, 325–381.
Faris, R., Roberts, H., Etling, B., Bourassa, N., Zuckerman, E., & Benkler, Y. (2017).
Partisanship, propaganda, and disinformation: Online media and the 2016 us
presidential election. Retrieved from Berkman Klein Center:
https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/33759251/2017-08_electionReport_0.pdf
García-Perdomo, V., Salaverría, R., Kilgo, D. K., & Harlow, S. (2018). To share or not to
share: The influence of news values and topics on popular social media content in the
United States, Brazil, and Argentina. Journalism Studies, 19(8), 1180–1201. doi:
10.1080/1461670X.2016.1265896
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., & Stone, D. F. (2015). Media bias in the marketplace: Theory.
In S. P. Anderson, J. Waldfogel, & D. Stromberg, Handbook of Media Economics (Vol.
1, pp. 623-645). North-Holland. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63685-0.00014-0
Gottfried, J. (2014, November). Facebook and twitter as political forums: Two different dynamics.
Retrieved from Pew Research Center: http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/11/12/
facebook-and-twitter-as-political-forums-two-different-dynamics/
Greer, C. F., & Ferguson, D. A. (2011). Using twitter for promotion and branding: A content
analysis of local television twitter sites. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media,
55(2), 198–214. doi:10.1080/08838151.2011.570824
Hermida, A. (2010). Twittering the news: The emergence of ambient journalism. Journalism
Practice, 4(3), 297–308. doi: 10.1080/17512781003640703
Hong, S. (2012). Online news on twitter: Newspapers’ social media adoption and their online
readership. Information Economics and Policy, 24(1), 69–74. doi:
10.1016/j.infoecopol.2012.01.004
Jackson, N. (2018, December). More transparency around newsroom decisions. Retrieved
from Nieman Lab: http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/12/ more-transparency-aroundnewsroom-decisions/
Kalsnes, B., & Larsson, A. O. (2018). Understanding news sharing across social media:
Detailing distribution on Facebook and Twitter. Journalism Studies, 19(11),
1669–1688. doi: 10.1080/1461670X.2017.1297686

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
29
Kim, S. E. (2018). Media bias against foreign firms as a veiled trade barrier: Evidence from
Chinese newspapers. American Political Science Review, 112(4), 954–970. doi:
10.1017/S0003055418000242
Lazer, D. M., Baum, M. A., Benkler, Y., Berinsky, A. J., Greenhill, K. M., Menczer, F., ...
Jonathan L. Zittrain (2018). The science of fake news. Science, 359(6380), 1094–1096.
doi: 10.1126/science.aao2998
Lewis, S. C. (2012). The tension between professional control and open participation:
Journalism and its boundaries. Information, Communication & Society, 15(6), 836–866.
doi: 10.1080/1369118X.2012.674150
Lewis, S. C., & Westlund, O. (2015). Big data and journalism: Epistemology, expertise,
economics, and ethics. Digital journalism, 3(3), 447–466. doi:
10.1080/21670811.2014.976418
Lischka, J. A. (2014). Different revenue incentives, different content? comparing economic
news before and during the financial crisis in German public and commercial news
outlets over time. European Journal of Communication, 29(5),
549–566. doi: 10.1177/0267323114538851
Lowrey, W., & Kim, E. (2016). Hyperlocal news coverage: A population ecology
perspective. Mass Communication and Society, 19(6), 694–714. doi:
10.1080/15205436.2016.1201687
Maier, S. (2010). All the news fit to post? comparing news content on the web to newspapers,
television, and radio. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 87(3-4), 548–562.
doi: 10.1177/107769901008700307
McDonald, P., & Charlesworth, S. (2013). Framing sexual harassment through media
representations. In Women’s studies international forum (Vol. 37, pp. 95–103). doi:
10.1016/j.wsif.2012.11.003
Meraz, S. (2011). Using time series analysis to measure intermedia agenda-setting influence
in traditional media and political blog networks. Journalism & Mass Communication
Quarterly, 88(1), 176–194. doi: 10.1177/107769901108800110
Meraz, S., & Papacharissi, Z. (2016). Networked framing and gatekeeping. In T Witschge, C.
W. Anderson, D. Domingo & A. Hermida II (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Digital
Journalism (pp. 950-112). Sage.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
Meyer, K. M., & Tang, T. (2015). #socialjournalism: Local news media on twitter.

30

International Journal on Media Management, 17(4), 241–257.
doi:10.1080/14241277.2015.1107569
Mimno, D., Wallach, H. M., Talley, E., Leenders, M., & McCallum, A. (2011).
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 262–272.
Newman, D., Lau, J. H., Grieser, K., & Baldwin, T. (2010). Automatic evaluation of topic
coherence. Human language technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
100–108.
Newman, N. (2011). Mainstream media and the distribution of news in the age of social
discovery. Retrieved from Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism:
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/201711/Mainstream%20media%20and%20the%20distribution%20of%20news%20in%20th
e%20age%20of%20social%20discovery.pdf
Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kalogeropoulos, A., Levy, D., & Nielsen, R. K. (2018). Reuters
Institute Digital News Report 2018. Retrieved from Reuters Institute for the
Study of Journalism: https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/digitalnews-report-2018.pdf.
Palser, B. (2009). Hitting the tweet spot: news outlets should use twitter to reach elusive and
valuable audiences. American Journalism Review, 31(2), 54–55.
Rashidian, N., Brown, P., Hansen, E., Bell, E., Albright, J., & Hartstone, A. (2018). Friend
and foe: The platform press at the heart of journalism. Retrieved from Tow Center for
Digital Journalism: https://www.cjr.org/tow_center_reports/the-platform-press-at-theheart-of-journalism.php
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., & Airoldi, E. M. (2016). A model of text for experimentation
in the social sciences. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 111(515), 988–
1003. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2016.1141684
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., & Tingley, D. (2016). Navigating the local modes of big data.
Computational Social Science, 51.
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., Tingley, D., Airoldi, E. M. (2013). The structural topic model
and applied social science. Advances in neural information processing systems
workshop on topic models: Computation, application, and evaluation. 1-20.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
Roston, M. (2015, January 22, January). Don’t try too hard to please twitter — and other

31

lessons from the new york times’ social media desk. Retrieved from Nieman Lab:
http://www.niemanlab.org/2015/01/dont-try-too-hard-to-please-twitter -and-otherlessons-from-the-new-york-times-social-media-desk/
Rowan, D. (2014, January 2, Jan). How buzzfeed mastered social sharing to become a media
giant for a new era. Wired.. Retrieved from http://www.wired.co.uk/article/buzzfeed
Schwemmer, C., & Ziewiecki, S. (2018). Social media sellout: The increasing role of product
promotion on Youtube. Social Media+ Society, 4(3), 1-20. doi:
10.1177/2056305118786720
Shoemaker, P. J., & Vos, T. (2009). Gatekeeping Theory. New York: Routledge.
Sjøvaag, H., & Stavelin, E. (2012). Web media and the quantitative content analysis:
Methodological challenges in measuring online news content. Convergence, 18(2),
215–229. doi: 10.1177/1354856511429641
Stempel III, G. H. (1985). Gatekeeping: The mix of topics and the selection of stories.
Journalism Quarterly, 62(4), 791–815. doi: 10.1177/107769908506200412
Stieglitz, S., & Dang-Xuan, L. (2013). Emotions and information diffusion in social media—
sentiment of microblogs and sharing behavior. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 29(4), 217–248. doi: 10.2753/MIS0742-1222290408
Strauß, N. (2018). Financial journalism in today’s high-frequency news and information era.
Journalism, 274-291. doi: 10.1177/1464884917753556
Tandoc Jr, E. C. (2014). Journalism is twerking? how web analytics is changing the process
of gatekeeping. New Media & Society, 16(4), 559–575. doi:
10.1177/1461444814530541
Tandoc Jr, E. C. (2017). Journalistic autonomy and web analytics. In B. Franklin & S. A.
Eldridge II (Eds.), The Routledge Companion to Digital Journalism Studies (pp. 293–
301). New York, NY: Routledge.
Tandoc Jr, E. C., & Vos, T. P. (2016). The journalist is marketing the news: Social media in
the gatekeeping process. Journalism Practice, 10(8), 950–966. doi:
10.1080/17512786.2015.1087811
Thorson, K., & Wells, C. (2015). Curated flows: A framework for mapping media exposure
in the digital age. Communication Theory, 26(3), 309–328. doi: 10.1111/comt.12087
Vargo, C. J., Guo, L., & Amazeen, M. A. (2017). The agenda-setting power of fake news: A
big data analysis of the online media landscape from 2014 to 2016. New

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
Media & Society, 2028–2049. doi: 10.1177/1461444817712086

32

Welbers, K., & Opgenhaffen, M. (2018a). Presenting news on social media: Media logic in
the communication style of newspapers on Facebook. Digital Journalism, 1–18. doi:
10.1080/21670811.2018.1493939
Welbers, K., & Opgenhaffen, M. (2018b). Social media gatekeeping: An analysis of the
gatekeeping influence of newspapers’ public Facebook pages. New Media & Society,
20(12), 4728–4747. doi: 10.1177/1461444818784302
Welbers, K., Van Atteveldt, W., Kleinnijenhuis, J., Ruigrok, N., & Schaper, J. (2016). News
selection criteria in the digital age: Professional norms versus online audience metrics.
Journalism, 17(8), 1037–1053. doi: 10.1177/1464884915595474
White, D. M. (1950). The “gate keeper”: A case study in the selection of news. Journalism
Bulletin, 27(4), 383–390. doi: 10.1177/107769905002700403
Yankelovich, D. (1991). Coming to Public Judgment: Making Democracy Work in a Complex
World. Syracuse Syracuse University Press.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
Table 1
The list of news organizations included in the dataset.
National

Regional

33

Magazine

Online

ABC News

Newsday

Economist

AlterNet

Al Jazeera
BBC
Bloomberg
CBS News
CNN
Fox News

NJ.com
The Baltimore Sun
The Boston Herald
The Chicago Sun Times
The Chicago Tribune
The Dallas Morning News

Forbes
New York Magazine
The Atlantic
The Christian Science Monitor
The New Republic

Bipartisan Report
Breitbart
BuzzFeed News
Common Dreams
Conservative Tribune
FactCheck

MSNBC

The Denver Post

FiveThirtyEight

NBC News

The Des Moines Register

Free Beacon

New York Times

The Detroit Free Press

Gateway Pundit

NPR

The Detroit News

Huffington Post

PBS Newshour

The Indianapolis Star

IBTimes

Reuters

The Mercury News

Inquisitr

The Guardian

The New York Post

Media Matters

The Wall Street Journal

The Oregonian

Politico

USA Today

The Orlando Sentinel

PoliticusUSA

Washington Post

The Philadelphia Inquirer

Slate

The Press Democrat

Talking Points Memo

The Stranger

The Daily Beast

The Sun-Sentinel

The Daily Caller

The Tennessean

The Hill
The Intercept
The Root
Vanity Fair
Vice
Vox
Washington Examiner
Western Journalism
Westword

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

34

Table 2
Words highly associated with each topic (High FREX scores).
Label

Words with High Probability

Life/Fun

realli, thing, think, know, im, dont, that, someth, lot, go, feel, want, kind, hes, ive, didnt, just, there, get, cant

Crime

polic, arrest, kill, gun, murder, suspect, prison, fire, sheriff, crash, counti, crime, car, shoot, jail, dead, death, man, offic, driver

Economy/Business

compani, text, firm, million, busi, inc, ceo, industri, custom, oper, execut, energi, contract, employe, financi, manag, consum, electr,
own, servic
internet, exampl, technolog, user, data, creat, neutral, idea, googl, platform, self, understand, comput, digit, connect, experi, system,
tool, communic, content
score, point, rebound, basketbal, shot, half, game, nba, guard, second, ball, pointer, assist, minut, lead, warrior, rewritten, straight,
redistribut, play
music, movi, film, episod, charact, star, song, artist, album, actor, singer, fan, award, seri, comedi, band, netflix, studio, disney, perform

Technology
Sports/Basketball
Entertainment
Sports/Football
Royal Family
Sports/Others
Local/Outdoor
Economy/Finance
Food/Cooking
International/Middle East
Media
Politics/President
Sexual Harassment Investigation
International/Europe
Medical/Health
Local/Weather
Politics/Congress
Economy/Tax
Politics/Election
International/East Asia
Education
Me Too

nfl, quarterback, yard, bowl, touchdown, playoff, footbal, coach, eagl, patriot, lion, offens, season, vike, defens, game, giant, tackl,
intercept, bradi
mother, father, famili, daughter, son, princ, children, husband, babi, child, parent, wife, harri, mom, friend, wed, sister, kid, life, coupl
goal, leagu, sport, match, player, club, champion, team, cup, round, titl, england, won, win, athlet, competit, championship, winner,
tournament, basebal
de, park, citi, hotel, beach, island, town, resid, area, squar, museum, mayor, san, build, mountain, river, land, locat, mile, lake
stock, market, price, percent, growth, trade, investor, bank, rate, gain, index, economi, rise, analyst, currenc, global, billion, averag,
oil, higher
amazon, store, shop, appl, app, food, gift, holiday, card, cook, restaur, wine, item, pinterest, retail, eat, coffe, christma, devic, toy
jerusalem, israel, protest, palestinian, muslim, iran, islam, peac, saudi, isra, capit, refuge, syria, embassi, countri, al, war, terror, turkey,
terrorist
news, media, fox, post, daili, facebook, nbc, video, cbs, fake, abc, tweet, network, host, page, twitter, tv, mail, journal, journalist
trump, fbi, flynn, obama, donald, mueller, presid, clinton, white, counsel, advis, administr, russia, russian, investig, intellig, campaign,
presidenti, lie, hillari
alleg, accus, resign, franken, attorney, complaint, statement, deni, lawsuit, claim, file, abus, investig, inappropri, lawyer, ethic, former,
apolog, misconduct, conduct
rule, court, uk, ban, legal, eu, law, britain, brexit, commiss, justic, union, appeal, copyright, suprem, caption, imag, judg, british, constitut
patient, medic, drug, studi, health, doctor, npr, diseas, cancer, research, treatment, climat, hospit, dr, transcript, mental, brain, care,
anim, risk
com, photo, detroit, iowa, http, michigan, dec, https, pic, usa, snow, nashvill, jan, decemb, twitter, today, nj, weather, nov, www
immigr, shutdown, lawmak, daca, congress, senat, sen, legisl, democrat, bipartisan, schumer, republican, illeg, rep, hous, mcconnel,
border, fund, leader, bill
tax, incom, cut, corpor, deduct, insur, bill, benefit, pay, wage, budget, reform, repeal, debt, worker, rate, money, taxpay, individu, trillion
moor, elect, voter, alabama, roy, candid, poll, vote, parti, democrat, jone, polit, seat, republican, governor, race, ballot, campaign, doug,
senat
korea, korean, nuclear, missil, north, china, flight, kim, chines, airlin, airport, south, plane, navi, weapon, japan, russia, sanction, putin,
russian
student, school, newslett, educ, mr, univers, colleg, teacher, graduat, subscrib, pleas, ms, campus, sign, class, recruit, inbox, click, board,
program
women, weinstein, sex, men, femal, sexual, harass, rape, black, woman, male, gender, harvey, assault, gay, hollywood, metoo,
movement, racial, rose

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
35
Table 3
Summary of the selective news link sharing strategies. Numbers in parenthesis are number of
topics categorized as a given strategy.

News scraper

Twitter scraper

Figure 1. A computational method to identify shared and unshared news on Twitter.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING
100.0%

36

●
●

Avg. Portion of Sharing

●

75.0%

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●

●
●
●●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
● ●

25.0%
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

50.0%

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

● ●
●

●
●
●

0

100

200

300

Daily Avg. Articles

Figure 2. The average proportion of news sharing of each news organization against the
average number of news stories daily published with a smoothed trend. Each dot represents a
news organization.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

37

●
●

Number of Published News Stories

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

6000

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

4000
●
●

●

●
●
●●

●

●

●

●●

●
●●●

●
●
●

2000

●

Dec 01

Dec 15

Jan 01

Jan 15

Date

Figure 3. Daily Number of Published Online News Stories. The data weren’t collected during
the period between the blue dotted lines.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

38

LIFE/FUN: like, go, get
CRIME: said, polic, offic
ECONOMY/BUSINESS: compani, said, million
TECHNOLOGY: can, use, work
SPORTS/BASKETBALL: point, game, score
ENTERTAINMENT: star, show, film
SPORTS/FOOTBALL: game, season, coach
ROYAL FAMILY: famili, year, children
SPORTS/OHTERS: team, goal, year LOCAL/OUTDOOR:
citi, new, park
ECONOMY/FINANCE: percent, year, market
COOKING: can, holiday, food
INTERNATIONAL/MIDDLE EAST: countri, state, said
MEDIA: news, report, post
POLITICS/PRESIDENT: trump, presid, white
SEXUAL HARASSMENT INVESTIGATION: said, alleg, accus
INTERNATIONAL/EUROPE: court, law, rule
MEDICAL/HEALTH: health, said, studi
LOCAL/WEATHER: photo, com, twitter
POLITICS/CONGRESS: senat, immigr, democrat
ECONOMY/TAX: tax, bill, cut
POLITICS/ELECTION: elect, democrat, moor
INTERNATIONAL/EAST ASIA: north, korea, said
EDUCATION: school, student, said
ME TOO: women, sexual, men

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

Expected Topic Proportions

Figure 4. A bar graph for estimated overall proportions of 25 topics.

0.20

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

39
Life/Fun

●

Crime
Economy/Business

●

●

Technology ●
Sports/Basketball ●
Entertainment ●
Sports/Football ●
Royal Family ●
Sports/Others ●
Local/Outdoor ●
Economy/Fina nce

●

Cooking ●
Internat ional/Middle East
Media ●
Politics/President ●
Sexual Harass. Inve sti. ●
International/Europe ●
Medical/Health ●
Local/Weather ●
Politics/Congr ess ●
Economy/Tax ●
Politics/Election ●
International/East Asia ●
Education ●
Me Too ●

●

●

−0.20

−0.15

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Less shared ... More shared

Figure 5. Overall sharing propensity of 25 topics on Twitter. The propensity is measured as a
fractional deviation of the proportion of a news topic among shared stories from the
proportion among published stories. The topics are ordered by the frequency on news
websites. There are a few topics that largely deviate from their proportions on websites.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

Type

40

Magazine

National

Online

Regional

Figure 6. A visualization of firm-specific publication propensity and firm-specific sharing
propensity broken down by types of news organizations. The firm-specific publication
propensities are measured by how much proportion of each topic on each news organization’s
website deviates from the overall topic proportions. And the firm-specific sharing
propensities are measured by how much proportion of each topic on each news organization’s
Twitter accounts deviates from its own website.

SELECTIVE LINK SHARING

41

Figure 7. The gatekeeping momentum generated by the selective news link sharing strategies.
Topics falling onto the red areas will be more visible, and topics in the blue area will be less
visible on social media compared to traditional outlets.

