"x"
"1" "Debriefing Digital Simulations: Exploring Designs that Support Teacher Educators in Using Teacher Candidate Performance Data"
"2" "Meredith Moore"
"3" "Kevin Ng"
"4" "Yoon Jeon Kim"
"5" "Kevin Robinson"
"6" "Meredith Thompson"
"7" "Justin Reich"
"8" "Massachusetts Institute of Technology"
"9" "Corresponding Author:"
"10" "Meredith Moore,  mcmoore@mit.edu , 718-753-4979"
"11" "Historically, teacher education programs have suffered from a disconnect between coursework and fieldwork ( Zeichner , 2009). Coursework has emphasized theories of teaching and learning, offering little practice, while fieldwork has been intended as a chance for teacher candidates to apply what they have learned in practice. Poor coordination between these two components of teacher preparation programs is often blamed for ineffectiveness in preparing teachers for success in the classroom (Darling-Hammond, 2006). In recent years, there has been a move towards practice-based teacher education as a means to rectify this problem. In a seminal piece, Ball and Cohen (1999) argued that much of what teachers need to learn can only be learned in and from practice. They proposed orienting teacher professional education around practice, providing opportunities for teachers to experience the tasks and ways of thinking that are fundamental to the profession, but with enough distance from the daily grind of their school context to ensure that experiences would “be open to careful scrutiny, unpacking, reconstruction, and the like” (p. 12)."
"12" "In the past decade, teacher educators and researchers have experimented with a variety of approaches towards giving teacher candidates practice enacting complex professional activities in situations that offer less complexity than the K-12 classroom. Increasingly, coursework incorporates opportunities for teacher candidates to practice engaging in interactive practices, either in real classrooms or in simulation. Ideally, these practice opportunities are combined with feedback from teacher educators and peers, as well as reflective discussions. This combination of practice, feedback, and reflection supports to teacher candidates to make connections between theories of teaching and their application in the classroom, preparing them to be more effective teachers."
"13" "The assignments in practice-based courses are qualitatively different than those in traditional courses, resulting in new demands on teacher educators. Some traditional written assignments have been replaced by assigned practice, which teacher candidates may capture using audio or video recordings. This poses a challenge for teacher educators; how can they best assess and offer formative feedback on teacher candidates’ teaching, when the records are stored in audio or video files? Teacher educators cannot quickly assess teacher candidates’ performance, as there is no easy way to skim through audio or video files or to know exactly what parts to listen to. Different models of handling this performance data are employed. On one end of the spectrum, some models require teacher educators to invest a substantial amount of time processing, watching, or listening to media of teacher candidates practicing in order to assess their performance (e.g. Allen,  Pianta , Gregory,  Mikami , &  Lun , 2011). For many teacher educators, the time required to watch or listen to recordings of all the students in their courses, potentially at multiple points throughout a semester, is simply unsustainable. On the other end of the spectrum, to avoid overloading teacher educators, some models have teacher candidates review their own videos, self-assess their strengths and weaknesses, and select segments to share during the debriefing process (e.g.  Dotger , 2013). A challenge of this approach is that, as novices, teacher candidates are not able to interpret their experiences in the same way that a more expert teacher would (Grossman et al., 2009); their self-assessments may not be accurate, and the data that they chose share may not be the most salient."
"14" "The promise of practice-based pedagogies lies in the ability of teacher candidates to process their practice with teacher educators who can support their reflection and offer feedback. Thus, it is essential for teacher educators to be able to more efficiently review audio and video records of practice. In this article, we discuss a tool that we have developed to allow teacher  educators to more efficiently process records of teacher candidates’ performance from a digital simulation that uses a new software called Teacher Moments. Teacher Moments is a mobile web application that immerses teacher candidates into vignettes of classroom life and requires them to react to challenging situations through text and audio recorded responses. Teacher Moments gives teacher candidates a safe space to learn how to navigate difficult situations with students and/or their parents. Prior to this study, there was no easy way for teacher educators to learn how their students had performed in the simulation, which limited the educators’ ability to offer feedback and support candidates’ reflection. For this study, we developed a prototype of a web portal to provide easy access to information from the simulation, including transcripts and audio recordings of teacher candidates’ practice, written reflections, and video prompts."
"15" "Theoretical Framework"
"16" "We understand learning to be grounded in the experience of the learners (Dewey, 1938). Active engagement with ideas and practices can catalyze learning. However, experiential learning occurs as learners reflect on and make meaning of their experiences (Kolb, 1984; Schön, 1987). Independent reflection is not sufficient for novice learners, such as teacher candidates, as novices lack the professional vision to identify  patterns  and  relationships that would allow them to extract meaning from their experiences (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000). They benefit from the close supervision of an expert who can guide them to reflect on their experiences, help them understand what competent practice looks like and where they stand in relation to competent practice (Schön, 1987). Reflecting-on-action with the support of an expert helps novices to develop the ability both to act and to think like a professional. This is essential for navigating what Schön terms “the indeterminate zones of practice,” those messy, real world problems of practice that professionals encounter that require on-the-spot experimentation in the  face of uncertainty.  One role that the expert plays is to offer targeted feedback about specific elements of the novice’s performance. Novices make use of this expert feedback to guide their future practice (Schön, 1997)."
"17" "In accordance with this model, we posit that Teacher Moments will have the most benefit for novice teachers when it is used under the supervision of teacher educators. The Teacher Moments simulations are designed to offer novice teachers direct experience with challenging situations that may arise in the course of their professional practice. These simulations are also standardized, allowing teacher educators to facilitate group debriefing after the simulation, and engage a group of teacher candidates to explore and compare different responses to the same situation. Ideally, debriefing offers a chance for novices to reflect on and make meaning of their experiences, as well as for the teacher educators to provide targeted feedback for the novices to improve their performance."
"18" "Literature Review"
"19" "This study is at the intersection of two areas of teacher education research, practice-based teacher education and simulations in teacher education, which I review below. I also situate the relatively new field of teacher education simulations within the larger field of research on simulation-based learning generally."
"20" "Practice-based Teacher Education"
"21" "Since Ball and Cohen’s (1999) proposal to orient teacher education around practice, significant progress has been made on developing a pedagogy of practice-based teacher education. In a cross-professional analysis of professional preparation, Grossman et al. (2009) presented a framework for thinking about the teaching of practice in university settings, that includes the use of: 1) representations, in which specific aspects of practice are made visible to  novices; 2) decompositions, in which practices are broken down into their component parts; and 3) approximations, in which novices have opportunities to simulate certain aspects of practice within the professional education classroom. Building on Grossman et al.’s work, McDonald,  Kazemi , and Kavanaugh (2013) proposed a pedagogy of practice that consists of iterative cycles of learning about an instructional activity, preparing and rehearsing it, enacting it with students, and analyzing the enactment. Rehearsal is operationalized as a pedagogy in which teacher candidates lead an instructional activity while their peers act as students.  Teacher educators play multiples roles during rehearsals including providing directive and evaluative feedback, scaffolding enactment by making a teacher move or acting as a student, and facilitating a reflective discussion of instructional decisions within the rehearsal (Lampert et al., 2013). Successful rehearsals require  a  culture in which new teachers are comfortable taking the risks of making their practice public, including sharing their pedagogical failures ( Kazemi ,  Ghousseini ,  Curnard , &  Turrou , 2014)."
"22" "Simulations in Teacher Education"
"23" "In parallel with the pedagogies of practice research, another research strand explores the use of simulations as a means to provide teacher candidates with opportunities to practice real world activities and processes in a safe environment, without the high stakes of the real world. Long used to train professionals in various fields, including medicine, emergency response, and aviation, simulations are relatively new to teacher education. Effective simulations are personalized in their approach, allow for suspension of disbelief, and provide opportunities for participants to learn through reflection and feedback ( Dieker , Rodriguez,  Lignugaris /Kraft, Hynes, & Hughes, 2014). The simulations that have been developed for teacher education include clinical simulations ( Dotger , 2010), in which teacher candidates interact in person with  trained actors, as well as technology-based simulations, in which teacher candidates engage with virtual students, parents, or colleagues ( Dieker  et al., 2014)."
"24" "Much of the early research on the use of simulations in teacher education has focused on their efficacy in developing teacher candidate competence, with generally promising results for both clinical and technology-based simulations.  Dotger  (2010) found that teacher candidates who took part in a  multiple clinical simulations   developed an increased awareness of and sensitivity to socio-cultural contexts. Research into interactive digital simulations has shown that participants find  the experience to be realistic and take the opportunity to practice pedagogical approaches ( Accardo  & Xin,  2017;    Thompson ,  Owho-Ovuakporie , Robinson, Kim, & Reich, 2018). Researchers have examined teacher candidate learning in several digital platforms, including  SimSchools  and  Mursion .  SimSchools  is a web-based virtual classroom environment populated by virtual students who react in different ways to teacher actions. Teacher candidates who spent time interacting with these students felt more prepared and rated their teaching skills higher than a control group, although their perceptions of inclusion did not change (McPherson, Tyler-Wood,  McEnturff , & Peak, 2011).  Mursion  (formerly  TeachLivE ) is a mixed reality teaching environment in which teachers interact in real time with avatars who are controlled remotely by an “Inter-actor.” Researchers have found that participating in  Mursion  simulations can increase teacher candidates’ abilities to manage undesired student behaviors ( Hudson,  Voytecki , & Zhang, 2018), provide feedback to students ( Dawson &  Ligunaris /Kraft, 2017) , and communicate with parents ( Accardo  & Xin, 2017).  This research suggests that simulations are a promising approach for fostering teacher candidates’ learning;  however  there is little research that looks specifically at why and how this learning occurs."
"25" "Simulation-Based Learning"
"26" "While it is relatively new to teacher education, simulation-based learning has long been theorized and researched in other fields.  Simulation-based learning is understood to consist of three core stages: briefing, simulation, and debriefing ( Cant  & Cooper, 2011;  Kriz , 2010), which participants learn through an experiential learning cycle (Fanning & Gaba, 2007; Pearson & Smith, 1985).  In experiential learning theory, learning is defined as \"the process whereby knowledge is created through the transformation of experience. Knowledge results from the combination of grasping and transforming experience\" (Kolb, 1984, p. 41). Applying this framework to simulation-based learning, the simulation provides the experience while the debriefing process enables learners to make meaning out of their experiences as they receive expert feedback ( McGaghie , Issenberg,  Petrusa , &  Scalese , 2010) and engage in structured reflection (Pearson & Smith, 1985)."
"27" "While debriefing can take many forms, including in-person or virtual, facilitator-led or self-debriefing, group or individual ( Verkuyl  et al., 2018), most debriefing models include three phases:  1) sharing  emotional responses; 2) describing the events; and 3) generalizing and applying. Sharing emotional responses is necessary step to allow participants to release tension and calm down, allowing them to concentrate during a less emotional discussion later on. This requires a climate of mutual confidence in which participants trust that they can share their feelings without negative repercussions ( Kriz , 2010; Pearson & Smith, 1995). Describing the events provides a common starting point so that participants can compare their experiences and identify commonalities as well as differences (Pearson & Smith, 1995). During this phase, a facilitator may focus on particular learning objectives by asking participants to reconstruct critical situations in detail and offering feedback on participants’ actions during the simulation ( Kriz , 2010). A skilled facilitator offers enough time for participants to defuse through sharing  their personalized accounts, before moving the discussion to a more global perspective (Fanning & Gaba, 2007). Ultimately, the goal of debriefing is to allow participants to generalize from the experience and their reactions to it, reflecting on what their experiences meant and how this applies in a larger context. Participants may have a chance to make plans for the future, on the basis of what they learned ( Kriz , 2010). Although these three phases may not occur in this sequence, including all of them in debriefing is important to experiential learning (Pearson & Smith, 1995)."
"28" "When those facilitating debriefing sessions are present during the simulations, either as observers or in some cases as participants, their knowledge of what happened during the simulation can inform their facilitation, enabling them to offer targeted feedback as well as to support participants’ reflections. When simulations occur individually in virtual spaces, which is increasingly common as digital simulations become more prevalent, facilitators may lack first-hand knowledge of simulation events. The project described here sought to enable teacher educators to more readily access data from simulations that they had not personally observed by creating a portal offering access to transcripts and audio and video files from the simulation. This article addresses the question: How can a  teacher educator portal help teacher educators  promote learning during the debriefing process with teacher candidates who have participated individually in a virtual, media-interactive simulation? Specifically, how did two teacher educators use the portal to prepare for and facilitate a debriefing session? What other opportunities does the portal provide to help teacher educators foster teaching candidate learning?"
"29" "Methods"
"30" "The study reported on in this article was a small, qualitative, exploratory study conducted  in the context of ongoing design-based research ( Barab  & Squire, 2004) on the Teacher Moments platform. At the time of the study, multiple “moments” had been developed. In each scenario, a participant playing the role of a teacher is immersed into a challenging situation within the realm of teaching and must respond  improvisationally , in real time. The simulation process is depicted in Figure 1. This study used a video-based scenario, based on a clinical simulation developed by Benjamin  Dotger  (2010). In the scenario, the participant holds a conference with a disgruntled parent, Jennifer Turner, whose daughter Amber is receiving low grades in the teacher’s 11th grade course. Participants are provided with contextual information ahead of time regarding the school, the class, and Amber. Before beginning the conference, participants answer two anticipatory reflection questions in writing. Participants are then prompted to go into a quiet room to engage in the simulation, which consists of six brief video clips where Mrs. Turner speaks directly to the camera. She expresses concern that the amount of school work is negatively impacting her daughter’s budding modeling career. She questions the teacher’s high expectations and constructivist teaching methods, implies that Amber is doing well in all of her other classes, and asks the teacher to give Amber a passing grade. Throughout the conversation Mrs. Turner acts condescending towards the teacher, and she ultimately announces that she will meet with the school principal. After each clip, participants are immediately prompted to audio record a response by speaking into the microphone on their device, after which the next clip automatically plays. After the simulation, participants respond in writing to a series of reflection questions about the experience. At the time of the study, the participants’ audio and text responses were stored within the system, but were not available to teacher educators."
"31" "Figure 1.  Teacher Moments simulation process."
"32" "In order to learn how to make Teacher Moments more useful and actionable in pre-service teacher education, we used iterative design cycles to understand how teacher educators envisioned using the platform with teacher candidates. We interviewed John and Jane, who are faculty members in a new teacher education program that is incorporating practice-based pedagogies, to understand how they would build a learning experience around Teacher Moments and to gauge their interest in seeing teacher candidate data from Teacher Moments. We also observed as John tested out Teacher Moments with a group of five in-service and pre-service teachers and led a debriefing session with the group as if they were students in his class."
"33" "Based on these interviews and observation, we found that there was an interest from teacher educators in using simulation data to inform teaching decisions, without needing to invest significant amounts of time accessing the raw data. Acting on feedback from Jane and John, we built a prototype of a teacher educator portal by repurposing and iterating on an existing research tool that pulled all the data collected in Teacher Moments. We designed a table to display teacher candidates’ data, and enabled users to sort the table according to students, questions and responses. Figure 2 depicts the initial prototype of the portal, which included teacher candidates’ written reflections and clickable links to their audio responses to each  simulation prompt."
"34" "Figure 2.  First iteration of teacher educator portal."
"35" "When John and Jane saw the initial prototype of the portal, they expressed enthusiasm that the portal offered access to the written reflections, but reported that listening to the audio clips would be overly time consuming. Jane noted that she would be unlikely to listen to the audio clips without having a transcript of the audio clips to signal what she would hear in the clip. This feedback was incorporated into the second iteration of the teacher educator portal, which uses IBM Watson’s Speech to Text API to transcribe the audio files with a machine learning algorithm. While the use of machine learning algorithms presents ethical challenges around fairness and algorithmic bias that are critical for researchers to address (e.g.  Diakapoulus , et al., 2016), in this prototype we explored what the design potential might be for using these techniques. The second iteration of the prototype can be viewed in Figure 3. Here, transcripts appear underneath the clickable audio clips."
"36" "F igure 3 . Second iteration of teacher educator portal."
"37" "In order to answer the question of how this portal helped teacher educators to promote teacher candidates’ learning during debriefing, we asked the teacher educators to try out the Turner simulation with teacher candidates and to conduct a follow up debriefing session. Five teacher candidates participated individually in the Turner scenario. Their data was compiled in the teacher educator portal. We introduced this portal to John and Jane during a 50-minute collaborative planning session that occurred immediately prior to the debriefing. The teacher educators used the portal as they developed a plan for the debriefing. This session also served as a forum for the teacher educators to provide feedback on the teacher educator portal. John and Jane subsequently co-facilitated a 45-minute long debriefing session with the teacher candidates. The planning and debriefing sessions were audio-recorded and transcribed for analysis."
"38" "The transcripts were coded using  using  simultaneous coding ( Saldaña , 2013). Each  instance of portal use was coded according to what information in the portal was used (video prompts, transcripts, audio clips, or written reflections). Additionally, process codes were used to identify the teacher educators’ actions during the planning and debriefing sessions. An initial a priori coding scheme was developed based on the literature on practice-based pedagogies and simulation-based learning. This was modified in accordance with the particulars of the data. The final coding scheme for the teacher educators’ actions is shown in Table 1. Each instance of portal use was subsequently analyzed to determine how the information in the portal informed the teacher educators’ actions as well as how teacher candidates responded."
"39" "Table 1."
"40" "Codes for Teacher Educators’ Actions during Planning and Debriefing"
"41" "Time"
"42" "Code"
"43" "Definition"
"44" "Planning Session"
"45" "Defining learning objectives"
"46" "TE articulates what they want TCs to learn through the experience."
"47" "Determining criteria for success"
"48" "TE gives examples of what does and doesn't count as hitting the learning objective"
"49" "Reviewing performance data"
"50" "TE reads a transcript/ written reflection or listens to an audio clip"
"51" "Analyzing performance data"
"52" "TE analyzes TC data in relation to learning objectives, criteria for success, or other data from other TCs."
"53" "Formulating a plan"
"54" "TE decides on debrief sequence, plans key points, generates questions, or plans feedback."
"55" "Debriefing"
"56" "Inviting emotional responses"
"57" "TE asks TC to share how they felt during the simulation."
"58" "Prompting review of events"
"59" "TE prompts TC to share their actions or thoughts during the simulation"
"60" "Interrogating values"
"61" "TE asks a question that prompts TC to unpack their values"
"62" "Giving feedback"
"63" "TE gives instructive or evaluative feedback of TC’s actions during simulation"
"64" "Guiding discussion of meaning"
"65" "TE asks TCs to analyze their own actions, compare different approaches, or articulate principles for future interactions"
"66" "Findings"
"67" "A total of five teacher candidates participated in the simulation and attended the final debriefing session: Nathan,  Betina , Jen, Leslie, and Andrea. In total, 32 text-based reflection responses and 24 audio-based simulation responses were accessed and displayed to the teacher educators. In the sections below, we describe how the teacher educators used the portal to prepare for and facilitate a debriefing session with the teacher candidates."
"68" "Portal Use during Planning"
"69" "John and Jane were introduced to the second iteration of the teacher educator portal at the beginning of their planning session. They reacted with excitement to see that the newest iteration included transcripts of the teacher candidates’ audio-recorded response. During their 50-minute planning session, they used the portal to access information contained in three different types of media: video, text, and audio. They used the embedded links to watch four out of the six video prompts to which the teacher candidates had responded during the simulation. They read aloud four of the transcribed audio responses, as well as one written reflection. They also read or skimmed additional transcribed responses and written reflections silently, although it is impossible to determine how many, as the portal was projected onto a screen. Reading the transcripts prompted John and Jane to listen to three audio clips of teacher candidates’ responses."
"70" "We identified multiple ways that the teacher educators used the information in the portal, including clarifying learning objectives, understanding how the teacher candidates had performed, determining criteria for success, planning feedback, and formulating a plan for debriefing. We describe these functions in detail below."
"71" "Clarifying a learning objective.  At the beginning of the planning session, prior to seeing the portal, the teacher educators defined three learning objectives for teacher candidates that they hoped to address through the Teacher Moments simulation and debriefing: 1) active listening and remaining calm in challenging conversations; 2) getting buy-in for their educational approaches; and 3) understanding different goals of schooling. Once they gained access to the performance data contained in the portal, the transcripts enabled them to refine their objectives and determine criteria for success. For instance, Jane and John had the following conversation, in which they used the transcript to articulate a shared vision for effective engagement with families and to revise their objectives:"
"72" "Jane: [reading aloud from  Betina’s  transcribed response] I understand that Amber [the student in the scenario] is definitely very ambitious, and has had a lot of success even now in her high school career with modelling. But I still think it's important. Amber had, like, a very well rounded strong educational experience just like other students."
"73" "Jane: That's a point where, seeing that, I'm like, oh that looks like potentially acknowledging the family's values, Amber's strengths in this area and then tying back maybe  their  why to the teacher's why…."
"74" "John: I think the point about acknowledging strengths is something that's really important here. I'm not exactly sure which it fits with though, with the goals we chatted about."
"75" "Jane: I think it's a fourth goal…. I think there's the active listening in challenging conversation I think is reframed more generically, like that's almost across any kind of challenging conversation to do active listening, empathy, and remain calm. But I think some of the things are specific to how you interact with parents... it was like not just calling when there is a problem but discussing the strengths too. So..."
"76" "John:  So  if the first goal was actually instead of active listening, if it was like building a relationship with a family, you might imagine like acknowledging the student's strengths would be a way to do that or a part of perhaps the first goal."
"77" "In this example, reading the transcript of the teacher candidate’s audio response enabled John and Jane to come to a deeper understanding of the competencies required to successfully navigate this challenging parent conversation. As she read what the teacher candidate said to the parent during the simulation, Jane identified  an  teacher effective move, “acknowledging the family’s values, Amber’s strengths in this area.” The teacher educators agreed that this move was “really important” and felt that it should be a  criteria  for success in the simulation. Through discussion of where it fit among their previously articulated learning goals, they decided to revise one of their learning goals, replacing “active listening” with “building a relationship with a family.” They agreed that acknowledging students’ strengths would be an effective way to meet that learning goal. While this was the only time that the teacher educators revised a learning objective, they used teacher candidate performance data to determine the criteria for successful performance multiple times, as discussed below."
"78" "Understanding teacher candidate performance.  The teacher educators reviewed and analyzed performance data to find out how the teacher candidates had performed. As they skimmed the transcribed responses they made quick judgments. For instance, Jane commented that all the teacher candidates had “answered fine” on the last prompt, and she quickly turned her attention to another prompt. The teacher educators examined the transcripts at greater length when they noticed differences in teacher candidates’ responses to the same prompt. Notably, John and Jane devoted 14 minutes to comparing teacher candidates’ response to one prompt where they noticed significant variation. In the prompt, Amber’s mother Mrs. Turner, says:"
"79" "I think your approach is wrong. I think you're expecting too much from these students. In fact, I came here today because Amber is doing fine in all of her other classes. This is the only class that she is having difficulty with."
"80" "After watching the video clip of the prompt, the teacher educators read three of the transcribed responses aloud. When they noticed that one of the transcripts was incomplete, they decided to listen to all three audio recordings as well. They toggled between reviewing the data and comparing and contrasting the teacher candidates’ approaches to engaging with families."
"81" "Determining criteria for success and planning feedback.  After listening to all three responses, the teacher educators analyzed the pros and cons of different approaches. Jane observed that she  had  a  “jaded concern” that Nathan’s response promised too much without spelling out a plan for how to support Amber to improve in the class, whereas  Betina’s  response included a detailed plan for what both the teacher and the student would need to do. Her direct comparison of these two responses led her to articulate some criteria for successfully engaging with families of struggling students, namely: “I think it's more effective leaving a meeting with a student or parent who's struggling to have concrete action steps. Having hope and inviting them into the process.” The teacher educators also considered feedback that they could give to teacher candidates whose responses did not embody these principles. Jane noted that she would like to ask Nathan, “Do you feel like the requirements are sufficiently clearly spelled out and understood?\" As this example illustrates, reviewing multiple teacher candidates’ responses to the same prompt facilitated analysis of this data, allowing the teacher educators to develop increased clarity about the criteria for success. It also enabled them to plan how to give constructive feedback to teacher candidates."
"82" "Formulating a plan for the debriefing session.  The information in the portal supported the teacher educators in planning the debriefing session at both a micro- and macro-level. At a micro-level, through their analysis of teacher candidate performance data, they generated questions to ask, key points to make, and feedback to give. At a macro-level, the teacher educators used other information in the portal to figure out how structure a debriefing session that would support teacher candidates’ development of specific objectives. In order to figure out which parts of the scenario to focus on, they played back some of the video clips and discussed which learning objectives were relevant to each clip. This guided their decision making about a session structure."
"83" "The teacher educators also used the written reflections, which offered insights into the teacher  candidates  perceptions of the experience, to inform their decisions. As they were discussing how to address the learning objectives about buy-in and values, Jane pointed that Nathan had written that he felt “a bit flustered” when responding to Mrs. Turner’s assertion that his class would not be useful to Amber in her modelling career. This reflection prompted Jane and John to review the prompt to which Nathan was referring. Ultimately, they decided to use that prompt as one of two focal prompts for the debriefing session. In discussing how the portal informed the plans for the debriefing, Jane explained, “The reflection at the end, where the word ‘flustered’ gets used. That was a trigger.” By enabling the teacher educators to toggle back and forth between the video prompts, performance data, and reflections, the portal offered the teacher educators the information they needed to plan a debriefing session that would be responsive to the teacher candidates’ learning and emotional needs."
"84" "Portal Use during Debriefing"
"85" "During the debriefing session with the teacher candidates, John and Jane used the teacher  educator portal to access the video and audio files stored therein and share them with the group. When John first mentioned to the teacher candidates that he and Jane hoped to play some of their audio responses to the group, the initial response was nervous laughter. Leslie exclaimed, “Oh my god!” John quickly said, “We don’t have to,” to which Leslie replied, “It’s fine.” As the session proceeded, the teacher educators suggested playing the teacher candidates’ audio responses on four occasions. However, as not all the data had been saved, they were only able to play two of these audio clips. The use of these audio and video records of the simulation during the debriefing supported teacher candidate learning by facilitating teacher candidates’ recall of both their emotional reactions and their verbal responses, fostering self-reflection and meaning-making, and creating opportunities for peer feedback."
"86" "Stimulating recollection of emotional responses and events.  The teacher educators focused the debriefing on two of the six video prompts, which they played to prompt the teacher candidates’ recollection of their emotions and experiences during the simulation. For instance, John shared a video clip in which Mrs. Turner complained that the teacher’s expectations were too high. He then invited emotional responses, asking, “Thinking back to this, what was your reaction?” Andrea shared that her first thought was, \"Wow, you must have been a terrible teacher, I'm glad you don't do it anymore.\" John asked further probing questions to encourage her to unpack this reaction and the emotion behind it."
"87" "In addition to prompting the teacher candidates to share their emotional reactions, the video clips also led them to voluntarily share what they had said to those particular prompts. After Andrea had shared her emotional reaction to the prompt, she described how she had actually responded. “I think in my actual response… I went more along the lines of like, ‘Even though this isn't an honors class, all students can…’ You know what I mean.” On this and three  other occasions ,  the video clips prompted teacher candidates to  shared  the gist of their responses."
"88" "Creating opportunities for feedback and meaning-making.  While the video clips supported teacher candidates’ recollection of their experiences in the simulation, their memories were limited. They were uncertain of the actual words that they had said, as illustrated by Andrea’s use of the qualifier, “I think in my actual response” before sharing the gist of what she had said. At another point, Nathan noted, “I don’t remember how I responded to this one, actually.” On both of these occasions, the teacher educators offered to play back the audio of their responses, saying, “Let’s find out!”  Once the audio responses were played, the teacher candidates’ actual words and actions become the focus of the ensuing conversation."
"89" "Through these conversations, which were grounded in the concrete words that had been said, teacher candidates were able to self-reflect on their performance, give each other feedback, and generalize to principles that could be applied more broadly when engaging with parents. This is illustrated in the following transcript, which begins with Nathan’s response to Mrs. Turner’s concern that the work in his class is too challenging."
"90" "Nathan [Audio clip]: Well, I  wanna  make sure that they can get the most out of their education. It doesn’t matter if they’re in an AP or honors class. And that's pretty much my goal in doing the stuff that I could really help them learn."
"91" "Nathan: Then as soon as I made that response, I was like, \"Wow. That was a really dumb response.\" And so, that was my thought."
"92" "John: How did it feel good? Did you say not good?"
"93" "Nathan: It was a dumb response."
"94" "John: Oh, dumb."
"95" "Nathan: The reason was, it sounded like... I don't know... That I assumed that they didn't know how to learn or something... That their daughter didn't know how to learn. I could just imagine a very negative response to what I just said."
"96" "Jen: I think you didn't do a lot of bad things. You didn't say, \"This is the way we teach now\" or something really condescending. Or... And you did focus on her. You were like, \"I am doing this for the good of my students,\" which is an important thing."
"97" "Nathan: That's true, yeah."
"98" "Jane: We named some principles."
"99" "As this transcript illustrates, playing Nathan’s audio clip was an opening for the teacher educators and other teacher candidates to give him specific feedback on his performance. Jen offered positive feedback, highlighting aspects of Nathan’s response that he was not able to see for himself. Similarly, when  Betina’s   audio  response to the same question was played a few minutes later, her peers responded with concrete, positive feedback. These were the only occasions during the entire debriefing that specific feedback was provided on a teacher candidate’s actions during the Teacher Moments simulation."
"100" "Sharing the teacher candidates’ audio responses also led to meaning-making about the principles for engaging with parents. In the transcript above, after Jen described what Nathan had done well, Jane pointed out that these things could be considered “principles.” Thus, the conversation moved from the specific words that teacher candidates had used, to generalizable principles for engaging with parents. Although this was not the only time that principles were developed during the debriefing, at other times they were developed from discussion of idealized ways that teacher candidates could have responded to Mrs. Turner. Playing the audio responses allowed for the principles to be grounded in a teacher candidate’s actions."
"101" "Discussion"
"102" "In the section above, we detailed the multiple ways that teacher educators used information in the portal to plan and facilitate a debriefing session with the teacher candidates. Below, we discuss these moves in relation to a framework for experiential learning. We first analyze how John and Jane’s use of the portal supported learning through experience. We then consider other ways that the portal could have been used to foster teacher candidate learning. As discussed above, we understand learning to be grounded in the experience of the learners, in this case the teacher candidates’ experiences in the Teacher Moments simulation. Experiential learning theory suggests that learning occurs as learners reflect on their experiences (Kolb, 1984). Novices, such as teacher candidates, benefit from the guidance of an expert who can help them reflect on their experiences in relation to competent practice and can offer targeted feedback on particular aspects of their practice (Schön, 1987). The debriefing after the Teacher Moments simulation was designed as an opportunity for the teacher candidates to learn from their experience, by receiving feedback and engaging in guided reflection with the facilitation of the teacher educators. Our analysis suggests that using the portal enabled John and Jane to better prepare for and facilitate the debriefing."
"103" "The teacher educators used their collaborative planning time to make concrete plans for a debriefing session that would foster teacher candidate learning about three objectives related to communicating with caregivers. As described above, the teacher educators used multiple types of information from the portal to inform their design. While replaying the video prompts was useful for selecting discussion topics that that would foster particular learning objectives, and reading the candidates’ reflections helped them to pinpoint areas of concern, it was the candidates’ actual responses during the simulation (audio responses and transcripts) that allowed John and Jane to  determine how to guide the candidates towards increased competence. In order to help the teacher candidates  both  understand the principles underlying effective communication with parents and reflect on their own performance, the teacher educators needed to have a clear vision of success. As shown above, John and Jane developed a more a nuanced understanding of competent performance by analyzing the teacher candidates’ written and audio responses that were contained in the portal. This analysis also gave them information about the range of performances among the teacher candidates. Thus, having ready access to the teacher candidates’ performance data allowed them to enter the debriefing session better prepared to help the teacher candidates recognize the gap between their actions during the simulation and effective parent engagement."
"104" "Effective debriefings allow participants time to process their emotional reactions, share what happened, generalize from events, and consider how to apply their learnings in the future ( Pearson & Smith, 1995). They sometimes include targeted feedback to support participants in improving their future performance ( Kriz , 2010). While debriefing the Teacher Moments simulation, John and Jane used the portal  to support all of these functions. As discussed above, they used the video clips to prompt teacher candidates to share their emotional responses as well as to describe what happened during the simulation. Playing the teacher candidates’ audio responses created an opportunity for peers to give each other specific feedback, which would not have been possible otherwise, as candidates has participated in the simulation individually."
"105" "While the portal was useful during both the preparation for and facilitation of the debriefing, its potential for promoting teacher candidate learning during debriefing was not fully realized. One promising pedagogical approach in practice-based teacher education is rehearsal, in which teacher candidates make their practice public through rehearsing a particular  instructional strategy in front of their peers and a teacher educator ( Kazemi  et al, 2014; McDonald et al., 2013). Public rehearsals afford opportunities for individual teacher candidates to receive immediate, targeted feedback from teacher educators. Although during the planning session John and Jane discussed feedback that they could give to Nathan, they did not, in fact, have occasion to give him this feedback during the debriefing, as his response was not shared with the group. Additionally, all the teacher candidates who are present during the rehearsal have a chance to participate in reflective discussions about specific instructional decisions, engaging in vicarious learning as they discuss the teaching experience of a peer (Lampert et al., 2013). It is harder to create these learning opportunities when teacher candidates practice privately in an individual simulation such as Teacher Moments. However, we posit that the portal offers a means for making teacher candidates’ performance public, potentially creating a similar learning opportunity to that offered by a rehearsal."
"106" "Moreover, the ability to select which performances to make public, is an advantage over both in-person rehearsals and debriefing models in which candidates decide which episodes to share (e.g.  Dotger , 2013). Without being able to anticipate exactly what teacher candidates will do or share, it can be challenging to orchestrate a session that moves the class towards an established learning objective. Being able to go through data from a digital simulation ahead of time could enable teacher educators to strategically select data to share in the service of a learning objective. For instance, teacher educators could purposefully highlight different ways of responding to the same prompt to. By facilitating an analysis of the different responses, similar to the conversion that John and Jane had during their planning session, they could support teacher candidates to deepen their understanding of what competent performance can look like."
"107" "In their research on rehearsals,  Kazemi  and colleagues (2014) found that teacher educators who use this pedagogy intentionally support a culture of making teaching public by establishing norms for participation in rehearsal and fostering experimentation and inquiry around practice. Teacher educators typically explain the participation structure of rehearsals before the first rehearsal of the semester. There was no time for John and Jane to develop and nurture such a culture with the teacher candidates who participated in the Teacher Moments scenario. However, were they to use Teacher Moments as part of a course, they would have an opportunity to lay the groundwork for publicly sharing practice, while the transcription feature of the portal would also make it easy to share practice anonymously."
"108" "Future Directions"
"109" "In this study, we pilot tested a portal prototype with users as a proof of concept, and, as reported above, we found that access to teacher candidate performance data supported teacher educators’ planning and facilitation of a debriefing session. Further research with a larger sample of teacher educators in authentic contexts is needed to better understand how teacher educators incorporate Teacher Moments in their courses, how they use the portal to analyze their own students’ performance, and how simulation-based learning with Teacher Moments impacts teacher candidate learning. Building on the promising findings of this pilot, we are continuing to work in two areas. First, we convened a network of ten teacher educators, introduced them to Teacher Moments, and are supporting them to use Teacher Moments in their education courses. We plan to study how educators in this larger group use the portal prototype to support the learning of the candidates in their courses. Secondly, we are iterating upon the portal by adding additional features to support analysis of teacher candidate performance. We are currently building a keyword search and a sentiment analysis tool, which we will test with teacher  educators in our network. Future work includes converting the prototype into a tool that teacher educators can use independently on their own machines."
"110" "Despite its limitations as a  small scale  pilot, this study has important implications for the future of digital simulations in teacher education. As simulations play an increasing role in teacher education, this study highlights the value in making the data from these simulations easily accessible to teacher educators, without requiring them to process information stored in audio or video. The unique structure of Teacher Moments, which divides the simulation into a series of prompts, facilitated access, as teacher candidates’ responses are also stored into small audio clips which can then be transcribed and displayed separately. This offers a promising model for other simulations. Whether other digital simulations adopt this model or develop alternatives, this study illustrates that easily accessible performance data enables teacher educators to plan and facilitate rich debriefings that can meet teacher candidates where they are and propel them forward, through data-informed reflection and targeted feedback."
"111" "References"
"112" "Accardo , A., & Xin, J. (2017). Using technology-based simulations to promote teacher candidate parental collaboration and reflective instructional decision making.  Journal of Technology and Teacher Education ,  25 (4), 475-494."
"113" "Allen, J. P.,  Pianta , R. C., Gregory, A.,  Mikami , A. Y., &  Lun , J. (2011). An interaction-based approach to enhancing secondary school instruction and student achievement.  Science ,  333 (6045), 1034-1037."
"114" "Ball, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-based theory of professional education. In L. Darling-Hammond and G. Sykes (Eds.),  Teaching as the learning profession  (pp. 3–32). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass."
"115" "Barab , S., & Squire, K. (2004). Design-based research: Putting a stake in the ground.  The Journal of the Learning Sciences ,  13 (1), 1-14."
"116" "Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000).  How people learn.  Washington, DC: National Academy ."
"117" "Cant , R. P., & Cooper, S. J. (2010). Simulation‐based learning in nurse education: Systematic review.  Journal of Advanced Nursing ,  66 (1), 3-15."
"118" "Darling-Hammond, L. (2012).  Powerful teacher education: Lessons from exemplary programs . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons."
"119" "Dawson, M. R., &  Lignugaris /Kraft, B. (2017). Meaningful practice: Generalizing foundation teaching skills from TLE  TeachLivE ™ to the Classroom.  Teacher Education and Special Education ,  40 (1), 26-50."
"120" "Dewey, J. (1938).  Experience and education:  the  Kappa Delta Phi lecture series . New York, NY: Kappa Delta Pi."
"121" "Diakapoulus , et al. (2016).  Principles for accountable algorithms and a social impact statement for algorithms.  Retrieved from Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning Website: http://www.fatml.org/resources/principles-for-accountable-algorithms"
"122" "Dieker , L. A., Rodriguez, J. A.,  Lignugaris /Kraft, B., Hynes, M. C., & Hughes, C. E. (2014). The potential of simulated environments in teacher education: Current and future possibilities.  Teacher Education and Special Education ,  37 (1), 21-33."
"123" "Dotger , B. (2010) “I had no idea:” Developing dispositional awareness and sensitivity through a cross-professional pedagogy.  Teaching and Teacher  Education ,   26 , 805-812."
"124" "Dotger , B. (2013).  I had no idea! Clinical simulations for teacher development.  Charlotte, NC:  Information Age Publishing."
"125" "Fanning, R. M., & Gaba, D. M. (2007). The role of debriefing in simulation-based learning.  Simulation in Healthcare ,  2 (2), 115-125."
"126" "Grossman, P., Compton, C.,  Igra , D.,  Ronfeldt , M., Shahan, E., & Williamson, P. (2009). Teaching practice: A cross-professional perspective.  Teachers College Record ,  111 (9), 2055-2100."
"127" "Hudson, M. E.,  Voytecki , K. S., & Zhang, G. (2018). Mixed-reality teaching experiences improve preservice special education students’ perceptions of their ability to manage a classroom.  Journal  For  Virtual Worlds Research ,  11 (2), 1-16 ."
"128" "Kazemi , E.  Ghousseini , H.,  Curnard , A., &  Turrou , A. C. (2014). Getting inside rehearsals: Insights from teacher educators to support work on complex practice.  Journal of Teacher Education, 67 (1) 18-31."
"129" "Kolb, D. (1984).  Experiential learning as the science of learning and development.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall."
"130" "Kriz , W. C. (2010). A systemic-constructivist approach to the facilitation and debriefing of simulations and games.  Simulation & Gaming ,  41 (5), 663-680."
"131" "Lampert, M. Franke, M. L.,  Kazemi , E.,  Ghousseini , H.,  Turrou , A. C., Beasley, H., Cunard, A. & Crowe, K. (2013). Keeping it complex: Using rehearsals to support novice teacher learning of ambitious teaching.  Journal of Teacher Education, 64 (3), 226-243."
"132" "McDonald, M.,  Kazemi , E., Kavanaugh, S.S. (2013) Core practices and pedagogies of teacher education: A call for a common language and collective activity.  Journal of Teacher Education,   64 (5), 378-386."
"133" "McGaghie , W. C., Issenberg, S. B.,  Petrusa , E. R., &  Scalese , R. J. (2010). A critical review of simulation‐based medical education research: 2003–2009.  Medical Education ,  44 (1), 50- 63."
"134" "McPherson, R., Tyler-Wood, T.,  McEntuff , A., & Peak, P. (2011). Using a computerized classroom simulation to prepare pre-service teachers.  Journal of Technology and Teacher Education ,  19 (1), 93-110."
"135" "Pearson, M., & Smith, D. (1985). Debriefing in experience-based learning.  Reflection: Turning Experience into Learning , 69-84."
"136" "Saldaña , J. (2013).  The coding manual for qualitative researchers . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage."
"137" "Schön, D. A. (1987).  Educating the reflective practitioner  (p. 27). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass."
"138" "Thompson, M.,  Owho-Ovuakporie , K., Robinson, K., Kim, Y.J. & Reich, J. (2018).  Teacher Moments: A digital simulation for preservice teachers to approximate parent-teacher conversations .  Manuscript submitted for publication."
"139" "Verkuyl , M.,  Lapum , J. L., Hughes, M., McCulloch, T., Liu, L.,  Mastrilli , P., ... & Betts, L. (2018). Virtual gaming simulation: Exploring self-debriefing, virtual debriefing, and in-person debriefing.  Clinical Simulation in Nursing ,  20 , 7-14."
"140" "Zeichner , K. (2009). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences in college-and university-based teacher education.  Journal of Teacher Education, 61 (1-2), 89–99.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487109347671"
