41

RUDOLF CYMORR KIRBY P.
MARTINEZ,

The Health Ritual of “Pag-aanito”
among the Aetas of Nabuclod,
Pampanga, Philippines

PhD, MA, RN
San Beda University,
Manila, Philippines

https://orcid.org/ 0000-00025323-5108

Abstract
A defining characteristic of an indigenous group is that it has
preserved its unique traditional ways of living, belief system or
pertinent rituals amidst the presence of modernity. One of the
indigenous group residing in the Philippines are the Aeta people,
found scattered in the archipelago. One of the unique cultural
health beliefs of this indigenous group revolves around the spirit
called "anito" and the ritual for appeasing this spirit termed as
"pag-aanito." This paper explores the contemporary
understanding of a select group of Aeta from Pampanga,
Philippines on these unique cultural health beliefs and how their
understanding and appreciation of their traditional customs
affects their perception of the world, themselves, and their health.
Keywords: Focused ethnography, health knowledge, indigenous
medicine

Context of the Study

A
Corresponding author’s email:
rmartinez@sanbeda.edu.ph

defining characteristic of an indigenous group is that it
has preserved its unique traditional ways of living, belief
system or pertinent rituals amidst the presence of
modernity. One of the indigenous group residing in the Philippines
are the Aeta people, found scattered in the archipelago and is
often described as its earliest inhabitants. Aetas are pygmy
people, nomadic in nature and are traditionally animist (Balila et
al., 2014; Shimzu, 1989, Waddington, 2002). One of the unique
beliefs of the Aeta people is the anito, a benevolent,
environmental spirit believed to inhabit the river, sea, hills and

42
various other places. They believed that the anitos are the original dweller of the earth and living in
harmony with them is an essential part of maintaining their people’s health and well-being. For the
Aetas, a break in this balance will bring about illness to the individual (Balila et al., 2014; Catseye,
2004; Torres, 2012).
In time of illness, therefore, a healer, the mang-aanito, is often called to help in restoring the
harmony with the anito and return the individual back to health. Brosius (1990) describe this curing
séance, the anituan, as a dramatic performance which involves trance, dances and dialogues
between the healer, the anito and the audience. Because of the nomadic nature of the Aeta people
and the changing modern culture they are in, this study aims to understand the contemporary
conceptualization of the pag-aanito among a select group of Aeta people residing in Nabuclod,
Floridablanca Pampanga as its relates to their identity and sense of well-being.

Locale of the Study
Nabuclod is one of the declared Ancestral Domains of the Aetas of Pampanga. The current
population of the area is composed of Aetas from Pampanga and the neighboring towns of Zambales;
and few “lowlanders,” which mainly consist of Kapampangans. The present site of barangay
Nabuclod is a resettlement area created after the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1998. It must be noted
however that majority of the populations residing in Nabuclod are the old residents of the area prior
to the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. According to the 2010 survey of the National Statistical Office,
barangay Nabuclod is composed of seven (7) sitios with a rough estimated population of 3,000
(“Municipal Profile-Official website of Municipality of Floridablanca, Province of Pampanga,” 2018)
largely attributed to their nomadic existence and inaccessibility of some Aetas still living in the
mountains surrounding the area (Early & Headland, 1998). The place is accessible through land travel
via small vehicle through a mixture of dirt road and pavement and is 30 minutes away from the town
center of Floridablanca. The hilly terrain of Nabuclod is mostly accessible by motorcycle and the total
area of the declared Ancestral Domain includes the barangay center, the sitios and the surrounding
mountains with the farthest sitio being two hours away from the barangay center accessible only by
foot through hiking along the mountainous terrain. Local governance is patterned from the existing
local political system while the “council of elders” may at times be convened to decide to things related
to the welfare of the community. Catholicism, Islam, Iglesia ni Cristo, and varied sect of Christianity
is also present in the community although folk and traditional belief are inculcated and practiced within
these denominations. Majority of the houses are made of cement and wood although there are still
traditional houses made of Nipa scattered around the area and is mostly present as one move away
from the barangay center. The source of living of the Aetas of Nabuclod is primarily farming with
ampalaya (bitter gourd) being the major produce of the barangay. Besides farming, charcoal making
is also practiced by few Aetas to augment the meager income of their family. The study locale was
one of the formally adopted communities of the researcher’s prior institution where he was formerly
affiliated with. As part of understanding the community dynamics in terms of specific culture and how

43
it relates to identity and health, this research was conceptualized.

Methods
This study was anchored on the interpretative philosophy, specifically qualitative approach,
to present a comprehensive summary of experiences of a select groups of individuals (Bernard, 2017;
Lambert, V. & Lambert, C., 2012; Lewis, 2015). After securing consent from the leaders of the
community, its members and the participating individuals, three key informants were chosen based
on the extensiveness of their traditional knowledge on pag-aanito. Other members of the community
were also interviewed to provide context of the community member’s contemporary understanding of
the pag-aanito. Narratives from the key informants and other informants serve as the basis for the
analysis of their stories. Unstructured free-flowing multiple interviews were done on the homes of the
informants from the different sitios of barangay Nabuclod. Prior to the interviews, the researcher
already did an immersion in the community for a period of two years, thus the informants were well
aware of the positionality of the researcher and the objective of the study. The key informants were
specifically from sitio Inararo and Dangas, the farthest sitios from the barangay center. Interviews
lasted for at least 30 minutes focusing on stories, personal experiences, and knowledge on pagaanito. All interviews were tape recorded with the consent of the informants.

Findings
The following findings were culled out based on the analysis of the informants’ narratives.
For the informants, the anito represent nature spirits residing in specific places within the community
and outside the boundaries of human settlement, specifically, the mountains. The physical attributes
of the anito cannot be described since the sight of the anito would cost one’s life. Although the anito
seems to exist in another metaphysical plane, the informants believed that disharmony with these
spirits could cause illness by two means, one thru possession (naanito) and the other by being
“greeted/ touched” (nabati) by these spirits. It should be noted however that another concept, nausog¸
is similar to the notion of nabati. Nabati is literally translated to “being greeted,” nausog colloquially
denotes “being touched” by the spirits. The relationship of the anito to the person seems to delineate
being naanito, to just being nausog/nabati, where in naanito, the person and the anito is in the same
body while in nausog/nabati no possession is involved. According to the informants, the pag-aanito
is the “highest” form of ritual that a human person could perform.
Specific rituals and healing modalities are traditionally assigned based on the gravidity of
the anitos effect on the person. For nausog/nabati, the ritual of pagtatawas is enough to appease the
spirit while for those naanito, the ritual of pag-aanito is deemed necessary. According to the
informants, anybody can learn the ritual of pagtatawas but the ritual of pag-aanito is reserved only to
those who belong to the lineage of mang-aanito. During the ritual, specific shamanic objects, like a

44
red cloth and beads and a knife, are essential. The red cloth is adorned with beads and must be
“activated” by a village elder prior to use while the knife is an heirloom piece passed down from one
generation to another. Beside the ritual object, another essential feature of the pag-aanito is the
dance called talipe, and the chanting of the mang-aanito in the Aeta language. During the dance, the
members of the community participating in the ritual will provide the tempo and music by tapping or
clapping while the mang-aanito dances in circle around the person, constantly waving and swaying
the red cloth on the person as if to drive away the anito from within. Chanting by the mang-aanito
was done while the dance is being performed. It is worth nothing that during the ritual, the mangaanito is believed to be possessed by another anito which either persuade or drive away the spirit
residing in the person being healed. According to the informants, during the ritual, the mang-aanito
and the naanito (sick person) are unaware of what is happening and it is only after the séance that
their consciousness returns back to them. The ritual also involves the family and relative of both the
mang-aanito and the naanito where the mang-aanito’s family helps in preparing the ritual space and
in providing melody through guitar while the naanito’s family and the other members of the community
surround in circle the mang-aanito ¬and the naanito to create the boundary of the ritual space.
The ritual of pang-aanito it seems is a communal séance where the members of the
community actively participate and the mang-aanito is the medium through which the anitos or spirits
communicates with each other.
According to the informants, the ritual of pag-aanito in its purest and traditional form is
currently rarely performed because of the limited access to the mang-aanito. Further, what the
“lowland” people often see in performances is merely an imitation of the original ritual. Also, the
informants further claimed that the ritual of pag-aanito can also be done to non-Aeta people and
always yields positive results.
One limitation of this study was that no actual performance of the pag-aanito was observed
since the ritual cannot be recreated without an actual naanito person involved. At the moment, there
are only two persons identified by the community as capable of doing the ritual. During the time of
data gathering, the identified mang-aanitos was not within the vicinity of the research locale. However
it is also interesting to note that according to the informants, there are other practitioners of pagaanito in other Aeta community.

Discussion and Implication
The traditional belief of the Aeta in the concept of anito is still prevalent in the community so
much so that specific rules are followed to avoid the wrath of the anito, like avoiding places believed
to be the dwelling place of the anito such as specific trees, or mountains (Brosius, 1990; Minoritized
& Dehumanized, 1983). Contact with the anito is believed to be deadly so specific rules on when not
to go out is also observed by members of the community. It seems that the community believes that

45
although they co-exist with the anito, unintentional crossing path with an anito causes disharmony in
the individual as evidence by the illness and in the community by disrupting the social processes
within. The belief in the concept of the anito is a remnant of their traditional belief in a pantheon of
gods rule by Apo Namalyari (Dizon, 2015.), where the anito belongs to the lower class of mythical
creatures yet seems to affect more the everyday lives of the community members. It seems that since
the upper classes of gods reside in secluded places such as the top of mountains, inherently
inaccessible to humans, the chance of “meeting” them is close to non-existent whereas the anitos
habitation is closer to human settlement thus there is a higher probability of antagonizing them
consciously or unconsciously. This encounter with the anitos is seen as the cause of an individual
illness (Griffin & Estioko-Griffin, 1985; Shimizu, 1989). Further, this belief in the anitos instill among
the Aetas a sense of environmental stewardship (Brosius, 1990; Nyaga & Torres, 2015) since the
dwelling places of the anitos must be respected and protected. The belief in the anito is the essence
of the practice of pag-aanito, a séance involving chanting, dancing, mediumship and ritual objects
aimed at healing the sick person (naanito) by removing the anito causing the illness from the person
(Dizon, 2015; Torres, 2012). The dance involves in the pag-aanito is believed to entice the spirit by
bribing them with food or gifts or by threatening them with harm using the heirloom knife (Samarena,
2007). The elements of traditional pag-aanito described in literatures is parallel to what the community
practices except the ending of the ritual described by Samarena (2007) which involves the mangaanito falling unconscious as she “absorb” the sickness from the individual. The ritual is a communal
affair, where each members of the community performs a specific task (as the audience, as the sick
person, as the healer or as a helper) and provides the boundaries of the ritual space where the pagaanito will be performed such that, without the support of the community, the pag-aanito will not
materialize.
Moreover, the decrease in the number séance performed at present times could largely be
attributed to the limited number and availability of mang-aanito and the high regards the people of
the community place on this specific ritual. The sense of exclusivity of the ritual, that it should be only
among Aetas, seems to be dissolving as the community integrates itself to the larger society for which
they come in contact with.
It is also interesting to note that all identified practitioner of pag-aanito are women. Although
equality among sexes is practiced in the Aeta community as evident by the active participation of
women in decision making within their family and among the community (Nyaga & Torres, 2015;
Shimizu, 1989), women were seen as more nurturing than men thus the practice of pag-aanito, which
in itself is a healing ritual, may have been linked with this idea of nurturing the sick. It must be noted
however that the mang-aanito is not given a special status within the community (Torres, 2012) but
rather an acknowledgement by its members of the unique ability inherent in that individual. This is
again another way by which the Aeta’s notion of equality is expressed.

46
Insight
The ritual of pag-aanito is a cultural heritage of the Aeta people of Nabuclod, Floridablanca
Pampanga that embodies the community’s sense of oneness, equality, and spirit. It is a unique
cultural identifier of their community and has stood the test of modernity. Although it is not as widely
practiced as it was before, the concepts and beliefs inherent in it are still being lived by members of
the community. This study provides a glimpse on how the concept of pag-aanito, as understood by
select members of a cultural community, reflects their inherent values and identities as a people.
Further research is indeed needed to fully understand how the other aspect of their culture is currently
practiced and understood by them.

References
Balilla, V. S., McHenry, J. A., McHenry, M. P., Parkinson, R. M., & Banal, D. T. (2014). The assimilation of
western medicine into a semi-nomadic healthcare system: A case study of the indigenous Aeta
Magbukún, Philippines. EcoHealth, 11 (3), 372-382
Bernard, H. R. (2017). Research methods in anthropology: Qualitative and quantitative approaches. USA:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Brosius, J. P., (1990). After Duwagan: deforestation, succession, and adaptation in upland luzon, philippines.
Michigan Studies of South and Southeast Asia Number 2. Center for South and Southeast Asian
Studies, University of Michigan Press.
Catseye (2004). Campers Point Philippines, the Negritos. Retrieved from: http://www.camperspoint.com/TheNegritos
Dizon, M. (2015). Sumpong: Spirit beliefs, murder, and religious change among eighteenth-century Aeta and
Ilongot in Eastern Central Luzon. Philippine Studies: Historical and Ethnographic Viewpoints, 63(1),
3-38
Early, J. D. & Headland, T. N. (1998). Population dynamics of a philippine rain forest people: The San Ildefonso
Agta. Gainesville, FL: University of Florida Press.
Griffin, P.B. and Estioko-Griffin, A. (Eds). (1985). The Agta of Northeastern Luzon: Recent studies. Cebu City,
the Philippines: San Carlos Publications.
Lambert, V. A., & Lambert, C. E. (2012). Qualitative descriptive research: an acceptable design. Pacific Rim
International Journal of Nursing Research, 16(04), 255-256.
Lewis, S. (2015). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches. Health promotion
Practice, 16(4), 473-475.
Minoritized and Dehumanized. (1983). Reports and reflections on the condition of tribal and Moro peoples in
the Philippines. Retrieved from http://daga.dhs.org/daga/press/urm/dehumanized/contents.htm
Municipal Profile-Official website of Municipality of Floridablanca, Province of Pampanga. (2018, January).
Retrieved from http://floridablanca.gov.ph/about-us/municipal-profile/.
Nyagaa, D. & Torres, R. (2015). The politics of cultural representation. Retrieved from
http://www.davidpublisher.org/Public/uploads/Contribute/569750d645855.pdf

47
Samareña, La Jota. (2007) Category talk: Philippine dances. Retrieved from:http://toen.wikipilipinas.org/
index.php/Category:Philippine_Dances
Shimizu, H. (1989). Pinatubo Aytas: Continuity and change. Quezon City, Philippines: Ateneo de Manila
University Press.
Torres, R. A. (2012). Aeta women Indigenous healers in the Philippines: Lessons and implications (Doctoral
dissertation) University of Toronto, Canada
Waddington, R. (2002). The Aeta people. the peoples of the world foundation. Retrieved February 1, 2018,
from http://www.peoplesoftheworld.org/text?people=Aeta

About the Author

Rudolf Cymorr Kirby P. Martinez, PhD, MA, RN, is currently a full time Assistant-Professor at San
Beda College of Nursing and a part-time Professorial-Lecturer at Arellano University, Florentino Cayco
Memorial School Graduate School of Nursing. Dr. Martinez finished his BS in Nursing from UST
College of Nursing, MA in Nursing from Trinity University of Asia and his PhD in Applied Cosmic
Anthropology from Asian Social Institute. At the moment, he is currently finishing up his second PhD
in Nursing Science from St. Paul University of the Philippines, Tuguegarao City. His research interests
include nursing science, theory and philosophy; nature, realities and phenomenon of caring; death,
dying and palliative care; and medical anthropology.

