Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.14

Pp.155-165

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement and Reading
Comprehension

Nazzem Mohammad Abdullah Attiyat
Department of English Language and Literature
Salt College for Human Sciences, AL- Balqa Applied University, Salt, Jordan

Abstract
Reading opens up wide-reaching paths for knowledge as it deepens the feelings of empathy.
Therefore, it represents a unique skill consists of a mixture of several procedures that encourage
the interaction with printed words for content and pleasure. The current study tries to identify the
impact of pleasure reading on enhancing writing achievement and reading comprehension. The
study has employed different data collection methods, such as published research, articles, books,
theses, and dissertations that are related to the study matter to provide answers to the following
question: ‘ Do pleasure reading have an impact on enhancing writing achievement and reading
comprehension?’. The results reveal that; pleasure reading has a positive impact on enhancing
writing achievement and reading comprehension. In addition to, pleasure reading provides readers
with entertainment, relaxation, comfort, as it also offers them a creative outlet and means of
escape, which, in turn, affect positively effect on the writing performance. Moreover, reading
helps learners develop their writing experience by inspiring them, expanding their vocabulary, and
improving their grammatical structure. The current study recommends applying more reading
programs into schools to encourage reading. It also suggests conducting more studies in order to
realize the true potential of reading and its impact on learners’ written works and reading
comprehension.
Keywords: ability, achievement, comprehension, fluency, language, language acquisition, learning
process, literacy, pleasure reading, reading, reading comprehension, writing achievement.
Cite as: Attiyat, N. M. A. (2019). The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing
Achievement and Reading Comprehension. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1),155-165.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.14

155

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

Introduction
Reading is a complicated process that comprises of equally complicated skills that require dynamic
participation from the reader’s part (Mancilla-Martinez & Lesaux, 2010). Some scholars and
researchers point out their perspective about reading and its process in order to highlight its
complexity, as it creates questions within the reader’s mind, which requires comprehensive
thought to be answered. In other words, reading can be considered as a thinking process that
requires the reader to comprehend, understand, and even employ different skills to gain the desired
information from a text, such as concluding, predicting, questioning, and drawing conclusions
(Zainal & Husin, 2011; Küçükoğlu, 2013).
Reading has opened up wide-reaching paths for knowledge that non-readers are unable to
access; it is also implied by many recent studies that reading deepens the feelings of empathy, and
presents the reader with a greater understanding of others’ mental states, if only temporarily
(Koopman & Hakemulder, 2015; Bal, & Veltkamp, 2013). Furthermore, pleasure reading develops
better reading comprehension skills among readers; increases their fluency, and displays higher
levels of general knowledge (Whitten, Labby, & Sullivan, 2016; Mol & Bus, 2011).
Pleasure reading also embraces the human interaction with written texts (Grosman, 2011)
and triggers the senses, such as sound, touch, and observation in order to create experiences in the
reader’s mind in ways that were not previously thought of. It is a frequent, yet enjoyable experience
that continues to grow, where the boundaries and variabilities of the reading experiences can
continue to expand and evolve (Tarulli, 2014).
Alternatively, writing is believed to be one of the most crucial skills that learners should
aim to develop. For many years, the writing is taught merely to boost the mastery of grammar rules
as well as vocabulary items (Lin & Maarof, 2013; Alqahtani, 2015). Yet, recent theories have
come to realise the importance of such language skill in achieving language proficiency. As far as
writing is concerned, reading is also a crucial skill that presents an array of information that cannot
be taught throughout the course of teaching writing. In addition, choosing the most suitable
approach for teaching writing should be considered in light of the contributions that reading could
offer to improve the learning process of writing skills (Rouabah, 2012).
Thus, the importance of conjoining reading and writing has been stressed by Salehi, Asgari
& Amini (2015) "Reading is not uniquely a single skill but a mixture of several skills and
procedures in which the readers interact with printed words for content and pleasure. Writing,
speaking, grammar, vocabulary items, spelling, and other language sub-skill scan be taught
through reading. p.306" they state that both reading and writing share similar features, making it
more beneficial to learn both skills concurrently and in a properly balanced manner.
To reach a certain level of a sufficient comprehension, a reader must employ certain
reading skills that increase the awareness of what is, how, and what to be read. Consequently, this
can help gifted readers recognise the true purpose of reading, allow them to approach it with that
purpose in mind, use successful strategies when coming across similar texts with similar purposes,
monitor the level of comprehension in those texts in light of the purpose in mind, and, if necessary,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

156

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

adjust the strategy use in accordance (Al-Mansour & Al-Shorman, 2014; Ahmadi, Ismail &
Abdullah, 2013).
Sullivan & Brown (2013) argue that reading isn’t an applicable habit. In similar context,
People for Education (2011) has reproted that pleasure reading has been declining in recent years,
and as years go by. Thus, the main problem the present study is trying to find explanations and
provide answers to know why there is sharper declines in the number of people who read for
recreational purposes that is considered an alarming rate. Consequently, this gives a certain
warning to social and cultural institutions to counter unsolicited consequences that might bring to
the point of making-or-breaking societies and their intellectual achievements. The current study
aims to answer the following questions:
• Does pleasure reading have an impact on enhancing writing achievement?
• Does pleasure reading have an impact on enhancing reading comprehension?
Literature Review
Pleasure Reading
Definitions of Pleasure Reading
Santos (2015) has defined pleasure reading as any form of reading that is fundamentally or socially
prompted and is considered as a pleasing activity for the reader. It refers to the act where the reader
would read on his or her own will rather than being forced, which stimulate positive emotions that
inspire him or her to make reading a personal desire. Pleasure reading can be also referred to as
out-of-school reading, voluntary reading, independent reading, leisure reading, recreational
reading, and self-selected reading.
Jung (2016) also defines pleasure reading, where he described it as reading that is
performed primarily for enjoyment and recreational purposes. It includes an extensive range of
genres and publications that reading within a school environment would allow; it is also not
necessarily restricted to the printed material and could include online reading as well.
While Bull (2017) defines pleasure reading as a non-oriented relation with texts as a way
to pass time and for enjoyment, he also describes it as the type of reading, which is voluntary and
is performed out of the reader’s choice that involves a text of interest to the reader. He further
explains that pleasure reading is not distinguished by the experience being pleasurable, but rather
by the purpose of the reading.
Importance of Pleasure Reading
It is strongly supported by Howard (2011) that people resort to pleasure reading unconsciously to
obtain everyday-life information and has to do with their personal characteristics and strong
developmental theme. Mikkonen (2017) argues that during the time pleasure reading, people tend
to gain insights regarding self-identification, self-recognition, and self-creation, all of which that
help the readers throughout their transition from childhood to maturity.
It is also noted that pleasure reading is seen as a social practice that is significant when it
comes to communication, taking part in life outside of the person’s direct circle, and understanding
the world. There are also two prime reasons for pleasure reading, which revolve around, sharing
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

157

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

knowledge with close people, such as friends and family, meeting people’s expectations, and
fitting into the surrounding environment (Doğan, 2014). Pleasure reading enriches one’s passion
and even boosts their self-confidence (Wilkinson, 2015).
2.1.3. Benefits of Pleasure Reading
The principal benefits of pleasure reading are quantity, purposeful reading, and fluency; as YoungScholten & Limon (2015) argue, books are the only reliable source that provides comfortably read
quantity of texts, while fiction is the only reliable source that provides texts that can improve a
learner’s eloquence and cognitive linguists. This is pointed out by Grosman (2011) " In this
connection it is worth mentioning that cognitive linguists are also interested in the results of the
reader’s interaction with texts that in psychology are conceived of as ‘the mental representation of
the text p.162". This reflects the experience of native speakers, who are capable of progressing
from fiction to non-fiction text with ease (Claridge, 2011).
According to Wilhelm & Smith (2016), Smith, Wilhelm & Fransen (2016), and Chowdry
Chowdry, Crawford, Dearden, Joyce, Sibieta, Sylva & Washbrook (2010), it is suggested that
pleasure reading is essential for children, as it strengthens their educational achievement and social
mobility, and increases their cognitive development. When the childern is at the age of five to ten,
it would be easier to stimuli reading activities and attain a high level.
This suggests that pleasure reading is not based entirely on children’s ability to read more,
but rather on the fact that the act of reading is actually linked to the increase of cognitive progress
over time (Alvermann, 2017; Cummins, 2015). From a strategic perspective, this strongly supports
the necessity to guide and inspire children to read during their spare time.
Apparently, the advantages of pleasure reading do not hold to native readers alone, but to
foreign readers as well. Many strong associations have been identified between pleasure reading,
foreign vocabulary acquisition, and morpho-syntax (Waring & Nation, 2004). For foreign readers,
pleasure reading can aid them in establishing the foundations for achieving both of literacy and
active citizenship, which can be acquired by drawing upon experiences and expectations from the
foreign sociocultural setting (Abbiss, 2016). However, while there is no lack of the number of
books that are intended for native readers, foreign readers’ capability to read for the sake of
pleasure depends is depending on the capability to access texts that are both engaging and easily
read (Nash, 2017).
Writing Achievement
Definitions of Writing Achievement
Al-Asmari (2013) defines writing achievement as the capability of expressing one's own ideas and
thoughts through the written form in either a second or a foreign language while ensuring a level
of accuracy and coherence.
Galbraith (2014), on the other hand, defines writing achievement as the outcome of five
dimensions, which are: 1) taking a clear stance regarding the issue, 2) supporting that stance with
relevant and accurate information taken from the source materials, 3) using information from said
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

158

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

source materials, 4) organizing ideas in logically and effictively, and 5) expressing said ideas in
one’s own words with both clarity and fluency).
In addition, Dahlia (2016) defines writing achievement as the outcomes of one’s learning
experience that were obtained during the writing process within a particular field, such as
knowledge and skills; these outcomes show the level and status of the person’s learning experience
and their ability to apply what they have learned throughout a standard test.
Factors Affecting Writing Achievement
Writing skills are considered to be quite complex and are hard to teach at times, given that
not only do they need the person to master the grammatical and rhetorical devices, but they also
need to master the conceptual and judgemental elements as well (Masjhari, 2010).
There are notable factors that influence writing achievement; the first of which is rich
vocabulary, as it allows people to express thoughts in a way that draws the interest of their targeted
audience (Ruday, 2014). The second is organisational ability, which refers to the person’s ability
to present ideas in a logical arrangement and an effective sequence (Yıldız & Yekeler, 2017). The
third is elaborating ideas in a way that allows the idea to develop fully and flow smoothly from
one sentence to another, and from one paragraph to another. Consequently, the sentence consists
a unity and coherence (Sudirman & Tiasari, 2015). The fourth is the capability of using a diverse
range of sentences to state thoughts and ideas accurately and fluently (Sulaiman, 2017).
In addition, there are some other factors that influence writing achievement. According to
Kırmızı (2009), reading habits is one of the key elements that affect writing. It has been noted that
most learning instruments rely on language acquisition, which, in turn, emphasizes the level of
reading comprehension among learners. There are also psychologies elements that can affect the
learning achievement that include intelligence, attitude, interest, motivation, and competence.
Moreover, there are several other elements that can govern students’ learning achievement
throughout the learning process, such as attitude, self-concept, interest, motivation, and learning
habits (Dahlia, 2016).
Reading Comprehension
Definitions of Reading Comprehension
According to Mckee (2012), reading comprehension is defined as the capability of understanding
texts, analysing the information found in these texts, and the ability to interpret the writer’s
statements and intents correctly.
However, Hans & Hans (2015) define reading comprehension as the capacity at which a
person can comprehend a text. This type of comprehension arises from the written words and how
they bring about knowledge existing outside the text. In other words, comprehension in this sense
is a complex yet creative process that depends on the four skills of language (phonology,
pragmatics, semantics, and syntax).
In addition, Bulut (2017) states that reading comprehension refers to the act of thinking
and forming meanings before, during, and after reading. He also states that reading comprehension
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

159

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

is one of the main language skills that entail interpretations and identifying the details that are
found in written materials, whether they are clear or not.
Factors Affecting Reading Comprehension
Sanford (2015) believes that reading comprehension is affected mainly by six factors,
which are working memory, vocabulary, prior knowledge, word recognition, reading strategies,
and the motivation to read. This is supported by a number of researchers, such as Moghadam,
Zainal & Ghaderpour (2012), who state that vocabulary items do affect reading comprehension
positively, as committing lexical errors is one of the recurring errors, thus, forming a prominent
barrier. It is also supported by Alfaki & Siddiek (2013), who believe that people use their alreadyexisting information – i.e. prior knowledge – in order to understand any text they would encounter,
and it also builds their confidence and security through activating their prior knowledge in regards
to the text.
As for the working memory, Swanson, Zheng & Jerman (2009) state that poor working
memory is one of the factors that have an impact on the person’s ability to read competently and
be able to understand texts. Furthermore, Birsch (2011) believes that reading comprehension relies
on word recognition in order to be achieved quickly and allow the reader to receive knowledge
from a text. In accordance with Gilakjani & Sabouri’s (2016) findings, it has been indicated that
suitable reading strategies do play an essential role in the improvement of reading comprehension
skill among learners, especially English as a foreign language readers.
As for motivation, its effect on reading comprehension has been discussed in a study by
Blay, Mercado & Villacorta (2009); they divide motivation into two kinds; The first kind, is
intrinsic motivation, that stems from the person’s willingness and drive to perform the learning
task and acquire new skills and experiences. While the second kind, extrinsic motivation is caused
by exterior influences, such as rewards, punishments and other variables in an attempt to
manipulate one’s motivation. In short, motivation, especially the intrinsic motivation, has a larger
influence on reading comprehension.

Discussion
It is strongly believed that pleasure reading is a vital mean to acquire information among readers,
especially young ones. It allows them to enhance their skills and supports them with the knowledge
they need to understand themselves, others, their relationships, and values, which, in turn, would
assist them throughout their transition into adulthood. Reading isn’t merely a single skill, but a
mixture of numerous other skills and procedures, such as writing, grammar, vocabulary items,
spelling, speaking, and other sub-skills that can be taught through reading, where readers are
voluntarily exposed to printed texts for the sake of content and pleasure.
The current study has explored whether writing achievement and reading achievement are
affected by pleasure reading. Learners must recognise the significance of reading and how
positively it affects their abilities in extending their knowledge and acquiring the skills necessary
to improve their learning experience; it is also believed that pleasure reading might have a
noteworthy effect on learners' writing achievement. There have been numerous relations, which
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

160

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

have been identified among pleasure reading and vocabulary achievement, as these relations can
be a useful source when attaining literacy, which involves both reading and writing skills. In
addition, the more a person indulges in reading, the higher the potential of picking up on words
subconsciously. Reading contributes to people’s vocabulary growth and provides them with a
better writing experience where they can utilise those words in their writing than those who don’t
read. In other words, it’s been suggested that both vocabulary production and acquisition can occur
through self-initiated (i.e. pleasure) reading experiences that involve reliable and appealing
materials. Moreover, being exposed to and interacting with written texts and vocabulary would not
only help learners increase their vocabulary items, but it would also help them improve both their
language and writing skills.
Fascinatingly, the connection between reading and writing is interchangeable, yet, the
impact of reading on writing is more significant than the impact writing has on reading. The current
study shades the light to t that reading promotes one’s growth and development and allows them
to understand their personal and social environments. It does not only enhance one’s personal,
spiritual, and mental growth, but it also offers entertainment, inspiration, and information in
regards to how they view themselves and others. In summary, the attitude toward reading
significantly affects the reading comprehension and writing achievement among readers and
learners. Thus, it is suggested applying more reading programs into schools in order to encourage
reading. It is also recommended performing more studies that aim to understand the true potential
of reading and its impact on learners’ written work and reading comprehension.
Conclusions
The current study attempts to identify what pleasure reading can play positively on enhancing
writing achievement and reading comprehension. As per previous studies, and after examining the
literature above, the researcher is able to conclude some important points that can enrich the
research in the filed of this study.
Firstly, when it comes to Pleasure reading, it can be concluded that it has a positive impact
on enhancing writing achievement and reading comprehension. It helps improve literacy and
enhance the thinking skills, as well as clarify and explore future goals and interests. Another
interesting point found that Reading skills can be strengthened and improved through employing
both reading and writing skills. Both points are supported by Cambria & Guthrie (2010) and
Genlott & Grönlund (2013), Graham & Hebert (2011) and Küçükoğlu (2013)
Secondly, when it comes to writing achievement and skills, the analysing of the previous
literature has led the researcher to conclude that written texts are usually derived from pleasure
reading, where the reading text is self-selected rather than imposed on the reader. Moreover,
Pleasure reading provides readers, especially young ones, with historical knowledge and
information regarding the current events. Moreover, it helps them develop positive feelings, such
as compassion and empathy, which would empower them to act upon their beliefs, and understand
the consequences of improper behaviors. Interestingly, Pleasure reading provides readers with
entertainment, relaxation, comfort, as it also offers them a creative outlet and means of escape,
which, in turn, affect positively writing performance; this is supported by Jung (2016) and Bull
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

161

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

(2017), Zainal & Husin (2011), Al-Mansour & Al-Shorman (2014), Abbiss (2016), Koopman &
Hakemulder (2015), and Bal & Veltkamp’s (2013) studies.
Lastly, Reading helps learners develop their writing experience by providing them with
inspiration, an extensive pool of vocabulary items, and grammatical structure. Furthermore,
Pleasure reading increases reading speed and comprehension, motivates the attitudes of the reader
toward learning the target language, develops their language competency, and improves their
language skills, which is reinforced by Whitten, Labby, & Sullivan (2016) and Mol & Bus (2011)
and , Salehi, Asgari & Amini (2015) & Kirmizi (2009).
Limitations and Further Research
While this study has generally answered the proposed research questions, further research on
pleasure reading, writing achievement, and reading comprehension need to be investigated.
The current study is based on related studies and articles that have addressed the topic of
the impact of pleasure reading on enhancing writing achievement and reading comprehension or
the topics that relate to them. The study has faced some difficulties when it came to acquiring
related literature, as there was a lack of research that addresses the issue. It can also be due to the
fact that the current study has applied the analytical method, which is inapplicable in any other
context, which, to the researcher's best knowledge, calls for the need to conduct more studies that
would investigate the impact of pleasure reading on enhancing writing achievement and reading
comprehension.
Findings of such studies would offer beneficial insights for instructors and students
likewise. Additionally, such findings would offer invaluable resources for textbook writers and
curriculum designers, as well as future researchers within the field of this study. The current study
has employed different data collection methods, such as published research, articles, books, theses,
and dissertations that are related to the study matter.
About the Author:
Nazzem Attiyat has a Bachelor’s degree in Human Sciences (English Language and Literature)
from Qatar University and a Master’s degree in English Language (Translation) from Jordan
University. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2720-6941.
References
Abbiss, J. (2016). Critical Literacy in Support of Critical-Citizenship Education in Social Studies. Teaching
and Learning, 3, 29-35.
Ahmadi, M., Ismail, H., & Abdullah, M. (2013). The Importance of Metacognitive Reading Strategy
Awareness in Reading Comprehension. English Language Teaching, 6(10), 235-244.
Al Asmari, A. (2013). Investigation of Writing Strategies, Writing Apprehension, and Writing Achievement
among Saudi EFL-Major Students. International Education Studies, 6(11), 130-143.
Al-Faki, I. & Siddiek, A. (2013). The Role of Background Knowledge in Enhancing Reading
Comprehension. World Journal of English Language, 3(4), 42-66.
Al-Mansour, N. & Al-Shorman, R. (2014). The Effect of an Extensive Reading Program on the Writing
Performance of Saudi EFL University Students. International Journal of Linguistics, 6(2), 247-275.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

162

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

Alqahtani, M. (2015). The Importance of Vocabulary in Language Learning and How to Be Taught.
International Journal of Teaching and Education, 3(3), 21-34.
Alvermann, D. (2017). Adolescent Literacies: A Handbook of Practice-Based Research. New York, United
States of America: Guilford Publications.
Bal, P. & Veltkamp, M. (2013). How Does Fiction Reading Influence Empathy? An Experimental
Investigation on the Role of Emotional Transportation. PLOS One, 8(1), 1-12.
Birsch, J. (2011). Multisensory Teaching of Basic Language Skills (3rd Ed.). Maryland, United States of
America: Paul H Brookes Publishing Company Inc.
Blay, R., Mercado, K., & Villacorta, J. (2009). The Relationship between Motivation and Second Language
Reading Comprehension among Fourth Grade Filipino Students. Philippine ESL Journal, 2, 5-30.
Bull, L. (2017). Reading for Pleasure and Empathy: Making the Connection. YA Hotline, (105), 1-4.
Bulut, A. (2017). Improving 4th Grade Primary School Students' Reading Comprehension Skills. Universal
Journal of Educational Research, 5(1), 23-30.
Cambria, J. & Guthrie, J. (2010). Motivating and Engaging Students in Reading. New England Reading
Association Journal, 46(1), 16-29.
Chowdry, H., Crawford, C., Dearden, L. Joyce, R. Sibieta, L. Sylva, K. & Washbrook, E. (2010). Poorer
Children’s Educational Attainment: How Important Are Attitudes and Behaviour? Report,
Goodman, A. and Gregg, P. (Eds.), Joseph Rowntree Foundation, York, United Kingdom.
Claridge, G. (2011). What Makes a Good Graded Reader: Engaging with Graded Readers in the Context
of Extensive Reading in L2. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Victoria University of Wellington,
Wellington, New Zealand.
Cummins, J. (2015). Literacy Policy and Curriculum. In Rowsell, J. and Pahl, K. (Eds.) The Routledge
Handbook of Literacy Studies. Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge.
Dahlia, M. (2016). The Correlation between Students’ Language Learning Strategies and Their Writing
Achievement (A Study of the Sixth Semester Students of English Department of STAIN Batusangkar
in Academic Year 2015/2016). Unpublished Thesis, State Institute for Islamic Studies Batusangkar,
Sumatra, Indonesia.
Doğan, B. (2014). Prospective Teachers' Reasons: The Importance of Reading a Book. Information World,
15(1), 159-175.
Galbraith, J. (2014). The Effect of Self-Regulation Writing Strategies and Gender on Writing Self-Efficacy
and Persuasive Writing Achievement for Secondary Students. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation,
Western Connecticut State University, Connecticut, United States of America.
Genlott, A. & Grönlund, Å. (2013). Improving Literacy Skills through Learning Reading by Writing: The
iWTR Method Presented and Tested. Computers & Education, 67, 98-104.
Gilakjani, A. & Sabouri, N. (2016). A Study of Factors Affecting EFL Learners’ Reading Comprehension
Skill and the Strategies for Improvement. International Journal of English Linguistics, 6(5), 180187.
Graham, S. & Hebert, M. (2011). Writing to Read: A Meta-Analysis of the Impact of Writing and Writing
Instruction on Reading. Harvard Educational Review, 81(4), 710-744.
Grosman, M. (2011). Readers and Reading as Interaction with Literary Texts. Perspectives of Reading
Research, 34(2), 157-171.
Hans, A. & Hans, M. (2015). Different Comprehension Strategies to Improve Student’s Reading
Comprehension. International Journal of English Language Teaching, 3(6), 61-69.
Howard, V. (2011). The Importance of Pleasure Reading in the Lives of Young Teens: Self-Identification,
Self-Construction and Self-Awareness. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 43(1), 4655
Jung, A. (2016). The Effect of Male Reading Role Models on the Reading Attitudes of Fourth Grade Male
Students. Unpublished Master's Thesis, Goucher College, Maryland, United States of America.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

163

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

Kırmızı, F. (2009). The Relationship Between Writing Achievement and the Use of Reading
Comprehension Strategies in the 4th and 5th Grades of Primary Schools. Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 1(1), 230-234.
Koopman, E. & Hakemulder, F. (2015). Effects of Literature on Empathy and Self-Reflection: A
Theoretical-Empirical Framework. Journal of Literary Theory, 9(1), 79-111.
Küçükoğlu, H. (2013). Improving Reading Skills through Effective Reading Strategies. Procedia-Social
and Behavioral Sciences, 70, 709-714.
Lin, O. & Maarof, N. (2013). Collaborative Writing in Summary Writing: Student Perceptions and
Problems. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 90, 599-606.
Mancilla-Martinez, J. & Lesaux, N. (2010). Predictors of Reading Comprehension for Struggling Readers:
The Case of Spanish-Speaking Language Minority Learners. Journal of Educational Psychology,
102(3), 701-711.
Masjhari, S. (2010). Improving the Students’ Writing Competence through Process Oriented Approach (A
Classroom Action Research of the Grade 9.2 Students of SMP Negeri 1 Probolinggo in Academic
Year of 2009/2010). Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Sebelas Maret University, Surakarta, Indonesia.
Mckee, S. (2012). Reading Comprehension, What We Know: A Review of Research 1995 to 2011.
Language Testing in Asia, 2(1), 45-58.
Mikkonen, A. (2017). Fiction Readers' Book Search in Public Library Catalogs. Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
Moghadam, S., Zainal, Z., & Ghaderpour, M. (2012). A Review on the Important Role of Vocabulary
Knowledge in Reading Comprehension Performance. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 66,
555-563.
Mol, S. & Bus, A. (2011). To Read or Not To Read: A Meta-Analysis of Print Exposure from Infancy to
Early Adulthood. Psychological Bulletin, 137(2), 267-325.
Nash, C. (2017). A New Chapter: A Study of the Influence of Phonological Awareness and Orthographic
Transparency on Word Attack Skills in LESLLA Learners of English and Spanish. Unpublished
Master's Thesis, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, England.
People for Education (2011). Reading for Joy. People for Education, Ontario Library Association, Ontario,
Canada, 1-5.
Rouabah, H. (2012). The Contribution of Reading Comprehension to Writing Skill Development Case Study
of Second Year Students of English at Biskra University. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation,
Mohamed Khider University of Biskra, Biskra, Algeria.
Ruday, S. (2014). The Informational Writing Toolkit: Using Mentor Texts in Grades 3-5. Abingdon, United
Kingdom: Routledge.
Salehi, H., Asgari, M., & Amini, M. (2015). Impacts of the Extensive Reading Texts on the Writing
Performance of Iranian EFL Pre-University Students. Asian Journal of Education and E-Learning,
3(4), 306-316.
Sanford, K. (2015). Factors that Affect the Reading Comprehension of Secondary Students with
Disabilities. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of San Francisco, San Francisco, United
States of America.
Santos, J. (2015). Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students' Perceptions of Out-Of-School Pleasure
Reading during the Academic Year: A Mixed Methods Study. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation,
University of Kansas, Kansas, United States of America.
Smith, M., Wilhelm, J., & Fransen, S. (2016). The Power of Fostering Pleasure in Reading. In Appleman
D. & Hinchman, K. (eds). Adolescent Literacy: A Handbook of Practice-based Research. New York,
United States of America: Guilford Publications.
Sudirman, A. & Tiasari, L. (2015). Developing Logical Divisions of Ideas in University Students’
Expository Essays. International Journal of Science and Research, 4(11), 191-199.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

164

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Enhancing Writing Achievement

Attiyat

Sulaiman, S. (2017). Improving Students’ Achievement in Writing Narrative Text through Modelling
Technique in the Second Semester of the Eight-Year Students of Public Junior High School 2 Blitar.
International Research-Based Education Journal, 1(1), 46-57.
Sullivan, A. & Brown, M. (2013). Social Inequalities in Cognitive Scores at Age 16: The Role of Reading.
CLS Working Paper, 2013/10, Centre for Longitudinal Studies, London, United Kingdom.
Swanson, H., Zheng, X., & Jerman, O. (2009). Working Memory, Short-Term Memory, and Reading
Disabilities: A Selective Meta-Analysis of the Literature. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 42, 260287.
Tarulli, L. (Ed.) (2014). Pleasure Reading Exploring a New Definition. Reference and User Services
Quarterly, 53(4), 296-299.
Waring, R. & Nation, I. (2004). Second Language Reading and Incidental Vocabulary Learning. Angles on
the English-Speaking World, 4, 97-110.
Whitten, C., Labby, S., & Sullivan, S. (2016). The Impact of Pleasure Reading on Academic Success. The
Journal of Multidisciplinary Graduate Research, 2(4), 48-64.
Wilhelm, J. & Smith, M. (2016). The Power of Pleasure Reading: What We Can Learn from the Secret
Reading Lives of Teens. English Journal, 105(6), 25-30.
Wilkinson, S. (2015). Literature Review: The Impact of Reading for Pleasure and Empowerment. London,
United Kingdom: The Reading Agency.
Yıldız, M. & Yekeler, A. (2017). Writing Performance of Fourth Grade Primary School Students in
Relation to Organizational Ability and Handwriting Proficiency: A Structural Equality Model.
Education and Science, 42(192), 99-112.
Young-Scholten, M. & Limon, H. (2015). Creating New Fiction for Low-educated Immigrant Adults:
Leapfrogging to Digital. International Journal of the Book, 13(4), 1-9.
Zainal, Z. & Husin, S. (2011). A Study on the Effects of Reading on Writing Performance among Faculty
of Civil Engineering Students. Journal of Science & Mathematics Education, 1-8. (Unpublished).
Retrieved 03/02/2018 from
http://eprints.utm.my/11872/1/A_Study_On_The_Effects_Of_Reading_On_Writing_Performance_
Among_Faculty_Of_Civil_Engineering_Students.pdf

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

165

