"x"
"1" "Teaching note: Creating open textbooks for social work education"
"2" "Matthew P. DeCarlo, PhD"
"3" "Radford University School of Social Work"
"4" "Author Note"
"5" "Matthew P. DeCarlo, PhD"
"6" "Radford University School of Social Work"
"7" "This work was supported by the Virtual Library of Virginia (VIVA) Course Redesign Grant, Radford University’s Waldron College Research Award, and the Open Education Group’s OER Research Fellowship."
"8" "Correspondence regarding this note should be addressed to Matthew DeCarlo, PhD, Radford University School of Social Work,  Waldron Hall 223, PO Box 6958, Radford, VA 24142 ."
"9" "The author would like to acknowledge the contributions of his open education collaborators: Anita Walz, Dr. Dalia Khoury, Dr. Cory Cummings, Kate Agnelli, Dr. Nicole Lee, David  Cacamis , Amanda Parsons, Courtney Crenshaw, and Daniel Brooks."
"10" "Contact:  mdecarlo1@radford.edu"
"11" "Disclosures: The author has no conflicts of interest to disclose."
"12" "Abstract"
"13" "Open educational resources (OER) and the open education movement  have  blossomed over the past  decade, yet their  demonstrated  impact on social work is in its infancy .  This teaching note describes  the  process of creating  the first two open textbooks for social work education  about  undergraduate and graduate research methods .  In the  first year   post- publication, the undergraduate open textbook was used by over  1,100  students across  3 5 campuses and  accrued  an estimated savings of $ 150 ,000 for students .  Despite the se clear benefits, t he process of resource creation for faculty can be challenging , and this note offers practical guidance for faculty considering  both  small or large-scale open textbook projects.  As universities, states, and international bodies increase funding for the creation and adoption of  OER ,  the field of S ocial  W ork should demonstrate its commitment to equity, inclusion, and justice by leading these efforts within our  classrooms , discipline, and  institutions ."
"14" "Keywords:  open educational resources, open textbooks,  open scholarship , OER"
"15" "Teaching  N ote: C reating  O pen  T extbooks for  S ocial  W ork  E ducation"
"16" "T he distinctiveness of open textbooks is subtle.  They   include  the same components and content as a commercial textbook  but carry an open copyright license .   Instead of reserving all rights to a commercial publisher, open licenses —most often, Creative Commons licenses —allow for universal access and transformative engagement .  In other words, o pen textbooks are free to access  and u sers are encouraged to   revise  content and openly  share derivative works they create .  M ost open textbooks are digitally distributed using HTML, PDF, or other exportable formats   such as  E PUB .  Print editions are usually low-cost and can be printed independently by students."
"17" "Authors who create open textbooks retain copyright  and ownership  of their  scholarship .  Other u sers  who  take  their  content and  create derivative works  must provide attribution to the author  and follow the author’s intent for commercial reuse and licensing of derivative works.   Th e   creation of derivative works underscores the inherently collaborative nature of open publishing, as  authors  can  copy and paste  one another’s  work, with attribution, rather than reinventing the wheel or  providing links  to relevant content. An open license is an invitation to not only access the resource for free but to use it in transformative ways  as well ,  thereby  creating new open resources as part of a community  of practice ."
"18" "Open textbooks and student learning"
"19" "Open textbooks are  part of a broader  palette  of open educational resources (OER), which include assignments, case studies, videos, and  so forth .  As textbooks are the most commonly used pedagogical tool in higher education  (Seaman & Seaman, 2018) , it is unsurprising that the production and empirical study of open textbooks is the most  researched  area of the OER movement to date .  The majority of  OER  studies find  that  students achieve equivalent outcomes  at lower cost  (Hilton, 2019) . Additionally,  l arger studies   find significant improvements in grades for students using open textbooks,  particularly among  individuals  from historically underserved groups in higher education :  part-time, non-white, and Pell-eligible students  ( e.g.,  Colvard, Wilson & Park, 2018) .  At the most basic level, s tudents cannot learn from textbooks they cannot afford to purchase.  According to a large survey of Florida college students, approximately  two-thirds of students report not purchasing a textbook due to its  prohibitive  cost  (Florida Virtual Campus, 2016) .  S tudents unable to afford textbooks  report  doing worse in classes, dropping or withdrawing from classes, and taking longer to graduate  (Clinton & Khan, 2019) .  OER directly addresses this issue by providing free, permanent, and first-day access to required course materials."
"20" "Lack of  OER  for  social work  education"
"21" "At present,  56%  of  all  universities  in the United States   use an open textbook in at least one class , most often in general education  courses  ( Seaman & Seaman, 2018;  Ruth ,  2019 ) .  Over the last five years, t he   burgeoning  adoption  of open textbooks  over commercial textbooks  has saved students over one billion dollars ( Allen, 2018 ).   Unfortunately,  my undergraduate textbook is the only social work  textbook  listed in the  Open Textbook Librar y ,  a   comprehensive  open textbook repository.   OER databases  such as   Merlot  and  OER Commons  contain a few thousand  social work  resources each ,  though the y  lack  organization  and review by  faculty . The absence of social work  OER is in stark contrast to  allied  disciplines   such as  psychology , home to the   OER publisher  Noba  Project   and  which  recently  dedicated a special edition of  the journal  Psychology of  learning and teaching   to   OER .  The dearth of open content  in the field of Social  Work  forces  social workers who want to use  open textbooks to  create their own , often without guidance."
"22" "Starting a  “ small-scale ”   open textbook project"
"23" "Over  the past two academic years , I  created  and revised  an open textbook to replace the commercial textbook required for my undergraduate research methods course .  This section describes lessons I learned as a sole author and content creator ."
"24" "Build  from  existing resources"
"25" "My  textboo k was built using content from   Principles of Sociological Inquiry: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches ,  by Blackstone ( 2012 )  and licensed by the Saylor Foundation .  It  carrie s  the most restrictive open license ( CC-BY-NC-SA ) . This  copyright license   requires that  in adapting her work, I  attribute any  of Blackstone’s content  I use  (BY),  forgo   commercial profit  (NC),  and  apply  the same license  to my  book  (SA).  A uthors adapting  existing open content  are constrained by the original author’s license ,   and  when  mixing works together ,  must check for  license compatibility . OER creators  should consult a librarian   for assistance ."
"26" "I spent my first summer revising Blackstone’s textbook by first copying it from HTML to Word and doing a line-by-line edit.  Next summer, I  added content from  a compatible  open textbook ( Frederiksen & Phelps, 2017 ) to address the creation of a literature review. The writing  process took  approximately  two months  of  full-time  work  over  two summers.  In addition, b ecause  Blackstone’s  textbook was written for sociology students,  I customized  the content for social work undergraduate students .  To that end,  I added  information  about evidence-based practice and single-systems design , revised overlapping theoretical and empirical content, and deleted sociology-specific material such as  field research  and participant observation ."
"27" "Customization , agency, and ownership"
"28" "I chose  Blackstone’s  book  as a source text   because  it was written  using   approachable, informal language  intended   to disarm and engage students .  Creating a book  using  conversational  language  would help  address the anxiety and expectations of boredom that students bring to the  research methods class , a  common  problem in social work  education  ( e.g.,  Bolin et al., 2012) .  One of my frustrations with the commercial textbook our program used was that it was written in abstract and formal language, which made it difficult for students to understand . In evaluations, students indicated that  reading the textbook was a waste of time  because they needed my lectures to understand it .  Indeed, I often felt my job was partly translating the language in the book for students.  For me, this was the most exciting part of OER  creation —deliver ing   approachable,  personalized,  and  customized content  to support   students  in their independent reading .  Because the textbook  delivered  included the  exact  content  I wanted  students to receive , I could spend more time on interactive activities , similar to a flipped classroom."
"29" "Pilot test  and revise"
"30" "After my first summer  on the project ,  I pilot tested  the textbook on a satellite campus  with a small class of students who joined our program through  a  local community college .  These students  were qualitatively different  from our traditional undergraduate population   in that they were in their mid-20s,  worked full-time, and  were more likely to have  family care responsibilities .  Because of their financial situation, they were appreciative of the no-cost textbook option, and they nominated me for a teaching award .  To utilize this resource, m ost students  relayed that they  simply printed out the  next  week’s  chapter  after class  and created a binder that included t extbook  printouts , their notes, and class room  activities .  Because of the small class size, students  openly shared  feedback on the textbook including grammatical errors, unclear language, and formatting issues .  Using their feedback, I worked with graduate and undergraduate assistants  to edit, redesign, and publish the first edition  using  Pressbooks , an open source platform  for open textbook s that charges a one-time fee of  $99  for hosting and support."
"31" "Measure  learning outcomes"
"32" "As a new pedagogical tool, open textbooks are likely to be met with some skepticism by faculty and administrators .  Faculty  using open textbooks should measure their  impact on student learning ,  thereby  augmenting the biased and incomplete student evaluations of teaching .  Common metrics of student outcomes include final  grades, withdrawal and drop rates, and test scores .  I supplemented these  with two additional measures. First, I included a pretest and posttest using a  previously published  measure of research knowledge . I also worked with student researchers to conceptualize ,  facilitate ,  and analyze  student perceptions and use of the book  (Hilton, Wiley, Fischer, & Nyland, 20 16) .  The  assessment of these  data points , in addition to the $8,000 saved by students,   supported my  continued engagement with  OER at my institution ."
"33" "Create a student access plan"
"34" "During  the  implementation  process  of the undergraduate textbook, my colleagues and I  observed   confusion from students  on   how to access to the textbook .  Although  I provided an email with instructions  to this effect , some students  purchased  the bookstore’s   $50  print edition of the textbook ,   unaware  it was freely available  via HTML and PDF .  OER  represents   a culture shift  for students used to  buying  commercial textbooks .  For this reason,  I  developed  a template for  my colleagues that integrated  online and downloadable versions of the textbook into  the learning management system .  Student s  also  requested  guidance on reading and annotating  in  electronic textbooks ,  which I  now provide  on the first day of class ."
"35" "Create and measure  community impact"
"36" "OER is not truly open unless it is publicly accessible.   For this purpose ,  I shared  my  textbook in OER repositories, including OER Commons,  Merlot , and the Open Textbook  Library — where it  received  open  peer reviews from social work faculty .  I also shared the textbook on the BPD -L  listser v  and at conference presentations, which  provided the  largest source of  textbook  adoption  ( in addition to word-of-mouth ) . Based on the adoption survey faculty completed , the book  is now in use at over 35 campuses in the United States and  in  seven international schools , reaching about 1,100 students in the Fall 2019 semester . Financial impact can be  challenging  to measure , as students rarely pay full price for a textbook and routinely engage in cost-cutting strategies , such as   renting or buying used editions .  However, c ompared with the  full price of previously used commercial textbooks in each course, students have saved over $150,000. Using a more conservative estimate of $ 100  per textbook  (similar to  Nyamweya , 2018) , students have saved over $110,000.  For 83% of faculty adopters, this was their first time adopting an open textbook, with a majority of adopters  reporting   limited knowledge  of  OER .  These data points underscore the importance of an adoption survey in understanding the community impact of an open textbook."
"37" "Plan for sustainability"
"38" "Sustainability in OER  has many meanings . For this project, sustainability  involve s  correcting  mistakes ,  add ing suggested  content,  and  updating the  changelog in the front matter of the textbook  over  academic breaks .  It  also means  assisting  faculty  users .  Faculty may need guidance on how to adopt  the book , ask for  ancillary  resources, or pose questions about  open licenses . V olunteering  my  enthusiasm  and  experience   to adopters  help s  ensure the sustainability and reach of my project .  For example, after  a  faculty  member   said  they were  considering  adapting the textbook  for new learning goals , I made the Pressbooks XML file for my textbook available  for   download . With this file, she could  easily  import   my  book  into  her   own Pressbooks   project, rather than manually copy and past e  content .  I also shared  with all faculty adapters  quizzes created by a colleague who had previously adopted the book."
"39" "Scaling up:  Multi- institutional collaborations  and  OER"
"40" "During the  2019-2020  academic year ,  I  led a team of faculty, researchers, students, and  practitioners  in creating  a  graduate  research methods  open textbook.   This  project is currently in  the  beta testing  phase .  Th e  l essons highlighted  here stem  from my work as project manager  in  what became a  forty -person team ."
"41" "Build a team"
"42" "I  recruited  a core group of authors whose work I knew to be of high quality and who shared a similar  philosophy for  teaching research methods .  My co-authors were  a part of  my  professional network ,  including three former PhD cohort members and a  teaching  mentor .  In addition to spreading the workload, our diverse authorship team created content  reflecting a lesser  degree of the  white male perspective,  which was  an important criticism of my  sole-authored  textbook .  These a uthors , coming from diverse identities themselves, also  draw from a wide range of research experience i n government, nonprofit, and academic  positions .  Together, we  proposed  a multi-institutional collaboration in which we would create an open textbook and suite of resources . These products would help us  redesign  the   introductory research methods courses for social work graduate students at three universities—Radford University, Virginia Commonwealth University, and Monmouth University —to use only OER ."
"43" "Recruit  specialist s"
"44" "In addition to  authors , our  project  required experts in scholarly and open publication ,  whom  I recruited via my professional network and the Virtual Library of Virginia .  For those with  narrow networks, i t is important to note other potential sources of recruitment ,  including those specific to open education  ( such as  the  Rebus Community ) a nd those specific to social work  (such as   the BPD- L   listserv  community ) .  Our team of specialists included an  open licensing and copyright coordinator  who  assisted with finding openly licensed materials, training authors on copyright and open licensing, and creating an attributions index .  Our  learning spaces architect  lead built the  textbook and student workbook  and  hosted the  resources  on his server .  A  social work  professor also created quiz questions for each chapter .  Quiz questions and other ancillaries  facilitate adoption, as faculty are accustomed to receiving them alongside commercial textbooks."
"45" "Partner with students"
"46" "Our  team engaged students from the  inception  of the content creation process . T hree student s   who showed promise in previous MSW  research methods classes  provided  formative and summative feedback  for a small stipend .  Through each step of the process,  student  feedback  grounded  the project in  what  students  truly  needed to know in order to be successful  in research classes .  One student advisor volunteered to write exemplars for the student workbook  to  guide students through  example  research projects .  Other  student contributors  provided  feedback on the workbook exemplars  and  created slideshows for each chapter ."
"47" "Solicit  peer review"
"48" "A longside  student advisors, three  senior  faculty advisors provided formative feedback on early products ,   as well as summative feedback  on final drafts .  Upon  submitting an open call for reviewers on the BPD-L listserv,  over  thirty faculty reviewers  volunteer ed  to provide additional review .  These reviews brought additional expertise to the team,  made  the  relevance of the  resource  more widespread , and laid the groundwork for a community  of faculty adopters,  adapters , and collaborators .  This is of import, as research indicates that faculty describe the  most  important  barrier to OER adoption is  related to  concerns about quality  ( Seaman & Seaman, 2018 ) .  These concerns may arise b ecause   open publication lacks  a  commercial publisher  to provide a  quality indicator .  The final text will include a peer review statement including institutional affiliations of all reviewers and how  review  comments were integrated."
"49" "Secure  funding"
"50" "A lthough OER are free to students, they are not free to create .  As teaching and contingent faculty, authors   were unable to take sabbaticals  (commonly the time when  books are written ) .  However, w e were grateful to receive  a $23,750 grant through the Virtual Library  of  Virginia .  Grants supporting OER generally focus on high enrollment courses,  but o ur team was able to achieve similar  student impact by redesigning average-size classes at multiple institutions .  We  estimated  our project  would reach 175 students ,  and given the cost of the commercial resources replaced ($ 175-$200 ), students would save about $29,500 in the first year  of implementation .  OER grant programs  are becoming more common on the university and state level, and multi-institutional partnerships will be key for social work faculty to win grants over  faculty  redesigning high-enrollment classes in other disciplines.   This f inancial support helps legitimize the  often-invisible  labor that goes into open  resource  production ( Versluis  et al., 2019)."
"51" "Dedicate a project manager"
"52" "In transitioning from a sole - author to a team-based project,  the  biggest surprise was  the increase in  time spent on administrative tasks .  As the project manager, I was responsible for coordinating paperwork, funding, contracts, and emergencies .  I relied heavily on the  Rebus community guide to  publishing  open textbooks (so far)  (Hyde & Ashok, 2019)  which helped me  formalize j ob roles and responsibilities  with in  a large team and guided me through each step of the process .  However ,  time spent on project management ma de it difficult to complete my work as  an  author .  Future textbook projects may want to consider using a dedicated project manager  or  an individual  with few er   writing tasks ."
"53" "Set realistic timelines"
"54" "As a neophyte project manager, I designed our team’s production timeline to work with my summer teaching and administrative responsibilities .  After missed deadlines early in the process, I  knew  our  timeline was  overly ambitious .  Textbooks take at least a year to complete .  A reasonable estimate for production is about one chapter per month , with  at least one  additional  month for visual design and publication  at the  close  of the project .  While our authors and reviewers were grateful  to receive  more realistic deadlines , lengthened  timelines locked them into our project  for   more time than  they originally anticipated ."
"55" "Unlocking the potential of OER"
"56" "Both  the undergraduate and graduate  open textbook projects  are simple implementations of  OER .  They  replace   textbooks and ancillary resources  currently available from commercial publishers   with openly licensed materials covering the same content .  Yet, the potential for OER in social work runs  far deeper ."
"57" "Localization  & decolonization"
"58" "OER  enables   faculty to localize and decolonize learning materials .  For example,   textbooks on child welfare  might use common core  content and localized content based on   state  regulations, trends, and client populations  (see   Lynham , 2018  for an example ).  As  the field of S ocial  W ork looks to decolonize its curriculum, it may  draw from  efforts  such as  those from   Maskwacis  Cultural College   which  adapted open textbooks to reflect indigenous perspectives on sociology and earth science   (Farrow,  n.d. ) ."
"59" "Open pedagogy"
"60" "Knowledge production and transfer in  my  OER projects  r eified the role of faculty as knowledge  creator  and  students as knowledge recipients. While student  review  and a diverse authorship team  mitigated these problems to a small degree, OER enables  the use of  more transformative approaches to knowledge production. There are numerous examples of textbooks and other resources written collaboratively with students as part of classroom assignments (see  Mays, n.d.  for more examples ) ."
"61" "Community building"
"62" "O pen resource creation, adaptation, and remix creates a  democratized  community of practice around teaching a topic  as well as  inviting collaboration and peer-to-peer learning .  T he connections, community, and criticism that comes from sharing  renders  community-driven resources more robust and relevant over time.  OER  scales the  informal  resource - sharing between colleagues, on community listservs, or at academic conferences .  Contrary to  the  oft en -unacknowledged  individualistic norms of intellectual property  that govern the social work discipline , OER  honors  the need to credit content creators while  also   enabling  free   and transformational engagement with   learning  resources .  Although OER are touted largely as a cost-saving and accessibility measure for students, it is truly the  associated  community-building aspects that will  render  OER a lasting and transformative pedagogical practice in higher education."
"63" "References"
"64" "Allen, N. (2018).  $1 Billion in savings through open educational resources . Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition. Retrieved from:  https://sparcopen.org/news/2018/1-billion-in-savings-through-open-educational-resources/"
"65" "Blackstone, A. (2012).  Principles of sociological inquiry: Quantitative and qualitative methods . Saylor Foundation.  Retrieved from:  https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/textbooks/principles-of-sociological-inquiry-qualitative-and-quantitative-methods"
"66" "Bolin, B. L., Lee, K. H.,  GlenMaye , L. F., & Yoon, D. P. (2012). Impact of research orientation on attitudes toward research of social work students.  Journal of Social Work Education, 48 (2), 223-243."
"67" "Clinton, V., & Khan, S. (2019). Efficacy of open textbook adoption on learning performance and course withdrawal rates: A meta-analysis.  AERA Open .   https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858419872212"
"68" "Colvard, N. B., Watson, C. E., & Park, H. (2018). The impact of open educational resources on various student success metrics.  International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education ,  30 (2), 262-276."
"69" "Farrow, R. (n.d.).  An  OER   implementation in  Maskwacis  Cultural College, an indigenous college . OER World Map. Retrieved from:  https://oerworldmap.org/resource/urn:uuid:3aac1cfc-42fe-4216-bd3a-a1981da4c3f1"
"70" "Frederiksen, L. & Phelps, S. F. (2017).  Literature reviews for education and nursing graduate students . Rebus Community.  Retrieved from:  https://press.rebus.community/literaturereviewsedunursing/"
"71" "Florida Virtual Campus (2016).  2016 student textbook survey . Retrieved from:  https://florida.theorangegrove.org/og/items/3a65c507-2510-42d7-814c-ffdefd394b6c/1/viewcontent/bd29caf5-1a63-417d-aae9-5999e05bc594?_sl.t=true"
"72" "Hilton, J. (2019). Open educational resources, student efficacy, and user perceptions: a synthesis of research published between 2015 and 2018.  Educational Technology Research and Development , 1-24."
"73" "Hilton, J., Wiley, D., Fischer, L., & Nyland, R. (2016).  Guidebook to research on open educational resources adoption . Open Education Group. Retrieved from:  http://research.cehd.umn.edu/otn/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/OER-Research-Guidebook.pdf"
"74" "Hyde, Z. W. & Ashok, A. (2019).  The Rebus guide to publishing open textbooks (so far) . Rebus Community.  Retrieved from:  https://press.rebus.community/the-rebus-guide-to-publishing-open-textbooks/"
"75" "Lynham , J. (2018).  Principles of microeconomics Hawaii edition . Retrieved from:  http://oer.hawaii.edu/project/principles-of-microeconomics-hawaii-edition/"
"76" "Mays, E. (Ed.) (n.d.)  A guide to making open textbooks with students . Retrieved from:  https://press.rebus.community/makingopentextbookswithstudents/"
"77" "Nyamweya , M. (2018).  A new method for estimating  OER   savings . Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition. Retrieved from:  https://sparcopen.org/news/2018/estimating-oer-student-savings/"
"78" "Ruth, D. (2019).  More than half of all colleges and 2.94 million students using free OpenStax textbooks this year . OpenStax. Retrieved from:  https://openstax.org/press/more-half-all-colleges-and-294-million-students-using-free-openstax-textbooks-year"
"79" "Seaman, J. E. & Seaman, J. (2018).  Freeing the textbook: Educational resources in U.S. higher education, 2018 . Babson Survey Research Group. Retrieved from:  https://www.onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/freeingthetextbook2018.pdf"
"80" "Versluis , A., Ashman, M., Zenon, E., Brown, M., Lauritsen, K. Hyde, Z. W., &  Essmiller , K. (2019). April office hours: Defining the invisible  labour  of  OER . In  Rebus Community Office Hours . Retrieved from:  https://rebus.foundation/2019/04/29/april-office-hours-defining-the-invisible-labour-of-oer-audio-and-chat-transcripts/"
