AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.15

Pp.188-197

Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial Egyptian Humour: A Study of
Khaled Al Khamissi’s Taxi (2006)

Sara A. Aldawood
Department of English
College of Languages & Translation, King Saud University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Translators face immense challenges translating humor in a way that does not lose the essence of
the original text. These difficulties are especially notable in translations between languages as
disparate as Arabic and English, as they come from different language families. The present study
aims to understand the strategies required for translating colloquial Egyptian humor into English
and highlights the issues involved in the process of this translation. For this purpose, the study
selected the book Taxi by Khaled Al Khamissi, as it is composed of 58 fictional monologues of
taxi drivers in Cairo. The study highlights the challenges faced in translating colloquial Egyptian
humor, along with the cultural differences that hinder its translation. The results show that
translation is a major hurdle for culture-based and word-based humor because of cultural and
linguistic differences; miscommunication and failure to translate humorous intent are due to lack
of knowledge of the source culture. The impact of the humor is not transferred to the target text
because a literal translation of word-based humour is not possible. A combination of procedures
is used to transfer a humorous effect when translating culture-based humor. The study concludes
that universal humour is easier to translate than culture-based humour, as the translator is familiar
with the concepts involved.
Keywords: colloquial language, Egyptian humor, Khaled Al Khamissi’s Taxi, translation
strategies
Cites as: Aldawood, S. A. (2019). Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial
Egyptian Humour: A Study of Khaled Al Khamissi’s Taxi (2006) Arab World English Journal for
Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 188-197.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.15

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

188

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

The role of language translation is highly significant in promoting the effective exchange
of ideas and experiences between different cultures. Through translations, target text readers may
be exposed to a myriad of cultures, customs, and traditions that they may otherwise be unaware of
(Brislin & Freimanis, 2001). The translator ensures that the essence of the original text is
maintained across different languages by providing a comprehensive and accurate translation.
Thus, it follows that any incompetence on the part of the translator results in poor textual
translations, which in turn leads to a low understanding and level of communication overall
between different cultures. Translations have occurred between many world languages, including
English and Arabic. However, various complexities arise in effectively translating between these
two languages because of their highly disparate nature and form. One of the aspects of language
that has proven a challenge to translate from English to Arabic, and vice versa, is humor. Humour
is considered a significant component of humanity and has deep roots in cultural and linguistic
contexts. As a result, it tends to play a vital role in enabling intercultural communication.
Humour can be classified into three main types: physical (depending on actions), verbal
(depending on words), and visual (depending on images). Studies have noted that the use of
techniques such as irony, ridicule, and exaggeration can produce humor without necessarily
evoking laughter (Berger, 1993). However, the cultural and language-specific elements of humour
present complexities in enabling effective translation that extend beyond cultural and linguistic
borders. Specifically, translators face challenges in translating elements of humor that are simply
not translatable without reducing the impact of their meaning. Therefore, their capability in
searching for creative solutions to counter these issues has been sorely tested.
Studies have discussed the prominent role humor has played in defining Egyptian culture
since pharaonic times (Harutyunyan, 2012; Houlihan, 2001). In fact, Egypt is greatly recognized
in the Arab world for its humor. In the wake of the Arab Spring of 2010, the creative use of humour
by Egyptians to defy censorship and criticize the president and government were widely noted
(Harutyunyan, 2012). The objective of this study is to analyze a book entitled Taxi (2006) by
Khaled Al Khamissi, which provides many examples of Egyptian political humor. In this book,
taxi drivers ironically express their opinions about the government and their former leader,
President Mubarak, and the oppression of Egyptians during his presidency. They also draw
attention to the poor economic conditions of their country and their own difficult lives in a sarcastic
and humorous way using colloquial language.
The topic of the translation of humor from Arabic to English has not been studied
extensively. The majority of the previous studies have emphasized humour translations from
English into another foreign language. Therefore, this study is novel in that it addresses an
extensive understanding of humor translations into English from Arabic. A key feature of this
study is its emphasis on the need for translators to develop an understanding of colloquial language
as opposed to solely focusing on standard language. Since colloquial language is commonly used
by the public, it is essential that its significance is adequately addressed. This study aims to
contribute to a deeper understanding of the problems and challenges faced in the translation of
Arabic humor. Therefore, the following research questions have been developed:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

189

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

1. What are the challenges faced in translating colloquial Egyptian humor?
2. How do cultural differences hinder the translation of colloquial humor?
3. What are the strategies employed by the translator to translate such type of humour?
Theoretical Background
The translation of linguistic jokes from Arabic to English is challenged by the incongruities
present within the specific language. Usually, the process of translation results in cultural and
linguistic problems owing to the incompatible and incorrect meanings of linguistics in a given joke
(El-Yasin, 1997). At times, the jokes depict accidental facts concerning Arabic culture and
language that have no equivalents with the target language. One needs to decipher the meanings
of a given joke to attain amusement and laughter (Nash, 1985).
Defining Humour
Humour is commonly understood as the ability to be funny and to provide amusement by
provoking people to giggle, chuckle, and laugh. Scholars from different fields, such as linguistics,
psychology, and sociology, have studied humor closely. Vandaele (2002) observes that works on
humor lack a proper description and definition of humor, and explains that humor is anything that
has a humorous effect. Moreover, he emphasizes that humor is not just an experience of positive
excitement, but it may be unappreciated when the outcome is that of disgust or disappointment
(Vandaele, 2002).
Different scholars define humor and its various functions and formulated many theories of
it. It is important to note that humor, a multifaceted phenomenon, cannot be integrated into a single
general theory. Attardo (1994) explores different linguistic theories of humor that are divided into
four classifications: structuralist theory, semiotic theory, script-based theory, and sociolinguistic
theory. Raskin (1985) defines two modes of communication: the first, no–bona fide
communication, is a humorous form of communication, while the second, bona fide
communication, is more serious and earnest. Bona fide communication is involved in conveying a
variety of information types, such as those concerning politics or current affairs (Raskin, 1985).
According to Newmark (1981), a joke that is capable of evoking amusement can be
compensated by a word or phrase that possesses a different but associated meaning. The complete
explanation of humor as a phenomenon has been suggested by Aristotle, Bergson, Hobbles,
Bateson, and Kant. Their theories have significantly contributed toward the understanding of
humor along with certain limitations and deficiencies (Alharthi, 2015, 2016).
Translation of Humour
Vandaele (2002) notes that the translation of humor is not as straightforward as the
translation of other types of writing and that it varies qualitatively from other types of translation.
Evidence suggests that translating humor is more difficult. When translating humor, one must
dedicate more attention to the cultural and linguistic aspects of the text. When the translator gives
extra credence to none–practice-oriented, linguistic, and cultural analyses, he or she can overcome
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

190

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

the reproduction challenges. However, translators do feel overwhelmed and are disheartened by
the complexity and the intricacy of the whole concept of humor.
Schmitz (2002) states that there are three types of humor: reality-based or universal
humour, word-based or linguistic humor, and cultural-based humour. Universal humor comprises
humour that has to do with the general functioning and running of the world. He suggests that
beginning translators must start with universal humour, which is relatively simple, and then move
on to cultural humour, which requires more learning and study. Eventually, the translator can move
on to linguistic humour, the most challenging and difficult type for foreign-language students. The
linguistic type of humor translation is so complex that most of the time, the translator resorts to
replacing a joke with a different joke from his or her collection (Schmitz, 2002).
According to Nida (1964), the process of translation completely indicates the structural
equivalence of the translated texts, in which the text is reproduced in its literal meaning. This type
of translation permits the readers to identify the possible source language concerned with the
customs, the meaning of the expression, and manner of thought. The principle of equivalent effect
provides the basis for translating a text that produces dynamic equivalence rather than a formal
one. This type of translation aims to complete the natural expression related to the receptor modes
of behavior. The behavior is relevant within the context of its own culture and significance.
Translatability and Untranslatability
Some types of linguistic humor are untranslatable and serve as a significant source of
discussion amongst translation researchers. Attardo (1994) notes that Cicero categorized linguistic
humor into the two groups of referential humor and verbal humor. He argued that verbal humor
was untranslatable, as it included graphemic and phonemic representation of the humorous
elements. Many scholars and translators use this specific distinction (Attardo, 1994). Laurian
(1992) explains that verbal humor can be translated by using functional elements contingent on
the ability of the translator. Additionally, he asserts that the functional approach applies to
referential humor too, as it is culture-bound and may not have the same effect on the target
language.
Complications often occur when translating cultural jokes. Although these jokes might be
similar in terms of semantics, there are missing features that render some of them untranslatable.
These missing features are the cultural and pragmatic aspects (Raphaelson-West, 1989). When
translating cultural humor, the consideration of cultural issues is imperative. It is a challenge for
the translator to decide whether to use a literal translation of a joke that does not have the same
humourous effect in the target language or to use a different joke in the target language that
produces the same funny effect from the source language.
Egyptian Humour
The use of humor as a tool for communication in Egypt has been noted since ancient times
(Harutyunyan, 2012). William Fry, an American sociologist, indicates that the use of humor may
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

191

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

date to dynastic times (Williams & Chesterman, 2002). Furthermore, Houlihan (2001) maintains
in his Wit and Humour in Ancient Egypt that the ancient Egyptians were thoroughly charmed by
writings that incorporated word play, wit, puns, irony, satire, and other highly sophisticated literary
elements. The author asserts that the Egyptian artisans who built the tombs of the pharaohs had a
unique sense of wit and humor (Houlihan, 2001). Additionally, the entire Arab world is very
familiar with Egyptians’ love of a healthy dose of humor. The Arab people use the phrase ibn
nukta, which means “son of the jokes”, to describe Egyptians. It may be difficult for an Egyptian
to translate a joke because Egyptian humor is rooted in the language itself.
The present study has provided analysis and discussion of the key issues in translating
humor between English and Arabic and focusses particularly on strategies for the translation of
humor between these two very different languages and cultures. The parameters, including spatial
and temporal constraints, source texts, and natural humor require further research and
understanding of the wide cultural and linguistic gaps between the two languages and cultures.
Material and Methods
Research Data
The study used the collection of short stories entitled Taxi to understand the challenges
faced by translators in translating humor. This collection is composed of 58 short stories written
by Khaled Al Khamissi. Dedicated to the lives of poor people (Al Khamissi, 2014), Taxi provides
insights into modern Egypt and Cairo by narrating the fictional stories of taxi drivers whom the
author met during his journeys. The English version of this book, initially translated by Aflame
Books in 2008, was republished by Bloomsbury Qatar in 2011. The translated book was rejected
by native English and Arabic speakers because of some issues. Al Khamissi commented that the
collection was difficult to translate because of the lack of an established tradition of translating
colloquial Arabic. The writer stated that working with colloquial Arabic was new for the
translators, who had no prior knowledge regarding it, although they were experienced in translating
standard Arabic content (Johnson, 2011).
Taxi has been chosen as the object of study in part because it has achieved great success
and has been translated into ten different languages (Al Khamissi, 2014). The book is also rich in
humorous elements and has played a role in the revival of the Egyptian dialect in the literature of
modern Egypt because the text tends to explore different political and social issues. The most
distinguishing factor of Taxi is that it is written in two different languages, standard Arabic and
colloquial Egyptian Arabic. It is important to discuss Wright’s method of translating Egyptian
humor and discover the reason he decided to use standard English instead of cockney slang when
translating the conversations of taxi drivers.
Research Methods
The study, a comparative analysis of Taxi and its English translation, investigates the source
text (ST) and randomly chooses several examples that represent a case study of colloquial Egyptian
humor. The translation strategies have been determined based on the framework proposed by
Mailhac (1996). Back-translation is not possible in cases when the translator has already used a
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

192

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

literal translation for the same word or expression. The translation strategies are identified and
analyzed to see whether they successfully transferred the humorous effect of the text.
Data Collection
The book Taxi by Khaled Al Khamissi was selected for this study. It comprises 58 monologues
of taxi drivers in Cairo, whom the author met. The author produced a series of stories depicting
the experiences of different drivers to capture the broadest possible picture of modern Egypt and
modern Cairo. This is an effective book for analysis because it has captured the main point at
which the taxis are just considered a mean of transportation, rather than becoming a topic of debate.
The immense cost and toll of Egypt’s endemic corruption is among the major points made by Al
Khamissi and is well-illustrated by numerous stories. The humorous elements, including the
discourses, have been extracted and categorized according to the model proposed by Schmitz
(2002):
•

Word-based humor: “‫( ”وبعدين اللي حصل في العراق ده احتالل رسمي نظمي فهمي‬Al Khamissi, 2006,
p. 52), back-translated as “Anyway, what happened in Iraq was an official Nazmi Fahmi
occupation”. “Nazmi” and “Fahmi” are proper nouns, which may indicate that this is the
occupation of a person named Nazmi Fahmi. However, the speaker in the ST uses these
nouns as a fixed expression to mean official and organized occupation. It has been said that
Rasmi Fahmi Nazmi was the name of a character in an old Egyptian film called ‫آه من حواء‬,
and people have borrowed it as a fixed expression to mean that something is official and
organized, as in this context. This sentence is translated as “Anyway, what happened in
Baghdad was an official occupation” (Al Khamissi, 2006, 2011). Here, the translator
deliberately omits the words ‫نظمي فهمي‬, which are the humorous elements in this sentence,
and keeps ‫ رسمي‬or “official”, which is enough to convey the intended meaning without
transferring the humorous effect. He chooses to do this because the effect created by the
original words is language-based and thus untranslatable.

•

Culture-based humour: “)‫ بقيت عامل زي’ ‘فرج هللا’ (فرج هللا ماركة لحم مفروم‬،‫”بعدها الحياة فرمتني فرم‬
(Al Khamissi, 2006, p. 41), back-translated as “After that life minced me up; I became like
Faragallah” (Faragallah is a brand of minced meat). The taxi driver here tries to make fun
of himself by claiming that his difficult life has minced him up like Faragallah. The
translator uses a combination of procedures here to translate the phrase: cultural borrowing
in not changing the brand Faragallah and compensation in adding “minced meat” to make
it more understandable. His translation is, “After that life really minced me up; I became
like Faragallah minced meat’ (Al Khamissi, 2006, 2011). Then the translator adds a
footnote: “Faragallah is a brand of preserved meat”. This footnote is available within the
text itself in the ST (not as a footnote) as a clarification by the author to ST readers who
are not familiar with this brand name. Here, the reader of the translated text (TT) will be
able to understand the intended meaning, and the humorous effect is successfully rendered.
However, it may not be perceived by the TT readers in the same way as it is perceived by
the ST readers because of the use of the footnote. The use of footnotes should be limited

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

193

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

as much as possible when translating jokes because they can impair their humorous effects
(Tisgam, 2009).
•

Universal or reality-based humor: “‫( ”قالوا لألعور حنضربك على عينك‬Al Khamissi, 2006, p. 93).
The translator translates this example literally as “They tell the one-eyed man they’ll hit
him in the eye” (Al Khamissi, 2006, 2011). This expression means that the one-eyed man
will be indifferent if someone hits his eye because his eye is already damaged.

Results and Discussion
Word-Based Humour
Example 1:
(Al Khamissi, 2006, p. 72) ‘‫’وح ألقى العيال مش واكلة وأمهم حايسة واليصة‬
“I’d find the children hadn’t eaten and their mother at her wit’s end” (Al Khamissi, 2006, 2011).
In the above sentence, the driver has explained the messiness of his house when he gets
home. The driver used the two words (‫ )حايسة واليصة‬to mean that his wife is confused and does
not know where to start when dealing with the children. The translator uses cultural substitution
here since this is an example of word-based humor. The interesting part here is that, in Arabic,
these words rhyme humorously. Some Egyptians use the word ‫ اليصة‬without even knowing what
it means, with the word ‫ حايسة‬as a fixed expression. One of its meanings, as indicated in the Lesan
Al Arab dictionary (2014), is “moving one’s eyes left and right as if wanting something”. The
translator has substituted this expression with the English idiom “at her wit’s end”, which means
“drained of all ideas or mental resources or utterly confused and frustrated” (The Free Dictionary,
2014). The meaning of the text, then, is rendered successfully; however, the equivalent rhyme
could not be rendered due to differences between English and Arabic.
Example 2:
‫ باعتبار إن قومي ده يبقى‬..‫ بعد ماخلصوا المشروع طلعوا لهم وقالوا لهم ماينفعش ده أمن قومي وأمن خالتي‬،‫“أهو ده اللي حصل‬
(Al Khamissi, 2006, p.113( ”.‫جدي‬
Back-translation: “It’s national security or my auntie’s security or whatever, in which case I
suppose that ‘my nation’ would be my grandfather’s!”
Translation: “That’s what happened. After they’d finished work in the project, they jumped on
them and said it wouldn’t do. It’s national security or my auntie’s security or whatever, in which
case I suppose the ‘national’ bit would be my grandfather’s!” (Al Khamissi, 2006/2011)
This example demonstrates word play resulting in humor as the driver makes use of the
homonymous relationship between the word ‫قومي‬, both an adjective which means national and the
noun that means “my nation”. Then, he sarcastically uses other kinship nouns because he is not
convinced of the claimed relationship between the project and national security. The translator
uses a combination of procedures. He translates the first part literally, which does not transfer the
humorous effect completely; this humor is lost in translation because in English, there is no such
homonymous relationship between the words. In the second part, the translator uses a
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

194

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

compensation strategy by adding the noun ‘bit’ to avoid having an incomplete sentence, because
in the Arabic sentence, the driver ironically uses ‫ ’’قومي‬as a noun.
Culture-Based Humour
Example:
(Al Khamissi, 2006, p. 189) “‫”عارفين إيه أحسن هدية تجيبوها للمدام؟ تذكرة على عبارة السالم‬
“Know what’s the best present you can get your wife? A ticket on el-Salam ferry to Safaga!” (Al
Khamissi, 2006, 2011)
This joke is associated with cultural humor, as it does not seem funny to those individuals
having no background knowledge about the el-Salam ferry (most of the passengers died when the
ferry sank in 2006). A combination of procedures has been used here by the translator. He has
translated the name of the ferry and compensated by adding “Safaga”, which was the destination
of the doomed ferry. Although the translator fails to transmit the humorous effect in full, many of
the TT readers may not be familiar with this tragic accident. This understanding is needed to get
the main point of the joke, which is that men want to get rid of their wives.
Universal-Based Humour
Example:
(Al Khamissi, 2006, p. 45) “‫”أنا شخصيًا مش عارف ايه اللي ممكن يطلع في أمخاخهم غير الصبار‬
“Personally, I don’t know what will grow in their brains beside cactus!” (Al Khamissi, 2006,
2011).
With the above statement, the driver describes how his children are deprived of any means
of entertainment by saying, “I don’t know what will grow in their brains beside cactus”. Cactus is
a prickly and bitter plant with a base that stores water. In Arab culture, it represents patience and
bitterness. The driver uses the word cactus to express his children’s patience and struggles with
not enjoying life. The translator uses literal translation here, which expresses the intended meaning
and transfers the humorous effect of sarcasm.
Conclusion
The translation of humor is difficult and challenging; moreover, its execution depends on
various factors. A translator is likely to face many difficulties when translating colloquial Egyptian
humor into another language. The most significant problem is that a translator of humor must
contend with cultural and linguistic differences, which makes it a challenge for a translator to
translate word-based and culture-based humor. What is considered humorous in Arabic may not
be considered humorous in English, and vice versa. Understanding colloquial language may be
difficult for someone who does not belong to the area or country in which the language is spoken.
Even, It may not be understood by non-Egyptian Arabic-speaking people. Many difficulties are
faced by translators when translating colloquial Egyptian humor into any other language. It is
difficult to decide whether to keep the humorous text or omit it; such texts may be of great
importance in the source text, but the translator may not be aware of it. It is necessary to search
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

195

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

for creative solutions to transfer the humorous effect in the translated text if it is a main element in
the text and not merely background information. The translator may use a combination of
procedures to translate word-based or culture-based humor since he or she deals with more than
just words. However, literal translation may frequently be used to translate universal humor which
is considered the easiest type to translate.
About the Author:
Sara Aldawood, is a lecturer at the College of Languages and Translation, King Saud University.
She got her MA degree in Translating: Arabic- English at a Distinction level from the University
of Salford, Manchester.
References
Al Khamissi, K. (2006). Taxi: Hawadit al mashawir. Cairo: Dar Alshorouk.
Al Khamissi, K. (2011). Taxi (J. Wright, Trans.). Qatar: Bloomsbury.
Al Khamissi, K. (2014). About me/Khaled Al Khamissi. Retrieved from:
http://www.khaledalkhamissi.com/about-me/english
Alharthi, A. A. A. (2016). Challenges and strategies of subtitling humour: A case study of the
American sitcom Seinfeld, with particular reference to English and Arabic (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Salford).
At her wit’s end. (2014). In The Free Dictionary. Retrieved from:
http://www.thefreedictionary.com
Attardo, S. (1994). Linguistic theories of humour. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Berger, A. A. (1993). An anatomy of humour. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Brislin, R. W., & Freimanis, C. (2001). Back-translation. In An encyclopaedia of translation:
Chinese-English, English-Chinese. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press.
El-Yasin, M. (1997). The translatability of Arabic jokes into English. Meta: Journal des
traducteurs/Meta: Translators’ Journal, 42, 670–676. https://doi.org/10.7202/002706ar
Harutyunyan, S. (2012). Humor: Egypt’s revolutionary ally. Cartoon Movement. Retrieved from:
http://blog.cartoonmovement.com/2012/07/humor-egypts-revolutionary-ally.html
Houlihan, P. F. (2001). Wit and humour in ancient Egypt. London: Rubicon.
Ibn Manzur, M. (2014). ‫ معجم لسان العرب‬. Retrieved from http://www.lesanarab.com
Johnson, A. (2011). Egyptian author gives fuel for thought. The National. Retrieved from:
http://www.thenational.ae/arts-culture/books/egyptian-author-gives-fuel-for-thought
Laurian, A. (1992). Possible/impossible translation of jokes. Humour, 51(2), 111–127.
https://doi.org/10.1515/humr.1992.5.1-2.111
Mailhac, J. (1996). The formulation of translation strategies for cultural references. In C.
Hoffmann Ed., Language, culture and communication in contemporary Europe. 132–151.
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Nash, W. (1985). The Language of humor: Style and technique in comic discourse. White Plains,
NY: Longman.
Newmark, P. (1981). Approaches to Translation (Language Teaching Methodology Senes).
Oxford: Pergamon Press. Doi: https://doi. org/10.1017.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

196

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Understanding the Strategies Used to Translate Colloquial

Aldawood

Nida, E. A. (1964). Toward a science of translating: With special reference to principles and
procedures involved in Bible translating. Leiden. Netherlands: E.J. Brill.
Raphaelson-West, D. S. (1989). On the feasibility and strategies of translating humour. Meta, 341,
128–141. https://doi.org/10.7202/003913ar
Raskin, V. (1985). Semantic mechanisms of humour. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel.
Schmitz, J. R. (2002). Humor as a pedagogical tool in foreign language and translation
courses. Humor, 15(1), 89-114.
Tisgam, K. H. (2009). Translating cultural humour: Theory and practice. Wasit Journal for
Humanities, 59, 79–121.
Vandaele,
J.
(2002).
Introduction.
The
Translator,
82,
149–172.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13556509.2002.10799130
Williams, J., & Chesterman, A. (2002). The map: A beginner’s guide to doing research in
translation studies. Manchester: St. Jerome.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

197

