Central Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Development Facility for Enhancing
Government Obligation and Efficiency in PPP Project

Md. Abu Rashed
PPP Advisor, PPP Office
Prime Minister‟s Office
Government of Bangladesh
Mobile: +88 01678005341
E-mail: rashed@pppo.gov.bd
Md. Mahmudul Alam
Senior Lecturer
School of Economics, Finance & Banking (SEFB)
College of Business (COB)
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM)
Sintok, Kedah, Malaysia
Email: rony000@gmail.com
Mobile: +60182467050
(Corresponding Author)
Yusnidah Bt Ibrahim
Professer
School of Economics, Finance & Banking (SEFB)
College of Business (COB)
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM)
Sintok, Kedah, Malaysia
Email: yibrahim@uum.edu.my

Citation Reference:
Rashed, M.A., Alam, M.M., and Ibrahim, Y. 2017. Central Public-Private Partnership
(PPP) Development Facility for Enhancing Government Obligation and Efficiency in
PPP Project, International Journal of Information Technology Project Management,
Vol. 8(4): 66-77. (Online) https://www.igi-global.com/article/central-public-privatepartnership-ppp-development-facility-for-enhancing-government-obligation-andefficiency-in-ppp-project/187162

This is a pre-publication copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

1

Central Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Development Facility for Enhancing
Government Obligation and Efficiency in PPP Project
Md. Abu Rashed, Prime Minister‟s Office, Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh
Md. Mahmudul Alam, Universiti Utara Malaysia, Malaysia
Yusnidah Bt Ibrahim, Universiti Utara Malaysia, Malaysia
ABSTRACT
The implications of public-private partnership (PPP) concept has gained utmost attention
from different governments around the world because of the opportunities inherent in it in
terms of overcoming budgetary constraints, improved service quality, enhanced efficiencies
in procurement and risk management, and prospects of generating managerial and technical
capabilities. The government obligations in PPP projects are often limited to feasibility study,
transaction support and implementing linked government or public sector projects which
subsequently raise the question regarding how the required funds should be mobilized by the
government for these services as upfront development cost. Generally, any government
agency driving a PPP project has to secure budgetary allocation from the central authority for
performing the government-side obligations, which is often a complicated and time
consuming process due to other priorities of the central treasury. To overcome this challenge,
establishment of a central PPP development facility by the government is required. The
ability to create and manage such a facility within the government mechanism will ensure
seamless development and implementation of PPP projects by different government agencies
and will contribute to foster a good relationship between the government and the private
sector investors.
JEL Classifications: H54, O18, O22
Keywords: Public-Private Partnership (PPP), Infrastructure project, Project Financing, PPP
Project, Project management, Project Development Fund (PDF)
INTRODUCTION
A public project is generally financed, owned and operated by government authorities or
utility companies. However, in a private infrastructure project or in a public-private
partnership (PPP) project, the development, financing, procurement, construction and
operation of the project are carried out through a private investor under different schemes
such as build-operate-transfer (BOT), build-own-operate (BOO), build-own-operate-transfer
(BOOT) etc. In reality, a PPP project is not only a project, but also a business for a long
period of time to be carried out by a private investor through partnerships between
government and a private firm to provide services formerly supplied by the government alone
(UNESCAP, 2005).
Considering the fundamental that investment is meant to come from the private sector
in most common PPP projects (though there are some PPP schemes that may not require
private sector investment), some upfront activities are required from the part of the
government to attract potential investors (Rashed, 2011). Prior to embarking on a PPP
project, the government studies the feasibility and benefits of the project, mainly in the areas
of serving the interest of the country and the relevant sector with the objective to ensure
sustainable and quality services to people (Alam, 2010; Hatefi & Seyedhoseini, 2012). The
government considers economic, technical and some commercial factors in its feasibility
2

study for a comparative assessment of the project proposals (UNESCAP, 2005) and in order
to decide the level of regulations to be framed on the business. Both the government and the
private investor have some obligations in a PPP project, so the government devises the terms
and conditions of the business which is reflected in the contract document, which eventually
is used to specify the rights and obligations of the private investor as well as the government
(World Bank & Inter-American Development Bank, 1998). The ultimate success of a PPP
project depends on the government‟s obligation to follow-up and on the recommendations of
advisors based on the feasibility, design, and manages of the final PPP contract (PPIAF,
2003). Nevertheless, availability of sufficient funds for the government or the specific
government body propels fast-track implementation of a PPP project, because it helps to
reduce bureaucracy, thus reduces process related lead time.
If these pre-implementation conditions are ensured by the government prior to
inviting private investors, it is expected to generate a level of confidence among the potential
investors, resulting in quality infrastructure services to the country people. Fulfillment of
these pre-implementation conditions is necessary for two purposes – (i) for advisory services
that may be needed by line ministries, executing agencies and other government bodies for
developing infrastructure projects; and (ii) for implementation of the linked government
sector projects which are predecessors for implementing any PPP project. The objective of
this paper is to propose a structure of a central advisory facility.
NECESSITY OF THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT FACILITY
A PPP project is generally different from a conventional public sector project because unlike
short-term construction projects, it is a business contract for a lengthy period of time.
Depending on the complexity of the clauses of the contract, a PPP project might entice the
private investors or drive them away. As a result, the government agency dealing with a
potential PPP project has to make an erudite estimate of the feasibility and viability of the
project in its very early stage. However, in reality many of the government bodies may not
possess the business skills and mindsets that are needed to identify and structure PPP
investment propositions such as front-end development of a PPP project. Despite these
limitations, essentially the PPP project identification and structuring should be driven by the
government (UNESCAP, 2008). Though private investors can identify some potential PPP
projects and provide unsolicited proposals to the government, it is the role of the government
to determine the feasibility and necessity of such project within its sector-wise plans and may
need to go for a competitive process to award the projects. In case of unsolicited PPP project
proposals, the proposing firm may enjoy some competitive advantages over others in terms of
preferential treatment in pre-qualification status or through some other incentives, but
generally every PPP proposal is subject to awarding through competitive tendering process.
Generally, the obligations of the government for a PPP project can be categorized as follows:
Defining the Project Capacity or Scopes

3

Two distinct perspectives are generally taken into account to define the scopes of a PPP
project. In one side, after necessary adjustments with the sector-wise plans, the value of the
project is determined through market and demand assessment, industry analysis and business
and financial assessment, macro-economic and social and environmental impact assessment,
etc. In another side, the terms of the contract and minimum equity percentage for the private
investor, the minimum expected performance standards, provisions of fiscal incentives and
repatriation of profit and capital, defining the mechanisms for establishing tariffs etc. are
finalized through defining the capacity of the project (Commonwealth of Australia, 2002).
Completion of Linked Projects and Facilitating Necessary Consents
For the realization of many PPP projects, some associated or linked projects need to be
carried out by public funds such as land acquisition, installation of gas pipelines and
transmission lines for IPP power plants, supply or relocation of utilities, approach roads etc.
In principle, the detailed feasibility report of a PPP project should identify all the linked
projects and the estimated cost for their implementation including a complete roadmap or
schedule of such implementation. In general, the cost of implementing linked projects for
large-scale PPP projects is significantly high, so difficulties often arise to secure funds on
time from traditional sources through government budgetary allocation. Moreover, the PPP
projects often face difficulties where the private investors complete their obligations but the
government fails to meet their part, resulting substantial financial burdens on the private
sector. As a result, instead of relying on traditional process of funding linked components of
PPP projects, the cost of these linked projects should be incorporated in the main PPP project
budget planning of the concerned executing agency.
As per the standard practice, after signing of the concession agreement, the winning
bidder secures its finances within a stipulated time period – referring to Condition Precedent
Period, which is generally less than six months for large PPP projects – and the government
completes its obligations including completion of associated or linked projects. The relevant
government bodies should prioritize the implementation of the linked projects and required
funds should be made available to finance them as per the contractual obligations. The timely
completion of these linked projects and acquiring necessary consents and approvals on time
is crucial for the successful execution of any large-scale PPP project; any undue delay may
result in a halt to the entire project for an unjustifiable period of time, ensuing significant
financial demurrages from the part of the government and delaying the completion of the
project. It is imperative that the linked projects must be completed before commencement of
the commercial operations of a PPP project.
The proposed arrangement of financing the linked projects also needs to be integrated
with the PPP policy framework. Considering the fact that the required funds for all linked
projects associated with the PPP projects will be very high in a fiscal year, the government
may decide to set aside the project development fund with sufficient allocation for the very
first year. After the first year of setting up the fund, the government (a neutral agency that
will be responsible for such fund, e.g. ministry of treasury or planning or central PPP Unit;
this has been discussed later in this paper) may look at the national PPP project pipeline and
planned implementation schedule and can identify the major projects that the government
wishes to develop in that particular fiscal year. A broad estimation of costs to be incurred for
implementing all the linked projects may be drawn for those selected PPP projects. Such
costs may be considered while allocating fund in the proposed facility for linked project
implementation. After spending the required expenses for linked project implementation from
the PPP development facility, the executing agency may later go toward traditional
4

government yearly budgetary allocation process for replenishing the facility with equal
amount. In such case the executing agency will develop traditional application to the central
budgetary allocation authority for replenishment of funds which is used for linked project
implementation from the PPP project development facility.
These challenges intensify when several PPP projects are implemented in multiple
sectors, exposing the projects to a large variety of circumstances and uncertainties. Under
such circumstances the government officials often face a multitude of complex situations
with regard to examination, design, development and execution of every project with a close
reference to individual project situations. Lack of required skills and understanding of such
complex development phases for a PPP project implementation from the part of the
government officials further intensify the challenges.
Determining the financial and economic viabilities of a business venture with broad
functional specification on technical matters and commercial aspects is one of the most
crucial aspects of a PPP project development (Alam & Rashed 2011a; Salari, Yousefi, &
Asgary, 2015). The government engages advisors or consultants for preparation of complex
feasibility studies and concession agreement documents (ADB, 2008), containing major
terms and conditions, broader roles and responsibilities, risk sharing and various regulatory
issues such as tariff etc. The feasibility studies and preparation of concession agreement
documents by these advisors or consultants incur a considerable amount of cost which needs
to be spent on an upfront basis. Likewise, linked project implementations to support the main
PPP project also incur an upfront cost. However, the relevant government bodies often face
challenges to spend a substantial amount of money on upfront basis due to two reasons:
a) Securing funds for advisory fees and linked projects: For any development (linked
projects) and technical assistance (providing advisory support) purpose, typically the
governments in developing countries rely on budgetary allocation as approved in the
national budget. After the conceptualization of a PPP project, the government
agencies generally go through a lengthy and bureaucratic procedure for the required
fund allocation. Unlike the government bodies that own a PPP project, in many
instances, the central authority of such fund allocation, which has its own priorities of
spending the public exchequer, may not realize the importance of that particular
project, thus slowing down the entire fund allocation process. All these factors
combined together and along with the lack of understanding and transparency in
government procedures hamper severely the process of engaging the advisors and
completion of the linked projects that subsequently results in lower level of project
progression and increased uncertainty for investors and developers that leads to
multiply costs or stop projects to move forward (World Bank & Inter-American
Development Bank, 1998).
b) Hesitation of the government for fear of the project being infeasible: The government
bodies leading the PPP projects often hesitate to spend money upfront particularly for
advisory fees considering the fact that the project may turn out to be infeasible for the
private sector.
To overcome these problems, a central PPP development facility should be in place to
ensure sufficient and timely fund availability for the advisory support and completion of
linked government projects. The specific objectives of this facility should be:
 To bring in more private investment in the country‟s infrastructure development
through the provision of rapid technical assistance and expert services;
 To reduce government fund allocation in infrastructure and release more funds for
social and poverty alleviation projects;
 To assist the line ministries and agencies in identifying private infrastructure projects;
 To implement government sector linked/associated projects under a PPP project on a
5




fast-track basis;
To develop capability and competency of ministries and agencies for awarding or
transacting private infrastructure projects;
To create a pool of local and regional expertise in private sector infrastructure, which
ministries can exploit as required.

EXPERIENCE ON SIMILAR FACILITY
A number of countries have already adopted centralized facilities to gear up PPP project
implementation. Most of the governments of countries giving preference to private sector
participation in infrastructure development and maintenance have kept provisions for project
development support through its legislative structure under PPP policy framework which
provide vital upfront project development support for individual or overall PPP development
activities.
Some other governments have developed separate institution for providing project
development services. Pakistan, for example, has developed a separate institution called
Infrastructure Project Development Facility (IPDF) to facilitate the promotion, generation
and implementation of PPP projects by the contracting authorities (GOP, 2010). IPDF aims to
increase the number and volume of PPP infrastructure transactions through either procuring
advisors or providing itself through professional PPP development services for contracting
institutions. However, IPDF does not act as a contract signatory to any transaction. The
government of Pakistan, under the PPP policy 2010, has also provisioned for the
establishment of a Project development fund (PDF) in line with the emerging PPP program.
The PDF operates according to standard operating procedures and guidelines issued for PDF
managers and users/beneficiaries. The PDF supports the appointment of transaction advisors
for undertaking project, transaction structuring, and implementation up to the signing of the
contractual arrangements with the private investor(s). This is also considered to be a
revolving fund with the third party costs being reclaimable from winning bidders in some
instances, particularly where projects reach financial close.
India is another example that has developed separate institution for the same purpose.
The government of India (GOI, 2006-2007) has set up „India Infrastructure Project
Development Fund‟ (IIPDF) for providing financial support for quality project development
activities to the States and the Central Ministries. The quality advisory services are
fundamental to procuring affordable, value-for-money PPPs, the costs of procuring PPPs, and
particularly the costs of transaction advisors, etc. The IIPDF was set up with initial
contribution of Rs.100crore. Although it is a revolving fund and gets replenished by the
reimbursement of „investment‟ through success fee earned from successfully bid projects, it
is also supplemented in subsequent years through budget support. The IIPDF assists
ordinarily up to 75% of the project development expenses. The IIPDF‟s primary focuses on
potential PPP projects‟ development expenses including costs of engaging consultants and
transaction advisor. Time to time, it also focuses on to set out in guidance issued for
identifying PPP projects and preparation for the Department of Economic.
Project development facilities in terms of technical assistance from the government
are also available in Philippines, Indonesia and UK. These facilities are government backed
assistance to provide support in three categories: a) for overall capacity building on PPP; b)
fees for the consultants for conducting feasibility and pre-feasibility studies for project
identification and structuring; and c) providing fees for the transaction advisors for preparing
various contract documents between government and private sector. The Infrastructure
Project Development Facility (IPDF) in Philippines is revolving in nature and directly
managed by the local government unit under the Ministry of Finance with donor assistance
6

from the Asian Development Bank. On the other hand, in Indonesia it is managed by the
infrastructure executing agencies.
The importance of the central facility can be realized by looking at the achievements
of this facility in different countries. For instance, PDF has played a significant role for
infrastructure development in Pakistan. While development of profitable projects was the
major challenge in Pakistan for PPP development, IPDF has been successful in developing a
rich pipeline of projects worth more than USD $4 billion. Proper project structuring has been
completed for these projects through PDF with detailed feasibility analysis and other due
diligence and many of these projects have been progressed at the transaction stages as well.
IPDF has supported development of PPP projects in 18 different sectors – eight projects in
transport & logistics sector, two projects in health sector, one project in education sector, two
projects in hydro-power sector and five projects in other sectors. Similarly, IIPDF has also
had a significant impact on the development of a pipeline of projects in various challenging
sectors in different states of India – over 25 projects are in different stages of project
development, such as water supply and sanitation projects (in Kohlapur, Aurangabad, Indore
and Bhopal), education projects (in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh) etc. This is considered as
one of IIPDF‟s major successes as most of these projects are quite small in size (in terms of
capital investment) but due to their complexity in project development, the executing
agencies generally considered these projects not worthy of “paying off” (as the project
development costs, i.e. costs of the transaction advisors are very high for such complex
projects) if developed through PPP. The success of IIPDF is also remarkable for other PPP
projects in various sectors, especially in transportation.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
Considering the need for project development facility in promoting PPP in a country and
following the examples of similar type project development facilities in some other countries,
some recommendations have been made in the following section regarding operationalization
of the facility especially in terms of modality, formation and administration, procurement and
operational model.
Modality of the PPP Project Development Facility
In order for identifying and promoting a PPP project, any ministry, agency or government
body responsible for infrastructure development and maintenance may use the facility for
general structuring of the project, supporting advisory fees and implementing the linked
projects. The specific activities to be covered under the facility are summarized in the
following table:
Table 1: Activity Coverage for the PPP Project Development Facility
Project Identification and
Structuring

Greenfield Project Identification

Transaction Advisory
Associated/Linked
Support
Government Project
Preparation of appropriate
contract documents,
Facilitation for receiving
ensuring a fair allocation appropriate consent from
of risk between the public relevant authority
and the private sector

7

Concept Development: Defining
the scope of the project
Pre-feasibility studies: Mode of
private sector participation, BOO,
BOT, BOOT etc, determining
broad project parameters and
boundaries
Feasibility studies: Detailed
feasibility study (if required to be
conducted by the government in
special case

Pursue the government
body who owns the
associated or linked
government project
Allocate fund for
Assistance in negotiations
contractor who will
to protect government‟s
develop/remove, such as
interest
implement the linked
projects
Identification of barriers
Acquisition of lands for
and process of removal of
some special cases like
such barriers for
Especial Economic
implementing PPP
Zones through PPP
projects
Preparation of tender
documents and assistance
with tendering

Commercial framework
Development
Project Specific Capacity
Building
Investment Promotion
Evaluation of proposals,
documents, or other technical,
commercial or legal matters in
relation to the PPP projects
The facility can be used for project structuring and transaction advisory through a
success fee based model where the fee for the advisor is replenished by the successful bidder,
thus allowing the required funds readily available. This method does not charge the executing
government bodies for such advisory support directly, but charges the investors who win the
projects, where the successful bidder to provide such fees once awarded preferably with a
premium (e.g. 2%-5%) on top of the fees of the advisors to cover the risk of any potential
infeasible project. For an example, the Infrastructure Investment Facilitation Centre (IIFC) in
Bangladesh is one of the government owned entities working in a number of PPP projects as
a professional project development service provider to the government based on a success fee
basis where IIFC shouldered the risk of the project (if the project does not move forward at
later stage) and carried the project forward up to the successful engagement of an investor
who subsequently paid fees for IIFC (Islam, 2003), as per the following model:

Professional Advisor

Payment of

Private Investor

Success Fees
Project
Development
Services

Line
Ministry

A project offered to
the private sector

Figure 1: Project Development based on the Success Fee Model

8

Apart from the specific aspects of project development and structuring, the facility may
also provide technical assistance in terms of capacity building of officials from the executing
agency who will be involved in such project development activities.
Formation and Administration of the Facility
PPP development facility should be initiated by any neutral government body with respect to
PPP project ownership. The neutral agency refers for a government agency that may not be
involved in developing and managing PPP projects. Depending on the country, the formation
of such a facility might require some regulatory changes to be made (Rashed, 2011). Hence,
this paper proposes that the PPP development facility should be developed under any
regulatory body of the government. Simultaneously, sufficient funds for advisors and linked
projects should be made available – preferably from a single budgetary allocation – for this
facility, consisting of several funds from individual donors or from the government‟s own
budget, while authorizing the execution of the fund under the dedicated unit. Assistance from
technical advisors, who have sufficient experience and expertise to understand PPP projects
and to evaluate the business behind it, may be sought to support the fund management and to
evaluate the applications received from different government bodies and the private sector for
the case of unsolicited proposal.
Additionally, the unit with assistance from its own advisors has to be the champion in
promoting PPP projects in the country. The unit needs to sort out the priority of different
applications based on the merit and importance of the projects and mobilize the required
funds accordingly. Depending on the success of the facility, the government may increase the
fund in later years through further budgetary allocation or by other sub-fund sources. The
proposed steering body should have members from different government ministries so that
the proposed PPP project can be evaluated in light of all the sectoral plans and from a macroeconomic perspective so that the country may also evaluate the economic rate of return from
the PPP project. A member from the private sector should also be included in the steering
body to understand the investors‟ perspectives about the project. The administration of the
proposed facility is described as follows:






Steering Body
Member from Finance Ministry
Member from Planning Ministry
Member from Private Sector
Chief of the unit for managing the facility

Central PPP Development Facility

 Unit under the executing ministry for

operation and management
 Other government bodies dealing with PPP

project processing
Figure 2: Organizational Structure for the PPP Development Facility
Procurement of Services from Central PPP Development Facility
9

If any ministry, government body or agency or civic community desires to award an
infrastructure project to private investors and they do not possess sufficient experience and
manpower to handle the proposed project, they will make an application to the facility (to the
unit administering the facility). The PPP development facility will support for the fees of the
technical advisors (to carry out feasibility studies) and for the transaction advisors (to prepare
the concession document and other agreements) in addition to actively supporting to carry out
the activities to implement the associated or linked government obligated projects. In
instances where such external consultants are procured from the support of the facility by the
government body working on a PPP project (after their application to the facility and the
subsequent approval from the unit through the steering body), the responsibility of the unit
administering the facility can provide process management services and supervise the
procurement and management of the external consultants. On the other hand, for
implementing the linked projects, the executing agency for a PPP project will request the
facility for support in two areas – (i) facilitating required consent from other government
agencies for supply of utility and other related issues; and (ii) providing funds for the
construction contractor to be engaged for development of the approach road, site compaction
and other ancillary activities as realized from the feasibility studies and through the tender
document (which might also have been developed from the support of the facility) and for the
land acquisition if required for any PPP project implementation.
Once the unit administering the PPP development facility receives application for any
of these linked projects or advisory support, it will precede the request to the steering body
with their own analysis on the application along with their recommendations and related
justifications. After the approval from the steering body, the unit will make a Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) with the executing agency for using the fund and will exert efforts
for receiving consent from other government agencies for relevant utility supply or reallocation.
Proposed Model of the Facility
The PPP development facility will primarily be used by the line ministries/agencies, local
government and communities who will execute the project, such as the government body who
owns the project and will make a contract with the investor (Alam, 2011b; Rashed, Alam &
Fahim, 2014). The executing agency will then require expert project development services,
including technical assistance funds and linked project in the PPP development phase. When
implementing agencies need to engage an advisor or will need support for linked projects and
other relevant assistance, they will provide application to the facility with their requirement
for the use of funds by specifying the name of the project, scope of advisory services (for
feasibility, transaction support etc.), duration of such support etc. It also needs to provide the
details of the linked project and executing authority for that linked project, nature of the
linked project and detailed description of the linked project as derived from the feasibility
study and as documented in the concession agreement. The steering body of the facility will
provide approval for such application. The modality for using the facility by different bodies
is as follows:

10

Figure 3: Model of PPP Project Development Facility
Ensuring Long-Term Sustainability of the Facility
Central PPP development facility enhances the quality of execution for PPP projects by
replacing reliance on government funds for infrastructure projects with that of private
financing. For the sustainability of the fund, the success fee model can be very instrumental.
However, with a longer term vision, the government may consider an arrangement whereby a
small percentage of the government funds saved as a result of a PPP project are put into the
facility as budgetary allocation in later years as replenishment. This might be effective in
cases where a significant amount of fund from the facility is utilized for advisory services but
the project later turns out to be infeasible or the project is not moving forward for private
sector awarding. However, it can be safely believed that with an efficient management of the
facility, such infeasible projects will be less in number and will also be covered from the
successful investors as the success fee. The facility would therefore become a rolling fund,
which will depend upon the project recognition skills of the unit. The skillful handling of the
fund will allow it to grow in size over time and take on larger projects for the country.
CONCLUSION
Commitment from both the government and the private investors is instrumental for the
success of any PPP project. Though it seems that the government obligation is limited to
awarding the contracts only, but in reality the most important obligation, which is project
development, lies on the government. The project development functions ensure that the
project is carried forward at a certain stage where the private investors feel comfortable about
the feasibility of the project and its risk structure. However, the governments often face
11

difficulties, particularly in developing countries, to manage the obligations under a PPP
project due to fund constraints, inherent bureaucracy and lack of understanding. This paper
identifies the necessity of a central PPP development facility and proposes a structure for it in
order to minimize the challenges faced by governments for PPP project implementation.
This paper recommends that the central PPP development facility should be
established within a neutral government ministry like the ministry of finance, treasury or
planning, with a dedicated unit under a steering body within the ministry to manage this
facility and its day-to-day activities. The facility should have a provision of funds for the PPP
project development advisors (to be engaged by the implementing government agency
dealing with a PPP project) and for implementing the associated or linked government
projects. This paper also suggests a model that establishes a formal procedure for the
government agencies to request and receive funds from this facility for upfront development
of the PPP projects. This fund should be rolling in nature that will be replenished by the
successful bidder. Governments around the world are gradually exploring the opportunities to
engage the private sector to provide quality infrastructure services to their respective
countries while reducing burdens on the national exchequer. Hand in hand with this vision by
the governments to engage the private sector for national infrastructure development, a
central PPP development facility will ensure greater government commitment in enhancing
the government side obligations for promoting the Public-Private Partnership projects in the
country.
REFERENCES
ADB (2008). Public-private participation handbook. Asian Development Bank, Manilla,
Philippines, pp.1 and 55.
Alam, M. M., & Rashed, M. A. (2010). Delivering countywide cost-effective and better
education services: The models of public private partnership (PPP). Technics Technologies
Education Management, 5(4), 875-880.
Alam, M. M., & Rashed, M. A. (2011a). Private sector participation in infrastructure
development: A non-residence infrastructure fund in Bangladesh. Journal of Bangladesh
Studies, 13(1), 34-38.
Alam, M. M., & Rashed, M. A. (2011b). The processes of location study for developing
economic zones under public private partnership model: Country study on Bangladesh.
Journal of Economics and Business Research, 17(2), 51-63.
Commonwealth of Australia (2002). Public-private participation: an introduction. Department
of the Parliamentary Library, Research Paper No. 1, 2002-03, pp. 4.
http://www.aph.gov.au/binaries/library/pubs/rp/2002-03/03rp01.pdf
GOI (2006-2007). Scheme and guidelines for India infrastructure project development fund.
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
http://www.pppinindia.com/pdf/scheme_Guidelines_India_Infrastructure_Project_Developm
ent_Fund-English.pdf.
GOP (2010). Pakistan policy on public private partnerships 2010, Government of Pakistan.
http://ipdf.gov.pk/tmpnew/PDF/PPP%20Policy%20FINAL%2014-May-2010.pdf

12

Hatefi, M. A., & Seyedhoseini, S. M. (2012). Comparative review on the tools and techniques
for assessment and selection of the project risk response actions (RRA). International
Journal of Information Technology Project Management, 3(3), 60-78.
Islam, N. (2003). Role of the infrastructure investment facilitation centre in the development
of private sector infrastructure in Bangladesh. Transport and Communications Bulletin for
Asia
and
the
Pacific,
72,
77-100.
http://www.unescap.org/ttdw/ppp/trainingmaterials/MonitoringPPPBangladesh.pdf
PPIAF (2003). Toolkit: A guide for hiring and managing advisors for private participation in
infrastructure. Washington, DC.
Rashed, M. A., Alam, M. M., & Toriman, M. E. (2011). Considerable issues for sustainable
public-private partnership (PPP) project. Res Manageria, 2(4), 57-65.
Rashed, M. A., Alam, M. M., & Fahim, F. (2014). The performances and challenges of
public-private partnership (PPP) projects in Bangladesh. Journal of Bangladesh Studies,
15(2), 62-71.
Salari, M, Yousefi, N., & Asgary, M. M. (2015). Cost performance estimation in construction
projects using fuzzy time series. International Journal of Information Technology Project
Management, 6(1), 66-75.
UNESCAP (2005). PPP: Readiness self-assessment. Bangkok, Thailand. pp. IX and 30.
UNESCAP (2008). Public-private partnerships in infrastructure development: A primer.
Bangkok, Thailand, pp.9.
World Bank & Inter-American Development Bank (1998). Concessions for infrastructure: A
guide to their design and award. World Bank Technical Paper 399. Washington, DC, pp.1
and 21.

BIOGRAPHY OF AUTHORS
Md. Abu Rashed is acting as the PPP Expert for Public Private Partnership Office of the
Office of the Hon. Prime Minister, Government of Bangladesh. Mr. Rashed is one of the
Global PPP Experts for United Nation Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and was
the Project Editor and work stream leader for development of the UNECE PPP health
standard. He worked at senior level positions for various government agencies, development
organizations and multinational agencies with focus on private sector development. He
actively promoted various multilateral driven PPP programs of the World Bank, IFC, ADB
(Manila) etc. He also acted as guest lecturer and international speaker in CSC under Dhaka
University, BDI at Berkeley University of California, UNECE in Geneva, UK, Malaysia,
Singapore, Thailand, Sri Lanka, India and many more countries. Mr. Rashed has over ten
core publications on PPP, project development & financial analysis from international
referred journals.
Md. Mahmudul Alam is a Senior Lecturer of Finance at Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM).
He is also affiliated with Accounting Research Institutes (ARI) at University Technology
13

MARA (UiTM) in Malaysia and International Islamic University Chittagong (IIUC) in
Bangladesh as a Research Associate. He obtained Ph.D. and Master‟s degrees in Environment
and Development (Fin. & Econ.) from National University of Malaysia (UKM) and Bachelor
(Hons) degree in Business Administration (Fin. & Econ.) from North South University (NSU)
in Bangladesh. He has a good number of publications including 95+ articles in refereed
journals and five books/ monographs. He has presented articles in 60+ international
conferences. He is recognized as one of the “Top Bangladesh Development Researchers of
the Millennium” by BDRC. His research areas include sustainable development, ecological
economics, Islamic economics, governance, finance & investment, etc.
Yusnidah Ibrahim is a Professor of Finance and the Dean of School of Economics, Finance
and Banking (SEFB) at University Utara Malaysia (UUM). She obtained BA and MSc in
Actuarial Science from University of Iowa, USA, and Ph.D. from De Montfort University,
UK. In terms of professional involvement, she possesses the Registered Financial Planner
(RFP) designation and Certificate in Risk Management (CFM). She also serves as the
editorial board member of the International Journal of Banking and Finance (IJBF) and
International Journal of Management Studies (IJMS). She has undertaken consultation work
on Private Financial Initiative (PFI) models, small business financial planning, and higher
education funding. Her research and publications are in the area of capital structure, dividend
policy, Islamic bonds (Sukuk), small business finance, and higher education finance, etc.

14

