Draft manuscript for AGRICULTURE AND HUMAN VALUES – version 2019/03/18
2

Title
4

Mobilizing common biocultural heritage for the socioeconomic inclusion of
small farmers: panarchy of two case studies on quinoa in Chile and Bolivia

6

Authors and affiliations
8
10

12
14

Thierry Winkel (1)*, Lizbeth Núñez-Carrasco (2), Pablo José Cruz (3), Nancy Egan (4), Luís
Sáez-Tonacca (5), Priscilla Cubillos-Celis (2), Camila Poblete-Olivera (2), Natalia ZavallaNanco (2), Bárbara Miño-Baes (2), Maria-Paz Viedma-Araya (2)
(1) Centre d’Écologie Fonctionnelle et Évolutive (CEFE), Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement (IRD), CNRS, Université de Montpellier, UPVM3, EPHE, Montpellier,
Francia
(2) Escuela de Trabajo Social, Universidad Católica del Maule (UCM), Curicó, Chile

16
18

(3) Unidad Ejecutora en Ciencias Sociales Regionales y Humanidades (UE CISOR), Consejo
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Universidad Nacional de
Jujuy (UNJU), San Salvador de Jujuy, Argentina

20

(4) Instituto Interdisciplinario Tilcara (IIT), Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Tilcara,
Argentina

22

(5) Departamento de Gestión Agraria, Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH), Santiago,
Chile
* Corresponding author: thierry.winkel@ird.fr ;

24

26
28
30
32

This work received financial support from CONICYT (National Council for Scientific and
Technological Research, Chile: Project PAI-80160043 BAQUIANA, UCM/IRD), MSH
(Maison des Sciences de l'Homme SUD, France: Project PANARCHI 2017-2018,
IRD/CNRS/UCM/UNJU) and ANR (The French National Research Agency, France: Project
ANR-06-PADD-011-EQUECO). We thank Pablo Jara-Valdivia and Marcela Calquín for their
contributions to the participatory process with the Lipimávida community, and Mathieu
Dionnet, co-organizer of the workshop "Common goods and participatory methods" (MSHSUD, 16-18/05/2018, Montpellier, France). Thanks are due to all the producers, development
agents and local authorities involved with us in these projects.

1

34

36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50

52

ABSTRACT
Valorising the biocultural heritage of common goods could enable peasant farmers to achieve
socially and economically inclusive sustainability. Increasingly appreciated by consumers,
peasant heritage products offer small farmers promising opportunities for economic, social
and territorial development. To identify the obstacles and levers of this complex, multi-scale
and multi-stakeholder objective, an integrative conceptual framework is needed. We applied
the panarchy conceptual framework to two cases of participatory research with small quinoa
producers: a local fair in Chile and quinoa export production in Bolivia. In both cases, the
"commoning" process was crucial both to bring stakeholders together inside their
communities and to gain recognition for their productions outside and thus reach social and
economic inclusion. Despite the difference in scale, the local fair and the export market
shared a similar marketing strategy based on short value chains promoting quality products
with high identity value. In these dynamics of biocultural heritage valorisation, the
panarchical approach revealed the central place as well as the vulnerability of the community
territory. As a place of both anchoring and opening, the community territory is the priviledged
space where autonomous and consensual control over the governance of common biocultural
resources can be exercised.

Keywords: adaptive cycle; inclusive agriculture; participatory action research; short value
chain; territorial development

54

2

56

58
60
62
64

66
68
70
72

74
76
78

80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94

1. Introduction
Activating the biocultural heritage of peasant—or family—agriculture has been proposed to
promote the social and economic inclusion of the peasant sector in a perspective of
sustainable and inclusive agriculture (Walshe and Argumedo 2016; Swyderska et al. 2018).
For millennia, peasant agriculture has satisfied the food needs of the majority of the humanity,
modeled rural landscapes and maintained agrobiodiversity. It thus represents a form of
biocultural heritage that encompasses a range of natural and cultural objects—from genes to
landscapes, from knowledges to practices—all rooted in the history and ecology of local
societies (Gavin et al. 2015).
Yet, despite its recent recognition by international organizations—FAO declared 2014
"International Year of Family Farming"— and by consumers who express a growing demand
for quality products with a local identity, peasant agriculture remains marginal in public
policies. In a majority of countries, these policies continue to promote the fragmentation of
family farms in favour of the agro-industrial sector, whose environmental, social, ethical and
aesthetic costs are however increasingly criticized as they become more widespread (e.g.
epizootic outbreaks, soil degradation, biodiversity loss, farmers' indebtedness, livestock
cruelty, destruction of amenities) (Ioris 2016).
In response, a number of alternatives seek to promote the specificities of peasant agriculture
around the values of territorial identity and biocultural heritage. Because of their sociocultural and local roots, the objects of the peasant heritage (e.g. landraces, vernacular
architecture or gastronomy) are distinctive of the territory. As such, they become vectors of
social and territorial identity for those who produce them and, being increasingly valued by
consumers, they also become opportunities for the economic inclusion of peasant farmers, for
example in fair-trade or short supply chains.
Territorial identity, as a form of collective symbolic capital, may be activated through
distinguishing signs linked to a place, know-how, or product, which reinforce social identity
and inclusion and also contribute to the protection of common natural resources (Macías
Vázquez and Alonso González 2015). The promotion of symbolic capital can therefore
increase the economic value of material productions from agriculture, food processing or
handicrafts. But this process of creation/accumulation of symbolic capital runs the risk of
being appropriated by exogenous actors like finders-keepers, mandated by private interests to
capture the value generated by local communities (Macías Vázquez and Alonso González
2015). When they are emblematic of a territory, biocultural heritage objects have an obvious
dimension of common goods, even in the case of private properties like buildings (e.g.
Andalusians windmills, Gascony dovecotes…) or privately-owned animals of local breeds
(e.g. Scottish Highland cattle, Chilean Araucana chickens…). The conception of biocultural
objects as—at least partially— common goods is also supported by their transgenerational
value as they are both an inheritance from the past (even recent) and a legacy for the future,
and not just the property of their current owners only.

3

96
98
100
102
104
106

108
110
112
114
116
118
120

122
124
126
128
130

132
134
136

Another way to value peasant biocultural heritage is through fair-trade and short value chains,
directly reconnecting producers and consumers (Contreras et al. 2014). Short value chains are
not necessarily local: they may be short because of the small number of intermediaries, not
because of geographical distance. In fact, in several cases, peasant producers see the export
market as more stable and fair than the domestic market (Soper 2016). The concept of nested
markets describes arrangements that allow small local producers to access increasingly
globalized markets without losing control over the production process and local/global
connections (Grivins and Tisenkopfs 2018). Consumer awareness of these local/global
connections and their solidarity with producers are key factors for the socio-economic
inclusion of small farmers (Castaldo et al. 2009). Successful initiatives of communitysupported agriculture around the world show that this alternative model is also economically
viable (Blay-Palmer et al. 2016).
The announced benefits of inclusive development point to greater prosperity and economic
equity for more people and territories (Chakrabarti 2014). But inclusion requires not only
attention to the excluded: it also needs an explicit transformational strategy to align current
economic and political trajectories with long-term ecological and social realities (Beling et al.
2018, De Schutter 2011). Two major obstacles arise there: the dominant discourse on the
virtues of globalized commercialization and the apolitical tradition of many social
organizations (Isgren and Ness 2017). To overcome them, some suggest replacing the narrow
concepts of development and growth with those of inclusive sustainability (Essex and Read
2016) and good living (Beling et al. 2018), which prioritize economic localisation and
cooperation among social actors in an integrating and ethical vision of their ecological and
social responsibilities. Beyond economic growth, peer cooperation creates a protective space
to jointly tackle socio-economic and environmental uncertainties. Cooperation generates
common knowledge through shared learning of practical skills in management, marketing or
communication and, at the same time, strengthens the autonomy of local actors vis-à-vis
uncontrolled outsiders (Lucas et al. 2016).
In practice, the participatory valorisation of a biocultural heritage includes: context analysis,
rescue of the heritage object to be promoted, and shared design, all of which are interrelated.
In shared design, the promoters of the initiative, often technical institutions, NGOs or
universities, can suggest objectives and methods that local actors reinterpret and appropriate
in the participatory processes. To access the market, some consider it necessary to improve
the quantity and quality of the product in order to achieve a high and homogeneous standard,
a process that would imperatively require the support of technological institutions (FIA 2015).
However, support institutions must guard against the temptation of "command-and-control"
that can undermine the empowerment of local actors (Cox 2016).
Quinoa provides exemplary cases that facilitate a more complete analysis of the question of
peasant inclusion through the valorisation of biocultural heritage. This ancestral grain from
the Andes and the Chilean coast is emblematic of the rescue and valorisation of the
agricultural heritage in Bolivia since the 1970s (Barrientos et al. 2017; Winkel et al. 2014,
2015) and more recently in Chile and Peru (Bedoya-Perales et al. 2018; Delatorre-Herrera et
al. 2013; Lacoste et al. 2017; Núñez and Bazile 2009, 2010). Quinoa is promoted in the media

4

138
140
142
144

146
148
150

152
154
156
158

as a superfood, both healthy (high in protein, gluten-free) and authentic (under the
questionable slogan of "rice of the Incas"). Its production by small, largely organic farmers,
has further enhances quinoa's popularity. While the rise of quinoa has allowed many peasant
producers access to the global market and to thus achieve socioeconomic inclusion, it also
poses real or potential environmental, social, and economic risks, which could lead to the
exclusion of small producers and benefit economic agents better prepared to face these risks.
Multiple actors with different motivations and priorities (governments, networks and
transnational corporations, etc.) question the relative control of quinoa production and
commercialization by small producers and their organisations (Zandstra 2015).
The growing complexity of quinoa's value chain has led to reflections on inclusive models for
peasant producers that can generate social, environmental, and economic benefits for all in the
value chain. Two recent studies focusing on Bolivia and Peru—the world's leading exporters
of quinoa—point to the association of producers and collaborations between producers,
processors, traders, and consumers as levers in an inclusive model (Böhm 2016; Zandstra
2015).
Unlike highland Andean countries like Bolivia, whose production has dominated the world
market for decades and remained in the hands of small farmers' organizations with only late
governmental support (Laguna 2011; Zandstra 2015), in Chile the recent expansion of quinoa
has been driven by state institutions for technical assistance, training, and credit, who involve
small producer and a dynamic agribusiness sector (PUC 2017). Despite their socioeconomic
specificities, in both countries the structure of the economy is based on the exploitation of
natural resources for export, and peasant family agriculture remains marginal in terms of GDP
with structural poverty and social exclusion (Salcedo and Guzmán 2014).

160

2. Theoretical and methodological framework

162

This study is based on the concepts of biocultural heritage, commons, and inclusive economy
and uses the methodology of participative-action research in the field and panarchy for the
integrative analysis of complex socio-ecological transformations.

164

Biocultural heritage, commons and inclusive economy

166
168
170
172

174

By definition, biocultural heritage is both a vector of identity—a heritage of a common local
past—and of sustainability, considered of sufficient socio-economic, cultural, or
environmental importance to be transmitted to future generations. Our working assumption is
that biocultural heritage can contribute to the economic and socio-cultural inclusion of
peasant farmers, locally (in tourism, free fairs...) and non-locally (e.g. export market). These
complementary dimensions of identity and sustainability, the local and non-local, place
biocultural heritage at the centre of territorial dynamics aimed at social inclusion and the
preservation of common welfare.
Commons are still often considered as simple resources, either tangible (water, land, seeds,
etc.) or intangible (with intellectual property interests). In this view, commons differ from
private or public goods because they are objects of rivalry but without exclusivity, at least

5

176
178
180
182
184

186
188
190
192

within a community. However, considering that this definition obviates the social and
dynamic dimensions of common goods, some authors emphasize that no common goods exist
without community (Ostrom 1990); a common good is not only a resource, but also the set of
rules and values mobilized by the community that care for that resource (Bollier 2015;
Gibson-Graham et al. 2013). For this reason, Bollier (2015) proposes replacing the word
"common" with the verb "commoning" to highlight all the actions of mutual aid, negotiation,
communication, and experimentation mobilized for the dynamic management of shared
resources. "Commoning" encompasses production, governance, culture, and personal interests
in an integral process. This alternative approach is enacted by responsible local communities
that define their own objectives and rules in relation to their resources (Bollier 2015).
Aimed at meeting basic needs and rights (food, health, education, etc.), common goods
naturally focus on the social inclusion of individuals and families marginalized by the market
(Bollier 2015). The second assumption of this study is that socio-cultural inclusion contributes
to economic inclusion because, by cooperating and activating symbolic and social capital,
small producers generate volume and commercial capacity (FIA 2015). The cooperation of
peasant producers appears key to building a redistributive model that improves their economic
income.
Resilience theory, adaptive loops and panarchy

194
196
198

200
202
204

206
208
210

Resilience theory explores how the social, economic and environmental components of a
socio-ecological system interact across time and space to determine its capacity for change
(Walker and Salt 2006). The adaptive loop1 model summarizes the possible transformational
paths of a socio-ecological system or subsystem into four phases of growth (r), conservation
(K), release (Ω) and reorganization (α), the latter permitting the emergence of a new system
(Holling 1973).
The position of the considered system in the four possible phases depends on the degree of
organization (connectedness) and the amount of resources (potential) accumulated in the
system. Connectedness and potential are defined by the ecological, economic or socio-cultural
specificities of the system identified after an integrated assessment of its situation and
dynamics.
Adaptive loops are not 4-phase sequences repeating themselves in a deterministic way.
Depending on adaptability, shortcuts can be opened between different phases that allow a new
system to emerge without going through the destructive release phase (Ω). In an adaptive
system, these shortcuts are the innovative paths to sustainability. Innovation also occurs at the
end of the reorganization phase (α), when weak internal control (low connectivity) allows
external opportunities ("chance events") to take root and open a path for unanticipated growth
(r) for a renewed system.

1

We use the term "adaptive loop" to avoid the connotation of deterministic recurrence of the term
"cycle", originally coined by Holling (1973).
6

212
214
216

218
220
222

224
226

228

230
232
234
236

A panarchy represents a hierarchy of several adaptive loops, nested in increasing levels of
organization (or scales), that interact with each other and drive the dynamics of the entire
system (Gunderson and Holling 2002). Typically, a panarchy in a socio-ecological system is
made up of nested loops of households—the basic units of living and decision-making—,
themselves anchored in the territory and its economic activities and, further afield, in the
entire society that determines socio-demographic rules and conditions.
In a panarchy, different types of cross-scale interactions can be recognized, including: the
"revolt" connection—when the collapse (Ω phase) of a small-scale subsystem propagates into
the surrounding system in late K phase—and the "memory" connection—through which a
collapsed subsystem reorganizes itself (α) from the resources of the surrounding, higher level,
subsystem (Gunderson and Holling 2002).
Adaptive loops and resilience theory have been used to frame the dynamics of change in
agricultural socio-ecosystems at the individual farm, territorial or industry level (e.g. Allison
and Hobbs 2004; Sinclair et al. 2014; Darnhofer et al. 2016; Slight et al. 2016), but
applications of a complete panarchy nesting multiple adaptive cycles across scales remain rare
(but see: Soane et al. 2012; Tittonell 2014).
General objective of the study
Building on previous vulnerability assessments of two participatory research projects in Chile
(Baquiana project) and Bolivia (Equeco project), we used the integrative framework of
panarchy to identify the organisational levels, stakeholders and institutions involved in
promoting local biocultural heritage for the socio-economic inclusion of peasant communities.
Based on this systemic vision of the transformations underway in two socio-ecosystems with
different trajectories and purposes, we looked for the cross-scale interactions that underlie
them and the rationales implemented by local actors, with the aim of drawing general lessons
on the conditions for inclusive sustainability based on common goods.

3. Case 1: Lipimávida, Chile
238

240
242
244
246

248

Socio-ecological assessment
Lipimávida is a locality on the Pacific coast of the Vichuquén commune (municipalidad) in
the Region of Maule, in central Chile. In 2010, according to the policy for isolated localities
(Gobierno Regional del Maule 2012), Vichuquén was considered the most isolated commune
in the region in a critical condition with respect to access to services, education, and capacity
for consumption. The earthquake and subsequent tsunami of February 2010 devastated
Lipimávida. Subsequently, this exiguous coastal area—inhabited although not constructible
according to civil security norms—saw the construction of a new village on higher terrain in
the locality, while buildings and chalets continued to be built in unauthorized coastal areas.
The locality is a seaside resort comprised of long beaches and a settlement of residents
historically dedicated to family agriculture and the production of woven and ceramic
handicrafts made by traditional local techniques. Its location at the end of the J60 coastal

7

250

route gives Lipimávida a singularity and isolation, making it attractive for tourists looking for
quiet seascapes and a pleasant Mediterranean climate.

252

Among the gastronomic attractions of the locality is the papaya, whose "trees" are part of the
local landscape in patios and orchards. The women prepare preserves, jams and desserts that,
together with the seafood and peasant cuisine, characterize the Lipimávida table. Another
crop that stands out in the memory of the residents is quinoa, whose local ecotype differs from
the Andean highland ecotypes. Specific to the Pacific littoral, it was domesticated by ancestral
populations of the central and southern coastal areas of Chile. In Lipimávida, older people
remember that quinoa's annual harvest ensured food for winter (Cubillos-Celis et al. 2018).
They can still describe the practices of sowing, harvesting, and post-harvesting, in particular
the sorting, cleaning and desaponification of the grains. As in other regions, the time and
effort required for these tedious post-harvest processes usually carried out by women are the
main reasons for the decrease in the amount of quinoa in the local diet. Therefore, although
quinoa has been part of local history and food, today few produce it and few consume it. Still,
with the media attention recently given to quinoa as a superfood, inhabitants of these rural
coasts are beginning to recover it as part of their traditions, seeing an opportunity to improve
and diversify their family incomes.

254
256
258
260
262
264
266

268
270
272
274

276
278
280
282

At the scale of the Maule region, massive forest monocultures, misuse, pollution, and
diminution of water and arable land resources, degradation of rural and urban landscapes,
drought and wildfires are associated with an economic and social model that destroys the
local natural and cultural heritage. In 2017, the region experienced the worst wildfires in the
last 40 years (CONAF 2017). However, several initiatives reflect a growing awareness of
socio-environmental issues, illustrated in the architectural restoration of the heritage village of
Vichuquén after the 2010 earthquake and the local agreement on watershed management
implemented since 2017 by the National Agency for Sustainability and Climate Change.
In Lipimávida, despite an institutional and political context promoting individualism through
elective democracy, generalized private land property, and a neoliberal economy, the vitality
and cultural identity of local associations maintains a high degree of social cohesion among
members. Also noteworthy in this isolated community, some people have significant
experience of exchange with foreign countries, in the marketing of papaya to Belgium or the
sale of handicrafts in several European countries. These successful experiences in marketing
high quality food and handicrafts proved valuable for the launch of a pilot project on local
biocultural heritage.
The Baquiana Project implementation

284
286
288
290

In June 2017, the Baquiana research team initiated a collaboration and exchange of
knowledge and experience with a focus group of a dozen residents (11 women, 1 man), all
small farmers or artisans. Then, 13 meetings with an average attendance of 10 people, and 14
individual interviews were realised during the 2017-2018 period. From the beginning of this
participatory process, the researchers sought to articulate the interests, positions and wishes of
the focus group with regional and local state and market actors. This was possible thanks to
the support of the Vichuquén commune, where both the Mayor and professionals of
8

292

294
296

298
300
302
304
306
308
310
312

314
316

318

PRODESAL (Local Development Program) demonstrated flexibility in their annual programs
to host this initiative, providing time, tools and socio-technical knowledge.
Focusing on the production of quinoa, the preliminary assessment study established the
patrimonial character of this product in the area and its potential for the economic inclusion of
peasant families (Cubillos-Celis et al. 2018). A complementary study examined the social
dynamics within the group of peasant actors involved in the co-construction of the pilot
project associated to the participatory research (Miño-Baes and Viedma-Araya 2019).
In the course of the participatory concertation, the initial focus on quinoa suggested by
researchers was challenged and reoriented towards the valorisation of the local tradition of a
mix of food and artisanal products of biocultural resources. In addition, local actors expressed
that, although most did not cultivate quinoa, their problem was not the "rescue" of the crop,
which could be bought from other communities and particularly from the neighbouring region
of O'Higgins (Lacoste et al. 2017; Núñez and Bazile 2009). Rather, in a meeting with an
expert in threshing and de-saponification of quinoa, they became convinced that cleaning the
grain is a complex process and that it was better to buy quinoa from other producers.
Similarly, after a participatory workshop with an expert in the co-design of agricultural
development projects, they felt that for them, the innovation of producing quinoa as a
vegetable (Sáez-Tonacca et al. 2018) was still premature and risky. Instead, they saw a
promising opportunity in the same expert's proposal to activate local production and human
capacities through short value chains. The pilot project "Lipimávida Heritage Fair" was then
co-constructed by researchers and locals with the aim of promoting the local biocultural
heritage by combining agricultural and craft products in a unique commercial offering that
showcased the knowledge and skills of the inhabitants of Lipimávida.
After opening in January 2018, the heritage fair has been operating regularly, not just in the
summer season but also on all dates when tourists are received. Members of the group are
engaged in a business that matches their interests and possibilities, offering fresh and
innovative products that are affordable to the diverse public visiting them.

4. Case 2: Salar de Uyuni, Bolivia
Socio-ecological assessment

320
322
324

326
328

The observations and data that follow describe the situation in the region with the highest
commercial production of quinoa in the world between 2007 and 2010, as analysed in the
framework of the Equeco project. Winkel et al. (2016) present a detailed analysis of this case,
however here we only address salient points that add new reflections on the issues of
biocultural heritage and collective action.
The study area is located in the southern highlands of Bolivia, on the banks of the Salar de
Uyuni, where plains at 3,600 meters above sea level alternate with volcanic reliefs that reach
to more than 6,000 meters above sea level. This extreme environment of high desert has been
occupied for millennia by agropastoralists that raise camelids and cultivate quinoa and potato
(Cruz et al. 2017).

9

330
332
334
336

338
340
342
344
346
348

350
352
354
356
358
360

362
364
366

Despite its extreme geographic conditions, this high altitude desert was traditionally
connected to the Andean "archipelago" (Murra 1984). For millennia, commercial caravans
allowed local populations to manage resources of diverse ecosystems, exchanging goods such
as salt, minerals, quinoa, wool and meat from the Salar highlands for corn, coca, cloth, etc.
from the Andean valleys and the Pacific coast. Over time, this ancestral subsistence strategy
has been complemented by temporary migration for work in mining, agriculture and various
activities in more or less remote cities.
Land tenure, characterized by the common use for grassland and family usufruct for cropland
(Vassas-Toral 2015), confers a certain social equity in the access to land while protecting the
communities—through the absence of a land market—from the risk of excessive
concentration of land or outsiders' land-grabbing (Winkel et al. 2016). Common pastures are
generally located on plains, while family croplands were traditionally located on slopes, a
disposition reflecting ancestral ecological knowledge regarding the distribution of frost risks
in mountain areas2 (Pouteau et al. 2011). In this desert area, each quinoa harvest results from
a biennial dry fallow cycle and thus represents a doubled land area: the current cultivated
field, plus the ploughed fallow waiting for the next year’s crop. These specificities of
community land tenure and biennial dry fallowing, which protect communities from landgrabbing and allow commercial production without irrigation, are central to understanding the
sustainability of rainfed production in the region.
In the early 1970's, after massive job cuts in the mining and public sectors due to structural
adjustment plans, smallholder families from indigenous communities of the Salar of Uyuni
initiated the expansion of quinoa as a cash crop in response to increasing demand for quinoa
in neighbouring Peru, a traditional importer of Quinoa Real–the local quinoa ecotype of the
Salar region. This initial phase of commercial production was favoured by a donation of
tractors from a Belgian NGO (Laguna 2011) and by Peru's policy of supporting Andean food
(Kerssen 2015); a case of "chance events" as coined by Gunderson and Holling (2002). This
expansion of commercial quinoa production sparked a strong territorial dynamic that
included: the partial mechanization of quinoa crops, which required converting much of the
flat grasslands—the only spaces accessible to tractors—into croplands; and the replacement of
the distant and prolonged emigration with various forms of seasonal mobility towards nearby
urban centres that became the principal place of residence of many quinoa producers.
In the observation period, the study area was populated by approximately 12,000 families of
quinoa producers, most of them of Aymara or Quechua origin with a strong cultural identity
(Vassas-Toral 2015; Vieira-Pak 2015). This factor of social cohesion is also observed in the
rotating positions of responsibility for common interests that are assumed by members of the
community. For each producer, complying with these community obligations and paying land
taxes guarantees the right to access the usufruct of the land, even if his residence in the
community is intermittent (Vassas-Toral 2015).

2

Due to its higher density, cold air drains to the lowlands at night thus increasing the risk of frost there
while slopes remain less exposed.
10

368
370
372
374

376
378
380
382
384
386
388

390
392
394
396
398

400
402
404

In relation to this lively tradition of self-management and participation in collective life, local
populations have demonstrated their organizational and negotiating capacity when they
formed, with the encouragement of European NGOs, powerful associations of family
producers. Organizations like CECAOT (Central de Cooperativas Agropecuarias Operación
Tierra, founded in 1974) and ANAPQUI (Asociación Nacional de Productores de Quinua,
founded in 1983) encourage the production, transformation and marketing of quinoa,
including export to new niche markets with organic and fair-trade certifications (Laguna
2011; Tschopp et al. 2018).
As a corollary of their success in the commercial production of quinoa, local producers have
promoted a rebalancing of regional territorial development, investing their new income not so
much in rural communities but rather in nearby cities (Salinas de Garcí Mendoza, Llica,
Uyuni, Challapata, Oruro, etc.). Compared to the rural sector, the provision of health services,
education, electricity and water, transport, and connection in the urban sector allows for
improved training and the professionalization of their children (Vassas-Toral 2015). Taking
advantage of their dual residence between rural and urban areas, most families combine two
or more activities in agriculture and livestock, handicraft, transport, commerce, mining, urban
employment, tourism, etc. (Vassas-Toral 2015). Among their agricultural activities, families
conserve a self-consumption production of quinoa and potato, while the breeding of camelids
and sheep—unprofitable and poorly compatible with urban residency—has diminished.
Handicraft (wool) and tourism (accommodation, driver-guide) remain marginal. Nonagricultural income offers a guarantee against the volatility of quinoa prices, which peaked in
January 2014 (approx. 6,000 USD/ton) and then stabilized at around 1,200-1,600 USD/ton.
While the assessment of peasant family income remains uncertain, a survey of 36 households
in the study area in 2007 (when quinoa was paid to the producer at about 750 USD/ton)
reveals the great disparity present within a single community, with incomes ranging from 200
to 18,000 USD per year (Winkel et al. 2016). This disparity in family income reflects
differences in social status (e.g. young single mothers vs. extended families) and inequalities
in economic power, both of which influence access to land since the inheritance of land use
right in the region is generally patrilineal and the extent of cultivated land depends on the
ability of each producer to assume the cost of hiring a tractor driver to plough and sow the
land.
With regard to the regulation of access to land, customary rules controlled by communities
and indigenous authorities mix with national laws adopted by the central government. More
specifically, agricultural production is governed by local consensual and collective norms,
which compete with food certification controls and foreign trade regulations. Low acceptance
rates and the lack of practical implementation result in most of these rules not being applied
consistently across the region.
The Equeco Project implementation

406
408

The Equeco project was launched in 2007, more than three decades after the start of quinoa
export production in the Salar de Uyuni region, a process that can be dated from the arrival of
the first agricultural tractors in late 1969 (Laguna 2011). Questioning the sustainability of a
11

410
412
414

416
418
420
422
424

426

process that has been going on for more than 30 years, project researchers examined the social
and environmental history of local quinoa production (see Winkel et al. 2014, 2015, 2016, for
more details). Focus groups were comprised of quinoa producers from various rural
communities around the Salar de Uyuni as well as the NGO AVSF ("Agronomists and
Veterinarians without Frontiers"), involved in a regional project for the sustainable
management of local agro-pastoral systems.
The participatory methodology of the project was based first on participant observation,
where researchers immerge themselves in the daily life of local producers during many
months. Based on this initial assessment of the local situation, role-playing workshops
followed by group analysis sessions were held in the communities to discuss with
participating producers what happened during the game and to analyse the similarity between
game and reality (Vieira-Pak 2015). As regards local development, researchers issued
recommendations for local stakeholders (producers, authorities, NGOs...) particularly
concerning the consensual renewal of communal norms of land access and use. On an
international scale, researchers accompanied the renegotiation process between producer
organizations and FairTrade International on the new fair-trade certification standards for
quinoa (Salliou 2011).

5. Adaptive loops and panarchy
Case 1: Lipimávida (Chile)

428
430

432

434
436
438
440
442
444

446

Returning to the case of Lipimávida, three levels of analysis of the ongoing innovation
process emerged from the study: the group of food and handicraft producers, the tourism
activity in the locality of Lipimávida, and the socioeconomic context of the Vichuquén
commune.
First loop: quinoa and handicraft producers
The concertation process among the local participants in the Project resulted in the decision to
establish a new fair of heritage products in the community, with the objective of allowing its
participants to market their handicraft, food, and local products in their own territory and
without intermediaries. In its organizational phase, the fair group began with 12 members,
maintaining oral agreements for its regulation, sustained by the bonds of trust that existed
among the participants. This group of a few people did not need a large organization or a long
dialogue to start operating. To ensure a sufficient number of potential clients, the group
decided to hold the fair on Sundays during the summer season (January, February). Once the
offer of products, the type of activity, and its frequency were agreed upon, the members of the
fair, with the help of the Project facilitators, were able to mobilize external support from the
commune, rural development services (PRODESAL) and from the parish. Through this, they
obtained the official authorization to occupy public space, publicity for the inauguration of the
fair, and the use of a car park for their clients.
This brief analysis (see Cubillos-Celis et al. 2018, and Miño-Baes and Viedma-Araya, 2019,
for a complete description of the process) highlights that the local producer group is in an

12

448
450
452
454

456

458
460
462

464
466
468

470
472
474
476

478
480
482

initial phase, organized around a project of local fair with a well-defined orientation:
promoting craft and food products from their biocultural heritage. Yet, this producer group
has chosen to maintain a diversified offer and, up to now, its few members have decided to
govern themselves by simple oral agreements. There is no evidence of extreme product
specialization, high investment in economic or work resources, organizational complexity or
connectivity that could hinder the adaptability of the group and compromise the viability of
the heritage fair project. For all these reasons, the current phase can be referred to as an initial
(r) growth phase.
Second loop: local tourism
Since the beginning of the 2000's, the tourism sector in Lipimávida has grown consistently.
The number of tourist establishments increased from 6 in 2004 to 70 in 2018, with a
combined accommodation capacity of more than 400 people. In this locality with only one
hotel, this development is mainly due to the decision of local residents to convert part of their
agricultural land for the building of chalets rented to tourists on weekends or for longer
holidays.
The locality has 6 restaurants that offer a variety of menus with fish, seafood, quinoa, and
papayas. Several stores sell fresh and processed food products, where quinoa and papaya
stand out. The direct sale of fresh vegetables, medicinal plants, eggs and honey, as well as
local handicrafts, is also important in the residents' homes. In fact, handicrafts are an essential
component of the local tourism market, with exceptional production in clay (greda blanca)
and sheep's wool, spun locally and coloured with natural dyes then transformed into highly
valued fabrics, with some sold in European markets.
Despite the high potential for tourism in Lipimávida, the sector shows signs of vulnerability.
The town is located on a dead-end road, connected to other coastal cities by a single route (J60) that is rapidly saturated in the peak season. This causes numerous traffic jams repeatedly
reported by the local press. In addition, in the Maule region in general and in the town of
Lipimávida in particular, water scarcity seriously affects the supply of drinking water and
sewage services. The seasonal influx of tourists into the region exacerbates this problem.
Tourist constructions directly bordering the ocean coastline seem vulnerable because they
violate building regulations in seismic risk areas.
Local tourism in Lipimávida can be characterised as an advanced (K) phase of the adaptive
loop since many indicators reveal: the concentration of financial and social resources
(potential axis) in tourism-related activities (accommodation, restaurants, shops and crafts);
and strong pressures (connectedness axis) on the local road, land, and water resources, which
present risks for tourism development and the commercial potential of the territory.
Third loop: communal socio-economic dynamics

484
486

In administrative and political terms, Lipimávida depends on Vichuquén that supports
different types of projects aimed at contributing to the development of the territory and the
well-being of its inhabitants. Crucial for Vichuquén and the surrounding communes, in 2017

13

488
490
492
494
496
498

the National Climate Change Agency initiated a "Voluntary Agreement" for the management
of water resources of the Llico, Vichuquén, Torca, Tilicura, and Agua Dulce watersheds.
Through a participative process, a public-private alliance has been formed bringing together
24 organizations with the participation of public administrations, civil society organizations,
cultural groups, the scientific academy, the Army and private companies. The projects
promoted by the Voluntary Agreement address diverse areas such as environment, agriculture
and industry, education, health, tourism and culture, so as to coordinate efforts and resources
and integrate different actions that contribute to the sustainable development of the basin in
the face of climate change, and the foreseeable decrease in water resources. Although some
projects are already underway, others have not yet begun and all options remain open,
because the Voluntary Agreement is an evolutionary process in which new initiatives may be
presented.

500

Due to the active coordination (connectedness) of multiple projects in different fields, and no
sign of exhaustion of social and financial capital (potential), the socio-economic sector at the
communal level can be considered in a dynamic (r) phase of its adaptive loop.

502

Integrating the adaptive loops in a panarchy

504
506
508

In the end, the integration of the three adaptive loops shows a tourism subsystem in advanced
(K) phase, prevailing over any other economic activity, and vulnerable not only to occasional
seismic hazards but also to the ongoing overexploitation of land, water and infrastructure
resources. Yet, the subsystems immediately below and above, both in a (r) phase, show a
responsible commitment to paths of sustainability (communal loop) and socio-economic
diversification and autonomy (producers' loop), all favourable to managing the vulnerability
of local tourism activities (Fig. 1, case 1).

510

512

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the panarchies of the two study cases. For each case,
three nested subsystems are hierarchically scaled and their respective positions in Holling's
adaptive loops are symbolized according to the right-hand insert.

514

Case 2: Salar de Uyuni (Bolivia)
First loop: quinoa producer families

14

516
518
520
522
524
526

528
530
532
534

536

538
540
542

544
546

548

550
552
554

In the 1980's, Bolivian quinoa growers opportunistically responded to increased demand for
gluten-free, protein-rich, organic food in North America and Europe. These new markets,
often labelled fair-trade, did not replace the Peruvian market which remained open to
unofficial trade of conventional (non-organic) quinoa (Gandarillas et al. 2015; Laguna 2011;
Rojas 2011). Local quinoa producers thus occupy a diversity of niches in the growing quinoa
market, but did not specialize in this unique production. While only a few continue to raise
llama and sheep—an activity with low economic profitability, incompatible with temporary
migration—, most maintain a seasonal rural/urban mobility that allows for off-farm activities
in neighbouring cities where producer families live almost year-round (especially those with
children in school). This strategy of on-farm/off-farm pluriactivity involving different family
members results in much diversified household economies (Laguna 2011; Vassas-Toral 2015;
Ofstehage 2012; Vieira-Pak 2015).
Considering the income of quinoa (potential) and the connection to market niches
(connectedness), the household economy of quinoa producers shows a situation of multiple
trajectories between the growth (r) and conservation (K) phases. Resolutely engaged in
commercial production, local families still maintain flexibility in their activities, thus avoiding
complete specialization in a profitable but risky business. This flexibility is reflected in partial
"back loops" when quinoa producers chose to alternate between multiple on- and off-farm
activities and multiple market niches, moving opportunistically from one trajectory to another
(Vassas-Toral 2015; Ofstehage 2012).
Second loop: community territory
The agricultural landscape of the Salar region has been profoundly modified by the change in
land use from pasture to crop fields, with almost all of the mechanizable lowlands now
converted to quinoa fields. More than unclear and controversial land degradation (WalshDilley 2013; Winkel et al. 2012), it is the land area converted to quinoa crops that appears as
the most reliable indicator of the local agroecosystem having reached its maximum carrying
capacity, with a significant homogenization of the landscape and virtually no more space
available for new crops.
The adaptive loop of the community territory thus appears to be trapped in an advanced
conservation phase (K) with vast quinoa monocultures resulting in minimal landscape
diversity (maximum field connectivity) and maximum available land capital (potential)
already converted into cropland.
Third loop: socioeconomic context
The socio-economic analysis of the Salar region highlights contradictory characteristics in
local population dynamics, with the national census indicating a continuous population loss
whereas recent studies suggest a "re-peasantization" of the region (Kerssen 2015; VassasToral 2015). In fact, commuting between rural and urban areas remains the current livelihood
strategy for the majority of the population, which implies a continuous reorganization of
household and economic activities on a monthly (sometimes weekly) time scale.

15

556
558

560
562

564

566
568
570

The strategy of double rural/urban residence has implications for the norms of access to and
use of agricultural resources, since compliance with these norms allows double residents to
claim land access rights in their community of origin. Yet, here too multiple rules enacted at
different levels of organization (community, nation, international organizations, food
industry) are accumulating, and continually rearranged and reinterpreted.
Thus, continuous adjustments in population dynamics (social potential) and land resource
management (normative connectedness) indicate an adaptive loop of the social system located
in a (α) phase of prolonged reorganization, with temporary emigrants crossing returnees, and
with multiples—sometimes unimplemented—land management rules.
Integrating the adaptive loops in a panarchy
In total, the scaling of the three adaptive loops shows a territorial subsystem in a vulnerable
(K) phase, but without any apparent risk of a "revolt" type connection since the underlying
system is in intermediate (r) phase, with quinoa producers' families maintaining a risk-coping
strategy of mobility and pluriactivity on-farm and off-farm. At a higher level, the (α) phase
characterizing the socio-economic context leaves open the possibility of multiple initiatives to
tackle the issue of the vulnerability of the territorial system (Fig. 1, case 2).

6. Discussion and conclusion
572
574
576
578

Since localities are at the crossroads of daily actions of local stakeholders and planned
interventions of external entities, it is not surprising that their territories emerge from the
panarchy analysis as the places where the vulnerability of local socio-ecological systems
concentrates. A more interesting result is to identify strengths and bottlenecks at adjacent
scales to address issues at this crucial organizational level. We have done this by paying
particular attention to "commoning" processes valuing the biocultural heritage in the
perspective of an inclusive peasant agriculture.
Commoning to get included

580
582
584
586

588
590

The two study cases illustrate how the inclusion of peasant farming through heritage products
operates simultaneously in two directions. First, it operates "inwards", with the inclusion of
individual peasants and artisans in local organisations that allow them to act for common
objectives, i.e. "commoning" in Bollier's terms (2015). It also operates "outwards" with the
recognition of peasants and artisans and their productions by a range of external socioeconomic actors: authorities, social and territorial development agents, processors and
marketers, gastronomic promoters, media and, finally, consumers.
"Inwards", social inclusion resulted from collaborative processes of decision making,
production and valorisation of biocultural goods, with the participation of marginalised
people, women (case 1) or smallholders (case 2). Cooperation helps social and economic
inclusion through the co-construction of new aspirations and identities, such as initiating and

16

592
594
596

598
600

602
604
606

608
610

612
614
616

618
620
622
624
626
628

managing short value chains3 for diverse heritage products (case 1) or for an ancestral ecotype
of quinoa, Quinua Real, emblematic of a vast territory (case 2). To individuals and families
with little economic power, collective action thus offers new social roles that embody cultural
values and imply both their responsibility and their rights (Bollier 2015). The two case studies
belong to the category of social innovations resulting from bottom-up, multi-stakeholder and
inclusive collective processes that emerge from territories to respond to aspirations for change
and local social needs (Faure et al. 2018).
"Outwards", more than just commercial spaces, the local fair (case 1) and the international
niche markets (case 2) become spaces for producers to meet consumers directly and for the
rest of society to recognize their products.
The cooperation and self-organisation of the producers are the pillars of "commoning", which
can be satisfied with an informal but effective grouping (case 1) or form powerful national
associations (case 2). Cooperation brings autonomy and, usually, involves a form of selfmanagement that goes beyond the simple need to generate commercial value (Lucas et al.
2016). Solidarity and social inclusion, identity and cultural recognition are also key values for
the sustainability of community groups (Lacote 2017).
In a broader perspective, both case studies demonstrate the importance of local action for the
governance of biocultural resources, thus corroborating the potential for efficiency and
resilience of local self-organization compared to centralized governance of natural resources
(Ostrom 1990; Tittonell 2014; Tschopp et al. 2018).
Local experiences of "commoning" can be difficult to replicate as they are often based on
informal networks of contacts and cooperation (Macías Vázquez and Alonso González 2015).
The relationship of trust gradually built between the actors can be formalized through a
contract of the rights and duties of the participants, such as the renewed norms of access and
use of land in case 2 (AVSF 2010). But case 1 shows that in a still incipient innovation
process the lack of a formal contract does not prevent—and perhaps facilitates—joint and
effective action by the group.
Another key point is the mobilization of consumers in support of producers at the other end of
the value chain. In the face of attempts to capture cultural value by exogenous actors, it seems
essential to maintain local social control (on the part of producers) and non-local control (on
the part of consumers) over the material capital of natural resources and products, but also
over the collective symbolic capital of knowledge, norms, images, etc. (Macías Vázquez and
Alonso González 2015). This objective of social control over heritage products does not mean
that the community of producers withdraws into itself: at the other end of the value chain,
citizen organizations concerned about the quality of their food, authenticity, social justice and
the sustainability of their modes of consumption can effectively support the orientations of
local producers (e.g. through militant fair-trade associations or community-supported
agriculture). Sustained public participation in the heritage fair in case 1 and the engagement of
3

Remember that "short value chain" does not refer to the geographical distance between producer and
consumer, but rather to the reduced number of intermediaries that separate them in the value chain.
17

630

632
634
636
638
640
642

644
646

648
650
652
654

656
658
660
662

fair trade organizations with quinoa producers in case 2 illustrate the common interest and
objective agreement between actors at both ends of the value chain.
It has been claimed that without support from state technical agencies, small producers cannot
access high-value markets (FIA 2015). However, the two cases presented here demonstrate
that innovations based on the commons do not always require the intervention of centralized
entities. The greater efficiency of local entities in the management of territorial resources has
been emphasized by Ostrom (1990) to justify self-governance over these resources. The
possibility for marginalised farmers to integrate the market for their own empowerment and
establish alliances different from those recommended by external agents (government, NGOs,
etc.) is an option that can be as innovative and a form of resistance to the "command-andcontrol" system (Cox 2016). However, there may also be abuses of power games or private
interests at the local level, which encourages reflection on how to maintain control over
individual or local actors in order to preserve the general interest. In case 2, this precaution
led to the consensual renewal of communal norms to control the usurpation by a few of
common pastures to convert them into crops with private usufruct.
In both cases, and regardless of their degree of formalization, the new social organizations
began with the smallest possible unit: grouping of individual producers (case 1) or indigenous
village community (case 2). This guaranteed the autonomy and control of local actors over the
new norms to which they would be subject (Ostrom 1990).
In economic terms, the two cases we analysed show that the inclusion of family agriculture
through artisanal products and heritage foods can operate by the construction of short value
chains both local (case 1) and international (case 2). By distributing added value more
equitably, short value chains increase the autonomy of producers while favouring agroecological transition (Lucas et al. 2016). This is illustrated in case 2 by the intense work of
renewing the community norms for the sustainable use of territorial resources, the result of
raising stakeholders' awareness of the ecological and social challenges of the changes
underway in their territory.
As a marketing strategy, short value chains often correspond to niche markets oriented
towards the product (biocultural good of quality with identity) and the consumer (tourist in
case 1, eco-responsible consumer in case 2), rather than towards conventional distributors,
who cling to criteria of volume and margins rather than quality, social justice, authenticity, or
mitigation of environmental damage. In this short value chain strategy, agrotourism offers
local producers a particular opportunity to value their biocultural heritage within their own
territory (Bazile et al. 2014; Núñez and Bazile 2010).
Key features of a "valuable" biocultural heritage

664
666
668

The two cases presented show that "valuable" heritage goods are products that combine local
identity and the general interest, or, in other words, that unite tradition and innovation. The
general interest and innovation around quinoa respond to the growing concerns in global
society about issues of nutrition and health, economy and environment, globalisation and
social justice. Regardless of the size of the target market, in both cases, local actors have been

18

670
672
674
676
678

680

682
684
686

688
690
692

694
696
698
700
702
704
706
708

able to respond to these concerns which, essentially, consist of finding quality products with
an identity that convinces consumers that their purchasing act benefits the common
biocultural, social or environmental heritage. The identitarian and traditional dimensions of
heritage goods are nourished by the affective relationship that local producers—generally
inhabitants or natives of rural areas—maintain not only with their territory (Hinds and Sparks
2009) but also with each other through ties of kinship or friendship (Laguna 2011; VassasToral 2015; Vieira-Pak 2015). Whether consciously or not, this affective symbolic value is
integrated into the price that the consumer is willing to pay, generating a positive circle
between market, social ties, and biocultural heritage. The strategies of local actors to valorise
and commercialise their biocultural goods are then oriented according to these values and
expectations of society in general.
Territories, between local identity and non-local connections
In a territorial perspective, the inclusion of peasant agriculture is established under two
complementary realities: the anchoring of family producers in their lands of origin even if, as
in case 2, families maintain a double rural/urban residence; and a flow of resources, people,
goods and information from the "outside" to the productive territory, which is then integrated
into new exchange networks, making its heritage known and reinforcing its connections to the
"outside".
In case 2, the anchoring and permanence of families in communities is conditioned by the
tension between their access to better basic services and their active control over the access
and use of territorial productive resources. This tension is resolved by replacing emigration,
often long and distant, by a new form of urban/rural mobility within the region that allows
compliance with communal obligations and access to land (Vassas-Toral 2015). In centralized
countries, as in case 1, this communal control of territorial resources poses the challenge of
deconcentration of power and resources of state institutions.
For heritage resources to contribute to the inclusion of family farming, the territorial
anchoring must also value a local identity—traditional or innovative—that allows for the
elaboration of a story or an image to be disseminated abroad (Annes and Bessière 2018). In
this story or image, the territory is highlighted as a source of authentic (made by the
inhabitants themselves, not by industrial processes), natural (coming from the ocean, the
mountains, the desert, all spaces a priori without contamination...), healthy (of high nutritional
value, without chemical additives), aesthetic and cultural products. In case 1, these symbolic
values motivated from the start the producers who were relying on their successful
experiences with high-quality papaya and handicrafts. For quinoa, the heritage value of its
local production and use still needs to be established with more evidence. A first step would
be through culinary innovation to generate socio-cultural identity and strengthen the territorial
anchorage of peasant agriculture. By betting on local gastronomy and tourism, it is possible to
promote biocultural heritage products without having to look for distant markets, which is
beneficial for the autonomy of emerging groups of small producers (FIA 2015). In case 2,
after 40 years of "generic" quinoa production and a growing competition from Peru, the
promotion of Quinoa Real's identity is now the basis of a denomination of origin process

19

710
712
714
716
718
720

722
724
726

(Soraide-Lozano 2011). However, some analysts suggest that this idea may be inappropriate
in the current configuration of the export market where differentiating one Bolivian ecotype
from another in Peru does not motivate the final consumer—European or North American—
interested in the organic, healthy, or even fair trade nature of the product and not its
geographical origin (Böhm 2016). Here, the geographical distance between producers and
consumers seems to be an obstacle for the latter to appreciate the biocultural heritage of a
distant and unknown territory, especially in the case of a food such as quinoa, which is
consumed marginally compared to tea and coffee, for example. Solving these bottlenecks
requires virtuous networks between conscious and organized citizens, and a socially and
ecologically responsible market, i.e. new terms of the social contract to take into account local
requirements in globalized scenarios (De Schutter 2011).
Overall, innovations based on biocultural heritage—whether creative in the case of a new
heritage fair or essentially adaptive in the case of sustainable export production—have made it
possible to change the local reality of small farmers without hindering existing activities,
which seems to guarantee their acceptability and social and economic viability in the medium
and long term. In particular, their consensual and progressive nature has made it possible to
promote inclusive changes that contribute to good living together.
References

728

1.

Allison, H. E., and R. J. Hobbs 2004. Resilience, adaptive capacity, and the "Lock-in
Trap" of the Western Australian agricultural region. Ecology and Society 9: 3. URL:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss1/art3/.

2.

Annes, A. and Bessière, J. 2018. Staging agriculture during on-farm markets: how does
French farmers' rationality influence their representation of rurality? Journal of Rural
Studies 63: 34-45. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2018.1007.1015.

3.

AVSF (Agrónomos and Veterinarios sin Fronteras). 2010. Pauta metodológica para la
elaboración de las normas comunales y sus planes de cumplimiento. La Paz, Bolivia:
Agrónomos and Veterinarios sin Fronteras. URL: https://www.avsf.org/es/posts/633/full/.

4.

Barrientos, E., F. Carevic, and J. Delatorre. 2017. La sustentabilidad del altiplano sur de
Bolivia y su relación con la ampliación de superficies de cultivo de quinua. Idesia (Chile)
35: 7-15. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-34292017005000025.

5.

Bazile, D., E. Martínez, J. Negrete, M. Thomet, E. Chia, H. Hocdé, and L. Nuñez. 2014.
Biocultural heritage: Quinoa as an important resource to be maintained through tourism
experiences for food security in the face of climate change. Tourism, Leisure and Global
Change 1:1-16. URL: https://www12.nau.edu/nabejp/ojs/index.php/igutourism/article/view/313.

6.

Bedoya-Perales, N., G. Pumi, A. Mujica, E. Talamini, and A. Domingos Padula. 2018.
Quinoa expansion in Peru and its implications for land use management. Sustainability
10: 532. URL: https://doi.org/510.3390/su10020532.

7.

Beling, A. E., J. Vanhulst, F. Demaria, V. Rabi, A. E. Carballo, and J. Pelenc. 2018.
Discursive synergies for a ‘Great Transformation’ towards sustainability: pragmatic

730
732
734
736
738
740
742
744
746
748

20

750

contributions to a necessary dialogue between human development, degrowth, and Buen
Vivir. Ecological Economics 144: 304-313. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.08.025.

752

8.

Blay-Palmer, A., R. Sonnino, and J. Custot. 2016. A food politics of the possible?
Growing sustainable food systems through networks of knowledge. Agriculture and
Human Values 33 (1):27-43. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-015-9592-0.

9.

Böhm, F. 2016. The grain of the gods against poverty: approaching the quinoa value
chain in Bolivia and Peru with inclusive business models. MSc thesis in Global Business
and Sustainability. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Rotterdam School of Management..

754
756
758
760
762
764
766
768

10. Bollier, D. 2015. Commoning as a transformative social paradigm. The Next System
Project, an initiative of the Democracy Collaborative. Washington DC, USA. URL:
https://thenextsystem.org/commoning-as-a-transformative-social-paradigm. Accessed 31
January 2019.
11. Castaldo, S., F. Perrini, N. Misani, and A. Tencati. 2009. The missing link between
corporate social responsibility and consumer trust: The case of fair trade products.
Journal of Business Ethics 84: 1-15. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-10008-1966910554.
12. Chakrabarti, S. 2014. A critique of inclusive growth: problems of modernization of
agriculture. World Review of Political Economy 5:372-391. URL:
https://doi.org/310.13169/worlrevipoliecon.13165.13163.10372.

770

13. CONAF. 2017. Situación diaria de incendios forestales. http://www.conaf.cl/situacionnacional-de-incendios-forestales/. Accessed 31 January 2019.

772

14. Contreras, R.; E. Krivonos, and L. Sáez. 2014. Mercados locales y ferias libres: el caso de
Chile. In Agricultura familiar en América Latina y el Caribe: recomendaciones de
políticas, eds., S. Salcedo, and L. Guzmán. Santiago, Chile: FAO. URL:
http://www.fao.org/docrep/019/i3788s/i3788s.pdf.

774
776

15. Cox, M. 2016. The pathology of command and control: a formal synthesis. Ecology and
Society 21: 33. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-08698-210333

778

16. Cruz, P., T. Winkel, M. P. Ledru, C. Bernard, N. Egan, D. Swingedouw, and R. Joffre.
2017. Rain-fed agriculture thrived despite climate degradation in the pre-hispanic arid
Andes. Science Advances 3: e1701740. URL:
https://doi.org/1701710.1701126/sciadv.1701740.

780
782
784
786
788

17. Cubillos-Celis, E., C.J. Poblete-Olivera, and N.O. Zavalla-Nanco. 2018. Contribución de
la agricultura familiar campesina a la preservación y salvaguardia del patrimonio
cultural y natural de la quinoa en Lipimávida. Tesis de Grado. Curicó, Chile:
Universidad Católica del Maule.
18. Darnhofer, I., C. Lamine, A. Strauss, and M. Navarrete 2016. The resilience of family
farms: towards a relational approach. Journal of Rural Studies 44: 111-122. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2016.01.013

21

790

19. Delatorre-Herrera, J., M. Sánchez, I. Delfino, and M.I. Oliva. 2013. La quinua
(Chenopodium quinoa Willd), un tesoro andino para el mundo. Idesia (Chile) 31: 111114. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-34292013000200017.

792

20. De Schutter, O. 2011. Towards more equitable value chains: alternative business models
in support of the right to food. New York, USA: United Nations.

794

21. Essex, J., and R. Read. 2016. To be truly inclusive, we must stop prioritising ‘growth’: a
critique of the RSA’s ‘Inclusive Growth Commission’. London, UK: Green House. URL:
https://www.greenhousethinktank.org/gases.html

796
798

22. Faure, G., Y. Chiffoleau, F. Goulet, L. Temple, and J.M. Touzard, eds. 2018. Innovation
et développement dans les systèmes agricoles et alimentaires. Versailles, France: Editions
QUAE.

800

23. FIA (Fundación para la Innovación Agraria). 2015. Patrimonio agroalimentario.
Innova+Agro 1: 100 p. URL: http://bibliotecadigital.fia.cl/handle/20.500.11944/1861.

802

24. Gandarillas, A., W. Rojas, A. Bonifacio, and N. Ojeda. 2015. Quinoa in Bolivia: the
PROINPA Foundation’s perspective. In State of the art report on quinoa around the
world in 2013, edited by D. Bazile, D. Bertero and C. Nieto. Santiago, Chile: FAO, 344-377. URL: http://www.fao.org/343/a-i4042e.pdf.

804
806
808
810
812
814
816

25. Gavin, M. C., J. McCarter, A. Mead, F. Berkes, J. R. Stepp, D. Peterson, and R. Tang.
2015. Defining biocultural approaches to conservation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution
30: 140-145. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2014.12.005.
26. Gibson-Graham, J.K., J. Cameron, and S. Healy. 2013. Take back the economy: an
ethical guide for transforming our communities. St Paul, USA: University of Minnesota
Press.
27. Gobierno Regional del Maule. 2012. Política regional de desarrollo de localidades
aisladas. Región del Maule. Talca, Chile: Gobierno Regional del Maule, División de
Planificación y Desarrollo Regional.
28. Grivins, M. and T. Tisenkopfs. 2018. Benefitting from the global, protecting the local:
The nested markets of wild product trade. Journal of Rural Studies 61: 335-342. URL:
https://doi.org/310.1016/j.jrurstud.2018.1001.1005.

818

29. Gunderson, L. H., and C. S. Holling, eds. 2002. Panarchy: understanding
transformations in human and natural systems. Washington (DC), USA: Island Press.

820

30. Hinds, J. and P. Sparks. 2009. Investigating environmental identity, well-being, and
meaning. Ecopsychology 1: 181-186. URL: https://doi.org/110.1089/eco.2009.0026.

822
824

31. Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 4:1-23. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.1104.110173.000245.

826

32. Ioris, A.A.R. 2016. Introduction: underscoring agribusiness failures, environmental
controversies, and growing food uncertainties. In: Agriculture, Environment and

22

828
830
832
834
836
838
840
842
844
846
848
850

Development, ed., A.A.R. Ioris. Switzerland: Springer. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/1978-1003-1319-32255-32251.
33. Isgren, E. and B. Ness. 2017. Agroecology to promote just sustainability transitions:
analysis of a civil society network in the Rwenzori Region, Western Uganda.
Sustainability 9: 1357. URL: http://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/1359/1358/1357.
34. Kerssen, T. M. 2015. Food sovereignty and the quinoa boom: challenges to sustainable
re-peasantisation in the southern Altiplano of Bolivia. Third World Quarterly 36:489507. URL: https://dx.doi.org/410.1080/01436597.01432015.01002992.
35. Lacoste, P., A. Castro, F. Mujica, and M. Lacoste Adunka, eds. 2017. Patrimonio y
desarrollo territorial. Productos típicos alimentarios y artesanales de la Región de
O'Higgins. Identidad, historia y potencial de desarrollo. Santiago, Chile: Instituto de
Estudios Avanzados, Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH).
36. Laguna, P. 2011. Mallas y flujos: acción colectiva, cambio social, quinua y desarrollo
regional indígena en los Andes bolivianos. PhD thesis in Social Sciences. Wageningen,
The Netherlands: Wageningen University. URL: http://edepot.wur.nl/188049
37. Lucas, V., P. Gasselin, and J.D. Van Der Ploeg. 2016. Increasing searches for autonomy
among French farmers: a starting point for agroecology? 12th European IFSA Symposium
"Social and technological transformation of farming systems: Diverging and converging
pathways". July 2016. Harper Adams University, Edgmond, UK. URL:
https://www.harper-adams.ac.uk/events/ifsa/papers/13/13.14%20Lucas.pdf.
38. Macías Vázquez, A., and P. Alonso González. 2015. Managing collective symbolic
capital through agro-food labelling: strategies of local communities facing neoliberalism
in Spain. Journal of Rural Studies 41: 142-152. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2015.08.03.

854

39. Miño-Baes, B.N., and M.P. Viedma-Araya. 2019. Producción sostenible de quinua en la
localidad de Lipimávida: resguardando el patrimonio natural y cultural de la agricultura
familiar campesina. Tesis de Grado. Curicó, Chile: Universidad Católica del Maule
(UCM).

856

40. Murra, J. V. 1984. Andean societies. Annual Review of Anthropology 13:119-141. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/110.1146/annurev.an.1113.100184.001003.

852

858
860
862
864
866

41. Núñez Carrasco, L., and D. Bazile. 2009. Cultura campesina en Chile central sobre la
producción y consumo de Chenopodium quinoa Willd.: el caso de la comuna de
Paredones provincia Cardenal Caro, región de O’Higgins. Revista de Geografía de
Valparaíso 42: 87-94. URL: http://www.rgv.ucv.cl/articulos/Articulo42-88.pdf
42. Núñez, L.C., and D. Bazile. 2010; La ruta de la quínoa costera y sus tradiciones
campesinas. Anales de la Sociedad Chilena de Ciencias Geográficas: 254-260. URL:
http://www.sochigeo.cl/circulares/diez.pdf
43. Ofstehage, A. 2012. The construction of an alternative quinoa economy: balancing
solidarity, household needs, and profit in San Agustín, Bolivia. Agriculture and Human
Values 29:441-454. URL: https://dx.doi.org/410.1007/s10460-10012-19371-10460.
23

868

44. Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: the evolution of institutions for collective
action. New York, USA: Cambridge University Press.

872

45. Pouteau, R., S. Rambal, J.P. Ratte, F. Gogé, R. Joffre, and T. Winkel. Downscaling
MODIS-derived maps using GIS and boosted regression trees: The case of frost
occurrence over the arid Andean highlands of Bolivia. Remote Sensing of Environment
115: 117-129.

874

46. PUC (Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile). 2017. Potencial competitivo de la
quinua chilena. Santiago, Chile: Fundación para la Innovación Agraria (FIA).

870

876
878
880
882
884
886
888
890
892
894
896
898

47. Rojas, W., ed. 2011. La quinua: cultivo milenario para contribuir a la seguridad
alimentaria mundial. Santiago, Chile: FAO, Oficina Regional para America Latina y el
Caribe.
48. Sáez-Tonacca, L., A. Aravena-Narbona, and C. Díaz Ramírez. 2018. Uso de harina de
hojas de quínoa (Chenopodium quinoa) como ingrediente innovador, para la elaboración
de alimentos de uso humano. Idesia (Chile) 36: 233-242. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-34292018005000602.
49. Salcedo, S., and L. Guzmán. (Eds.). 2014. Agricultura familiar en América Latina y el
Caribe: Recomendaciones de políticas. Santiago, Chile: FAO. URL:
http://www.fao.org/docrep/019/i3788s/i3788s.pdf .
50. Salliou, N. 2011. Rapport final pour la révision des montants de prix minimum et de
prime pour le quinoa labélisé Fairtrade Max Havelaar. France: Max Havelaar. URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Nicolas_Salliou/publication/271964300.
51. Sinclair, K., A. Curtis, E. Mendham, and M. Mitchell. 2014. Can resilience thinking
provide useful insights for those examining efforts to transform contemporary
agriculture? Agriculture and Human Values 31: 371-384. URL:
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-014-9488-4
52. Slight, P., M. Adams, and K. Sherren. 2016. Policy support for rural economic
development based on Holling’s ecological concept of panarchy. International Journal of
Sustainable Development & World Ecology 23: 1-14.
53. Soane, I. D., R. Scolozzi, A. Gretter, and K. Hubacek 2012. Exploring panarchy in alpine
grasslands: an application of adaptive cycle concepts to the conservation of a cultural
landscape. Ecology and Society 17:18. doi: 10.5751/es-05085-170318

900

54. Soper, R. Local is not fair: indigenous peasant farmer preference for export markets.
Agriculture and Human Values 33: 537–548. URL: http://dx.doi.org/510.1007/s1046010015-19620-10460.

902

55. Soraide-Lozano, D. 2011. La Quinua Real en el altiplano sur de Bolivia: documento
técnico para la denominación de origen. La Paz, Bolivia: Fundación FAUTAPO.

904

56. Swiderska, K., A. Argumedo, Y. Song, A. Rastogi, N. Gurung, and C. Wekesa. 2018.
Biocultural innovation: the key to global food security? London, UK: International

24

906
908
910
912
914
916
918

Institute for Environment and Development (IIED). URL:
http://pubs.iied.org/17465IIED/?p=17461.
57. Tittonell, P. 2014. Livelihood strategies, resilience and transformability in African
agroecosystems. Agricultural Systems 126: 3-14.
58. Tschopp, M., S. Bieri, S., and S. Rist. 2018. Quinoa and production rules: How are
cooperatives contributing to governance of natural resources? International Journal of
the Commons 12: 402-427. URL: http://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.826.
59. Vassas-Toral, A. 2015. Movilidades, recursos de tierra y sistema de producción agrícola
en el altiplano sur de Bolivia. In Racionalidades campesinas en los Andes del sur:
reflexiones en torno al cultivo de la quinua y otros vegetales andinos, eds., P. Cruz, R.
Joffre, and T. Winkel. Jujuy, Argentina: EdiUNJU, Universidad Nacional de Jujuy.
60. Vieira-Pak, M. 2015. El auge de la quinua: visiones de futuro en el altiplano sur de
Bolivia. In Racionalidades campesinas en los Andes del sur: reflexiones en torno al
cultivo de la quinua y otros vegetales andinos, eds., P. Cruz, R. Joffre, and T. Winkel.
Jujuy, Argentina: EdiUNJU, Universidad Nacional de Jujuy.

920

61. Walker, B. H., and D. A. Salt 2006. Resilience thinking: sustaining ecosystems and
people in a changing world. Washington DC, USA: Island Press.

922

62. Walsh-Dilley, M. 2013. Negotiating hybridity in highland Bolivia: indigenous moral
economy and the expanding market for quinoa. The Journal of Peasant Studies 40:659682. URL: http://dx.doi.org/610.1080/03066150.03062013.03825770.

924
926
928
930
932
934
936
938
940
942

63. Walshe, R., and A. Argumedo. 2017. Ayni, ayllu, yanantin and chanincha: the cultural
values enabling adaptation to climate change in communities of the Potato Park, in the
Peruvian Andes. GAIA - Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society 25: 166-173.
URL: https://doi.org/110.14512/gaia.14525.14513.14517.
64. Winkel, T., R. Alvarez-Flores, D. Bertero, P. Cruz, C. Del Castillo, R. Joffre, S. Peredo
Parada, and L. Sáez Tonacca. 2014. Calling for a reappraisal of the impact of the quinoa
expansion on agricultural sustainability in the Andean highlands. Idesia (Chile) 32: 95100. URL:http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-34292014000400012.
65. Winkel, T., R. A. Alvarez-Flores, P. Bommel, J. Bourliaud, M. Chevarria Lazo, G.
Cortes, P. Cruz, C. Del Castillo, P. Gasselin, R. Joffre, F. Léger, J. P. Nina Laura, S.
Rambal, G. Rivière, M. Tichit, J.F. Tourrand, A. Vassas Toral, and M. Vieira-Pak. 2015.
The southern altiplano of Bolivia. In State of the art report on quinoa around the world in
2013, eds. D. Bazile, D. Bertero and C. Nieto. Rome, Italy: FAO. URL:
http://www.fao.org/433/a-i4042s/i4042s4024.pdf .
66. Winkel, T., H. D. Bertero, P. Bommel, M. Chevarría Lazo, G. Cortes, P. Gasselin, S.
Geerts, R. Joffre, F. Léger, B. Martinez Avisa, S. Rambal, G. Rivière, M. Tichit, J.F.
Tourrand, A. Vassas Toral, J.J. Vacher, and M. Vieira-Pak. 2012. The sustainability of
quinoa production in southern Bolivia: from misrepresentations to questionable solutions.
Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science 198: 314-319

25

944
946
948
950
952
954

67. Winkel, T., P. Bommel, M. Chevarría-Lazo, G. Cortes, C. Del Castillo, P. Gasselin, F.
Léger, J. P. Nina-Laura, S. Rambal, M. Tichit, J. F. Tourrand, J. J. Vacher, A. VassasToral, M. Vieira-Pak, and R. Joffre. 2016. Panarchy of an indigenous agroecosystem in
the globalized market: The quinoa production in the Bolivian altiplano. Global
Environmental Change 39: 195–204. URL:
https://doi.org/110.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.1005.1007.
68. Zandstra, M. 2015. Powerfood: an analysis of relations between the state, local
authorities and transnational networks in the production and sales of quinoa in Bolivia.
MSc thesis. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: University of Amsterdam, Department of
Global Environmental Politics and Governance. URL:
http://www.scriptiesonline.uba.uva.nl/530111.

26

