Decentralising the Patent System
Gaétan de Rassenfosse1 and Kyle Higham1
1

Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
December 17, 2019

Abstract
This paper proposes a substantive re-think of the modern patent
system. The patent system has come under intensive criticism in the
past, and many scholars have proposed ways to improve it. Ideas for
improvement include, e.g., prior-art bounties, contracting out examination and dynamic fee setting. However, many of these ideas have
gone unheeded due to the cost of administering them and the rigidity
of the patent system. We explore how distributed ledger technologies
enable these major changes.
Keywords— blockchain, distributed ledger, intellectual property, patent, smart
contract
JEL: K11, K23, L24, O34, O38

1

1

Introduction

The core rationale behind the patent system has not changed since 15th century
when the first well-documented patent system was concocted in Venice (Prager,
1944; Long, 1991; Sichelman and O’Connor, 2012). By granting inventors the right
to exclude others from a newly discovered slice of technological space, the patent
system provides an incentive to pour more resources into the inventive process.
Furthermore, the disclosure of the technical details of the invention in the patent
document is supposed to facilitate knowledge diffusion. However, it has been argued
that current patent systems are not a particularly efficient means of achieving these
goals (Thurow, 1997; Jaffe and Lerner, 2004; Stiglitz, 2007; Bessen and Meurer,
2008), and additionally come with such high costs to society that many have wondered why governments should grant these rights at all (Boldrin and Levine, 2008,
2013; Mirowski, 2011).
In this work, we argue that distributed ledger technologies (DLTs) may improve
the effectiveness of modern patent systems, and illustrate this point with vivid proposals. These proposals, many of which are already discussed in the literature, are
aimed at alleviating well-known problems associated with patent systems, including
long grant lags (Gans et al., 2008; Ackerman, 2011), high levels of patent invalidity (Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; Frakes and Wasserman, 2017), anti-competitive
patenting strategies (Macdonald, 2004; Blind et al., 2009), the high risk and cost
of litigation (Bessen et al., 2011; Bessen and Meurer, 2013; Lemley et al., 2018),
and many other problems that have been covered in recent years (Hall and Harhoff,
2012; Eckert and Langinier, 2014; Sampat, 2018). We explain how a more decentralised, transparent, and accessible patent records system offers the flexibility
required to address or reduce the impact of many of these issues.
We use the word ‘decentralisation’ very broadly in this work. First, patent data
and the management of this data is currently quite centralised; patent offices hold
and organise all patent information, and we generally trust them with this responsibility. However, this may not hold across all jurisdictions or, indeed, indefinitely.
Centralisation also appears to be simply unnecessary; most patent information is
public by nature. A more decentralised source appears to be sensible for this purpose. Second, and perhaps most importantly, the patenting process is even more
centralised than the data. Patent offices represent a bottleneck in innovation systems more widely, and this can be largely explained by the centralisation of this
system and its interaction with public policy (Jaffe and Lerner, 2004). The primary function of patent offices today is to examine patent applications; however,
this process is extremely slow and often results in poor-quality output. At the same
time, there exists a large pool of expertise outside patent offices that is not being
leveraged to address these problems—decentralising some parts of the patenting
process may seem a sensible design.

2

Any discussion concerning reforms that may fix these inefficiencies should start
with the following question: are current patent systems, if they were working exactly as intended, the best way to encourage technological progress and optimise
societal welfare? The answer to this question is impossible to know. After all, technological progression, and the way technology benefits society at large, is highly
heterogeneous and so requires a heterogeneous set of approaches to innovation policy (Hemel and Ouellette, 2019). However, an obvious first step is allowing our
innovation-inducing policies of choice to dovetail effectively by making our current
systems much more amenable to modifications that may address current inefficiencies (and any new ones) that may arise.
It has also become clear in recent years that it is not merely inefficiencies within
patent offices that lie at the root of these problems, but the systems to which
theses offices are duty-bound. It is easy to forget that patent offices are resourceconstrained actors with little control over the legal and industrial environments in
which they are embedded. Financial constraints and extended patent pendency
times, the decisions around patent-eligible subject matter, or even differences in
novelty and non-obviousness thresholds between the patent office and the courts,
are crucial issues with current patent systems that are almost entirely out of the
control of patent offices (Jaffe and Lerner, 2004; Rai, 2008; Sohn, 2011).1,2
The structure of this document is as follows. We first introduce in Section
2 the fundamental ideas behind DLTs and their use. The main sections of the
paper, Sections 3 and 4, split potential changes to patent systems into those that
run complementary to current procedures and those that fundamentally restructure
them. Both of these sections are organised chronologically through the life of an
invention. Section 5 outlines the important new roles and responsibilities that
patent offices would need to assume to maintain and regulate functional patent
systems of the future, should they become more decentralised and dynamic. Section
6 concludes, and suggests some avenues for future work.

2

Distributed Ledger Technologies

It is first important to understand, at a high level, how a distributed ledger functions. However, it is also important to keep in mind that these technologies are still
new, and different configurations continue to be invented and implemented for new
use cases. For this reason, we do not wish to restrict the proposals detailed in this
work to one particular system architecture. In order to give a general overview,
1

Of course, many of the benefits and drawbacks of current patent systems lie outside
of these bureaucracies, and any proposed changes to patent systems must also consider
the flow-on effects that these policies may have.
2
In the United States, however, there have been recent developments towards increasing patent office autonomy (Wasserman, 2012).

3

however, what follows is a description of the most common form of distributed
ledgers as the technology exists today.

2.1

Overview of Distributed Ledger Technologies

A distributed ledger is a list of transactions or instructions that are distributed
across a network of nodes. Every entity, or node, with access to the network is
assigned a private key and a public key. The former is used to generate a digital
signature to authorise transactions while the latter is a public identifier that can
be used by others (that is, anyone who is allowed to read the ledger) to verify the
authenticity of the signature and, therefore, the transaction.3 Every transaction
that an entity wishes to have recorded on the ledger is broadcast through the
network and added to each node’s copy of the ledger. Through this mechanism,
the network acts as a witness to a transaction (Holden and Malani, 2019). If
the transaction is found to be valid, the network can come to a consensus that
the transaction did indeed occur. Technologies that distribute a ledger across a
network in this fashion, with an in-built consensus mechanism that ensures that all
participants agree on the contents of the ledger, are known collectively as distributed
ledger technologies (DLTs).4
The overarching goal of a DLT is to maintain a list of transactions that is
agreed by all parties to be correct. This agreement is established via a consensus
mechanism that entities in the network trust to provide a secure ledger. The choice
of consensus mechanism depends on the choice of DLT type, as well as its purpose.
In the case of a permissionless public blockchain, a distributed ledger that anyone
with an internet connection can read and write to, the consensus mechanism must
eliminate any dependence on trust in fellow users to maintain a secure ledger. For
this reason, most blockchains of this type must incentivise computational work by
offering cryptocurrency in exchange for the generation of a cryptographically linked
chain of transaction blocks (hence the name ‘blockchain’ for DLTs organised in this
manner). This consensus mechanism, referred to as ‘proof of work,’ is effective
at maintaining a trusted (but decentralised) ledger as long as no single entity,
or group of cooperating entities, control the majority of the resources doing the
computational work (Li et al., 2017).
Permissioned DLTs, on the other hand, restrict network access to authorised
entities. In this case, the requirement to eliminate trust may be relaxed somewhat,
and consensus mechanisms adapted appropriately—the transparency, immutability,
3
Within the context of this work, a ‘transaction’ generally refers to an interaction
between an applicant or patentee and the patent office or examiner.
4
DLTs, and blockchain in particular, are inextricably linked to cryptocurrency in the
mind of the public. It is therefore worth noting that not one of the proposals suggested
in this work is dependent on cryptocurrency. There is no technical reason why standard
payment systems, using fiat currencies, could not be integrated into a DLT-based patent
records system.

4

and decentralised nature of the ledger is not dependent on a particular consensus
mechanism. For example, in the case of strictly private DLTs that are used for
record-keeping within an organisation, this mechanism may be as simple as having
trusted members authorise any additions to the ledger. This form of DLT may be
useful for large organisations who wish to keep all transactions of a particular type
on one ledger that cannot be altered once recorded.
A particularly relevant type of permissioned DLT for the current work is federated blockchain, also known as a blockchain consortium. In its most general
form, a blockchain consortium is a network of entities with a common interest in
maintaining a shared record of transactions. Participating entities agree on a consensus protocol that will validate the transaction blocks, and access rights can be
very flexible. While participating entities may add to this ledger (and also potentially validate transactions), there is no technical reason why the information on the
ledger cannot be public. Note also that in the case of permissioned DLTs, it is often
the case that entities on the network have a shared goal or use-case and, therefore,
the incentive to participate in the consensus mechanism is simply the utility that
each entity is able to extract through its access to the ledger—no cryptocurrency
need be involved in the system.
At this point, it is necessary to directly address concerns that the types of
DLTs that may be usefully implemented in patent systems may require excessive
amounts of computational power. After all, many popular blockchains, such as the
Bitcoin blockchain or Ethereum, require a considerable amount of computational
work to validate blocks of transactions (Krause and Tolaymat, 2018). This shortcoming is inherent to a proof-of-work based consensus mechanism as it is precisely
this computational work that ensures that participants agree on the contents of
the ledger (Nakamoto et al., 2008). Permissioned DLTs, on the other hand, offer
much more computationally efficient validation and consensus mechanisms that are
entirely different to proof-of-work. This efficiency is possible because the identities
of the validators are known and they are generally few (Gramoli, 2017). Therefore,
while complexity and computational efficiency are inarguably higher for permissioned DLTs than for traditional systems, we consider these particular downsides
to be negligible when considering the implementation of a permissioned DLT.
Blockchain is not the only type of DLT in existence, but it was the first and
is the most widely used. However, there exists an entire ecosystem of DLTs that
differ from each other in many fundamental ways while sharing a common goal,
namely, to provide a decentralised source of information. Some of these blockchainalternatives aim to fix particular shortcomings of blockchain to make them more
suited to particular use-cases. Usually these improvements are made by facilitating
both vastly increased transaction rates on the network as well as scalability of the

5

DLT (El Ioini and Pahl, 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Pervez et al., 2018).5 While these
specific properties may not be particularly useful for application to patent systems
as described in the remainder of this work, we will continue to use the general term
DLT so as not to limit our proposals to a single technical framework. After all, the
most suitable system may not yet exist.

2.2

On the Necessity of DLTs

The remainder of this work will go into some detail about how DLTs may be used to
improve the functioning of current patent systems. However, DLTs are not strictly
necessary for any single proposal presented here. So then, why use DLTs at all?
It may be argued that DLTs are only necessary when it is desirable to reduce
the reliance on trust between transacting entities or, if possible, do away with
trust altogether. This way of thinking could lead one to the conclusion that DLTs
are probably unnecessary for our proposals, After all, centralised systems based
on mature technological solutions may be able to perform these roles just as well.
Inventors and firms already trust the patent office with some of their most valuable
assets: their ideas. The question usually associated with these concerns is: Do you
need a blockchain? (Wüst and Gervais, 2018). Of course, we do not wish to restrict
ourselves to the technical framework of blockchain, but the sentiment holds: Do we
need a DLT?
To answer this question, we must acknowledge that while trust is generally not a
problem for developed countries with modern patent systems, trustworthy systems
may not always be easily accessible to inventors and firms in less developed regions.
However, we will steel-man the argument above by assuming that DLT-based patent
record systems are implemented in developed countries, and that inventors deeply
trust patent offices with their valuable Intellectual Property (IP). Is there still a
reason to use a DLT in this scenario?
Core to the arguments presented in this work is the assertion that DLTs not only
streamline many processes within the patent office as it is organised at present, but
they also significantly expand the realm of possibilities for improvements to current
policies and protocols. Some of these possibilities may indeed involve interactions
between parties that do not necessarily trust each other such as contracting out
patent examination (see Section 4.2). These solutions may, therefore, be thought
of as infeasible at present due to the sensitive nature of the information contained
in patent applications. Patent-related interactions between distrustful parties may
also occur outside the patent office. For example, patents are tradable or licensable assets (Arora and Gambardella, 2010); DLT-based patent information, with
5

For example, directed acyclic graph-based DLTs (Benčić and Žarko, 2018) are sometimes touted as the natural successors of blockchains (Popov, 2016; Pervez et al., 2018),
and are already gaining traction as an appropriate form of DLT for applications such as
microtransactions (Popov, 2016).

6

government-verified ownership and legal status, may reduce uncertainty and other
frictions in the markets for these assets. In short, while societal trust in the patent
office is not generally a concern, the existence of DLTs means that issues of trust
need not restrict our thinking about improvements to patent policy. Additionally,
it is also in the interest of governments to remove barriers to innovation and trade
that would otherwise benefit society at large—it may be worth adopting DLT-based
records solely to encourage more activity in adversarial environments outside the
patent office.
It is also noteworthy that firms currently use DLT-based records internally,
which suggests that trust is not the only factor driving the adoption of this technology. The benefits of DLTs for streamlining asset management (Savelyev, 2018),
data sharing (Xia et al., 2017), and identity management (Dunphy and Petitcolas,
2018), for example, are well-known. In the context of IP, these benefits may be
recast as: automation of knowledge asset management through smart contracts
or off-ledger code,6 a pathway towards a global patent and application database
with standardised formats, and transparent and automatic recording of ownership
or licensing information. Most of these applications have little to do with distrust
between entities, and yet clearly represent a range of possibilities that are either
administratively inefficient to operate or otherwise infeasible if implemented within
current systems. We believe such benefits present a compelling case for the consideration of DLT-based patent records, in addition to the applications above that
are unlocked by a reduced need for trust.
By understanding the advantages of DLTs over traditional means of recordkeeping, we can re-frame the primary functions of government-run patent systems
to leverage these advantages. What follows is a reimagining of the patent system
in a way that offers decentralised, immutable, and transparent records.

3

DLTs for Unlocking Flexibility

In the minds of many, DLTs have the potential to change the nature of institutional
trust and offer the opportunity to replace traditional institutions with decentralised
systems entirely. The abolition of patents is not the topic of the current work. In
fact, even in a much more decentralised IP system, we see patent offices as essential
players. By nature, a patent bestows upon the owner a government-granted right—
as long as patents exist, the government has the responsibility to ensure they work
6
Smart contracts are automatically executing if/else statements that are recorded on
a DLT and may or may not be associated with an actual contract—some new DLT infrastructures even distance from this terminology, e.g., in Hyperledger Fabric (Androulaki
et al., 2018) smart contracts are called “chaincode.” In the current work, the only distinction we make between smart contracts and (simple) traditional programs is whether
or not it is encoded on the DLT (and is therefore immutable and public). Both types of
code can, in theory, react to events on or off the DLT.

7

as intended. This regulatory role will remain paramount, and we discuss this role
in more detail in Section 5.
In this work, we make a distinction between those proposals that leverage DLTbased records for structural changes to the patenting process and those that may
raise the efficiency of current procedures. In this chapter, we discuss the latter,
the less dramatic changes that patent offices can make that may nonetheless have
significant benefits to the functioning of the patent system as a whole. The following
proposals may run complementary to current office procedures and facilitate greater
experimentation with new policies than is currently possible. Here we think of DLTs
as tools for ‘unlocking flexibility,’ both for the patent office (by facilitating policy
experimentalism) and users (through new technology management tools).

3.1

Patent Application

The first, and perhaps most obvious, step towards a DLT-based patent records system is to register patent applications on a DLT. This process is a small extension
to current procedures: it merely adds the record to the ledger to provide notice
that an application has been made to the patent office. Additionally, all future
transactions related to this application and, if successful, subsequent patent can be
recorded on the DLT as well, providing full transparency and immutability. At the
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), this record-keeping already
takes place through PAIR,7 while the European Patent Office (EPO) achieves much
the same level of transparency through the European Patent Register.8 The contents of the information placed on the DLT in this manner does not have to be
public, however. For example, all information regarding a new patent application
(and any amendments to this application) can be hashed before being recorded on
the DLT,9 and decrypted (as a new record) when it is made public as a typical
pre-grant application. Functionally, this procedure is identical to current procedures. At the time of decryption, the transaction history related to the application
can also be made public. This ensures that the entire history of the application
or patent becomes eventually public information and, if recorded correctly, can be
trusted to be accurate due to the nature of the DLT.10 While we see no reason to
distrust the patent office to perform these tasks, the present mechanism allows technology transfer between potentially untrusting parties while the application is still
secret—as the hash allows for easy verification that the application being licensed
7

https://portal.uspto.gov/pair/PublicPair (last accessed 07/11/2019)
https://register.epo.org/regviewer (last accessed 07/11/2019)
9
Cryptographic hashing is a process that takes arbitrary data as input and that outputs an apparently random string of ones and zeros with a fixed length. Crucially, this
function always gives the same output for a given input, and it is impossible to reverse
engineer the original data from this output.
10
Knowing the method of encryption as well as the original text, it is straightforward
to check that the decrypted document was indeed what was encrypted in the first place.
8

8

pre-grant or otherwise transferred is the same as the application that is awaiting
examination (without requiring any affirmation from the patent office).

3.2

Patents as Assets

Patent rights are part of a bargain, whereby an applicant discloses the details of an
invention, and the government grants the applicant temporary rights to exclude its
use by others. After this point in time, the applicant may treat this IP as any other
asset—they can license its use to others, sell it outright, securitise or collateralise
it, or even place it directly into the public domain.
As such, perhaps the most convincing non-structural rationale for transitioning
to a DLT-based patent records system is how ownership and use of these assets may
be recorded and managed by both patent offices and their users. DLTs also provide
many opportunities to third-parties that offer auxiliary services to both potential
applicants and patent owners. These opportunities are numerous and cover many
aspects of the innovation process, including trade secrets, collaboration, and supply
chain management. However, here, we will focus on the direct and immediate
benefits of DLT-based patent records: notice of patent ownership, ease of licensing,
marking, and the automatic public disclosure of these actions. Third parties have
already begun to offer private opt-in versions of some of these services; indeed, they
have emerged in the absence of any patent office initiatives to incorporate DLTs
into their processes.11

3.2.1

Patent Ownership

In most jurisdictions, there is no legal obligation to provide the patent office with
information about changes in patent ownership. This ‘notice failure’ introduces
significant, and many would argue unnecessary, inefficiencies into the innovation
system (Menell and Meurer, 2013). In many cases, even the government itself does
not know exactly to whom these government-granted rights belong. This problem
is well-known—one effort from the USPTO to attempt to remedy this situation
was eventually abandoned due to concerns about undue administrative burden on
patentees (Anderson, 2015).12 DLT-based records are inherently compatible with
a requirement that any change of ownership (including to applications) needs to be
registered with the patent office within a reasonable time frame from the transfer
date. All parties involved need simply to provide digital signatures to authorise
the change, without having to involve the patent office directly.13 This metadata
11

See e.g., ipwe.com (last accessed 07/11/2019).
This view was predominantly put forward by large corporate entities with complex
ownership structures, e.g. see https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/FR-2014-01-24/
2014-01195 (last accessed 07/11/2019).
13
Note, however, that this kind of action should be subject to additional security measures, see Section 6.1.3.
12

9

would automatically be updated on the patent record. Many firms currently report
reassignments to the patent office (Graham et al., 2018)—DLT-based reassignment
could streamline this process.
The USPTO’s proposed change mentioned above also required that all entities that may be able to enforce a particular patent be listed on the document,
along with any changes in these entities over time.14 This requirement appears to
be the component of the proposal that would place the most ‘undue’ burden on
patent holders. However, these potential enforcers are precisely the entities about
whom competitors and potential infringers are concerned. Therefore, information
on enforcers would likely go the furthest in addressing the inefficiencies associated
with notice failure. This suggestion remains an appropriate one as part of broader
reform efforts, as this burden is currently placed on competitors and not those who
are responsible for the complexity of ownership structures in the first place—the
patent holders themselves—and who are in the best position to provide this information (Anderson, 2015). Like ownership information, there is little justification
for obscuring potential enforcement entities (and any changes to them) from the
patent office and the public.15
In summary, DLTs would integrate nicely into any policy that would seek to
clarify patent ownership or enforcement status at any particular point in time.
These changes would be recorded in the patent metadata without directly involving
the patent office. The firm that applied for the patent is listed on the application,
the firm that was granted the patent is listed on the patent itself, and any transfers
of ownership would be recorded (and time-stamped).16 These events can easily be
aggregated to view a full ownership history. Transfers would not be, in the traditional sense, ‘reported’ to any authority—they are transactions between private
parties made official by an associated record on the DLT. Patent offices, like the
public, are simply observers in this scenario. When ownership is transferred, there
is no doubt about the parties involved or the timing of the transaction, and the
event is made immediately public.
14

See https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/FR-2014-01-24/2014-01195 for more
information (last accessed 07/11/2019).
15
Note in the case of ownership, however, there is a significant incentive on the part of
the new assignee to ensure the transfer is promptly reported to the patent office. If it is
not, the transfer may be voided in favor of a subsequent transfer that does get reported.
(See 35 USC §261).
16
Loss of ownership is not a concern in the same way that it is for cryptocurrencies
(e.g. money.cnn.com/2013/11/29/news/bitcoin-haul-landfill) because ownership is
not secret. A registration process for assignees means that there is an authority with
whom to interface in case of security issues. For a brief overview of security issues in the
context of DLT-based patent records, see Section 6.1.3.

10

3.2.2

Licensing and Markets for Technology

Scholars have pointed out that the market for technology, be it a license or transfer, is an extremely information-poor setting with regard to pricing (Lemley and
Myhrvold, 2007; Arora and Gambardella, 2010). Unlike markets for other goods,
negotiations for IP rights are often closed-door ordeals with significant information
asymmetries between parties (Gallini and Wright, 1990; Buenstorf and Geissler,
2012).
Firms would benefit significantly from a thicker and richer (information-wise)
market for technology. Perhaps most obviously, having access to a thick market of
buyers and sellers allows more efficient distribution of knowledge resources across
parties—on one side, buyers can access new technologies at market price, and on the
other side, suppliers can raise funds by allowing others access to their inventions.
In the latter case, these funds can be funnelled into other activities such as followon innovation or investment in tangible capital (Arora et al., 2001; Sichelman and
O’Connor, 2012; de Rassenfosse, 2012). Information on the value of the usage rights
for particular inventions is also invaluable to all players in this market. In particular,
knowing the market value of inventions would have a drastic impact on the pricing
of IP rights, likely lowering licensing and transfer costs for everyone, increasing
the pace of follow-on innovation, and reducing the impact of commercialisationinhibiting phenomena such as patent thickets (Hall et al., 2015).
More generally, licensing has benefits for society at large. Theoretical work suggests that both ex-ante and ex-post licensing facilitates and incentivises sequential
innovation (Green and Scotchmer, 1995), therefore aligning the financial interests
of firms with social welfare by accelerating technological progress where invention is
cumulative. In a similar vein, some empirical work indicates that the common utilisation of cross-licensing agreements may neutralise the adverse effects that patents
could have on follow-on innovation (Sampat and Williams, 2019).
When patents are all recorded on a DLT, smart contracts can reduce the complexity of some simple forms of licensing and lower the barriers to licensing otherwise
dormant IP (Gambardella et al., 2007).17 Both the USPTO and WIPO facilitate
some form of post-grant patent licensing market,18 and pre-written contracts could
modernise these services: the licensor sets simple contractual terms, places the licenses in some central marketplace,19 and anyone who would like to license the
17

Patent licensing negotiations are often complicated, strategic, and multilateral ordeals. It is therefore unlikely that smart contracts would simplify, or even be feasible for,
many forms of patent licensing.
18
E.g.,
see
https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/newsletter/
inventors-eye/licensing-options
and
https://www3.wipo.int/wipogreen/en/
(both last accessed 07/11/2019).
19
Markets for patent transfers and licenses in a world with DLT-based patent records
would inevitably be set up by third parties in any case.

11

technology could simply buy the contract.20 This kind of system would incur little or no administrative costs on either party once the contract is digitally signed.
Whether or not a patent is licensable, as well as a list of current licenses,21 would
be recorded in the DLT and aggregated with the other metadata of the patent
in question. This type of licensing would probably work best when bundles of
patents are offered (such as patent pools) or in the context of standard-essential
patents (Shapiro, 2000; Lerner and Tirole, 2015).
All of these licensing and transferal transactions recorded on the DLT would
constitute valuable and easily aggregated information to assist in the correction of
the information asymmetry that exists within the current market.

3.2.3

Virtual Patent Marking

Virtual Patent Marks (VPMs) were introduced in the United States with the America Invents Act in 2012, which allows patent owners to indicate patent-product
relationships on the internet as a complement to physically marking the product (USPTO, 2014; de Rassenfosse, 2018). VPMs were introduced in the United
Kingdom in 2014 under the name ‘webmarking.’ Marking serves several functions including, importantly in the current context, informing would-be imitators
of patent rights that may be infringed should the product be copied. If the patent
is marked and subsequently infringed, the patent owner can claim damages from
the time the VPMs were posted online (as opposed to from the moment a formal
infringement notice has been mailed to the alleged infringer). We suggest that
virtual marking is perhaps under-utilised as a tool for not only monitoring commercialisation of patented inventions (which may in itself have important policy
implications) but also as a way to incentivise proper disclosure.
A patentee could virtually mark their patents by linking them to their associated products via a transaction on the DLT.22 This process would create a two-way
link between patent and product: one could not only find the patents marked on
the product page as is currently the case, but also find the associated products
listed in the patent metadata. This change would result in increased levels of useful
disclosure of the existence of patented information and provide a starting point for
mitigating the uncertainty associated with patent thickets (Shapiro, 2000; Fromer,
2016). To incentivise patentees to use VPMs in this way, they could act as evidence
of commercialisation or other usage (Vonneuman, 1956; Trimble, 2016) which may
be rewarded in the form of discounted maintenance fees, a stronger case in infringement litigation, or other benefits. One particular use case is the use of DLT-based
20

In this example, the contract would constitute something akin to a subscription.
As licenses do not come with exclusions (and therefore enforcement) rights, there is
no sensible reason for the identity of the licensee to be listed, however.
22
A standard format for VPMs would be ideal; currently, there are no formatting
requirements.
21

12

VPMs for proving version history of patent marking websites—there is currently
no requirement to keep these records, but they could be crucial when attempting
to claim damages on a marked item in a litigation case.

4

DLTs for Structural Change

We will now move on to the structural changes that DLT-based records can facilitate. Up to this point, the identified benefits of switching to a DLT-based patent
records system are most useful after a patent has been granted and primarily relate
to clarity in patent rights. Changes that increase clarity and ease of management
may on their own provide enough justification for such a switch. This section discusses how DLTs may enable some changes that may solve more inherent problems
in patent systems that have been identified in the past (See e.g., Jaffe and Lerner,
2004; Bessen and Meurer, 2008).

4.1

Patent Application

The first step in the patenting process is the filing of an application to the patent
office. This step is perhaps the easiest to envision as a transaction recorded on a
DLT, as described in Section 3.1. After all, the patent office already records applications and the information contained therein. Therefore, this section addresses
the appropriate extent of disclosure at this early point in the process, and examine how this would be facilitated and implemented if patent offices were to record
applications on a DLT.

4.1.1

The Timing and Nature of Invention Disclosure

The status quo in many patent offices is the publication of all patent applications
after 18 months (if an accelerated publication is not requested). It is not obvious,
however, that there should be a delay in the publication of the application from
a social welfare viewpoint. Disclosure is one of the most fundamental aspects of
the patent system; indeed it is one half of ‘grand bargain’ that society makes with
innovators (Graham and Hegde, 2015), and it is only as useful as it is timely (United
States Senate, 1992). While the well-known reward theory of patents primarily
focuses on the incentives that encourage inventors to invent, with the presumption
that these inventions will eventually benefit everyone, there are also many benefits
associated with invention disclosure. Appendix A goes into further detail about the
disclosure function of patents that partially motivates our suggestion below.
We propose that there be no secrecy period automatically endowed to patent
applications. If assignees would like to keep their applications secret, they can
pay a fee for this privilege.23 This way, secrecy benefits the public to some extent
23

The arguments against this proposition generally concern with time-to-market. For

13

since the patent office would be better resourced as a result, while also reducing
the potential impact on the prevalence of breakthrough inventions — without the
secrecy option, high-risk R&D projects in particular may be disincentivised at the
margin. In the context of DLTs, ‘dynamic secrecy’ may be facilitated by a smart
contract or off-ledger mechanism that decrypts and publishes the patent application
at a time of the firm’s choosing, perhaps retaining the 18-month secrecy period as
a maximum. The cost of entering this arrangement would scale with the requested
secrecy period.
This proposal pertains to the disclosure of the invention itself. However, there
is additional information, sometimes referred to as non-technical disclosure (Anderson, 2016), that may be leveraged to make increased levels of disclosure more
palatable to patentees at the cost of the (initial) transparency described above. To
illustrate one such lever, let us assume that the utility of disclosure generally does
not depend on whose invention is being disclosed. For this reason, it is not strictly
necessary to disclose any metadata that explicitly identifies the assignee, inventor,
attorney, or any other entity related to the invention until the patent is granted.
This mechanism could assist in maintaining some balance between disclosure and
incentives to invent, as disclosing the details of the invention would not signal the
research direction of any particular applicant, merely that it is someone’s research
direction. Note that in many jurisdictions patents are reviewed for national security purposes, and may be placed under a secrecy order as a result. This process is
clearly an important one, and is briefly discussed in the current context in Appendix
D.
These proposals, taken together, would have several profound effects, both on
the way the patent system functions internally, and how it is utilised. First, the
suggested timing of pre-grant publication will lead to earlier disclosure of new inventions, more patent office funding, or a combination of both. The earlier disclosure
of inventions would not only bring with it all the benefits of disclosure, such as
follow-on innovation (Furman et al., 2018), in a more timely fashion,24 but may
also increase the quality of patent applications. After all, potential applicants
would be less willing to disclose the results of costly R&D if they were not sure
about the patentability of these results, especially if patent examination was more
rigorous than at present (see Section 4.2) to combat potentially increased levels of
obfuscation of invention details. A firm that is indeed unsure about the patentabilexample, firms would lose some of the lead time advantage bestowed upon them by the
current secrecy period, which may particularly affect small firms and technologies that
take a long time to commercialise. This of particular concern if it is possible to imitate
the inventions quickly in jurisdictions with weaker IP enforcement. We believe that the
benefits outlined below outweigh these costs, which may, in any case, be mitigated through
tools such as price discrimination dependent on firm or technology type.
24
Early disclosure has been studied extensively in both the theoretical (e.g., Aoki and
Spiegel, 2009) and empirical literature (e.g., Graham and Hegde, 2015).

14

ity of an invention in its current state (assuming a patent is necessary) would have
two options: develop the invention further to ensure patentability (this option is
explored in a related context in Cotropia, 2009), or pay for secrecy—both of these
are socially desirable outcomes. Further, recent changes to trade secret law and the
emergence of third-parties specialising in DLT-based trade secret management have
made early disclosure more feasible than ever—these developments are discussed in
Appendix B.
Firms can currently request early pre-grant publication in some jurisdictions,
and the benefits of this early disclosure are particularly pertinent for small firms
who do not have the resources to commercialise a promising invention. Patent
applications, and patents themselves, are vital to the success of these firms as
measures of their capabilities and can be used as a signal to investors (Lemley,
2000; Long, 2002; Hsu and Ziedonis, 2008; Veer and Jell, 2012; Häussler et al.,
2012; de Rassenfosse, 2012; Conti et al., 2013; Hall, 2019; Farre-Mensa et al., 2019).
Immediate disclosure would speed up these fundraising processes, including pregrant licensing (Hegde and Luo, 2017) and loans (Saidi and Zaldokas, 2017), and
therefore the realisation of the public and private benefits stemming from these
inventions.

4.1.2

Incentivising Higher Quality Applications

Surveys consistently find that lead time and secrecy are more effective appropriability mechanisms than patents across many industries, countries, and time, (Levin
et al., 1987; Harabi, 1995; Brouwer and Kleinknecht, 1999; Cohen et al., 2000; Arundel, 2001; Cohen et al., 2002; Blind et al., 2006; Capponi et al., 2019). Despite this
evidence, a culture of ‘file early, file often’ is still prevalent, and indeed encouraged,
as inventors can claim priority on inventions before they know much about potential utility, paths towards implementation, or even commercial viability (Cotropia,
2009). This practice has significant ramifications for the quality of disclosure—at
the time of early filing, the inventor, by definition, has not refined the invention and
therefore often does not have enough information to adequately delimit the scope
of their patent or fulfil the enablement requirement (Cotropia, 2009). Applicants
can further exacerbate this problem if they choose to merely fabricate the potential
applications of the invention as part of the specification.25 These applications do
not need evidence to demonstrate viability (Freilich, 2018; Freilich and Ouellette,
2019). Immediate disclosure may shift firms’ incentives to ensure they have sufficient lead time to offset the risk that the patent is narrowed considerably during
examination (or rejected altogether).
There exists a risk, however, that firms would make their applications extremely
broad or technically obscure in response to an immediate disclosure policy, which
25

This practice is legal and done in part to illustrate invention utility and preempt
potential infringements

15

would substitute for the desired increase in lead time before filing a patent application. Of course, the option to pay for secrecy as proposed in this paper would
discourage this behaviour for valuable inventions (assuming firms are more likely
to pay for secrecy in these cases); however, the patent value distribution is known
to be highly skewed (Pakes, 1986; Gambardella et al., 2008) and so this payment
may not be worthwhile for most patents.
There is clearly a need for balance, and we do not present here any DLT-based
solutions to mitigate intentional obscuring of invention specifications. As such, it is
important to note that both early filing and the lack of clarity in patent applications
are well-studied problems. Appendix C discusses some potential solutions to these
issues that may provide the balance necessary for immediate disclosure to be a
sensible modification to patenting procedure.

4.2
4.2.1

Examination
Weak Patents

Recent years have seen increasing concern about the quality of granted patents (Jaffe
and Lerner, 2004; Wagner, 2008; de Rassenfosse et al., 2016). Much of this concern
has been focused on the perceived proliferation of so-called ‘weak’ patents (Choi,
2005; Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; Farrell and Shapiro, 2008) that are likely to be
found invalid if challenged in court. After all, the exclusion rights obtained by
patenting an invention only exist insofar as they are enforceable. In the parlance
of Lemley and Shapiro (2005), variable enforceability of a patent is equivalent to
probabilistic patent rights—a patent gives the owner a chance to exclude others
from this technological space. An increase in the number of invalid patents that
are granted corresponds to this chance becoming smaller. In turn, the incentives to
partake in risky inventive activities become weaker. These likely invalid or ‘weak’
patents impact innovation in some industries more than others (Allison and Lemley,
1998; Bessen and Meurer, 2013); and it is conceivable that more patent litigation
due to the existence of these patents in a few industries could significantly increase
the level of defensive patenting among large firms in these industries (Hall and
Ziedonis, 2001; Chien, 2010), adding to the backlog (and grant lag) for all prospective patentees.
The reasons for the granting of invalid patents are also well-studied. In a
recent work, Henkel and Zischka (2019) find that one of the primary causes of
the invalidity of German patents, as determined by the German court system, is
incomplete prior art search. This finding is consistent with previous results using
USPTO data (Frakes and Wasserman, 2017) which indicate that less examination
time results in patents with less prior art cited, an increased grant rate, and a
higher likelihood of being found invalid if challenged. It is the job of the patent
office to grant valid patents and, in many jurisdictions, restrictions on examination

16

times are clearly too strict for the examiners to fulfil this requirement for all patent
applications. After all, if examiners are allotted less time to examine each patent
application, they have less time for an extensive search of the prior art, and so
are less likely to reject an application based on this prior art. At the USPTO, for
example, the burden is with the examiner to show why the patent shouldn’t be
granted. In this scenario, less examination time leads to less opportunity to find a
good reason to reject an application and, ultimately, results in a higher likelihood
of grant for any particular patent.
However, restrictions on patent examination time is sometimes a necessary evil.
Continuing with the USPTO as an example, some seemingly innocuous changes
made to the patent system in the 1980s (Jaffe and Lerner, 2004) has led to the
number of patent applications to the office ‘exploding’ in the past 30 years (Hall,
2004; Strandburg et al., 2006), and the USPTO has generally not managed to keep
up with this demand (Ackerman, 2011). While all patenting firms are affected
by the increase in grant lags associated with the resultant backlog, it particularly
impacts small firms and startups. For example, there is evidence that the beneficial
side-effects of patent grants for these entities are largely diminished by long grant
lags—the delayed access to financing made possible by patent ownership can prove
as damaging as the rejection of the application altogether (Farre-Mensa et al., 2019).
While the USPTO announced “specific actions [they] have taken to help reduce
the backlog” in 2011,26 and the backlog has indeed decreased, the percentage of
applications that are granted has risen at the same time (Cotropia et al., 2013).
Therefore, the net effect of decreasing examination time allotments may simply be
a reduction in grant lags at the expense of increasing levels of litigation when these
weaker, expedited patents are challenged in court—arguably an even greater source
of inefficiency in the innovation system (Frakes and Wasserman, 2019).
One potential, and perhaps obvious, solution to this particular problem is an
increase in patent office resourcing to allow examiners more time to consider the
patentability of applications. Assuming that this is either not feasible or would
not work (Lemley, 2011), we will discuss the concept of prior art bounties for the
remainder of this section, and how DLTs may enable this development.

4.2.2

Prior Art Bounties

The idea behind prior-art bounties is simple: pay third parties for relevant prior art
that leads to a rejection of a patent application.27 This concept was first proposed
26
https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/newsletter/inventors-eye/usptoyear-review-and-look-forward
27
Note that this proposal is distinct from outsourcing prior art searches as practiced in
some jurisdictions (Yamauchi and Nagaoka, 2015) and discussed in Section 4.2.3. However,
both outsourcing and the current proposal serve a common purpose: to widen the scope
of the prior art search and attempt to optimise patent quality with limited examiner
resources.

17

and explored rigorously by Thomas (2001). The need for such a system has been
echoed more recently (Ghafele et al., 2011), and even trialed in several countries,
albeit in the absence of financial rewards. These trials, in the end, were a series of
short-lived projects starting in the United States as Peer-to-Patent,28 and assumed
that the benefits to the third-party experts would outweigh the time cost of the
prior art search. These ‘strong’ motives (Noveck, 2006) included the “opportunity
to produce better patent quality”, as well professional motivations such as the will to
keep their domain knowledge up to date and gain recognition amongst their peers
and future employers. We argue that prior-art bounties take a more pragmatic
approach by offering a financial reward alongside these other incentives. The aim
of this approach is not to encourage third-parties to conduct in-depth searches in
the hope of finding relevant prior art. The motivation is to give examiners access to
large, preexisting reservoirs of expert knowledge that can quickly identify relevant
prior art—thus making the job of examiners easier, improving patent quality, and
financially rewarding experts for their vigilance. It is important to note that the
following suggestions do not aim to replace the entire prior art search process, but
merely assist examiners in making patentability decisions that would, hopefully,
result in fewer validity disputes.
A prior-art bounty system would consist of two stages: a submission stage and
a review stage. Submissions begin as soon as the patent application is made public
and close while the application is under examination. The submission may cost
the ‘bounty hunters’ some nominal fee per submission to disincentivise bad actors
and minimise the number of low-quality submissions. All submissions would be
published on the DLT and therefore be publicly viewable. The public and the
applicant are thus able to keep track of submissions.
The examiner, during their prior art search, first considers the submitted art
for each patent application in order of submission.29 If they deem a particular
piece of submitted prior art relevant and uses it as justification of a rejection notice
of any kind, the bounty hunter receives a reward or bounty. At this point, fees
from all other submissions would not be refunded, even if the examiner did not see
the submission before the rejection—this mechanism incentivises the submission of
prior art to applications where the hunters do not believe any relevant prior art
has yet been submitted. The benefits of such a bounty system are clear: third
parties are incentivised, professionally and financially, to provide relevant prior art
to the patent office.30 These incentives may be further enhanced when a patent
28

The results of these programs likely inspired new or updated implementations of
third-party submission processes around the world, including those implemented in the
United States (112th Congress of the United States of America, 2011), Australia (IP
Australia, 2018), and at the World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO, 2012).
29
This queue-based prior art check is already standard practice, with applicant-supplied
prior art reviewed first before an independent search by they examiner.
30
One can imagine this process being streamlined for large organisations employing

18

is of particularly high value, as competitors would like to see the scope of these
patents narrowed as much as possible. Competitors often know more about the
technology and state of the art than do the examiners. Therefore, in a system
where examiners are restricted in their ability to conduct an effective prior art
search, prior-art bounties appear to us as a way to reduce this load, reduce the
incidence of weak patent grants, and ultimately work to ensure the integrity of
granted patents.
The administration of a prior-art bounty system need not be resource-intensive—
many of the processes involved can be automated, on or off the DLT. As an on-DLT
example, the submission of prior art and associated submission fee could append
the submission to the patent application metadata and initiate a smart contract between the hunter and the patent office. This code would monitor events on the DLT
and execute appropriately, dependent on the fate of the application. If the patent
is rejected, the contract would check the prior art used in the rejection justification
(which is also recorded on the DLT). If it matches the prior art submitted by the
hunter, then the hunter is paid their dues. Else, if the application is withdrawn or
abandoned before examination, the fee is refunded. Else, the patent is examined
and either rejected or allowed with no reference to the submitted art, and the fee is
forfeit. Every transaction from the time the prior art is submitted is automated and
requires no human input beyond the usual actions of the applicant and examiner.
Acceptance conditions of this smart contract could also be set automatically, taking
all public information about the application into account and making an offer to
potential bounty hunters—applications for notoriously marginal or technical types
of inventions may have their fee-to-bounty ratios and the absolute levels of these
quantities adjusted accordingly.31
Prior art bounties come with some issues that need to be addressed in detail.
Some of these are very jurisdiction-specific; we discuss some examples of these in
Appendix E. Others are more general, the most pressing of which concern the potential for collusion between the different parties involved. Of course, there is a need
to ensure that the incentives structures of bounty hunters, applicants, and examiners are appropriately designed. Safeguards in the form of patent office oversight,
legislation, or pricing need to be put in place to ensure that there is no collusion
between these parties or anonymised foul-play that can undermine the value of a
bounty system. As a straightforward example, there is nothing in this system preventing the examiner from submitting prior art as an anonymous bounty hunter
and then using their submission as justification for rejection. Another problematic
many experts, whereby the experts submit relevant prior art to their legal team or technology transfer office for formatting and submission, with the organisation pooling and
sharing expenses and bounties.
31
This programme could, initially, take a form similar to that of Peer-to-Patent, where
applicants could opt-in to such a third-party submission system for particularly technical
subject matter.

19

scenario is one in which the people or firm doing the prior art search before filing
the application may leave an important piece of art out of the application, knowing
that they would be able to submit this as a bounty hunter and claim the bounty,
while potentially being hired to amend the application in light of this prior art.
This concern is more acute if the submitted documents have not been timestamped
by an authority or DLT-record (see Appendix F).
One way to mitigate this kind of behaviour, in addition to outright punishment, is to limit submissions to the non-patent literature only. After all, these
references are generally the most challenging and time-consuming for examiners to
find (Thomas, 2001; Sampat, 2005). This kind of prior art has the additional benefit
of being less intimidating to those who are much more familiar with a field-specific
set of documents (e.g., academic literature) than the examiners or even the applicants themselves. This limitation divides the search effort more efficiently, as patent
examiners are likely more proficient at searching for relevant patents than they are
at searching for non-patent literature.32 Another foul-play mitigation strategy is to
ensure that bounty hunters are subject to a robust identity verification procedure
during the bounty hunter registration process.

4.2.3

Contracting Out Examination

Examination of patent applications may be considered to be one of the main privileges of patent offices. However, in the face of concerns about the quality of
granted patents, restrictions on examination time, and skewed incentive structures
in favour of issuance, we may be forgiven for thinking that there may be alternative procedures that can do better. In this section, we propose the contracting out
of examination services,33 and how DLTs facilitate the implementation of such a
system that may otherwise be considered too complicated or trust-dependent to
administer.
Many patent offices are self-funded by applicant fees, with the burden on the examiners to prove invalidity. Additionally, patent offices have a monopoly on patent
examination services (Abramowicz and Duffy, 2008) and can thus perform poorly
with little risk (Domberger and Jensen, 1997). In combination, these facts encourage the grant of as many patents as possible while skewing incentives away from
ensuring high-quality examination. Third-party contractors would be incentivised
to conduct a high-quality examination—they would not only be subject to patentoffice oversight but would also have to compete for examination contracts. This
32
A recent work, however, has examined the types of prior art used by the United
States’ Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB) to justify the invalidation of a granted
patent after an Inter-Partes Review (Yelderman, 2019). The authors found that while
most obviousness invalidations cited a U.S. patent (76%), almost half (47%) cited a printed
publication such as a book or journal article (note that multiple citations are allowed).
33
Note that this concept has been discussed previously in the legal literature (Abramowicz and Duffy, 2008).

20

competition would also incentivise contractors to find ways to examine patents as
efficiently as possible, and spur on technological innovations that the patent office
lacks the resources and incentives to develop.34
The contracting out of government services is not a new idea, and the piece-wise
nature of patent examination makes this a particularly suitable application of this
process—the examination of a single patent application may constitute a discrete
contract. Blueprints for contracting out prior-art search to qualified third parties
already exist in multiple jurisdictions (Kazenske, 2003; United States Patent and
Trademark Office, 2003; Yamauchi and Nagaoka, 2015). In the case of the USPTO,
patent examiners often leave to become patent attorneys (Drahos, 2010; Tabakovic
and Wollmann, 2018) and are therefore very familiar with the patent examination
process, perhaps more experienced than many of the examiners at the patent office.
This attrition suggests that there exists a pool of examiners, some of which may be
willing to come back to this role as a private practitioner, with more flexible hours
and higher pay. On the other hand, examiners that remain would be able to spend
much more time on marginal or technical cases, which may be appealing to many
technically-minded people in want of stable employment.
Prior art search may justifiably be considered an integral (and not separable)
part of the examination process (Jeffery, 2002). That is, integral to a high-quality
examination is a high-quality prior art search. If competition for examination
contracts is fierce, therefore, third-party examination would inevitably lead to innovations that change how prior art is searched for, at least compared to the way it
is done in the context of examination within the patent office. This effect may be
further amplified when all transaction data, including all third-party prior art submissions and their success, are publicly available and stored on a DLT (see Section
5.2). The argument for such a system is strengthened further when considering a
DLT shared between multiple offices (see Section 5.3), who can use the same submitted prior art information for whole patent families, reducing duplicative search
efforts.
In Japan, outsourcing the prior art search component of patent examination
is already practiced. Yamauchi and Nagaoka (2015) observe that, when given a
choice, Japanese patent examiners were more likely to choose to outsource prior
art search for less complex technologies. The examined applications that had the
search outsourced had significantly fewer appeals against both rejection and grant
decisions, and final decisions were reached more quickly when compared to similarly
complex applications for which search was conducted internally.35 This suggests
that, at least in the case of less complex technologies, outsourcing prior art search
34

This innovation is also likely to occur outside of the contracting firms by specialised
service providers.
35
There are indications that these effects are driven in part by a broader scope in the
prior art search of the contractors.

21

is effective at both increasing the quality of examination and reducing pendency
times; the potential to extend these effects to more complex technologies could be
realised by a system where third-party examiners have the time and technology to
integrate these effective searches into the examination process.

Small-Scale Experimentation
We suggest that the technical components of the current proposal could be trialed
within current office procedures, complementary to current systems. This experimentation may be conducted by simply recording all examiner activities and correspondence on the DLT. After this technical foundation is put in place, an initial
opt-in system could be designed to take up patent office slack and could be restricted
to particularly non-controversial or non-complex technology fields. Using the outsourcing of prior art search by the Japanese Patent Office as a model (Yamauchi
and Nagaoka, 2015), examiners themselves could have discretion as to which patents
can easily be examined by third parties. Further testing of third-party examination
may even involve other national offices that may be better resourced or have particular areas of technological specialty. Such contracting out is already being done
by some small patent offices or collections of such offices (albeit in the absence of a
DLT). One example is the Support System for Patent Applications Management for
the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic (CADOPAT), which
also extends to the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization.36

Incorporating Review Processes
DLT-based examination would also facilitate other permutations of public-private
cooperation in patent examination. For instance, it is possible to set up a system to
help ensure the incentives of private examiners are aligned with the patent office’s,
such as the second-pair-of-eyes review (SPER) program (Allison and Hunter, 2006).
In the current context, this process would be a request for the patent office to
re-examine a patent application after the private examination is complete. Mark
Lemley and others have also suggested that a patent surviving reexamination should
result in an earned presumption of validity, should its validity be challenged (Lemley
et al., 2005; Lichtman and Lemley, 2007; Lemley, 2011). These ideas are discussed
in more detail in relation to private examination in Appendix G.
Contracting out examination services not only provides a natural application
of SPER as a way to ‘gold-plate’ patents—first by going through a third-party
examiner, then through a USPTO examiner—but also provides checks on the performance and reliability of third party examiners, perhaps in addition to random
checks (see also Abramowicz and Duffy, 2008). This system also solves, in part, an
36

https://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/doc_details.jsp?doc_id=345737 (last accessed 07/11/2019)

22

important problem with private examination: the potential for collusion between
the applicant and the private examiner. At present, while the incentives, resource
constraints, and protocols at some patent offices are undoubtedly skewed in favour
of granting patents (Schuett, 2013; Frakes and Wasserman, 2015), examiners are
not incentivised to favour some ‘customers’ over others. When examination is private, there is much more room for these activities to occur, and less direct oversight
to detect such activities. Granted, all official communications, including all justifications for changes to the applications, would be recorded on the DLT for all to see,
but this does nothing to prevent, for example, leniency towards marginal patents
in exchange for return business. Of course, one way to mitigate this is to impose
penalties on contractors where evidence of misbehavior is uncovered. As the entire
examination process is public due to being recorded on the DLT, firms would also
be able to act as watchdogs during the examination of their competitors’ patent
applications, as they too have a stake in the outcome.
However, SPER may also provide a way to mitigate this kind of collusion. We
foresee SPER being used in three circumstances:
• When an applicant wants added certainty in their patent rights via a presumption of validity should the patent be litigated;
• When a third party believes a patent has been wrongly allowed; or
• When an applicant believes their application has been wrongly denied.
In each of these cases, the party initiating the SPER pays for the examination to
start the process. This deposit guarantees that this party is financially committed
to the outcome. However, if the USPTO does not agree with the result of the private
examination, then the contractor must pay the USPTO examination fee and forfeit
their initial examination fee (which was recorded in the DLT), while the initiating
party is refunded. Assuming the SPER process is only utilised for valuable patents
(from the point of view of either the applicant or a competitor), this mechanism
would assist in incentivising private examiners to try to be at least as strict and
thorough as a USPTO examiner during their examination process, and particularly
so when the patent protection sought is valuable (to anyone). The above integrates
the incentive schemes for private examination explored in Abramowicz and Duffy
(2008) with the SPER system (Allison and Hunter, 2006; Lemley, 2011), while
DLTs record and make transparent, in real-time, the whole process in a way that
relies on no single entity to do so.

4.3

Keeping Patents in Force

After grant, firms must pay maintenance fees to the patent office to keep a patent
in force. From the perspective of the patent office, the monitoring of maintenance
fees via a smart contract has the potential to reduce administrative costs associated

23

with keeping patents in force. DLTs may also enable a schedule of fees that is more
optimal from a social welfare viewpoint.
A simple implementation could manifest itself as follows: upon patent grant, a
smart contract would be initiated. It would track the receipt of associated maintenance fees and the time at which this transaction is added to the DLT. Another
smart contract is initiated regarding the next maintenance fee event. If the patentee does not pay the fee, then the patent is considered expired, and the invention
enters the public domain.
Such a pay-as-you-go maintenance fee system may function as follows: inventions would automatically obtain some minimum period of protection on receipt of
the patent issue fee (on the order of a few years), during which time the patent
owners may pay their maintenance fee at any point. Three factors determine the
amount paid: time since grant; additional time requested; and time until expiration.
Intuitively, the fee should increase with time since grant and the additional time
requested, and decrease with the length of time until expiration to offset the risk
that firms take on by paying maintenance fees early.37 Of course, the maximum
patent term should still be limited in time, and the invention would fall into the
public domain at the latest at this point as usual. This kind of scheme allows firms
to pay maintenance fees commensurate with the present value of the invention
to the firm and rewards them for risk-taking when this associated future income
stream is uncertain. A DLT-based maintenance fee system would effectively remove
administrative burden from this process altogether; a smart contract could, knowing
the time of grant and the expiration date immediately prior to payment, be able to
calculate the additional time requested directly from the amount paid and apply
this extension to the patent metadata after confirmation from the patentee.
As a first step, this pay-as-you-go maintenance fee system can easily be matched
to the current pricing model. For example, the parameters that determine the
relationship between the three factors listed above and the resultant fee can be
calibrated such that the price of a set expiration time extension (e.g., one year at
the EPO and four years at the USPTO) at a particular time match the current prices
for the same extension. The flexible pricing described can then be entirely optional
for those firms who would like maximum control—after all, this flexibility would
integrate nicely with automated payment level optimisation based on, for example,
the present value of the patent rights, the uncertainty of this future income, or
other technology performance metrics (Jin et al., 2011). Other firms may prefer
some predefined payment schedule, such as those currently in place. For these firms,
the maintenance fee system would not change unless they would like to deviate from
37

There exists a large body of literature, both theoretical and empirical, that examines patent fee structures (both before and after grant) and the incentives that different
structures produce (Cornelli and Schankerman, 1999; Scotchmer, 1999; Gans et al., 2004;
Baudry and Dumont, 2006; de Rassenfosse and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, 2013).

24

it.

5

New Roles for Patent Offices

Patents represent a government-granted right. As such, patent offices, as representatives of their respective governments, have a vital role to play in every proposal
contained here. This fact remains true if the decentralisation of various patentrelated processes is taken to its most extreme. Here we will go into detail about
the new roles that the patent offices would need to assume to achieve the kind of
flexibility and efficiency gains that are intended by the proposals above.

5.1

Oversight and Regulation of Patent Examination

Supposing patent examination may be contracted out in a piecewise manner, contracts need to be distributed and monitored in a way that minimises the risk of
collusion between third-party examiners and applicants. Here, we will remain agnostic to the choice of contract allocation mechanism.38 We will, therefore, focus
on patent office oversight of third-party examination services and the challenges
that may arise independent of a particular contract allocation system.
It is vital to ensure complete transparency of the examination process if a third
party carries it out. To this end, all communication between the applicant, the
patent office, and the contractor should be recorded on the DLT in a standard
format. Patent offices would therefore be able to conduct significant oversight,
some of which may itself be outsourced to third parties specialising in, for example,
anomaly detection or examination quality monitoring.39 Furthermore, contractors
would need to declare any conflicts of interest they may have before accepting the
contract for any given examination. It is crucial to ensure not only that the grant
incentives of the examiners are orthogonal to the incentives of the applicant to
mitigate collusion, but that both parties benefit in the case of the grant of a highquality patent. That is, examiners must benefit when they grant a high-quality
patent, and for reasons unrelated to those benefiting the applicant. At the same
time, examiners must not be disadvantaged due to a well-reasoned rejection.
The DLT-based record described above could then be aggregated by contractor and would contain all information of interest to potential applicants, including
the cost of past examinations, technological specialties, and examination times.
This aggregate report could also contain post-grant information, such as any in38

It may be useful to keep one’s favoured mechanism in mind, however. Classes of
allocation mechanism include: applicant’s choice of private examiner, patent-office-fixed
contracts for individual patents or bundles offered to trusted firms, and patent-officemoderated auctions of the same. Catalini and Gans (2016) gives an example of how the
latter may function via a DLT in a generic auction context.
39
Outsourcing in this manner is not unusual. For example, financial auditing is outsourced to large accounting firms in many countries.

25

validity rulings or other litigation outcomes related to these patents. The patent
office may also use this information to optimise their monitoring processes; for
example, if patent office examiners conduct random checks on examined applications (Abramowicz and Duffy, 2008), then the probability of selecting a patent
examined by a particular contractor could be determined by their record through
a publicly viewable reputation metric.40
To become a registered examiner in the first place, a training program similar to that undertaken by patent office examiners should be required, and these
contractors should have attained (at minimum) the same qualifications as the equivalent patent office examiners. To ensure that their examination skills remain sharp,
contractors should have to examine some minimum number of applications every
year. Furthermore, to ensure that their knowledge is kept up-to-date, they should
enroll in continuing education classes provided by the patent office. Additionally,
technology-specific examination qualifications can be provided by the patent office
in order to train both in-house examiners and contractors to assist in the examination of applications in legally or technically challenging fields. The registration of
third-party examiners may be suspended or terminated by the patent office in the
case of particularly poor performance, or malfeasance.
The primary function of patent offices is to examine patents and, therefore, it is
during this pre-grant period that most patent office expense is incurred. However, to
lower the upfront cost to applicants, these expenses are subsidised by maintenance
fees paid by patentees. Additionally, current patent fee schedules discriminatory
with regard to price: smaller applicants pay less at each step of the process. These
details are important in the context of third-party examination, as contractors
would need to be paid in full for their work, thereby potentially increasing upfront
costs for the applicant. Therefore, regardless of the contract allocation mechanism,
there exists an question about how (and how much) the patent office would crosssubsidise these examination services should such a system materialize. The answer
is sensitive to the particular implementation of this system, so we leave this question
open and amenable to theoretical scrutiny (See, e.g., Gans et al., 2004).41

5.2

Patent Data Organisation

One consequence of recording patent-related transactions to a DLT is that this
information is automatically preserved, immutable, and all in one place. Exactly
40

These kinds of checks for examined applications are currently not possible at patent
offices due to resource constraints (Allison and Hunter, 2006).
41
There are good arguments for raising the necessary funds through sensible fee structures, both pre- and post-examination (the latter is examined in more detail above in
Section 4.3). Application fee increases at the USPTO in the 1980s acted as a filter for
low-quality patents, particularly for firms with already large patent portfolios, with little
effect on the quality or number of patents from small firms (de Rassenfosse and Jaffe,
2018).

26

how particular types of information is to be stored will not be discussed here;42
however, note that it is currently standard practice to store files in a dedicated
database with any metadata, hashes, and links to the file location stored on the
DLT itself (Xu et al., 2017).
Disclosure of inventions is not only a function of the clarity of the invention
description but also of accessibility. With all patent-related data in one place (or
at the very least all metadata with permalinks to full files), third parties, or even
patent offices themselves could start building flexible tools for the public to access
this information easily. These data should include all files relevant to each granted
patent in a standardised format,43 including datasets, CAD files for 3D models,
and more specialised formats for, e.g., molecular structures. Access to these data
for large-scale analyses by commercial ventures could be offered for a fee.
This single source of information could also facilitates the examination of new
patent applications, through the development of advanced search techniques exploiting it. If examination is done by the patent office, then these tools can be
developed in-house or in partnership with a third party. However, if examination
can be contracted out, then the competitive environment created would likely drive
innovation in this direction at a much faster pace than what can be achieved by
the patent office alone. Software designed to examine novelty and non-obviousness
would be able to use the data contained in all of the data types listed above (alongside the patent description itself) to facilitate these judgements and increase both
the scope and nature of prior art search of patent documents and applications.
Changes to this database would be, by definition, events published on the DLT.
These events, being publicly accessible in real-time, could trigger smart contracts
running on different ledgers (of any kind) or local programs on a centralised system.
This event-by-event information pipeline is much more conducive to these kinds
of activities than the APIs currently available, which require requests for specific
information—the programs would detect relevant new events almost immediately,
and be able to react automatically. This change may open up new possibilities for
technology management and monitoring for anyone interested and at the very least
would significantly increase the timeliness and efficiency of current efforts to do so.

5.3

International Coordination

One obvious question that arises when discussing distributed ledgers is: amongst
whom is the ledger distributed? This question is important to address, as DLTs are
often seen as a way to decentralise authority and control of a system. However, there
are other justifications for the use of DLTs. Some firms use private blockchains, for
42

See, e.g., Benet (2014) for an example of a popular DLT-based file storage system.
There is no discernible benefit to making all files public on application that would
outweigh the disincentive for disclosure (or incentive for obfuscation) such a policy would
create.
43

27

example, to ensure all transactions of a particular type are recorded in one place,
whether it be supply chain management (Kshetri, 2018; Saberi et al., 2019), or workflow management (Fridgen et al., 2018). These applications of DLTs are centralised
by design—the DLT is used as a tool to assist in the recording and management of
many actions by many different actors within (or contracting for) an organisation.
The incentive to ensure an accurate timeline of transactions is simply the utility
gained by an immutable and centralised ledger, which can facilitate oversight and
information aggregation for functions such as performance monitoring and thirdparty audits (Dai and Vasarhelyi, 2017).
However, many patent offices around the world may find utility in a DLT for
their own applications. In the case where many organisations would appreciate
access to the same DLT, a consortium (see Section 2) could provide the basis for
a consensus mechanism for the DLT and provide some assurance that the ledger is
indeed immutable (or very close to it).44
DLT consortia, in particular, have been experimented with for a number of years
within certain industries. These sectors include, but are not limited to, banking,
finance, insurance, healthcare, and transport.45 These applications could serve as
models for a DLT-based patent records system, as many serve the same underlying
purposes: a reduction of administration costs, increases in system efficiency, and
easier data sharing and transactions between participants, all of which are also
desirable for a global system. The use of a consortium of patent offices, however,
has an additional benefit that is generally not desirable for these other applications:
transparency. Indeed, this may prove to simplify implementation significantly, as
privacy is generally not a concern where (granted) patents are concerned.
Most jurisdictions have their own assignee or applicant identification systems.
However, are significant benefits to harmonising these systems across countries, not
least having clear and transparent ownership and relevant corporate structure information across patent families. A DLT-based global patent information database
would be a good starting point for such harmonisation. Firms must elucidate ownership structures (which often stretch across jurisdictional boundaries) for other
purposes such as taxation, and as such, there are few socially beneficial reasons for
obscuring the identity of potential enforcers of IP from competitors and governments.
44

A number of highly flexible infrastructures and tools aimed at building and running
DLT consortia have been gaining traction recently, the most prominent being Hyperledger (Androulaki et al., 2018)
45
See, e.g., voltrontrade.com, marcopolo.finance, b3i.tech, hashedhealth.com
and dlt.mobi, respectively (all last accessed 07/11/2019).

28

6

Conclusions and Future Work

Taken individually, most, if not all, of the possibilities for improvement of patent
systems offered above do not require that patent offices transition to a DLT-based
records system. However, the flexibility unlocked by such a system could be invaluable to the trial and implementation of future modifications to innovation policy,
from minor tweaks to wholesale reforms. There exist exciting proposals in the legal
and economic literatures that suggest seemingly straightforward solutions to many
of the issues that plague current patent systems. However, most solutions would
constitute major administrative disruptions and place significant and continuous
financial burdens on patent offices or their users. DLTs not only make many of
these ideas administratively feasible, but are also able to be tested in a step-wise,
scalable, and very public manner.
Such a system would have additional transparency and archival attributes
baked-in. A patent should be a privilege bestowed on those who take resourceintensive risks to explore the frontier of our technological capabilities, as a reward
for their achievements. Full transparency of these rewards and the ways they are
decided is very much in the public interest, as it is society-at-large that pays for inefficiencies, both administrative and economic, that exist in today’s systems. DLTs
can enhance this transparency.
It is clear, however, that there remain many important questions that require
answering before a DLT-based patent records system of any kind can be implemented on anywhere near the scale proposed here. The remainder of this section
outlines some of these issues.

6.1
6.1.1

Future Work
Legal Questions

Some of the more obvious unknowns concern the law. First it is essential to uncover
any potential conflicts between the kinds of DLT-based records described here and
current laws (e.g., the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act in the United States), international treaties or agreements (e.g., the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights or the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property), or national constitutions. Further, considering a new system
without any of the structural changes outlined in Section 4 or any conflicts with
the official documents listed above, is a shift to an immutable and public record of
patent information going to take a substantial amount of legislative work?
Secondly, interactions between DLT-based records and patent litigation must
also be addressed. Expensive, lengthy, and excessive litigation proceedings are a
well-known inefficiency within current innovation systems. How might the current proposals be augmented to alleviate some of these systemic problems to make

29

patent cases less numerous and less costly for the litigants and, directly and indirectly, society-at-large? This question naturally overlaps with other lines of enquiry
concerning the future of court systems and legal processes more generally (Cabral
et al., 2012; Remus and Levy, 2017); however, in the case of patent systems, any solutions may be able to be trialled at a smaller scale through current administrative
review procedures (e.g., the Patent Trial and Appeal Board in the United States).

6.1.2

Fair Competition and Regulatory Concerns

Governments currently conduct patent examination with transparent fee schedules. Additionally, current patent office funding models use maintenance fees from
granted patents to subsidise the examination costs of new patent applications, particularly for small firms. These two aspects of the current systems force two open
questions regarding fee setting. First, how may we use fees paid directly to the
patent office (e.g., application, issue, and maintenance) to subsidise private examination costs so that potential patentees (of all sizes) are not dissuaded from filing
in the first place? Second, how can we ensure private patent examination is priced
fairly for all applicants?
Competition in examination services may force costs down, especially if there
exists a database of certified examiners and their pricing. Firms active in R&D are
likely to file for many patents over an extended period, so return business is also
important—this may act as a quality enforcement mechanism in addition to those
mentioned in Section 4.2 and help firms to ‘get what they pay for’. However, it is
clear that the private examination industry would require clear regulations to make
sure that small firms are not priced out of high-quality examination services. It is
also clear that these services would cost much more than current patent examination
in the absence of cross-subsidisation with renewal fee income.
Another regulatory concern is to mitigate the risk of patent attorneys (representing the firm’s interest) and private examiners (representing the public’s interest)
colluding to prolong examination proceedings, as they both have an incentive to
extract as much money in fees as possible from applicants, who are paying both
parties. Applicants are, of course, paying both parties currently; however, as the
examiner receives a flat ‘reward’ per patent the incentives of these parties are actually opposed: the attorney extracts more fees via a prolonged examination, while
the patent office extracts more fees by examining as many applications as possible
(that is, as short an examination as possible). Additional regulation or incentiveshifting mechanisms must be put in place to make sure examination does not take
longer than necessary to assess the validity of the applications—for example by restricting the number of times an applicant can amend their application, which may
have the additional effect of narrowing the scope of the average patent to avoid the

30

additional costs of an appeal and potential final rejection.46
Implementation of a decentralised examination system also raises questions
about who exactly is going to do the examining. What kind of background should
an examiner have, and what kind of additional training must they go through before
they become private examiners? The default answer to these questions is clearly
‘whatever we currently ask of patent examiners’, but current examiners are quite
specialised concerning the subject matter that they examine (Righi and Simcoe,
2019). This prompts further questions regarding field-specific training courses and
certifications, regulations around publicising these certifications, maintaining these
certifications at regular intervals, or even optional advanced courses that could
allow examiners to command higher fees by providing higher levels of subsidisation
to these more highly trained individuals, with the hope that their training results in
higher-quality examination.47 These are small details in the grand scheme; however,
they highlight the significant upfront cost of implementing such a significant change
to a government-run system.

6.1.3

Security Concerns

With many new technologies come new security concerns, particularly in the digital
realm. DLTs are no exception to this; however, the particular security concerns
depend almost entirely on the type of DLT that is in use, and the sensitivity of
the information stored on it. In the case of patent information, transparency is
generally the goal, and when secrecy is required, usual forms of encryption can be
utilised. Many personal details of parties involved in the patenting process, such
as detailed contact information for inventors or attorneys, are not currently public
information and there is no reason for these details to be placed on the DLT—the
patent office must still retain this information centrally. Therefore, privacy is no
more a concern than it is under current systems if usual precautions are taken.
The security concerns within a DLT as proposed here, therefore, are limited
to two aspects: transaction validation and identity. The former depends on the
method of consensus and the security of the nodes taking part in this consensus.
There exist many consensus mechanisms that are very robust to attack (Baliga,
2017; Mingxiao et al., 2017; Cachin and Vukolić, 2017), and the consortium approach suggested above would only allow approved nodes to take part in transaction
validation in any case—an attack on this system would require actual infiltration
of many of these nodes (in contrast to an attack on a public proof-of-work based
consensus mechanism which simply requires a lot of computational power (Li et al.,
46

In the literal sense of the word, rather than its somewhat misleading use by patent
offices—indeed, a ‘final’ rejection can be a misnomer because an invention can never be
definitively rejected in some jurisdictions.
47
In a recent work, Righi and Simcoe (2019) observe lower grant rates for more specialised patent examiners, indicating more stringent examination.

31

2017)). Identity, on the other hand, is a much greater concern. To fraudulently add
a transaction to a DLT (at its simplest), such as a transfer of IP, a ill-intentioned
actor must acquire the victim’s credentials. This act may not be very different
from uncovering a password, except that this kind of attack could result in the
loss of control of extremely valuable intangible assets. For this reason, any such
DLT-based system would require multiple levels of authentication for certain types
of transaction. The patent office has a significant role to play in the regulation
of patent-related transactions, and that role may also extend to the policing of
suspicious activities on the DLT and putting in place systems that ensure the validity of transactions. Independent of the patent DLT, the use of DLTs for identity
management is an active area of research (Shrier et al., 2016; Kuperberg, 2019;
Lesavre et al., 2019); these may present much more secure modes of transaction
than existing DLTs currently offer.

6.1.4

Theoretical Challenges

Even small modifications to the structure and function of complex social systems,
particularly those which are permeated by substantial financial incentives, may have
far-reaching effects that are difficult to predict in advance. Further, some of the
modifications we suggest have only become feasible to implement in recent years.
For these reasons, there is both a great need and a dearth of theoretical research that
attempts to model the effects of significant structural changes to patent systems.
Take private examination services, as described in Section 4.2, as an example.
This set-up involves up to four parties (applicant, examiner, patent office, and
decision-challenger), each with their own set of priorities and incentives. A gametheoretical analysis of this scenario may uncover strategies that entirely undermine
the desired effect of this structural change. It is therefore essential that this proposal
is ‘incentive-compatible’ (Hurwicz, 1973).
As a second (perhaps simpler) example, pay-as-you-go maintenance fees may
significantly change the way firms signal their perspective on the present value of
their patents. At present and in most jurisdictions, firms pay period-by-period to
keep their patents in force, which limits the inference outsiders can make about
firms’ own assessments of this value. When fees are flexible, a whole new set of
strategies open up that would allow firms to choose how much information about
these assessments they would like to disclose through their payments. Also, on the
patent office side, decisions would have to be made about the optimum parameters
that govern the fee payment calculations in such a system. These calculations
will depend on, for example, the expected value distribution of granted patents.
Considerations would need to include the desired levels of revenue balanced against
outcomes for social welfare, in more detail than required at present. On any scale,
shedding light on the potential ramifications of policy changes is vital.

32

6.1.5

The Future of IP Policy

While the majority of the concerns above might be considered barriers to the implementation of the current proposals, there are also important questions about the
future of IP that will inform the design of this system. For example, how might
we build-in interoperability between patent systems and other forms of innovationincentivising policies such as patent box regimes, prizes or R&D tax credits? Could
the use of DLTs be extended to other types of formal IP such as trademarks or
copyrights, or are these somehow so fundamentally different so as to warrant an
entirely different framework? Answering all these questions will be an endeavour
stretching across disciplinary boundaries.

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Marco Barulli, Emma Francis, Alan Marco, Geoff
Sadlier, Kees Schuller, Claudia Tapia, Adam Jaffe, Joachim Henkel, Dominique
Guellec and Beth Webster for useful discussions.

33

References
112th Congress of the United States of America. Pub. l. no. 112-29, 125 stat. 284,
2011.
https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/PLAW-112publ29.
35 U.S.C. § 17 (United States). Invention Secrecy Act of 1951 (2006).
https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/USCODE-2011-title35/
USCODE-2011-title35-partII-chap17.
M. Abramowicz. The danger of underdeveloped patent prospects. Cornell Law
Review, 92:1065, 2006.
M. Abramowicz and J. F. Duffy. Ending the patenting monopoly. University of
Pennsylvania Law Review, 157:1541, 2008.
L. J. Ackerman. Prioritization: Addressing the patent application backlog at the
united states patent and trademark office. Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 26
(1):67–92, 2011.
J.-W. Ahn, M. D. Chang, R. Kokku, and P. Watson. Blockchain for open scientific
research, June 11 2019. US Patent App. 10/320,574.
J. R. Allison and S. D. Hunter. On the feasibility of improving patent quality one
technology at a time: The case of business methods. Berkeley Technology Law
Journal, 21:729, 2006.
J. R. Allison and M. A. Lemley. Empirical evidence on the validity of litigated
patents. AIPLA Quarterly Journal, 26:185, 1998.
J. J. Anderson. Nontechnical disclosure. Vanderbilt Law Review, 69:1573, 2016.
N. P. Anderson. Striking a balance: The pursuit of transparent patent ownership.
Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 30(4):395–444, 2015.
E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V. Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Christidis, A. De Caro,
D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Laventman, Y. Manevich, et al. Hyperledger fabric: a
distributed operating system for permissioned blockchains. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth EuroSys Conference, page 30. ACM, 2018.
R. Aoki and Y. Spiegel. Pre-grant patent publication and cumulative innovation.
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 27(3):333–345, 2009.
A. Arora and A. Gambardella. Ideas for rent: An overview of markets for technology. Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(3):775–803, 2010.
A. Arora, A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella. Markets for technology and their implications for corporate strategy. Industrial and Corporate Change, 10(2):419–451,
2001.
A. Arundel. The relative effectiveness of patents and secrecy for appropriation.
Research Policy, 30(4):611–624, 2001.
A. Baliga. Understanding blockchain consensus models. Persistent Systems, 2017.
S. Bartling. Blockchain for science and knowledge creation. In Gesundheit digital,
pages 159–180. Springer, 2019.

34

M. Baudry and B. Dumont. Patent renewals as options: Improving the mechanism
for weeding out lousy patents. Review of Industrial Organization, 28(1):41–62,
2006.
F. M. Benčić and I. P. Žarko. Distributed ledger technology: Blockchain compared to directed acyclic graph. In 2018 IEEE 38th International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pages 1569–1570. IEEE, 2018.
J. Benet. IPFS - content addressed, versioned, P2P file system. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1407.3561, 2014.
J. Bessen and M. J. Meurer. Patent failure: How judges, bureaucrats, and lawyers
put innovators at risk. Princeton University Press, 2008.
J. Bessen and M. J. Meurer. The patent litigation explosion. Loyola University
Chicago Law Journal, 45:401, 2013.
J. Bessen, J. Ford, and M. J. Meurer. The private and social costs of patent trolls.
Regulation, 34:26, 2011.
K. Blind, J. Edler, R. Frietsch, and U. Schmoch. Motives to patent: Empirical
evidence from Germany. Research Policy, 35(5):655–672, 2006.
K. Blind, K. Cremers, and E. Mueller. The influence of strategic patenting on
companies’ patent portfolios. Research Policy, 38(2):428–436, 2009.
M. Boldrin and D. K. Levine. Against intellectual monopoly. Cambridge University
Press Cambridge, 2008.
M. Boldrin and D. K. Levine. The case against patents. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 27(1):3–22, 2013.
E. Brouwer and A. Kleinknecht. Innovative output, and a firm’s propensity to
patent: An exploration of CIS micro data. Research Policy, 28(6):615–624, 1999.
G. Buenstorf and M. Geissler. Not invented here: Technology licensing, knowledge transfer and innovation based on public research. Journal of Evolutionary
Economics, 22(3), 2012.
J. E. Cabral, A. Chavan, T. M. Clarke, and J. Greacen. Using technology to enhance
access to justice. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 26:241, 2012.
C. Cachin and M. Vukolić. Blockchain consensus protocols in the wild. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.01873, 2017.
G. Capponi, P. Criscuolo, A. Martinelli, and A. Nuvolari. Profiting from innovation:
Evidence from a survey of Queen’s Awards winners. Structural Change and
Economic Dynamics, 49:155–169, 2019.
C. Catalini and J. S. Gans. Some simple economics of the blockchain. National
Bureau of Economic Research, (w22952), 2016.
C. V. Chien. From arms race to marketplace: The complex patent ecosystem and
its implications for the patent system. Hastings Law Journal, 62:297, 2010.
J. P. Choi. Live and let live: A tale of weak patents. Journal of the European
Economic Association, 3(2-3):724–733, 2005.

35

W. M. Cohen, R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh. Protecting their intellectual assets:
Appropriability conditions and why us manufacturing firms patent (or not). National Bureau of Economic Research, (w7552), 2000.
W. M. Cohen, A. Goto, A. Nagata, R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh. R&D spillovers,
patents and the incentives to innovate in Japan and the United States. Research
Policy, 31(8-9):1349–1367, 2002.
A. Conti, J. Thursby, and M. Thursby. Patents as signals for startup financing.
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 61(3):592–622, 2013.
F. Cornelli and M. Schankerman. Patent renewals and R&D incentives. RAND
Journal of Economics, pages 197–213, 1999.
C. A. Cotropia. The folly of early filing in patent law. Hastings Law Journal, 61:
65, 2009.
C. A. Cotropia, C. D. Quillen Jr, and O. H. Webster. Patent applications and
the performance of the US Patent and Trademark Office. Federal Circuit Bar
Journal, 23:179, 2013.
J. Dai and M. A. Vasarhelyi. Toward blockchain-based accounting and assurance.
Journal of Information Systems, 31(3):5–21, 2017.
G. de Rassenfosse. How SMEs exploit their intellectual property assets: Evidence
from survey data. Small Business Economics, 39(2):437–452, 2012.
G. de Rassenfosse. Notice failure revisited: Evidence on the use of virtual patent
marking. National Bureau of Economic Research, (w24288), 2018.
G. de Rassenfosse and A. B. Jaffe. Are patent fees effective at weeding out lowquality patents? Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 27(1):134–148,
2018.
G. de Rassenfosse and B. van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie. The role of fees in
patent systems: Theory and evidence. Journal of Economic Surveys, 27(4):696–
716, 2013.
G. de Rassenfosse, A. B. Jaffe, and E. Webster. Low-quality patents in the eye of
the beholder: Evidence from multiple examiners. National Bureau of Economic
Research, (w22244), 2016.
S. Domberger and P. Jensen. Contracting out by the public sector: Theory, evidence, prospects. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 13(4):67–78, 1997.
P. Drahos. The global governance of knowledge: Patent offices and their clients.
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
P. Dunphy and F. A. Petitcolas. A first look at identity management schemes on
the blockchain. IEEE Security & Privacy, 16(4):20–29, 2018.
A. Eckert and C. Langinier. A survey of the economics of patent systems and
procedures. Journal of Economic Surveys, 28(5):996–1015, 2014.
N. El Ioini and C. Pahl. A review of distributed ledger technologies. In OTM
Confederated International Conferences “On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems”, pages 277–288. Springer, 2018.

36

J. Farre-Mensa, D. Hegde, and A. Ljungqvist. What is a patent worth? Evidence
from the U.S. Patent “lottery”. Journal of Finance, Forthcoming, 2019.
J. Farrell and C. Shapiro. How strong are weak patents? American Economic
Review, 98(4):1347–69, 2008.
R. Feldman. Plain language patents. Texas Intellectual Property Law Journal, 17:
289, 2008.
M. D. Frakes and M. F. Wasserman. Does the US Patent and Trademark Office
grant too many bad patents: Evidence from a quasi-experiment. Stanford Law
Review, 67:613, 2015.
M. D. Frakes and M. F. Wasserman. Is the time allocated to review patent applications inducing examiners to grant invalid patents? Evidence from microlevel
application data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(3):550–563, 2017.
M. D. Frakes and M. F. Wasserman. Irrational ignorance at the patent office.
Vanderbilt Law Review, 72, 2019.
J. Freilich. Prophetic patents. 2018.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3202493.
J. Freilich and L. L. Ouellette. Science fiction: Fictitious experiments in patents.
Science, 364(6445):1036–1037, 2019.
G. Fridgen, S. Radszuwill, N. Urbach, and L. Utz. Cross-organizational workflow
management using blockchain technology-towards applicability, auditability, and
automation. In Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2018.
J. C. Fromer. Patent disclosure. Iowa Law Review, 94:539, 2008.
J. C. Fromer. Dynamic patent disclosure. Vanderbilt Law Review, 69:1715, 2016.
J. L. Furman, M. Nagler, and M. Watzinger. Disclosure and subsequent innovation: Evidence from the patent depository library program. National Bureau of
Economic Research, (w24660), 2018.
N. T. Gallini and B. D. Wright. Technology transfer under asymmetric information.
The RAND Journal of Economics, pages 147–160, 1990.
A. Gambardella, P. Giuri, and A. Luzzi. The market for patents in Europe. Research
Policy, 36(8):1163–1183, 2007.
A. Gambardella, D. Harhoff, and B. Verspagen. The value of European patents.
European Management Review, 5(2):69–84, 2008.
J. S. Gans, S. P. King, and R. Lampe. Patent renewal fees and self-funding patent
offices. Topics in Theoretical Economics, 4(1), 2004.
J. S. Gans, D. H. Hsu, and S. Stern. The impact of uncertain intellectual property
rights on the market for ideas: Evidence from patent grant delays. Management
Science, 54(5):982–997, 2008.
R. Ghafele, B. Gibert, and P. DiGiammarino. Driving innovation through patent
application review: The power of crowdsourcing prior art search. Journal of
Intellectual Property Rights, pages 303–308, 2011.

37

S. Graham and D. Hegde. Disclosing patents’ secrets. Science, 347(6219):236–237,
2015.
S. J. Graham, A. C. Marco, and A. F. Myers. Patent transactions in the marketplace: Lessons from the USPTO patent assignment dataset. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 27(3):343–371, 2018.
V. Gramoli. From blockchain consensus back to Byzantine consensus. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2017.
J. R. Green and S. Scotchmer. On the division of profit in sequential innovation.
The RAND Journal of Economics, pages 20–33, 1995.
B. H. Hall. Business method patents, innovation, and policy. National Bureau of
Economic Research, (w9717), 2003.
B. H. Hall. Exploring the patent explosion. Journal of Technology Transfer, 30
(1-2):35–48, 2004.
B. H. Hall. Is there a role for patents in the financing of new innovative firms?
Industrial and Corporate Change, 28(3):657–680, 2019.
B. H. Hall and D. Harhoff. Recent research on the economics of patents. Annual
Review of Economics, 4(1):541–565, 2012.
B. H. Hall and R. H. Ziedonis. The patent paradox revisited: An empirical study
of patenting in the US semiconductor industry, 1979-1995. RAND Journal of
Economics, pages 101–128, 2001.
B. H. Hall, C. Helmers, and G. Von Graevenitz. Technology entry in the presence
of patent thickets. National Bureau of Economic Research, (w21455), 2015.
N. Harabi. Appropriability of technical innovations an empirical analysis. Research
Policy, 24(6):981–992, 1995.
C. Häussler, D. Harhoff, and E. Müller. To be financed or not. . . : The role of
patents for venture capital-financing. ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper, (09-003), 2012.
D. Hegde and H. Luo. Patent publication and the market for ideas. Management
Science, 64(2):652–672, 2017.
D. J. Hemel and L. L. Ouellette. Innovation policy pluralism. Yale Law Journal,
128:544, 2019.
J. Henkel and H. Zischka. How many patents are truly valid? extent, causes, and
remedies for latent patent invalidity. European Journal of Law and Economics,
48(2):195–239, 2019.
R. T. Holden and A. Malani. Can blockchain solve the hold-up problem in contracts? National Bureau of Economic Research, (w25833), 2019.
D. H. Hsu and R. H. Ziedonis. Patents as quality signals for entrepreneurial ventures. In Academy of Management Proceedings, number 1 in 2008, pages 1–6.
Academy of Management, 2008.
L. Hurwicz. The design of mechanisms for resource allocation. American Economic
Review, 63(2):1–30, 1973.

38

IP Australia. Patent manual of practice & procedure, 2018.
http://manuals.ipaustralia.gov.au/patents/national/examination/2.
13.11.1_Notifications.htm, Retrieved 30/08/2019.
A. B. Jaffe and J. Lerner. Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken
Patent System is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do about
it. Princeton University Press, 2004.
J. A. Jeffery. Preserving the presumption of patent validity: An alternative to
outsourcing the US patent examiner’s prior art search. Catholic University Law
Review, 52:761, 2002.
P. H. Jensen and R. E. Stonecash. Incentives and the efficiency of public sectoroutsourcing contracts. Journal of Economic Surveys, 19(5):767–787, 2005.
R. Jensen and M. Thursby. Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licensing of university inventions. American Economic Review, 91(1):240–259, 2001.
X. Jin, S. Spangler, Y. Chen, K. Cai, R. Ma, L. Zhang, X. Wu, and J. Han.
Patent maintenance recommendation with patent information network model.
In 2011 IEEE 11th International Conference on Data Mining, pages 280–289.
IEEE, 2011.
E. R. Kazenske. The future of prior art searching at the United States Patent and
Trademark Office. World Patent Information, 25(4):283–287, 2003.
E. W. Kitch. The nature and function of the patent system. The Journal of Law
and Economics, 20(2):265–290, 1977.
M. J. Krause and T. Tolaymat. Quantification of energy and carbon costs for
mining cryptocurrencies. Nature Sustainability, 1(11):711, 2018.
N. Kshetri. Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management objectives.
International Journal of Information Management, 39:80–89, 2018.
M. Kuperberg. Blockchain-based identity management: A survey from the enterprise and ecosystem perspective. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2019.
J.-J. Laffont and J. Tirole. A theory of incentives in procurement and regulation.
MIT press, 1993.
M. A. Lemley. Reconceiving patents in the age of venture capital. Journal of Small
& Emerging Business Law, 4:137, 2000.
M. A. Lemley. Can the patent office be fixed. Marquette Intellectual Property Law
Review, 15:295, 2011.
M. A. Lemley. Ready for patenting. Boston University Law Review, 96:1171, 2016.
M. A. Lemley and N. Myhrvold. How to make a patent market. Hofstra Law
Review, 36:257, 2007.
M. A. Lemley and B. Sampat. Is the patent office a rubber stamp. Emory Law
Journal, 58:181, 2008.
M. A. Lemley and C. Shapiro. Probabilistic patents. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2):75–98, 2005.

39

M. A. Lemley, D. Lichtman, and B. N. Sampat. What to do about bad patents.
Regulation, 28(4):10–13, 2005.
M. A. Lemley, K. Richardson, and E. Oliver. The patent enforcement iceberg.
Texas Law Review, 97:801, 2018.
J. Lerner and J. Tirole. Standard-essential patents. Journal of Political Economy,
123(3):547–586, 2015.
L. Lesavre, P. Varin, P. Mell, M. Davidson, and J. Shook. A taxonomic approach to
understanding emerging blockchain identity management systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.00929, 2019.
R. C. Levin, A. K. Klevorick, R. R. Nelson, S. G. Winter, R. Gilbert, and
Z. Griliches. Appropriating the returns from industrial research and development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987(3):783–831, 1987.
X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen. A survey on the security of blockchain
systems. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2017.
D. Lichtman and M. A. Lemley. Rethinking patent law’s presumption of validity.
Stanford Law Review, 60:45, 2007.
C. Long. Patent signals. The University of Chicago Law Review, pages 625–679,
2002.
P. O. Long. Invention, authorship, “intellectual property,” and the origin of patents:
Notes toward a conceptual history. Technology and Culture, 32(4):846–884, 1991.
S. Macdonald. When means become ends: Considering the impact of patent strategy on innovation. Information Economics and Policy, 16(1):135–158, 2004.
S. J. Marsnik. Will the America Invents Act post-grant review improve the quality
of patents? A comparison with the European Patent Office opposition. The
Changing Face of US Patent Law and Its Impact on Business Strategy, page 183,
2013.
S. M. McJohn. Patents: Hiding from history. Santa Clara Computer & High
Technology Law Journal, 24:961, 2007.
P. S. Menell and M. J. Meurer. Notice failure and notice externalities. Journal of
Legal Analysis, 5(1):1–59, 2013.
D. Mingxiao, M. Xiaofeng, Z. Zhe, W. Xiangwei, and C. Qijun. A review on
consensus algorithm of blockchain. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pages 2567–2572. IEEE, 2017.
P. Mirowski. Science-mart. Harvard University Press, 2011.
S. Nakamoto et al. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. 2008.
B. S. Noveck. Peer to patent: Collective intelligence, open review, and patent
reform. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 20:123, 2006.
L. L. Ouellette. Do patents disclose useful information? Harvard Journal of Law
& Technology, 25(2):545, 2012.
L. L. Ouellette. Pierson, peer review, and patent law. Vanderbilt Law Review, 69:
1825, 2016.

40

J. Owen-Smith and W. W. Powell. The expanding role of university patenting in the
life sciences: Assessing the importance of experience and connectivity. Research
Policy, 32(9):1695–1711, 2003.
A. Pakes. Patents as options: Some estimates of the value of holding European
patent stocks. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 755–
784, 1986.
Patents Act 1977 (United Kingdom). Patents Act 1977, c. 22.
Available at: https://tinyurl.com/UKPatentSecrecy.
H. Pervez, M. Muneeb, M. U. Irfan, and I. U. Haq. A comparative analysis of
DAG-based blockchain architectures. In 2018 12th International Conference on
Open Source Systems and Technologies (ICOSST), pages 27–34. IEEE, 2018.
S. Popov. The tangle. IOTA Whitepaper, 2016.
F. D. Prager. A history of intellectual property from 1545 to 1787. Journal of the
Patent Office Society, 26:711, 1944.
A. K. Rai. Growing pains in the administrative state: The patent office’s troubled
quest for mangerial control. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 157:2051,
2008.
D. Remus and F. Levy. Can robots be lawyers: Computers, lawyers, and the
practice of law. Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics, 30:501, 2017.
C. Righi and T. Simcoe. Patent examiner specialization. Research Policy, 48(1):
137–148, 2019.
S. Saberi, M. Kouhizadeh, J. Sarkis, and L. Shen. Blockchain technology and its
relationships to sustainable supply chain management. International Journal of
Production Research, 57(7):2117–2135, 2019.
F. Saidi and A. Zaldokas. How does firms’ innovation disclosure affect their banking
relationships?
Available at SSRN: https: // ssrn. com/ abstract= 2715925 , 2017.
B. Sampat. Determinants of patent quality: An empirical analysis. 2005.
Available
at
https://www.immagic.com/eLibrary/ARCHIVES/GENERAL/
COLUMBIA/C050902S.pdf.
B. Sampat and H. L. Williams. How do patents affect follow-on innovation? Evidence from the human genome. American Economic Review, 109(1):203–36,
2019.
B. N. Sampat. A survey of empirical evidence on patents and innovation. National
Bureau of Economic Research, (w25383), 2018.
A. Savelyev. Copyright in the blockchain era: Promises and challenges. Computer
Law & Security Review, 34(3):550–561, 2018.
F. Schuett. Patent quality and incentives at the patent office. The RAND Journal
of Economics, 44(2):313–336, 2013.
S. Scotchmer. On the optimality of the patent renewal system. The RAND Journal
of Economics, pages 181–196, 1999.

41

S. B. Seymore. Heightened enablement in the unpredictable arts. UCLA Law
Review, 56:127, 2008.
S. B. Seymore. The presumption of patentability. Minnesota Law Review, 97:990,
2012.
C. Shapiro. Navigating the patent thicket: Cross licenses, patent pools, and standard setting. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 1:119–150, 2000.
D. Shrier, W. Wu, and A. Pentland. Blockchain & infrastructure (identity, data
security). Massachusetts Institute of Technology-Connection Science, 1(3):1–19,
2016.
T. Sichelman and S. O’Connor. Patents as promoters of competition: The guild
origins of patent law in the Venetian Republic. San Diego Law Review, 49:1267,
2012.
J. L. Sohn. Can’t the PTO get a little respect. Berkeley Technology Law Journal,
26:1603, 2011.
D. F. Spulber. Should business method inventions be patentable? Journal of Legal
Analysis, 3(1):265–340, 2011.
J. E. Stiglitz. Economic foundations of intellectual property rights. Duke Law
Journal, 57:1693, 2007.
K. J. Strandburg, G. Csardi, J. Tobochnik, and P. Erdi. Law and the science of
networks: An overview and an application to the patent explosion. Berkeley
Technology Law Journal, 21:1293, 2006.
H. Tabakovic and T. G. Wollmann. From revolving doors to regulatory capture? Evidence from patent examiners. National Bureau of Economic Research,
(w24638), 2018.
J. R. Thomas. Collusion and collective action in the patent system: A proposal
for patent bounties. In Entrepreneurial Inputs and Outcomes: New studies of
entrepreneurship in the United States, pages 95–132. Emerald Group Publishing
Limited, 2001.
J. R. Thomas. The responsibility of the rulemaker: Comparative approaches to
patent administration reform. Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 17:727, 2002.
L. C. Thurow. Needed: A new system of intellectual property rights. Harvard
Business Review, 75:94–107, 1997.
M. Trimble. Patent working requirements: Historical and comparative perspectives.
UC Irvine Law Review, 6:483, 2016.
United States Patent and Trademark Office. USPTO 21st century strategic plan. https://www.uspto.gov/about-us/performance-and-planning/
strategic-planning/strategic-plan-21st-century, 2003.
United States Senate. The Patent System Harmonization Act of 1992: Joint hearing
before the Subcommittee on Patents, Copyrights, and Trademarks of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/
008517993, 1992.

42

USPTO. Report on virtual marking, 2014.
https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/aia_implementation/
VMreport.pdf.
T. Veer and F. Jell. Contributing to markets for technology? A comparison of
patent filing motives of individual inventors, small companies and universities.
Technovation, 32(9-10):513–522, 2012.
N. A. Vonneuman. Conditionally exclusive patent rights and the patent clause of
the constitution. American Journal of Comparative Law, 5:391, 1956.
R. P. Wagner. Understanding patent-quality mechanisms. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 157:2135, 2008.
M. F. Wasserman. The changing guard of patent law: Chevron deference for the
PTO. William & Mary Law Review, 54:1959, 2012.
WIPO. Administrative instructions under the Patent Cooperation Treaty, 2012.
https://www.wipo.int/pct/en/texts/ai/s801.html#_801_a,
Retrieved
30/08/2019.
K. Wüst and A. Gervais. Do you need a blockchain? In 2018 Crypto Valley
Conference on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT), pages 45–54. IEEE, 2018.
Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, K. O. Asamoah, J. Gao, X. Du, and M. Guizani. Medshare:
Trust-less medical data sharing among cloud service providers via blockchain.
IEEE Access, 5:14757–14767, 2017.
X. Xu, I. Weber, M. Staples, L. Zhu, J. Bosch, L. Bass, C. Pautasso, and P. Rimba.
A taxonomy of blockchain-based systems for architecture design. In 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Software Architecture, pages 243–252. IEEE, 2017.
I. Yamauchi and S. Nagaoka. Does the outsourcing of prior art search increase the
efficiency of patent examination? Evidence from Japan. Research Policy, 44(8):
1601–1614, 2015.
W. Yang, S. Garg, A. Raza, D. Herbert, and B. Kang. Blockchain: Trends and future. In Pacific Rim Knowledge Acquisition Workshop, pages 201–210. Springer,
2018.
S. Yelderman. Prior art in inter partes review. Iowa Law Review, 104:2705–2734,
2019.

43

A

The Disclosure Function of Patents

The ‘prospect theory’ of patents (Kitch, 1977) highlights the many advantages
of patents as claims of rights to exploit a particular piece of the technological
landscape. Importantly, from the viewpoint of social welfare, significant efficiency
gains in technological search are associated with disclosure (when compared to
trade secrets): a patent signals the location of a technologically valuable piece of
information, just as a mineral claim signals the geographical location of valuable
minerals. In both scenarios, competitors will start searching, or prospecting, the
surrounding landscape for a claim of their own while avoiding much duplicative
effort searching less mineral-rich areas.48 To optimise the societal-welfare-increasing
function of patents, therefore, an ideal system would maximise the value of the
disclosure mechanism without reducing the incentive for firms to partake in risky
inventive activities—there is a need for balance between disclosure and incentives
to innovate.
We can reframe disclosure requirements as existing on two axes: clarity and
time. Clarity broadly reflects the usefulness of the information disclosed in the
patent document—disclosure is not useful if information relevant to follow-on innovators is omitted, nor if it is obscured in legal terms unfamiliar to a ‘person having
ordinary skill in the art’ (PHOSITA). Time reflects the length of the secrecy period that is included in the ‘grand bargain’—firms enjoy secrecy of their patented
inventions for much of the inventions’ pendency. Even if no formal litigation takes
place, this could result in years of expensive duplicative effort by competitors being, at least partially, wasted. At the extremes of these axes, conditional on the
necessity of some form of disclosure consistent with the terms of the grand bargain,
we find two scenarios: one that is optimal for the patenting firms, and one that is
optimal for competitors and follow-on innovators. The former is when secrecy time
is maximised (public at grant) and the invention description is allowed to be as obfuscated as possible such that it is of minimal assistance to a PHOSITA who would
like to replicate the invention. The latter scenario is one in which an invention is
public from the filing date such that secrecy time (that is, wasteful duplication)
is minimised, while clarity is maximised by applicants being held to a very high
standard such that a PHOSITA has all the information required to precisely replicate the invention. The socially optimal amount of disclosure likely lies somewhere
between these two extremes, as we would like to encourage the use of the knowledge
48

In the context of patents, Yelderman (2019) observed that about one-third of all
patent invalidations resulting from an inter-partes review cited at least one patent or application that was secret at the time of filing, representing significant duplicative efforts
and financial waste. According to the authors, “there was no lawful way for the inventor to
discover the fatal prior art reference, no matter how hard she might have searched” (Yelderman, 2019). As inter partes review generally occurs after grant, one may hypothesise
that many more applications are rejected during examination for a similar reason.

44

contained in granted patent without discouraging patenting in the first place and
undermining their use as incentives for risky R&D. It may be argued that current
standards of clarity lie too close to the extreme that is beneficial for the patenting
firm (Fromer, 2008; Ouellette, 2012). Adjusting the time of disclosure as suggested
in Section 4.1.1, therefore, may help compensate for this imbalance.

B

Trade Secrets and DLTs

Also of note is the increasingly easy modes of keeping a trade secret while an
invention is in development—if patents are being applied for at a later stage of
development, then firms would be more dependent on trade secrets than they are
currently. Firms offering blockchain-based trade secret records with linked nondisclosure agreements are already numerous49 and can provide much more security
and oversight than traditional systems. These trade secrets are well-defined and
time-stamped, with recorded version histories and access logs, and thus can provide
much more concrete evidence for misappropriation than in the past. Courts in
China, for example, have already ruled that these documents are permissible as
evidence in trade secret cases,50 and the state legislature of Vermont in the United
States has passed a law allowing blockchain records as evidence in state courts,51
which presumably covers misappropriation of blockchain-based trade secrets. In the
United States, third-party services are very relevant in light of recent changes to
trade secret law included in the America Invents Act (112th Congress of the United
States of America, 2011). If an entity makes use of a particular trade secret, and
this trade secret is discovered independently and patented by a different entity,
then the first entity is granted ‘prior usage rights’—provided they are able to prove
that the patent invention was being used for at least a year before the filing of the
patent. Proving the existence and use of this trade secret is made much simpler
with DLTs as each record is time-stamped and immutable. Earlier disclosure is
now more feasible than ever, thanks to the conjunction of these legal and technical
developments.52
49
Examples include Bernstein (bernstein.io) and iDefendo (idefendo.com) (all last
accessed 07/11/2019).
50
https://tinyurl.com/blockchainChina (last accessed 07/11/2019)
51
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/section/12/081/01913 (last accessed 07/11/2019)
52
Taken alone, this does not imply that the patent system itself requires a DLT component. However, it does suggest that the legal environment in which the patent system
operates will likely become much more DLT-friendly to accommodate these changes.

45

C

Early Filing and Patent Obfuscation

The ‘file early, file often’ attitude that exists in many industries leads inevitably to
vague invention specifications. One solution to this problem, proposed by Cotropia
(2009), is to add a patentability requirement stipulating that applicants reduce their
invention to practice before examination (but not necessarily before application)—a
kind of ‘brute force’ solution. This is certainly desirable, but inherently difficult to
implement as it would add considerable administrative burden and subjectivity to
the examination process in many cases.53 It would additionally disadvantage firms
without the resources to fund the development of a functioning prototype before
the investment that a patent may attract (Farre-Mensa et al., 2019), or those that
intend to license the technology to firms with development capabilities as might
universities (Jensen and Thursby, 2001; Owen-Smith and Powell, 2003).
To combat intentionally obscured patent specifications,54 there need to be
higher standards for disclosure, particularly concerning enablement and the level
of detail in the description of the technical principles on which the invention functions (Lemley, 2016). Claimed attributes and applications of inventions that exist
in the real world (and have been tested for particular use cases) are, by definition,
able to be specified more clearly and in more detail; resulting in narrower claims.
In order to ensure the inventors that patent later in the development process are
not disadvantaged in this way, strict rules must be placed on those that cannot
produce evidence that the invention has been reduced to practice, such as limiting
granted patents to the specified use cases (including prophetic examples), provided
these are themselves not overly broad (Lemley, 2016).
It is additionally worth noting that early filing not only encumbers the patent
office with dubious applications that amplify examination problems such as backlog and invalid grants.55 In cases where a high-quality patent is granted and the
invention commercialisable, the patentee now has much less time to recoup their
investment in the development of the resultant product as the patent term starts
at the filing date in most jurisdictions. Relatedly, filing earlier in the development process means that there is less time to fully develop the invention before it
53

Enablement becomes a particularly interesting requirement in this scenario as the
lack of a proper invention specification enabling a PHOSITA to make and use the invention (without costly experimentation) becomes less acceptable if the invention has already
been reduced to practice. Such problems may be solved by a kind of peer review system (Seymore, 2008; Ouellette, 2012, 2016), which is out of scope of the current work but
may also be facilitated by DLT-based records and feedback (Bartling, 2019; Ahn et al.,
2019).
54
This behaviour likely occurs within the current system as well (McJohn, 2007; Feldman, 2008).
55
If new developments lie outside the scope of the original application, then follow-up
applications such as continuations may be filed that all but supersede the initial filing,
adding to the already large backlog of patent applications (Cotropia et al., 2013).

46

becomes financially unviable (due to a looming patent expiry date), resulting in
‘under-developed’ patent rights to the detriment of both the patentee and society,
the latter of whom miss out on new-and-improved products (Abramowicz, 2006).

D

Secrecy Orders

In many jurisdictions, when particular inventions disclosed to the patent office are
determined to be a threat to national security, they may be placed under forced
secrecy (35 U.S.C. § 17 (United States); Patents Act 1977 (United Kingdom)). The
checks for inventions of this nature necessarily take place before any publication
of the patent application or granted document. Because of this, publication on
filing may not be feasible and instead should take place after these checks to ensure
compliance with current law. Of course, full publication on filing may not be
appropriate even in the absence of secrecy orders—the patent office would also need
to check the formatting of patent applications is correct and classify the subject
matter before publication.56 Therefore, there are good arguments to have a delay
from filing to ‘immediate’ publication; however, we argue that this delay should be
minimised and does not undermine the arguments laid out above. Moreover, these
procedures are very jurisdiction dependent and, therefore, their interaction with
local law should be examined on a case-by-case basis in any case. (Of course, this
applies equally to all proposals presented in this work).

E

Office-Specific Considerations for Prior Art Bounties

All proposals contained in this work are susceptible to office-specific limitations.
Prior art bounties are a relatively simple suggestion with many components that
are already implemented in some way in many patent offices. For these reasons,
this proposal presents a good opportunity to illustrate how jurisdiction-specific
procedures may interact with such a policy change.
The simple example involves a situation where two or more bounty-hunter submissions are used in combination to reject a patent application. At the EPO, there
exists a ‘Y’ tag to indicate these kinds of citation. This event could require a
split of the reward between bounty hunters when a combination contains multiple
bounty-hunter submissions. The USPTO has a similar practice but does not have a
formal tag to describe this scenario, further complicating matters. In any case, the
way these cases are dealt with could change the incentives of the bounty hunters,
particularly when submissions can only contain one piece of prior art at a time.
56

It is still possible, however, to automatically publish a hash for every application on
filing.

47

A more complex example concerns the ability for an applicant to amend an
application before it is examined in response to a third-party prior art submission.
This scenario would significantly reduce the incentive for bounty hunters to submit
relevant prior art, as relevant art could be made irrelevant by an amendment and the
bounty hunter would have wasted their time. We must also rule out the possibility
of paying out the bounty should the applicant amend the document and submit
the hunter’s prior art themselves as justification; this policy would constitute the
use of the bounty hunter as a free search service paid for by the patent office.
Ideally, we would like to incentivise firms to conduct their own in-depth prior art
search before filing for a patent that takes this art into account. For this reason,
jurisdictions where applications can be amended before the search report or first
office action may not extract as much utility as possible from prior art bounties.57
In the case where amendment is not possible between the time the document is
made public and the first office action, firms can still see suggested prior art, and
prepare an amended document in advance to be submitted should the examiner
use this information to justify a rejection; this could significantly reduce pendency
times.
Assuming amendments are possible, the following may be an appropriate solution. If the applicant abandons or amends their application after the document
is made public but before examination (in response to a prior art submission), the
bounty-hunters’ submission fees are refunded. In the case where an application is
withdrawn, then a small reward should also be given to hunters in acknowledgement of the resources they may have saved the patent office—as application fees
are not refunded, and minimal resources have been spent on applications that are
withdrawn before examination, the funds exist to provide such a reward.

F

Proof of Existence of Prior Art Submissions

From a technical point of view, any third party submitting relevant non-patent
literature as prior art to the patent office in the capacity of a bounty hunter would
not generally be able to prove that the art was publicly available before the patent
application. This deficiency exists for current validity challenges and is not remedied with the DLT-based patent system proposed in Section 4.2.2. However, this
is a need that would be catered to by third-party services via DLT-based defensive publications, working papers, preprints, or other technical documents—these
services already exist in forms that are low-cost and easily accessible.58
57

At the EPO, applications may be amended between receipt of the search report and
before examination, while at the USPTO, applications may be amended at any point
before the first office action (and under certain conditions after this point).
58
See e.g., loci.io, operem.com, blockchainyourip.com, bernstein.io, artifacts.
ai, and idefendo.com (all last accessed 07/11/2019).

48

G

Gold-Plated Patents, SPER, and Private Examiner Incentives

One idea to reduce levels of unnecessary patent litigation, popularised by Mark
Lemley and colleagues (Lemley et al., 2005; Lichtman and Lemley, 2007; Lemley,
2011) and directed at the USPTO, proposes a weakening of the default presumption
of validity and encourages a move towards an earned presumption of validity.59 This
is sometimes framed as the ‘gold-plating’ of a patent (Lemley et al., 2005; Lichtman
and Lemley, 2007), and would simply grant a presumption of validity to those
patents that survive additional scrutiny. This review process would be conducted
at the request of, and paid for by, either an applicant desiring additional certainty
in their patent rights or by a competitor who believes the patent application should
be rejected under the patent office’s own standards (similarly to current inter-partes
and post-grant reviews). This mechanism ensures that only particularly valuable
patents undergo this additional scrutiny.
The above proposal dovetails nicely with another popular proposal: ‘secondpair-of-eyes’ review (SPER). This process, which would require two examiners to
agree on the patentability of a particular application, was actually implemented at
the USPTO in the year 2000 for a particular class of business methods patents;
being somewhat controversial as patentable matter in the first place (Hall, 2003;
Spulber, 2011), and attracting many applications of questionable quality, this class
appeared to be a suitable test-bed for SPER (Allison and Hunter, 2006). This pilot
resulted in a dramatic drop in grant rates for this class (down to 17%, compared to
about 70% for most other classes) according to Lemley and Sampat (2008), indicating that the scheme may have indeed filtered out a high number of unpatentable
inventions. At the same time, however, the high technological similarities between
patent classifications meant that it was generally not difficult to draft applications
in a way that avoided a main classification60 that would result in a SPER (Allison
and Hunter, 2006).
Meanwhile, a granted patent may be challenged by third parties, or even the
applicant themselves if they feel the resulting patent has been unnecessarily narrowed. These challenges (and indeed appeals, in the case of rejected applications)
are generally handled in the United States by the Patent Trial and Appeal Board
and in Europe by the Opposition Divisions of the EPO (Marsnik, 2013). While
this process would remain an important check in the presence of third-party examiners, the patent office is currently not held accountable for granting invalid
patents (Thomas, 2002), or indeed rejecting valid applications. Therefore, with a
59

U.S. courts automatically presume that the USPTO issues valid patents, which means
that it is the responsibility of those challenging the patent to provide clear and convincing
evidence that the patent is invalid (Seymore, 2012).
60
Applications with the SPER-enforced class as a secondary classification were exempt.

49

contractor monitoring system in place and the patent office having the power to
terminate the certification of these contractors, third party examiners already have
a much larger incentive to make correct patentability decisions than do current
examiners. After all, the risk the contractor takes on when accepting a contract
is that their decisions are found to be incorrect on review61 —this factor is almost
entirely in their control and so is not subject to the usual risks associated with government contracts such as higher than expected costs or low ex-post demand for
the end-product (Laffont and Tirole, 1993; Jensen and Stonecash, 2005). In fact,
it may be argued that the patent office taking on the responsibility for penalising
contractors for poor performance constitutes a much higher level of accountability
than that at present.

61

Both incorrect rejections and incorrect grants

50

