AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number1. February 2019

Pp. 2 -21

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.1

Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)
Ghazala, H. S.
Department of English, College of Social Sciences
Umm Al-Qura University
Makkah Al-Mukarramah, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
The translation of poetry has been and will continue to be an issue of great concern to translators,
men of letters and readers. Poetry has been approached differently by translators. They are divided
into two major parties: tone insists on translating poetry into poetry with respect to all prosodic
features; another suggests translating sense with no concern in prosody, especially rhyme, rhm,
meter and foot, especially when the translator is for some good reason, unable to translate a poem
into a poen in the target language(TL). Each party has their own justifications for their claim. This
Paper attempts to demonstrate the merits and demerits of both approaches at translating one and
the same poem in terms of poetic translation for the former, and poetical translation for the latter.
The aim behind that is two fold: first to satisfy all types of readers; second, to provide concrete
evidence for the argument put forward throughout the whole Paper, which is poetic translation is
superceding poetical translation in Arabic for Arab readers who still highly appreciate the
aestheticity and poeticity of poetry. At the end of the day, it is left to readers to decide which
version to prefer. At times, more than one poetic version of translation are suggested for the same
poem by different translators. Still on one or two occasions, a middle way version combining some
features of each of poetical and poetic translations, is proposed. It is termed as a ‘semi-poetic’
translation, with the ultimate objective of drawing a comparison between the different versions of
translation of the same poem to give readers the opportunity to judge for themselves which
translation they go for and why. Convincing readers is a daunting ask, but rewarding at the end.
This pproach is applied to the translation of five English poems into Arabic.
Key words: Foot, poetry, poetic, poetical, prosodic features, rhyme, rhythm, translation

Cites as: Ghazala, H. S. (2019). Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic). Arab
World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (1) 3- 21.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.1

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

3

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

Introduction: Translating Poetry
It has been said that due to its far-fetched sound / prosodic patterns, poetry is untranslatable. It has
also been claimed that only a poet can translate poetry (see Khulusi, 2000). This echoes Dryden's
view that a poet cannot be translated but by a poet (in Schulte, et al, 1992). Further, in an answer
to the question, "Can one translate a poem", Bonnefoy says "of course not" (in ibid.). This view is
also held by Jakobson who says: "Poetry by definition [is] untranslatable" (1960). Likewise, Dante
echoes the same stance for any translation of it would destroy its consistency and charm (in
Khulusi, 2000, p.34). This is perhaps due to the specialty of poetry in terms of:
1. Subtlety of language elaboration
2. Subtlety of the spirit of meaning;
3. Charm of style and topic;
4. Aestheticity;
5. Musicality;
6. Prosodic features (of rhyme, rhythm, meter, foot, etc. See above);
7. Syntactic complexity;
8. Semantic intricacies;
9. Special diction;
10. Stylistic patterning;
11. Symbolism;
12. Pragmatic implications;
13. Cultural-specificity;
14. Over-occurrence of figurative language;
15. Far-fetched imagery;
16. Deviation from ordinary language (syntactic, semantic, stylistic and phonological);
17. Special conventions of reading poetry;
18. Sublimity;
19. Special features of literariness; and
20. Hypersensitivity of romanticism,sentimentalism, emotionalism, passion and touchiness.
(see also Denham, in Schulte et al (1992, p. 20) and Raffel, 1988 & 1994).
The ideal translator of poetry or otherwise according to Al-Jahez should be as follows:
ْ ‫ في‬،‫"وال بد للتر ُج مانَ من أن يكون بيانهُ في نفس الترجمة‬
‫أعلم الناس باللغة‬
‫ وينبغي أن يكون‬،‫نفس المعرفة‬
ِ ‫وزن علمه في‬
َ
،‫الًوويم عليهما‬
‫ علمنا أنَّه كد أدخ َل‬،‫ ومتى وجدناأ أيً وا و كد مكللم بلنووانين‬،‫فيهما سوووا و وياية‬
ِ ‫ حتَّى يكون‬،‫المنقولة والمنقو ِل إليها‬
َ
ُّ
ُّ
َّ
ُ‫ن‬
ُ‫يكون‬
‫ كتمكنِه‬،‫ممك اللنوووووان منهما مجتمعين فيه‬
‫ وكيف‬،‫ ومعترض عليها‬،‫ألن كل واحدةٍ من اللغتين مجذب األخرى ومأخذ منها‬
َّ
‫ل‬
ْ ‫ وكذلك‬،‫القوة ُ عليهما‬
ْ َ‫ ف‬،‫كوة ٌ واحدة‬
‫ وعلى‬،‫بأكثر ِم ْن لغتين‬
‫إن مكلم‬
َّ ‫إن مكل َم بلغ ٍة واحدة اسووت ُ ْف ِر َي ْ ملك‬
َّ ‫ وإنَّما له‬،‫إذا انفرد بالواحدة‬
َ
َّ
َّ
،‫المترجم‬
‫ كان أشوود على‬،َّ‫ والعلما ُ به أكل‬،‫أعنوور وأقوويا‬
‫ وكلما كانَ البابُ من العلم‬،‫حنوواب ذلك مكون الترجمةُ لجميع اللغات‬
ِ
َ
". ‫ ولن مجد البتَّةَ مترجما و ي ِفي بواح ٍد من هؤال العلما‬،‫وأجدر أن يخطئ فيه‬
َ
It is true that the best translator of poetry is a poet translator, this attitude is idealistic and Platonic,
but neither practical nor realistic. Poetry has been and is being translated satisfactorily even by
non-poets. Therefore, I suggest modifying these claims as follows:

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

4

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

"Poetry is probably the most difficult type of text to translate, yet it is translatable not solely by a
poet, but also by a good translator provided he/she has a good grip of both English and Arabic
languages and essentials of prosody. A good translation of a poem is not necessarily perfect
translation, exactly like the translation of almost any other type of text."
As usual, at translating poetry, precedence is given to rhyme and rhythm in particular, then
to foot and meter over other prosodic features for they are the cornerstone of verse. Consequently,
a poem with no rhyme and rhythm in particular would be considered in effect poor, because what
sets poetry aside from ordinary language is chiefly its aesthetic, prosodic features, on top of which
are rhyme and rhythm. This is the case - especially in Arabic - for the norms of writing, reading,
perceiving and, hence, translating poetry are to be rhymed and rhythmical; otherwise, perhaps it
is not worthy of interest in the eyes of the public in general. This view is confirmed by the criticism
of ‘blank verse’ in Arabic in the forties-sixties of the Twentieth Century, which is a kind of modern
poetry with no concern with rhyme and rhythm. It is closer to prose, rather. Hence its notorious
nickname, ‘prosaic poetry’, which insinuates its semi-poetic identity. Yet, some accept it as a good
solution at times to the translation of some poems (see Khulusi, 2000, pp. 35-36). This type of
poetry should not be confused with the well-established and fully recognized ‘free verse’, which
is based on stanzaic rhyme, rhythm, foot and meter, the basics of classical poetry (or Qasidah),
with some differences between the two types concerning the layout and number of rhymes in the
same poem, though (see also Bassnet-McGuire et al, 1995; Lefeveré, 1975 & 1992).
Paramountcy of Sound Patterns And Effects
There are major sound patterns (i.e. rhyme, rhythm, meter, foot, parallelism) that are essential to
the translation of poetry. Indeed, sound patterns and effects have a special caliber in literary texts
in general, and poetry in particular. The presence of at least some of the sound patterns of different
types in a poetic text is the prerequisite for such text to be described as a 'poem'. The presence of
other features of literary discourse (including rhetorical figures of all kinds, syntactic and lexical
deviations and parallelisms of all types, the manipulation of all language intricacies and
elaborations at different levels of language, and the possibility of reading at more than one level)
is indispensable to a poem, but none is a precondition for calling it a poem. I want to say that no
matter how rhetorical, elaborate, deviant, or special the language of a poetic text might be, what
matters most is the strong, creative presence and use of sound patterns of different types, however,
partially. Translators find poetry as the most difficult type of text to translate primarily because of
the difficulty of rendering sound patterns and effects.
In his elaboration of the writer's creative use of language, Leech restricts creativity to
linguistic creativity only. He suggests two conditions to achieve it: (i) if he makes original use of
the established potentials of language; and (ii) if he really goes beyond these possibilities in the
sense that he creates new communicative possibilities which are not already in language. In either
sense, creativity is termed 'inventiveness', or 'originality'. He declares that it is the property of all
varieties which have liberal inclinations, and supremely of poetic language (1969, p. 24). I would
add a third condition for creativity in poetic writing, that is, the elaborate manipulation of sound
patterns of different kinds by poets who may not have a claim for creativity unless this 'sound
patterning condition' is attended to carefully. I suggest this condition for its unparalleled function
in poetry. More emphatically, if this condition is not met by writers, their poetry may not be viewed
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

5

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

as poetic in the first place, and, hence, may not be read at all. I do not mean the absence of rhyme
only, but also the disregard of sound patterns in general, in which case one wonders whether a
piece of writing like this can be labeled in any sense as poetic. Suppose this piece of writing is rich
with the most effective meanings, implications and figures of rhetoric that one can imagine, but
the reader is not interested to look into in principle for the absence of sound patterns. So, one may
ask, 'what is the use of those big meanings, implications and figures of rhetoric?
I do not mean to say that sound patterns are just a means to an end, a threshold to poetic
texts that once it has achieved its goal, it has exhausted its usefulness. Rather, sound patterns are
representative of the aesthetic constituents, the music of these texts through isochronic structural
parallelisms, measures, feet and beats, without which they perhaps cease to be poetic. Aesthetics
has 'the domino effect' in poetry that in combination with other language components pointed out
earlier, it makes up what is commonly known as poetry.
As to sound effects, they are the product of sound patterns that are employed by writers in
an intricate, delicate and effective way. It has to be admitted that the question of what and how
sound patterns communicate meaning(s) is one of the mysterious aspects of literary appreciation
(see also Leech, 1969: 95 and Simpson, 2004). Leech points out two sound patterns that can be
related directly to meaning: 'Chiming' (e.g. 'mice' and 'men'; 'foul' and 'fair') which is a kind of
alliteration that connects two words by similarity of sound in such a way that we are made to think
of their similitude and interrelationship; and 'Onomatopoeia' which suggests a resemblance
between what a word sounds like, and what it means (see Leech, 1969; Carter & Nash, 1990;
Simpson, 2004 for further details).
Sound patterns can be said to have some effects that are common to all of them: aesthetic
pleasure similar to that of music (see also Thornborrow& Wareing, 1998: 43); enjoyment of
reading and appreciating poetic texts; marking creativity; achieving macro-contextual cohesion of
texts (see also Traugott and Pratt, 1980: 69); opening the way for collaborative interpretation as a
result of interdependence of sound patterns and another (or other) feature(s) of language of the
text; relating sound to meaning either directly or indirectly in specific contexts; emphasizing a
word, a phrase or a topic; contrasting an idea; juxtaposing two words, concepts, etc.; reflecting a
certain implication of a word, a phrase, or a concept; conformity of words; concepts, rhetorical
figures, etc.; and building up the structure of a poem in an organization of some kind, to name
some.
As to specific sound effects of sound patterns, they can be considered on individual bases,
each in its specific text and context, taken in connection with other stylistic features of language.
That said, the first, and most prominent and significant sound effect, the aesthetic effect, is selfsufficient to provide a strong justification for the indispensability of sound patterns in poetry in
particular that after all mark its poeticity. Hence, I stress that the absence of any other language
feature, other than those of sound might be tolerated in such text.
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation: Practical Examples
I distinguish between the two terms, 'poetic' as really poetic, and 'poetical', as poorly poetic, or
pseudo-poetic. Therefore, the following texts suggested for discussion below are translated mainly
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

6

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

into poetic (i.e. literary) and poetical (ordinary) versions of translation. While the latter is based
on translating sense regardless of any concern with sound features, the former is based on the
paramountcy of sound patterns argued for above in constructing the source texts in the Target
Language in poetic terms of sound / prosodic features, giving precedence to the major sound
patterns of rhyme, rhythm, foot and meter of some kind in particular for the reasons just pointed
out. Five English poems are translated into Arabic in terms of two main versions, poetical and
poetic translations, with occasional semi-poetic (i.e. middle ground) versions for purposes of
comparison.
Poem (1): Song V
‘O where are you going’ ? Said reader to rider
‘That valley is fatal when furnaces burn,
Yonder’s the midden whose odors will madden,
‘That gap is the grave where the tall return’.
‘O do you imagine’, said fearer to farer,
‘That dusk will delay on your path to the pass,
That diligent looking discover the lacking
Your footsteps feel from granite to grass?
‘O what was that bird’, said horror to hearer,
‘Did you see that shape in the twisted trees?
Behind you swiftly the figure comes softly,
The spot on your skin is a shocking disease’.
‘Out of this house’-said rider to reader,
‘Yours never will’-said farer to fearer,
‘They’re looking for you’-said hearer to horror,
As he left them there, as he left them there.
(W.H. Auden. From Carter, 1982)
(Semi-poetic Translation 1)
‫للفارس‬
‫أين ذهابك يا هذا؟ كال القارئ‬
ْ
‫ذاك الوادي ممي حينما مشتعل األفران‬
ْ
‫بجنون‬
‫هنالك مزبلة بروائ َح منتن ٍة‬
ْ‫ملك الهوة كبر حيث يعود الجبارون‬
‫للنائر‬
‫هل متخيل يا هذا؟ كال الخائف‬
ْ
‫ب‬
ِ ‫أن الغنا يعيا سبيلك للهر‬
‫ب‬
‫ي‬
‫ع‬
‫ال‬
ِ َ ِ ‫والنظرة جدا و ثاكبةٌ في كشف‬
‫ب؟‬
َّ ‫في وكع خطاك على ال‬
ِ ‫صلب وإلى العش‬
‫ كال الهلع لمن ينم ْع‬،‫"ما ذاك الطائر" يا هذا‬
‫أرأي إلى ذاك الشبحِ بين األشجار الملتويه؟‬
‫ِمن خل ِفك في عجل ْه يأميك الشب ُح برويل ْه‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

7

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

ٍ ‫ومرقك رهيب في طفحا‬
‫ت جلدي ْه‬
، ْ‫"خارج هذا البي ْ "كال الفارس للقارئ‬
‫للخائف‬
‫"خطوامك أبداو لن مثمر" كال النائر‬
ْ
ْ
،ِ‫ كال النامع للهلع‬-"‫ماقون‬
‫"إذ في إثْرك هم‬
‫ل‬
.‫ حين هنالك خلفهم‬... ‫حين هنالك خلَّفهم‬
The Arabic version is described as semi-poetic due to the lack of perfect rhyme. It is based on the
following:
1. Achieving rhyme as much as possible.
2. Creating as much rhythm as possible and by any possible means in the context of
the poem.
3. Playing as much as struggling with synonyms, near or close, to realize ‘1’ and ‘2’
to a maximum degree possible.
4. Feeling free at changing the grammatical/stylistic structure, in regard to word order
(i.e. foregrounding, backgrounding and deviation from language norms) and word
classes (i.e. using nouns instead of adjectives, verbs instead of nouns, plural for
singular, etc.) in particular. This is done primarily to achieve rhyme and rhythm,
and better collocability among words (i.e. which word goes with which word),
mainly for aesthetic reasons, alongside precision of meaning whenever possible.
5. Employing lexical and grammatical gaps (i.e. syntactic structures and words left
out of the poem but implied within).
The English original does not rhyme perfectly, which puts it on equal footing with the Arabic
translation which is not perfectly rhymed too. Take for example, the first line of each stanza which
does not rhyme with the rest of the lines of the stanza (see ‫ للقارئ‬،‫ للنوامع‬،‫ للنوائر‬،‫)للفارس‬. However,
they are made to achieve a semi-rhyme with one another by virtue of the long )‫ (آ‬/æ/, which is a
common motif (or main feature) among them, and their strong end-stop )‫(سكون‬. Also, )‫ (أفران‬halfrhymes with )‫ الجبارون‬،‫ (بجنون‬. The last stanza (or quatrain) has no end-rhyme at all. Yet meter and
foot compensate for that somehow.
Rhythm, on the other hand, is perfectly achieved in Arabic in terms of meter )‫الوزن‬/‫(البحر‬
and foot )‫ (التفعيلة‬in accordance with Arabic prosody. A careful, prosodic reading of the whole
poem may confirm that. Yet, a perfect prosodic version can be introduced in the following poetic
version of the poem:
Now, another Arabic version for the last three stanzas of Auden’s poem is suggested
below. It is completely free and made to conform perfectly to the classical Arabic poetry (i.e.
Qasidah (i.e. ‫ القصيدة‬/ ‫ )الشعر العمودي‬in terms of layout, rhyme and rhythm (see also Lefeveré, 1992:
ch. 6). Only the spirit of the message of the original is retained, as the following version may
demonstrate:
(Poetic Translation 2)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

8

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)
‫الرعب كال وعبلرا‬
‫أشباح رعب كد مرى‬
‫من خلفك الرعب سرى‬
‫فوق الثرى مح الثرى‬
‫جلد ٌ مبقَّع واهترا‬
‫ومغادر من بيتنا‬
‫مام خطاك فنر بنا‬
‫في إثرك أشباحنا‬
‫في مأمن عنا هنا‬

Ghazala

‫طير ما جرى‬
ُ ‫ما الخطب‬
‫للنامع المعت لل في أحشائه‬
‫أشجار لوت‬
‫في جوف‬
ٍ
‫بعجال ٍة بنعوم ٍة‬
‫يا مبتلى هذا الوبا‬
‫يا كارئا و أنا فارس‬
‫يا خائفا و أنا سائر‬
‫يا رعبنا أنا سامع‬
‫حين نأى عنهم هناك‬

The poem’s meter is the popular )‫( (البحر الكامل‬Lit.: ‘The Perfect meter’), which is two/three long
feet for each hemistich(i.e. ‫ )شطر‬of the line of verse, as follows:
0//0///

0//0/// 0//0///
)‫(مت َفاعلن متَفاعلن متفاعلن‬

As to synonymy, it plays a critical role in the realization of rhyme and rhythm. Many words are
chosen among large lexical sets from which translators can feel free to some extent to select the
closest word(s) - especially key words - to achieve both features, and then accuracy of meaning,
sometimes closely, sometimes loosely. In any case, the selected synonym is a kind of concept that
has to be within the range of the semantic dimension of the original word of the SL poem. This is
how it is done in practice (see also Ghazala, 2008).

Poem (2): Virgil's the Aeneid (BK. II, P.B.36)
Who can express the slaughter of that night
Or tell the number of the corpses slain?
Or can in tears bewail them worthily?
The ancient famous city falleth down
That many years did hold such signiory
With senseless bodies every street is spread,
Each palace and sacred porch of the gods.
(Surrey, The Aeneid, BK. II, P.B.36. In Anani, 1997, pp.1918-19))
This stanza is representative of 'epic poetry' )‫(الشووعر الملحمي‬, which is close to what is described in
Arabic traditional literature 'Fortitude poetry )‫(شووعر الحماسووةح الحماسووات‬. To those who are interested
in the literal sense of these lines, a poetical version can be suggested as follows:
(Poetical Translation)
‫من ينتطيع أن يعبر عن المذبحة في ملك الليلة‬
‫أو يخبرنا عن عدد الجثث المذبوحة؟‬
‫أو ينتطيع أن يذرف الدموع وينتحب عليها باستحقاق؟‬
‫منقط المدينة القديمة الشهيرة‬
‫التي مشبث لننين طويلة بالنيادة‬
‫بأجناد فقدت إحناسها انتشرت في كل شارع‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

9

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

.‫وكل كصر ورواق مقدس لآللهة‬
Clearly, there is no concern with prosodic features of any kind, only literal sense, which suggests
that the translation is senseless and emotionless. I wonder if such translation can be of interest to
many readers, for its devastating demolition of the essence of the original. It turns it into spiritless,
lifeless, demeaning and fatal sense, style, sounds and impact. Hence, a good and sensible poetic
translation is urgently in demand. Following are three poetic versions of translation of the stanza,
the first two of which are suggested successfully by Arani; the third is an alternative put forward
by the author:
(Poetic Translation 1)
‫من ذا الذي يقوى على وصف الدم المهراق ليلتها إذن؟‬
‫من ذا الذي يحصي لنا القتلى وأعداد الًحايا وال ُجثث‬
َّ ‫يذرف الدمع الهتونَ ليرثي الماقين‬
‫حا رثائِهم؟‬
‫أو‬
ُ
‫سقط صرو ُح البلدة الشما ذات ِ ل‬
!‫العز والصيَّ ِ التَّليد‬
!‫بعد الصمود على مدى األعوام واألمجا ِد والجا ِأ العريض‬
‫ومناثرت أجناد ُ من ال ينمعون وال يَ َر ْون بك لِل شارع‬
!‫وبكل كصر شامخ وبكل أكداس الهياكل في المعابد‬
(Poetic Translation 2)
‫من ذا يعبر عن مدى سفك الدلِما بليلها؟‬
‫من ذا الذي يدري بأعداد الًحايا والجثث‬
‫أو يذرف الدمع الجدير بنعيهم؟‬
‫هوت العريقة والشهيرة في المدن‬
‫بعد الصمود طوال أعوام وبعد المنعة‬
‫ومناثرت أجناد من ال يشعرون بكل شارع‬
!‫كصر بَ ْل وكل هياكل األرباب فيها‬
‫وبكل‬
ٍ
(Anani, 1997,pp. 118-119)
The two translations are of the same Arabic meter, 'the Perfect' )‫(الكامل‬, with variations in the
number of feet and modulations. Although they are not rhymed, they are described as poetic due
to their: remarkable metrical rhythm, poetic / literary syntactic elaborations (e.g. ‫من ذا ;من ذا الذي‬
‫وبكل كصر شامخ ; َب ْل وكل هياكل ;يعبر‬, ‫هوت العريقة والشهيرة في المدن‬, etc.), syntactic parallelisms ( ‫كصر‬
‫وبكل‬
ٍ
‫ بعد المنعة ;بَ ْل وكل هياكل‬... ‫ ;بعد الصووووومود‬etc.); metrical modulations (e.g. ُ ‫(ومناثرت أجنووووواد‬instead of the
normal ٌ‫ومناثرت أجنوووووواد‬, etc.). semantic density (e.g. ‫وبكل أكداس ;على مدى األعوام واألمجا ِد والجا ِأ العريض‬
‫هوت العريقة والشهيرة ;الهياكل‬, etc.). Yet, the major reason for their poetic nature is rhythm and meter.
A third poetic version with perfect rhyme and the same Perfect Meter is proposed below:
(Poetic Translation 3)
‫من ذا الذي يقوى على وصف المذابح ليلها‬
‫يعطي األعداد للجثث التي أدم حناياها؟‬
‫أو‬
َ
‫و‬
‫يذرف الدمع النخي مًرجا برثائها؟‬
‫أو‬
ُ
‫هوت المدينة من كديم كد سرت شهرامها‬
ْ
‫األزل ماض مليد خلد أمجادها‬
‫كان لها منذ‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

10

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

‫أجناد ناس في أزكتها مناديها م ََوكف نبًها‬
.‫في كل كصر كد أشيد ومعبد كد هيك َل أرجا ها‬
This version is claimed to be an improvement on the previous two versions in regard to poetic
features of prosody and aesthetics, especially perfect rhyme. Further enforcement is provided by
stylistic, syntactic and semantic intricacies and elaborations including: literary syntactic structures
(e.g. ‫كد أشووويد ومعبد كد هيكل أرجا ها ;)في ملك الليلة(ليلها ;من ذا الذي‬, etc.); syntactic deviations (e.g. ‫شوووهرامها‬
(which is normally not a part of Arabic grammar for ‫شهرة‬is a mass noun)); semantic elaborations
and images (e.g. ‫مًرجا و (يذرف الدمع النخي مًرجا و برثائها‬is used with blood rather than with eulogy));
‫للجثث التي أدم حناياها ;هوت المدينة من كديم‬, etc.), etc.
Poem (3): Calm ‫السكون‬
Calm is the morn without a sound,
Calm as to suit a calmer grief,
And only through the faded leaf
The chestnut pattering to the ground
[…]
Calm on the seas, and silver sleep,
And waves that sway themselves in rest,
And dead calm in that noble breast
Which heaves but with the heaving deep.
(Alfred Tennyson, in Carter &Long, 1987)
(Semi-Poetic Translation)
‫النكون صبح دون قجي ْج‬
ْ‫سكون يوازي الحزن الشديد‬
‫من خالل وركة ذابل ْه‬
ْ‫م َْربُ الكنتنا على اليابنه‬
]...[
‫ والنوم الفًي‬،‫سكون على البحار‬
‫أمواج مؤرجح نفنها بارمياح شجي‬
‫وهدو مي نام في ذاك الصدر النقي‬
‫يتنهد التنهد العميا القوي‬
(Poetic Translation)
ْ‫إن النكون صبيحة دون الصخب‬
ْ‫ما مثله إال األسى يا للعجب‬
ْ
‫من بين أوراق‬
ْ‫ذوت منها وحنب‬
ْ‫الكنتنا على الثرى انهال بًرب‬
]...[
‫الي ُّم هادي والكرى من فً ِة‬
‫والموج مرماح شجي الركص ِة‬
‫وسكينة أبدية في ذلك الصدر الفتِي‬
ِ‫ومنهد ٌ أنلامُه في حنرة‬
Poem (4): Lycidas
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

11

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

Eulogy on a Friend Drowned in the Irish Channel
Yet once more, O ye Laurels, and once more
Ye Myrtles brown, with Ivy never-sear,
I com to pluck your Berries harsh and crude,
And with forc'd fingers rude,
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.
Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear,
Compels me to disturb your season due:
For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer:
Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew
Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
He must not flote upon his watry bear
Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
Without the meed of som melodious tear.
(John Milton, in Khulusi, 2000,p. 36)
(com = come; forc'd = forced; ere = before; bear = bier; flote = float; meed = reward; som =
some)
Lycidas is a famous Miltonic monody in lament of his learned friend and schoolmate at Cambridge
University, Edward King, who drowned when his ship sank off the coast of Wales in August,
1637. Khulusi, suggests the following translation which he describes as a prosaic translation.
Hence, it is non-poetic translation:
(Poetical Translation)

‫مرثاة صديق مات غرقا ً في البحر اإليرلندي‬
‫ مرة أخرى‬،‫جئ مرة أخرى يا شجيرات الغار‬
‫أيتها الرياحين المربدة[؟] واللبالب الذي ال يذبل‬
‫جئ ألكطف ثمرك النيئ الفج‬
‫وألبدد بأصابع كوية مندفعة بعنف‬
‫أوراكك كبل حلول العام‬
‫يير أن الًرورة الملحة والذكرى العزيزة الحزينة‬
‫مريمانني على أن أكلا فصلك كبل أوانه‬
‫ مات كبل عنفوانه‬،‫ألن لنيداس كد مات‬
‫لنيداس الفتى الذي رحل دون أن يخلف نظيراو‬
‫فمنذا الذي ال يرمل الشعر من أجل لنيداس؟‬
‫فقد كان يحنن انشاد الشعر ويعرف كيف ينمو بقوافيه‬
‫فينبغي أال يطفو فوق نعش من ما‬
‫ معبث به الريح المحركة‬،‫يير مبكى عليه‬
‫دون أن يكافأ بدمعة شجية‬

I do not mean by poetical translation a bad translation, but a translation that has no concern with
prosody and aesthetics. Instead, the focus has turned to rendering sense in a normal prosaic
language, and it can be described in a way as not a bad translation of sense. However, to
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

12

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

demonstrate more differences between a prosaic ordinary translation and a poetic translation, I
suggest the following version, followed by a comparison between the two:
(Poetic Translation)
‫صديقي الحميم ليسيداس‬

ْ ‫مرة أخرى أمي ْ يا أيها الغار أمي‬
ْ ‫يا أيها الريحان واللبالب كد أبي‬
،‫أن مذبل كد جئ أكطف الثمرات النيئات القاسيات‬
ْ ‫وأبدد بأصابعٍ من كوة واندفع‬
ْ ‫أوراكك كبل حلول العام أو سنة خل‬
ْ
‫العزيزات‬
‫فالًرورات إذاو والذكريات الحزينات‬
ْ
ْ ُ ‫كد كً أن أ‬
:‫كمحظورات‬
‫كلقك في فصلكَ كبل األوان‬
ْ ‫ كبل األوان‬،‫إذ مات لينيداس‬
‫مات‬
ْ
‫ولدت‬
‫رحل الفتى ما مثله أي امرأ ْأ كد‬
‫ نور الحياةْ؟‬،‫من ذا الذي ال ينشد من أجلك يا لينيداس‬
ْ
‫بالقافيات‬
‫كد كان أحنن في النشيد وكد سما‬
‫ما كان للمفقود أن يطفو على نعش بما البحيرات‬
ْ ‫ به الرياح العامية كد عبث‬،‫لم يذرف الناس عليه دمعة‬
. ْ ‫ما دمعةٌ ذُرف عليه شجيةٌ أو أُس ِكب‬

The translation is meant to be a poem in Arabic per se. Once an Arab reader reads it, he / she may
not feel it as a translation, except perhaps for the foreign name, Lycidas, representing the poet's
drowned friend. The focus is entirely on meter, rhyme, rhythm and aesthetics in Arabic, so that a
poetic piece of writing is constructed on purpose. Here are the details:
(1) The meter is generally the Perfect )‫(الكامل‬, the author's personal preference.
(2) The Perfect is an Arabic meter that can fit happy as well as sad occasions, depending on the
tone and tune of the reader.
(3) The rhythm of feet is achieved satisfactorily.
(4) Rhyme is near to perfect.
(5) Rhyme is intended to be the voiceless stop sound, /t/ )‫(ت‬to imply the breathlessness of the
drowned man of the poem.
(6) Modulations (e.g.‫ ما مثله‬to be read prosodically as follows: ‫الننا ;ما مثلهو‬is normally ‫الننا‬, but
the last sound is dropped for reasons of foot and rhythm
ْ ‫أُك ِل‬which is normally َ‫أُكلِقك‬, is modulated for reasons
(7) Deviations are used on a large scale (e.g. ‫قك‬
of foot; ‫امرأ ْأ‬is grammatically ٌ ‫امرأة‬, but modulated for the same reason as the former, etc. (check
vocalization )‫)(التشكيل‬.
(8) The literary / poetic features of language and style are overwhelming throughout.
The former version, on the other hand, is primarily ordinary language, used frequently in nonliterary types of text. Examples include:(e.g. ‫دون أن ;فينبغي ;كبل حلول العام ;مندفعة بعنف ;الًرورة الملحة‬
‫ ;يكافأ‬etc.). Also, and more importantly, rhyme and meter are absent, yet rhythm is occasionally
used. These and the features of the latter translation can be exemplified and sharpened by
juxtaposing the two versions, and comparing them to one another in the following table:
Poetic Language

Less Poetic Language

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

13

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)
‫مرة أخرى أمي يا أيها الغار أمي‬‫يا أيها الريحان واللبالب كد أبي‬‫أن مذبل كد جئ أكطف الثمرات النيئات‬،‫القاسيات‬
َ‫وأبدد بأصابعٍ من كوة واندفَع‬‫أوراكك كبل حلول العام أو سنة خل‬‫لكن كل الًرورات والذكريات الحزينات‬‫العزيزات‬
ُ
َ
ْ
‫كد كً أن أكلقك في فصلكَ كبل األوان‬:‫كمحظورات‬
‫ كبل األوان مات‬،‫إذ مات لينيداس‬‫رحل الفتى ما مثله أي امرأة كد ولدت‬،‫من ذا الذي ال ينشد من أجلك يا لينيداس‬‫نور‬
َ
‫الحياة؟‬
.‫كد كان أحنن في النشيد وكد سما بالقافيات‬‫ما كان للمفقود أن يطفو على نعش بما‬‫ اَلريح عامية به‬،‫لم يذرف الناس عليه دمعةو‬‫كد عبث‬
ْ. ‫ما دمعةٌ ذ ُ ِرفَ ْ عليه شجيةٌ أو أُس ِكب‬-

Ghazala

‫ مرة‬،‫جئ مرة أخرى يا شجيرات الغار‬‫أخرى‬
‫أيتها الرياحين المربدة واللبالب الذي ال‬‫يذبل‬
‫جئ ألكطف ثمرك النيئ الفج‬‫وألبدد بأصابع كوية مندفعة بعنف‬‫أوراكك‬‫يير أن الًرورة الملحة والذكرى العزيزة‬‫الحزينة‬
‫مريمانني على أن أكلا فصلك كبل أوانه‬‫ مات كبل عنفوانه‬،‫ألن لنيداس كد مات‬‫لنيداس الفتى الذي رحل دون أن يخلف‬‫نظيراو‬
‫فمنذا الذي ال يرمل الشعر من أجل‬‫لنيداس؟‬
‫فقد كان يحنن إنشاد الشعر ويعرف كيف‬‫ينمو‬
‫بقوافيه‬
‫فينبغي أال يطفو فوق نعش من ما‬‫ معبث به الريح المحركة‬،‫يير مبكي عليه‬-

.‫دون أن يكافأ بدمعة شجية‬It is left to readers to draw their own judgment about which version is poetic, and which is
poetical, with prejudice implied.

Poem (5): Shall I Compare thee to a Summer's Day?
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimmed;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to Time thou grow'st.
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
(William Shakespeare)

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

14

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

This notoriously famous Shakespearean Sonnet has been excessively quoted in translation books
and by translators, particularly for the cultural difference between Arabian Summer and English
Summer. However, here it is cited by way of exemplifying for more than one possible poetic
translation of it, three of which are done by three translators, the fourth is suggested by the author.
These versions are meant to represent four valid approaches to poetic translation given in an
ascending order, starting with the less poetic up to the most poetic (the first two are very close,
while the third and the fourth are close in prosodic terms):
(Poetic Translation 1: mainly rhythmical and partly rhymed):
‫(هال أكول بأن فتونك أشبه شي بصيف جميل؟‬
‫لطيف اعتدال‬
‫ ويزدان فيك‬،‫فأن مفوكينه فتنةو‬
ُ
‫مهز الرياح زهور الربيع‬
‫وللصيف قيف كصير المقام‬
‫وحينا محرق عين النَّما‬
‫ومشجب حينا و كأهل النقام‬
‫وال بد يوما و لكل بها وداع البها‬
‫ فشوط الحياة أسير الفنا‬،‫فإن لم يكن َع َرقا و مومه‬
‫ فذلك ُخلَّدَ ال للبلى‬،‫على أن صيفك لن يذبال‬
‫ إليه انتهى ال لكي يفصال‬،‫وما فيك من رونا ملكه‬
‫ولن يفخر الموت أن كد رآك مجرين خطوك في ظله‬
‫فأن كصيدي الذي لن يزول‬
‫فما دام في الكون خلا يرون وينري بهم نفس من حياة‬
).‫فذلك يحيا ومنري لنفنك منه الحياة‬
)154 :2004 ،‫ را عناني‬:‫(حنين دباغ‬
Poetically speaking, this translation has no perfect rhyme, yet it is rich with rhythm, rhetorical
figures and several literary semantic and syntactic elaborations, as illustrated below:
(1) Rhythmical patterning (e.g. ‫لطيف اعتدال ;هال أكول‬
‫وللصيف ;مهز الرياح زهور الربيع ;ويزدان فيك‬
ُ
‫ ;فشوط الحياة أسير الفنا ;ومشجب حينا و كأهل النقام ;قيف كصير المقام‬etc.(the most part of the
translation is metered to the Tripping )‫(المتقارب‬
of the following rhythmical ‫فعولن فعولن‬
َ
‫فعولن فعولن‬, etc.).
(2) Figurative language (e.g. ‫فشوط الحياة أسير ;وداع البها ;محرق عين النَّما ;وللصيف قيف كصير المقام‬
‫رآك (الموت) مجرين ; يفخر الموت ;صيفك لن يذبال ;الفنا‬, etc.).
(3) Occasional perfect end-rhyme (e.g. ‫ سقام‬/ ‫ فنا ;مقام‬/ ‫ يفصال ;بها‬/ ‫بلى‬, etc.).
(4) Occasional semi end-rhyme (e.g. ‫ جميل‬/ ‫)اعتدال‬.
(5) Internal rhyme (e.g. ‫ جميل‬/ ‫ البلى ;أكول‬/ ‫يذبال‬,etc.).
(6) Syntactic elaboration: disruption of normal word order for prosodic and rhetorical
reasons, etc. (e.g. ‫(وال بد يوما و لكل بها‬c.f. ‫( ;فإن لم يكن َع َرقا و مومه ;)وال بد لكل بها يوما و‬c.f. ‫فإن لم يكن‬
‫)مومه عرقا و‬, etc.).
(7) Syntactic elaboration: modulation )‫(القلب‬of noun-adjective order in Arabic (e.g. ‫لطيف‬
‫(اعتدال‬instead of the normal ‫)اعتدال لطيف‬, etc.
etc.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

15

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

A little improvement on the prosodic features can be done, as demonstrated by the following
version by Anani:
(Poetic Translation 2: regular meter and occasional rhyme)
‫(أال مشبهين صفا المصيف‬
‫بلى أن أحلى وأصفى سما‬
‫ففي الصيف معصف ريح الذبول‬
‫ومعبث في برعمات الربيع‬
‫وال يلبث الصيف حتى مزول‬
‫وفي الصيف منطع عين النما‬
‫ويحتدم القيظ مثل األمون‬
‫وفي الصيف يحجب عنا النحاب‬
‫قيا النما وجمال ذُكا‬
‫وما من جميل يظل جميالو‬
‫فشيمة كل البرايا الفنا‬
‫ولكن صيفك ذا لن يغيب‬
‫ولن مفقدي فيه نور الجمال‬
‫ولن يتباهى الفنا الرهيب‬
‫بأنك ممشين بين الظالل‬
‫إذا صغ منك كصيد األبد‬
‫فما دام في األرض ناس معيش‬
‫وما دام فيها عيون مرى‬
‫فنوف يردلِد شعري الزمان‬
).‫وفيه معيشين بين الورى‬
)155-154 ،2004 :‫(عناني‬
This is a fairly good poetic translation, also based on the perfect rhythm of the feet of the Tripping
Meter )‫(المتقارب‬
of the following rhythmical ‫فعولن فعولن فعولن فعولن‬meter )‫(المتقارب‬, however with
َ
no perfect rhyme, only partially. Another disadvantage, which is also admitted by the translator
himself, is the line number of the translation which unnecessarily outnumbers those of the original.
Presumably, it goes without saying that the same number of line is expected. However, the
translation of two lines might be occasionally interceptive, but they do not become three lines in
the TL translation. That said, this has not blocked the rhythmical flow of the translation, quite the
reverse, the tempo of the poem has become faster, which is not necessarily required by the theme
of the English original.
Still a further improvement can be done on this version, by having a more regular meter,
rhyme and rhythm, as the third version below by a poet may suggest:
(Poetic Translation 3: regular meter, rhyme and rhythm):
‫(من ذا يقارن حننك المغري بصيف كد مجلى‬
‫وفتون سحرك كد بدت في ناظري أسمى وأيلى‬
‫مجني الرياح العاميات على البراعم وهي جذلى‬
‫والصيف يمًي منرعا و إذا عقدأ المحدود ولى‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

16

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

‫كم أشرك عين النَّما بحرها متلهب‬
‫ولكم خبا في وجهها الذَّهبي نور يغرب‬
‫ال بد للحنن البهي عن الجميل سيذهب‬
‫فالدهر مغيير وأطوار الطبيعة كللب‬
‫لكن صيفك سرمدي ما اعتراأ ذبول‬
‫لن يفقد الحنن الذي ُمل ْك ِ فهو بخيل‬
‫والموت لن يزهو بظلك في حماأ يجول‬
:‫ستعاصرين الدَّهر في شعري وفيك أكول‬
‫ما دام األنفاس مصعد والعيون محدق‬
).‫سيظل شعري خالدا و وعليك عمرا و يغدق‬
)156-155 :2004 ،‫ را عناني‬:‫(فًيلة النائب‬
We have here perfect metrical rhythm of the Perfect Meter )‫(البحر الكامل‬, with regular , but not
perfect, rhyme, which is parallel to the English original. The poet has rightly committed herself to
the same number of lines. Although the translation is poetic in the full sense of the word, it has
been excessively free translation, as also Anani notes (ibid.), but not too excessive, anyway (c.f.
the literal commitment to some key terms and expressions like 'summer' )‫(صيف‬and 'the hot eye of
heavens' )‫)(عين الشمس الحارة‬. The language of the poem is obviously imbued with rhetorical figures,
aesthetic features, internal rhymes and rhythms and several semantic and syntactic elaborations of
foregrounding, backgrounding, deviations and literary structures. Yet, I personally do not believe
it is much better than Anani's poem, except perhaps for using more regular rhyme and more
elaborate language than the latter.
A yet further improvement can be done on this version by having perfect rhyme from
beginning to end.
(Poetic Translation 4: Perfect meter and perfect rhyme):

‫(ما ِمثلُ ِك الش َهدْ يا درة البل ْد‬
ْ‫مثلك أحد‬
‫في الرك ْه والحنان ما‬
ِ
ْ‫براعم الربي ْع مهزها الريا ْح بحبل من مند‬
ْ‫والصيف صيفنا كصير في األمد‬
ْ‫وشمس صيفنا أوارها امقد‬
ْ‫شعاعها المذهب في يالب خمد‬
ْ‫ورونا الجمال جماله نفد‬
ْ‫فال دوام إال للواحد األحد‬
ْ
ْ‫ بها لألبد‬،‫محال‬
‫يا درة البلد ذبولك‬
ْ‫بهاؤك الذي مزدانة به ُحزميه ال بدد‬
ْ‫والموت لن يتيه بظلك اعتًد‬
ْ‫أبيات من كصيد خلدمك فيها سبحان من وجد‬
ْ‫خلودك باق إذا األنفاس واألبصار لم م ُ َبد‬
).ْ‫خلود سرمدي يحييك بالمدد‬

The point of departure of this translation from the previous three ones is its perfect rhyme from
beginning to end, according to the Trembling Meter )‫الر َجز‬
َّ ‫(البحر‬with full manipulation of the
variations and modulations on its original rhythmical feet(‫ )منتفعلن منتفعلن منتفعلن‬that are allowed
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

17

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

in Arabic prosody. Like the previous versions, rhetorical, aesthetic, literary stylistic, syntactic and
semantic features and intricacies are used deliberately, elaborately and extensively, to construct a
good poetic translation. Here are some of them:
(1) Figurative cultural equivalents (e.g. ‫(درة البلد ;مثل الشهد‬instead of the literal translation into
the English culture ‫ ;يوم صيفي‬which is not acceptable in Arabic culture for summer is
generally hot in the Arab Countries).
(2) Figurative features (e.g. ‫ ;بظلك اعتًد ; والموت لن يتيه;بحبل من مند ;درة البلد ;ما مثلك الشهد‬etc.).
(3) Extra Arabic / Islamic culture to translate terms and expressions related to eternity and
other concepts (e.g. ‫)سبحان من وجد ;فال دوام إال للواحد األحد ;بحبل من مند‬.
(4) Literary / deviant combinations (e.g. ‫(أوار الشمس‬normally: ‫(جمال ينفد ;(أوار الحرب‬normally:
‫(مبيد األنفاس واألبصار ;)مال ينفد‬normally: ‫)مبيد األجناد‬, etc.
(5) Literary tautology (e.g. ‫(خلود سرمدي‬the adjective is implied in the noun).
(6) Alliteration (e.g. ‫بلد‬...‫)واحد أحد ;شهد‬.
(7) Assertive repetition (e.g. ‫)جمال جماله ;الصيف صيفنا‬
(8) Symbolism (e.g. the whole translation, especially: ‫(درة البلد‬a reference to the poet's
sweetheart).
etc.
All the previous suggested four poetic versions demonstrate the versatility of possible poetic
translation, depending on the translator's point of focus (i.e. (partial rhyme and rhythm (1); perfect
meter, rhythm with no rhyme (2); meter and partial rhyme (every four lines) (3); and perfect meter
and perfect rhyme (4). Hence, they can be viewed as four possible choices available to the good
translator of poetry, who may go for whatever more convenient to him / her and the poem.
Poetic Translation: Procedures and Guidelines
The final stage of this Paper is to suggest some guidelines and procedures that may help students
and translators come very close to achieving a good version of poetic translation.
(1) Careful and close reading of the SL poem for several times to absorb meaning properly by
reading through the lines, and between the lines, before starting translation. If lexical, stylistic
or grammatical problems of translation arise, they have to be resolved first, before going to the
next step.
(2) Translating the English poetic text into sense in Arabic first, ignoring sound features
completely.
(3) Assigning a good time for considering the main phonological features of the original,
especially rhyme and rhythm, as a general umbrella for common prosodic features of
alliteration, consonance, assonance, foot and meter in particular.
(4) Concentrating on achieving a kind of rhyme, semi-rhyme or half rhyme, first, and then rhythm
of some kind by any, some or all means that follow hereafter. Illustrative examples are sought
for in the foregoing discussion.
(5) Investing the flexibility of Arabic word order to a maximum in particular to make any changes
necessary for accomplishing a regular rhyme or a near rhyme, and then, rhythm of a sort, if
possible, especially at translating into English.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

18

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

(6) Looking for the widest possible range of synonyms for key words, rhyme words and
rhythmical, isochronic feet of meter in particular, be near or close synonyms, individual words,
or long expressions equivalent to the original lexical items that may achieve the intended sound
patterns. Synonyms close to standard Arabic, as much as classical, very formal ones can be a
potential stylistic choice, on the condition that they derive from the type of text and context of
the original.
(7) Employing the translation procedure of transposition, i.e. the changes of the grammatical
classes of words freely, using an adjective for a noun, an adverb for an adjective, a verb for a
noun in Arabic, etc., so that considerable space is made available to help realize some key
sound features.
(8) Making use of 'poetic license' in full in regard to stylistic, lexical and grammatical deviations,
abbreviations and short forms of words, and vocalization (in Arabic) with the four vocal points:
)‫ النكون‬،‫ الكنرة‬،‫ الًمة‬،‫ (الفتحة‬anywhere in the text.
(9) Adding extra words, or gap-fillers to fill in 'translation gaps', which are not readily used in the
original, but are derived from the context of the source text, including implied words, syntactic
structures sentence connectors and initial words, whether obligatory, necessary or optional.
(10) Dropping unnecessary words, words implied in others, or understood from context directly.
(11) Doing one's best to adopt a specific traditional meter in the translation of a poem, especially
in Arabic, and advisably in English, at least partly throughout.
(12) Finally, and most importantly, cognitive translators of poetry should be attentive to the
mental, ideological, attitudinal, cultural, social, religious and political implications of stylistic
choices at semantic / lexical, grammatical / syntactic and sound / phonological levels of
language, with special attendance to the first level, i.e. words and expressions of all types and
their implicated connotations and associations. In principle, any stylistic choice represents a
concept, or a mental conceptualization of language of some kind, therefore, the process of
selection should be governed by this principle, with some sacrifices and concessions for
achieving key prosodic patterns of rhyme, rhythm, meter and foot in particular. These patterns
might take precedence over conceptualization and message, however not essentially. Any
sacrifice for sound features can be done when the poem's readability is in jeopardy, due to lack
of interest in an unrhymed, un-rhythmical and, hence, unaesthetic, uninteresting and boring
poem.
Conclusions
It has been argued throughout this Paper that translating poetry is an extremely difficult task.
Hence, translators are advised to try it later in their career after having built up wide experience in
translation. It has also been argued that a good poetic translation is entirely based on prosodic and
sound features to be constructed with as much rhyme and rhythm as possible. The general
argument goes for a distinction and a division between two major types of translating poetry: (a)
poetical translation that renders the SLT sense (i.e. literal and direct meaning) with no concern
with prosody or sounds; (b) poetic translation, based entirely on prosodic and sound features,
especially regular rhyme, rhythm and preferably meter and foot. It has been suggested that the
latter is claimed to have several sub-types, given in an ascending order of excellence:
(1) Mainly rhythmical and partly rhymed;
(2) Perfect rhythmical feet and meter and occasional rhyme;
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

19

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

(3) Semi-poetic, involving perfect meter and rhythm with semi-rhyme;
(4) regular meter, rhyme and rhythm; and
(5) Perfect meter, rhyme and rhythm.
It has also been claimed that all these are acceptable poetic versions of translation of poetry with
variations, though. They are meant to demonstrate to translators of poetry that they have a good
range of variations to achieve a poetic translation of some kind. Throughout, a comparison is
drawn between poetical and poetic versions of translation of the same verses in terms of poetic /
non-poetic and literary / unliterary features, prosodic or otherwise. The goal of such comparison
is to make the points of departure between the two versions sharper, and, hence, the argument for
poetic translation more persuasive.
There has also been an exemplification in simple terms of how the process of constructing
poetic translation goes on in practice (see in particular poem (1) above), giving a practical exercise
for trainee translators and students of translation in particular, and translators in general as how to
proceed in steps in the translation of poetry, and how to solve problems of prosodic features of
rhyme, rhythm, meter and foot in particular. The process is claimed to be applicable to both
directions: English-Arabic, and Arabic-English.
The Paper has ended up with some procedures and guidelines for translating poetry to help
translators develop their skills of achieving a satisfactory version of poetic translation gradually
and systematically and simultaneously practice how to solve problems of translating poetry.
About the Author:
HASAN SAID GHAZALA is currently a Full Professor of Stylistics and Translation at the English Department,
College of Social Sciences, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah Al-Mukarramah, Saudi Arabia. He has so far published
(26) books and (54) papers in the two areas of his specialism including three Dictionaries and 10-volumes
Encyclopedia of Translation Textbooks. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3654-2325

References
Anani, M. (1997). Literary Translation (in Arabic). Libraire du Liban: Lebanon.
Anani, M. (2004). The Art of Translation (in Arabic) (4th edn). (Libraire du Liban: Lebanon.
Ateeq, A. A. (1987). Prosody and Rhyme (in Arabic). Dar Al-Nahdah Al-Arabiyyah: Beirut.
Bassnett-McGuire, S. (1980/1991). Translation Studies (Revised edn, 1991.London: Routledge.
Bassnett-McGuire, S. & Lefeveré, A. (eds.) (1995). Translation History and Culture. Rutledge: London.
Carter, R. (ed). (1982). Language and Literature : An introductory Reader in Stylistic. George Allen &
Unwin: London.
Carter, R. and Long, M. (1987). The Web of Words: Exploring Literature Through Language.
Cambridge University Press.
Carter, A. &Nash, W. (1990). Seeing Through Language: A Guide to Styles ofEnglish Writing. Basil
Blackwell.
Dryden, J. (1992). On Translation, in Schulte, R. and Biguenet, J (1992). Theoriesof Translation: an
Anthology of Essays From Dryden to Derrida. The University of Chicago Press: Chicago and
London:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

20

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Poetic Vs. Poetical Translation of Poetry (English-Arabic)

Ghazala

Ghazala, H. (2008 / 2012). Translation as Problems and Solutions: A Textbook forUniversity Students
and Trainee Translators. Dar El-Ilm Lil-Malayin: Beirut.
Ghazala, H. (2013). A Textbook of Literary Translation. Konooz AlMarifa: Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,
Jakobson, R. (1960). Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics, in Sebeok, T.A. (ed) Style in Language.
Cambridge: The MIT Press, 350-93. Khulusi, S (2000). The Art of Translation (in Arabic) (2nd
ed.). Al-Haiah Al-Misriyyah Lil-Kitab: Cairo.
Leech, G.(1969). A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry. London: Longman.
Lefeveré, A. (1975). Translating Poetry: Seven Strategies and a Blueprin., Assent:van Gorcum.
Lefeveré, A. (1992). Translation Rewriting & The Manipulation of Literary Fame. Routledge: London
and New York.
Raffel, B. (1988). The Art of Translating Poetry. The Pennsylvania State University Press:
Pennsylvania.
Raffel, B. (1994). The Art of Translating Prose. The Pennsylvania State University Press:
Pennsylvania.
Schulte, R. & Biguenet, J (1992). Theories of Translation: an Anthology of Essays From Dryden to
Derrida. The University of Chicago Press: Chicago and London.
Simpson, P. (2004). Stylistics: A Resource Book for Students. Routledge: London & New York.
Thornborrow, J. & Wareing, S. (1998). Patterns in Language. Routledge: London and New York.
Traugott, E. &Pratt, M. (1980). Linguistics for Students of Literature. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

21

