MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS
https://doi.org/10.1080/13629395.2018.1511299

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Theorizing state-diaspora relations in the Middle
East: Authoritarian emigration states in comparative
perspective
Gerasimos Tsourapas
Department of Political Science & International Studies, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
ABSTRACT

Recent scholarly interest in the politics of migration and diaspora across the
Global South has yet to address how authoritarian states attempt to reach out
to populations abroad. In an eﬀort to shift the discussion on state-diaspora
relations beyond liberal democratic contexts and single-case studies, this
article comparatively examines how authoritarian emigration states in the
Middle East – Libya, Syria, Egypt, Turkey, and Jordan – behave towards their
own citizens living beyond state borders. It identiﬁes how each state develops
multi-tier diaspora engagement policies aimed at three separate stages of
citizens’ mobility: ﬁrst, policies of exit regulate aspects related to emigration
from the country of origin; second, overseas policies target citizens beyond the
territorial boundaries of the nation state; ﬁnally, return policies set processes of
readmission into the country of origin. In doing so, the article identiﬁes
similarities across disparate Middle East states’ engagement with emigration
and diaspora policymaking. At the same time, the article paints a more
complex picture of non-democracies’ strategies towards cross-border mobility
that problematizes existing conceptualizations of authoritarian practices and
state-diaspora relations.

I. Introduction
On 19 November 2016, Azza Soliman, the Egyptian founder of the Centre for
Egyptian Women’s Legal Assistance, made her way to Cairo International
Airport. She was planning to take a ﬂight to Jordan to participate in a
workshop on human rights, but it was not meant to be; Soliman was
informed by authorities that she had been banned from travelling outside
Egypt, together with hundreds of Egyptian citizens (Michaelson, 2016). A
few months earlier, in a similar attempt at a clampdown on political dissent
in Turkey, the Erdoğan government banned thousands of academics from
travelling abroad (The Independent, 2016). At the same time, both the
CONTACT Gerasimos Tsourapas
g.tsourapas@bham.ac.uk
This article was originally published with errors, which have now been corrected in the online and print
versions. Please see Correction (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13629395.2018.1520421)
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

2

G. TSOURAPAS

Egyptian and Turkish regimes have been funnelling considerable resources
towards citizens who have already moved abroad – most recently, in the
eﬀorts to court their diasporas’ vote for the March 2018 Egyptian presidential elections and the April 2017 Turkish referendum, respectively. In warravaged Syria, the Assad regime introduced Law No. 10 to allow the seizure
of private property, in an eﬀort to discourage Syrians abroad from returning
to the homeland (Associated Press, 2018). While states across the Middle
East develop complex strategies aimed at managing cross-border population mobility, the relevant literature has yet to suﬃciently theorize this
phenomenon in a comparative manner. How do authoritarian states aim
to manage their citizens’ cross-border mobility?
States’ policies towards emigration and diasporas have diﬀused into a
global phenomenon (for recent overviews, see: Délano Alonso & Mylonas,
2017; Koinova & Tsourapas, 2018), with the majority of states developing a
range of diverse policies that go beyond mere consular support for expatriates. A growing number of states are implementing out-of-country voting
processes (Laﬂeur, 2013), dual citizenship provisions (Mirilovic, 2014), as well
as a variety of policies that aim to strengthen connections to the homeland
(Gamlen, 2014). A sizeable body of literature has built on archetypical cases
of liberal democracies’ development of migration and diaspora institutions –
namely India (Naujoks, 2013), Mexico (Fitzgerald, 2009), and the Philippines
(Rodriguez, 2010). Building on this work, social scientists are now identifying
how non-democracies also target citizens residing outside the boundaries of
the nation state.1 An emerging literature identiﬁes the development of
diaspora engagement policies in Syria (Moss, 2018), Morocco (Dalmasso,
2018), Eritrea (Hirt & Mohammad, 2017), Egypt (Brinkerhoﬀ, 2005;
Tsourapas, 2018a), Tunisia (Natter, 2015), and elsewhere. Even though
research acknowledges that regime type matters in states’ diaspora policymaking (Glasius, 2017; Koinova & Tsourapas, 2018; Mirilovic, 2016), scholars
have yet to examine the linkages between authoritarian emigration states’
diaspora policies and repressive policies within the borders of the nation
state.2 Do authoritarian states develop identical sets of diaspora engagement policies with liberal democracies and, if not, do they face additional
constraints or opportunities? Ultimately, what is the range of policies developed by authoritarian emigration states?
To address these questions and stimulate further comparative research
on state-diaspora relations in the Global South, I examine the various
ways through which how states in the Middle East attempt to engage
with their population groups abroad. In contrast to the expectations of
the literature for homogenous diaspora policies,3 I build on earlier
research to argue that authoritarian emigration states develop “multitier” diaspora policies (Tsourapas, 2015b; cf. Han, 2017). They engage
with diﬀerent sets of emigrants in three separate stages of their mobility:

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

3

ﬁrst, policies of exit regulate aspects related to emigration from the
country of origin; second, overseas policies target population groups
beyond the territorial boundaries of the nation state; ﬁnally, return policies set processes of readmission into the country of origin. While I do not
expect to create a comprehensive typology of the range of authoritarian
emigration states’ diaspora policies, I aim to problematize existing conceptualizations of frequently unitary diaspora policymaking based upon
liberal democracies, while also moving away from single case study
analyses that tend to dominate the ﬁeld.
The article proceeds as follows: I begin by examining the literature on
states’ diaspora policies more closely, and I identify a gap in the diverse
manners through which authoritarian emigration states attempt to reach
out to their populations abroad. I continue by arguing for a multi-tier
approach to diaspora policymaking in non-democratic contexts, before
proceeding to examine the policies of ﬁve Middle Eastern states – Libya,
Syria, Egypt, Turkey, and Jordan – in the pre-2011 period. The case selection
aims to maximize variance in degree of authoritarianism, ranging from the
Libyan and Syrian dictatorships to Jordan’s parliamentary monarchy and the
hybrid regimes of Egypt and Turkey. I identify how each state developed
multi-tiered emigrant policies, targeting diﬀerent population groups at
diﬀerent stages of mobility.4 I draw on primary sources (World Bank data,
NGO reports, and Arabic media sources) as well as secondary literature. I
conclude with a discussion of how the article’s theorization and argumentation may be carried forward in the future.

II. Diaspora policymaking in authoritarian emigration states
This section examines how scholars have approached the question of nondemocracies’ policymaking towards their citizens abroad to highlight a
lack of engagement with the full range of policies developed by such
states. Social scientists have traditionally approached authoritarian states
as aiming to restrict their citizens’ cross-border mobility and prevent
emigration at any cost (Alemán & Woods, 2014; Hirschman, 1993, p. 179).
This was a Cold War perspective shaped by the construction of the Berlin
Wall and the German Democratic Republic’s shoot-to-kill policy towards
anyone aiming to cross it. With the ‘transnational turn’ in international
relations over the last 20 years, scholars shifted their attention to diaspora
policies, gradually beginning to theorize as to the conditions under which
liberal democratic ‘emigration states’ reached out to their communities
abroad (Collyer, 2013; Gamlen, 2008). This strand left a gap with regard to
authoritarian states’ strategies (for exceptions, see: Brand, 2006; Shain,
2005; Østergaard-Nielsen, 2003). A recent wave of scholarship has
addressed this by examining both how diasporas interact with

4

G. TSOURAPAS

authoritarian politics at home (Betts & Jones, 2016; Escriba-Folch,
Meseguer, & Wright, 2018) as well as how autocratic governments develop
policies to govern their populations abroad (including a special issue of
Globalizations, edited by Glasius, 2017).
I argue for the need to examine the workings of ‘authoritarian emigration
states’, namely ‘the set of institutions, practices, and mechanisms regulating
cross-border mobility developed within non-democratic contexts’
(Tsourapas, 2018a, p. 403). In doing so, I highlight how a liberal democratic
framework of diaspora policymaking faces an important hurdle when
applied to this subset of states: authoritarian emigration states aim to
exert, by deﬁnition, a greater degree of control throughout citizens’ migration trajectory. For one, permission to leave or return to one’s country of
origin, which liberal democracies recognize as individual right,5 is subject to
the political exigencies of authoritarian emigration states. To understand
non-democracies’ diaspora outreach, it is necessary to problematize who is
allowed to become diasporic. For citizens aiming to emigrate from
Uzbekistan or North Korea, for example, exit visas continue to remain a
strict requirement; Cuba only abolished the practice in 2013. Particularly in
previous decades, ‘black lists’ were a prominent phenomenon that contained citizens that were speciﬁcally prohibited from emigrating, as in the
case of the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact states.
At the same time, the long arm of authoritarian emigration states also
reaches out to citizens who have emigrated. Citizens abroad may ﬁnd
themselves being monitored by embassy and consular staﬀ or groups
aﬃliated with them – as in the case of the Tunisian and Moroccan amicales
that operated across Western Europe (Brand, 2002). As will be seen below,
authoritarian emigration states have not hesitated to target citizens’ family
and friends in the homeland as retribution for citizens’ political activism
abroad. Many states are able to support authoritarianism via ﬁnancial
extraction from diaspora communities – as in the case of Eritrea. In even
more extreme cases, a number of authoritarian emigration states have also
not hesitated to diminish ‘opposition in exile’ through forced extraditions, as
in Central Asia or, even, to engage in political assassinations, as in the case
of Russia under Putin (Tsourapas, 2018b).
Finally, authoritarian emigration states regulate citizens’ return migration
processes. They may not allow dual citizenship or may engage in denaturalization of dissenters. This is particularly popular across the Gulf states (The
Economist, 2016). Qatar revoked the citizenship of an entire clan, approximately 6,000 members of the Al-Ghufran branch of the Al-Murrah tribe in
the 2004–2005 period, because of lack of loyalty to the Emir (Parolin, 2009).
In June 2017, Vietnam denationalized political dissident Pham Minh Hoang,
a member of the Vietnam Reform Party that the government considers a
‘terrorist group’, preventing his return to the homeland (Al-Jazeera, 2017). In

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

5

less extreme cases, passports may be conﬁscated, or not renewed – either as
a way of severing one’s ties to the homeland or forcing their return.
Overall, beyond policies that exclusively target those citizens already
residing outside its borders, non-democracies develop two additional sets
of policies aiming to control emigration and return migration. Authoritarian
emigration states arguably develop multi-tier diaspora policies targeting
three separate stages of cross-border mobility: exit, overseas, and return
(see Table 1). While some overlap exists between these tiers, as will be
analysed below, this conceptualization demonstrates how states view diaspora communities as dynamic and attempt to aﬀect them via diverse sets
of policies. As seen above, most states today develop policies aiming to
engage with populations abroad; in non-democratic contexts, these policies
also control these populations’ expansion or decline. States, in Adamson’s
apt characterization, are able to both ‘generate’ and ‘shape’ diasporas
(Adamson 2018); arguably, authoritarian emigration states may also seek
to ‘dismantle’ them.

III. Theorizing diaspora policymaking in the Middle East
This section employs the exit, overseas, and return analytical framework of
diaspora policymaking outline above in the context of the Middle East. It
examines how ﬁve authoritarian emigration states – Libya, Syria, Egypt,
Turkey, and Jordan – have engaged with population groups abroad, and
demonstrates key commonalities and diﬀerences among them.
Table 1. Typology of multi-tier diaspora policies in authoritarian emigration states.
Diaspora
Policy-Tier
Exit

Overseas

Return

Policy Examples
Legal regulations regarding the issuance of travel documents
‘Black lists’ preventing select individuals’ cross-border mobility
Informal processes hindering emigration
Restrictions on travel based on age, sex, occupation, fulﬁlment of military service
obligations, political activity, or criminal records
Bilateral agreements with (potential) host states
Intimidation, corporal punishment, or assassination of citizens residing abroad
Financial extraction, through taxation or other means
Organisation of informant networks gathering information and reporting on
citizens’ activities
Forced participation in regime-sponsored activities or celebrations
Targeting of citizens’ family and friends in the homeland as retribution
Diplomatic pressure on host states for cooperation
Limited out-of-country voting provisions
Dual/multiple citizenship not allowed or tightly-regulated
Cancelling as well as refusing to issue or to renew passports and other travel
documents to individuals abroad
Practices of denationalisation
Forced extradition processes
Development of ‘black lists’ banishing individuals’ return, including via threat of
harm

6

G. TSOURAPAS

Libyan diaspora policies
Oil-rich Libya is traditionally examined as a country of immigration or, more
recently, transit migration (Bredeloup & Pliez, 2011; Paoletti, 2010). While
outﬂows never reached the high ﬁgures of other Middle Eastern and African
states, Libya experienced sustained emigration, particularly temporary emigration of students and high-skilled professionals, dispersed across multiple
host states (Figure 1). Short-term emigration can be explained primarily from
a developmental perspective: Idris, the ﬁrst ruler of post-independence Libya
(1951–1969), relied on foreign staﬀ to develop the Libyan state and train
Libyan citizens (Tsourapas, 2015a; Vandewalle, 2012), but his successor,
Muammar Gaddaﬁ, encouraged the emigration of Libyans for skill-acquisition
purposes, instead. Political scientists have examined how Libyan elites have
manipulated the status of the country both as a transit and as a host country
of migrants for economic and foreign policy gains in its migration diplomacy
(Tsourapas, 2017; Paoletti, 2011; cf. Greenhill, 2010); yet, little has been written
on the country’s complex diaspora policy.
With regard to managing emigration through the state’s exit policy, postindependence Libya initially regulated emigration almost at the point of
restriction. The ruling regime considered a Libyan’s relocation abroad to
constitute a political act hostile to the state, and duly developed a variety of
repressive mechanisms: it instituted a rigid system of exit-visa regulations
for Libyan nationals. The issuance of travel documents was also extremely
complex, having to go through a number of bureaucratic and administrative
channels. This process was bound to be unsuccessful, or result in imprisonment, if one had been placed on one of the regime’s ‘black lists’, merely by
being a relative of another Libyan abroad. A gradual shift occurred in the
years following Gaddaﬁ’s 1969 Revolution.

35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0

1960
Sudan

1970
Israel

United States

1980
Egypt

United Kingdom

1990
Tunisia

2000
Palestine

Italy

2010
Canada

Figure 1. Libyan migrant stock in major countries of destination [1960–2010].
Source: World Bank (2011)

Chad

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

7

Eager to rid Libya of its dependence on foreign labour and conduct a
‘Libyanization’ of the country’s workforce (Maghur, 2010, p. 3), Gaddaﬁ
gradually encouraged the emigration of Libyans for skill-acquisition purposes and expanded a programme for scholarships to study abroad. The
requirement of ‘exit visas’ was formally dropped in 1991, although female
Libyan citizens continued to not be able to travel abroad without written
authorization from their father or husband (Obeidi, 1999, p. 171). Although
research on Libyan emigration is scant, there is ample evidence of ‘arbitrary
seizure or non-issuance of passports’ (United States Department of State,
2012). In the 2004 case of Loubna El Ghar v. Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, the United Nations Human Rights Council determined that Libya
refused the issuance of a passport ‘without any valid justiﬁcation and . . .
prevented [her] from travelling abroad to continue her studies’ (Harvey &
Barnidge, 2005, p. 5). The state also imposed heavy penalties on those who
attempted to emigrate without proper permission, while the facilitation of
unauthorized emigration carried both a prison penalty and a ﬁne, as formalized in Law No. 2 |2004 and Law No. 19 |2010.
The Libyan state under Gaddaﬁ also developed an extensive overseas diaspora policy that aimed to exert control over the activities of citizens that had
permanently relocated abroad. In the UK, this included eﬀorts in mobilizing
Libyan students against potential anti-regime activists, organized by Omar
Sodani in the early 1980s (for an account of the era, see: Kawczynski, 2011,
pp. 88–111). The Gaddaﬁ regime would describe many of those who had ﬂed
abroad as traitors to the Libyan state or, more frequently, kullāb d ̣āla (‘stray
dogs’), and would threaten vengeance. In his 1982 ‘Day of Vengeance’ speech,6
Gaddaﬁ included these political dissenters to the same group as the Libyan
Jews that had been ousted earlier: ‘these stray dogs composed of ex-premiers
who are traitors and hirelings. . .’ Gaddaﬁ stated. ‘They demean the Libyan
people because they sold out Libya . . . There shall be no mercy for the agents
of America. The escaped hirelings, enemies of the Libyan people, shall not
escape from this people’ (quoted in Ross, 1982). In the Libyan case, patriotism
and loyalty to the regime entailed a rejection of the West (cf. Shain, 2005),
which rendered emigration politically suspect.
Teams of rough and ready revolutionaries moved in and took over the Libyan
embassies (now named ‘people’s bureaus’) around the world and began
rooting out the ‘stray dogs’ who were engaged in anti-regime activities.
Eliminating the opposition was far more important to Qaddaﬁ than the
niceties of foreign diplomacy (Pargeter, 2012, pp. 103–104).

Libyan strategies of silencing the diaspora included political assassinations
(Ross, 1982). These campaigns were reportedly organized by Moussa Koussa,
nicknamed mab’ūth al-mawt (‘envoy of death’), for he also organized covert
assassination attempts against Libyan opposition ﬁgures abroad. In 1980,

8

G. TSOURAPAS

Koussa was formally removed from his position as public envoy in London
when he publicly admitted these practices to the London Times: ‘We killed
two in London and there were another two to be killed . . . I approve of this’
(The Times, 11 June 1980). Earlier that month,
‘On 11 April 1980, Mohamed Ramadan, a Libyan journalist with the BBC’s
Arabic Service, who had been publishing open letters to Qaddaﬁ in the
Arabic media, was shot at point-blank range in the courtyard of the Regent’s
Park mosque after Friday prayers. The Libyan authorities refused to accept his
body back for burial. Ramadan’s death was not a one-oﬀ: the same month
Libyan lawyer Mahmoud Abu Nafa was shot dead in the oﬃces of a legal ﬁrm
in Ennismore Gardens in London, a street that at the time also housed the
education oﬃces of the Libyan People’s Bureau . . . In May 1980, a wealth
Libyan timber merchant was murdered in his hotel bed in Rome. The following
month Izzadine Al-Hodeiri, a Libyan living in Bolzano in northern Italy, was
shot dead in the railway station in Milan. At the same time, a naturalised Italian
of Libyan birth, Salem Fezzani, was shot at in the Rome restaurant he owned.
The attacker told the police: ‘I was sent by the people to kill him. He is a traitor
and an enemy of the people’ (Pargeter, 2012, pp. 104–105).

Many dissidents mysteriously disappeared, such as former Minister of
Foreign Aﬀairs (1972–73) Mansour Rashid El-Kikhia. Having disagreed with
Gaddaﬁ’s policies, El-Kikhia was granted an American citizenship and went
on to help found the Arab Organization of Human Rights. He disappeared in
Cairo in 1993, and his remains were only discovered in Libya in 2012. As
Salem al-Hassi, Libya’s Intelligence Chief following the 2011 ousting of
Gaddaﬁ (2012–15) recounts:
‘I was not the only one who was pursued by the Gaddaﬁ intelligence services.
For years, the Gaddaﬁ intelligence services went after opposition leaders in the
capitals of many countries, in Europe, the United States and Arab countries. A
great number of opposition leaders were handed over Gaddaﬁ by Arab and
European countries. A great number were kidnapped in Arab and European
countries. The regime used the most evil ways to eliminate the opposition’
(quoted in Asharq al-Awsat 2012).

Finally, beyond aiming to control diasporic activity by targeting Libyans who
wished to exit and those abroad, the Gaddaﬁ regime also tailored its return
diaspora policy along similar aims. The regime would attempt to have Libyan
dissenters returned to the homeland to face persecution and appropriate
punishment. The intended aim was to dissuade Libyans from emigrating by
highlighting the risks involved. Not surprisingly, the regime’s treatment of
return migrants often involved public show trials. One of the most chilling
was the case of Al-Sadek Hamed al-Shuwehdy, who had emigrated to pursue
an engineering degree in the United States. He was publicly executed in 1984,
in the middle of a stadium full of thousands of school children and students,
who had been brought in for the occasion. After he tearfully confessed that he

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

9

has joined the ‘stray dogs’, a gallows was brought into the arena and alShuwedhy was hanged on live state television (Black, 2011).
Such violence was also aimed at dissuading any Libyan exiles from
returning to the homeland as well as disciplining those already abroad –
demonstrating how diﬀerent tiers of Libya’s diaspora policy may overlap.
At the same time, the state’s diaspora policy also developed a rigid legal
framework for restricting any attempts at repatriation: for one, dual citizenship was expressed forbidden as per Nationality Law No. 17|1954, and Law
No. 3 |1979. A common measure adopted for political dissenters abroad, or
those who had emigrated without formal permission, was denaturalization:
for instance, Ali Tarhouni, a key ﬁgure in post-2011 Libyan politics, had ﬂed
the country in 1973, was stripped of his citizenship, sentenced to death in
absentia, and placed on a government hit list in 1981 (Fahim, 2011). The
Libyan state had introduced detailed regulations on how the process of
involuntary loss of Libyan citizenship occurs, on the following grounds:
‘Person obtains new citizenship without government permission. Person
enlists in foreign military or attempts to avoid Libyan conscription. Person
seeks asylum in another country. Person attempts to smuggle money out of
the country. Person converts to a religion other than Islam. Person deserted
country after 1969 revolution. Person refuses to return home within 6 months
of state request. Person commits treasonous acts against the state. Additional
grounds for a naturalized citizen: Person commits crimes against the security
of the state. Person remains outside the country more than two years. Person
obtained citizenship through fraud or false statement’ (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, 1979).

Syrian diaspora policies
Similar to Libya, the Syrian Arab Republic, or Syria, is another Middle Eastern
country that is not traditionally considered as an emigration state given the
numerous restrictions that the Assad regime placed on population mobility
(Philipp, 1985; Winckler, 1997). Yet, Syria has experienced waves of lowskilled emigration into Lebanon for decades (Chalcraft, 2008), Venezuela, as
well as into the Gulf countries from the mid-1970s onwards (Figure 2).
Similar to the Libyan case, Syrians also ﬂed the political regime of Hafez
al-Asad by emigrating to the West, particularly during the 1980s which saw a
wave of harsh repression.
In terms of Syria’s exit policy, Syrians were able to pursue short-term labour
emigration into Lebanon and the Gulf Cooperation Council states; this was
supervised by the regime via bilateral accords with the Arab host states and is
best understood as a socio-economic ‘safety valve’: unemployed, low-skilled
Syrians had the opportunity to pursue temporary or cyclical employment in
Lebanon; medium- or high-skilled Syrians sought employment in the oilproducing Arab countries of the Gulf instead. The state regulated this process

10

G. TSOURAPAS

300,000

250,000

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

0
1960
Kuwait

1970
Saudi Arabia

United States

1980
United Arab Emirates

1990
Palestine

Libya

2000
Jordan

Israel

2010
Argentina

Germany

Figure 2. Syrian migrant stock in major countries of destination [1960–2010].
Note that Syrians’ large–scale circular migration into Lebanon is not captured in World
Bank data.
Source: World Bank (2011).

by requiring two documents from a prospective emigrant: one would state
that the individual was either unemployed (or employed in the private sector)
or, in the case of public sector workers, that he/she had permission from the
government to leave the country. A second document would state successful
completion of military service, or exemption from it. Border control oﬃcials
also possessed lists of Syrian citizens barred from travel abroad. This eﬀectively prevented regime dissenters or political activists from leaving the
country. At the same time, the regime was also keen to ‘preventing the
migration of skilled and professional workers by means of coercion and by
denying exit visas to those who were important to the economy’ (Winckler,
1997, p. 113). This was notably the case with Syrian engineers who, according
to a 1988 law, were forbidden from emigrating until they had been employed
in the public sector for at least 5 years. This is not to suggest that political
dissenters did not manage to leave Syria; however, bilateral agreements with
neighbouring countries prevented irregular Syrian emigrants from travelling
to a third country (for they either did not have travel documents or lacked the
Syrian exit stamp on their passport).
Those citizens that settled abroad were subject to Syria’s overseas policy.
With regard to any unauthorized political activism abroad, the Syrian state
would target the emigrant’s family members back home, not unlike Libyan
strategies: in case a Syrian abroad engages in unauthorized political activism, his/her family members in Syria would be forbidden from emigration,
and authorities would launch an investigation on their activities. A notable
example is Mohamad Mamoun Alhomsi, an independent member of the

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

11

Syrian parliament, and a signee of the 2005 Damascus Declaration, who ﬂed
to Lebanon in 2006 after serving a prison sentence for ‘attempting to
change the constitution by illegal means’. State security forces detained
his 16-year-old son Yasin overnight ‘hoping to lure his father back’. A few
years later, Yasin was placed in prison and, when released 7 months later, he
was forbidden from leaving Syria (Carman, 2015). Beyond blurring the line
between ‘exit’ and ‘overseas’ policies, the targeting of one’s family members
back home casts into doubt whether it is possible to ever fully escape the
grip of the authoritarian emigration state.
Syria also followed Libya’s example of monitoring diaspora communities and
exerting violence on dissenters abroad. Reports of Syrians’ disappearances
abroad have gone unanswered. Assassinations have not been uncommon:
Muhammad Umran, a founding member of the Ba’ath Party, was imprisoned
following the 1966 Syrian coup d’état; he ﬂed to Lebanon upon his release, where
he was assassinated in March 1972. Salah ad-Din al-Bitar, another founder of the
Ba’ath Party and later Prime-Minister of Syria, ﬂed to Europe in 1966. He was shot
in the back of the neck in July 1980 in Paris, after calling for the overthrow of
Asad. Two weeks beforehand, Syrian radio had declared that ‘Syria is capable of
ﬁrmly striking at all the hands attempting to harm it’, while the al-Ba’ath paper
warned that ‘the hand that is directed against Syria will be cut oﬀ be it directed
from abroad or internally’ (Koven, 1980). In March 1981, Banan al-Tantawi was
assassinated inside her home in Aachen, Germany (Reuters, 1981). She was the
wife of exiled Syrian Muslim Brotherhood leader Isaam el-Attar, who had been
prohibited from returning to Syria from Saudi Arabia in 1964 (and who was
reported to have been the target for assassination). As with the Libyan authoritarian emigration state’s practices, it bears noting that only prominent ﬁgures
targeted abroad are known to the wider public; the full list of those citizens
targeted by Syria’s overseas policy is likely to be much longer.
Finally, in terms of return policy, the Syrian regime developed strategies
reminiscent of Libya. Dual nationality required authorization from the Syrian
authorities, and the state put forth legal sanctions in case of acquisition of a
second nationality without authorization. Beyond other criteria, such authorization was expressly subject to the previous fulﬁlment of military service
obligations. Unlike Libya, however, Syria’s diaspora policy preferred to have
political opposition ﬁgures returned to the homeland, rather than denaturalize them while abroad. Syrian dissenters abroad were granted documentation to return, merely to be arrested upon entering Syria: when Medhat
Tayfour, for instance, who had left the country in 1983, applied for permission
to return to Syria from Jordan, he was given a laissez-passer travel document
but was arrested at the border on 1998 and never seen again. His brother was
a member of the Muslim Brotherhood in exile (Human Rights Watch, 1999, p.
376). The strictly enforced rule of having to serve a 2-year military service for

12

G. TSOURAPAS

any Syrian abroad that did not do so before emigrating (or pay a hefty waiver
fee) is also a major factor prohibiting return.
Cutting across Syria’s overseas and return policies is a long-standing
culture of fear among Syrians abroad against the workings of state embassies
and consulates abroad (Ibid.). It is common knowledge that members of the
feared Air Force Intelligence Directorate (Idarat al-Mukhabarat al-Jawiyya) are
stationed in every Syrian embassy or consulate, although these oﬃcers are
more involved in the surveillance of staﬀ than of citizens abroad. Diaspora
communities’ reports of intimidation and harassment have multiplied since
the onset of the Syrian Civil War (Amnesty International, 2011; Moss, 2016).
Assessing the validity of these claims – ranging from verbal abuses by staﬀ to
the existence of prison cells within embassies’ basements – is not important,
for they are able to dissuade Syrians abroad from engaging with state oﬃcials
irrespective of their accuracy. By representing the long arm of the authoritarian emigration state, these Syrian institutions shape state-diaspora relations in
a diﬀuse manner, similar to the North African amicales across Western Europe
(Brand, 2002): they are able to aﬀect diaspora groups’ conduct abroad eﬀectively without resorting to conspicuous acts of violence.

Egyptian diaspora policies
While Egyptian migrants worked across the Arab world and Africa for most of
the twentieth century (Amin & Awni, 1986; Awad & Selim, 2017; Tsourapas,
2016), Egyptian migration increased signiﬁcantly in the Sadat and Mubarak era
(1970–2011), both towards the oil-producing countries of the Arab world
(Fergany, 1983), as well as towards the West (Zohry & Harrell-Bond, 2003).
Sizeable Egyptian migrant stocks exist across the Arab world today, particularly
in Saudi Arabia (Figure 3), as well across Europe, North America, and Australia.
In contrast to the exit policies developed by Syria and Libya, Egypt under
Presidents Anwar Sadat and Hosni Mubarak approached its citizens’ emigration as a right (Dessouki, 1982; Author). Article 52 of the 1971 Constitution
declared that ‘citizens shall now have the right to permanent or temporary
migration’ (Arab Republic of Egypt 1971). Exit visas, which President Gamal
Abdel Nasser used to restrict emigration in the 1950s and 1960s, were
abolished in 1974, and the state ceased collecting data on emigration.
Furthermore, according to Presidential Decree 73|71, public sector employees who emigrated in pursuit of employment abroad to be reinstated in
their positions in Egypt, if they returned home within a year after their
resignation (later 2 years), with any salary increments they missed to also
be considered. A number of agreements were negotiated with migrant host
states (Table 2). Egyptian school curricula were instructed to teach that
‘people emigrate, just like the birds’ (Al-Ahram al-Iqtisadi, No. 745, 1983).
The 1977 preparatory school certiﬁcate exam asked students to write an

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

13

1,050,000
900,000
750,000
600,000
450,000
300,000
150,000
0
1960
Saudi Arabia

1970
Libya

Kuwait

1980
United States

United Arab Emirates

1990
Palestine

2000
Jordan

Israel

2010
Australia

United Kingdom

Figure 3. Egyptian migrant stock in major countries of destination [1960–2010].
Source: World Bank (2011)

essay on ‘the joys of a person who could obtain work in an Arab country’ (alAhram, 18 May 1977).
With regard to its overseas policy, the Egyptian regime would attempt to
reach out to these migrant and diaspora communities in a variety of ways
following the liberalization of emigration in the early 1970s (Tsourapas,
2015b). Not unlike other developing countries, a major aspect of Egypt’s
diaspora policy built on the perceived political and economic gains of
embracing its diaspora in the West. A large number of them would frequently be invited back to Cairo and Alexandria, where they would be

Table 2. Emigration-related agreements between Egypt and Arab States, 1971–2011
(Treaties, memoranda of understanding and protocols).
Year
1971
1972
1974
1974
1975
1981
1985
1985
1993
1993
1993
1994
1994
1997
1998
2001
2003
2007
2007
2009
Source: Tsourapas, 2015b

Countries
Egypt – Libya
Egypt – Algeria
Egypt – Jordan
Egypt – Qatar
Egypt – Iraq
Egypt – Jordan
Egypt – Jordan
Egypt – Iraq
Egypt – Iraq
Egypt – Lebanon
Egypt – United Arab Emirates
Egypt – United Arab Emirates
Egypt – Libya
Egypt – Yemen
Egypt – Lebanon
Egypt – Tunisia
Egypt – Sudan
Egypt – Jordan
Egypt – Saudi Arabia
Egypt – Libya

14

G. TSOURAPAS

entertained by the President and the First Lady under both the administrations of both Presidents Sadat (al-Jumhuriya, 4 August 1976) and Mubarak
(al-Ahram, 2 August 2010). In the aftermath of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War,
about 1500 emigrants from North America would receive annual tours of
the Suez war front hosted by various cabinet ministers (al-Ahram, 17 June
1974; al-Jumhuriya, 27 August 1976). Those studying in Europe and North
America would receive ﬁnancial support from the Egyptian President on an
ad hoc basis – a grant of $50,000, or ~$212,000 today, was given to the
Union of Egyptian students in North America, for instance (al-Ahram, 9
August 1976), while any problems were to be dealt with immediately,
regardless of cost. At one point, Sadat even had the Presidential airplane
transport home Egyptians who had been unable to ﬁnd employment in
France (al-Jumhuriya, 12 July 1975). A number of diﬀerent committees and
other institutions developed that were responsible for emigrants, including
a separate Ministry of State for Emigration Aﬀairs (created in 1981), which
was replaced in 1996 by the Ministry of Manpower and Emigration.
Scant research exists with regard to the repressive nature of Egypt’s
diaspora policies. The violence – overt or otherwise – that characterized the
Libyan and Syrian states’ workings with citizens abroad appears to not be as
prominent in the case of pre-‘Arab Spring’ Egypt. One explanation may be
that Egyptian diaspora groups never constituted a suﬃcient threat to the
ruling regime to warrant the development of repressive mechanisms; yet,
reports of diasporic anti-regime activism (particularly by the Coptic diaspora)
are frequent. A more convincing answer may relate to Egyptian migrants’
choice of destination: the vast majority of Egyptians sought employment in
Iraq and the Gulf Cooperation Council states, which oﬀered scant opportunities for political activism. At the same time, given the close security cooperation between sending and host states’ security sectors (Feiler, 2003) and
the absence of democratic norms at work, Egypt relied on its Arab counterparts for monitoring, repression, and control in ways that the Libyan and
Syrian regimes could not have replicated in Europe or North America.
Finally, the Egyptian authoritarian emigration state would also promote a
return policy aiming to have diaspora members contribute to the development of the homeland. The theme of citizens’ return to the homeland, in
particular, highlighted how labour emigration was approached not as an act
of political treason, but as an economic necessity for Egypt’s economic
development. Mechanisms for the granting of dual citizenship to
Egyptians were duly instituted. The Egyptian state put forth ﬁnancial incentives (for instance, beneﬁcial access to housing), or the ad hoc creation of
‘Visiting Professor’ posts in universities to be occupied by Egyptian scientists
residing abroad (al-Ahram, 21 April 1974). Those who had emigrated illegally
before 1970 (either as an act of political dissent or to escape the military
draft) were free to return without persecution: Sadat decided to grant a

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

15

general amnesty to all Egyptians who had escaped conscription and dispatched military delegations abroad inviting the emigrants back to Egypt.
More prominently, the acts of emigration and, importantly, return migration
were approached in a patriotic manner:
Egypt’s youthful skills have stolen the limelight and come to be the country’s
staple crop. Some of them get higher salaries than Dr. Henry Kissinger while still
in their forties. Some lead the same lavish life as Hollywood stars. They own
villas with fragrant gardens and as many as three cars each. One of them travels
by private helicopter from his country home to his place of work inside New
York! But our country will not lose the brains we export to the outside world.
For a successful Egyptian must be back home one day to drink again from the
Nile and to live with the generous people [of Egypt]. An Egyptian travels but
does not go for good, for he always returns (al-Akhbar, 30 June 1975).

Turkish diaspora policies
The Turkish state encouraged labour emigration from the late 1950s
onwards, primarily to Germany and, to a lesser extent, other Western
countries (Aksel, 2014; Sayari, 1986). While Germany has remained a main
country of destination ever since (Figure 4), the Turkish state also promoted
labour emigration to the Arab world and Russia in the post-1973 era, as
demand for immigrant labour in Europe declined.
Similar to Egypt, authorities initially framed the state’s exit policy around
the potential economic and developmental contribution of migration to the
Turkish state from the 1960s onwards (Martin 1991). According to the IIBK’s
1964 report, labour migration would serve ﬁve aims, namely:
Realising the idea of integration of the country into the European political and
economic community; reducing under-employment as much as possible; raising hard currency revenues; unskilled and semi-skilled worker’s acquisition of
knowledge, ability and experience; and, by increasing the number of people
with European work-methods and experience within the country, encouraging
industries of the receiving countries to set up subsidiaries in Turkey (quoted in
Akgündüz, 2008, p. 52).

Already in 1950, Turkish law clariﬁed that no exit visas are required to leave
Turkey (Art. 7, Law No. 5682) and posed no residency requirements for those
already employed within Turkey: a 1975 SOPEMI report found that 81% of
Turkish emigrants were already employed prior to emigration. In fact, as per
its 1961 agreement with the Federal Republic of Germany, a liaison oﬃce
was established in Istanbul that formed a branch of the German
Bundesanstalt für Arbeit, which coordinated the recruitment process and
made the ﬁnal selection of emigrants on behalf of the German state.
Realizing the economic beneﬁts of migrant remittances, the Turkish state
engaged in a series of migration-related agreements with host states, as in

16

G. TSOURAPAS

3,000,000
2,800,000
2,600,000
2,400,000
2,200,000
2,000,000
1,800,000
1,600,000
1,400,000
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
0
1960
Germany

1970
Austria

France

1980
Netherlands

United States

1990
Switzerland

2000
Belgium

Saudi Arabia

2010
Israel

Greece

Figure 4. Turkish migrant stock in major countries of destination [1960–2010].
Source: World Bank (2011)

the case of Egypt. However, obstacles to emigration remained, particularly
for Turkey’s Kurdish citizens in the 1980s. When the 1973 oil-embargo
diminished Western Europe’s appetite for immigrant labour, Turkish authorities targeted Libya, Jordan, and the oil-producing countries of the Gulf. It is
worth noting that, similar to Egypt, diﬀerent ministries shared responsibility
for these policies, including the Ministries of Labour, Finance, Education,
Foreign Aﬀairs, Customs and Local Aﬀairs, the Turkish Employment Service,
as well as the Turkish State Planning Organization.
With regard to its overseas policy, Turkey developed extensive outreach
mechanisms for its diaspora populations, particularly within Europe (Baser
2017). These evolved out of the need to incentivize the dispatch of economic remittances into a broader set of policies that provided social assistance and facilitation of diasporic organizations abroad, in a manner
reminiscent of Egypt. Dedicated institutions – such as the Oﬃce for Turks
Abroad and Related Communities (YTB) – have been created with an economic, sociocultural, but also political rationale. Turkey aims to project ‘soft
power’ abroad through these communities but also aiming to ensure the
well-being of these communities, to have a greater say in EU states’ politics.
In Europe, Turkey has sought to secure host states’ cooperation in monitoring and restricting dissidents’ behaviour policing’ (Østergaard-Nielsen, 2003,
p. 94), similar to intra-Arab security cooperation in the Egyptian case. Turkey
has also demonstrated behaviour similar to Syria and Libya with regard to its
treatment of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and PKK-related organizations and individuals abroad. Abdullah Öcalan, the PKK leader, was captured
in Kenya and returned to Turkey, in February 1999; assassinations of Kurdish
activists abroad have also been attributed to the MIT, or the Turkish
Intelligence Service (Adamson 2018).

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

17

At the same time, the state’s return policy involved a number of provisions put in place for returnees: the Turkish state clariﬁes that no visa
requirement is needed for Turkish citizens to return home (Art. 5, Law No.
5682) and Article 23 of the 1982 Constitution also states that no citizens may
be deprived of the right to return to the homeland. However, Turkish
consulates have been known to refuse the issuance or renewal of passports
to political dissenters – primarily trade union activists – and force them to
return to Turkey to resolve the issue in a process that Østergaard-Nielsen
called ‘passport harassment’ (2003, 94). This is reminiscent of Syrian practices both in terms of the hostility created between the diasporic communities and state institutions abroad, as well as in the authoritarian emigration
state’s aim of forcing regime dissenters to return home. In 1981, Turkey
legalized dual citizenship, while the Constitution established the Higher
Coordination Council for Workers, including the Social Aﬀairs and
Economic Aﬀairs Committees, aiming to strengthen the attachments of
diaspora groups to Turkey (Aksel, 2014, pp. 203–204). At the same time,
however, Turkey has engaged in denaturalization practices against individuals that acquired a second citizenship without informing consular authorities. As in Syria, cases of harassment by Turkish consulate oﬃcials against
opposition groups, including the Kurds, the Alevites, and members of the
Gülen movement, have been widely reported (Röhn, 2017).

Jordan diaspora policies
The Jordanian state has encouraged labour emigration from the late 1950s
onwards, and its national economy depends to a large degree on migration
and remittances (Shami, 1999, pp. 140–51; Brand, 2006, pp. 176–215). The
majority of emigration ﬂows occur towards the Arab oil-producing countries
of the Gulf, notably high-skilled Jordanians and Palestinians – by the 1970s,
around 60% of the Jordanian labour force was working in the Gulf (Thiollet,
2011, p. 11). Such ﬂows continue today, with the exception of a period of
economic downturn and return migration from the mid-1980s to the early
2000s (Figure 5).
Similar to Egypt, the Jordanian authoritarian emigration state facilitated
emigration through its exit policy. Until 1962, the Jordanian state implemented an exit visa policy that aimed at preventing the emigration of political
activists, for any hint of suspicion about one’s political aﬃliation would lead
to rejection (Abu-Odeh, 1999, p. 83). However, from 1962 onwards the
Jordanian rentier state relied on remittances and the steady outﬂow of
emigrants, and adapted its policy accordingly: it ceased keeping detailed
records of emigration ﬂows and adopted an open-door policy, similar to that
of Egypt. This included a number of bilateral agreements with host states,
starting with a Jordanian-Kuwait accord in 1958, followed by agreements

18

G. TSOURAPAS

500,000
450,000
400,000
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
1960
Kuwait

Palestine

1970

1980

Saudi Arabia

United Arab Emirates

1990
United States

Yemen

2000
Qatar

Germany

2010
Bahrain

Egypt

Figure 5. Jordanian migrant stock in major countries of destination [1960–2010].
Source: World Bank (2011)

with Pakistan and Libya in 1978. Together with Egypt and (pre-Assad) Syria,
Jordan had also signed a 1967 agreement calling for the free circulation of
labour workers in the Arab world. As in the case of Egypt, Jordan attempted
to normalize the phenomenon of labour emigration through textbooks: the
2010 Jordanian tenth-grade civics textbook, for instance, highlights how
countries such as Egypt and Jordan beneﬁtted from migration to the Gulf
and states that ‘with the tremendous ﬂow of oil in the Gulf region and in
Libya, new waves of population and labor force movement began, employment opportunities expanded . . . and the processes of migration and movement of labor to the oil regions became one of the more important forces
shaping contemporary Arab life’ (Brand, 2010, p. 105). In contrast to Syrian
and Turkish attempts at keeping political discontents within their borders,
Jordan did not forcibly detain them at home. Similar to Egypt, Jordan relied
on close security cooperation with the Gulf states to monitor and suppress
political activism (Brand, 2013).
Indeed, similarities exist in Egyptian and Jordanian overseas policies.
The Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs had established a special section on
expatriate aﬀairs in 1981. The 1981–85 Five-Year Plan laid out speciﬁc
strategies for the dispatch of labour attachés at the main countries of
destination, such as Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, to resolve any
problems and support expatriates’ activities. In 1987, Jordan decided to
establish an Expatriates Directorate (mudiriyyat al-mughtaribin) in the
Ministry of Labour and Social Development. The Jordanian state also
initiated a series of expatriate conferences, which would annually invite
hundreds of Jordanians residing abroad back to the homeland to share
their opinions on how to further develop linkages with the diaspora. The
existence of large expatriate communities across the Middle East was

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

19

framed, as in the case of Egypt, in pan-Arab terms and was presented as
contributing to regional economic integration and Arab unity. At the
same time, once ruling elites perceived of the Palestinian population
(and the Palestine Liberation Organization) as a threat to a Jordanian
national identity, Palestinian migrants’ activities abroad came under
close scrutiny. As in the case of Syrian and Turkish communities abroad,
Palestinian Jordanians developed a culture of reticence, even fear,
towards state institutions abroad:
‘for many expatriates, the relationship to Jordan was one of an imposed nationality, while political loyalty belonged to one of the factions of the PLO. One might
well own an apartment or a home in Jordan, but this was because to do so in
Palestine was much more diﬃcult or impossible. Jordanian embassies were
places where passports had to be renewed, but which were otherwise to be
avoided. The state was increasingly associated with a Transjordanian-staﬀed
internal intelligence service that impounded passports, harassed, and at times
tortured suspected political activists’ (Brand, 2006, pp. 181–82).

Finally, in terms of Jordanian policy of return: by 1987, the Jordanian
Parliament responded to expatriate requests and approved dual citizenship (Jordan Times, 18 July 1987). Those who participated in the
Expatriate Conferences were taken on tours of development projects
across Jordan and made familiar with state initiatives that would allow
them to pursue economic activities back in the homeland. They were
oﬀered special hotel rates (according to instructions by the Ministry of
Tourism and Antiquities) and ﬂight tickets on Royal Jordanian Airlines
(cf. Jordan Times, 14 July 1986). Yet, as with other Middle East authoritarian emigration states, Jordan also uses its return policy for political
ends – particularly with regard to Palestinian Jordanians that hold 2- or
5-year passports (Human Rights Watch, 2010). This precarity adds
another level of control over migrant groups. Beyond the issue that
these documents do not constitute full citizenship, they have allowed
state oﬃcials to arbitrarily strip Jordanians of their nationality – in
eﬀect, making them stateless for a second time after 1948.

IV. Conclusion
This article attempted to ﬁll a gap in the existing literature on states’
diaspora policymaking by identifying how non-democracies, in particular,
develop multi-tier diaspora engagement policies that target diﬀerent groups
of citizens at various stages in their mobility. By arguing that authoritarian
emigration states have the capacity to generate, shape, as well as dismantle
diasporas, I demonstrate how diaspora engagement policies need to be
broken down into exit, overseas, and return policies, respectively. Across
the ﬁve Middle Eastern cases examined, all states (Libya, Syria, Egypt,

20

G. TSOURAPAS

Turkey, and Jordan) developed complex policies that targeted citizens differently at diﬀerent times. Going beyond unitary conceptualizations of
diaspora policymaking as solely targeting population groups abroad, the
article has highlighted the diverse policy tools at the disposal of states and
aimed to contribute to the on-going research in state-diaspora relations,
Middle East studies, and the politics of authoritarianism.
A cursory examination suggests that a number of Middle Eastern states
develop similar, multi-tier diaspora policies: Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco,
for instance, developed permissive exit and return policies that encouraged
labour emigration to Western Europe in the past, similar to the policies
developed by Egypt, Turkey, and Jordan. All three states also developed
overseas policies that involved intense surveillance of their diaspora groups
abroad. As discussed in the Introduction to this article, Egypt has adopted
numerous in the aftermath of the 2011 Arab Uprisings, including the expansion of ‘black lists’ and closer monitoring of diaspora communities in Europe,
which resemble Libyan and Syrian policies. Similar practices are currently
evident in Turkey.
Further work is necessary to understand policy variation, across both time
and cases. Why do Libya and Syria appear to develop more repressive diaspora
policies than Egypt, Turkey, or Jordan? How does regime change aﬀect diaspora policymaking across authoritarian emigration states? It appears that
domestic shifts towards harsher authoritarianism are reﬂected on a state’s
approach to diaspora policymaking. At the same time, additional work is
needed to understand interaction across policy tiers – it appears that authoritarian emigration states with permissive exit policy are more concerned about
controlling populations abroad via their overseas policy, as in Algeria, Tunisia,
and Morocco; however, states that restrict exit appear less likely to expand
resources on expansive overseas or return policies, as in pre-Gaddaﬁ Libya or
Egypt under Nasser. The rationale behind authoritarian emigration states’
multi-tier diaspora policies continues to be an unexplored dimension of the
state-diaspora relations literature.

Notes
1. Seminal earlier accounts include Østergaard-Nielsen’s work on Turkey (2003)
and Brand’s work on Arab states (2006).
2. Drawing on work by Holliﬁeld and Gamlen (Gamlen, 2008; Holliﬁeld, 2004), I
deﬁne authoritarian emigration states as ‘the set of institutions, practices, and
mechanisms regulating cross-border mobility developed within non-democratic
contexts’ (for a full discussion, see: Tsourapas, 2018a).
3. Recent work challenging this includes Koinova (2018); Adamson (2018);
Adamson and Tsourapas (2019).
4. Although word limitations in a comparative analysis of ﬁve case-studies prevent a full discussion of how these policies change over time, I have

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

21

attempted to include as much detail on diaspora policies’ evolution as
possible.
5. This is encapsulated in Article 13b of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which states that ‘everyone has the right to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country’.
6. The annual event celebrated the exodus of the Italian and Jewish communities
from post-independence Libya.

Acknowledgement
An earlier version of this article was presented at the ‘Diasporas and Contested
Sovereignty’ conference at the University of Warwick, 28-29 September 2017. I
would like to thank Maria Koinova, Catherine Ruth Craven, and the conference
participants for valuable feedback. I would also like to thank Ahmad Barakat and
Hannah Betyna for invaluable research assistance.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.

Funding
This work was supported by the British Academy [Grant No. SG163246] and the
Council for British Research in the Levant [2017 Pilot Study Grant].

ORCID
Gerasimos Tsourapas

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2746-9752

References
Abu-Odeh, A. (1999). Jordanians, Palestinians & the Hashemite Kingdom in the Middle
East Peace Process. Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.
Adamson, F. (2018). Sending states and the making of intra-diasporic politics: Turkey
and its diaspora(s). International Migration Review. Forthcoming.
Adamson, F., & Tsourapas, G. (2019). Migration diplomacy in world politics.
International Studies Perspectives, 20(2).
Akgündüz, A. (2008). Labour migration from Turkey to Western Europe, 1960–1974: A
multidisciplinary analysis. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
Aksel, D. B. (2014). Kins, distant workers, diasporas: Constructing Turkey’s transnational members abroad. Turkish Studies, 15(2), 195–219.
Alemán, J., & Woods, D. (2014). No way out: Travel restrictions and authoritarian
regimes. Migration and Development, 3(2), 285–305.
Al-Jazeera. 2017. Vietnam exiles dissident after revoking his citizenship. Retrieved
2017, June 26 from http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/06/vietnam-exiles-dissi
dent-revoking-citizenship-170625150005282.html.

22

G. TSOURAPAS

Amin, G. A., & Awni, E. T. (1986). Hijrat Al-̀ amālah Al-Misṛīyah: Dirāsah Naqdīyah Lil-Buhụ̄ th
Wa-Al-Dirāsāt Al-Khāsṣạh Bi-Hijrat Al-̀ amālah Al-Misṛīyah Ilá Al-Khārij [Egyptian Labor
Migration: A Critical Study of Research and Studies on the Migration of Egyptian Workers
Abroad]. Ottawa: Markaz al-Buhụ̄ th lil-Tanmiyah al-Dawlīyah.
Amnesty International. 2011. The long reach of the Mukhabaraat: Violence and
harassment against Syrians abroad and their relatives back home. Retrieved
from http://www.refworld.org/docid/4e8e94e52.html.
Associated Press. 2018. Rights group: Syria’s new property law discourages return. Associated
Press, May 29, 2018, https://apnews.com/5a45e2c36ba84e0abda12cb14d278783.
Awad, I., & Selim, H. (2017). Labour migration governance in times of political transition: A
comparative analyisis of Egypt and Tunisia. Migration and Development, 6(1), 1–13.
Baser, B. (2017). Emigration and diaspora policies in the age of mobility. 221–238.
Cham: Springer.
Betts, A., & Jones, W. (2016). Mobilising the diaspora - how refugees challenge authoritarianism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Black, I. 2011. Gaddaﬁ’s Libyan rule exposed in lost picture archive. The Guardian, July
18, 2011, sec. World news. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/18/gad
daﬁ-brutal-regime-exposed-lost-archive.
Brand, L. A. (2002). States and their expatriates: Explaining the development of
Tunisian and Moroccan emigration-related institutions. San Diego: University of
California.
Brand, L. A. (2006). Citizens abroad: Emigration and the state in the Middle East and
North Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brand, L. A. (2010). National narratives and migration: Discursive strategies of inclusion and exclusion in Jordan and Lebanon. International Migration Review, 44(1),
78–110.
Brand, L. A. (2013). Jordan’s inter-Arab relations: The political economy of alliancemaking. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bredeloup, S., & Pliez, O. (2011). The Libyan migration corridor. Florence: European
University Institute.
Brinkerhoﬀ, J. M. (2005). Digital diasporas and governance in semi-authoritarian
states: The case of the Egyptian Copts. Public Administration and Development,
25(3), 193–204.
Carman, T. 2015. Two generations of Syrian refugees ﬁnd sanctuary in Vancouver.
http://www.vancouversun.com/life/generations+syrian+refugees+ﬁnd+sanctuary
+vancouver/11622736/story.html
Chalcraft, J. (2008). The invisible cage: Syrian migrant workers in Lebanon. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Collyer, M. (ed). (2013). Emigration nations: Policies and ideologies of emigrant engagement. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Dalmasso, E. (2018). Participation without representation: Moroccans abroad at a
time of unstable authoritarian rule. Globalizations, 15(2), 198–214.
Délano Alonso, A., & Mylonas, H. (2017). The microfoundations of diaspora politics:
Unpacking the state and disaggregating the diaspora. Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies, 1–19.
Dessouki, A. E. H. (1982). The shift in Egypt’s migration policy: 1952–1978. Middle
Eastern Studies, 18(1), 53–68.
Escriba-Folch, A., Meseguer, C., & Wright, J. 2018 Remittances and Protest in Dictatorships,
American Journal of Political Science, https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12382.

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

23

Fahim, K. 2011. Rebel insider concedes weaknesses in Libya. The New York Times, March 23,
2011, https://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/24/world/africa/24minister.html.
Feiler, G. (2003). Economic relations between Egypt and the Gulf Oil States, 1967–2000:
Petro-Wealth and patterns of inﬂuence. Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.
Fergany, N. (1983). Al-Hijrah Ilá Al-Naft: Abʻād Al-Hijrah Lil-ʻamal Fī Al-Buldān AlNaftị̄ yah Wa-Atharuhā ʻalá Al-Tanmiyah Fī Al-Watạn Al-ʻarabī [Migration to Oil:
Dimensions of Labour Migration in Oil Countries, and Its Impact on Development
in the Arab World]. Beirut: Markaz Dirāsāt al-Wahḍah al-ʻArabīyah.
Fitzgerald, D. (2009). A nation of emigrants: How Mexico manages its migration.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gamlen, A. (2008). The emigration state and the modern geopolitical imagination.
Political Geography, 27(8), 840–856.
Gamlen, A. (2014). Diaspora institutions and diaspora governance. International
Migration Review, 48(September), S180–S217.(Forthcoming)
Glasius, M. (2017). Extraterritorial authoritarian practices: A framework. Globalizations,
15(2), 179–197.
Greenhill, K. M. (2010). Weapons of mass migration - Forced displacement, coercion,
and foreign policy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Han, E. (2017). Bifurcated homeland and diaspora politics in China and Taiwan
Towards the overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia. Journal of Ethnic and Migration
Studies, doi:10.1080/1369183X.2017.1409172.
Harvey, C., & Barnidge, R. P. (2005). The right to leave one’s own country under
international law. Belfast: Global Commission on International Migration.
Hirschman, A. O. (1993). Exit, voice, and the fate of the German democratic republic:
An essay in conceptual history. World Politics, 45(2), 173–202.
Hirt, N., & Mohammad, A. S. (2017). By way of patriotism, coercion, or instrumentalization: How the Eritrean Regime makes use of the diaspora to stabilize its rule.
Globalizations, 15(2), 232–247.
Holliﬁeld, J. F. (2004). The emerging migration state. International Migration Review,
38(3), 885–912.
Human Rights Watch. (1999). World report 2000. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2010. Jordan: Stop withdrawing nationality from Palestinian-origin
citizens. Human Rights Watch. February 1, 2010. https://www.hrw.org/news/2010/02/
01/jordan-stop-withdrawing-nationality-palestinian-origin-citizens.
Kawczynski, D. (2011). Seeking Gaddaﬁ: Libya, the West and the Arab Spring. London:
Biteback Publishing.
Koinova, M. (2018). Sending states and diaspora positionality in international relations. International Political Sociology, 12(2), 190–210.
Koinova, M., & Tsourapas, G. (2018). How do countries of origin engage migrants and
diasporas? Multiple actors and comparative perspectives. International Political
Science Review, 39(3), 311–321.
Koven, R. 1980. Prominent enemy of Syria’s Assad is slain in Paris. Washington Post, July 22,
1980. https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1980/07/22/prominentenemy-of-syrias-assad-is-slain-in-paris/03d0ﬀ98-33a5-4c84-9fe8-a3b0b3df0851/.
Laﬂeur, J.-M. (2013). Transnational politics and the state: The external voting rights of
diasporas. New York: Routledge.
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 1979. Libyan nationality law. https://www.multiplecitizen
ship.com/wscl/ws_LIBYA.html.

24

G. TSOURAPAS

Maghur, A. 2010. Highly-skilled migration (Libya) - Legal aspects. CARIM Analytic and
Synthetic Notes. Florence: European University Institute. http://cadmus.eui.eu/bit
stream/handle/1814/13685/CARIM_ASN_2010_31.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
Martin, P. L. (1991). The unﬁnished story: turkish labour migration to western europe with special reference to the federal republic of germany. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Labour Oﬃce.
Michaelson, R. 2016. Arrest of leading Egyptian feminist Azza Soliman sparks anger.
The Guardian, December 7, 2016, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/
07/womens-rights-activist-azza-soliman-arrested-in-egypt.
Mirilovic, N. (2014). Regime type, international migration, and the politics of dual
citizenship toleration. International Political Science Review, 36(5), 510–525.
Mirilovic, N. (2016). Regime type and diaspora politics: A dyadic approach. Foreign
Policy Analysis. 14(3), 346–366.
Moss, D. M. (2016). Transnational repression, diaspora mobilization, and the case of
the Arab spring. Social Problems, 63(4), 480–498.
Moss, D. M. (2018). The ties that bind: Internet communication technologies, networked authoritarianism, and ‘voice’ in the Syrian diaspora. Globalizations, 15(2),
265–282.
Natter, K. (2015). Revolution and political transition in Tunisia: A migration game
changer?. Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute.
Naujoks, D. (2013). Migration, citizenship, and development: Diasporic membership policies
and overseas Indians in the United States. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Obeidi, A. (1999). Political culture in Libya. Richmond: Curzon.
Østergaard-Nielsen, E. (2003). Turkey and the ‘Euro Turks’: Overseas nationals as an
ambiguous asset. In E. Østergaard-Nielsen (Ed.), International migration and sending countries: Perceptions, policies and transnational relations (pp. 77–98).
Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Paoletti, E. (2010). The migration of power and north-south inequalities: The case of
Italy and Libya. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Paoletti, E. (2011). Migration and foreign policy: The case of Libya. The Journal of
North African Studies, 16(2), 215–231.
Pargeter, A. (2012). Libya: The rise and fall of Qaddaﬁ. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Parolin, G. P. (2009). Citizenship in the Arab world: Kin, religion and Nation-State.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Philipp, T. (1985). The Syrians in Egypt: 1725–1975 (Vol. 3). London: Coronet Books
Incorporated.
Reuters. 1981. Wife of Syrian dissident is Slain in West Germany. The New York Times,
March 18, 1981. https://www.nytimes.com/1981/03/18/world/around-the-worldwife-of-syrian-dissident-is-slain-in-west-germany.html.
Rodriguez, R. M. (2010). Migrants for Export: How the Philippine state brokers labor to
the world. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Röhn, T. 2017. Erdogan-Gegner Erleben Im Türkischen Konsulat Böse Überraschung.
Die Welt. March 19, 2017. https://www.welt.de/politik/deutschland/arti
cle162961336/Erdogan-Gegner-erleben-im-tuerkischen-Konsulat-boeseUeberraschung.html.
Ross, J. 1982. Qaddaﬁ threatens dissidents overseas. Washington Post, December 6,
1982. https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1982/12/06/qaddaﬁthreatens-dissidents-overseas/d7bfa1d3-22b5-419a-a8df-a39805e9ed26/.

MEDITERRANEAN POLITICS

25

Sayari, S. (1986). Migration policies of sending countries: Perspectives on the Turkish
experience. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 485,
87–97.
Shain, Y. (2005). The frontier of loyalty: Political exiles in the age of the nation-state.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Shami, S. (1999). Emigration dynamics in Jordan, Palestine and Lebanon. In R.
Appleyard (Ed.),Emigration Dynamics in Developing Countries, 4, 128–201.
Aldershot: Ashgate
The Economist 2016. To silence dissidents, Gulf states are revoking their citizenship.
The Economist, November 26, 2016. http://www.economist.com/news/middle-eastand-africa/21710679-many-are-left-stateless-result-silence-dissidents-gulf-states-are.
The Independent. 2016. Turkey coup: Erdogan bans all academics from leaving
country as government crackdown intensiﬁes. July 20, 2016. https://www.indepen
dent.co.uk/news/world/europe/turkey-coup-erdogan-academics-ban-leaving-coun
try-government-crackdown-latest-a7146591.html.
Thiollet, H. (2011). Migration as diplomacy: Labor migrants, refugees, and Arab
regional politics in the oil-rich countries. International Labor and Working-Class
History, 79(1), 103–121.
Tsourapas, G. 2015a. The politics of Egyptian migration to Libya. Middle East Research
and Information Project. http://www.merip.org/mero/mero031715.
Tsourapas, G. (2015b). Why do states develop multi-tier emigrant policies? Evidence
from Egypt. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 41(13), 2192–2214.
Tsourapas, G. (2016). Nasser’s educators and agitators across Al-Watan Al-‘Arabi:
Tracing the foreign policy importance of Egyptian regional migration,
1952–1967. British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, 43(3), 324–341.
Tsourapas, G. (2017). Migration diplomacy in the Global South: Cooperation, coercion
& issue-linkage in Gaddaﬁ’s Libya. Third World Quarterly, 38(10), 2367–2385.
Tsourapas, G. (2018a). Authoritarian emigration states: Soft power and cross-border
mobility in the Middle East. International Political Science Review, 39(3), 400–416.
Tsourapas, G. (2018b). The peculiar practices of ‘authoritarian emigration states’.
British Academy Review, 32, 22–24.
United States Department of State. 2012. Country Report on Human Rights Practices,
2011, Libya. https://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsreport/index.
htm#wrapper.
Vandewalle, D. (2012). A history of modern Libya (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Winckler, O. (1997). Syrian migration to the Arab oil-producing countries. Middle
Eastern Studies, 33(1), 107–118.
Zohry, A., & Harrell-Bond, B. (2003). Contemporary Egyptian migration: An overview of
voluntary and forced migration. Sussex: Development Research Centre on
Migration, Globalisation and Poverty.

