TOOLS AND GUIDANCE ON THE ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE

Asking sensitive questions in
conservation using the
Unmatched Count Technique
What is UCT?
The Unmatched Count Technique (UCT), or
list experiment, is an indirect questioning
technique which allows answers to remain
confidential and respondents to be
protected. Because questions are asked in an
indirect way, it is used to inquire about illegal
activities or behaviours people might not

want to openly admit to. The method
provides an estimate of how many people
within a population are performing the
behaviour in question. Its indirect nature
should produce more truthful answers than
directly asking respondents whether they
have engaged in an illegal or sensitive
activity, thus providing a more reliable
estimate of prevalence of people performing
the behaviour. Although using UCT will not
uncover why people are performing a given
behaviour, its analysis can produce results to
indicate which characteristics (e.g. location,
gender, age, income) of the population
surveyed are more likely to affect whether a
person is engaging in the behaviour.

Fig 1. Decision tree to assess the suitability of UCT, and when other methods may be more appropriate (Hinsley et al. 2018)

1

TOOLS AND GUIDANCE ON THE ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE

There are several things to consider before
deciding if UCT is the most appropriate
research method; if its design and
implementation is not adequate, it might not
work at all. Firstly, there are logistical
considerations: sample size (which relies on
funding and time) and having the human
resources and time to pilot the questions
before starting data collection. The sample
size will vary between studies, depending on
how prevalent the behaviour in question is; if
it is rare amongst the population, the study
will require a larger sample size. Number of
respondents of UCT surveys have ranged
from 50 to over 20,000 – but the majority
have used around 1,000 respondents. Other
considerations must be thought of once the
research question has been formulated. The
diagram on page 1 (Fig. 1), developed by
Hinsley et al. (2018), can help guide the
decision on whether UCT should be used.

and the other half is presented the same list
with an additional sensitive item. Examples 1
(Hinsley et al. 2018) and 2 show two real
UCT lists that have been used in the field to
ask about illegal orchid trade and pangolin
meat consumption respectively. In these
examples, the blue shading denotes nonsensitive ‘control’ items, and yellow shading is
used for the sensitive behaviour in question.
Whilst these lists contain only text, a UCT can
also include drawings to make it more
appealing and easier to understand, especially
where literacy levels are low.
EXAMPLE 1

How does it work?
The UCT presents a sensitive behaviour of
interest among a list of other related (but
non-sensitive) ‘control’ items. First,
respondents are randomly divided into two
groups, which can be done using
randomisation functions in survey software if
an online/tablet survey is used, or with a
simple randomisation method such as a coin
toss or random number generator. For cases
where randomisation in the field is
challenging, researchers can use the ABBA
method; where, if the block size is four, the
first respondent (A) is assigned to the control
or treatment group, the next two
respondents (BB) are assigned to the other
group and the following respondent (A) is
assigned to the first group. With
randomisation or the ABBA method, half of
respondents are shown a list of control items,

EXAMPLE 2

Respondents are shown the list and asked to
state the total number of items that apply to
them. As demonstrated by these examples,
depending on the question being asked, the
answer could be how many of the items they
have bought or consumed, how many of the
activities they have done, or how many
2

TOOLS AND GUIDANCE ON THE ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE

statements they agree with. It is important
that they give the total number, and do not
state which specific items apply to them so
that respondents are not directly asked about
performing the behaviour in question.
To obtain the prevalence for the presence of
the sensitive behaviour, the mean answer for
each group is calculated, and the control
group mean subtracted from the treatment
group mean to give the proportion of people
who have said yes to the sensitive item. To
illustrate this with Example 2, if the mean
answer for the control group was 2.6, and
the mean for the treatment was 2.8, then
the difference would be 0.2, suggesting that
the proportion of people who had consumed
pangolin meat in the last 12 months is 20%.
How to design a control list?
The UCT is only useful if it is designed well,
and it should not be used if the time or
resources available are not adequate to do
this. The most important task is putting
together a list of control items and this
requires a lot of thought, trial and,
potentially, error. A pilot survey can be used
to determine whether control items meet
certain criteria, and this should test several
potential control items at once (at least 10)
with the survey target audience. The pilot
should focus on the following issues to
ensure that the control items are:
• Relevant
Control items must be somewhat related to
the sensitive item and should be phrased in a
similar way, so the sensitive item does not
stand out. The control item should also be
relevant to the reality of the situation and
ideally not obviously impossible.

• Non-sensitive
In the basic UCT design, only one sensitive
item is used, so control items should be
checked to ensure that they themselves are
not sensitive for any reason. This can be
determined by how willing people are to talk
about/admit to the behaviour.
• Unambiguous
Whether items are a statement or a single
word, they must be very clear, to ensure that
respondents recognise the item, are not
confused and know right away if it applies to
them or not. Multiple interpretations of an
item should also be checked for.
• Not all too rare or common
Ideally, each list should include some items
that apply to most people (high prevalence),
some that only apply to about half (medium
prevalence) and some that only apply to very
few people (low prevalence). Although
familiarity with the study population helps
with the design, it is still better to test the
prevalence of control items to ensure there is
the right mix in each list.
CASE-STUDY. The draft control item list for
Example 2 (page 2) originally included
‘international cuisine’ and ‘Lotteria’ (restaurant
chain in Vietnam) as control items. Testing
these with respondents in Vietnam revealed
‘international cuisine’ was understood both as
fast food, such as pizza and burgers which are
common among young people and somewhat
cheap, and as high-end French, Italian or
Japanese cuisine served at expensive
restaurants. This item was thus not included
as it was confusing for respondents due to its
multiple interpretations. ‘Lotteria’ was
removed as the sensitive item is a single food
item while ‘Lotteria’ is a restaurant, so these
cannot be included in the same category.

3

TOOLS AND GUIDANCE ON THE ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE

Once tested, any items that do not meet
these criteria should be removed, and the
final control list selected. The number of
control items varies between studies, but
four items is common, as in the examples
above. It has been argued that it is harder for
respondents to keep count when the items
number presented is high and adding more
will increase the error of the results.
Piloting a UCT
When the control items have been tested, the
next step is to pilot both control and treatment
questions with respondents from the same
audience with which the final survey will be
conducted. This helps to confirm that the
survey is appropriate and understandable for
the respondents and ensures that surveyors
become comfortable with administering the
questionnaire and explaining how UCT
questions must be answered. An example UCT
question can be used to familiarise respondents
with the method without a sensitive item being
present. For example, a control list of simple
items (e.g. ‘Which of these fruits have you
eaten?’), and a treatment list containing one
extra (but non-sensitive) item.
Piloting will help identify if there are issues with
the design of control and treatment lists. The
table on the right covers some potential issues
and steps that can be taken to address these.

Analysing a UCT
• Design effect
The R package, ‘list’, has been designed
specifically for UCT analysis. The first test
detects if there is a design effect. This means
that the presence of the sensitive item in the
treatment list is affecting the answers the
respondents give for the control items. If a
design effect is found then the prevalence
estimate will not be accurate, and further
analysis should not be carried out.

Issue

What can be done?

Majority of
respondents’
answers show
none or just 1
of the items
apply to them.

Control items should be
revised, some with higher
prevalence included.

Majority of
respondents’
answers show
all the items
apply to them.

Control items should be
revised, some with lower
prevalence included.

Respondents
are
underreporting
their answers.
Note that UCT
is known to
result in slight
underreporting
compared to
direct
questions, but
this can be
mitigated to
some extent.

• Direct questions on each
of the control items can
be added at the end of the
survey. Can be a simple
‘Have you done the
following behaviour?’ with
a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ answer.
Direct question answers
can be compared with
those of the UCT to
determine whether the
prevalence of control
items is indeed low. These
direct questions should be
asked of all respondents in
both control and
treatment groups.
• List of control items might
be too long.
• If underreporting is only
taking place in the
treatment group, then the
sensitive item may be
making people
uncomfortable. This could
be addressed by
reiterating anonymity
before the UCT question.
If the level of
underreporting is the
same for both control and
treatment groups, the
difference in means
between the two groups
should not be drastically
affected.

4

TOOLS AND GUIDANCE ON THE ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE

• Difference in means
The difference in means test is used to
estimate the prevalence of the sensitive
behaviour and can also be carried out with the
‘list’ package. If UCT has worked well, and there
is no design effect, then the difference in
means between treatment and control
questions should be positive. Additionally, the
test will provide standard errors; the smaller
the standard error the more confident
researchers can be in the estimate of
prevalence. Sometimes the standard error
overlaps with zero, suggesting a negative
prevalence, which is of course impossible. In
this case, the prevalence of the sensitive
behaviour cannot be calculated as there is no
evidence for the presence of the behaviour.
• Multivariate analysis
The ‘list’ package also allows a multivariate
analysis to be conducted, which can reveal
what types of respondents are more likely to
perform the behaviour in question relative to
each other. For example, lower income
respondents are more likely to consume
pangolin meat than higher income respondents.
To decide which variables (e.g. income, gender,
location, age) can be in the same model,
variables must be tested for collinearity.
Variables that have collinearity with each other
are those that have an effect on each other
already (such as age and income; it would be
expected that older people fall in a higher
income category than young people). Collinear
variables should not be included in the same
model. Alternatively, a normal generalized linear
model (GLM) can be conducted using all
variables, and model averaging (e.g. using the R
package ‘MuMIn’) used to select a final model.

Summary checklist
UCT requires careful thought and critical
reflection through the design process. Use this
checklist to make sure you have:
✓ Checked that it is the best method for your
study;
✓ Expertise on the study population, or are
collaborating with somebody who has;
✓ Chosen and tested your control
statements;
✓ Piloted your final UCT to ensure
respondents understand and trust it;
✓ Checked for recent developments in
analysis techniques and chosen the most
appropriate one for your question.

Key references
Blair G. & Imai K. 2012. Statistical Analysis of
List Experiments. Polit Anal. 20.
Glynn A. N. 2010. What Can We Learn with
Statistical Truth Serum? Design and Analysis of
the List Experiment. Public Opin Q. 77.
Hinsley et al. 2018. Asking sensitive questions
using the unmatched count technique:
Applications and guidelines for conservation.

Methods Ecol Evol. 10(3).
Tsuchiya T. & Hirai Y. 2010. Elaborate Item
Count Questioning: Why Do People
Underreport in Item Count Responses? Surv.
Res. Methods. 4(3).

Suggested Citation
Olmedo A., Davis E., Hinsley A. 2019. Asking
sensitive questions in conservation using the
Unmatched Count Technique. Tools and
Guidance, Oxford Martin Programme on the
Illegal Wildlife Trade, University of Oxford. DOI:
10.31235/osf.io/rcdbk

5

