The effect of leaded gasoline on elderly mortality:
Evidence from regulatory exemptions
Alex Hollingsworth and Ivan Rudik∗
June 8, 2020
Abstract
Leaded gasoline is still used globally for aviation and automotive racing. Exploiting
regulatory exemptions and a novel quasi-experiment, we find that leaded gasoline use
in racing increases ambient lead, elevated blood lead rates, and elderly mortality. The
mortality estimates indicate that each gram of lead added to gasoline exceeds $1,100
in damages. Our setting allows us to rule out potential confounders, such as correlated
pollutants or socioeconomic status. We provide the first causal estimates linking adult
mortality to leaded gasoline, highlight the value of banning on-road leaded gasoline,
and present policy-relevant cost estimates at the lowest ambient levels to date.
JEL: I00, I18, Q53
Keywords: lead, air pollution, mortality, childhood health, gasoline

∗

Hollingsworth: hollinal@indiana.edu. O’Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs. Indiana
University, 1315 E. Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN, 47405. Rudik: irudik@cornell.edu. Charles H. Dyson
School of Applied Economics and Management. Cornell University, Warren Hall, Ithaca, NY, 14853. We
thank Patrick Carlin, Livy Crim, Sam Kuster, and Shyam Raman for research assistance. We thank Lindsay
Allen, Judd Boomhower, Karen Clay, Brian Dillon, Maoyong Fan, Teevrat Garg, Scott Grosse, Dave Keiser,
Jonathan Ketcham, Cathy Kling, David Konisky, Gabe Lade, David Molitor, Julian Reif, Jessica Reyes,
Nick Sanders, Edson Severnini, Kosali Simon, Gregory Steele, Coady Wing, Nikos Zirogiannis, Eric Zou,
and seminar participants at the AERE Summer Conference, the Annual Health Economics Conference, the
ASHEcon Annual Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, EPA NCEE, the Heartland
Workshop, Indiana University, the Inter-American Development Bank, Miami University, the NBER EEE
Spring Meetings, UC Davis, UC San Diego, the University of Connecticut, and the University of Louisville
for valuable comments.

1

Introduction

Lead (Pb) is a toxic heavy metal associated with numerous adverse outcomes ranging from
increased aggressive behavior to premature mortality. In response to mounting health concerns, countries around the world began taking action in the 1970s to reduce lead exposure.
In 1975, Japan phased lead out of regular gasoline and the United States mandated all new
model-year cars to have emission control devices that required unleaded instead of leaded
gasoline (Newell and Rogers, 2003; Yoshinaga, 2012). Many European and Asian countries
began lead phasedowns in the 1980s (Nriagu, 1990), while African and Middle Eastern countries generally began the process in the 1990s or 2000s (Thomas, 1995; Lovei, 1998). As of
2020, leaded gasoline has been phased out of regular on-road use in all but one country (UN
Environment Programme, 2020). The reduction of lead in gasoline produced steep declines
in ambient lead concentrations, representing one of the greatest public health achievements
in recent history.1
Despite these advances, the phaseout of lead from gasoline remains incomplete. While
virtually every country has banned the sale of leaded gasoline for on-road use, it is still
widely allowed for off-road uses such as aviation and automotive racing.2 The continued use
of lead remains a major public health concern as thousands of communities still grapple with
lead contamination from legacy sources (Pell and Schneyer, 2016), and research increasingly
suggests there is no safe level of exposure (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012;
Lanphear, 2017).
In this paper we use the automotive racing exemption from the United States Clean
Air Act to causally identify the external effects of leaded gasoline. We take advantage of a
novel quasi-experiment where two major racing organizations, the National Association for
Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR) and the Automobile Racing Club of America (ARCA),
switched from leaded to unleaded gasoline in 2007.3 Using difference-in-differences and event
study designs, we estimate the relationship between leaded gasoline use and each link in the
causal chain from release of lead in the air, to accumulation of lead in blood, and finally to
1

Lead was used in a variety of products because of its efficacy and versatility. It was added to gasoline
for its lubrication properties and to boost octane, reducing the likelihood of pre-ignition; it was added to
paint to increase moisture resistance, brightness, and durability, as well as to accelerate drying; and it has
been used in pipes and pipe solder because of its malleability.
2
In the United States, federal regulations allow unleaded gasoline to contain up to 0.05 grams of lead per
gallon. This is about 2% of the lead content added to gasoline in the 1970s. See 40 CFR § 80.140 and 40
CFR § 80.173 (b).
3
The EPA had been concerned about racing lead emissions leading up to 2007. A 2006 report on lead
writes, “As was the case with on-road emissions during the time of universal leaded gasoline use, the combustion of racing fuel likely elevates ambient Pb concentrations in the nearby area. This may pose some
health risk for some subpopulations, such as residents living in the vicinity of racetracks, fuel attendants,
racing crew and staff, and spectators.” (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2006).

1

impacts on human mortality. We find that each leaded race significantly increases nearby
ambient lead concentrations in the weeks following the race. We further find that leaded races
increase the prevalence of elevated blood lead levels (EBLLs) in children and increase elderly
mortality. This provides the first causal evidence that leaded gasoline exposure increases
adult mortality.
We estimate that the reduction in annual lead emissions from deleading NASCAR and
ARCA races yielded social benefits of $1,800 per child in counties with racetracks, and $600
per child in bordering counties through avoided IQ reductions. The benefits from avoided
premature elderly mortality in racetrack and bordering counties are over $15 million per
race, totaling $2.2 billion per year. These annual benefits are more than the estimated value
of all NASCAR teams combined (Forbes, 2020).
The mortality effects alone put a lower bound on the social cost of a gram of lead in
gasoline at $1,100. These magnitudes, while large, are consistent with prior observational
findings on the relationship between adult mortality and lead exposure (Pirkle et al., 1985;
Lustberg and Silbergeld, 2002; Menke et al., 2006; Lanphear et al., 2018). For comparison,
the equivalent mortality reduction from deleading NASCAR and ARCA races could be generated by reducing PM2.5 concentrations in the areas surrounding racetracks by 11 µg/m3 ,
90% of 2006 levels (Deryugina et al., 2019).
The deleading of automotive races is an ideal setting to identify the effects of lead since
it overcomes identification challenges such as residential sorting and correlated declines in
emission of lead and other pollutants at the tailpipe. The switch to unleaded fuel was the
only fuel-relevant change made by NASCAR or ARCA in 2007, and races continued in the
same places and at roughly the same times of year. In our empirical approach, we compare
changes in population outcomes, before and after deleading, between those who live near
racetracks and those who live further away. This enables within-population comparisons
that alleviate problems with persistent confounders such as socioeconomic status, the stock
of soil lead, the presence of leaded household paint, and lead emissions from nearby municipal
airports.
Races emit large quantities of lead that significantly increase ambient concentrations,
providing sufficient statistical power for our analysis. Figure 1 compares the magnitude
of lead emissions from races to the distribution of annual airborne lead emissions at Toxic
Release Inventory (TRI) facilities, and to annual lead emissions at airports. A single threehour race emits more lead than the annual total of 70% of all lead-emitting facilities in the
TRI, and as much lead as the average airport in an entire year. If all races were aggregated
into a single TRI entity they would emit an estimated 2 million grams of lead per year,
collectively ranking as the 30th largest emitter out of over 5,000 facilities and accounting for
2

Figure 1: Automotive racing and aviation lead emissions compared to distribution of all
lead-emitting facilities in the 2005 TRI.

Note: Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) facility emissions are the sum of fugitive and stack emissions in 2005,
the year prior to unleaded race tests. The distribution is similar for 2006. We only include TRI facilities with
positive quantities of airborne lead emissions. TRI and airport emissions are annual totals while average race
emissions are about a three hour total. Airborne lead emissions from both automotive races and aircraft are
not reported in the TRI. We obtain the amount of lead emitted from NASCAR and ARCA races using an
estimate of 3.2 race miles per gallon as the average fuel economy. The methodology behind the fuel economy
estimate can be found in Section A.10, and total emissions are calculated in Section A.11.

roughly half a percent of all annual U.S. lead emissions.4,5
This work makes several contributions to the literature. The main contribution is that we
use a quasi-experiment to causally link three economically relevant outcomes to well-defined
sources and quantities of leaded gasoline. In turn, we provide the first causal evidence of the
effects of leaded gasoline exposure on adult mortality, and construct a credible lower bound on
4

This is 800 times the median annual TRI facility emissions and 25 times the average.
Prior research has demonstrated that employees on race teams (e.g. pit crews, mechanics) had high
blood lead levels prior to the 2007 deleading. Blood lead levels for employees on NASCAR race teams in
1968 and 2006 were over 7 µg/dl higher than the population averages in those same years. Testing in 2006
showed that 40% of NASCAR team members had blood lead levels above 10 µg/dl, the threshold at the
time for elevated blood lead (Polacek and Collins, 1968; O’Neil et al., 2006).
5

3

the social cost of lead in gasoline. Second, the deleading of racing fuel allows us to separately
identify the effect of lead emissions from other correlated pollutants, socioeconomic factors,
and legacy lead in the soil and on the road. This is a critical distinction between prior
research designs and our approach. Third, we show that the effects of deleading are readily
apparent in the raw data, and we use the same study design to estimate the effects on each
link in the emission-outcome chain, assuring internal validity. Fourth, our work sheds light
on the adverse effects of lead at some of the lowest levels of ambient lead exposure studied
in the literature.6 This allows us to provide policy-relevant estimates that are pertinent to
modern exposure levels. A nascent literature, to which this paper contributes, increasingly
demonstrates that there is no safe level of lead exposure (Aizer et al., 2018; Grönqvist et al.,
2018; Lanphear et al., 2018).
This paper also helps to quantify both the value of the global deleading of on-road gasoline
and the large social costs of continued usage of leaded gasoline for racing and aviation. While
NASCAR and ARCA now use unleaded fuel, leaded racing fuel can still be legally purchased
at hundreds of locations across the U.S. and remains widely used in both professional and
amateur races. Our mortality cost estimate indicates that the efficient price for leaded racing
fuel is orders of magnitude higher than current prices, which range from $10-$20 per gallon.
The continued use of leaded racing fuel puts participants, attendees, and those who live
nearby at risk of bearing undue external costs. Although we do not directly study aviation
gasoline, our results are suggestive that the use of leaded fuel by piston-engine aircraft
remains a major threat to public health worldwide. Over a quarter of a million aircraft
across the world still use leaded avgas (Federal Aviation Administration, 2020), and over
500,000 gallons are used each day in the United States alone (Kessler, 2013).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the physiology of lead and relevant
prior research. Section 3 reports data sources. Section 4 contains methods and results.
Section 5 computes the value of external effects of leaded gasoline on blood lead levels, and
premature mortality. Section 6 concludes. The appendix contains the history of NASCAR
and ARCA’s switch to unleaded fuel, information on the ambient lead sample, information on
other events at tracks, an additional cross-sectional soil analysis, information on collinearity
issues, summary statistics, robustness checks and an alternative split-sample instrumental
variables approach, associations related to environmental justice, a balance table, results
from a survey testing knowledge about NASCAR fuel use, an out-of-sample validation of
our ambient air estimates, a counterfactual prediction of ambient lead levels if leaded gas
6

One caveat to our findings is that the same quantity of emissions may differentially affect health if
released over a longer time period. Short-lived, but high-rate exposure (e.g., an automotive race) may affect
health differently than constant but low-rate exposure (e.g. industrial facility).

4

was still used for on-road driving, and additional calculations used to put our effects into
context.

2

The Physiology of Lead and Prior Work

Lead can enter the body through the skin, digestive tract, or by inhalation.7 Once in the
blood stream, lead can be deposited in both soft (e.g., liver and brain) and hard (e.g. teeth
and bone) tissues. Lead has a half life of approximately 30 days in the blood, up to a few
years in soft tissues, and several decades in hard tissues. It serves no purpose in the human
body, however it competes with and displaces necessary metals such as calcium, zinc, and
magnesium. This displacement has a number of negative physiological consequences ranging
from impaired cellular signaling to cellular death.
Tetraethyl lead (TEL) is the primary lead compound added to gasoline. TEL boosts
octane, reducing the likelihood of pre-ignition of the gasoline. TEL is particularly toxic,
even when compared to forms of lead historically found in household paint (Agency for
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, 2018). TEL is easily absorbed through the skin and
other major routes of entry, and it can also cross the blood-brain barrier (Abadin and Pohl,
2010). These properties make it extremely harmful at low levels of exposure.8
A large body of prior work has studied the correlation between lead exposure and adverse
health outcomes. While lead affects nearly every organ in the body, the most well-known
impacts are on the nervous system. This is particularly salient for young children, where
long run IQ declines are associated with early life exposure (Baghurst et al., 1992; Lanphear
et al., 2005). Children are more sensitive to lead because, conditional on exposure, they
absorb more lead than adults and because their nervous systems are still developing (Lidsky
and Schneider, 2003).
Lead is also associated with increased cardiovascular ailments including hypertension,
and higher rates of plaque build up and clotting in blood vessels. Jointly these cardiovascular issues serve to increase the risk of ischemic heart disease and death (Lanphear et al.,
2018). Previous research has found strikingly large estimates of the association between
lead exposure and adult mortality. Lanphear et al. (2018) estimate that over 400,000 (18%)
deaths per year in the U.S. are associated with lead exposure; Pirkle et al. (1985) find that
7

See Papanikolaou et al. (2005), Garza et al. (2006), and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2006)
for more details on how it enters and affects the body; Ranft et al. (2008) for a review of how ambient lead
concentrations correlate more strongly with blood lead levels than soil lead concentrations; and He et al.
(2009) and Oh et al. (2017) for more on how mean blood lead and ambient lead levels rapidly decreased
following the enactment of leaded gasoline regulations in Korea and China.
8
Workers at Du Pont’s first TEL plant began dying from lead poisoning within a month of operation, and
over 80% of workers at General Motors and Standard Oil’s first TEL plant died or had severe lead poisoning
(Kitman, 2000).

5

the decrease in blood lead levels (BLLs) in the late 1970s was associated with a 6% decrease
in all-cause mortality; Lustberg and Silbergeld (2002) find that having BLLs in the range of
10-19 µg/dl is associated with a 17% increase in the risk of all-cause mortality; and Menke
et al. (2006) find that having BLLs above 3 µg/dl is associated with a 30% increase in allcause mortality. These correlational studies have generally found the strongest mortality
associations with cardiovascular-related causes of death.
Despite lead’s clear physiological effects, it is difficult to recover causal estimates using
observational data because exposure is not randomly assigned. In addition to gasoline and
paint, lead exposure is a byproduct of a host of processes including refining, manufacturing,
power generation, smelting, mining, and even drinking water transportation. Many of these
processes generate substantial disamenities for nearby residents, including increased exposure
to lead and other pollutants (e.g. Currie et al., 2015a; Klemick et al., 2019).
Lead exposure is also correlated with a number of potentially confounding factors like
year of birth, place of residence, and socioeconomic status. The types of places that have
leaded pipes, high soil lead content, or are near polluting facilities, are also different from
locations with lower lead exposure in other ways. Leaded pipes and pipes that contain leaded
solder are more likely to be found in older homes (Levin et al., 2008), and industrial facilities
are more likely to locate in disadvantaged communities (Ash and Boyce, 2018; Christensen
et al., 2019b). All else equal, low-income and minority communities face higher ambient
pollution levels and greater exposure to lead (Levin et al., 2008; Miranda et al., 2011), and
even within a given community, low-income residents may face greater lead exposure due
to an increased prevalence of leaded paint (Jacobs et al., 2002). In general, socioeconomic
status is tightly linked to both health and lead exposure (Meara, 2001; Currie and Stabile,
2003; Adams et al., 2004; Currie, 2009; Cutler et al., 2012).
Recent work has taken significant care to address many of the potential confounders
associated with non-random lead exposure. A common strategy is to use fixed effects estimators that exploit cohort or group level differences in exposure to lead. Previous work has
used this strategy to show that lead exposure through drinking water has negative effects
on cognition, fertility, and infant mortality (Ferrie et al., 2012; Clay et al., 2014; Grossman
and Slusky, 2019), that the Flint lead crisis was capitalized into housing values (Christensen
et al., 2019a), that early life interventions may offset some of the negative effects of lead
exposure (Billings and Schnepel, 2018; Sorensen et al., 2019), and that leaded aviation gasoline increases the blood lead levels of those who live near airports (Zahran et al., 2017).9
9
In addition to the lead literature, this paper also complements the broader pollution literature on the
impacts of vehicle emissions (Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011; Currie and Walker, 2011; Knittel et al., 2016),
the impacts of toxics (Currie et al., 2015b; Persico and Venator, 2018), and the effects of lead remediation
(Billings and Schnepel, 2017; Gazze, 2018; Sorensen et al., 2019).

6

Another common approach is to use a variable correlated with exposure to lead as an instrument, such as distance from a major road or state average gasoline lead content, in order
to address issues with non-random lead exposure, avoidance behavior, or measurement error. This strand of literature has shown that lead can increase rates of crime, delinquent
behavior, and enrollment in special education; as well as decrease fertility and test scores
(Reyes, 2007, 2011, 2015; Feigenbaum and Muller, 2016; Gazze, 2016; Aizer et al., 2018; Clay
et al., 2018; Aizer and Currie, 2019; Clay et al., 2019). These empirical approaches often
exploit leaded gasoline phasedowns to generate variation in lead exposure that is plausibly
exogenous to socioeconomic confounders (Reyes, 2007, 2011, 2015; Grönqvist et al., 2018;
Clay et al., 2018).
One challenge with using historic leaded gasoline reductions to generate variation in lead
exposure is that these reductions did not occur in isolation. Legislation intended to reduce
ambient concentrations of lead and other pollutants was often introduced at similar times.
As an example, consider the case of the U.S. lead phasedown that began in the 1970s following the passage of the Clean Air Act. The Clean Air Act established National Ambient Air
Quality Standards (NAAQS) for six criteria pollutants, and a number of programs and regulations were implemented to maintain compliance with these standards. Aggregate emissions
of both directly and indirectly targeted pollutants gradually declined by 73% from 1970 to
2016 as a result of this portfolio of programs (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1989,
1990; Lee, 1991; Greenstone, 2002; Schmalensee and Stavins, 2018).10
Some of these regulations, such as catalytic converter mandates, simultaneously targeted
both lead and other pollutants. In the U.S., the key driver of the leaded fuel emissions
reductions was the mandated adoption of catalytic converters in new model-year cars beginning in 1975 (Newell and Rogers, 2003). Catalytic converters are emission control devices
that convert CO, nitrogen oxides (NOx ), and VOCs into benign compounds like water and
nitrogen (Newell and Rogers, 2003; Ravindra et al., 2004). The pollutants controlled by catalytic converters have been linked to adverse health outcomes by a large body of prior work,
and catalytic converter usage has been linked to large improvements in health in the U.S.
and other countries (Mott, 2002; Currie and Neidell, 2005; Greenstone and Hanna, 2014;
10
Figure A1 shows the consistent declines in mean ambient concentrations of all pollutants except for ozone.
This general pattern of correlated, overlapping pollution regulations exists in countries other than the U.S.
For example, Swedish air pollution regulations began in 1969 with the passage of the Swedish Environmental
Protection Act. Following their EPA formation, many new laws were implemented to address various sources
of emissions such as high-sulfur fuel oil, mercury, pesticides, and lead in gasoline. This generated simultaneous
decreases in ambient concentrations of a wide range of pollutants (Naturvårdsverket, 2010). Sweden also
began targeting reductions in motor vehicle emissions in 1969 and tightened emissions restrictions several
times thereafter. This occurred simultaneously with leaded gasoline phasedowns in 1972 and mandated
adoptions of catalytic converters in 1988 (Lovei, 1998). See Lundqvist (1979) for a brief policy overview and
comparison to the U.S.

7

Alexander and Schwandt, 2019). Although catalytic converters do not directly reduce lead
emissions, lead damages the devices, effectively prohibiting leaded fuel use. As new cars with
catalytic converters replaced older cars, emissions of lead, CO, NOx , and VOCs all declined
simultaneously at the point source.
Jointly, the portfolio of pollution policies deployed in the U.S. and other countries led
to a gradual and correlated decline in the ambient concentrations of many pollutants. This
presents problems for separately identifying the effects of lead from the effects of other
pollutants. Our research setting overcomes the challenges in separately identify the effect
of lead since race cars do not use catalytic converters or other emission control devices, and
the removal of lead was the only relevant change made to the fuel between 2006 and 2007.

3

Data

Here we describe our data. Summary statistics can be found in Section A.4 of the appendix.
Racing data: Race data were obtained from Racing Reference, a site that catalogs
historical races for NASCAR, ARCA, and a number of other racing series. We collected
data on the universe of races for the four racing series that were required to switch to
unleaded fuel in 2007, NASCAR’s three national series and the ARCA Menards Series. For
robustness checks, we also collected race data for all regional NASCAR K&N Pro Series,
which are the main series for which we cannot determine the leaded fuel status at any point
in time in our sample. For each race we record the number of drivers, the number of laps
needed for race completion, the length of each lap, the actual number of miles driven in
the race by each driver, the racetrack location, and the date of the race. Race miles are
observed and not estimated from lap length. We have information on every race in each
of the national series since their inception: 1949 for the Monster Energy Cup, 1982 for
the Xfinity Series, and 1995 for the Gander Outdoors Truck Series.11 Track location was
ascertained through Google Maps and manually confirmed. Figure A3 shows the geographic
distribution of counties that have a racetrack or border a county with a racetrack.
For a placebo test, we also collected data on the NTT IndyCar Series races from ChampCarStats. IndyCar races are an ideal comparison group since they do not use leaded fuel,
and because they use many of the same tracks as NASCAR and ARCA, but take place at
different times of the year.12 IndyCar allows us to test whether or not our ambient lead
11

These series have gone by several different names since their inception. We use their 2019 names when
discussing them in this paper.
12
IndyCar has not used lead additives since 1964 when it began using pure methanol, an alcohol-based fuel.
In 2006, it switched to a 90/10 ethanol/methanol blend, and in 2007 it switched to a 98/2 ethanol/gasoline
blend.

8

estimates are simply picking up on lead emissions from spectators’ vehicles and generators,
or resuspension of legacy lead. 13
Pollution data: Daily pollution data were obtained from the EPA’s AirData datasets,
which report pre-generated daily summaries by pollutant at each air enforcement monitor.
For every recorded monitor day from 1980 to 2018, data were collected for CO, NO2 , PM10 ,
PM2.5 , Pb, VOCs, and O3 . Daily data on lead levels prior to 1980 were provided by the EPA
by request. All events were included in the calculation of a daily mean.
Weather data: Weather data come from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) NCEP-NCAR Reanalysis 1 model, which provides daily weather
data in a 2.5◦ latitude by 2.5◦ longitude global grid (Kalnay et al., 1996). We extracted
data from 1948-2018 on surface level (i.e. 0.995 sigma level) average air temperature (C◦ ),
pressure (kPA), relative humidity (%), and wind. Wind data are reported within each cell
by two vectors: a u-wind vector that measures east to west wind in meters per second and
a v-wind vector that reports north to south wind in meters per second. Using these two
vectors, we calculate wind-speed (m/s) and wind direction.14 To proxy for precipitation, we
kg
◦
by 2.5◦ atmospheric column;
extracted data on daily precipitable water ( m
2 ) in each 2.5
these data are not reported at the surface level. To estimate the daily weather conditions
at each pollution monitor, we first determine the 2.5◦ latitude by 2.5◦ longitude grid cell in
which each pollution monitor is located. We then assign the daily weather data for each cell
to all pollution monitors within it.
Blood lead data: Blood lead data were obtained from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) State Surveillance Data. Data are reported at the county-year level
from 2005-2015. The blood lead data report the percentage of children tested in a given
county-year that had elevated blood lead levels, which would be a BLL above 10 µg/dl. The
CDC funded 29 states, Washington D.C., and 5 cities to sample blood lead in children under
72 months old. 5 additional states also voluntarily submitted data. Blood lead sampling was
targeted at high-risk areas. Section A.7 describes two tests of whether targeting is a concern
13

In addition to NASCAR, ARCA, and IndyCar, there are other racing series in the U.S. such as Formula
1, National Hot Rod Association (NHRA) drag racing, and a large number of regional and local series. Like
NASCAR, Formula 1 historically allowed leaded fuel but switched to unleaded gasoline in 1996 (Collins,
2012). We omit Formula 1 races from our analysis because there is at most one Formula 1 race per year in
the U.S., and the fuel switch occurred prior to the earliest years used in our results. We do not include data
on NHRA series since racers have the option to use a wide range of fuels including gasoline, diesel, propane,
or nitromethane. In the series that require a specific fuel (e.g. the Mello Yello Drag Racing Series, which
requires either nitromethane or methanol) we are unaware of any changes to fuel rules that coincide with
NASCAR and ARCA deleading. In Section A.5 of the appendix, we discuss changes in car performance
across time, where racetracks are located, where lead monitors are located relative to racetracks, and other
events that occur at√the racetracks in more detail.
14
Wind speed = u2 + v 2 . Wind direction = mod(atan2(−u, −v) · 180
π − 180, 360).

9

for identification. We do not find evidence that this is the case.
Here we focus on confirmed cases of elevated blood lead. Confirmed cases of elevated
blood lead in children require a venous blood draw registering a BLL above 10 µg/dl, or
two separate capillary draws within two weeks registering BLLs above 10 µg/dl. This helps
avoid measurement error in readings from a single capillary draw, which can be easily contaminated.
Mortality data: Mortality data come from the restricted CDC National Vital Statistics System, and population data come from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Result (SEER) program. Mortality data report information at the
individual level of death. We observe cause of death; age at death; county, month, and year
of death; and county of residence. The SEER data are reported from 1999-2016. We report
the age-standardized death rate per 100,000 population of each cohort. The reference population we use to standardize is the U.S. population for each cohort in 2000. For our analysis
we focus on the elderly population (65+), but we also report results for infants (under 1 year
old) in Section A.8 of the appendix.
Covariate data: In some specifications we control for socioeconomic variables.15 We
collect county level data on median income from the U.S. Census, unemployment rates from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and percent non-white from the SEER program. We obtain
data from the Toxic Release Inventory on lead emissions from industrial facilities. Facilities
included in the TRI emissions data must have at least 10 employees and manufacture, process, or use above 100 pounds of general lead compounds. The threshold is 25,000 pounds
if the facility is using lead in brass, stainless steel, or bronze alloys. We augment the lead
emissions data with county level payroll data for the manufacturing sector from the County
Business Patterns dataset as a way to proxy for other emissions, address the censoring of
smaller facilities, and address the known measurement error issues in the TRI database
(De Marchi and Hamilton, 2006).

4

Methods and results

Here we describe our empirical methods and present our results for each outcome of interest. All of our results exploit the deleading of NASCAR and ARCA fuel in 2007. Due to
differences in the granularity of our outcomes data across both time and space, we use a
slightly different specification for ambient lead outcomes versus the blood lead and mortality
15

In Section A.9.2 of the appendix, we report how counties with racetracks differ from other counties
along socioeconomic indicators that were omitted from our set of covariates such as percent in poverty. We
find that conditional on covariates and fixed effects, race counties, border counties, and control counties are
similar on these margins.

10

outcomes. In addition, we choose geographic units of comparable size across each analysis, further ensuring that results are commensurable. Sections A.6-A.9 contain alternative
specifications, robustness checks, and additional analyses for all outcomes.

4.1
4.1.1

Ambient lead concentrations
Ambient lead concentrations methods

To estimate the effect of leaded races on ambient lead concentrations we estimate an event
study and a spatial lag model. The following equation is our simplest specification, a monitorday design that underlies results displayed in the tables:
asinh(Pb)mdwy =βl leaded race milesmdwy + βu unleaded race milesmdwy
+ γXmdwy + Θmy + Ωwy + εmdwy .

(1)

asinh(P b)mdwy is the inverse hyperbolic sine of the measured lead concentration at monitor m
on day d in week-of-year w and year y. We use the asinh transform because the empirical lead
concentration distribution is right-skewed and has a large number of zero-valued observations.
The asinh transform is similar to the natural log transform insofar as it is monotonic and
compresses the influence of large outliers. It does this with the additional advantage of
preserving zero valued inputs without needing additional manipulation.
Xmdwy is a vector of covariates containing the average temperature, precipitable water,
relative humidity, surface pressure, and wind speed on the day of the reading. Θmy is a set of
monitor-by-year fixed effects that flexibly control for monitor-specific annual trends in lead
concentrations, and Ωwy is a set of week-by-year fixed effects that control for within-week
shocks that are common across monitors. εmdwy is the error term. Standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the county level since the errors of nearby monitors
are likely to be correlated. In our main results we restrict our sample to begin in 1996, when
on-road leaded fuel was banned. This avoids potential confounding from spectator travel to
the racetrack.
leaded race milesmdwy is the number of leaded race miles that occurred within 50 miles of
monitor m, in the week prior to monitor m’s lead reading on day d.16 unleaded race milesmdwy
is the same but for unleaded race miles. Our coefficients of interest are βl and βu . βl is the
effect of the leaded race miles driven in the past week on ambient lead readings within 50
miles, and βu is the same but for unleaded miles. Identification of βl comes from variation
16

Section A.6 of the appendix shows our results are robust to using alternative cutoffs to 50 miles.

11

Figure 2: Ambient lead concentrations in the four weeks before and after the last leaded
race (left) or unleaded race (right).
A.

B.

Note: This figure plots ambient lead concentrations across time and space. The left panel (A) plots average
ambient lead concentrations 4 weeks before and after a race from 1996-2006, years when races were leaded.
The right panel (B) is the same, but for 2007-2017, years when races were unleaded. Negative values on the
x-axis indicate monitor readings that occurred in the weeks prior to a race, and positive values on the x-axis
indicate monitor readings that occurred in the weeks after a race.

in leaded miles at a monitor, within a year, off of week-of-year averages across monitors.17
Identification of βu comes from the same variation but in unleaded race miles.
To estimate a distance gradient we use a spatial lag model. This specification also
includes four variables in addition to those in equation (1). The four variables are the
number of leaded and unleaded miles that occurred within the last week between 50-75
miles and 75-100 miles away from the monitor. To estimate a time gradient and test for any
pre-trends in lead concentrations prior to a race, we use an event study specification. This
specification includes 14 additional variables: the number of leaded and unleaded race miles
that occurred within 50 miles, but 8-14 days, 15-21 days, and 22-28 days in the past; and
the number of leaded and unleaded race miles that occurred within 50 miles, but 0-7 days,
8-14 days, 15-21 days, and 22-28 days in the future.
4.1.2

Ambient lead concentrations results

First we plot the raw data. Figure 2 plots the average ambient concentration of lead by weeks
since the most recent race in the 11 years prior to deleading (left panel) and the 11 years after
17

Note that identification of βl does not rely upon unleaded race miles being driven. We are comparing
monitor readings on days with positive leaded race miles in the past week to monitor readings on days without.
These are primarily days without any kind of race in the past week. The same is true for identification of
βu and leaded miles.

12

deleading (right panel). Negative values on the x-axis indicate monitor readings that occurred
in the weeks prior to a race, and positive values on the x-axis indicate monitor readings that
occurred in the weeks after a race. During leaded race years, lead concentrations prior to
a race show a slight downward trend within 50 miles of a racetrack, and are flat or slightly
increasing further away. In the week after a race, concentrations jump by over 20% compared
to concentrations the week prior at monitors within 50 miles. The jump slowly attenuates
until it reaches pre-race levels after 4 weeks. There is essentially no change in concentrations
outside 50 miles. The right panel shows that once NASCAR and ARCA deleaded, the
post-race jump in ambient lead concentrations vanishes.
Table 1: The effect of race miles on ambient lead concentrations at monitors within 50 miles
of a racetrack.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Leaded race miles in past week (100k)

0.16**
(0.08)

0.14*
(0.08)

0.14**
(0.07)

0.13**
(0.06)

0.13**
(0.05)

0.13**
(0.05)

0.13***
(0.05)

Unleaded race miles in past week (100k)

0.07***
(0.03)

0.06**
(0.02)

0.06**
(0.02)

0.02*
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

–0.00
(0.01)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
County
0.35
312296

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
County
0.35
312296

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County
0.39
312291

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
County
0.41
312285

No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
County
0.44
312277

No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
County
0.45
312277

Monitor FE
Year FE
Daily Weather Controls
Week FE
State-by-Year FE
County-by-Year FE
Monitor-by-Year FE
Week-by-Year FE
Clustered Standard Errors
Adjusted R2
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
County
0.35
312296

(7)

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. The
dependent variable is asinh(Pb). Monitor-specific daily weather variables include air temperature, pressure, relative humidity, wind speed, and daily precipitable water. Column 7 shows estimates from equation (1).

Table 1 displays estimates that gradually build up to our preferred set of fixed effects
and controls in column 7, which corresponds to equation (1).18 The top row shows estimates
of the effect of 100,000 leaded miles in the past week, and the second row shows estimates
of the effect of 100,000 unleaded miles in the past week. Column 1 controls for only monitor
fixed effects and year fixed effects. In this simple comparison, the estimated effect of 100,000
leaded miles on asinh(Pb) is 0.16, and the effect of 100,000 unleaded miles is 0.07. As we add
monitor-specific daily weather controls (column 2) and week-of-year fixed effects (column 3),
neither coefficient meaningfully changes. Including state-by-year fixed effects (column 4)
reduces the impact of leaded miles to 0.13 and the impact of unleaded miles to 0.02. Further
18

In the sample there are 205 lead monitors that were treated at least once by a leaded race within 50
miles, and 635 lead monitors that had never been treated.

13

refining the spatial fixed effects to county-by-year (column 5) or monitor-by-year (column
6) and adding week-by-year fixed effects (column 7) continues to attenuate the estimated
relationship between unleaded race miles and ambient lead levels, while leaving the estimated
effect of leaded race miles on ambient lead concentrations relatively unchanged.
The inclusion of flexible time-trends (at the state, county, or monitor level) are important for our identification since they help guard against the possibilities that our estimates
only reflect spurious differential trends (e.g. declining ambient lead levels in areas far from
racetracks) or that our findings are caused by local changes in pollution, policy, or other
unobservables (e.g. the closing of a manufacturing plant). Incorporating monitor-by-year
and week-by-year fixed effects, as we do in our preferred specification in column 7, ensures
that our treatment effect estimates are derived from within monitor-year variation in the
quantities of leaded and unleaded miles, and address common seasonal patterns in ambient
concentrations. Using this specification, we estimate that every 100,000 leaded miles driven
in the past week increases ambient asinh(Pb) levels by 0.13, which is equivalent to a 14% increase in mean concentrations.19 We further estimate a precise zero effect of unleaded miles
on ambient lead concentrations; we can statistically distinguish the leaded and unleaded
miles estimates from each other.
Figure 3 plots the estimated time and distance gradients. The left panel plots our event
study estimates of the effect of 100,000 race miles by weeks since the last race within 50
miles. In the weeks prior to exposure to either type of race miles, we do not detect any
change in ambient lead concentrations. In the first week after exposure to 100,000 leaded
miles we estimate that asinh(Pb) increases by 0.15, a 16% increase in mean concentrations.
The effect then tapers off toward zero in the weeks after. All estimates for unleaded miles
are centered around zero with no clear trend over time, suggesting that unleaded races do
not resuspend legacy lead or have other attributes that increase ambient lead levels.
The right panel of Figure 3 plots spatial lag estimates of the effect of 100,000 race miles
in the past week on asinh(Pb) by distance bands. We find an intuitive decreasing gradient
in distance for leaded miles. We estimate an effect of 14% in the 0-50 mile distance band,
which declines to 3% in the 50-75 mile band, and to approximately zero in the 75-100 mile
band. In contrast, we do not find any discernible relationship between unleaded miles and
distance from racetrack to monitor.
Robustness checks, and alternative specifications: Section A.6 of the appendix
further demonstrates the robustness of our estimates to a variety of specifications and sample definitions. It also contains event study estimates including baseball and IndyCar as
19

See Bellemare and Wichman (2019) for how to compute asinh elasticities. They are slightly different
than log elasticities, so the percentage changes we report will not always match the coefficient estimate.

14

Figure 3: The effect of race miles on ambient lead by weeks since most recent race (left) and
by distance from track (right).
A.

B.

Note: This figure shows the effect of 100,000 leaded and unleaded race miles on ambient lead concentrations
across both time and space. The left panel (A) plots the estimated time gradient, while the right panel
(B) plots the estimated distance gradient. For each panel, all coefficients come from one regression. Each
regression controls for week-by-year fixed effects, monitor-by-year fixed effects, and daily monitor-specific
weather controls. The dependent variable is asinh(Pb). Brackets denote 95% confidence intervals, calculated
from robust standard errors clustered at the county level. For the time panel (A), negative values on the
x-axis indicate monitor readings that occurred in the weeks prior to a race, and positive values on the x-axis
indicate monitor readings that occurred in the weeks after a race. For the time panel, only race miles within
50 miles are included. For the distance panel (B), only race miles within the past seven days are considered.

additional comparison groups showing they have no effect on ambient lead concentrations,
and that there is no differential effect of leaded versus unleaded races on concentrations of
other potentially confounding pollutants. Section A.9.1 contains a cross-sectional analysis
of soil lead, showing higher concentrations near racetracks. In Section A.10, we use our
estimates to predict how daily historic vehicle traffic affects mean air quality in major cities.
Over the range of common support, our estimates predict historic mean lead levels quite
well, lending further credibility to our in-sample estimates. This section also reports results
from a counterfactual prediction of ambient lead concentrations as if lead were still added
to gasoline at 1970 levels.

15

4.2
4.2.1

Blood lead
Blood lead methods

Our elevated blood lead level outcomes are at the county-year level, so we use the following
event study specification:
asinh(EBLL)scy =

X

βtr 1(race in county)sct +

t∈Y

X

βtb 1(race in border county)sct

t∈Y

+ γXscy + Θc + Ωsy + εscy .

(2)

asinh(EBLL)scy is the inverse hyperbolic sine of the elevated blood level prevalence in state
s, county c, and year y. We again use the inverse hyperbolic sine transform because of
the distribution of elevated blood lead rates is right-skewed and contains a large number of
P
zero-valued observations.
t∈Y 1(race in county)sct is our main set of treatment variables.
They are indicator variables that are equal to 1 if there was a race in county c in year t.20 Y
is the set of years from 2005 to 2015 with 2007 omitted. The βtr s capture the effect of having
a race in a year t on asinh(EBLL)scy in year y, relative to the difference in asinh(EBLL)scy
between race counties and control counties in 2007. Control counties in year t are those that
did not have a race and did not border a county with a race in year t. This does allow for
some counties to be in the control group in one year and in one of the treatment groups
in another. However, since the half-life of blood lead is short, and there are generally not
NASCAR or ARCA races in the first or last 40 days of the year, effects of leaded races on
the prevalence of elevated blood lead in the next year would be small.
P
t∈Y 1(race in border county)sct is a set of indicator variables equal to 1 if there was a
race in a county that borders county c in year t, but there was no race in county c itself.
The βtb s capture the effect of not having a race, but bordering a county with a race in a
particular year on asinh(EBLL)scy , relative to the difference in asinh(EBLL)scy between
border counties and control counties in 2007. This second set of variables is to determine if
there is a distance gradient for EBLL rates like we found for ambient lead.
20

The sum of leaded and unleaded race miles in a county does not change much from year to year since
the race schedule is usually the same on an annual basis, and races typically maintain the same length
over time. The only variation in the sum of the two types of miles generally comes from weather-related
issues, or crashes or retirements during a race. Since total race miles is approximately fixed and total race
miles = leaded miles + unleaded miles, using total miles in a given county-year as treatment variables
will be effectively the same as using dummy variables after conditioning on county fixed effects, and trying
to separately estimate the effect of leaded and unleaded miles will have the usual multicollinearity issues.
Figure A20 of the appendix shows the high degree of collinearity between leaded and unleaded miles. We
explore outcomes in a difference-in-differences framework with varying treatment intensity using just leaded
miles in Section A.7 of the appendix.

16

Xscy is a set of controls that includes the unemployment rate, median income, percent
non-white, payroll in the manufacturing sector, and quantity of TRI lead emissions. The first
three are to control for socioeconomic status and potential sorting across locations, while the
latter two are to control for alternative sources of lead emissions.21 Θc is a set of county fixed
effects, and Ωsy is a set of state-by-year fixed effects. εscy is the error term. Standard errors
are robust to heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the county level. Identification of βtr
and βtb comes from annual within-state variation in races, off of the county means. Since the
sample of children tested is a non-random sample of those at risk for higher blood lead levels,
an additional identification assumption is that this selection did not differentially change for
race and border counties relative to control counties around the time of deleading. This is
addressed further in Section A.7, where we show that the number of children tested in race
counties did not change in race counties following deleading.
4.2.2

Blood lead results

We begin by plotting the raw data. Figure 4 plots average prevalence of elevated blood lead
from 2005 to 2009 by county type, where the means are weighted by the square root of the
number of children tested.22 Prior to the switch to unleaded fuel in 2007, all three types of
counties exhibited slight downward trends in EBLL rates that are nearly parallel, although
the rate of elevated blood lead in border counties and race counties were 1 and 2 percentage
points higher than in control counties. In 2007, when NASCAR and ARCA permanently
switched to unleaded gasoline, control county EBLL rates continued along the same trend,
but race and border county EBLL rates dropped so that they were nearly identical to control
counties. In subsequent years, EBLL rates across county types had similar levels and parallel
trends.
Figure 5 plots estimates from our main regression. The top panel displays estimates for
race counties. In 2005 and 2006 we estimate that race counties had EBLL rates that were
18% and 13% higher than in 2007. The decrease from 2005 to 2006 is consistent with the fact
that 14% of race miles driven in 2006 were unleaded race miles, thus decreasing exposure
in race counties relative to 2005. For all years after 2007, the point estimates are all close
to zero. The dashed line is the point estimate from our preferred difference-in-differences
regression, where year-specific race county and border county indicator variables are replaced
with two indicator variables: one for if there was a race in the county in 2005 or 2006, and
21
Section A.9.5 of the appendix contains results from a Mechanical Turk survey indicating that the public
may be generally unaware of the fuel used by NASCAR and when they have switched fuels. This alleviates
concerns about sorting and other behavior that may bias our estimates.
22
Leaving the data unweighted does not affect the results. We truncate the sample at 2009 for the plot
since after 2009 some counties stop reporting and the composition of our sample changes.

17

Figure 4: Mean percent of children with elevated blood lead levels by year and county type.

Note: Each point represents the mean percent of children tested with elevated blood lead levels by county
type, weighted by the square root of the number of children tested. The results are similar when we do not
weight the data. Elevated blood lead level means that the concentration of lead in the blood is at least 10
µg/dl. County type refers to if there was a NASCAR or ARCA race in that county (blue squares) or in a
border county (green diamond) in that year. All other counties are considered control counties (red circle).
For this figure we use a balanced panel of counties from 2005 to 2009. All data are included in our regression
estimates.

one for if there was not a race in the county but there was one in a bordering county in 2005
or 2006. The estimates from this regression indicate that the prevalence of elevated blood
lead was on average 17% higher in leaded race years versus unleaded race years.
The bottom panel shows estimates for border counties. Here we estimate an effect of 6%
in 2005 and 5% in 2006 relative to 2007, and effects that are close to zero in the years after
2007. The difference-in-differences regression yields an estimate of 6% higher EBLL rates
in leaded races years versus unleaded race years. The smaller estimated effect for border
counties is consistent with a decreasing distance gradient. Section A.7 of the appendix
includes estimates from the difference-in-differences regressions as we build up to our main
specification, event study estimates when the outcome is the untransformed EBLL rate, and
additional estimates using the quantity of leaded miles as treatment.
18

Our event study results shed light on the mechanisms driving higher EBLL rates in race
counties. EBLLs could be caused by exposure to newly emitted lead from races, exposure to
legacy lead deposits, or some combination of the two. The switch to unleaded fuel affects the
flow of new lead, which reduces airborne exposure and additional deposition to the existing
stock of legacy lead. If the effects on EBLL rates were mainly a function of the stock of lead,
we should expect the decrease in EBLL rates in race counties relative to control counties to
occur more slowly over many years or perhaps to not find a decline at all. The observed,
immediate decline in 2007 and subsequent plateau in both the regression estimates and raw
data is consistent with higher EBLL rates being primarily a function of exposure to lead
emissions from recent races.
Appendix Section A.9.2 reports results from a series of specifications that examine if
omitted variables or differential trends could be driving the estimates between leaded races
and the prevalence of elevated blood lead reported above. We follow Pei et al. (2019) and
swap our dependent variable of interest with one of a number of socio-economic variables
not included as control variables in our preferred specification. We find no clear, statistically
significant or economically meaningful relationship between our independent variables of
interest and these socio-economic variables, helping to alleviate concerns that our estimates
are driven by omitted variables or differential trends.

4.3
4.3.1

Elderly mortality
Elderly mortality methods

Here we use the same empirical approach as the EBLL analysis since the data are at the
same county-year level. The specification is:
mortality ratescy =

X

βt 1(race in county)sct +

t∈Y

X

βtb 1(race in border county)sct

t∈Y

+ γXscy + Θc + Ωsy + εscy .
mortality ratescy is the cause-specific, age-standardized, elderly mortality rate in state s,
county c, and year y. Since the mortality rate distributions are roughly normally distributed
with very few zeros we do not use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation.23 The mortality rate is in terms of deaths per 100,000 in the elderly cohort, which we define as those
aged 65 and above. The rest of the specification is identical to equation (2). We study six
causes of death. The first is all-cause mortality. This picks up an aggregate mortality impact
23

Results are similar if we use an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation.

19

and avoids potential misclassifications related to any particular cause of death. The next
four causes of death are cardiovascular mortality, ischemic heart disease (IHD), respiratory
mortality, and deaths of despair as defined by Case and Deaton (2015). We selected cardiovascular, IHD, and respiratory mortality because of the existing associational evidence
that EBLLs are related to cardiovascular mortality and reduced respiratory function (Pirkle
et al., 1985; Lustberg and Silbergeld, 2002; Jurdziak et al., 2015; Lanphear et al., 2018). We
included deaths of despair because higher levels of blood or bone lead are associated with
higher rates of drug addition, psychiatric symptoms such as depression and panic attacks,
and suicide risk (Rhodes et al., 2003; Fishbein et al., 2008; Bouchard et al., 2009; Kim et al.,
2015).
The last cause of death is a placebo: diabetes. Lead has a systemic effect on the human
body making it difficult to come up with valid placebos a priori. However, since diabetes
is a chronic disease, the sudden deleading of gasoline is unlikely to affect diabetes mortality
rates. We find no effect of deleading on diabetes; the event study estimates can be found in
Section A.8 of the appendix. Section A.8.1 of the appendix contains the specific CDC and
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes used to define each of the six causes of
death.
4.3.2

Elderly mortality results

We again begin with the raw data. Figure 6 plots the raw data for the age-standardized
average all-cause mortality rate, where counties are weighted by the square root of the elderly
population. All three types of counties exhibited steep downward trends over the sample
period. All-cause mortality rates were nearly identical in race and control counties prior to
the fuel switch, while border county rates were slightly lower but follow a parallel trend.
At the time of deleading in 2007, mortality rates of race counties dropped below those of
control counties, and border county mortality rates also dropped relative to control counties.
Trends in the post-period were also approximately parallel. Figure A14 in the appendix plots
the data for cause-specific mortality and the figure shows similar patterns as for all-cause
mortality.
The top left panel of Figure 7 plots our all-cause mortality estimates in event study
form. There are no clear pre-trends in the estimated effect of being in a race or border
county relative to a control county. All-cause mortality rates in race and border counties
declined relative to control counties after deleading, and remained lower for the rest of the
sample period. To get a better sense of the average size of the effect, the dashed line shows the
estimated effect when we replace the event study with our preferred difference-in-differences
specification with unleaded treatment beginning in 2007. We estimate a decline in elderly
20

mortality rates of 91 deaths per 100,000 in race counties and 38 deaths per 100,000 in border
counties.
Figure 7 also plots event study estimates for the other four mortality outcomes. Again,
there are no clear pre-trends except for respiratory mortality. Mortality rates in race and
border counties decrease relative to control counties at the time of deleading for all three
causes of death, and then they remain lower. Here we find that cardiovascular mortality
rates drop by 37 deaths per 100,000 in race counties after deleading, and drop by 12 deaths
per 100,000 in border counties after deleading. IHD mortality rates drop by 53 deaths per
100,000 in race counties and 20 deaths per 100,000 in border counties, respiratory mortality
rates drop by 20 deaths per 100,000 and 5 deaths per 100,000, and deaths of despair mortality
rates drop by 4 deaths per 100,000 and 2 deaths per 100,000. In total, our results suggest
that lead emissions have an immediate effect on elderly mortality. The smaller effects in
border counties are consistent with the expected distance gradient.24
The appendix shows that we find weak evidence for effects on infant mortality, although
an existing literature finds that lead exposure has negative effects on fertility, infant mortality,
and infant health (Troesken, 2008; Clay et al., 2014; Grossman and Slusky, 2019). There are
several possible reasons for this distinction. First, our findings indicate that leaded gasoline
tends to increase elderly mortality through cardiovascular causes and deaths of despair. The
former requires long term damage to the cardiovascular system while the latter is an adult
cause of death. Second, our results are from a different medium of exposure. In our case,
people are exposed to lead through the air while the previous literature has explored exposure
through drinking water. Third, the level of exposure likely differs between our setting and
others. We study a setting where ambient lead concentrations, as well as concentrations
of other pollutants, are very low. If infant mortality increases only at higher levels of lead
exposure then we will not estimate an economically significant effect.

5

The social cost of leaded gasoline

We value the external effects of leaded gasoline in two ways. First, we estimate the effect on
future earnings from increases in blood lead concentrations and the associated decreases in
IQ. Second, we value the effect of lead on premature all-cause elderly mortality and use this
to provide a lower bound on the total social cost of leaded gasoline.
24

One potential explanation for our findings is that they are actually caused by the great recession. We
argue that this is unlikely. If improvements in mortality rates were driven by differential effects of worsening
economic conditions, we would expect the differential decreases in mortality in race and border counties
to vanish as the recession ended and the economy improved. We find little evidence that mortality rates
rebounded along with economic conditions.

21

5.1

Blood lead, IQ, and future income

To estimate the expected decreases in IQ from lead exposure, we combine estimates from our
work with those from the prior literature. First, we translate our county level difference-indifferences estimates reported in Figure 5 into expected changes in individual BLLs. Recall
that our county level estimates indicate that living in a race county increases the prevalence
of those with EBLLs by 17% and that the threshold for EBLL is 10 µg/dl. First, we assume
the 17% estimate is the probability that living in a county with leaded races causes a child
to have an elevated BLL value. Second, we conservatively assume that if a child does not
test positively for EBLL, their baseline BLL level is just below the threshold at 9 µg/dl, and
if the child tests positively, their elevated BLL is right on the EBLL threshold at 10 µg/dl.
We make this last assumption because we are interested in the minimum individual changes
that are consistent with our observed estimates. This helps to provide as conservative a
valuation as possible because it is unlikely that all blood lead levels below the elevated
threshold dropped to zero following deleading. This procedure suggests that the deleading
of NASCAR and ARCA races resulted in a 0.17 × (10 µg/dl - 9 µg/dl) = 0.17 µg/dl expected
decline in BLLs per child in race counties.
Next, we link changes in BLLs to changes in IQ. The average IQ point loss per 1 µg/dl
for BLLs under 10 µg/dl is 0.513 (Lanphear et al., 2005; Gould, 2009).25 In expectation, a
child in a race county experienced a 0.087 IQ point decrease. Last, we link IQ to earnings
following the procedure in Klemick et al. (2019), which estimates that a 1 IQ point decrease
for a three year old is associated with a present value earnings loss of $20,568 in 2019 dollars.26
Combining these estimates, the costs of reduced IQ are $1,789 per child in race counties.
Because blood lead testing is targeted at high-risk areas, it is unclear whether we can map
this number to an aggregate county-wide benefit from deleading. Instead, we consider the
deleading benefits only obtained by the children in the EBLL dataset. The dataset reports
that 75,725 children under 6 were tested in race counties in 2015.27 This gives us that the
IQ-related social benefits for the cohort of children tested in 2015, who were never exposed
to leaded NASCAR or ARCA races during their lifetime, is $135 million. When we perform
the same exercise for border counties we get that expected BLL declines are 0.06 µg/dl, and
expected IQ increases are 0.031 points. This gives a present value earnings gain per child
of $638 in 2019 dollars. In 2015, 242,385 children were tested in border counties for a total
25

Previous estimates suggest that the relationship may be roughly half this size: between 0.185 and 0.323
IQ points per 1 µg/dl (Grosse et al., 2002).
26
Recall that the children in the testing sample are 72 months and younger, so a three year old is near the
middle of this age range.
27
In 2015 approximately 1 million children 4 and younger lived in race counties, 3 million lived in border
counties, and 15 million lived in control counties.

22

earnings gain of $155 million. In total, we estimate that the 2015 cohort of tested children
in race and border counties obtained $290 million in benefits from never being exposed to
leaded races.28
This valuation has several limitations. First, we do not have data on actual blood lead
levels so we do not directly observe how they change following deleading. Second, this
valuation does not account for how long each child’s blood lead was elevated and how this
length may matter for IQ or future earnings. Finally, because lead is only detectable in the
blood stream for a month following exposure, the procedure implicitly assumes that once
blood lead returns to baseline levels, the IQ effects and associated future earnings losses also
dissipate. This is in contrast to physiological evidence that lead exposure can permanently
damage neurological pathways and development.

5.2

Elderly mortality

Since the effects of leaded races on elderly mortality are acute and permanent, the calculation
of their dollar value is more straightforward and we use them to lower bound the social cost
of leaded gasoline. We first use the difference-in-differences estimates shown in Figure 7,
which indicate that race counties have higher all-cause elderly mortality rates by 91 deaths
per 100,000 during leaded race years, and border counties have all-cause mortality rates
higher by 38 deaths per 100,000. We then compute the number of premature deaths by
combining the mortality estimates with data on the population over 65.29 In total, our
estimates suggest that leaded races caused 32,000 premature elderly deaths between 19992006. Next, we translate the count of premature deaths into dollar terms. The average
age of a person over 65 is 74, and the expected age of death is 87 conditional on reaching
74 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017). Following Deryugina et al. (2019),
we deflate the number of life-years lost by 31% to account for possible harvesting (i.e. that
those who are likely to die prematurely from pollution are also more likely to die prematurely
from other causes). We value each life year lost at approximately $140,000 in 2019 dollars
(Cutler, 2004). On average, each premature elderly death from lead exposure generates
approximately $550,000 in social costs, and total annual elderly mortality externalities are
approximately $2.2 billion per year.
To compute the social cost of lead in dollars per gram, we normalize the annual mortality
cost by an estimate of the annual lead emissions. We estimate annual lead emissions to be
28
If our estimates are mapped to the full population, the effect on elevated blood lead rates in race counties
would result in approximately an extra 100 poisoned children in the average race county.
29
In 2015 approximately 3 million elderly lived in race counties, 7 million lived in border counties, and 36
million lived in control counties.

23

approximately 2 million grams in Section A.11. Combining these two estimates, the social
cost of a gram of lead added to racing fuel is approximately $1,100.

6

Conclusion

The main objective of this research is to causally estimate the effect of leaded gasoline on
elderly mortality. We do so by exploiting both regulatory exemptions and a natural experiment that together serve to separately identify the effect of leaded gasoline from other
potential confounders. The importance of our results extends beyond ascribing a value to automotive racing fuel decisions. Our findings indicate that even at present day levels of overall
lead exposure, additional exposure can generate heightened mortality risk. The estimated
relationship between lead exposure and these outcomes is both statistically significant and
economically meaningful. Our estimates likely understate the true magnitude of the mortality effect of leaded gasoline. Due to the structure of the data and analysis, our mortality
analysis is at the county-year level, which introduces measurement error that may attenuate
our estimates.
The mortality estimates place a lower bound on the social cost of each gram of tetraethyl
lead added to gasoline at roughly $1,100. This estimate is conditional on several factors.
First, since lead emissions from races affect outcomes through changes in ambient concentrations, the estimated social cost is conditional on the ambient levels of lead during the
time-frame of our mortality analysis, 1999-2016. Ambient levels during this time were much
lower than in earlier decades, and they continue to slowly decline. This matters for computing the social cost of lead if, as prior work suggests, the dose-response is non-linear with
respect to ambient concentrations (e.g. Grönqvist et al., 2018). Second, the social cost estimate is the average marginal effect over the range of quantities of lead emitted across all
races. The marginal effect of the first gram emitted by a race may be much different than the
marginal effect of the 100,000th gram emitted near the end of a multi-race weekend. If the
lead dose-response function is nonlinear and ambient concentrations continue to decline, then
understanding the marginal effect near the origin of the dose-response function is critical for
future policy design.
An important issue not studied here is the lack of information about lead in gasoline.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no public information on the quantity or location of
leaded racing fuel sales. Depending on the location and timing of its use, the social cost of
a particular gallon of leaded gasoline may vary dramatically. There is also little information
available on the lead content of unleaded gasoline. Although its name implies the absence of
lead, unleaded gasoline simply contains no added lead. Lead, in addition to other toxic heavy
24

metals like cadmium, is naturally found in crude oil and may persist in trace amounts after
the refining process. Lead can enter the unleaded fuel supply from storage tanks, pipes,
solder, or through cross-contamination from use of the same pipelines for leaded aviation
gasoline. More information on leaded gasoline sales and the lead content of unleaded fuel is
critical for determining social costs and the appropriate amount of regulatory scrutiny.
Our findings shed light on the consequences of the continued use of leaded gasoline for
racing and aviation. Our mortality cost estimate indicates that the the social cost of leaded
racing fuel is substantially higher than the private costs reflected in current market prices.
While we do not directly study leaded aviation fuel, our estimates are informative of the
external costs associated with its use. Even if the external effects of aviation gasoline are
only 1% ($10 per gram) of our racing fuel estimates, then the socially efficient price of leaded
aviation fuel would be three times higher than current market prices. This suggests that
there are significant global damages from leaded aviation gasoline.
Our findings also have implications for current lead poisoning policies. Much of the
concern about lead is heavily focused on children as evidenced by the CDC’s nationwide
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program as well as numerous state and county level
efforts. Our results demonstrate the large costs imposed on the elderly and that there are
potential benefits from expanding lead exposure mitigation efforts to include this overlooked
sensitive group.

References
Abadin, Henry G and Hana R Pohl (2010) “5: Alkyllead Compounds and Their Environmental Toxicology,” in Organometallics in Environment and Toxicology, pp. 153–164.
Adams, Peter, Michael D. Hurd, Daniel L. McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago Ribeiro
(2004) “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths between Health and
Socioeconomic Status,” Perspectives on the Economics of Aging.
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (2018) “Case Studies in Environmental
Medicine: Lead Toxicity,”Technical report.
Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie (2019) “Lead and juvenile delinquency: New evidence from
linked birth, school and juvenile detention records,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
No. 0.
Aizer, Anna, Janet Currie, Peter Simon, and Patrick Vivier (2018) “Do low levels of blood
lead reduce children’s future test scores?” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 307–41.
Alexander, Diane and Hannes Schwandt (2019) “The Impact of Car Pollution on Infant and
Child Health: Evidence from Emissions Cheating.”
ARCA Racing (2006) “Busy Day Ahead at Kansas; 2 Practice Sessions & Qualifying.”
Ash, Michael and James K. Boyce (2018) “Racial disparities in pollution exposure and
employment at US industrial facilities,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
Vol. 115, No. 42, pp. 10636–10641.
Associated Press (2006) “NASCAR officials pleased with first unleaded test.”
Auffhammer, Maximilian and Ryan Kellogg (2011) “Clearing the air? The effects of gasoline
25

content regulation on air quality,” American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 6, pp. 2687–
2722.
Baghurst, Peter, Anthony J McMichael, Neil R Wigg, Graham V Vimpani, Evelyn F Robertson, Russell J Roberts, and Shi-Lu Tong (1992) “Environmental Exposure to Lead and
Children’s Intelligence at the Age of Seven Years: The Port Pirie Cohort Study,” New
England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 327, No. 18, pp. 1279–1284.
Bay Area News Group (2006) “NASCAR to begin phasing in unleaded fuel,” East Bay
Times.
Bellemare, Marc F and Casey J Wichman (2019) “Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic
sine transformation,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.
Belson, Ken (2011) “Gentlemen, Start Conserving.”
Bernstein, Viv (2006) “NASCAR plans to switch to unleaded fuel in ’08,” New York Times.
Billings, Stephen B and Kevin T Schnepel (2017) “The value of a healthy home: Lead paint
remediation and housing values,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 153, pp. 69–81.
(2018) “Life after lead: Effects of early interventions for children exposed to lead,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 315–44.
Bouchard, Maryse F, David C Bellinger, Jennifer Weuve, Julia Matthews-Bellinger,
Stephen E Gilman, Robert O Wright, Joel Schwartz, and Marc G Weisskopf (2009) “Blood
lead levels and major depressive disorder, panic disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder
in US young adults,” Archives of general psychiatry, Vol. 66, No. 12, pp. 1313–1319.
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton (2015) “Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among
white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, Vol. 112, No. 49, pp. 15078–15083.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2012) “CDC response to advisory committee on childhood lead poisoning prevention recommendations: low level lead exposure harms children: a renewed call of primary prevention,” US Department of
Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA, USA. Available online: http://www. cdc.
gov/nceh/lead/acclpp/cdc response lead exposure recs. pdf (accessed on 23 April 2014).
(2017) “National Vital Statistics Reports Deaths: Final Data for 2015,” National
vital statistics reports: from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Vol. 66, pp. 1–75.
Christensen, Peter, David A. Keiser, and Gabriel E. Lade (2019a) “Economic Effects of
Environmental Crises: Evidence from Flint, Michigan.”
Christensen, Peter, Ignacio Sarmiento-Barbieri, and Christopher Timmins (2019b) “Toxic
Discrimination: Experimental Evidence of the Effect of Racial Discrimination on Toxics
Exposures and their Damages..”
Clay, Karen, Margarita Portnykh, and Edson Severnini (2018) “Toxic Truth: Lead and
Fertility,”Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
(2019) “The Legacy Lead Deposition in Soils and Its Impact on Cognitive Function
in Preschool-Aged Children in the United States,” Economics & Human Biology.
Clay, Karen, Werner Troesken, and Michael Haines (2014) “Lead and mortality,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 96, No. 3, pp. 458–470.
Collins, Sam (2012) “F1- Tech Explained: Formula 1 and the environment.”
Currie, Janet (2009) “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 47,
No. 1, pp. 87–122.
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker (2015a) “Environmental Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and
Closings,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 2, pp. 678–709.
(2015b) “Environmental health risks and housing values: evidence from 1,600 toxic
plant openings and closings,” American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 2, pp. 678–709.
26

Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell (2005) “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We
Learn From California’S Recent Experience?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
120, No. 3, pp. 1003–1030.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile (2003) “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is
the Relationship Stronger for Older Children?,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No.
5, pp. 1813–1823.
Currie, Janet and Reed Walker (2011) “Traffic congestion and infant health: Evidence from
E-ZPass,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 65–90.
Cutler, David M (2004) Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health
Care System, New York, New York: Oxford University Press.
Cutler, David M, Adriana Lleras-muney, and Tom Vogl (2012) “Socioeconomic status and
health: Dimensions and Mechanisms,” The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics.
De Marchi, Scott and James T Hamilton (2006) “Assessing the accuracy of self-reported
data: an evaluation of the toxics release inventory,” Journal of Risk and uncertainty, Vol.
32, No. 1, pp. 57–76.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Garth Heutel, Nolan Miller, David Molitor, and Julian Reif (2019)
“The Effect of Pollution on Health and Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Changes
in Wind Direction.”
Federal Aviation Administration (2020) “Fact Sheet – Leaded Aviation Fuel and the Environment,”Technical report.
Feigenbaum, James J. and Christopher Muller (2016) “Lead exposure and violent crime in
the early twentieth century,” Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 62, pp. 51–86.
Ferrie, Joseph P, Karen Rolf, and Werner Troesken (2012) “Cognitive disparities, lead plumbing, and water chemistry: Prior exposure to water-borne lead and intelligence test scores
among World War Two US Army enlistees,” Economics & Human Biology, Vol. 10, No.
1, pp. 98–111.
Fishbein, Diana H, Andrew C Todd, Erin P Ricketts, and Richard D Semba (2008) “Relationship between lead exposure, cognitive function, and drug addiction: Pilot study and
research agenda,” Environmental research, Vol. 108, No. 3, pp. 315–319.
Forbes (2020) “Nascar Team Values Flatline As Series Struggles, But Its Leaders Aim To
Shift Into A Higher Gear.”
Fryer, Jenna (2006) “NASCAR Pleased With Unleaded Fuel Test,” Washington Post.
(2008) “Lower levels get hit a lot harder by skyrocketing fuel prices.”
Garza, Anibal, Rosario Vega, and Enrique Soto (2006) “Cellular mechanisms of lead neurotoxicity. Med Sci Monit 12:RA57-RA65,” Medical science monitor : international medical
journal of experimental and clinical research, Vol. 12, pp. RA57–65.
Gazze, Ludovica (2016) “Lead policies, lead poisoning, and government spending,” URL:
http://home. uchicago. edu/lgazze/webfiles/LeadPolicies. pdf.
(2018) “The Price and Allocation Effects of Targeted Mandates: Evidence from
Lead Hazards,”Technical report.
Gould, Elise (2009) “Childhood lead poisoning: conservative estimates of the social and
economic benefits of lead hazard control,” Environmental health perspectives, Vol. 117,
No. 7, pp. 1162–1167.
Greenstone, Michael (2002) “The impacts of environmental regulations on industrial activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 clean air act amendments and the census of
manufactures,” Journal of political economy, Vol. 110, No. 6, pp. 1175–1219.
Greenstone, Michael and Rema Hanna (2014) “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water
Pollution, and Infant Mortality in India,” American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 10,
pp. 3038–3072.
Grönqvist, Hans, J Peter Nilsson, and Per-Olof Robling (2018) “Early Lead Exposure and
Outcomes in Adulthood.”
27

Grosse, Scott D., Thomas D. Matte, Joel Schwartz, and Richard J. Jackson (2002) “Economic
gains resulting from the reduction in children’s exposure to lead in the United States,”
Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 110, No. 6, pp. 563–569.
Grossman, Daniel S and David JG Slusky (2019) “The impact of the Flint water crisis on
fertility,” Demography, Vol. 56, No. 6, pp. 2005–2031.
He, Kangmin, Shunqin Wang, and Jinliang Zhang (2009) “Blood lead levels of children and
its trend in China,” Science of the Total Environment, Vol. 407, pp. 3986–3993.
Howard, Scripps (2005) “EPA asked NASCAR to switch six years ago,” ESPN.
Jacobs, David E, Robert P Clickner, Joey Y Zhou, Susan M Viet, David A Marker, John W
Rogers, Darryl C Zeldin, Pamela Broene, and Warren Friedman (2002) “The Prevalence
of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in U.S. Housing,” Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol.
110, No. 10, pp. 599–606.
Jurdziak, Marta, Pawel Gac, Helena Martynowicz, and Rafal Poreba (2015) “Function of
respiratory system evaluated using selected spirometry parameters in persons occupationally exposed to lead without evident health problems,” Environmental toxicology and
pharmacology, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 1034–1040.
Kalnay, E, M Kanamitsu, R Kistler, W Collins, D Deaven, L Gandin, M. Iredell, S. Saha,
G. White, J. Woollen, Y. Zhu, A. Leetmaa, R. Reynolds, M. Chelliah, W. Ebisuzaki,
W. Higgins, J. Janowiak, K. C. Mo, C. Ropelewski, J. Wang, Roy Jenne, and Dennis
Joseph (1996) “The NCEP/NCAR 40-Year Reanalysis Project,” Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society, Vol. 77, No. 3, pp. 437–471.
Kessler, Rebecca (2013) “Sunset for leaded aviation gasoline?” Environmental health perspectives, Vol. 121, No. 2, p. a54.
Kim, Min-Gi, Jae-Hong Ryoo, Se-Jin Chang, Chun-Bae Kim, Jong-Ku Park, Sang-Baek Koh,
and Yeon-Soon Ahn (2015) “Blood lead levels and cause-specific mortality of inorganic
lead-exposed workers in South Korea,” PloS one, Vol. 10, No. 10.
Kitman, Jamie Lincoln (2000) “The secret history of lead,” NATION-NEW YORK-, Vol.
270, No. 11, pp. 11–11.
Klemick, Heather, Henry Mason, and Karen Sullivan (2019) “Superfund Cleanups and Children’s Lead Exposure,” EPA. National Center for Environmental Economics. Working
Paper No. 19-01.
Knittel, Christopher R, Douglas L Miller, and Nicholas J Sanders (2016) “Caution, drivers!
Children present: Traffic, pollution, and infant health,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 98, No. 2, pp. 350–366.
Lanphear, Bruce P (2017) “Low-level toxicity of chemicals: No acceptable levels?” PLoS
biology, Vol. 15, No. 12, p. e2003066.
Lanphear, Bruce P., Richard Hornung, Jane Khoury, Kimberly Yolton, Peter Baghurst,
David C. Bellinger, Richard L. Canfield, Kim N. Dietrich, Robert Bornschein, Tom Greene,
Stephen J. Rothenberg, Herbert L. Needleman, Lourdes Schnaas, Gail Wasserman, Joseph
Graziano, and Russell Roberts (2005) “Low-level environmental lead exposure and children’s intellectual function: An international pooled analysis,” Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 113, No. 7, pp. 894–899.
Lanphear, Bruce P, Stephen Rauch, Peggy Auinger, Ryan W Allen, and Richard W Hornung
(2018) “Low-level lead exposure and mortality in US adults: a population-based cohort
study,” The Lancet Public Health, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. e177–e184.
Lee, Bryan (1991) “Highlights of the clean air act amendments off 1990,” Journal of the Air
& Waste Management Association, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 16–19.
Levin, Ronnie, Mary Jean Brown, Michael E Kashtock, David E Jacobs, Elizabeth A Whelan, Joanne Rodman, Michael R Schock, Alma Padilla, and Thomas Sinks (2008) “Lead
exposures in US children, 2008: implications for prevention,” Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 116, No. 10, p. 1285.

28

Lidsky, Theodore I and Jay S Schneider (2003) “Lead neurotoxicity in children: basic mechanisms and clinical correlates,” Brain, Vol. 126, No. 1, pp. 5–19.
Lovei, Magda (1998) “Phasing Out Lead from Gasoline.”
Lundqvist, Lennart J. (1979) “Who Is Winning the Race for Clean Air? An Evaluation of
the Impacts of the US and Swedish Approaches to Air Pollution Control,” Ambio, Vol. 8,
No. 4, pp. 144–151.
Lustberg, Mark and Ellen Silbergeld (2002) “Blood lead levels and mortality,” Archives of
internal medicine, Vol. 162, No. 21, pp. 2443–2449.
Meara, Ellen (2001) “Why is health related to socioeconomic status? The case of pregnancy
and low birth weight,”Technical report.
Menke, Andy, Paul Muntner, Vecihi Batuman, Ellen K Silbergeld, and Eliseo Guallar (2006)
“Blood lead below 0.48 mmol/L (10 mg/dL) and mortality among US adults,” Circulation,
Vol. 114, No. 13, pp. 1388–1394.
Miranda, Marie Lynn, Sharon E Edwards, Martha H Keating, and Christopher J Paul
(2011) “Making the Environmental Justice Grade: The Relative Burden of Air Pollution
Exposure in the United States,” International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, Vol. 8, No. 6, pp. 1755–1771.
Mott, Joshua A (2002) “National Vehicle Emissions Policies and Practices and Declining US
Carbon Monoxide–Related Mortality,” JAMA, Vol. 288, No. 8, p. 988.
Naturvårdsverket (2010) Sweden’s Environment Problems and Protection: 1960-2010, Stockholm, 1st edition.
Newell, Richard G and Kristian Rogers (2003) “The US experience with the phasedown of
lead in gasoline,” Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, Vol. 2.
Nriagu, Jerome O (1990) “The rise and fall of leaded gasoline,” Science of the total environment, Vol. 92, pp. 13–28.
Oh, Se-Eun, Gi Bog Kim, Sung Ho Hwang, Mina Ha, and Kyoung-Mu Lee (2017) “Longitudinal trends of blood lead levels before and after leaded gasoline regulation in Korea,”
Environmental Health and Toxicology, Vol. 32, p. e2017019.
O’Neil, Joseph, Gregory Steele, C Scott McNair, Matthew M Matusiak, and Jyl Madlem
(2006) “Blood lead levels in NASCAR Nextel Cup teams,” Journal of occupational and
environmental hygiene, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 67–71.
Papanikolaou, Nikolas C, Eleftheria G Hatzidaki, Stamatis Belivanis, George N Tzanakakis,
and Aristidis M Tsatsakis (2005) “Lead toxicity update. A brief review.,” Medical science
monitor, Vol. 11, No. 10, pp. RA329–RA336.
Pei, Zhuan, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Hannes Schwandt (2019) “Poorly Measured Confounders are More Useful on the Left than on the Right,” Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 205–216.
Pell, M.B. and Joshua Schneyer (2016) “Special Report: Thousands of U.S. areas afflicted
with lead poisoning beyond Flint’s,” Reuters.
Persico, Claudia and Joanna Venator (2018) “The Effects of Local Industrial Pollution on
Students and Schools.”
Pirkle, James L, Joel Schwartz, J Richard Landis, and William R Harlan (1985) “The relationship between blood lead levels and blood pressure and its cardiovascular risk implications,” American journal of epidemiology, Vol. 121, No. 2, pp. 246–258.
Polacek, Micheal A. and Daniel P. Collins (1968) “Lead intoxication in automotive sports,”
Pre-Crash; Factors in Traffic Safety; 12th Annual Symposium; American Association; for
Automotive Medicine, pp. 181–191.
Ranft, Ulrich, Thomas Delschen, Monika Machtolf, Dorothee Sugiri, and Michael Wilhelm
(2008) “Lead concentration in the blood of children and its association with lead in soil
and ambient air - Trends between 1983 and 2000 in Duisburg,” Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health - Part A: Current Issues, Vol. 71, No. 11-12, pp. 710–715.
29

Ravindra, Khaiwal, László Bencs, and René Van Grieken (2004) “Platinum group elements
in the environment and their health risk,” Science of The Total Environment, Vol. 318,
No. 1-3, pp. 1–43.
Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw (2007) “Environmental policy as social policy? The impact of childhood lead exposure on crime,” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Vol. 7,
No. 1.
(2011) “Childhood Lead and Academic Performance in Massachusetts.”
(2015) “Lead exposure and behavior: effects on antisocial and risky behavior among
children and adolescents,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 53, No. 3, pp. 1580–1605.
Rhodes, Daniel, Avron Spiro III, Antonio Aro, and Howard Hu (2003) “Relationship of bone
and blood lead levels to psychiatric symptoms: the normative aging study,” Journal of
occupational and environmental medicine, Vol. 45, No. 11, pp. 1144–1151.
Schmalensee, Richard and Robert Stavins (2018) “Policy Evolution under the Clean Air
Act,”Technical Report 11, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Sorensen, Lucy C., Ashley M. Fox, Heyjie Jung, and Erika G. Martin (2019) “Lead exposure
and academic achievement: evidence from childhood lead poisoning prevention efforts,”
Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 179–218.
Stock Car Racing (2009) “ARCA at 50.”
Sunoco (2018) “Sunoco Race Fuel 101: Lead and Leaded Racing Fuels.”
Thomas, VM (1995) “The elimination of lead in gasoline,” Annual Review of Energy and
the Environment, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 301–324.
Troesken, Werner (2008) “Lead water pipes and infant mortality at the turn of the twentieth
century,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 43, No. 3, pp. 553–575.
UN Environment Programme (2020) “The Lead Campaign,”Technical report.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1989) “Final Rule: Volatility Regulations for Gasoline and Alcohol Blends Sold in Calendar Years 1989 and Beyond. 54 FR 11868,”Technical
report.
(1990) “Final Rule: Volatility Regulations for Gasoline and Alcohol Blends Sold in
Calendar Years 1992 and Beyond. 55 FR 23658,”Technical report.
(1994) “Automobile emissions: An overview. Fact Sheet OMS-5.”
(2006) “Air Quality Criteria for Lead.”
Wusz, Tim (1994) “Gasoline for NASCAR Stock Car Racing: 1951-1994,”Technical report,
SAE Technical Paper 942539.
Yoshinaga, Jun (2012) “Lead in the Japanese living environment,” Environmental health and
preventive medicine, Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 433–443.
Zahran, Sammy, Terrence Iverson, Shawn P. McElmurry, and Stephan Weiler (2017) “The
Effect of Leaded Aviation Gasoline on Blood Lead in Children,” Journal of the Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 575–610.

30

Figure 5: The effect of leaded races on the percent of children with elevated blood lead levels
in race and border counties.

Note: The top panel reports coefficients (blue squares) for children living in race counties. The bottom
panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for children living in border counties. Each coefficient represents
the effect of being in a particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes
state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, %
non-white, tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients come
from the same regression. The regression is weighted by the square root of the number of children tested.
The shaded gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust standard errors clustered at
the county level. The dashed line is the average effect from our preferred difference-in-differences regression,
where the race county treated group consists of those counties that had at least one leaded race prior to
2007, and the border county treated group consists of those counties that did not have a leaded race but
bordered a county with a leaded race prior to 2007. This regression defines the post-period as 2007 and
after.

31

Figure 6: Mean all-cause elderly mortality rates by year and county type.

Note: Each point represents the mean age-standardized all-cause elderly mortality rate by county type
weighted by the square root of elderly population. The elderly population of the entire U.S. in the year 2000
was used as the reference population for standardization. County type refers to if there was a NASCAR or
ARCA race in that county (blue squares), or in a border county (green diamond) in that year. All other
counties are considered control counties (red circle). For this figure and in our regression estimates we use
a balanced panel of counties.

32

Figure 7: The effect of leaded races on elderly mortality rates in race and border counties.
A.

B.

C.

D.

E.

Note: Subfigure A shows estimates for all-cause mortality, Subfigure B shows estimates for cardiovascular
mortality, Subfigure C shows estimates for ischemic heart disease (IHD) mortality, Subfigure D shows estimates for respiratory mortality, and Subfigure E shows estimates for deaths of despair (Case and Deaton,
2015). The top panel of each subfigure reports coefficients (blue squares) for race counties, and the bottom
panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for border counties. Each coefficient represents the effect on the
age-standardized, elderly morality rate for that cause of death from being in a particular county type relative
to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, % non-white, tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and
total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients in each subfigure come from the same regression. The elderly
population of the entire U.S. in the year 2000 was used as the reference population for age standardization.
Each regression is weighted by the square root of the elderly population. The shaded gray areas denote the
95% confidence interval calculated from robust standard errors clustered at the county level. The dashed
line is the average effect of deleading from our preferred difference-in-differences regression, where the race
county treated group consists of those counties that had at least one leaded race prior to 2007, and the
border county treated group consists of those counties that did not have a leaded race but bordered a county
with a leaded race prior to 2007. This regression defines the post-period as 2007 and after.

33

A

Appendix: For Online Publication
A.1
A.2
A.3
A.4
A.5

Automotive racing and the switch to unleaded fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Correlated criteria pollutants since 1980 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Outcome distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Racetracks: locations, other events, statistics, and distance to lead monitors . . . . . . . .
A.5.1 Racetrack counties and border counties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.5.2 Other events at racetracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.5.3 Distribution of monitor-racetrack distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.5.4 Racetrack statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6 Lead concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6.1 Specification and sample robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6.2 Comparison tests and confounding pollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6.3 Excluding observations by monitor-racetrack distance deciles . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6.4 Alternative sample periods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.6.5 Raw data example of our fixed effects strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7 Blood lead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7.1 Difference-in-differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7.2 Untransformed outcome variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.7.3 Targeted testing in high risk areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8 Mortality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.1 Causes of death . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.2 Raw data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.3 Difference-in-differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.4 Mortality analysis using publicly available data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.5 Elderly mortality placebo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.6 Split-sample instrumental variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.8.7 Infant mortality event studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.9 Other robustness checks, sensitivity checks, and analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.9.1 Soil lead cross-section robustness check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.9.2 Balance table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.9.3 Collinearity of leaded and unleaded miles in annual regressions . . . . . . . . . . .
A.9.4 Environmental justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.9.5 Survey on beliefs about NASCAR fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.10 City lead emissions counterfactuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.10.1 Estimating historical lead emissions from daily VMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.10.2 Converting race miles to grams of lead used per race . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.10.3 Comparison of historic lead emitted from daily VMT to automotive racing sample
A.10.4 Out-of-sample historical prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.10.5 Counterfactual ambient lead levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.11 Calculations used in the main text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.11.1 Deleading is equivalent to a 10 µg/m3 reduction in PM2.5 concentrations . . . . .
A.11.2 NASCAR and ARCA used an estimated 2 million grams of TEL . . . . . . . . . .

A1

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Page
. A2
. A3
. A4
. A5
. A7
. A7
. A7
. A8
. A9
. A11
. A11
. A15
. A19
. A20
. A20
. A25
. A25
. A25
. A25
. A27
. A27
. A27
. A28
. A28
. A28
. A28
. A30
. A42
. A42
. A43
. A45
. A46
. A48
. A49
. A49
. A50
. A51
. A52
. A53
. A57
. A57
. A57

A.1

Automotive racing and the switch to unleaded fuel

NASCAR is a racing organization that operates three national series with races across the
U.S. Its most well-known national series is the Monster Energy Cup. The other two national
series are a minor league series called the Xfinity Series and a modified pickup truck series
called the Gander Outdoors Truck Series. NASCAR also runs several regional racing series
that concentrate in particular areas of the U.S., such as the K&N Pro Series East and West,
and the Whelen Modified Tour. In total, NASCAR operates hundreds of races a year. In its
national series, which are the races included in our main analysis, NASCAR enforces strict
rules on vehicle dimensions and mandates that all vehicles use the exact same gasoline, which
is provided by NASCAR and their fuel sponsor Sunoco.
In 2006, NASCAR announced that its three national racing series would switch to unleaded fuel.30 NASCAR set a tentative goal to switch at the beginning of 2008, but also
stated that their ultimate target was to make the switch in 2007 ahead of the Daytona 500
(Bernstein, 2006; Bay Area News Group, 2006). Prior to the official switch, NASCAR performed a four-week experiment with unleaded fuel: first in the Xfinity Series starting on July
29, 2006 at Gateway International Speedway, and then a two race test in the truck series in
August 2006 at the O’Reilly Raceway Park in Indianapolis and at the Nashville Superspeedway. Both of these series then permanently switched to unleaded fuel on September 23, 2006
for the remainder of the 2006 season (Fryer, 2006). After the first tests at Gateway were
successful, NASCAR announced a plan to switch in early 2007 (Fryer, 2006). NASCAR officially switched from leaded Sunoco Supreme to unleaded Sunoco 260 GTX across all three
national series on the weekend of February 25, 2007, two weeks after the Daytona 500.31
Sunoco Supreme is a 112 octane fuel while Sunoco GTX is 98 octane; the difference between
the two octane ratings can be fully explained by the removal of lead (Sunoco, 2018).
NASCAR operates several other regional racing series, such as the K&N Pro Series.
NASCAR still allows teams to use leaded fuel in these regional series. We do not include
these regional series in our main analysis because it is unclear whether leaded, unleaded, or
both types of fuel are used at individual races. For our main analysis we will focus on races
30

The EPA had been pushing NASCAR to make the switch since at least 1998 (Howard, 2005). NASCAR
originally partnered with Unocal to find a workable unleaded gasoline, however Unocal abandoned the
partnership in 2003 (Associated Press, 2006).
31
One other change that occurred during 2007 and 2008 was the adoption of the “Car of Tomorrow.” The
Car of Tomorrow was a new generation of cars aimed at improving safety in light of recent deaths during
races. This model was used in some races during the 2007 Monster Energy Cup season before being fully
phased in during the 2008 season. The Xfinity Series adopted the Car of Tomorrow for the 2011 season.
Results—not shown due to space constraints, but available upon request—from an analysis of pole speeds
(proxying for pure vehicle performance) and average race speeds and demonstrates that there have been
only had minor fluctuations since 1999. This indicates that the new cars and deleading are unlikely to have
affected vehicle performance in a way that confounds our results.

A2

from the national series, since we are certain about the leaded status of each race.
ARCA is a racing organization that was operated separately from NASCAR over our
sample period. ARCA runs several different series and has a similar national/regional hierarchical structure to NASCAR. ARCA races are either run on the same racetrack as NASCAR
races but several days earlier, or on smaller tracks not used by the national NASCAR series.
ARCA racers have also historically used older model NASCAR vehicles (Stock Car Racing,
2009).
In 2006, ARCA announced plans for their top racing series, currently called the ARCA
Menards Series, to switch to unleaded fuel the following year. Prior to the official switch,
ARCA performed an unleaded fuel test during the Food World 250 at Talladega Superspeedway on October 6, 2006. Teams had the option of using leaded or unleaded fuel for
the remainder of races in the 2006 season before permanently switching at beginning of the
2007 season (ARCA Racing, 2006).
In 2006, across the four national race series, leaded races accounted for 86% of all race
miles, while unleaded races accounted for the remaining 14%. For ease of exposition, throughout the paper we will refer to deleading as having occurred in 2007, since this is when the
change was made permanent. When we report estimated effects in terms of leaded or unleaded miles driven, as in our ambient lead outcomes, we correctly account for the unleaded
races in 2006. However, when we use an event study approach, as we do in our blood lead
and mortality specifications, we report the average effect of all races in each county-year.
Therefore the reported estimates from any event study estimate are slightly attenuated for
2006.

A.2

Correlated criteria pollutants since 1980

Figure A1 shows the trends in criteria pollutants and the Air Quality Index (AQI) in the
United States since 1980. Average concentrations in the initial year of reporting for each
pollutant are normalized to 1. AQI, and all criteria pollutants except for ozone, display
correlated downward trends between 1980 and 2018. The correlation coefficients for each
pair of non-ozone pollutants are all greater than 0.6.

A3

Figure A1: Criteria pollution concentrations and AQI since 1980.

Note: AQI is the Air Quality Index, which is a function of all reported pollutant concentrations. Each point
represents the annual mean relative to the mean from the first year reported for each pollutant/measure. Data
come from the EPA AirData pre-generated daily datasets, which begin in 1980 for all pollutants/measures
except for PM10 and PM2.5 . All monitor-day readings are used to calculate the mean.

A.3

Outcome distributions

Figure A2 plots the distributions of our outcome variables. The left panel plots the ambient
lead concentration distribution. It is highly right-skewed and approximately 10% of the
sample consists of zeroes. The middle panel plots the distribution of the percent of children
tested with elevated blood lead. Similar to the air data, the distribution is right-skewed
and about a third of the data are zero-valued. The right panel plots the distribution of the
all-cause elderly mortality rate. These data appear normally distributed although with a
longer right tail as the distribution is bounded below by zero.

A4

Figure A2: Distributions of ambient lead concentrations (left), percent of children tested
with elevated blood lead (middle), and the all-cause elderly mortality rate (right).

Note: Each subfigure plots the distributions of the untransformed outcome variables. The left panel plots
the mean lead concentration readings (µg/m3 ), the middle panel plots the percent of children tested with
elevated blood lead (%), and the right panel plots the all-cause elderly mortality rate (deaths per 100,000 in
the elderly population).

A.4

Summary statistics

Tables A1-A4 display the summary statistics for the variables used in each of our main
regressions.
Table A1: Summary statistics for the ambient lead dataset.

Pb concentration (µ g/m3 )
Leaded miles past 7 days within 50 miles (100,000s)
Unleaded miles past 7 days within 50 miles (100,000s)
Air temperature (◦ C)
Preciptable water (kg/m2 )
Surface pressure (kPa)
Relative humidity (%)
Wind speed (m/s)
Observations

Mean

S.D.

Min.

Max.

0.34
0.00
0.00
13.03
19.26
97.10
74.38
4.43

1.47
0.01
0.01
10.42
11.89
5.31
18.73
2.40

0.00
0.00
0.00
–37.54
–0.47
74.22
0.00
0.01

147.90
0.41
0.37
37.07
66.92
104.48
100.01
22.19

875034

Note: These data range over our entire lead pollution dataset, 1957 to 2018. Relative humidity can
be above 100% when the air is supersaturated. Ambient lead estimates are robust to forcing total
precipitable water to be non-negative.

A5

Table A2: Summary statistics for the ambient lead data used in regressions from Table 1.

Pb concentration (µ g/m3 )
Leaded miles past 7 days within 50 miles (100,000s)
Unleaded miles past 7 days within 50 miles (100,000s)
Air temperature (◦ C)
Preciptable water (kg/m2 )
Surface pressure (kPa)
Relative humidity (%)
Wind speed (m/s)
Observations

Mean

S.D.

Min.

Max.

0.14
0.00
0.00
13.24
19.73
97.65
74.54
4.27

0.76
0.01
0.02
10.24
12.07
4.45
17.67
2.33

0.00
0.00
0.00
–36.38
–0.25
74.36
1.25
0.03

57.47
0.41
0.37
37.07
66.92
104.48
100.01
19.79

312277

Note: These data range from 1996 to 2018. Relative humidity can be above 100% when the air is supersaturated. Ambient lead estimates are robust to forcing total preciptable water to be non-negative.

Table A3: Summary statistics for the blood lead dataset.

Mean
EBLL rate (%)
Race county
Border county
Unemployment rate (%)
Median income (1,000 USD)
Percent non-white (%)
TRI facility lead emissions (Metric tons)
Manufacturing payroll (1,000 USD)
Observations

0.92
0.01
0.08
0.07
43.48
0.14
17.69
208.51
22887

A6

S.D.

Min.

Max.

3.92
0.12
0.27
0.03
11.45
0.16
210.27
591.96

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
17.84
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00
1.00
1.00
0.29
119.53
0.89
11275.01
12935.51

Table A4: Summary statistics for the mortality dataset.
Mean
General cardiovascular (deaths per 100,000) 1845.19
Ischemic heart disease (deaths per 100,000) 871.85
Respiratory (deaths per 100,000)
588.21
All-cause (deaths per 100,000)
4873.42
Diabetes (deaths per 100,000)
149.75
Deaths of despair (deaths per 100,000)
47.83
Race county
0.01
Border county
0.07
Unemployment rate (%)
0.06
Median income (1,000 USD)
41.65
Percent non-white (%)
0.13
TRI facility lead emissions (Metric tons)
79.06
Manufacturing payroll (1,000 USD)
175.06
Observations

S.D.
586.15
423.16
235.42
915.49
119.03
54.06
0.11
0.25
0.03
11.62
0.16
2516.61
578.43

Min.

Max.

0.00 35424.34
0.00 35424.34
0.00
8856.08
0.00 35424.34
0.00
8291.19
0.00
3248.70
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.01
0.30
0.00
134.61
0.00
0.97
0.00 275971.86
0.00 19471.85

58063

Note: The maximum mortality rates for cardiovascular, IHD, and all-cause mortality are all
the same because they are all from the same observation of a small county with a single
IHD death. IHD is a subset of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.

A.5

Racetracks: locations, other events, statistics, and distance
to lead monitors

A.5.1

Racetrack counties and border counties

Figure A3 plots the county types for the EBLL and mortality analysis. The 75 counties in
blue are those that had at least one NASCAR or ARCA race since 1995; the 365 counties in
green are those that border race counties; the 2,700 counties in white are the control group.
If a race county did not have a race in a particular year, it might be a control or border
county for that year.
A.5.2

Other events at racetracks

Other events besides NASCAR and ARCA races occur at the racetracks in our sample.
Here we document the set of events that occurred in 2017 at the tracks used for the national

A7

Figure A3: Map displaying counties with at least one race (blue) or that border a race county
(green) since 1995.

Note: White counties are control counties, blue counties are those that had at least one race since 1995, and
green counties are those that have not had a race since 1995 but border a county that did.

NASCAR series. Data were obtained from cached versions of schedules on the racetrack
websites. In total we were able to obtain information on 20 racetracks, including major
ones like Auto Club Speedway, Daytona International Speedway, and Indianapolis Motor
Speedway. We have documented that in 2017, these tracks had a total of 200 events. 84 of
these events were individual NASCAR or ARCA races. 20 were non-automotive events like
concerts, festivals, or marathons. The remaining 96 were automotive events. About a fifth
of the 96 were days for a supercar (e.g. Ferrari, Lamborghini) driving school at Auto Club
Speedway. Other common events at racetracks include drag racing, NHRA events, sprint
car racing, IndyCar, and monster trucks.
A.5.3

Distribution of monitor-racetrack distances

Figure A4 displays the distributions of the distances of ambient lead monitor readings from
the nearest racetrack by the status of the observation in our preferred specification. The first
column shows the distributions for observations that had a leaded race in the last 7 days
within 50 miles; the second column is for unleaded races in the last 7 days within 50 miles;
and the third column is for observations at monitors that have never had a race within 50
miles. For each column, the top row shows a histogram of the data, the middle row shows
the cumulative density function, and the bottom row scales the cumulative density function
by the number of race miles per observation.

A8

The distributions across the first two columns show similar patterns. There are a moderate number of race miles driven within 3 miles of a monitor, however data in the 3-25
mile range is sparse. The modes of the distributions are at 30 miles and approximately
50% of observations occur 25-35 miles from a racetrack. The third column shows that the
distribution of observations for monitors that never had a race within 50 miles is relatively
smooth.
A.5.4

Racetrack statistics

Table A5 details statistics for each racetrack in our dataset for the ambient lead specifications,
including the lap length, mean distance to the nearest monitor reading, and the fraction
of treated observations accounted for by the racetrack. We limit the data to monitors
within 50 miles for computing the statistics to preserve direct comparison with our preferred
specification. Monitors tend to be located a substantial distance from racetracks. Averaging
over the fourth column shows that the mean distance from a racetrack to a monitor is 25
miles. 40% of racetracks have a mean distance to a monitor of over 30 miles. The minimum
distance column indicates that two thirds of racetracks do not have a monitor within 10
miles, and about 40% of racetracks do not have a monitor within 20 miles. The racetracks
that account for larger fractions of our leaded miles in our sample also tend to be located
further from racetracks as shown in the eighth and ninth columns. Only 1 of the 14 racetracks
that contributes more than 1% of the leaded miles (column 9) in the sample has an average
distance to a monitor of less than 20 miles. These 14 racetracks account for over 90% of our
observations. The final two columns show that about a quarter of racetracks are, on average
25-35 miles from a monitor, and that 40% of racetracks are on average 30-50 miles from a
monitor. The 25-35 mile range accounts for over half of the race miles driven in our sample.
These miles come from 13 distinct racetracks and 89 unique monitor-racetrack pairs out of
a total of 47 racetracks and 216 monitor-stadium pairs.

A9

Figure A4: Distribution of distance from monitor to the nearest racetrack a with race in the
past week by leaded and unleaded race status.

Note: Each column is differentiated by the status of the lead monitor reading in our preferred specification. The first column displays the distance distribution for daily lead monitor readings that occur within one week of a leaded race; the second
column is the distribution of lead monitor readings that occur within one week of an unleaded race; and the third column
displays the distribution of lead monitor readings whose monitors never had observations that occur within one week of a
nearby race. The top row shows a series of histograms that display the distance between each daily lead monitor reading and
the distance to the nearest race within the past week. The middle row shows the empirical cumulative density functions of
the race observations, weighting each race equally. The bottom row displays the empirical cumulative density functions of the
race data by distance, where we weigh each race by miles driven. 50% of our treated observations (column a) occur between
25 and 35 miles of a racetrack.

A10

Table A5: NASCAR/ARCA track locations, monitor distance, and % of treatment contribution for ambient lead specifications.

Track

Location

Alabama International Motor Speedway
Talladega, AL
Phoenix International Raceway
Avondale, AZ
Tucson Raceway Park
Tucson, AZ
California Speedway
Fontana, CA
Sonoma Raceway
Sonoma, CA
Colorado National Speedway
Erie, CO
Pikes Peak International Raceway
Fountain, CO
Dover International Speedway
Dover, DE
Daytona International Speedway
Daytona Beach, FL
Miami-Dade Homestead Motorsports Complex
Homestead, FL
Lanier National Speedway
Braselton, GA
Atlanta Motor Speedway
Hampton, GA
Chicago Motor Speedway
Cicero, IL
Gateway International Raceway
Madison, IL
Illinois State Fairgrounds
Springfield, IL
Anderson Speedway
Anderson, IN
Indianapolis Raceway Park
Clermont, IN
Indiana State Fairgrounds
Indianapolis, IN
Salem Speedway
Salem, IN
Indianapolis Motor Speedway
Speedway, IN
Winchester Speedway
Winchester, IN
Heartland Park Topeka
Topeka, KS
Michigan Speedway
Brooklyn, MI
Michigan International Speedway
Brooklyn, MI
Flat Rock Speedway
Flat Rock, MI
Berlin Raceway
Marne, MI
I-70 Speedway
Odessa, MO
Charlotte Motor Speedway
Concord, NC
Hickory Speedway
Hickory, NC
North Carolina Motor Speedway
Rockingham, NC
Flemington Speedway
Flemington, NJ
Toledo Speedway
Toledo, OH
Cloverleaf Speedway
Valley View, OH
Pocono Raceway
Long Pond, PA
Nazareth Speedway
Nazareth, PA
Darlington Raceway
Darlington, SC
Rambi Raceway
Myrtle Beach, SC
Bristol Motor Speedway
Bristol, TN
Memphis Motorsports Park
Memphis, TN
Nashville Superspeedway
Nashville, TN
Nashville Speedway
Nashville, TN
Texas Motor Speedway
Fort Worth, TX
Martinsville Speedway
Martinsville, VA
Richmond Fairgrounds Raceway
Richmond, VA
Evergreen Speedway
Monroe, WA
Milwaukee Mile
West Allis, WI
West Virginia Motor Speedway
Mineral Wells, WV

A.6
A.6.1

Lap Length (mi.)

Mean Monitor
Dist. (mi)

2.66
1.00
0.38
2.00
2.52
0.38
1.00
1.00
2.50
1.50
0.40
1.54
1.00
1.25
1.00
0.25
0.69
1.00
0.56
2.50
0.50
1.80
2.00
2.00
0.25
0.44
0.54
1.50
0.40
1.02
0.62
0.50
0.25
2.50
1.00
1.37
0.50
0.53
0.75
1.33
0.50
1.50
0.53
0.54
0.65
1.00
0.62

43.47
14.86
16.35
26.74
25.06
20.08
21.29
37.14
44.35
21.78
15.48
31.60
13.11
22.87
33.07
23.10
10.04
44.26
34.78
25.47
20.70
12.35
35.04
35.04
17.38
15.50
39.90
32.89
5.87
40.88
41.59
42.51
32.39
36.40
34.99
25.44
27.08
1.19
14.88
21.72
20.92
30.21
38.71
4.54
26.08
12.73
5.51

S.D.

Min.

Max.

% of treated obs

1.62
1.38
4.23
15.96
6.10
3.29
3.34
9.45
0.00

42.04
13.75
12.69
0.91
15.00
16.33
18.28
14.11
44.35
21.78
10.09
28.01
4.41
3.00
31.74
15.32
4.86
44.04
29.87
3.83
20.52
8.39
35.04
35.04
15.62
9.01
38.12
32.19
5.87
38.93
20.40
36.42
21.57
18.09
7.66
9.17
5.23
0.88
13.99
20.37
2.63
27.27
38.71
2.68
26.08
4.85
5.51

45.23
16.33
20.01
47.09
31.90
25.19
24.85
45.40
44.35
21.78
20.88
42.36
21.77
31.17
38.08
39.07
16.47
44.33
39.00
49.87
20.84
20.28
35.04
35.04
18.58
22.10
43.67
46.23
5.87
41.58
49.58
45.46
47.83
43.56
47.91
40.32
33.99
42.73
15.15
22.04
32.92
42.19
38.71
7.01
26.08
38.64
5.51

0.12
0.27
0.15
4.66
0.46
0.54
0.93
2.04
0.12
0.04
0.08
0.31
1.31
18.62
0.73
0.69
0.50
0.15
0.50
3.12
2.27
0.19
0.08
0.42
0.31
0.35
0.35
1.54
0.04
0.39
4.74
2.20
6.44
5.63
5.51
2.35
0.73
8.56
1.23
2.20
2.35
15.73
0.08
0.54
0.19
0.19
0.04

7.64
6.64
6.39
10.26
2.65
10.09
5.19
0.14
4.74
22.05
0.16
4.77
0.00
0.00
1.45
6.16
1.93
3.10
0.77
6.72
3.19
5.90
9.61
8.85
13.40
11.61
2.80
0.48
0.35
7.07
2.89
0.00
2.22
0.00
14.69

% of treated obs
accounting for
Mean dist
Mean dist
miles driven
between
between
at track
25 and 35 mi 30 and 50 mi
0.26
0.25
0.03
6.23
0.35
0.13
0.63
3.96
0.16
0.03
0.02
0.64
0.59
12.58
0.19
0.10
0.16
0.04
0.13
5.17
0.50
0.07
0.04
0.63
0.02
0.06
0.09
2.93
0.01
0.75
1.33
0.52
8.65
11.17
3.24
3.95
0.29
8.55
0.56
2.15
1.08
20.55
0.07
0.84
0.06
0.23
0.01

0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0

Lead concentrations
Specification and sample robustness

Table A6 shows estimates from a set of alternative specifications for equation (1). Column 1
replaces asinh(Pb) with just the untransformed mean reading; column 2 replaces asinh(Pb)
with ln(Pb + 1); column 3 clusters at the monitor level instead of county level; column 4
includes monitor-by-year-by-month fixed effects; column 5 controls for baseline ambient Pb
levels prior to the race; column 6 includes data back to 1957; column 7 only uses miles from
the national NASCAR series; column 8 includes regional NASCAR series; column 9 restricts
the data to be within 50 days of a race; column 10 replaces the miles treatment variables
with indicator variables for if there was a race in the past week to closer match the EBLL
A11

and mortality regressions; column 11 clusters at the state level; and column 12 uses Conley
standard errors where the distance cutoff is 150 miles from the monitor and the time cutoff
is 100 years. The estimates are robust across all specifications.

A12

Table A6: The effect of 100,000 race miles within 50 miles using alternative Pb functional forms, using race indicators instead
of miles, alternative treatments of standard errors, controlling for baseline Pb levels, or using alternative samples.
(1)
mean Pb

(2)
ln(Pb +1)

(3)
asinh(Pb)

(4)
asinh(Pb)

(5)
asinh(Pb)

(6)
asinh(Pb)

(7)
asinh(Pb)

(8)
asinh(Pb)

(9)
asinh(Pb)

(10)
asinh(Pb)

(11)
asinh(Pb)

(12)
asinh(Pb)

Leaded race miles in past week (100k)

0.25*
(0.13)

0.10***
(0.04)

0.13**
(0.06)

0.12***
(0.03)

0.13***
(0.05)

0.10**
(0.04)

0.13**
(0.06)

0.08*
(0.05)

0.11***
(0.03)

0.13*
(0.06)

0.13**
(0.06)

Unleaded race miles in past week (100k)

–0.02
(0.02)

–0.00
(0.01)

–0.00
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)

–0.00
(0.01)

–0.00
(0.01)

–0.01
(0.02)

0.00
(0.01)

–0.02
(0.02)

–0.00
(0.01)

–0.00
(0.02)

Mean lead two weeks before race

0.02***
(0.01)

A13

1(Leaded race in past week)

0.02***
(0.01)

1(Unleaded race in past week)

–0.00
(0.00)

Daily Weather Controls
Monitor-by-Year FE
Mon-by-Year-by-Month FE
Week-by-Year FE
Clustered Standard Errors
Years Included
Races Included
Restriction Around Race
Adjusted R2
Observations

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County
County
1996-2018
1996-2018
Main Sample Main Sample
None
None
0.29
0.47
312277
312277

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Monitor
1996-2018
Main Sample
None
0.45
312277

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County
1996-2018
Main Sample
None
0.44
311301

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
1996-2018
Main Sample
None
0.45
311207

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
1957-2018
Main Sample
None
0.64
872880

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
1996-2018
NASCAR Only
None
0.45
311056

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
1996-2018
Main Sample + Regional
None
0.45
312842

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
1996-2018
Main Sample
± 50 days
0.45
59968

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
1996-2018
Main Sample
None
0.45
312277

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State
Conley (150 miles)
1996-2018
1996-2018
Main Sample
Main Sample
None
None
0.45
.45
312277
312277

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses unless otherwise noted. Monitor-specific daily weather variables include air temperature, pressure, relative humidity, wind speed, and
daily precipitable water.

A13

Figure A5 shows how the size of the estimates in column 7 of Table 1 vary with the
chosen treatment distance cutoff. The thin black line corresponds to the cumulative density
function of monitor readings. Estimated effects of leaded miles under 10 and 20 mile cutoffs
are approximately zero which is consistent with the small number of monitors within 20
miles as shown in Figure A4 and Table A5. Table A5 showed that a substantial number
of leaded miles occur in the 25-35 mile range. This is when we are sufficiently powered to
estimate an effect and at the 30 mile cutoff we estimate an effect of 0.22 for leaded miles
and an effect of approximately zero for unleaded miles. The leaded miles effect attenuates
as the distance cutoff is expanded outward up to 100 miles.
Figure A5: Treatment effect by distance cutoff and the distribution of distance from monitor
to nearest racetrack by leaded or unleaded race status.

Note: This figure shows the effect of 100,000 leaded and unleaded race miles on ambient lead concentrations
across increasing distances between the stadium and nearby racetrack. The left panel (A) plots the estimated
effect of leaded race miles from a set of increasing distance cutoffs. The right panel (B) plots the estimated
effect of unleaded race miles. Each regression is similar to Equation 1, but with a different distance bin.
Each regression includes both leaded and unleaded miles in the past week within the given distance cutoff
and controls for week-by-year fixed effects, monitor-by-year fixed effects, and daily monitor-specific weather
controls. The dependent variable is asinh(Pb). Brackets denote 95% confidence intervals, calculated from
robust standard errors clustered at the county level. The estimates for 50 miles depicted in the figure
correspond to the results shown in column 7 of Table 1. The black line behind the coefficient estimates
depicts the cumulative density function of all leaded race miles (A) and unleaded race miles (B) that occur
within 100 miles of a stadium and occur in the week before a lead monitor reading. Over 50% of past week
race miles between 0 and 50 miles of a race track occur between 25 and 35 miles. There are 261 unique
monitor-racetrack pairs from 0 to 50 miles, 89 of these unique pairs occur between 25 and 35 miles.

A14

A.6.2

Comparison tests and confounding pollutants

Figures A6 and A7 display event study estimates when including treatment by a pair of
placebo events and a set of potentially confounding pollutants using the same specification
as the left panel of Figure 3. Figure A6 displays the results using the two placebo events:
baseball games and IndyCar races. The estimates come specifications corresponding to the
left panel Figure 3, but where we include identical treatment variables for IndyCar miles and
baseball attendance in the regression. This tests whether similar large events are associated
with changes in lead concentrations that may occur due to spurious lead trends, resuspension
of soil lead, or increased leaded air travel. The top row shows the effect of NASCAR miles
when now additionally controlling for IndyCar miles or baseball attendance. The event study
estimates are nearly identical to Figure 3. The bottom row shows the effects of IndyCar race
miles and baseball attendance on lead concentrations. Note that IndyCar did not use leaded
fuel over our sample period. Both sets of estimates are centered around zero with no clear
spike in lead concentrations following a race as was observed following leaded NASCAR and
ARCA races.
Figure A7 displays results from the second set of placebo tests. These tests examine
whether the switch to unleaded racing fuel affected concentrations of other automotive pollutants that could confound estimated effects on mortality (U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 1994).32 For our estimates to be confounded, leaded and unleaded races would need
to differentially affect levels of other pollutants. Similar to the left panel of Figure 3, we
would need to find evidence that the levels of other pollutants increase following leaded or
unleaded races, and that there is no change or a significantly smaller increase following the
other type of race. Moreover, we would also need to demonstrate parallel pre-trends in the
weeks preceding both leaded and unleaded races to provide the usual suggestive evidence
that we are estimating a causal effect of races rather than background trends. We do not
find convincing evidence that any of these pollutant levels were altered as a result of the
deleading of NASCAR and ARCA races.
The first row of Figure A7 shows no effect of races on ambient CO or VOCs before or
after deleading. CO levels at monitors within 4 weeks of a leaded or unleaded race tend
to be the same as CO levels at control monitors. VOC concentrations tend to be higher at
monitors nearby a race, but there is no clear effect of the race itself on VOC concentrations.
The second row does not show strong evidence that either leaded or unleaded races affect
ambient PM10 and PM2.5 , although unleaded races tend to occur when PM2.5 concentrations
are lower. There is an increase in PM2.5 two weeks after a leaded race, however this is likely
32

If gasoline is not perfectly combusted inside the engine, a vehicle may emit hydrocarbons (a VOC), NOx ,
PM, or CO. NOx and VOCs can react in the air to form O3 .

A15

Figure A6: The effect of other large events on ambient lead concentrations within 50 miles.
A.

B.

C.

D.

Note: The top left panel (A) shows the effect of 100,000 NASCAR/ARCA miles on ambient lead concentrations when controlling for IndyCar race miles. The top right panel (B) shows the effect of 100,000
NASCAR/ARCA miles on ambient lead concentrations when controlling for baseball attendance. The bottom left panel (C) shows the effect of 100,000 IndyCar race miles on ambient lead concentrations. The
bottom right (D) panel shows the effect of 10,000,000 baseball attendees on ambient lead concentrations.
For each panel, all coefficients come from the same regression. Each regression controls for week-by-year
fixed effects, monitor-by-year fixed effects, and daily monitor-specific weather controls. The dependent variable is asinh(Pb). We estimate effects separately before and after 2007 to approximately match the timing
of deleading for NASCAR and ARCA. Brackets represent 95% confidence intervals, calculated from robust
standard errors clustered at the county level. Negative values on the x-axis indicate monitor readings that
occurred in the weeks prior to a race, and positive values on the x-axis indicate monitor readings that
occurred in the weeks after a race. For all outcomes only race miles (or attendance) within 50 miles are
included.

A16

spurious. There is no increase in PM10 which contains PM2.5 as a subset, and the positive
estimated effect is delayed until two weeks after a race and does not show the same decay
pattern one would expect as in Figure 3.
The final row shows no effect of races on NO2 and O3 concentrations. NO2 concentrations
tend to be lower in the weeks following both leaded and unleaded races, so although it tends
to change after a race, there is no differential effect of leaded versus unleaded races that
would confound identification of the effects of lead on mortality outcomes. For ozone, we
cannot distinguish any of the leaded miles estimates from zero except for the estimates for
a race four and two weeks in the future. Similar to the PM2.5 specification, O3 levels appear
to be slightly lower in the weeks surrounding unleaded races, but there is no clear, unique
effect immediately following a race. Finding no evidence of increases in concentrations in
non-Pb pollutants is not entirely surprising. NASCAR and ARCA use high-quality fuel and
have extremely efficient engines, making it more likely for gasoline to combust into CO2
and water rather than leaving uncombusted byproducts like CO. Unlike the hydrocarbons
in gasoline, lead is not combusted into other compounds and thus either remains in a vehicle
or is emitted from its tailpipe.

A17

Figure A7: The effect of race miles within 50 miles on other pollutant concentrations.
A.

B.

C.

D.

E.

F.

Note: Each panel shows the effect of 100,000 leaded and unleaded race miles on ambient concentrations of a
non-lead pollutant (CO, VOCs, PM10 , PM2.5 , NO2 , and O3 ). For each panel, all coefficients come from the
same regression. Each regression controls for week-by-year fixed effects, monitor-by-year fixed effects, and
daily monitor-specific weather controls. The dependent variable is asinh(Pb). We estimate effects separately
before and after 2007 to approximately match the timing of deleading for NASCAR and ARCA. Brackets
represent 95% confidence intervals, calculated from robust standard errors clustered at the county level.
Negative values on the x-axis indicate monitor readings that occurred in the weeks prior to a race, and
positive values on the x-axis indicate monitor readings that occurred in the weeks after a race. For all
outcomes only race miles (or attendance) within 50 miles are included.

A18

Estimated effects in terms of grams of lead Table A7 translates effects in miles into
effects in grams of lead using the race mile fuel efficiency estimates from Section A.10. The
estimates indicate that a metric ton of lead emitted from racing approximately doubles lead
concentrations the following week.
Distributions of wind direction and the initial bearing between the track and
monitor Figure A8 explores wind direction in the ambient lead dataset. The hexagonal
heatmap shows the empirical joint distribution of the absolute value of the angle difference between the initial bearing (direction from track to monitor) and the prevailing wind
direction at the monitor, and of the absolute value of the angle difference between the initial bearing (direction from track to monitor) and the prevailing wind direction at the track.
The smoothed distributions are the marginal distributions. Observations to the left are those
where the wind at the track is blowing toward the monitor, i.e. the monitor is downwind of
the track, and observations to the bottom are those where the wind at the monitor is also
blowing downwind. Wind at the monitor matters because the cells in the wind reanalysis
dataset are relatively large. We define downwind to be if the prevailing wind direction is
within 22.5◦ of the initial bearing, a wedge of 45◦ in total. Lighter colors indicate more
observations in that hexagonal cell.
If the wind angle difference was uniformly distributed from 0 to 180◦ , we would expect
12.5% of observations to be downwind for each marginal distribution. This is not the case,
only 9.7% percent of observations have the wind at the track blowing downwind, while 8.2%
have wind at the monitor blowing downwind. In fact, most of our observations are upwind,
and the mode of both marginal distributions is such that the prevailing direction blows in
the opposite direction of the monitor. This is consistent with monitors tending to be located
in populated areas, and large facilities like racetracks being located downwind of these areas
to avoid noise and air pollution.
In total, our data contain fewer than 200 observations where the monitor is downwind
of the track, significantly hampering our ability to estimate a model exploring the effect of
wind direction.
A.6.3

Excluding observations by monitor-racetrack distance deciles

Figure A9 displays estimates using the same specification as column 7 of Table 1, but where
each decile of monitor-racetrack is excluded, cutting our sample by 10%. This test is to
determine which distances are driving most of the effect while preserving statistical power.
The estimates are insensitive to excluding deciles.

A19

A.6.4

Alternative sample periods

Figure A10 plots estimated effects of 100,000 leaded and unleaded miles on concentrations as
a function of the years in our dataset using the same specification as column 7 of Table 1. The
top graph shows estimates as we expand the dataset year by year back to 1957. Expanding
the panel back in time decreases the effect of leaded miles down to 0.1, however the effect is
still statistically distinguishable from that of unleaded miles.
The bottom graph restricts the dataset to the two years around deleading for the leftmost pair of estimates, 2006-2007, and then expands in both directions year by year until
we arrive at the 1996-2018 dataset used in the main ambient lead analysis in the right-most
pair of estimates. With panel lengths under 4 years, the estimates are very noisy and in fact
have the opposite of expected signs when there are only two years in the panel. As the panel
length grows, the effects become more precise, particularly for unleaded miles, and the signs
are correct.
A.6.5

Raw data example of our fixed effects strategy

Figure A11 plots an example of the raw data for the ambient lead concentrations. We
selected Bristol Motor Speedway since it has three nearby lead monitors in operation in
1998 which facilitates a clear graph. The solid markers show the amount of leaded race miles
in the past week, while the hollow markers show lead concentration readings at the nearby
monitors. The vertical dashed lines denote the dates of the two races at Bristol in 1998.
Prior to the races, lead concentrations fluctuate but are generally low. In the week after the
races, concentrations spike at all three monitors to their highest or second-highest levels in
the two-month window before falling back to normal levels.
Table A7: The effect of estimated grams of lead emitted from racing in the past week on
ambient lead concentrations.

Lead emitted from racing in past week, metric tons
Daily weather controls
Monitor-by-year fixed-effects
Week-by-year fixed-effects
Standard errors clustered by
Observations

(1)
asinh(Pb)

(2)
mean Pb

0.89***
(0.31)

1.69**
(0.83)

Yes
Yes
Yes
County
312277

Yes
Yes
Yes
County
312277

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered
at the county level in parentheses. The procedure for estimating grams of
lead emitted can be found in Section A.10. Monitor-specific daily weather
variables include air temperature, pressure, relative humidity, wind speed,
and daily precipitable water.

A20

Figure A8: Joint distribution of the difference between wind direction at the monitor and
initial bearing from the racetrack to the monitor, and the difference between wind direction
at the racetrack and initial bearing from the racetrack to the monitor.

Note: Differences between initial bearing (direction from track to monitor) and wind direction at the monitor
(y axis) and wind direction at the racetrack (x axis). Smoothed marginal distributions are shown in gray,
and the joint distribution is plotted as a heatmap. Lighter colors indicate more observations.

A21

Figure A9: The effect of race miles within 50 miles on ambient lead excluding deciles of
distance between monitor and racetrack.

Note: This figure plots estimates corresponding to column 7 of Table 1 when excluding deciles of observations by monitor-racetrack distance within 50 miles. Each regression controls for week-by-year fixed effects,
monitor-by-year fixed effects, and daily monitor-specific weather controls. The dependent variable is asinh(Pb). Only race miles within 50 miles in the past week are included.

A22

Figure A10: The effect of race miles within 50 miles on ambient lead by weeks since most
recent race (left) and by distance from track (right).
A.

B.

Note: This figure plots estimates corresponding to column 7 of Table 1 when varying the panel length.
The top panel shows estimates when expanding the panel back to 1957, year by year. The bottom panel
shows estimates when expanding the panel from just 2006-2007 to our full sample from 1996-2018. Each
regression controls for week-by-year fixed effects, monitor-by-year fixed effects, and daily monitor-specific
weather controls. The dependent variable is asinh(Pb). Only race miles within 50 miles in the past week
are included.

A23

Figure A11: Raw data from three monitors around Bristol Motor Speedway for ambient lead
concentration regressions.

Note: The red markers are our variable of interest in equation (1), the number of leaded race miles in the
past week within 50 miles. The hollow markers are the inverse hyperbolic sine lead readings at 3 nearby
monitors.

A24

A.7
A.7.1

Blood lead
Difference-in-differences

Table A8 reports results from difference-in-differences regressions estimating the relative
effect of having leaded races in a county or in a bordering county. Column 1 reports estimates
only including county and year fixed effects, column 2 adds in the set of controls, column
3 adds in state-specific linear time trends, column 4 replaces the linear trends with stateby-year effects. The next four columns repeat the first four but use leaded miles instead of
dummy variables. Column 9 is the same as column 4 but where the the indicator variable is
now a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10 and 11 cluster standard errors
at the state level and using the Conley approach with a 150 mile distance cutoff from the
county centroid. The estimated effects are robust across all specifications, however estimates
for the effect in per-mile terms are noisy.
A.7.2

Untransformed outcome variable

Figure A12 plots estimates corresponding to the same regression as the one used for Figure 5
but where the outcome variable is the untransformed percent of children tested with elevated
blood lead. Estimates for race counties are similar to our main results with the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation.
A.7.3

Targeted testing in high risk areas

The data we use for the blood lead analysis comes from monitoring efforts that are targeted
at high risk areas in ways we do not observe. This may confound our analysis in two ways.
The first is if the the number of children tested in a county is changing differentially across
county types. For example, if a county added more children to the testing pool, it may be
because of a newly discovered lead hot spot, or additional funding which allows for testing in
more marginal areas. Both of these effects would bias estimates but in opposite directions.
The second way is if the targeting scheme within counties were changed differentially over
time even though the number of children tested is constant. For example, if race counties
spuriously changed their blood lead sampling population to even higher risk areas once
NASCAR and ARCA deleaded, then our results would be biased toward zero.
To test whether these phenomena are occurring, we first estimate an unweighted version
of equation (2) with the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of children tested as the
dependent variable.33 The estimates for the event study are shown in Figure A13. There is
33

It is unweighted since the weights we previously used were the number of children tested.

A25

no clear differential trend across county types in the number of children tested except for a
slightly increasing, but small, pre-trend in border counties. This suggests that differential
changes in the number of children tested is not a concern for identification.
Differential trends in targeting schemes within counties is more difficult to directly test.
Figure 5 provides supporting evidence in a similar way to pre-trends tests. Given that
the number of children tested does not exhibit differential trends, if targeting is changing
differentially in the post-period (which comprises most of our panel), we would expect EBLL
rates to show differential trends across county types in the post-period. This is not the case.
The trends are flat, providing supporting evidence that differential changes in targeting is
not occurring.
Table A8: Effect of races and race miles on EBLL rates.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1(Leaded Race in County)

0.22**
(0.10)

0.21**
(0.10)

0.21**
(0.09)

0.16***
(0.06)

0.16**
(0.06)

0.16***
(0.05)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

0.09*
(0.05)

0.08*
(0.05)

0.07*
(0.04)

0.05
(0.04)

0.05
(0.05)

0.05
(0.04)

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

22831

22831

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

0.50
(0.38)

0.49
(0.38)

0.53*
(0.32)

0.23
(0.16)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

0.15
(0.13)

0.12
(0.12)

0.14
(0.10)

0.04
(0.07)

(9)

Leaded Races in County

0.04*
(0.02)

Leaded Races in Border County

0.01*
(0.01)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

22832

22832

22832

22831

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
County County
22832

22832

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County
22832

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County County
22831

22831

(10)

(11)

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county,
on asinh(EBLL). Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on asinh(EBLL). Column 9: Same as
column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11: same as column 4 but
with state clusters or Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Counties are weighted
by the square root of the number of children tested.

A26

A.8
A.8.1

Mortality
Causes of death

In our mortality analysis we aggregate causes of death into six categories: cardiovascular,
ischemic heart disease, respiratory, diabetes, deaths of despair, and all-cause. We categorize
each death using the primary cause of death reported on the death certificate and the CDC
113 cause of death recode. Each CDC 113 cause recode is an aggregate of ICD-10 causes of
death. For each cause of death we use in the paper, we list below the category, the set of
CDC 113 recodes composing the category, the associated ICD-10 codes for the category, and
one example cause of death included in the category. For deaths of despair, we use a set of
ICD-10 codes reported in Case and Deaton (2015) and thus do not report a 113 recode.
• Cardiovascular: CDC 113: 53–75; ICD-10: I00–I78; Hypertensive heart and renal
disease
• Ischemic heart disease: CDC 113: 58–63; ICD-10: I20–I25; Acute myocardial infarction
• Respiratory: CDC 113: 76–89; ICD-10: J10-J18, J20–J22,J40–J47, J60–J66, J68, J69,
J00–J06, J30–J39, J67, J70–J98; Acute bronchitis
• Diabetes: CDC 113: 46 ; ICD-10: E10-E14; Diabetes mellitus
• Deaths of despair (drugs, suicide, liver), as defined in Case and Deaton (2015):
– ICD-10 X40–X45; Accidental poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], not elsewhere classified
– ICD10 Y10–Y15; Poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics
and antirheumatics, undetermined intent
– ICD10 Y45, Y47, Y49; Adverse effects in therapeutic use: analgesics, antipyretics
and anti-inflammatory drugs
– ICD10 X60–84, Y87.0; Intentional self-harm
– ICD10 K70, K73, K74; Alcoholic liver disease
• All-cause: All codes and causes.
A.8.2

Raw data

Figure A14 plots the data for cardiovascular, IHD, respiratory, and deaths of despair mortality. Cardiovascular mortality rates show a similar pattern to all-cause mortality rates.
A27

IHD and respiratory mortality rates were generally higher in race counties relative to control counties prior to deleading, but then were about the same or lower afterwards. Deaths
of despair mortality rates are decreasing everywhere prior to about 2009 before starting to
increase. Prior to 2007, deaths of despair mortality rates were higher in race counties than
border counties, and higher in border counties than control counties. Beginning in 2007
mortality rates across the three types of counties are similar.
A.8.3

Difference-in-differences

Tables A10-A13 display estimates for our alternative specifications for the mortality results.
The specifications for the mortality tables are the same as the blood lead specifications in
Table A8. Results are consistent with estimates in the main text and robust to different
choices of fixed effects, treatment variables, and clustering.
A.8.4

Mortality analysis using publicly available data

Figure A15 reports results from the same analysis as reported in Figure 7, but using publicly
available data instead of restricted access data. The publicly available data are provided by
CDC Wonder and report the all-cause age-standardized mortality rate for those age 65 and
above in each county-year. These data differ from the restricted access data in that they
suppress death rates from any county-year that contain fewer than ten deaths. Over 98% of
all county-year observations are included in the public data, accounting for over 99.5% of all
deaths. Results are similar when using this alternative dataset.
A.8.5

Elderly mortality placebo

Figure A16 displays event study estimates for our placebo cause of death: diabetes. We find
little evidence of placebo effects. There is no trend over the full time-frame, nor any clear
change in 2007.
A.8.6

Split-sample instrumental variables

Here we perform a split-sample IV similar to our mortality regressions to identify the effect
of changes in ambient lead on mortality. Recognizing the fact that lead concentrations spike
only temporarily after a race, we do the following for the first stage. At the county-year level,
we estimate the effect of leaded races on ambient lead averaged across all weeks immediately
following a race. Our first stage regression is
Pb in week after racesscy =βl 1(leaded race)scy + γXscy + Θc + Ωsy + εscy .
A28

(3)

1(leaded race)scy is an indicator variable equal to 1 if county c in state s had a leaded race
in year y. The remaining variables are identical to the mortality regressions. For counties
with lead monitors and racetracks, Pb in week after racesscy is the average across the lead
concentrations in the 7 days immediately following races in county c in year y. As stated
above, we take this approach because Figure 3 indicates that lead concentrations spike in the
first week after a race before declining back to baseline levels. Races also occur at the same
time each year (e.g. the Daytona 500 is always in mid-February), so there are generally no
changes in the season of when these lead readings occur. For counties with lead monitors but
without racetracks (i.e. our control counties), Pbscy is the average lead concentration in these
counties in weeks of the year that immediately followed races other counties. In other words,
we average across all lead readings in control county c when 1(leaded race in past week)sdy
for any d 6= c. This lets us compare concentrations in race counties versus control counties
on the same days of the year.
Our second stage regression is then
\
mortality ratescy =β Pb after
racescy + γXscy + Θc + Ωsy + εscy .

(4)

where P b af\
ter racescy is the first stage prediction. We calculate non-parametric confidence
intervals and p-values using a bootstrap procedure. We generate 500 randomly drawn bootstrap samples and estimate the model on each sample. The 95% confidence interval is the
2.5th and 97.5th percentiles from the distribution of bootstrap sample estimates. Because of
this, the confidence interval may not be symmetric about the point estimate. The p-value is
the percent of times a bootstrap sample estimate is larger in absolute value than the absolute
value of our point estimate.
Results are reported in Panel A of Table A15. The instrument is well powered and
operates in the expected direction with a Kleibergen-Paap F-stat of 14.76 and a first stage
coefficient of .04 (se = .01, p < .01). After using the inverse hyperbolic sine elasticity formula,
the estimates show a 1 percent increase in the ambient lead level increases elderly mortality
by roughly 9%, with about 50% of these deaths coming from Ischemic Heart Disease (IHD).
We obtain a nearly identical result when we use the untransformed lead level as our
endogenous predictor instead of the asinh(Pb). This is displayed in column 7 of table A15.
We find no statistically significant effect on deaths of despair or diabetes outcomes.
In addition to the split sample IV strategy, we also consider a more traditional instrumental variable strategy. Where we only use the subset of observations that have data on
pollution, race miles, and mortality. This is the same subset of observations that is used
to construct the first stage for results in panel A. Despite this analysis only having 3% of

A29

the observations as the split-sample analysis, we find consistent, albeit less precise, point
estimates.
A.8.7

Infant mortality event studies

Figures A17 and A18 display event studies for infant mortality. We find no effect for our
outcomes of interest or the placebos in either race counties or border counties.

A30

Figure A12: The effect of leaded races on the percent of children with elevated blood lead
levels in race and border counties.

Note: The outcome variable is the untransformed percent of children tested with elevated blood lead. The
top panel reports coefficients (blue squares) for children living in race counties. The bottom panel reports
coefficients (green diamonds) for children living in border counties. Each coefficient represents the effect of
being in a particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes state-by-year
fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, % non-white,
tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients come from the
same regression. The regression is weighted by the square root of the number of children tested. The shaded
gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust standard errors clustered at the county
level. The dashed line is the average effect from our preferred difference-in-differences regression, where the
race county treated group consists of those counties that had at least one leaded race prior to 2007, and the
border county treated group consists of those counties that did not have a leaded race but bordered a county
with a leaded race prior to 2007. This regression defines the post-period as 2007 and after.

A31

Figure A13: The association between the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of children
tested for elevated blood lead and county type.

Note: The top panel reports coefficients (blue squares) for children living in race counties. The bottom
panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for children living in border counties. Each coefficient represents
the effect of being in a particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes
state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, %
non-white, tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients come
from the same regression. The shaded gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust
standard errors clustered at the county level.

A32

Figure A14: Mean elderly mortality rates by cause of death, year, and county type.

A33

A.

B.

C.

D.

Note: Each panel presents the mean age-standardized elderly death rate by county type weighted by the square root of elderly population for each
cause of death. The elderly population of the entire U.S. in the year 2000 was used as the reference population for standardization. Panel A shows
cardiovascular death rate, panel B the death rate from ischemic heart disease (IHD), panel C shows the respiratory mortality death rate, and panel
D shows the deaths of despair death rate. Exact ICD-10 codes for each of these causes of death are reported in Section A.8.1. County type refers
to if there was a NASCAR or ARCA race in that county (blue squares) or in a border county (green diamond) in that year. All other counties are
considered control counties (red circle). For this figure and in our regression estimates we use a balanced panel of counties.

A33

Table A9: Effect of races and race miles on all-cause elderly mortality rates.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(10)

(11)

1(Leaded Race in County)

122.4***
(30.5)

103.8***
(27.6)

98.8***
(28.1)

91.2***
(28.9)

91.2***
(27.3)

91.2***
(28.1)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

69.3***
(17.1)

56.4***
(16.1)

42.1**
(17.0)

37.8**
(18.0)

37.8*
(21.0)

37.8**
(18.2)

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

279.9***
(100.5)

224.4**
(96.7)

184.7*
(103.2)

161.1
(103.3)

176.8***
(42.4)

137.9***
(40.0)

70.2
(42.8)

54.2
(44.5)

(9)

Leaded Races in County

21.4**
(9.1)

Leaded Races in Border County

6.5*
(3.9)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

58063

56202

56202

56184

58063

56202

56202

56184

56184

56184

56184

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly all-cause
mortality rate. Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly all-cause mortality rate. Column 9: Same as
column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11: same as column 4 but with state clusters or
Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Weights are given by the square root of the elderly population.

Table A10: Effect of races and race miles on elderly cardiovascular mortality rates.
(1)

(2)

1(Leaded Race in County)

30.7**
(14.8)

25.6*
(14.1)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

22.3**
(10.5)

18.2*
(10.4)

(3)

(4)

(10)

(11)

41.6***
(15.0)

36.7**
(15.4)

36.7**
(14.5)

36.7**
(15.1)

12.5
(10.5)

12.5
(11.0)

12.5
(10.4)

14.1
(9.9)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

73.4
(47.7)

63.2
(44.5)

93.1**
(45.5)

76.7*
(46.1)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

62.1**
(24.2)

48.4**
(24.2)

38.4*
(23.0)

28.8
(24.2)

(9)

Leaded Races in County

10.3**
(4.3)

Leaded Races in Border County

2.5
(2.2)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

58063

56202

56202

56184

58063

56202

56202

56184

56184

56184

56184

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly cardiovascular
mortality rate. Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly cardiovascular mortality rate. Column 9: Same
as column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11: same as column 4 but with state clusters
or Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Weights are given by the square root of the elderly population.

A34

Table A11: Effect of races and race miles on ischemic heart disease elderly mortality rates.
(1)

(2)

1(Leaded Race in County)

48.5**
(23.3)

41.9*
(23.5)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

33.5***
(10.6)

28.7***
(10.2)

(3)

(4)

55.0**
(21.3)

53.6**
(21.7)

19.6**
(8.9)

19.8**
(9.2)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

114.1*
(66.7)

99.3
(66.0)

134.8**
(59.0)

129.8**
(60.1)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

94.3***
(25.1)

82.2***
(24.0)

70.0***
(19.5)

67.9***
(20.5)

Leaded Races in County

15.0***
(5.8)

Leaded Races in Border County

6.5***
(2.0)

Observations

(11)
53.6**
(20.8)

19.8*
(11.1)

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors

(10)
53.6***
(18.9)

19.8**
(8.8)

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

58063

56202

56202

56184

58063

56202

56202

56184

56184

56184

56184

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly ischemic
heart disease mortality rate. Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly ischemic heart disease mortality
rate. Column 9: Same as column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11: same as column 4
but with state clusters or Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Weights are given by the square root of
the elderly population.

Table A12: Effect of races and race miles on respiratory elderly mortality rates.

1(Leaded Race in County)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(10)

(11)

34.0***
(10.2)

27.9***
(9.2)

22.3***
(6.9)

20.3***
(7.0)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

20.3***
(6.4)

20.3***
(6.9)

13.1***
(4.9)

9.1**
(4.6)

6.1
(4.6)

4.7
(4.9)

4.7
(7.2)

4.7
(5.1)

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

90.0***
(31.9)

72.9**
(29.8)

50.5**
(25.5)

43.6*
(24.2)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

27.4**
(12.2)

18.0
(11.4)

1.4
(11.2)

–2.0
(11.8)

(9)

Leaded Races in County

5.7***
(2.1)

Leaded Races in Border County

0.5
(1.1)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

58063

56202

56202

56184

58063

56202

56202

56184

56184

56184

56184

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly respiratory
mortality rates. Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly respiratory mortality rate. Column 9: Same as
column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11: same as column 4 but with state clusters or
Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Weights are given by the square root of the elderly population.

A35

Table A13: Effect of races and race miles on deaths of despair elderly mortality rates.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(10)

(11)

1(Leaded Race in County)

4.1***
(1.2)

4.1***
(1.3)

4.6***
(1.2)

4.4***
(1.3)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

4.4***
(1.5)

4.4***
(1.2)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

1.6**
(0.7)

1.6**
(0.7)

1.6**
(0.7)

1.6**
(0.7)

1.6**
(0.7)

1.6**
(0.7)

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

7.6**
(3.3)

6.7*
(3.5)

7.7**
(3.5)

6.8*
(3.5)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

3.2*
(1.7)

3.4**
(1.6)

3.3**
(1.6)

2.9*
(1.6)

(9)

Leaded Races in County

0.9**
(0.4)

Leaded Races in Border County

0.4**
(0.2)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

58063

56202

56202

56184

58063

56202

56202

56184

56184

56184

56184

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly deaths
of despair mortality rates Case and Deaton (2015). Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly deaths of
despair mortality rate. Column 9: Same as column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11:
same as column 4 but with state clusters or Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Weights are given by
the square root of the elderly population.

Table A14: Effect of races and race miles on diabetes elderly mortality rates.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(10)

(11)

1(Leaded Race in County)

–6.7
(4.1)

–4.0
(4.1)

–3.2
(3.2)

–2.7
(3.3)

–2.7
(3.4)

–2.7
(3.2)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

–1.3
(2.2)

–0.3
(2.2)

–0.9
(2.0)

–0.9
(2.1)

–0.9
(2.2)

–0.9
(2.1)

Leaded Miles in County (100k)

Leaded Miles in Border County (100k)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

–21.3**
(10.1)

–14.7
(10.4)

–12.3*
(7.4)

–10.9
(7.9)

0.2
(5.0)

3.5
(4.9)

0.4
(4.7)

–0.1
(4.9)

(9)

Leaded Races in County

–0.9
(0.9)

Leaded Races in Border County

0.0
(0.5)

County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Clustered Standard Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
County

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
County

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
State

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Conley (150 miles)

58063

56202

56202

56184

58063

56202

56202

56184

56184

56184

56184

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Columns 1-4: Estimated effects of having a NASCAR or ARCA race in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly diabetes
mortality rates. Columns 5-8: Estimated effects of 100,000 leaded race miles in county, or in a bordering county, on the elderly diabetes mortality rate. Column 9: Same as
column 4 but where the indicator for having a race is replaced with a continuous measure of the number of races. Columns 10-11: same as column 4 but with state clusters or
Conley standard errors. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses for columns 1-9. Weights are given by the square root of the elderly population.

A36

Figure A15: The effect of leaded races on all-cause elderly mortality rates in race and border
counties using publicly available mortality data.

Note: These data use publicly available data obtained from CDC Wonder. These data differ from the
restricted access data in that they suppress death rates from any county-year that contain fewer than ten
deaths. The top panel reports coefficients (blue squares) for race counties, and the bottom panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for border counties. Each coefficient represents the effect on the age-standardized,
all-cause elderly morality rate from being in a particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The
regression includes state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate,
median income, % non-white, tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. All
coefficients come from the same regression. The elderly population of the entire U.S. in the year 2000 was
used as the reference population for age standardization. The regression is weighted by the square root of
the elderly population. The shaded gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust
standard errors clustered at the county level. The dashed line is the average effect of deleading from our
preferred difference-in-differences regression, where the race county treated group consists of those counties
that had at least one leaded race prior to 2007, and the border county treated group consists of those counties
that did not have a leaded race but bordered a county with a leaded race prior to 2007. This regression
defines the post-period as 2007 and after.

A37

Figure A16: The effect of leaded races on placebo elderly mortality rates in race and border
counties.

Note: The figure shows estimate for elderly diabetes mortality. The top panel reports coefficients (blue
squares) for race counties, and the bottom panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for border counties.
Each coefficient represents the effect on the age-standardized, elderly morality rate for that cause of death
from being in a particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes state-byyear fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, % non-white,
tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients come from the same
regression. The elderly population of the entire U.S. in the year 2000 was used as the reference population
for age standardization. Each regression is weighted by the square root of the elderly population. The
shaded gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust standard errors clustered at the
county level. The dashed line is the average effect of deleading from our preferred difference-in-differences
regression where, the race county treated group consists of those counties that had at least one leaded race
prior to 2007, and the border county treated group consists of those counties that did not have a leaded race
but bordered a county with a leaded race prior to 2007. This regression defines the post-period as 2007 and
after.

A38

Figure A17: The effect of leaded races on infant mortality rates in race and border counties.
A. All-cause

B. Cardiovascular

D. Respiratory

C. IHD

E. Deaths of despair

Note: Subfigure A shows estimate for infant all-cause mortality, Subfigure B shows estimates for infant cardiovascular mortality,
Subfigure C shows estimates for infant ischemic heart disease (IHD) mortality, Subfigure D shows estimates for infant respiratory
mortality, and Subfigure E shows estimates for infant deaths of despair mortality. The top panel of each subfigure reports
coefficients (blue squares) for race counties, and the bottom panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for border counties.
Each coefficient represents the effect on the age-standardized, infant morality rate for that cause of death from being in a
particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed
effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, % non-white, tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and
total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients in each subfigure come from the same regression. The infant population of the
entire U.S. in the year 2000 was used as the reference population for age standardization. Each regression is weighted by the
square root of the infant population. The shaded gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust standard
errors clustered at the county level. The dashed line is the average effect of deleading from our preferred difference-in-differences
regression, where the race county treated group consists of those counties that had at least one leaded race prior to 2007, and
the border county treated group consists of those counties that did not have a leaded race but bordered a county with a leaded
race prior to 2007. This regression defines the post-period as 2007 and after.

A39

Figure A18: The effect of leaded races on placebo infant mortality rates in race and border
counties.

Note: The figure shows estimate for infant diabetes mortality. The top panel reports coefficients (blue
squares) for race counties, and the bottom panel reports coefficients (green diamonds) for border counties.
Each coefficient represents the effect on the age-standardized, infant morality rate for that cause of death
from being in a particular county type relative to 2007, which is omitted. The regression includes state-byyear fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, % non-white,
tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. All coefficients come from the same
regression. The infant population of the entire U.S. in the year 2000 was used as the reference population for
age standardization. Each regression is weighted by the square root of the infant population. The shaded
gray areas denote the 95% confidence interval calculated from robust standard errors clustered at the county
level. The dashed line is the average effect of deleading from our preferred difference-in-differences regression,
where the race county treated group consists of those counties that had at least one leaded race prior to
2007, and the border county treated group consists of those counties that did not have a leaded race but
bordered a county with a leaded race prior to 2007. This regression defines the post-period as 2007 and
after.

A40

Table A15: Split-sample instrumental variables estimates of the effect of ambient lead concentrations in the week after a race on mortality rates.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Diabetes

All cause

All cause

Cardiovascular

Respiratory

IHD

Deaths of
despair

3601*
[1886 to 10386]

1278*
[401 to 4063]

604*
[250 to 1839]

1736*
[ 753 to 5013]

69
[ 16 to 201]

56183

56183

56183

56183

56183

56183

56183

1246
[-778 to 3269]

629
[-495 to 1753]

100
[-402 to 601]

1554**
[114 to 2994]

43
[-50 to 136]

-217
[-490 to 56]

1177
[-753 to 3107]

Observations

1731

1731

1731

1731

1731

1731

1731

County FE
State-by-year FE
Controls
Potentially
endogenous
measure of
lead level

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

asinh(Pb)

asinh(Pb)

asinh(Pb)

asinh(Pb)

asinh(Pb)

asinh(Pb)

mean(Pb)

14.78

14.78

14.78

14.78

14.78

14.78

13.99

A. 2SLS Split Sample
\
Lead
level

Observations

7
3402*
[-222 to 226] [1759 to 10334]

B. 2SLS
\
Lead
level

F-Stat

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 95% confidence intervals reported in brackets. Both p-values
and 95% confidence intervals are bootstrapped and based upon a non-parametric randomization inference
procedure. 95% confidence intervals may not be symmetric. Panel A reports results from a split-sample
strategy. The observations in first stage contain data on average race miles per race and average lead
concentration in the week following a race. The observations in the second stage contain data on average
race miles per race and mortality. We do this because there are not lead monitors in every county-year.
Panel B shows results from a traditional IV strategy where we restrict our data to counties that have
information on lead concentrations, race miles, and mortality.

A41

A.9
A.9.1

Other robustness checks, sensitivity checks, and analyses
Soil lead cross-section robustness check

To provide supporting evidence that leaded races emit substantial quantities of lead, we
estimate the conditional correlation between soil lead concentrations and distance from a
NASCAR/ARCA track. We obtain data on county urban-rural status from the USDA and
data on soil lead from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). USGS sampled over 5,000 sites
across the U.S. over 2007-2010. The samples were taken so that there was approximately
one for every 1,600 square kilometers. We estimate a model of the following form:
asinh(soil Pb)sy = βdistance to racetracks + γXsy + Ωsy + εsy .

(5)

asinh(soil Pb)sy is the inverse hyperbolic sine of soil lead concentrations at site s, sampled
in year y; distance to racetracks is the distance from site s to the nearest NASCAR/ARCA
racetrack. Xsy is same set of controls in the EBLL results. Ωsy is a state-by-year of sample
effect. εsy is the error term which is robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the county
level.
The left panel of Figure A19 plots the raw data. There is a strong negative correlation
between soil lead concentrations and distance from a racetrack. The right panel of Figure A19
plots the residuals from estimating equation (5) without the distance to racetrack variable.
After removing variation from potential confounders, we still find a negative relationship
between soil lead concentrations and distance from a racetrack.
Table A16 shows the estimates from equation (5) as we add fixed effects and split the
estimates into whether the samples were taken in urban or rural counties. We find a strong
negative correlation between distance to the nearest racetrack and soil concentrations across
all specifications. Inclusion of both state-by-year-of-sample fixed effects and controls attenuate the size of the negative correlation. We also find a slightly stronger negative correlation
in urban areas.

A42

Figure A19: Inverse hyperbolic sine of soil lead concentrations as a function of distance to
the nearest racetrack.

Note: The left panel shows the raw data correlation between the inverse hyperbolic sine of soil lead concentrations (mg/kg) and distance from the measurement site to the nearest NASCAR/ARCA track. The right
panel is the same but uses residuals from a regression of asinh(soil Pb) on the set of controls and fixed effects
in equation (5). Data are averaged within 5 mile bins.

Table A16: Correlation between asinh(soil Pb) and distance to the nearest NASCAR/ARCA
racetrack.
(1)

Distance to Nearest Racetrack (1,000 miles)

State-by-Year of Sample FE
Controls
Observations

–1.26**
(0.48)

(2)

–0.94***
(0.17)

(3)

–0.73***
(0.17)

(4)
Urban

(5)
Rural

–1.03**
(0.42)

–0.51**
(0.21)

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

4839

4834

4682

1545

1751

Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses.
Control variables are unemployment rate, % non-white, median income, lead emissions reported in Toxic Release Inventory, and total manufacturing payroll. Urban and rural indicates that the specifications are limited
to urban or rural counties only. County urban or rural status is taken from the 2013 Rural-Urban Continuum
Codes produced by the United States Department of Agriculture with a USDA continuum code of 1, 2, or 3,
indicating an urban county and USDA continuum code of 7, 8, or 9, indicating a rural county.

A.9.2

Balance table

Table A17 displays results from a series of regressions with different dependent variables,
where each is a socio-economic measure that is not included as a control variable in our
other analyses. Each column reports results from a separate regression. For each regression,

A43

the independent variables of interest are dummy variables that indicate whether or not there
was a leaded race in a given county or border county in each year.
Each regression is analogous to our preferred difference-in-differences specifications for
elevated blood lead levels and for elderly mortality; the results from these are reported in
column 4 of Tables A9 to A13 (for mortality) and in column 4 of Table A8 (for blood
lead). The key difference between our preferred specifications and results presented here
is that in this robustness check we swap our dependent variable of interest for a socioeconomic variable. Each regression includes state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed effects,
and controls for the unemployment rate, median income, % non-white, tons of lead emitted
from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. Standard errors are clustered at the
county level.
This procedure follows Pei et al. (2019) and serves as a balance test. This balance test
helps to verify the identification assumption that the variation in our independent variables
of interest is unrelated to other omitted variables after conditioning our preferred set of controls and fixed effects. We find no clear, statistically significant or economically meaningful
relationship between any of our independent variables of interest and these socio-economic
variables. The null findings here mitigate concerns that the estimated relationships in our
specifications of interest between exposure to leaded races and either blood lead levels or mortality are driven by omitted variables or differential trends that are not otherwise captured
by our preferred covariates and fixed effects.

A44

Table A17: Balance table examining conditional relationship between county-race status and
socioeconomic variables not included in regression of interest.
(1)
Adjusted
gross income
per return

(2)
(3)
Manufacturing
employment
per 1000
% in poverty

(4)

(5)

% children

% elderly

1(Leaded Race in County)

505.055
(410.941)

–0.630
(1.913)

0.000
(0.002)

0.002***
(0.001)

0.003*
(0.002)

1(Leaded Race in Border County)

142.126
(290.145)

0.480
(1.218)

0.000
(0.001)

0.002***
(0.000)

–0.001
(0.001)

49761.29

45.07

.14

.06

.14

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

56170

56173

56173

56149

56160

Mean of dependent variable
County FE
Year FE
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
State-by-Year FE
Controls
Observations

Note: Regressions in this table correspond to specifications in column 4 of the mortality regressions in Tables A9 to A13 and to the specification column 4 of the blood lead level regressions in Table A8. However,
here each dependent variable is a socio-economic variable that has not been included in other analyses.
Each dependent variable is the at the county-year level. The independent variables of interest are whether
or not there was a leaded race in a given county or border county in a given year. Each regression includes state-by-year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and controls for the unemployment rate, median
income, % non-white, tons of lead emitted from TRI facilities, and total manufacturing payroll. Robust
standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses and each regression is weighted by the square
root of total population. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

A.9.3

Collinearity of leaded and unleaded miles in annual regressions

Here we show the high degree of collinearity between leaded and unleaded miles in our
samples with annual variation. After conditioning on observational unit fixed effects, e.g.
county fixed effects, there is effectively no variation in the sum of leaded and unleaded
miles. Since their sum is approximately constant, it is difficult to separately identify them
or identify the effect of race miles in an event study framework. We show this in Figure A20
by plotting the residualized unleaded miles against residualized leaded miles after taking out
the observational unit fixed effects.
The left panel of Figure A20 shows the low degree of collinearity between the two types of
miles in our ambient lead concentrations sample, which has daily variation. When regressing
unleaded miles on leaded miles, we only obtain a correlation of -0.4. This allows us to
A45

separately identify the effect of leaded miles from unleaded miles. Collinearity is not an
issue for the ambient lead setting because the data are in terms of days: the sum of the
types of miles can take on the value of the actual miles driven over a racing weekend, a
fraction of the actual miles driven, or zero if the monitor reading was taken more than a
week after any race within the treatment radius.
The right panel of Figure A20 shows the near-perfect collinearity between the two types
of miles in our county-year BLL and mortality samples. Regressing unleaded miles on leaded
miles yields a correlation of -0.9. If there is an increase in unleaded miles in a given county
by 1, it is offset by a decrease in leaded miles by 0.9. There is very little within-observational
unit variation in the sum of leaded and unleaded miles. This hinders our ability to do event
studies like Figure 5 for BLLs or mortality. Since there is not much inter-annual variation in
total miles, it is effectively equivalent to a dummy variable. For the difference-in-differences
specifications in Section A.7 we use leaded miles instead of indicator variables for leaded
races and find similar results.
Figure A20: Collinearity between leaded and unleaded miles.
B.

A.

Note: Correlation between leaded and unleaded miles after conditioning on monitor effects in the ambient
lead sample (left panel), or conditioning on county effects in the BLL and mortality samples (right panel).

A.9.4

Environmental justice

One concern about the effect of lead emissions from racing is that it may have negative
environmental justice implications. Here we analyze associations between total county level
exposure to leaded race miles and the average of five demographic variables over the last 5
years with leaded races. The five variables are the percent of the population that are children,
non-white, male, or elderly, and the county’s median income. To estimate the association,
we run a cross-sectional county level regression with the the average of the variable on the
A46

left-hand side, and total leaded miles on the right-hand side. We estimate the associations
separately for urban and non-urban counties, where urban counties have USDA continuum
codes of 1, 2 or 3, while non-urban counties have continuum codes of 4, 5, or 6. There are
no leaded races in our sample with higher continuum codes.
Table A18 reports coefficient estimates on leaded miles. Here we find that in urban counties, areas with more leaded miles driven tend to have more children, more non-whites, more
women, fewer elderly, and higher incomes. Non-urban areas generally show the same pattern
except for children. Pooling the urban and non-urban samples together yields results almost
identical to the urban sample. The associations suggest that races may be disproportionately harming certain subgroups of the overall population, based on demographic, but not
necessarily socioeconomic variables.
Table A18: Associations between average county socioeconomic and demographic characteristics and total leaded race miles within county from 2002-2006.
(1)
% Children

(2)
% Non-White

Urban
(3)
% Male

(4)
% Elderly

Total Leaded Miles 2002-2006

0.002**
(0.001)

0.029*
(0.015)

–0.002
(0.002)

–0.006*
(0.004)

Observations

1157

1228

1158

1158

Note:

(5)
Median Income
1261.361
(1155.302)
1159

* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Regressions have no controls or fixed effects.

A47

Non-Urban
(8)
(9)
(10)
% Male % Elderly Median Income

(6)
% Children

(7)
% Non-White

–0.002
(0.002)

0.023
(0.035)

–0.002
(0.004)

–0.007
(0.006)

895

902

895

895

2145.133
(1423.185)
895

A.9.5

Survey on beliefs about NASCAR fuel

To determine whether the general public had knowledge about NASCAR fuels that may
have caused behavior changes following the fuel switch, we conducted a survey on Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk. We surveyed 100 respondents and paid each $0.10 for completing the
survey. Respondents were restricted to those who live in the United States. We asked the
respondents for their county of residence, state of residence, how far away they believe they
live from the nearest NASCAR track, and two multiple choice questions:
1. What type of fuel did NASCAR use in 2002?
(a) Don’t know
(b) 100% Ethanol
(c) Leaded gasoline
(d) Unleaded gasoline
2. What type of fuel did NASCAR use in 2010?
(a) Don’t know
(b) 100% Ethanol
(c) Leaded gasoline
(d) Unleaded gasoline
Figure A21 shows results for the responses to the multiple choice questions. About half
the respondents said they didn’t know the fuel used either before or after the fuel switch.
Conditional on answering with a specific fuel type, the 2002 responses are evenly spread
across unleaded gasoline, leaded gasoline, and 100% ethanol. Respondents tended to believe
that NASCAR used pure ethanol in 2010 conditional on answering with a specific fuel type.
Regressing a binary variable for a correct fuel type response on believed distance from
the track,34 we do not find any correlation between distance to a track and knowing which
fuel type NASCAR used in either year.

34
We drop responses from the non-contiguous U.S. or where they believe they were more than 1000 miles
from a NASCAR track, which is effectively impossible.

A48

Figure A21: Histograms of responses to our survey asking what respondents believed was
the type of fuel used in NASCAR in 2002 (left) and 2010 (right).

A.10

City lead emissions counterfactuals

In this section we use our quasi-experimental estimates to both predict out-of-sample historical lead concentrations and estimate the counterfactual ambient lead concentration if
lead were still added to gasoline. Our estimates predict out-of-sample historical levels well,
which provides credibility to our quasi-experimental estimates. Moreover, the counterfactual
estimates give some insight into what ambient lead levels would have been in the absence
of EPA abatement efforts and the Clean Air Act, which is an essential component for any
attempt to value the benefits provided by these regulatory efforts.
Our out-of-sample historical prediction is performed in three steps. First we estimate the
average grams of lead emitted from daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT) for U.S. cities from
1971 to 1995. Second, we convert our ambient lead estimates in Section 4.1 from changes
in concentration per race mile to changes in concentration per gram of lead per gallon. This
involves making assumptions about the fuel efficiency of the racing vehicles. Third, we
combine these estimates to form our historical prediction. We perform our counterfactual
prediction by a similar procedure, except where we assume that the lead content of gasoline
remained at 1971 levels.
A.10.1

Estimating historical lead emissions from daily VMT

To estimate grams of lead emitted from daily VMT, we collect data from several sources that
account for increases in VMT, changing fuel economy, and the decreasing use of lead additives
across time. First, we obtain estimates of daily VMT for both highway and non-highway
roads for 101 cities from 1982 to 2014 from the Texas A&M Transportation Institute’s Urban
Mobility Scorecard. These estimates are based upon the Federal Highway Administration’s

A49

Highway Performance Monitoring System Data. We estimate city VMT prior to 1982 by
assuming each city’s VMT growth followed the U.S. national trend, which is provided the
U.S. Department of Energy’s Alternative Fuels Data Center. National average annual fuel
economy data are provided by the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Finally, the
share of unleaded gasoline and the lead content in leaded gasoline by year come from Newell
and Rogers (2003). We combine these measures as follows:
Daily grams TEL from routine VMTcy = Daily VMT estimatecy ×

(6)

Mean U.S. MPGy ×
% of all gasoline leadedy ×
Mean grams TEL per leaded gallony
A.10.2



Converting race miles to grams of lead used per race

Next we use our ambient lead estimates to translate grams of TEL emitted to changes in
ambient lead concentrations. In Tables 1 and A6, we provide multiple estimates of the relationship between miles driven in a leaded race and the impact on ambient lead concentration
in the following week. Our race data report the number of miles driven during each race, but
do not report the number of gallons consumed at each race. One strategy to estimate fuel
consumption would be to multiply the average fuel economy of a racecar by the total miles
driven. In-race fuel economy has been cited to be between four and five miles per gallon
(Belson, 2011). However, even if we knew the exact in-race fuel economy of each car in every
race, using this measure exclusively would still cause us to under-count total fuel consumption because we would be neglecting additional fuel consumed during idling, practice, and
qualifying sessions. The number of miles driven in addition to the in-race miles is unknown
because practice and qualifying laps are not usually reported and will differ by race and
series. We consider two estimates of the importance of these miles relative to in-race miles.
The first estimate uses data for a race that reported both in-race miles and practice miles,
the 2019 Ticket Guardian 500. This race had 10,766 race miles and 3,053 practice miles.35
The total number of qualifying laps were not tracked since the qualifying procedure allows
drivers to drive as many laps as they wish across a qualifying period that totals up to 25
minutes in length.36 Under the assumptions that the average driver travels 5 laps during a
35
https://www.nascar.com/results/race_center/2019/monster-energy-nascar-cup-series/tic
ketguardian-500/stn/practice1/
36
Qualifying for the 2019 Ticket Guardian 500 occurred in three rounds. Drivers are ranked by their
fastest single lap performed during each round. In the first round, 36 drivers drove for up to 10 minutes
each. In the second round, 24 drivers drove for up to ten minutes each. In the third round, 12 drivers drove
for up to five minutes each.

A50

ten-minute period, 330 miles were driven as a part of qualifying. Thus the 10,766 in-race
miles represent only 76% of the total miles driven as a part of the entire event. Accounting
for these additional non-race miles would mean adjusting in-race fuel economy to be between
3 and 3.8.
This simple deflator does not account for gasoline combustion due to idling or testing
that may also occur as a part of the race. To address this last issue, we provide another
fuel economy estimate that comes from reports that the top series in NASCAR used 175,000
gallons of fuel in 2008 (Fryer, 2008). In the previous season, the top series ran 566,130 in-race
miles; combining these two estimates suggests that there are 3.24 in-race miles traveled per
gallon used for all race activities. This estimate is within the bounds of the first one, so we
will use 3.24 as our measure of total gallons used per race mile.
To obtain the total grams of lead emitted per race, we first multiply the number of inrace miles traveled by 3.24 to calculate the number of gallons of fuel used for all race-related
activities.37 We then multiply by our year-specific estimate of the grams of TEL added to
each each gallon to get the grams of lead emitted per race. Next., we estimate the same
specifications displayed in Tables 1 and A6, but with the estimated metric tons of lead
emitted during each race as our treatment variable rather than the number of race miles
traveled. This gives us the relationship between an additional metric ton of lead emitted at
a race and ambient lead concentrations. The resulting coefficients are displayed in Table A7.
A.10.3

Comparison of historic lead emitted from daily VMT to automotive
racing sample

Figure A22 compares how both historical ambient airborne lead concentrations and historical
lead emissions from daily motor vehicle traffic compare to the analogous measures used in
our automotive racing analysis. Panels A and B compare the distributions of estimated
quantities of lead emissions caused by NASCAR and ARCA races to average daily traffic
in 101 major U.S. cities across different decades. Below the densities, the blue bar shows
the range of emissions that share common support with our automotive racing analysis.
Panel A shows the density of average lead emissions from a day’s worth of traffic in the
1970s and 1980s, while panel B shows the distribution of estimated lead emissions from
daily traffic from 1990 to 1995 and from NASCAR/ARCA races from 1996 to 2018. A single
race generally emits more lead than all daily traffic in a major city in the 1990s and is on
the lower end of daily emissions from major cities in the 1970s and 1980s. Panels C and
37

We have data on the grams of TEL added to each gallon of fuel used in NASCAR from 1951 to 2006
(Wusz, 1994). From 2003 to 2006, NASCAR used Sunoco Supreme fuel, which contains 5.2 grams of TEL
per gallon. This was confirmed by e-mail with Sunoco Race Fuels.

A51

D present the distribution of mean ambient lead concentrations for these same 101 cities
across time. Mean daily lead pollution levels for each city and year are calculated using EPA
lead monitoring data; see Section 3. Panel C shows that lead concentrations in the 1970s
were generally higher than in the 1980s, reflecting the effect of the EPA’s policies. Panel
D zooms in on the support of the distribution of lead concentrations during the period of
our automotive racing analysis (1996-2018) and shows again that lead concentrations have
continued to decrease relative to ambient concentrations from the early 1990s.
A.10.4

Out-of-sample historical prediction

Figure A23 presents results that directly compare a non-parametric estimate of the historic
relationship between lead emitted from daily VMT and mean ambient lead levels to an
estimate of the relationship that is based upon our quasi-experimental automotive racing
analysis. Panel A presents a binscatter showing the non-parametric relationship between
estimated lead emitted from daily vehicle traffic and average daily ambient lead concentrations in 101 U.S. cities. The binscatter is created by dividing the x-axis into ten equally
sized bins, computing the mean of the x and y variable for each bin, and then showing a
scatterplot of the mean pairs for each bin. Our x-axis is the average daily metric tons of lead
emitted due to vehicle travel in 101 U.S. cities from 1971 to 1995. The y-axis is the mean
average daily ambient lead concentration for 101 U.S. cities in each year from 1971 to 1995.
The blue and red bars at the bottom of the panel denote the range of both lead emissions
and mean ambient lead that overlap with the data we use in our automotive racing analysis. Panel B zooms in on the support of Panel A that overlaps with the range of each axis
used in our automotive racing analysis. Thus only the first four deciles of the binscatter are
shown. Panel B also shows predicted ambient lead concentrations using our estimates from
Table A7. The prediction based on asinh(Pb) and its associated 95% confidence interval are
displayed in red (on the right), and the prediction using unadjusted (i.e., linear) Pb as the
dependent variable is reported in blue (on the left). We form the prediction by multiplying
each coefficient by an amount of lead released across an evenly spaced grid from 0 to .11
metric tons. For the asinh(Pb), we perform the correct transformation of the estimate and
calculate the standard errors and resulting 95% confidence interval using the delta method.
Both our estimates do an excellent job of predicting the out-of-sample historic mean lead
concentrations. However these predictions are so far limited to be within the support of our
automotive racing analysis. In Figure A24 we extend this comparison back to 1971, which
is far off of the support of both our dependent and independent variables from our preferred
analysis. We report the mean of the prediction for the 101 cities in each year. The prediction
based on the asinh regression is depicted with the solid orange line, while predictions using
A52

the linear regression are depicted with the dashed orange line. The actual average historical
ambient lead concentration for these 101 U.S. cities is depicted by the solid black line. Our
quasi-experimental estimates predict historical ambient lead levels quite well, suggesting that
our estimates are capable of predicting out-of-sample ambient lead levels with a good degree
of accuracy.
A.10.5

Counterfactual ambient lead levels

We next estimate counterfactuals that attempt to predict ambient lead concentrations if
leaded gasoline use was still widespread. The counterfactuals assume that TEL additives
remained constant at the 1970 level of 2.1 g/gallon, that all cars used leaded gasoline, and
that there were no counterfactual changes in VMT or fuel economy. Figure A24 reports the
results from two counterfactuals. The solid gray line represents the counterfactual estimate
using our asinh regression, and the dashed gray line is the counterfactual from our linear
specification. Our most conservative counterfactual estimates suggest that if tetraethyl lead
was still added to gasoline, ambient lead levels would be 6.34 µg/m3 —4 times larger than
the 1971 mean lead concentration of 1.45 µg/m3 and 500 times higher than the actual 2014
concentration.

A53

Figure A22: Comparison of lead emissions and lead pollution for data used in our quasiexperimental specification with estimates for 101 U.S. cities by decade.

Note: Data plotted in yellow represent the data used in our main analysis outlined in Section 4.1. The
post-race density in panel B only displays the subset of data in the week following a race. The analogous
density in panel D includes all observations, both before and after a race. The range of support for these
data are indicated by the blue and red bars at the bottom of each panel. The data sources and procedure
used to estimate city VMT across time are outlined in Section A.10. Mean daily lead pollution levels for
each city and year are calculated using EPA lead monitoring data; see Section 3. Overall this panel shows
that the amount of lead released after a typical race is greater than the average amount of lead released from
all of a city’s daily VMT in the early 1990s. A large NASCAR race (about 3 hours long) emits about as
much lead as was emitted from all vehicle miles traveled on an average day in Buffalo, NY in 1987.

A54

Figure A23: Predicted out-of-sample lead levels using our ambient lead estimates.

A55
Note: Panel A presents a binscatter showing the non-parametric relationship between estimated lead emitted from daily vehicle
traffic and average daily ambient lead concentrations in 101 U.S. cities. The binscatter is created by dividing the x-axis into ten
equally sized bins, computing the mean of the x and y variable for each bin, and then showing a scatterplot of the mean pairs for
each bin. Our x-axis is the average daily metric tons of lead emitted due to vehicle travel in 101 U.S. cities from 1971 to 1995. The
y-axis is the mean average daily ambient lead concentration for 101 U.S. cities in each year from 1971 to 1995. The data sources and
procedure used to estimate daily city lead emissions from VMT across time are outlined in Section A.10. Mean daily lead pollution
levels for each city and year are calculated using EPA lead monitoring data; see Section 3. The blue and red bars at the bottom
of the panel denote the range of both lead emissions and mean ambient lead that overlap with the data we use in our automotive
racing analysis. Panel B zooms in on the support of Panel A that overlaps with the range of each axis used in our automotive racing
analysis. Thus only the first four deciles of the binscatter are shown. Panel B also shows predicted ambient lead concentrations
using our estimates from Table A7. The prediction based on asinh(Pb) and associated 95% confidence interval are displayed in red
(on the right), and the prediction using unadjusted (i.e., linear) Pb as the dependent variable is reported in blue (on the left). We
form the prediction by multiplying each coefficient by an amount of lead released across an evenly spaced grid from 0 to .11 metric
tons. For the asinh(Pb), we perform the correct transformation of the estimate and calculate the standard errors and resulting 95%
confidence interval using the delta method.

A55

Figure A24: Predicted counterfactual lead levels using our ambient lead estimates.

Note: The average historical ambient lead concentration in U.S. cities is depicted by the solid black line.
We construct a city-year estimates of daily grams of lead emitted due to VMT from 1971 to 1995. We
multiply this estimate by the coefficient estimate of our ambient lead regression in Table A7, which assumes
automotive racing uses 3.24 gallons of fuel per mile raced. This provides us with predictions of historical
ambient lead concentrations due to daily leaded traffic in each city and year. Prediction based upon the
asinh regression are depicted with the solid orange line, while predictions using the linear regression are
depicted with the dashed orange line. Counterfactuals assume that TEL additives in gasoline remained
constant at the 1970 level of 2.1 g/gallon and that there were no changes in VMT or fuel economy. The solid
gray line represents the counterfactual estimate using our asinh regression, and the dashed gray line is the
counterfactual from our linear specification. Average daily VMT relative to 1970 is plotted by the dashed
black line.

A56

A.11

Calculations used in the main text

A.11.1

Deleading is equivalent to a 10 µg/m3 reduction in PM2.5 concentrations

We compare our finding to a result from Deryugina et al. (2019) that reports that a 1 µg/m3
increase in daily PM2.5 exposure results in an additional 0.69 deaths per million elderly in the
subsequent 3 days.
We first use our difference-in-differences estimate that living in a race county results in a 1.7%
increase in the all-cause mortality rate. We use this to compute the number of additional deaths
per million elderly in each county-year caused by in-county races. We compute this by multiplying
the change in the mortality rate by the county-year elderly mortality rate and elderly population
per 100,000 for each county-year
\
\ per million =% change in
county-year deaths
mortality rate
× deaths per 100,000 elderly
10 × 100,000
×
1 million
where hats indicate estimated values and the other terms are data or scalars. To put this in PM2.5
terms, we first translate our annual estimate into a 3-day number of deaths, and use the Deryugina
et al. (2019) estimate of the mortality effect of PM2.5 to get an estimated equivalent effect of PM2.5
\PM2.5 change =county-year deaths
\ per million
equivalent county
1 year
×
365 days
× 3 days
×

1\
µg/m3
.
0.69 deaths per million elderly over 3 days

We then take the average of this value over race counties in 2006 resulting in an average of an 8.7
µg/m3 reduction in PM2.5 concentrations.

A.11.2

NASCAR and ARCA used an estimated 2 million grams of TEL

In 2005, our data give us that NASCAR and ARCA drove approximately 1.2 million race miles.
Using our estimate of 3.2 race miles per gallon from Section A.10, this gives us that there were
370 thousand gallons used during that season. Lead content of the fuel prior to deleading was 5.2
grams of TEL per gallon, yielding approximately 2 million grams.
1, 146, 547 miles ×

1 gallon
5.2 grams
×
= 1.9 million grams
3.2 miles
1 gallon

A57

