Everything You Always Wanted to Know About AI*
(*But Were Afraid to Ask)

Nowcasting Digital Skills with Wikipedia
(Working Paper - Version 16/9/19)

Fabian Stephany123
1

1

Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society, Französische Straße 9, 10117 Berlin, Germany
2 Wittgenstein Centre, Welthandelsplatz 2, 1020 Vienna, Austria
3 AtomLeap GmbH, Oranienstraße 183, 10999 Berlin, Germany
OrcidID: 0000-0002-0713-6010, mail@fabianstephany.com

Introduction

Digital technologies have a pervasive effect on our society. They augment or transform
various previously analogue processes of value creation, capture, and exchange [1,2].
Hence, on the labour market, the skillful development and application of relevant digital
technologies are in strong demand. However, early research findings indicate that the
labour demand of certain tech industries is not met. The talent pool does not grow at the
pace of industry demand and precise skill requirements related to growing technologies,
such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), remain opaque [3].
This work proposes a network perspective in order to empirically identify the relevant ICT skills related to AI, how their composition changes over time, and how they
could be predicted with online data. With the example of the US tech sector, two data
sources are employed: The US’ most popular online tech-job platform dice.com allows
to relate ICT skills, in a network structure, from an industry perspective. Two skills are
connected in an industry demand network, if they are jointly required by the same job
advertisement. In addition, data from the online encyclopedia Wikipedia allows to create a network on the online knowledge side of ICT skills4 . Here, skills are related in a
network, if their respective articles are connected by a reference hyperlink (Figure 2 in
the Appendix illustrates.
Similarly, past skill networks can be constructed: Information about previous job
advertisements is stored in older versions of dice.com on the web-archive5 since 2004
and Wikipedia’s reference history allows to reconstruct article networks at any point
in time during the history of the encyclopedia. Over time, composition developments
of the skill networks can be compared between and within the two network environments. The underlying hypothesis is that developments in the online knowledge network (Wikipedia) proceed changes in the industry demand network (dice.com). While
it is one of the main challenges of this work to assess the validity of this hypothesis,
previous studies have shown that the edit activities of the Wikipedia crowd enable early
4 It is reasonable to assumed that Wikipedia article editors possess relevant topical knowledge
on the digital skill the edited article is about.
5 http://web.archive.org/web/ /http://www.dice.com/jobs
*

predictions on movie sales [4], electoral popularity [5], stock prices [6], knowledge
hubs [7] or even global spreading of diseases [8].

2

Results

For the first exploratory part of the research, two ego-centred networks are regarded: All
job postings advertised with the tag ”Artificial Intelligence”6 on dice.com on September 14th, 2019, are considered. Skill tags are connected as nodes in a network, if they
appear in the same advertisement. Similarly, all articles linked with the Wikipedia article ”Artificial Intelligence”7 and the articles they refer to are connected in a network8 .
For both networks, a common set of most relevant overlapping skill tags are identified9 .
With the use of the Wikipedia edit history and the web-archive, the date, when these
tags entered the respective ego-centred AI-networks on both Wikipedia and dice.com
are registered10 . On average, skill nodes joined the Wikipedia AI-network 15 weeks
before they appeared in relation to AI on dice.com, as illustrated in Figure 1.

Fig. 1: In both ego-networks of AI (Wikipedia and dice.com), new nodes join over time.
However, nodes entered significantly earlier on Wikipedia. For a set of selected skills,
on average, their articles have been linked to ”Artificial Intelligence” about 15 weeks
before they had been announced on job advertisements about AI.

With this first indication of the predictive potential of Wikipedia data on digital
skills, future extensions of this work focus on an identification of AI-cliques by clustering algorithms and under the consideration of all relevant skill tags that are currently
6 https://www.dice.com/jobs?q=Artificial+intelligence&l=
7 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence
8 Nodes

can, at most, have a distance of one iteration from the original AI article.
NeT, Big data, Caffe, Computer vision, Data mining, Data science, Deep learning, Keras, Machine learning, Natural language processing, Neural networks, Predictive analytics, Python, PyTorch, TensorFlow, Theano, R, RNN
10 For five of the key skills it was possible to find the entry into the respective networks.
9 ApacheMX

in use on dice.com and their respective Wikipedia articles. Moreover, future extension
take centrality metrics, e.g., Eigenvector centrality, into account for comparing the state
and development of skill nodes in both network environments. Lastly, the comparison
of network similarities, e.g., Jaccard similarity, allows future investigations to evaluate
the development of the AI-cliques within and across the two network environments. In
addition, following investigations should take regional digital knowledge geographies
[9] into account, too.
Overall, the insights of this project can support businesses in developing a datadriven strategy for the acquisition and the development of adequate skills needed to
implement and leverage new technologies at best. Furthermore, the empirical relationship of digital skill sets will help to establish a common taxonomy to be used by policy
makers, education providers, and recruiters, so that job market mismatches can be reduced. Lastly, a potential predictive power of the online knowledge network could help
to develop farsighted programmes for the training of digital skills in the future.
Summary. With the use of online data from the tech job platform dice.com and the
online encyclopedia Wikipedia, two networks of digital skills are created around the
topic of Artificial Intelligence. Initial research indicates that new skill tags first join the
Wikipedia network, before they appear in AI-related job announcements on dice.com.
The findings of this work could be used in order to create a data-driven strategy for the
acquisition and the development of adequate skills needed to implement and leverage
new technologies at best.

References
1. Yoo, Youngjin, Ola Henfridsson, and Kalle Lyytinen. ”Research commentarythe new organizing logic of digital innovation: an agenda for information systems research.” Information
systems research 21, no. 4 (2010): 724-735.
2. Nambisan, Satish, Kalle Lyytinen, Ann Majchrzak, and Michael Song. ”Digital Innovation
Management: Reinventing innovation management research in a digital world.” Mis Quarterly 41, no. 1 (2017).
3. De Mauro, Andrea, Marco Greco, Michele Grimaldi, and Paavo Ritala. ”Human resources
for Big Data professions: A systematic classification of job roles and required skill sets.”
Information Processing Management 54, no. 5 (2018): 807-817.
4. Mestyn, Mrton, Taha Yasseri, and Jnos Kertsz. ”Early prediction of movie box office success
based on Wikipedia activity big data.” PloS one 8, no. 8 (2013): e71226.
5. Yasseri, Taha, and Jonathan Bright. ”Can electoral popularity be predicted using socially
generated big data?.” it-Information Technology 56, no. 5 (2014): 246-253.
6. Moat, Helen Susannah, Chester Curme, Adam Avakian, Dror Y. Kenett, H. Eugene Stanley, and Tobias Preis. ”Quantifying Wikipedia usage patterns before stock market moves.”
Scientific reports 3 (2013): 1801.
7. Stephany, Fabian, and Fabian Braesemann. ”An exploration of wikipedia data as a measure
of regional knowledge distribution.” In International Conference on Social Informatics, pp.
31-40. Springer, Cham, 2017.
8. Generous, Nicholas, Geoffrey Fairchild, Alina Deshpande, Sara Y. Del Valle, and Reid Priedhorsky. ”Global disease monitoring and forecasting with Wikipedia.” PLoS computational
biology 10, no. 11 (2014): e1003892.
9. Stephany, Fabian, Fabian Braesemann, and Mark Graham. ”Coding Together-Coding Alone:
The Role of Trust in Collaborative Programming.” (2019).

3

Appendix

Fig. 2: Two skill networks are constructed with the example of Wikipedia articles (lhs)
and dice.com job advertisements (rhs). The stronger the edges between the nodes, the
more references articles share with each other / the more jobs have jointly advertised
the same skills. The example of the nodes, most strongly connected to the software TensorFlow, serves as an illustration. TensorFlow belongs to the field of machine learning
skills and was written in the programming languages Python and C++. Considering
the subgraph of these four tags, exclusively, one can see that C++ is more strongly
connected in the online knowledge network than in the industry demand network. This
could potentially be explained by the fact that C++ is less relevant for the application
of TensorFlow, than it was for the development of the software.

