"x"
"1" "BOOK REVIEW:"
"2" "NATURE IN THE HISTORY OF ECONOMIC THOUGHT: HOW NATURAL RESOU RCES BECAME AN ECONOMIC CONCEPT  BY NATHANIEL   WOLLOCH"
"3" "REVIEWED BY"
"4" "MARCO P. V. FRANCO *"
"5" "*  Center for Development and Regional Planning, Federal Un iversity of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,  Brazil.   Contact:  mpvianna@gmail.com"
"6" "This “preprint” is the accepted typescript of a book review that is forthcoming in revised form, after minor editorial changes, in the  Journal of the History of Economic Thought  (ISSN: 1053-8372), volume 41 (2019), March issue.  Copyright to the journal’s articles is held by the History of Economics Society (HES), whose exclusive licensee and publisher for the journal is Cambridge University Press ( https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-the-history-of-economic-thought ).  This preprint may be used only for private research and study and is not to be distributed further."
"7" "The preprint may be cited as follows:"
"8" "Franco ,  Marco P.V . Review of “Nature in the History of Economic Thought: How Natural Resources Became an Economic Concept” by  Nathaniel Wolloch . Journal of the History of Economic Thought  41 (1) (forthcoming). Preprint at  SocArXiv , osf.io/preprints/socarxiv"
"9" "Those interested in reading  Nathaniel Wolloch’s  Nature in the History of Economic Thought  can trust its subtitle as an accurate description of  its  focus and intent: to understand  “how natural resources became an economic concept”. As Wolloch hastens to make clear in the preface,  it  deals with a  more  specific issue  than  what we may think at first :  it covers  t he  intellectual  history of  the  economic consideration of the natural physical environment as a resource for human use .  Th is  statement  is  not to be mistaken with a more encompassing history of intellectual efforts toward nature, including philosophical, literary or scientific views on the human-nature relationship. Therefore,  whereas  the book can only aspire to assist in th is  broader endeavor , it delivers the intended results.  One could criticize the author’s choice for a rather limited approach to the  subject , maintaining that these other perspectives of  a much   wider  histor iography  compose an indivisible whole   (as Wolloch himself affirms has already happened) . Without denying the perils of dealing one-dimensionally with such an intricate topic, one must also concede that this is an important piece of the puzzle. The history of the  ideas related to the  economic use of natural resources  is  vital to  a  better  understanding of  the  workings  of the human-nature relationship.  Thus,  not only  historians of economic thought might  benefit fr o m Wolloch’s  work , but  also those with a  wider intellectual  interest on  the subject."
"10" "The  basic  premise  of the book  relates to the historical convergence of  a  growing  concern  for the enhancement of  man’s material  conditions and  the  efforts to   comprehend our  relationship with the  natural world. Such convergence would be most  clearly  seen in the development of classical political economy, when such economic consideration of nature has first taken a systematic form. With this idea in mind, the author focuses  roughly  on the  eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , drawing mostly on Smith, Malthus, Ricardo and Mill. Wolloch bridges the history of classical political economy with environmental history, emerging therefrom an  account  that, despite its  more  direct roots in the Enlightenment, stretches from antiquity all the way  in to contemporaneity, deeply ingrained in modern economic thought. It would be, in this  respect  and according to Wolloch, a “history of continuity, not of change”, as the Promethean idea that humans must maximize their natural resource use to foster their own development would have consistently been observed through time, up to the formation of what could be called a “Western view of nature”."
"11" "In Part 1, Wolloch addresses the \"attitudes toward nature from antiquity to mercantilism\" in the sense discussed above.  The  Western anthropocentric view of nature, in which the physical world's sole purpose was to serve humanity's material needs, would have its roots in biblical cosmology and classical philosophy, enduring also in medieval and mercantilist views. In classical heritage,  i ncluding the meaning of the term  oikonomia , such outlook was yet not related to prosperity or progress in the sense of economic growth, but rather to quality of life, combined with the morals of frugality and a material stationary-state that opposed excessive consumption and wealth accumulation. Medieval economic views, taken in general, corroborated this idea of nature as means for human utilization. However,  from this point forward ,   religious and scientific arguments  have  increasingly  advocated for social progress ,  based on the advantages offered by the physical world ,  through knowledge, agriculture, larger populations and enhanced human skills. Mercantilism saw the rational modes of thought of the Enlightenment gradually gaining ground, what reaffirmed the intellectual paradigm of man's right and duty to dominate nature  despite  the decline in the influence of religious arguments.  According to Wolloch, t here was no room for aesthetic considerations of nature in such economic context, as unexplored resources were deemed wasteful and what mattered was the proper use of resources through labor to  increase national wealth.  L ocke's argument  would  fit well here:  \"investment of labor in cultivating natural resources conferred economic value on them, and made them objects of judicial proprietary rights\" (p. 29). Locke's labor theory of value  would  thus  have  helped establish ing  man's right over nature  in classical political economy ."
"12" "Part 2 draws heavily on E nlightenment  stadial theory and Dugald Ste w art’s concept of conjectural history in order to advance the argument that the idea of  a  historical progress of human societies  has permeated the main discourses in classical political economy.  The material improvement of man’s conditions was  seen as  a stadial process, leading to cultural development  with positive feedback mechanisms . An abundant civilized population would be the main  variable to ascertain the level of progress ,  as it was labor that insured subsistence, not  natural bounty   itself .  Wolloch then analyzes the particular contributions of  a comprehensive list of  thinkers from the second half of the eighteenth to late nineteenth century to corroborate  his  argument: from pre-classical developments (Steuart, Hume ,  Robert Wallace) through  p hysiocracy (Quesnay,  Mirabeau,  Turgot ,  Condorcet) to classical political economy (Smith,  Ricardo, Malthus, Say, McCulloch, Torrens, Stewart, von Thünen and Mill, among others).   Ideas on the  economic  roles of agricul ture, manufactures and commerce,  the existence of limits to a materially-based cultural progress and the problem of overpopulation pervade the discussion. W ithout going into Wolloch’s  particular  interpretations of  each of  these many thinkers, the  insights advanced in the book  are sufficiently rich to instigate new lines of  research,  and the outstanding references (both in quantity and quality)  provided by the author are very   help ful  in this regard."
"13" "Part 3  focuses on policies advanced by political economists to enhance the use of natural resources in favor of  social and  cultural progress.  But even more  central  than that  to the book’s main  message   is Wolloch’s  opposition   to the  views of scholars which claim that  the  economic  discourse on nature  has suffered an important change  during  the first half of the nineteenth century  (e.g. Schabas, 2009; Jonsson, 2013) : the  alleged  post-Enlightenment  denaturalization of economic science, as the natural world  stopped being perceived as a key component of   cultural development in favor of the weight of social forces and deliberate human action .  Wolloch, in contrast, argues that the Enlightenment view  on nature  has endured  to this day . What happened  instead  was an intensification of  the  anthropocentric view,  with strengthened encouragement to  new and more efficient ways to make the most out of natural resources for  the sake of  social progress  (with land and fossil fuels still playing significant roles ,  respectively in classical and neoclassical economic thought) .  As laid out in the epilogue, neither socialists (Sismondi, Marx, Engels ,   the Frankfurt  School) nor marginalists (Marshall, Böhm-Bawerk, Jevons )  would  have deviated from this view , including Keynes . Therefore,  Wolloch  concludes  that there  has been  a consistent  Western  economic approach to nature for centuries, with a few isolated deviations such as Malthus’s pessimistic population theory.  The number and influence of such deviations  are   perhaps   not  as  negligible  as suggested ,  but  in any case far from invalidating the main point. Finally, it is  concede d  that a n increasing  number  of  political economic  discourses  has appeared in late twentieth century  that seem to break with such pattern ,  though still constituting m inor  deviations from the mainstream of economic science,  such as  Amartya Sen’s concept of sustainable development  and  the approach of modern ecological economics."
"14" "A s  with most   high - quality  historical stud ies ,  the book   is able to  explain   aspects of  the present as  a  result of the accumulation of significant past  events, ideas and  developments  that, if not able to  put in perspective  the   cornucopian, cynic or maybe even irrational side of modern economic thought in its attitudes toward nature, at least  provide  solace for those  struggling to  understand   the current  stalemate seen in economic d iscussions  on environmental issues .  I believe  Wolloch accomplishes  both  goals rather gracefully,  enriching  public and  scholarly  debates on the  matter   instead of  taking sides – a stance worthy of praise amidst a field in which  more radical  accounts abound , either pro- or against  modern  environmentalism .  For all the reasons  above , I strongly recommend his book."
"15" "R EFERENCES"
"16" "Jonsson, Fredrik A. 2013.  Enlightenment’s Frontier: The Scottish Highlands and the Origins of Environmentalism .  New Haven: Yale University Press."
"17" "Schabas, Margaret . 2009.  The Natural Origins of Economics . Chicago : University of Chicago Press ."
