Begüm Adalet. Hotels and Highways: The Construction of Modernization Theory in
Cold War Turkey. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2018. 304 pp. $90.00 (cloth),
ISBN 978-1-5036-0429-2; $29.95 (paper), ISBN 978-1-5036-0554-1.
Reviewed by Husik Ghulyan (Independent Scholar)
Published on H-Socialisms (June, 2019)
Commissioned by Gary Roth (Rutgers University - Newark)

Mirrors of Capitalist Modernization in Turkey
signing specific functions to the economy, thus extending and reproducing the spaces of the global capitalist order. During the earlier republican era (1923-45), railway
construction was one of the major steps in the creation
of an integrated national market and spatialization of
the state’s authority.[4] Under the rule of the Democrat
Party, the US-aided highway construction program and
agricultural mechanization were yet additional steps in
the integration of the national market, the establishment
of the market-oriented national economy, and a versatile
integration of the nation-state space—all of which engendered political, ideological, and sociocultural controversies.

Between 1945 and 1950, Turkey experienced a substantial transformation, whereby liberal economic policies replaced the previously dominant protectioniststatist industrialization policies that had existed since
the 1930s. At the same time, Turkey’s political regime
evolved into a multiparty regime, with increased participation at all levels of society in political and civic life.[1]
These changes pointed to immense changes in the social,
political, and economic life of the country. The most critical change was the victory of the Democrat Party in the
1950 general elections, which by “any measure constituted a fundamental break in Turkish history.”[2]
The Democrat Party was the representative of the
dominant classes in agriculture and trade, and it focused
on reconfiguring and reshaping Turkey’s capitalism in
line with agricultural priorities. The establishment of an
agrarian capitalism was key not only to developments in
the economy but also in the political, ideological, and
cultural domains of the country.[3] The establishment
of an agrarian capitalist regime was also the product of
the place that the world system assigned to the economy of Turkey. Ever since the end of the 1940s, agriculture had been undergoing mechanization through the
Marshall Plan, while US aid agencies had fostered highway construction policies. Both agricultural mechanization and highway construction were in line with capitalist modernization attempts; these aimed at integrating Turkey into the global space of capitalism and as-

Begüm Adalet’s Hotels and Highways: The Construction of Modernization Theory in Cold War Turkey develops its narrative with this background, and aims to explore the emergence of modernization theory and developmental thought and their Turkish archetype after the
Second World War. The major focus of Hotels and Highways is the examination of Turkey “as both the template
on which modernization theory was based and the object on which it was enacted” (p. 3). The manufacturing of this theory was based on the production of architectural and infrastructural spaces, functioning as laboratories both for testing the assumptions of modernization theory and initiating the creation of modern subjectivities. For modernization theory of the Cold War
era, the primary indices of development were the capac-

1

H-Net Reviews

ity for empathy, mobility, and hospitality. In the case
of Turkey—as a laboratory for modernization theory—
survey research, highways, and tourism landmarks appeared as the most crucial sites of theory construction
and enacting modern subjects. Hotels and Highways is
based upon the elaboration of these three sites of theory
construction and modernization enactment: survey research to measure modernization and enact it, highway
construction to create an integrated national market and
foster mobility among citizens, and tourism landmarks
to root hospitality as another most pertinent feature of
modern subjects. The structure of Hotels and Highways is
framed on a detailed examination of each of these cases.

egated to the background or depicted as an unswerving Cold Warrior because of his involvement with the
Council on Foreign Relations” (p. 31). But, as Adalet
masterfully documents through archival work and analysis, Rustow’s engagement in this endeavor of knowledge
production contained instances of doubt and hesitation.
Some aspects of Rustow’s writings show his fluctuations
between contesting visions of modernization. Rustow
initially appeared as a proponent of “taming the beast of
politics with the power of reason” (p. 34). Through his
interactions with both sides of Atlantic, he later became
“skeptical of the universalistic claims of modernization
theory” and evolved from a proponent of positivism into
its critic, starting to raise objections to “the validity of
laboratory aspirations within the social sciences” (p. 51).

Chapter 1 takes on the emergence of modernization
theory in Turkey during the Cold War and focuses particularly on the case of political scientist and Middle East
specialist Dankwart Rustow’s participation in Turkey’s
portrayal as a showcase in academic and policy circles.
Here, Adalet tries to uncover Rustow’s role as “an uncertain translator between Turkish and American social
scientists” (p. 26) and his role in “forging transnational
circuits of knowledge on both sides of the Atlantic” (p.
31). He was one of those Cold Warriors engaged in
both the process of knowledge production pertaining to
modernization theory and the diffusion of that knowledge to foreign locales. Adalet focuses on Turkey’s treatment as a laboratory and its representation as a model
to its Middle Eastern neighbors. According to such an
approach to Turkey’s landscape, the country was conceived as a prototype of modernization, a representation
on a smaller scale, which, in an unspecified time in the
future, would become a modern country. Through multiple stages of abstraction, Turkey’s history and landscape
appeared as “raw data” for the crafting of modernization
theory, which then would be repackaged and re-exported
to the rest of the Middle East (p. 43). Although proponents of modernization theory considered Turkey as a
singular case with its specific legacy of modernization in
the late Ottoman period and the early republican era, its
case implied problematic replication elsewhere; notwithstanding the critical assessments from both scholars and
policymakers, Turkey was still treated as a template and
laboratory for crafting and testing modernization initiatives in order to replicate them in the region.

Based on the detailed analysis of Rustow’s case as intermediary between Turkish and American social scientists in knowledge production and dissemination, Adalet
shows that Rustow’s fluctuations between “wholesale
complicity with universalistic social science and a selfreflexive condemnation of its use in the service of ‘the
wealthy and the powerful’ ” reflects tensions pertaining
to the intertwined problems of knowledge production
and the problems of the political order (p. 53). Rustow’s
case and the whole of chapter 1 show that modernization theory was not a simple political endeavor designed
in the United States and applied to the Third World; it
was also an intellectual activity involving contentious dialogue, and instances of doubt were central to the construction of the theory.
Chapter 2 focuses on the role of survey research,
funded by organizations such as the Mutual Security Agency, Turkish State Planning Organization, Ford
Foundation, and Voice of America, and the work of sociologist Daniel Lerner in Turkey. Survey research was
intended to routinize modernization theory by creating
certain kinds of social interactions between the survey
researchers and respondents; interviewees would transport themselves out of the “traditional” environment and
be placed instead into the modern, sterile, and “impersonal” setting of the interview (p. 66). This would occasion forms of subjectivity and interpersonal relations
proper to modern society, generating modern subjectivities capable of empathy, considered as one of the basic
traits of modern subjectivity. At the same time, survey
research was conducted among peasants, students, and
administrators, attempting to measure levels of modernization across Turkey.

Rustow’s crucial asset in this endeavor was his familiarity with the case of Turkey, which enabled him to contribute to the construction of the theory. According to
Adalet, Rustow is often considered as one of the founders
of modernization thought, and in recent intellectual histories of modernization theory, “Rustow is either rel-

It is in this context that Adalet discusses the role of

2

H-Net Reviews

Daniel Lerner, who shared Gabriel Almond’s credo that
“attitudinal research would help generate a universally
applicable, scientifically sound model of modernization”
(p. 62). In his theory of modernization, Lerner conceived
of respondent behavior itself as a decisive signifier of
modernity; the pillar of his understanding of modernization was the subjects’ ability to imagine themselves
outside the self, defined through an empathy index. In
this regard, Lerner thought that “failure to abide by the
interactional prerequisites of the survey indicated an inability to partake of the modern or empathetic mindset”
(p. 65). Such a conception of modern subjects as capable of empathy meant that “the surveys were conducted
not merely to measure or describe but also to occasion
the performance of the very categories—modern, transitional, and traditional—that they sought to explain” (p.
65).

pothetical situations, a capacity for psychic and physical
mobility, and hospitality to the interviewer were all considered as evidence of modern subjects and raw data to
measure modernization. According to Adalet, “there was
not a wholesale acceptance of the premises and dictates
of those practices, and they were not imbued with the
ability to cultivate new subjectivities for their recipients”
(p. 83).
Chapters 3 and 4 of Hotels and Highways takes to the
US-planned and -funded highway construction projects
in Turkey and the technological and expertise transfer
between the two countries. These two chapters are very
closely related and uncover the modernizers’ attempts to
master space and time and extend the global space of capitalism to the entire national space of Turkey. To me,
these two chapters are the most entertaining part of the
book as well as the most salient to modernization theory, and indeed, raise issues that lie at the core of the
(re)production of capitalist modernity.

During the 1950s and 1960s, large-scale sample surveys were conducted in Turkey, employing Lerner’s
procedures and categories of modern, transitional, and
traditional.
Researchers such as Nermin Abadan,
Arif Payaslıoğlu, Herbert Hyman, and others not only
adapted Lerner’s categories but also introduced modifications to some of his formulations, thus contributing to
the popularization of survey research in Turkey. But despite the popularity of survey research and its prevalence
in social science research and policy considerations, it
was not immune to growing skepticism towards it, epistemic challenges, and problems arising in Turkey’s setting. As Adalet shows, respondents challenged the meanings and contexts presupposed by the interviewers. Indeed, Adalet’s stupendous archival work reveals that in
the questionnaires used in Turkey, there were responses
that did not find their reflections in respective publications. Those responses were refusals to engage with the
survey questions, which “disqualified the respondents
from being categorized as modern subjects, capable of
empathy in general and of conversing with the interviewer in a proper manner in particular” (p. 68). Such
refusals were due to respondents’ realistic assessment of
their standing or interests in life, rather than due to their
lack of capacity for imagination and empathy.

The aim of US aid and expertise- and machinerytransfer through the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall
Plan was to initiate modernization in terms of aiding
rational methods of record-keeping, roadbuilding, and
machine maintenance. At the same time, technology
transfer was an important part of Turkey’s status as a
showcase, in terms of constructing state-sponsored infrastructural networks and deepening capitalist relationships. Those transfers and aid, as Adalet shows, also attempted to implant additional traits of modern subjectivity among Turkish engineers, planners, and administrators. This was done by upgrading their habits and temporal outlook, from a dominant cyclical-time approach, and
an impatient and “non-pedantic” outlook, to a linear-time
approach, and patience about the immediate future; thus,
through their engagement with reports, maps, highway
equipment, and roads, local experts would master concepts like foresight, expenditure, saving, and management. The circulation of machinery was also aimed at
presenting and propagating alternative models of development, namely the capitalist one, thus “a wide range
of material objects, such as machines, paper-work, and
maps were concrete channels through which ideas about
modernization and expertise traversed and crystallized”
(p. 98).

Indeed, the researchers erased the respondents’ manipulations of interactional frames, thus contributing to
“the crystallization of survey research as both a tool and
an indicator of modernization across its sites of implementation” (p. 57); or those respondents not elaborating their views in the interview setting were presumed
to not have any opinions at all. Openness to the survey
settings, an ability and willingness to identify with hy-

Another fascinating aspect of chapters 3 and 4 is
Adalet’s take on various cartographic and discursive
practices of the period in the context of highway construction. These aimed at dissecting Turkey’s national
space for administrative and productive proposes, prac-

3

H-Net Reviews

tices dominated by depictions of the “backwardness” of
some of Turkey’s regions, especially Kurdish-populated
ones in southeastern Turkey. While the delivery of “civilization” to those regions was considered an urgent need
(p. 125), such depictions also carefully framed the Kurdish question under the title of “regional backwardness,”
instead of treating it in terms of ethnic and political difference (p. 142). Moreover, such an approach fitted the
Turkish state’s longstanding approach to the Kurdish issue in terms of a militarized Turkification project. In
this context, highway construction was another attempt
to dominate these territories through possession, categorization, and regulation (p. 133) and “making order out
of chaos and modernity out of wilderness” (p. 135).

reaucratic establishments. While machinery was considered important in the temporal reorientation of Turkish civil engineers and the creation of linear thinking
to prevent waste and unnecessary expenditures, there
were many cases of engineers mistreating machinery and
thereby disrupting those modernization attempts. In societal terms, highway construction resulted in a massive flow of the rural population to cities, which in less
than two decades after the start of the highway initiative
and technology transfer programs, became “sites of leftist
mobilization and fascist backlash” (p. 157).

In the final chapter of Hotels and Highways, Adalet
takes on the Istanbul Hilton Hotel, erected as a “simultaneous expression of and blueprint for Turkish hospiHighway projects and technology transfer were also tality” (p. 161). At the cultural front of the Cold War,
aimed at wider populations within Turkey’s rural and it appeared as a part of American cultural diplomacy
“peripheral” regions, since modernization facilitated the and propaganda and was the reflection of “the vision of
circulation of bodies, goods, and ideas and thus occa- geopolitics-as-hospitality” (p. 170). Through its archisioned the production of knowledge (p. 123). In chap- tectural style, arrangements, and American amenities,
ter 4, Adalet masterfully uncovers modernization’s dis- the hotel was presented as a conceived space, produccursive and practical aspects. It was believed that roads ing new ideals of leisure and consumption pertinent to a
would induce attitudinal changes in the masses and instill hospitable mind-set; like other Hilton hotels, it was innew spatial experiences and dispositions among them. tended both to showcase “American modernity against
Due to their difference from railroads, roads were ex- the dangers of Communism” and “to disseminate the dicpected to change the social and sensory world of the pop- tates of the tourism industry” (p. 171). At the same time,
ulation, facilitate intimate encounters, create the individ- on the Turkish side, the construction of the hotel fit the
ual consumer, and instill the habits and mind-set of mo- vision of tourism as a civilizational cause and matter of
bile modernity among them, thus producing the subject national honor, and attempts to create a national hotel
of a new political economy based on agrarian capitalism. industry; it would be more than a commercial enterprise
While technology transfer (e.g., providing trucks to vil- and would help to consolidate national mobility and polagers) appeared as a means of economic unification, the litical and cultural unity.
bus became a means of social and cultural unification,
The Istanbul Hilton also involved substantial tenproviding opportunities for spare-time activities outside
sions,
contradictions, hesitations, and doubts. The Turkthe village due to a decline in travel time and cost. Creish
architects
protested against the project, and there
ating such mobile conditions and sociocultural unificawere
local
debates
on the desirability of the American
tion was important in terms of inducing empathy among
conception
of
hospitality
and the meaning and desirpeople, because only the mobile person would be able to
ability of foreigners. There were also debates on the
anticipate and understand another’s needs and wishes.
shortcomings of the tourism industry as it related to
The production of capitalist modernity also meant that
the rural population was more closely integrated into the people from rural backgrounds who lacked proper maneconomy by means of orderly bus schedules and punctual ners and hygienic habits, debates which “concealed the
darker underside of the republic’s history of intolerance
delivery times for trucks.
for lifestyles it deemed to be foreign” (p. 188). Thus,
As described in chapters 3 and 4, both highway according to Adalet, the Istanbul Hilton—as a mirror of
construction and technology transfer involved various diplomacy, modernity, and hospitality with its multiple
contradictions during their implementation, with un- meanings—appeared as a site of contestation and reconexpected societal consequences and unforeseen usages. ciliation, an “innkeeper of peace” against the “the perNamely, there were national debates questioning the ex- ilous march of Communism” and a turning point in the
tensive American involvement in the highway initiative, development of Turkey’s tourist industry, while at the
or elaborations by Americans on intentional and planned same time a representational space of Turkey’s long hissabotage of the highway program within Turkey’s bu- tory of dispossession, especially that of minorities (p.
4

H-Net Reviews

191).

undergoing urban renewal in the aftermath of their destruction by security forces during 2015-16. Thus, the
Adalet’s Hotels and Highways is an important work, Cold War era motto of Turkey’s General Directorate of
uncovering how modernization theory was constructed Highways: “It’s not yours if you can’t get there”—indeed,
in the Cold War era and Turkey’s role in its construction one of the chapter headlines of Hotels and Highways and
and enactment. One of the most valuable aspects of the one of its core threads—while resonating with military
book is Adalet’s intensive archival fieldwork, with imthinking that an area is not under control if its infantry
portant insights derived from archival documents, memhas not yet walked through it, still appears as the domiories, and memos. At first sight, Hotels and Highways ap- nant approach to the problem under discussion.
pears to be a work of architectural history, urban studies, and infrastructural geography. But it goes beyond
Although the Turkish state was able to get there long
strict disciplinary fields, presenting important insights ago, either through infrastructural development or, more
from the perspective of political science. The book serves recently, through artillery and infantry, the same issues
as a valuable resource.
still exist, since the Kurdish question is still treated either as a problem of underdevelopment or as one to be
The body of literature focusing on Turkey’s infrassolved through “getting there” by various means. In this
tructural modernization in the Cold War era is large, es- context, Hotels and Highways resonates with recent depecially in Turkish,[5] but what makes Hotels and High- velopments and goes beyond a strictly historical analysis
ways an outstanding work is its critical take on the topic of the topic, with relevance for our times as well.
and its focus on knowledge production through the perspective of science and technology studies. Adalet unThe final aspect of the book which makes it an encovers how modernization unfolded in Turkey, with all gaging and relevant read is that Adalet, although incithe attendant tension, hesitation, and anxiety. Adalet’s dentally, draws important conclusions and parallels with
elaborate discussion of the encounters through which both modern Turkey and the surrounding region. The
these tensions and anxieties unfolded and how scholarly Cold War era treated Turkey as an exception, a model
and technocratic certitude was undercut by these issues, of modernization and laboratory of modernization atis highly insightful and entertaining. The book is also tempts. Turkey’s modernization was seen as a replicable
important in terms of showing that the Cold War mod- case for other Middle Eastern countries. Turkey started
ernization of Turkey was not imposed in a uniform and to be treated in a new fashion during the early 2000s,
unidirectional way, but involved substantial contention when the Justice and Development Party (JDP) came to
and dissent.
power in Turkey. In the 2000s, the treatment of the JDP as
a moderate Islamist party, and the promotion of Turkey
The depiction of development experts and their inter- as an exemplary and replicable case for other countries of
ventions as conceited and self-assured does not hold in the region, appeared to have some parallels with the earthe case of Turkey, since there were fragilities and anxlier attempts. For the larger region, the book is of import
ieties in expert thinking and practice. Hotels and Highfor providing insights into modernization theory and deways is also important in terms of providing insights velopmental thought, showing that contemporary interinto the hierarchical, colonial, and exclusionary nature of national developments, particularly democracy promoTurkey’s Cold War modernization processes, especially tion and reconstruction projects in the region, are based
in the context of the Kurdish question in Turkey. This I on the premises of this line of thought.
find important, not only because Adalet, within the scope
of the cases analyzed, draws attention to issues that have
Notes
not been greatly elaborated and uncovered by the respec[1]. See, for example, Çağlar Keyder, State and
tive literature of infrastructural modernization in Turkey,
Class
in Turkey: A Study in Capitalist Development (Lonbut also since the same approach to the question still endon:
Verso, 1987); and Ateş Uslu, “ ‘Hür’ Dünyanın
dures both in discourse and practice.
Saflarında” [In the ranks of the “free” world], in OsInfrastructural development and urban renewal are manlı’dan Günümüze Türkiye’de Siyasal Hayat [Political
still propagated from the highest levels as the cure for life in Turkey from the Ottoman Empire to the present],
the enduring Kurdish question in Turkey—similar to the ed. Gökhan Atılgan, Cenk Saraçoğlu, and Ateş Uslu (İsdominant approach of the Cold War era uncovered by tanbul: Yordam Kitap, 2015), 341–86.
Adalet. In practice, entire neighborhoods in the major
[2]. Keyder, State and Class in Turkey, 124.
Kurdish-populated urban areas in Turkey are currently
5

H-Net Reviews

[3]. Gökhan Atılgan, “Tarımsal Kapitalizmin Sancağı
Altında” [Under the banner of agrarian capitalism], in Osmanlı’dan Günümüze Türkiye’de Siyasal Hayat, 391.

no. 2 (2013): 345–64.

[5]. See, for example, İlhan Tekeli and Selim İlkin,
Cumhuriyetin Harcı: Modernitenin Altyapısı Oluşuken
[4]. Filiz Çolak, “Atatürk Dönemi’nde Türkiye [The plaster of the republic: Forming the infrastructure
Cumhuriyeti’nin Ulaşım Politikasına Genel Bir Bakış (A of the modern], 2nd ed. (Istanbul: İstanbul Bilgi ÜniverGeneral Overview of the Transportation Policy of the sitesi Yayınları, 2010).
Turkish Republic in the Atatürk Era),” Turkish Studies 8,
If there is additional discussion of this review, you may access it through the network, at:
https://networks.h-net.org/h-socialisms
Citation: Husik Ghulyan. Review of Adalet, Begüm, Hotels and Highways: The Construction of Modernization Theory
in Cold War Turkey. H-Socialisms, H-Net Reviews. June, 2019.
URL: http://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=53688
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoncommercialNo Derivative Works 3.0 United States License.

6

