Research Conference 2019
Preparing students for life in the 21st century:
Identifying, developing and assessing what matters

PROCEEDINGS AND PROGRAM

4–5 August 2019
Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre

Australian Council for Educational Research
Australian Council for Educational Research

Karmel Oration: On with the 21st century! Preparing
Australian education for the 2020s and beyond

Neil Selwyn is a Professor in the Faculty of Education,
Monash University, having previously worked at the UCL
Institute of Education (UK). His research and teaching
is focused on digital education – a field in which he is
internationally recognised as a leading critical researcher
and commentator.
Neil’s latest book – Should robots replace teachers?
AI and the future of education will be published in
September 2019 with Polity Press.

Professor Neil Selwyn
Monash University

Abstract
It is rare that the education community gets the chance to think seriously about the future. The 2019 Research
Conference theme therefore gives us a welcome opportunity to be future-focused and forward-thinking. This
presentation will preface the conference by reflecting on some pressing issues that Australian education is set
to face over the next decade. In particular, we will explore a series of substantial challenges that are likely to
come to the fore during the 2020s. These include:
• making a persuasive case for retaining traditional models of ‘school’ and ‘teacher’ in the face of compelling
alternatives
• develop broader notions of ‘skills’, ‘competencies’ and ‘aptitudes’ that help students to flourish in an age of
precarious employment, misinformation and an increasingly fragmented society
• engaging with digital technology in ways that strengthen the character and values of public education
• renegotiating relationships between educational institutions and the corporate actors that are shaping
education agendas around the world
• engaging with public opinion, and fostering a genuine public understanding of (and support for) education
• re-imagining educational provision and practices that are appropriate for an age of climate change.
While these are all incredibly complex challenges, there is good reason to remain hopeful. In this spirit, the
presentation will consider a variety of ways in which the Australian educational community might move forward
in a realistic manner – allowing us to play a proactive part in how the 21st century continues to unfold.

Australian Council for Educational Research

12

Research Conference 2019

Introduction

practical benefit. First, there is the need to speculate
on the future in plausible (rather than fantastical) terms.
Second, there is the need to distinguish between what
is probable, what is possible and what is preferable.
Third, there is the need to think of ‘futures’ plural – that
is, being open to the idea of different variations and
directions that may well unfold over the next few years.

Throughout this conference we are likely to hear
repeated grumblings that it is too late to be worrying
about ‘preparing students for life in the 21st century’.
After all, we are already one-fifth of the way through the
21st century. The first cohorts of students born in the
2000s have already completed Year 12. Time is flying by!

So, with these guidelines in mind, here are six
substantial challenges that I expect Australian education
to be facing over the next decade …

That said, any mention of ‘the 21st century’ still raises
some important points of contention. These are clearly
very distinct and different times. It is now claimed that
globalisation is dead, that we are living in a post-digital
age, and/or on the cusp of ‘Industrial Revolution 4.0’.
Notwithstanding such hype, our day-to-day lives are now
distinctly different than they were 20 years ago, and these
differences will continue to unfold. The nature of Australia’s
economy, politics, culture and society is steadily (and
often unpredictably) shifting. As such, Australian education
is in the midst of considerable change.

Challenge 1
Making a persuasive case for retaining
traditional models of ‘school’ and
‘teacher’ in the face of compelling
alternatives
The next 10 years will see growing push back against
traditional forms of ‘school’ and ‘teacher’. For example,
the idea of the fixed-schedule, bricks-and-mortar
school is attracting sustained criticism – derided as
an outdated ‘factory’ model based on impersonal
and inefficient ‘batch processing’ of students. Flexible
alternate models are being developed in the form of
virtual schools, open schooling and schools-in-thecommunity. Similarly, advances in student-centred
personalised learning systems are prompting calls for
teaching to be automated, learner-driven and ‘teacherproof’. While these technologies still require classroom
facilitators and technicians, the need for highly trained
expert teachers is being seriously questioned.

However, many of the problems that have long blighted
Australian schooling continue to be all too prevalent.
The Karmel Report (1973) highlights deficiencies
in resourcing, significant inequalities of educational
opportunity and poor-quality teaching, curriculum
and school organisation. All of these concerns remain
relevant nearly 50 years later, and are likely to remain so
50 years from now. All told, these are worryingly familiar
and unfamiliar times for everyone in education.
So, this written precursor to my Karmel Oration is
offered in an understandably tentative spirit. What
follows is a set of initial ideas that may well change
between my writing this text (in April) and presenting at
the conference (in August). Given the current volatility
of the world, it is unwise to be too fixed in what one
expects to be talking about four months down the
track. The following text therefore gives a sense of what
I currently expect to be reflecting upon in August … it
will be interesting to see what alters in the interim.

Put bluntly, the entire premise of ‘schooling’ and the
‘teaching profession’ faces an impending challenge to
convincingly justify its existence. Australian educators
will be under mounting pressure to explain the benefits
of these long-dominant forms of educational provision.
While we might like to reassure ourselves that these
benefits are self-evident, the education community
needs to engage much more forcibly in justifying the
added value of the classroom teacher and the traditional
school, while also being open to suggestions for
improvement.

Looking to the ‘near future’
One aspect that I am confident my talk will retain is
the conference’s interest in the future of education.
More specifically, I want to reflect on what is termed
the ‘near future’ – that is, the situation in 5 to 10 years’
time. While we can all have fun speculating on what
the schools of 2069 might be like, this might be of little
practical benefit to the conference attendees of 2019.
It is far more useful to focus on what we are likely to
be grappling with a few years from now. This Karmel
Oration is therefore an opportune moment to reflect on
Australia’s education challenges of the 2020s.

Challenge 2
Develop broader notions of ‘skills’,
‘competencies’ and ‘aptitudes’ that
help students to flourish in an age of
precarious employment, misinformation
and an increasingly fragmented society

As with any look into the future, anything that I say
will be inevitably subjective. Nevertheless, there are
ways of keeping our discussions on point and of

Australian Council for Educational Research

The idea of schools preparing young people with skills
required for future employment will be stretched to

13

Research Conference 2019

will continue to be subject to major pushes for
privatisation of infrastructure. The global education
agenda will continue to be influenced by big corporate
‘edu-businesses’, such as Pearson, alongside wealthy
philanthropics, such as the Gates Foundation. These
actors will be accompanied by portfolios of ‘start-up’
companies (often financed by powerful venture capital
interests) spruiking educational ‘innovations’ and
‘solutions’.

its limits during the 2020s. There will be little sense in
continuing to set schools up to cater for a ‘knowledge
economy’ that will require masses of highly-skilled
information workers. Instead, the 2020s promise
growing technological unemployment, low-skilled/semiautomated jobs and other forms of precarious labour.
This will particularly be the case for Western economies
struggling to retain their 20th century dominance.
Rather than developing skills for future jobs, Australian
schools might be recast as sites for the development
of competencies, aptitudes and dispositions that will
help the next generation to collectively ‘hustle’ their
way through life. Alongside the usual 21st-century
skills, these might include critical consciousness,
social entrepreneurship, citizen activism, environmental
citizenship, and sense of global place. Schools need
to be places that foster flexible attributes that will
leave young people well-equipped to navigate their
increasingly non-linear and unpredictable futures.

While there is nothing inherently wrong with these
commercial contributions, questions need to be asked
about regulation and oversight of corporate activities
in Australian education. For example, should major
corporations continue to exercise ‘soft power’ in
influencing and shaping education decision-making,
while all the time profiting from the decisions being
made? How might we better ensure that commercial
actors respond primarily to the needs of the school
sector rather than working to create demand for their
products within schools?

Challenge 3

Challenge 5

Engaging with digital technology in
ways that strengthen the character and
values of public education

Engaging with public opinion, and
fostering a genuine public understanding
of (and support for) education

The 2020s will arguably be the first full ‘post-digital’
decade. Digital technologies will become entwined
across all aspects of education to the extent that they
largely stop being noticeable. This will be a decade
marked by the increased ‘datafication’ of educational
institutions and the adoption of AI-driven systems that
make decisions autonomously.

Public debate on education is a prominent part of
Australian politics, yet public knowledge of what takes
place in our schools and universities is highly incomplete
and polarised. Public opinion on education should be
an important element of the national education debate,
offering a basis from which to develop democratically
driven change and improvement.

The educational implications of these new technologies
are extremely difficult for anyone (even their developers)
to fully discern. Nevertheless, it is crucial that educators
begin to exert more influence over the digital processes
and practices that they are choosing to be implemented
in schools – ensuring that the technologies allowed
to deliver and direct educational provision operate
in the best interests of teachers, students and the
public education ethos. Schooling should not descend
unwittingly into a mechanised, overly-individualised and
de-humanised free-for-all.

However, for this to happen, the education community
first needs to work toward establishing a robust ‘public
understanding of education’. This will require concerted
efforts to better publicise the work of teachers and
schools – both to parents and local communities.
Similarly, universities will have to work hard to justify
the need for higher education. The 2020s should be a
decade where teaching and learning takes place in the
‘open’, and we increase public engagement with current
education provision and practices.

Challenge 4

Challenge 6

Renegotiating relationships between
educational institutions and the
corporate actors that are shaping
education agendas around the world

Reimagining educational provision and
practices that are appropriate for an age
of climate change
The 2020s will be the decade where we finally face
up to the imperative to establish sustainability and
ecological responsibility as central elements of
educational provision and practice. This is already

The 2020s will see the expansion of the commercial
‘ecosystem’ that already exerts considerable influence
on what takes place within schools. School systems

Australian Council for Educational Research

14

Research Conference 2019

However, responsibility should not be loaded solely
onto individual schools, school leaders, teachers
and the general public. As the 1973 Karmel Report
proved, considerable progress can be made through
the coordination of federal and state government
intervention. Yet we are living in very different
circumstances in comparison to the Whitlam era.
The post-industrial, post-digital, climatic challenges
I have outlined are unlikely to be tackled effectively
through top-down planning in the manner of a ‘Schools
Commission Act 2.0’. These are not problems
that governments can simply ‘plan’ their way past.
Instead, then, we need to think of ways in which policy
responses might be enacted in a manner fitting for the
2020s. Governments need to take a lead in mobilising,
unifying and coordinating networks of multiple agencies
around visions of education futures that we collectively
agree are best for Australia.

beginning to drive the ways in which educational
buildings are designed, built and maintained, yet there
are many other aspects of education that lag well
behind. These include the environmental connotations
of mass daily school-runs and campus commutes, as
well as ways in which digital technologies have been
excessively consumed and discarded over the past 20
years in the name of education ‘innovation’.
Regardless of how daunting such changes might seem,
the education community needs to quickly curtail the
environmental and ethical impacts of its practices. Put
bluntly, the priority for everyone working in education
needs to be a rapid collective change of attitude and
action. The next generations of students will be dealing
with the environmental consequences of their everyday
lives in very different ways than before. It is crucial that
their places of education are a source of support rather
than a hindrance.

But do not just take my word for all this! This short text
has outlined six probable challenges, and begun to
suggest the types of actions that Australian education
might now focus on. Yet these are my own preferred
futures, and it is likely that every conference attendee
will have alternate responses and preferences. So, we
now need to commit to engaging in sustained collective
conversations about how we might all work together
to prepare Australian education for the 2020s … let
alone the remainder of the 21st century. I hope that
this conference provides momentary respite from the
immediate challenges of contemporary education, and
an opportunity to think ahead in a realistic manner.
Education in the 21st century may already be well under
way, yet we should all take a proactive role in how it
continues to unfold.

Conclusion
These are all uncomfortably big issues for educators to
tackle. Indeed, when faced with challenges of this scale
there is always a danger of becoming either blithely
optimistic or excessively pessimistic. These are undeniably
complex challenges to consider, yet there are decent
grounds for Australian educators to address these issues
in a hopeful (rather than hopeless) manner.
So, where should this hope take us? Clearly there is a
need for the education community to engage with other
actors that might traditionally be thought of as ‘noneducational’ but will nevertheless play a leading role
in defining what ‘schooling’ is throughout the 2020s.
Educators certainly need to engage properly with their
‘publics’ – especially parents and local communities.
Educators also need to establish relationships with
commercial actors that work in the favour of schools
rather than shareholders. Australian society needs to
become comfortable with the notion that there is more
to schooling than ill-defined imperatives of employability
and national economic success.

Australian Council for Educational Research

References
Karmel, P. (1973). Schools in Australia: Report of
the interim committee for the Australian Schools
Commission. Retrieved from http://apo.org.au/
system/files/29669/apo-nid29669-86861.pdf

15

Research Conference 2019

