"x"
"1" "10 Simple Rules for Innovative Dissemination of Research"
"2" "Tony Ross- Hellauer ,  Viltė   Banelytė , Edit  Gorogh , Daniela  Luzi , Peter  Kraker , Lucio  Pisacane , Roberta Ruggieri, Electra  Sifacaki , Jonathan Tennant, Michela  Vignoli"
"3" "Affiliations:"
"4" "TRH: Open and Reproducible Research Group, Institute of Interactive Systems and Data Science, Graz University of Technology and Know-Center GmbH, Graz, Austria"
"5" "VB: Public Policy and Management Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania"
"6" "EG: University and National Library, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary"
"7" "DL: Institute for Research on Population and Social Policies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy"
"8" "PK: Open Knowledge Maps, Vienna, Austria"
"9" "LP: Institute for Research on Population and Social Policies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy"
"10" "RR: Institute for Research on Population and Social Policies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy"
"11" "ES: National and  Kapodistrian  University of Athens, Athens, Greece"
"12" "JT: Center for Research and Interdisciplinarity, University of Paris, Paris, France ;  Southern Denmark University Library, Odense, Denmark."
"13" "MV: Center for Digital Safety and Security, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria"
"14" "Introduction"
"15" "As with virtually all areas of life, research dissemination has been disrupted by the Internet and digitally-networked technologies. The last two decades have seen the majority of scholarly journals move online, and scholarly books are increasingly found online as well as in print. However these traditional communication vehicles have largely retained similar functions and formats during this transition. But digital dissemination can happen in a variety of ways beyond the traditional modes. The open access and open science “movements” have transformed the types of outputs being disseminated, as well as their potential for access and engagement. Beyond this, a wealth of approaches going beyond traditional academic publishing (i.e., peer reviewed articles and journals) now exist. In the wake of this transformation, innovative forms of research dissemination have emerged: blogging and other social media have become very popular among researchers  ( Jarreau  2015; Bik and Goldstein 2013;  Yammine  et al. 2018) . Professional academic social networks such as  ResearchGate  and  Academia.edu  boast millions of users. New online formats for interaction with the wider public, such as TED talks broadcast via YouTube, often receive millions of views. Some researchers have even decided to make all of their research findings public in real time by keeping open notebooks  ( Clinio  and  Albagli  2017; Harding 2019) . In particular, digital technologies invoke new ways of reaching and involving audiences beyond their usual primary dissemination targets (i.e., other scholars) to actively involve peers or citizens who would otherwise remain out of  reach for traditional methods of communication  (Bonney et al. 2009;  Stilgoe , Lock, and  Wilsdon  2014) ."
"16" "Beyond the increase in the use of Web-based and computational technologies, other trends in research cultures have had a profound effect on dissemination. The push towards greater public understanding of science and research since the 1980s, and an emphasis on engagement and participation of non-research audiences have brought about new forms of dissemination. These approaches include popular science magazines and science shows on television and the radio. In recent years, new types of events have emerged that aim at involving the general public within the research process itself, including science slams and open lab days. With science cafés and hackerspaces, novel, participatory spaces for research production and dissemination are emerging - both online and offline. Powerful trends towards responsible research and innovation, the increasing globalisation of research, the emergence and inclusion of new or previously excluded stakeholders or communities are also reshaping the purposes of dissemination as well as the scope and nature of its audiences."
"17" "Many now view wider dissemination and public engagement with science to be a fundamental element of open science  (Sengupta and Shanahan 2017) . However, there is a paradox at play here. For while there have never been more avenues for the widespread dissemination of research, researchers tend nonetheless to value and focus upon just a few traditional outputs: journal articles, books, and conference presentations  ( Alperin  et al. 2018) ."
"18" "Following Wilson et al.  (2010) , we here define  research dissemination  as a planned process that involves consideration of target audiences, consideration of the settings in which research findings are to be received, and communicating and interacting with wider audiences in ways that will facilitate research uptake and understanding.  Innovative dissemination , then, means dissemination that goes beyond traditional academic publishing (e.g. academic journals, books, or monographs) and meetings (conferences and workshops) to achieve more widespread research uptake and understanding."
"19" "We here present ten steps researchers can take to embrace innovative dissemination practices in their research, either as individuals or groups   (Figure 1) . They represent the synthesis of multidimensional research activities undertaken within the  OpenUP  project . This European Coordination and Support Action addressed key aspects and challenges of the currently transforming science landscape and proposed recommendations and solutions addressing the needs of researchers, innovators, the public and funding bodies. The goal is to provide stakeholders (primarily researchers, but also intermediaries) with an entry point to innovative dissemination, so that they can choose methods and tools based on their audience, their skills and their requirements. The advice is directed towards both individual researchers and research teams or projects. It is similar  to  other  entries in the 10 Simple Rules series (e.g.,  (Ekins and Perlstein 2014; Bik et al. 2015) .  Ultimately, the benefit here for researchers is increased recognition and social impact of their work."
"20" "Figure  1 . Summary of the ten simple rules presented in this paper."
"21" "Step 1: Get the basics right"
"22" "Despite changes in communication technologies and models, there are some basic organisational aspects of dissemination that remain important: to define objectives, map potential target audience(s), target messages, mode of communication/engagement, and create a dissemination plan. These might seem a bit obvious or laborious, but are critical first steps towards strategically planning a project."
"23" "(a) Define objectives"
"24" "The motivation to disseminate research can come in many forms. You might want to share your findings with wider non-academic audiences, to raise awareness of particular issues, or invite audience engagement, participation and feedback. Start by asking yourself what you want to achieve with your dissemination. This first strategic step will make all other subsequent steps much simpler, as well as guide how you define the success of your activities."
"25" "(b) Map your audience"
"26" "Specify who exactly you want your research results to reach, for which purposes, and what their general characteristics might be (e.g., policymakers, patient groups, NGOs). Individuals are not just ‘empty vessels’ to be filled with new knowledge, and having a deeper contextual understanding of your audience can make a real difference to the success of your engagement  practices.Who  is most affected by your research? Who might find it most valuable? What is it you want them to take away? Get to know your target audiences, their needs and expectations of the research outcomes, as well as their preferred communication channels to develop a detailed understanding of their interests and align your messages and media with their needs and priorities. Keep in mind, too, that intermediaries such as journalists or science communication organisations can support or mediate the dissemination process. These groups can be seen as target audiences in themselves, and usually require separate consideration."
"27" "(c) Target/frame your messages"
"28" "Target and frame the key messages that you want to communicate to specific groups. Think first from the perspective of what they might want or need to hear from you, rather than what you want to tell them. Choosing media and format of your communication strongly depends on your communication objectives, i.e., what you want to achieve. There are many ways to communicate your research; for example, direct messages, blog/vlog posts, tweeting about it or putting your research on Instagram. Form and content go hand in hand. Engage intermediaries and leverage any relevant existing networks to help amplify messages."
"29" "(d) Create a dissemination plan"
"30" "Finally, organise all of this information into a structured plan. Many funded research projects require a dissemination plan. However, even if not, the formal exercise of creating a plan at the outset which organizes dissemination around distinct milestones in the research lifecycle will help you to assign roles, structure activities, as well as plan funds to be allocated in your dissemination. This will ultimately save you time and  make future work easier. If working in groups, distribute tasks and effort to ensure regular updates of content targeted to different communities. Engage those with special specific skills in the use and/or development of appropriate communication tools, to help you in using the right language and support you in finding the suitable occasions to reach your identified audience. Research is not linear, however, and so you might find it best to treat the plan as a living document to be flexibly adapted as the direction of research changes."
"31" "Step 2: Keep the right profile"
"32" "Whether communicating as an individual researcher, a research project or a research organization, establishing a prominent and unique identity online and offline is essential for communicating. Use personal websites, social media accounts, researcher identifiers and academic social networks to help make you and your research visible. When doing this, try to avoid any self-promotion - your personal profile naturally will develop based on your ability to be an effective and impactful communicator."
"33" "Academia is a prestige economy, where individual researchers are often evaluated based on their perceived esteem or standing within their communities  (Blackmore and  Kandiko  2011) . Remaining visible is an essential part of accumulating esteem. An online presence maintained via personal websites, social media accounts (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn), researcher identifiers (e.g.,  ORCID ) and academic social networks (e.g., ResearchGate, institutional researcher profiles), can be a personal calling card, where you can highlight experience and demonstrate your expertise in certain topics. Being active on important mailing lists, forums, and social media is not only a good chance to disseminate your findings to those communities, but also offers you the chance to engage with your community, and potentially spark new ideas and collaborations."
"34" "Using researcher identifiers like ORCID when disseminating outputs will ensure that those outputs will be unambiguously linked back to the individual researcher (and even automatically updated to their ORCID profile). The  OpenUP  survey showed that nearly half of the respondents (41%) use academic social networks as a medium to disseminate their research and a quarter of respondents (26%) said that these networks informed their professional work  ( Kraker  et al. 2019) ."
"35" "For projects, similar principles apply. Create a brand by giving your project a unique name, ideally with some intuitive relation to the issue you are investigating. Create a striking visual identity, with a compelling logo, core colours and project slogan. Create a website which leverages this visual identity and is as simple and intuitive as possible, both in its layout and in the way content is formulated (limit insider jargon). Make sure to keep old content up to date and to add new content frequently in order to incentivise people to re-visit. Create associated appropriate social media accounts (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, SlideShare, YouTube) and link to this from the project website. Aim for a sustained presence with new and engaging content to reinforce project messaging, and this can help to establish a core following group or user base within different platforms. Include links to other project online presences such as social media accounts, or a rolling feed of updates if possible. Consider including a blog to disseminate core findings or give important project updates. A periodical newsletter could be released in order to provide project updates and other  news, to keep the community informed and activated regarding project issues. Depending on the size of your project and budget, you might want to produce hard copy material such as leaflets or factsheets, as well as branded giveaways to increase awareness of your project. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, try not to come across as a ‘scientific robot’, and make sure to communicate the more human personality side of research."
"36" "Step 3: Encourage participation"
"37" "In the age of open research, don’t just broadcast. Invite and engage others to foster participation and collaboration with research audiences. Scholarship is a collective endeavour, and so we should not expect its dissemination to be unidirectional, especially not in the digital age. Dissemination is increasingly done at earlier stages of the research lifecycle and such wider engagement is becoming an integral part of the whole research workflow. In addition, dissemination becomes more of an interactive process. As a result, it is often difficult to draw the line between the activities of dissemination and participation in terms of knowledge transfer."
"38" "Disseminating early and often showcases the progress of your work and demonstrates productivity and engagement as part of an agile development workflow. People like to see progress and react positively to narrative, so give regular updates to followers on social media, for example blogging or tweeting early research findings for early feedback. You might even find it useful to actively engage “citizen scientists” in research projects; for example, to collect data or analyse findings. Alternatively, involving businesses early on can align research to industry requirements and expectations thus potentially increasing commercial impact. Such engagement has In any case, active involvement of citizens and other target audiences beyond academia can help increase the societal impact of your research  ( Bornmann  2012) ."
"39" "Step 4: Open science for impact"
"40" "Open science is “transparent and accessible knowledge that is shared and developed through collaborative networks”, as defined by one systematic review  (Vicente- Saez  and Martinez-Fuentes 2018) . It encompasses a variety of practices covering a range of research processes and outputs, including areas like open access to publications, open research data, open source software/tools, open workflows, citizen science, open educational resources, and alternative methods for research evaluation including open peer review  ( Pontika  et al. 2015) . Open science is rooted in principles of equitable participation and transparency, enabling others to collaborate in, contribute to, scrutinise and re-use re-search and spread knowledge as widely as possible  (McKiernan et al. 2016) . As such, innovative dissemination is a core element of open science."
"41" "Embracing open science principles can boost the impact of research. Firstly, Open Access publications seem to accrue more citations than their closed counterparts  (Tennant et al. 2016) . A comprehensive bibliography of studies documenting the impact of Open Access on citations is available from SPARC Europe since 2013 (sparceurope.org/ oaca /). There are a number of ways to make research papers OA, including at the journal site itself, or self-archiving an accepted manuscript in a repository or personal website."
"42" "Disseminating publications as preprints (Bourne et al., 2017) in advance of or parallel to journal submission can increase impact, as measured by relative citation counts  (Shuai, Pepe, and  Bollen  2012) . Very often, traditional publishing takes a long time, with the waiting time between submission and acceptance of a paper being in excess of 100 days  (Powell 2016)  - often longer than the analogue era despite the power of Web technologies for instant communication.  Preprinting  hence speeds up dissemination meaning that findings are available sooner for sharing and re-use. Potential platforms for disseminating preprints include the  Open Science Framework ,  biorXiv , or  arXiv ."
"43" "Dissemination of other open science outputs which would usually remain hidden also not only helps to ensure the transparency and increased reproducibility of research  ( Munafò  et al. 2017) , but also means that more research elements are released which can potentially impact upon others by creating networks effects through re-use. Making FAIR research data and code available enables re-use and remixing of core research outputs, which can also lead to further citations for projects  ( Drachen  et al. 2016;  Pasquetto ,  Randles , and  Borgman  2017; Piwowar, Day, and  Fridsma  2007) . Publishing research proposals, protocols and open notebooks act as advertisements for ongoing research and enable others to reuse methods, exposing the continuous and collaborative nature of scholarship."
"44" "To enable re-use, embrace open licenses. When it comes to innovative dissemination, the goal is usually that the materials are accessible to as large an audience as possible. If appropriate open licenses are not used, while materials may be free to access, they cannot be widely used, modified or shared. The best in this case is the widely adopted  Creative Commons  licenses, CC BY or CC 0. Variations of these licenses are less permissive, and can constrain re-use for commercial or derivative purposes. This limitation, however, prevents the use of materials in many forms of (open) educational resources and other open projects, including Wikipedia. Careful consideration should be given to licensing of materials, depending on what your intended outcomes from the project are (see Step 1)."
"45" "Step 5: Remix traditional outputs"
"46" "Traditional research outputs like research articles and books can be complemented with innovative dissemination to boost impact; for example, by preparing accompanying non-specialist-summaries, press-releases, blog posts, and visual/video abstracts to better reach your target audiences. Free media coverage can be an easy way to get results out to as many people as possible. There are countless media outlets interested in science-related stories. Most universities and large research organizations have an office for public affairs or communication: liaise with these experts to disseminate research findings widely through public media. Press releases offer one of the most effective ways to disseminate information to the media. Consider writing a press release for manuscripts that have been accepted for publication in journals or books and use sample forms and tools available online to assist you in the process. Some journals also have dedicated press teams that might be able to help you with this. Not only is this good for disseminating research to wider audiences, but can also have the effect of building your public profile as a researcher, and open up new forms of collaboration and outreach."
"47" "Another useful tool to disseminate traditional research outputs is to release a research summary document. This one- or two-page document that clearly and concisely summarizes the key conclusions from a research initiative. It can combine several studies by the same investigator or by a research group and should integrate two main components: key findings and fact sheets (preferably with graphical images to illustrate your point). This can be published on your institutional website as well on research blogs, thematic hubs or simply posted on your social media profiles. Other platforms such as  ScienceOpen  and  Kudos  allow authors to attach non-specialist summaries to each of their research papers."
"48" "If your data visualizations could be considered too technical and not easily understandable by a non-expert reader consider creating ad hoc image for this document; sometimes this can also take the form of a graphical abstract or infographic. Use online tool to upload a sample of your data and develop smart graph and infographic (e.g.  Infogr.am ,  Datawrapper ,  Easel.ly , or  Venngage ). Your research summary could then be easily shared via social media channels, and provides and efficient and effective way for your audience to digest research information."
"49" "To maximise the impact of your conference presentations or posters, there are several steps that can be taken. For instance, you can upload your slides to a general-purpose repository such as  Figshare  or  Zenodo  and add a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) to your presentation. This also makes it easier to integrate such outputs with other services like ORCID. You can also schedule tweets before and during any conferences, and use the conference hashtag to publicise your talk or poster. Finally, you can also add information about your contributions to email signatures or out-of-office messages  ( Teperek  2018) ."
"50" "Step 6: Go live"
"51" "In-person dissemination doesn’t just have to be at stuffy conferences. With research moving beyond the walls of universities, there are several types of places for more participatory events. Next to classic scientific conferences, different types of events addressing wider audiences have emerged. It is possible to hit the road and take part in science festivals, science slams, TEDx talks, or roadshows."
"52" "Science slams are short talks where researchers explain a scientific topic to a typically non-expert audience. Similar to other short talk formats like TED talks, they lend themselves to being spread over YouTube and other video channels. A prominent example from the German speaking area is Giulia Enders, who won the first prize in a science slam that took place in 2012 in Berlin. The YouTube video of her fascinating talk about the gut has received over 1 million views. After this success she got an offer to write a book about the gut and the digestive system, which has since been published and translated into many languages. You never know how these small steps might end up having a wider impact on your research and career."
"53" "Another example is Science Shops, small entities which provide independent, participatory research support to civil society. While they are usually linked to universities, hacker and maker spaces tend to be community-run locations, where people with an interest in science, engineering, and art meet and collaborate on  projects. Science festivals are community-based showcases of science and technology which take place over large areas for several days or weeks and directly involve STEM researchers and practitioners in public outreach. Less formally, Science Cafés or similar events like  Pint of Science  are public engagement events in casual settings like pubs and coffeehouses."
"54" "Alternatively, for a more personal approach, consider reaching out to key stakeholders who might be affected by your research and requesting a meeting, or participating in relevant calls for policy consultations. Such an approach can be especially powerful in getting the message across to decision-makers and thought-leaders, although the resources required to schedule and potentially travel to such meetings means you should target such activities very carefully. And don’t forget the value of serendipity - who knows who you’ll meet in the course of your everyday meetings and travels. Always be prepared with a 30 second “elevator-pitch” that sums up your project in a confident and concise manner - such encounters may be the gateways to greater engagement or opportunities."
"55" "Step 7: Think visual"
"56" "Dissemination of research is still largely ruled by the written or spoken word. However, there are many ways to introduce visual elements which can act as attractive means to help your audience understand and interpret your research. Disseminate findings through art or multimedia interpretations. Let your artistic side loose or use new visualisation techniques to produce intuitive, attractive data displays. Of course, not everyone is a trained artist, and this will be dependent on your personal skills."
"57" "Most obviously, this could take the form of data visualization. Graphic representation of quantitative information reaches back to “earliest map-making and visual depiction”  (Friendly 2008) . As technologies have advanced, so have our means of visually representing data. Powerful tools for data visualization now mean that researchers can produce arresting images which add clarity to their research."
"58" "Science comics can be used, in the words of  McDermott, Partridge, and Bromberg (2018) , to “communicate difficult ideas efficiently, illuminate obscure concepts, and create a metaphor that can be much more memorable than a straightforward description of the concept itself”. McDermott et al. continue that comics can be used to punctuate or introduce papers or presentations, to capture and share the content of conference talks, and that some journals even have a “cartoon” publication category. They advise that such content has a high chance of being “virally” spread via social media."
"59" "As previously discussed, you may also consider creating a video abstract for a paper or project. However, as with all possible methods it is worth considering the relative costs versus benefits of such an approach. Creating a high quality video might have more impact than, say, a blog post, but could be more costly to produce."
"60" "Projects have even successfully disseminated scientific findings through art. For example, The Civilians - a New York based investigative theatre company - received a three-year grant to develop  The Great Immensity , a play addressing the complexity of climate change.  AstroDance  tells the story of the search for gravitational waves  through a combination of dance, multimedia, sound and computer simulations. The annual  Dance Your PhD  contest, which began in 2007 and is sponsored by Science magazine, even asks scientists to interpret their PhD research as dance. This initiative receives approximately 50 submissions a year, demonstrating the popularity of novel forms of research dissemination."
"61" "Step 8: Respect diversity"
"62" "The academic discourse on diversity has always included discussions on gender, ethnic and cultural backgrounds, digital literacy, and epistemic or economic diversity. An approach that is often taken to address diversity issues in research is to include as many diverse individuals into research teams as possible; for example, more women, under-represented minorities, or persons from developing countries. In terms of scientific communication, however, not only raising awareness about diversity-issues, increasing visibility of under-represented minorities in research, or including more women in science communication teams should be considered, and embedded in projects from the outset. Another important aspect is assessing how the communication messages are framed, and if the chosen format and content is appropriate to address and respect all audiences. Research should reach all who might be affected by it. Respect inclusion in scientific dissemination by creating messages which reflect and respect diversity regarding factors like gender, demography and ability. Overcoming geographic barriers is also important, as well as the consideration of differences in time zones and the other commitments that participants might have. As part of this, it is a key responsibility to create a healthy and welcoming environment for participation. Having things such as a code of conduct, diversity statement, and contributing guidelines can really help provide this for projects."
"63" "The 2017 Progression Framework benchmarking report of the Scientific Council made several recommendations on how to make progress on diversity and inclusion in science: (1) a strategy and action plan for diversity should developed which requires action from all members included, (2) diversity should be included in a wide range of scientific activities, such as building diversity into prizes, awards or, creating guidance on building diversity and inclusion across a range of demographics groups into communications, and building diversity and inclusion into education and training  (Science Council 2018) ."
"64" "Step 9: Find the right tools"
"65" "Innovative dissemination practices often require different resources and skills than traditional dissemination methods. As a result of different skills and tools needed, there may be higher costs associated with some aspects of innovative dissemination. You can find tools via a range of sources including the  OpenUP  Hub . The Hub lists a catalogue of innovative dissemination services, organised according to the following categories:"
"66" "Visualizing data: tools to help create innovative visual representations of data (e.g.,  Nodegoat ,  DataHero ,  Plot.ly )"
"67" "Sharing notebooks, protocols and workflows: ways to share outputs that document and share research processes, including notebooks, protocols & workflows (e.g.,  HiveBench ,  Protocols.io ,  Open Notebook Science Network )"
"68" "Crowdsourcing & collaboration: platforms that help researchers and those outside academia to come together to perform research and share ideas (e.g.,  Thinklab ,  Linknovate ,  Just One Giant Lab )"
"69" "Profiles & networking: platforms to raise academic profile and find collaboration and fund- ing  opportunities with new partners (e.g.,  Humanities Commons ,  ORCID ,  ImpactStory )"
"70" "Organizing events: tools to help plan, facilitate and publicise academic events (e.g.,  Open Conference Systems ,  Sched ,  ConfTool )"
"71" "Outreach to wider public: channels to help broadcast your research to audiences beyond academia, including policy makers, young people, industry and broader society (e.g.,  Famelab ,  Kudos ,  Pint of Science )"
"72" "Publishing: platforms, tools and services to help you publish your research (e.g.,  Open Science Framework ,  dokieli ,  ScienceMatters )"
"73" "Archive and share: preprint servers and repositories to help you archive and share your texts, data, software, posters and more (e.g.,  BitBucket ,  GitHub ,  RunMyCode )"
"74" "The Hub here represents just one attempt to create a registry of resources related to scholarly communication. A similar project is the  101 Innovations in Scholarly Communication  project which contains different tools and services for all parts of a generalised research workflow, including dissemination and outreach. This can be broadly broken down into services for communication through social media (e.g., Twitter), as well as those designed for sharing of scholarly outputs including posters and presentations (e.g., Zenodo or Figshare). The Open Science MOOC has also curated a list of resources for its module on  Public Engagement with Science , and includes key research articles, organisations and services to help with wider scientific engagement."
"75" "Step 10: Evaluate, evaluate, evaluate"
"76" "Assess your dissemination activities. Are they having the right impact? If not, why not? Evaluation of dissemination efforts is an essential part of the process. In order to know what worked and which strategies did not generate the desired outcomes, all the research activities should be rigorously assessed. Such evaluation should be measured via the use of a combination of quantitative and qualitative indicators (which should be already foreseen in the planning stage of dissemination, see Step 1). Questionnaires, interviews, observations and assessments could also be used to measure the impact. Assessing and identifying the most successful practices, will give you the evidence for the most effective strategies to reach your audience. In addition, the evaluation can help you plan your further budget and minimise the spending and dedicating efforts on ineffective dissemination methods."
"77" "Some examples of quantitative indicators include:"
"78" "Citations of publications;"
"79" "Alternative metrics related to websites and social media platforms (updates, visits, interactions, likes and reposts);"
"80" "Numbers of events held for specific audiences;"
"81" "Numbers of participants those events;"
"82" "Production and circulation of printed materials;"
"83" "Media coverage (articles in specialised press newsletters, press releases, interviews, etc.); and"
"84" "How much time and effort were spent on activities."
"85" "Some examples of qualitative indicators include:"
"86" "Visibility in the social media and attractiveness of website;"
"87" "Newly established contacts with networks and partners and the outcomes of these contacts;"
"88" "Feedback from the target groups; and"
"89" "Share feedback within your group on what dissemination strategies seemed to be the most effective in conveying your messages and reaching your target audiences."
"90" "Conflicts of Interest"
"91" "TRH is Editor-in-Chief of the Open Access journal “Publications”"
"92" "JT is the founder of the Open Science MOOC, and a former employee of  ScienceOpen ."
"93" "Bibliography"
"94" "Alperin, Juan Pablo, Carol Muñoz Nieves, Lesley Schimanski, Gustavo E. Fischman, Meredith T. Niles, and Erin C. McKiernan. 2018. “How Significant Are the Public Dimensions of Faculty Work in Review, Promotion, and Tenure Documents?,” October. https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:21015/."
"95" "Bik, Holly M., Alistair D. M. Dove, Miriam C. Goldstein, Rebecca R. Helm, Rick MacPherson, Kim Martini, Alexandria Warneke, and Craig McClain. 2015. “Ten Simple Rules for Effective Online Outreach.”  PLOS Computational Biology  11 (4): e1003906. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003906."
"96" "Bik, Holly M., and Miriam C. Goldstein. 2013. “An Introduction to Social Media for Scientists.”  PLOS Biology  11 (4): e1001535. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001535."
"97" "Blackmore, Paul, and Camille B. Kandiko. 2011. “Motivation in Academic Life: A Prestige Economy.”  Research in Post-Compulsory Education  16 (4): 399–411. https://doi.org/10.1080/13596748.2011.626971."
"98" "Bonney, Rick, Caren B. Cooper, Janis Dickinson, Steve Kelling, Tina Phillips, Kenneth V. Rosenberg, and Jennifer Shirk. 2009. “Citizen Science: A Developing Tool for Expanding Science Knowledge and Scientific Literacy.”  BioScience  59 (11): 977–984."
"99" "Bornmann, Lutz. 2012. “Measuring the Societal Impact of Research.”  EMBO Reports  13 (8): 673–76. https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2012.99."
"100" "Clinio, Anne, and Sarita Albagli. 2017. “Open Notebook Science as an Emerging Epistemic Culture within the Open Science Movement.”  Revue Française Des Sciences de l’information et de La Communication , no. 11 (August). https://doi.org/10.4000/rfsic.3186."
"101" "Drachen, Thea, Ole Ellegaard, Asger Larsen, and Søren Dorch. 2016. “Sharing Data Increases Citations.”  LIBER Quarterly  26 (2): 67–82. https://doi.org/10.18352/lq.10149."
"102" "Ekins, Sean, and Ethan O. Perlstein. 2014. “Ten Simple Rules of Live Tweeting at Scientific Conferences.”  PLOS Computational Biology  10 (8): e1003789. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003789."
"103" "Friendly, Michael. 2008. “A Brief History of Data Visualization.” In  Handbook of Data Visualization , edited by Chun-houh Chen, Wolfgang Härdle, and Antony Unwin, 15–56.  Springer Handbooks Comp.Statistics. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-33037-0_2."
"104" "Harding, Rachel J. 2019. “Open Notebook Science Can Maximize Impact for Rare Disease Projects.”  PLOS Biology  17 (1): e3000120. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000120."
"105" "Jarreau, Paige. 2015. “All the Science That Is Fit to Blog: An Analysis of Science Blogging Practices.”  LSU Doctoral Dissertations , January. https://digitalcommons.lsu.edu/gradschool_dissertations/1051."
"106" "Kraker, Peter, Rainer Bachleitner, Viltė Banelytė, Ilire Hasani-Mavriqi, Daniela Luzi, Roberta Ruggieri, Electra Sifacaki, Vilius Stanciauskas, Michela Vignoli, and Mappet Walker. 2019. “Deliverable D4.1 – Practices Evaluation and Mapping: Methods, Tools and User Needs.” https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2557357."
"107" "McDermott, Jason E., Matthew Partridge, and Yana Bromberg. 2018. “Ten Simple Rules for Drawing Scientific Comics.”  PLOS Computational Biology  14 (1): e1005845. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005845."
"108" "McKiernan, Erin C, Philip E Bourne, C Titus Brown, Stuart Buck, Amye Kenall, Jennifer Lin, Damon McDougall, et al. 2016. “How Open Science Helps Researchers Succeed.”  ELife  5 (July). https://doi.org/10/gbqsng."
"109" "Munafò, Marcus R., Brian A. Nosek, Dorothy V. M. Bishop, Katherine S. Button, Christopher D. Chambers, Nathalie Percie du Sert, Uri Simonsohn, Eric-Jan Wagenmakers, Jennifer J. Ware, and John P. A. Ioannidis. 2017. “A Manifesto for Reproducible Science.”  Nature Human Behaviour  1 (1): 0021. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-016-0021."
"110" "Pasquetto, Irene, Bernadette Randles, and Christine Borgman. 2017. “On the Reuse of Scientific Data.”  Data Science Journal  16 (0). https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2017-008."
"111" "Piwowar, Heather A., Roger S. Day, and Douglas B. Fridsma. 2007. “Sharing Detailed Research Data Is Associated with Increased Citation Rate.”  PLOS ONE  2 (3): e308. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0000308."
"112" "Pontika, Nancy, Petr Knoth, Matteo Cancellieri, and Samuel Pearce. 2015. “Fostering Open Science to Research Using a Taxonomy and an ELearning Portal.” In . Graz, Austria. http://oro.open.ac.uk/44719/."
"113" "Powell, Kendall. 2016. “Does It Take Too Long to Publish Research?”  Nature News  530 (7589): 148. https://doi.org/10.1038/530148a."
"114" "Science Council. 2018. “Diversity and Inclusion Progression Framework 2017 Benchmarking Report: Scientific Bodies.” https://sciencecouncil.org/diversity-and-inclusion-progression-framework-2017-benchmarking-report-scientific-bodies/."
"115" "Sengupta, Pratim, and Marie-Claire Shanahan. 2017. “Open Science, Public Engagement and the University.”  ArXiv:1702.04855 [Physics] , February. http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.04855."
"116" "Shuai, Xin, Alberto Pepe, and Johan Bollen. 2012. “How the Scientific Community Reacts to Newly Submitted Preprints: Article Downloads, Twitter Mentions, and Citations.”  PLOS ONE  7 (11): e47523. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0047523."
"117" "Stilgoe, Jack, Simon J. Lock, and James Wilsdon. 2014. “Why Should We Promote Public Engagement with Science?”  Public Understanding of Science  23 (1): 4–15. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963662513518154."
"118" "Tennant, Jonathan P., François Waldner, Damien C. Jacques, Paola Masuzzo, Lauren B. Collister, and Chris. H. J. Hartgerink. 2016. “The Academic, Economic and Societal Impacts of Open Access: An Evidence-Based Review.”  F1000Research  5 (September): 632. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.8460.3."
"119" "Teperek, Marta. 2018. “How to Make the Most of an Academic Conference – a Checklist for before, during and after the Meeting.”  Impact of Social Sciences  (blog). March 16, 2018. http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2018/03/16/how-to-make-the-most-of-an-academic-conference-a-checklist-for-before-during-and-after-the-meeting/."
"120" "Vicente-Saez, Ruben, and Clara Martinez-Fuentes. 2018. “Open Science Now: A Systematic Literature Review for an Integrated Definition.”  Journal of Business Research  88 (July): 428–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.12.043."
"121" "Wilson, Paul M., Mark Petticrew, Mike W. Calnan, and Irwin Nazareth. 2010. “Disseminating Research Findings: What Should Researchers Do? A Systematic Scoping Review of Conceptual Frameworks.”  Implementation Science  5 (1): 91. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-5-91."
"122" "Yammine, Samantha Z., Christine Liu, Paige B. Jarreau, and Imogen R. Coe. 2018. “Social Media for Social Change in Science.”  Science  360 (6385): 162–63. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat7303."
