This is the pre-print version of an article published in the Review of International
Political Economy. For citation purposes please refer to the original, available
open access:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09692290.2019.1687557

The discourse of competitiveness and the dis-embedding of the national
economy

Lukas Linsi
Department of International Relations and International Organization (IRIO)
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands
l.a.linsi[at]rug[dot]nl

Abstract. In the 1950s-70s inward foreign direct investments (IFDI) were widely seen as a menace,
threatening to undermine national economic development. Two decades later such concerns had virtually
disappeared. Rather than as a problem, IFDI were now portrayed as a solution - even symbols of national
economic success. To better understand the ideational dynamics underlying this remarkable transformation
in perceptions of IFDI, this research traces the evolution of economic discourses in the United Kingdom
over the post-war period. Deviating from conventional accounts in constructivist IPE, the investigation
indicates that the rise of first-generation neoliberal discourses in the 1980s played only a secondary role in
these processes. Instead, the discursive reshaping of IFDI was primarily driven by the rise of the narrative
of national competitiveness in the early 1990s – a discourse inspired by managerial rather than neoclassical
economic theory. Building a framework that prioritizes (multinational) firms over national economies, the
rise of this second-generation neoliberal narrative played a critical role in promoting now taken-for-granted
imaginaries of the global economy as an economic ”race” between nations-as-platforms-of-production. The
findings highlight both the ideational underbelly of the rise of the competition state and how it re-shaped
dominant social representations of IFDI.

Keywords: economic ideas; business schools; competitiveness; foreign direct investments; United
Kingdom.
Word count (incl. references): 11,876

1

Introduction
In the 1950s-70s concerns about the harmful effects of inward foreign direct investments (IFDI)
were widespread and pronounced. In a speech held in 1969, British Prime Minister Harold Wilson
warned that there was ‘no future for Europe, or for Britain, if we allow American Business … so
to dominate the strategic growth industries of our individual countries, that they, and not we, are
able to determine the pace and direction of Europe’s industrial advance’ (in Hodges, 1974, p. 228).
President Pompidou summoned that French firms should not become ‘furnishers of hand labour to
foreign brains’ (in Behrman, 1970, p. 41). In Germany, leaders of the centre-right governing party
CDU emphasized that ‘a healthy economy must free itself from dependence on foreign capital’ (in
Servan-Schreiber, 1979, p. 45). And even the famously liberal Financial Times described IFDI as
a serious economic problem in an editorial calling for greater regulatory intervention (“The
General Makes One Valid Point,” 1965).
By the early 2000s, even if they hadn’t disappeared completely1, such fears about negative longterm implications of foreign ownership had largely vanished. In the UK, politicians now suddenly
celebrated IFDI as one of ‘this country’s greatest success stories’ (UK Hansard, 1994). The French
Socialist Party swore to take up ‘the fight’ for the attraction of foreign companies (Les Archives
de l’Assemblée Nationale, 2014). The German Council of Economic Experts now worried about
receiving too little rather than too much IFDI (Sachverständigenrat, 1997, pp. 10–11). And even
the Japanese Ministry of Trade and Industry (MITI), poster child of effective industry
protectionism in the post-war period, commissioned advertisements in the international media to
announce that IFDI had ‘the green light to go in Japan’ (“Invest Japan,” 2008). The financial press

1

And experienced a remarkable revival in populist economic discourses that have emerged in most recent years.

2

was no less enthusiastic, variously describing IFDI as ‘a boon to the … economy’ (“Britain’s Many
Options,” 1996), a ‘vote of confidence’ (“Sunshine, with a Chance of Showers,” 2000) by global
markets or even a ‘source of national pride’ (“Foreign, Redirected Investment,” 2004). In brief, as
The Economist noted in the mid-1990s (“Back in fashion,” 1993):
Raymond Vernon (…) observed in 1977 (…) that ‘the multinational enterprise has come to be seen
as the embodiment of almost anything disconcerting about modern industrial society.’ Yet now it is
only a slight exaggeration to say that it is seen as the reverse, as the embodiment of modernity and
the prospect of wealth: full of technology, rich in capital, replete with skilled jobs. Governments all
around the world (…) are queuing up to attract multinationals.

How can we make sense of this remarkable transformation in the perceived desirability of IFDI?
Previous studies of the role of economic ideas in the political processes that have led to the
unleashing of global capital markets have strongly emphasized the importance of neoclassical
economic theory and the agency of academic mainstream economists as ideational entrepreneurs
(Abdelal, 2007; Ban, 2016; Blyth, 2002; Chwieroth, 2009; McNamara, 1998; Nelson, 2017). But
empirically, they have focused only on developments concerning short-term portfolio capital flows
(PFI), not FDI.2
To start filling this gap, this article sets out to trace the evolution of the discursive representation
of IFDI among policy elites in the United Kingdom (UK). To build my argument, I draw a
conceptual distinction between “discourses” as cognitive frames circulating primarily among
policy-making communities on the one hand, and more theoretical academic debates that feed

2

PFI are short-term investments of a speculative nature, primarily in equities or bonds. FDI are long-term
investments by multinational corporations who take a controlling stake of a company outside their home market.

3

those discourses on the other. In contrast to the conventional treatment of neoliberalism as a fairly
monolithic body of thought in much of the existing literature in IPE, this article argues that the rise
of neoliberal economic discourses in UK politics in the late twentieth century can be usefully
divided into two stages, each one being characterized by a distinct articulation of dominant
economic world-views and drawing inspiration from different fields of academic research. The
first-generation, “Thatcherian” version represents a discourse strongly inspired by neoclassical
economics. Maintaining the ontological primacy of national economies it primarily sought to
impose the priority of market mechanisms over collective political decisions at the domestic level.
The second-generation version, centered on the notion of national competitiveness, rose to
prominence in the early 1990s. It was pushed by management and business school scholars against
the intellectual preferences of mainstream economists. In contrast to the former, it sought not
merely to subordinate domestic politics to domestic markets, but to discursively subject the nationstate as a whole to an economic logic dictated by global markets. To that end, it drew a new vision
of the nation-state, in which the needs and preferences of multinational corporations took
precedence over those of domestic actors. Firms had become globally footloose, claimed the
discourse. Therefore the primary economic responsibility of national policymakers was no longer
to make domestic firms competitive, but the state itself (and the society that constitutes it) in order
to attract globally mobile capital (cf. Fougner, 2006, p. 175).
As the empirical investigation will demonstrate, it was this second-generation version of
neoliberalism, not Thatcherian discourses, which acted as the key driver of the remarkable
metamorphosis in dominant social representations of IFDI. While first-generation neoliberal
discourse portrayed IFDI in a somewhat more favorable manner than the statist Keynesian views
that had been dominant previously, the welcome extended to IFDI remained lukewarm: they were
4

seen as a useful tool to foment competition in domestic industries, but it was the (export) strength
of domestic, nationally-owned, firms, which remained the ultimate yardstick of economic strength.
The enthusiasm for IFDI that emerged in the 1990s – and the ambition to attract as much as
possible of it to one’s shores – was built on the frames provided by the second-generation
discourse. It effectively turned IFDI from a perceived menace into a symbol of economic success
and badge of honor.
The primary aim of this article is to trace these discursive developments in the case of Britain. In
so doing, the article makes two main contributions: as part of this special issue, it seeks to outline
the ideational underbelly of the rise of the competition state (Cerny, 1997; W. Davies, 2014;
Elkins, Guzman, & Simmons, 2006; Fougner, 2006; Jessop, 2003; Stopford, Strange, & Henley,
1991), thereby adding empirical “flesh” on claims about management scholars’ influence on public
policy developed in the introduction to this issue (cross-reference to SI introduction). Secondly, in
the context of the wider literature, it casts a theoretically fresh light on the phenomenon of IFDI.
Whereas conventional depictions of IFDI in IPE, business and economics scholarship tend to treat
it as a purely material phenomenon, this article emphasizes its symbolical dimension (and the
dramatic transformations therein) as an equally important dimension for the study of the politics
of foreign direct investments.
As such, three clarifications are in order. Firstly, the dependent variable that the study seeks to
enlighten are policymakers’ perceptions of the desirability of IFDI, not the policies that end up
being adopted. Although developments in the depiction of IFDI in dominant economic policy
discourses on the one hand, and changes in IFDI policy approaches during the period of
observation on the other seem to broadly coincide in Britain (and elsewhere), the article does not
examine the pathways that connect the two. Two further clarifications follow from this. Economic
5

discourses do not appear out of thin air. They are inspired by observations of material
developments that their proponents make. The growing importance of cross-border transactions
during the time period of observation are not merely a discursive construct; they are ”real”. Yet,
they are a reality that has no meaning – or policy response - attached to them (cf. Chwieroth &
Sinclair, 2013). The internationalization of economic regimes of production can variously be seen
as irrelevant, as a threat calling for protectionist interventions, or as an opportunity to be embraced.
Discourses are crucial in determining which interpretation prevails. At the same time, discourses
do not only give meaning to “actual” developments, but simultaneously affect the constitution of
underlying material phenomena themselves (MacKenzie, 2006). This deeply endogenous nature
of the relationship between the discursive and the material make it difficult to keep them apart
analytically, and some unavoidable limitations in this regard have to be borne in mind. Finally, as
for any single country-case study, there are questions about the generalizability of the findings
from the British case. In cross-national perspective, British policy elites’ enthusiasm for the
competitiveness discourse has been particularly strong, which is plausibly related to the traditional
international orientation and relatively weak industrial base of the British economy. What makes
Britain a good case to study is thus not that it is “typical” (it is not), but that it is well suited to
study nuances in different currents of neoliberal discourses because of the salience of the latter in
British economic policy debates. It is furthermore a highly relevant case because Britain has been
at the vanguard of the development of these discourses over the past decades and the British
experience has been influential for their (partial) adoption elsewhere.
The remainder of the article is organized in the following manner: Section one introduces the
analytical framework. Section two discusses the relationships between economics and
management theory. Section three situates the rise and remarkable political success of the
6

competitiveness discourse in long-term developments in economic discourses. Sections four to six
unpack the evolution of the discursive representation of IFDI among British policy elites in three
historical intervals: the periods of statism (1950s-1970s), first-generation neoliberalism (1980s),
and second-generation neoliberalism (1990s-2000s). The final section discusses the implications
and concludes.

Economic ideas and the unleashing of global capital markets
A substantial body of research in constructivist IPE has enlightened the power of ideational
constructs in political processes driving the liberalization of the world economy (Abdelal, 2007;
Best & Widmaier, 2006; Blyth, 2002; Campbell & Pedersen, 2014; Chwieroth, 2009; Watson &
Hay, 2004). A central feature of this body of research is a strong emphasis on the role of academic
economists in propagating economistic ways of thinking among policy elites. As such, the
literature also forwards a fairly clear definition of “the economist” and ”economic ideas”: the
agents at the center of attention are individuals in – or closely associated to – mainstream
economics departments at prestigious (U.S.) universities, and the body of knowledge that they
promote is neoliberalism. This focus is particularly prominent in studies of the role of ideas in the
political economy of capital account liberalization. As the work by Abelal (2007), Chwieroth
(2009), McNamara (1998) and Nelson (2017) shows, the removal of capital controls constituted
neither a self-evident answer to the stagflationary challenges that policymakers faced at the time,
nor were they a long-desired objective of financially powerful elites who, for long periods of time,
had considered capital controls to be in their best interest. To be seen as a solution, unfettered
capital markets thus first had to be defined as desirable objects through active ideational

7

entrepreneurship. Analyzing the processes that did this work, the studies by McNamara, Chwieroth
and Nelson all identify the rise of monetarist economic theory at leading economics departments
in the USA of the 1970s and 1980s as the critical juncture moment3. One influential piece of
research has even traced capital account liberalization decisions in emerging markets directly to
the individual training national policymakers received in specific economics departments
(Chwieroth, 2007).
While these studies do provide compelling accounts of how monetarist economic theories have
affected institutional structures of global capital markets, empirically, they have so far only
considered the politics regulating markets for short-term flows of global capital, which together
account for little less than half of total global capital flows.4 The other ”half”, markets for longterm FDI, has received only scant attention in the literature, with some of the authors noting in
passing that Keynes held a clearly more favorable view of long-term FDI than short-term portfolio
capital flows (PFI) and that regimes for FDI were relatively more liberal in the Bretton Woods
period (Abdelal, 2007, pp. 98–101; Chwieroth, 2009, p. 63). Yet, while it is true that regulatory
frameworks for FDI tended to be less restrictive and policy changes not as visible and abrupt as
they were in the case of PFI, this does not mean that there is nothing to be explained. Quite the
opposite: although there were fewer formal restrictions on IFDI in the post-war period, government
administrations around the world had developed sophisticated apparatuses aimed at discouraging
or regulating IFDI in an ad hoc manner through a variety of instruments ranging from industrial
policies discriminating in favor of domestic firms to investment review boards and sectoral
3

Abdelal’s position is more nuanced. He describes the consensus-formation among professional economists as a
necessary but not sufficient condition (Abdelal, 2007, pp. 17; 32).
4
The reported volumes of FDI inflows slightly exceed short-term capital inflows in recent years: In 2015, the total
reported value of FDI liabilities reached 2.5 trillion USD, compared to 1.7 trillion USD for portfolio investment
liabilities and another 0.4 trillion for financial derivatives (see IMF Balance of Payments Yearbook 2016, Table A1).

8

restrictions (see Bailey et al. 1994; Safarian 1993). By the late 1990s, most (if not all) of these
regulatory tools had been dismantled5 and replaced by policies designed to actively attract IFDI.
In this sense, although less clear-cut, the policy change in the case of IFDI was not notably less
important than it had been in the case of short-term PFI. In terms of dominant perceptions, the
transformation may in fact have been even more pronounced. As I will show, changes in the
interpretation of IFDI are marked not only by a gradual waning of concerns (which had been the
key development for PFI), but a further-going metamorphosis, which re-conceptualized them not
only as innocuous, but as eminent symbols of national economic strength and success.
At the same time, neither the timing nor the substance of the discursive changes that shaped these
crucial ideational transformations correspond well with established accounts in the constructivist
IPE literature. Although the rise of first-generation neoliberal discourses did play a role in
motivating policymakers to adopt a more favorable view of IFDI in the 1980s, the more
consequential changes occurred only in the 1990s. As I will show, they were driven by business
school scholars rather than economists who propagated a world-view that was distinct from – and
at times opposed to – the axioms of neoclassical economic theory.

Economic ideas in multi-dimensional space
Most accounts of the evolution of economic policy discourses in the twentieth century tend to
characterize it as a contest among two clearly defined camps: states vs. markets, Hayek vs. Keynes,
statism vs. neoliberalism. Accordingly, most analyses in the field tend to work with only two,

5

In most recent years, the surge in FDI inflows from China has led to the re-emergence of some of these tools in
European and US politics.

9

neatly delineated, ideal-typical bodies of economic thought. Although this approach can serve as
a useful heuristic for didactical purposes, it risks obfuscating more nuanced transformations in
economic discourses (cf. Carstensen, 2011). Most problematically, I suggest, it has encouraged
analysts to treat the rise of Thatcherian neoliberalism in the 1980s as some sort of “end-point” in
the evolution of economic ideas (an assumption that in my reading many prominent accounts in
constructivist political economy tend to make6).
But neoliberalism is not a monolithic body of thought. It is a multi-faceted, dynamic phenomenon
that draws from heterogenous sources (Mudge, 2008; Steger & Roy, 2010). It is constituted of
various currents that aspire to replace collective, political judgments with market-based evaluation
techniques as a broad common goal (W. Davies, 2014, p. 3). But its specific configurations are
historically and geographically contingent. And as the subsequent empirical investigation will
show, neoliberal economic discourses in Britain have evolved in consequential ways after the rise
(and fall) of Thatcherism (cf. Carstensen & Matthijs, 2017).
To systematize these discursive transformations, I borrow from regulationist economic theory (in
particular Boyer, 1990; Jessop, 2003), which conceptualizes the economy as being constituted of
distinct layers of social relations or ‘institutional forms’: e.g. the fiscal-monetary nexus, labor
market institutions, corporate governance arrangements, industrial policy and the organization of
relationships between national and international regimes (cf. horizontal axes in Table 1).

6

It is worth noting that a similar observation served as the starting point of Mark Blyth seminal study: “Polanyi
replicated a fallacy he rightly denounced in the liberal economists of his day: the tendency to see market society
as the ‘end of history’. Yet in critiquing such a view, Polanyi paradoxically posited his own historical end.”
(Blyth, 2002, p. 4). It is thus not without irony that contemporary scholarship on the role of ideas in political
economy, for which Blyth’s contribution was such an important impetus, frequently tends to replicate the very
same fallacy yet again by inadvertently treating Thatcherian neoliberalism as the end point of history.

10

In this perspective, the emergence of the narrative of national competitiveness in the early 1990s
is important because it significantly re-shaped public economic discourses in Britain with regards
to two of the five horizontal axes in Table 1: it partly re-legitimized a more active role of the state
in industrial policy7 at the domestic level (the ‘industrial policy’ axis in Table 1); and it altered
predominant understandings of the role of the national economy in world markets by shifting
attention from national to global perspectives, thereby discursively subordinating national
economies to the economic logic of global production processes (the ‘national-international’ axis
in Table 1).
As seminal literature in constructivist IPE has argued (Blyth, 2002), first-generation neoliberal
discourses formulated by Thatcher, Reagan, and others in the 1980s can be understood as an
attempt to “dis-embed” domestic market institutions: that is, efforts aimed at imposing an
expressly economic (as opposed to socio-political or cultural-symbolic) rationale upon how
domestic societies ought to be organized. This lens, I suggest, can be usefully expanded to the
‘second-generation’ neoliberal discourse that the competitiveness narrative incorporates: akin to
how ‘first-generation’ neoliberalism sought to undo the embedding of domestic institutions in noneconomic arrangements, the competitiveness narrative can be seen as a discursive frame that seeks
to legitimize the submission of the nation-state itself to a more clearly economic rationale. Disembedding the national economy, in this sense, does not equate to nation-states being portrayed as
irrelevant or unimportant actors, but the conceptualization of the social purpose of nation-states in
strictly economic (as opposed to symbolic, identitarian or (geo-)political) terms.

7

Even if discursively constrained to the supply side.

11

Table 1. Double movements in the long twentieth century
Dimensions
Time period

DOMESTIC
MARKET
Authority of
states vs.
markets

POSITION
IN WORLD
MARKET
Authority of
national vs.
world economic
forces

Fiscal-monetary nexus
Labour markets
Corporate governance
Industrial policy

Classical (imperial)
liberalism

Statism

First-generation
neoliberalism

Second-generation
neoliberalism

First era of globalization

Bretton Woods

1980s

1990s-2000s

Deregulated

Regulated

Deregulated

Deregulated

(disengagement)

(supply-side intervention)

EMBED

DISEMBED

markets>states

states>markets

markets>states

markets>states

Subordinated
(gold standard)

Relative
autonomy

Relative
autonomy

Subordinated
(”platforms
of production”)

national>world

national>world

EMBED

DISEMBED

National-international
world>national

12

world>national

With the end of the Cold War, proponents of the competitiveness discourse argued, the locus of
inter-state competition had shifted from a military to an economic contest (Thurow, 1992). It
painted a vision of political authority in which, as Bill Clinton (in)famously put it, ‘each nation is
like a big corporation competing in the global marketplace’ (in Krugman, 1994, p. 29), with
political leaders akin to CEOs and citizens to their employees (W. Davies, 2014, p. 113). And it
emphasized that to “win”, nation-states had to subject themselves to (and embrace) the logic of
global market forces.
Critically for the purposes of this special issue, the discourse that motivated these transformations
was distinct from Thatcherian neoliberalism in both content and intellectual origin. It did not come
out of economics departments, but was built upon a discourse that took inspiration from
managerialist frames about corporate strategy advocated by business school scholars.

Principles of economics vs. management
Existing work that does actively consider the influence of management scholars in the construction
of dominant economic discourses tends to downplay the distinction between the disciplines of
economics and management, conceptualizing them as merely two sides of the same coin (e.g.
Davies 2014). Yet, as other contributions to this special issue illustrate, there are good reasons to
challenge this conceptualization.
It is true that economics and management share important similarities and they have crossfertilized - and reinforced - each other in important ways (see Fourcade and Khurana 2013): on the
one hand, business schools - most prominently Carnegie’s GSIA - served as an intellectual home
for early proponents of neoliberalism at a time at which monetarist and rational expectations
13

theories were not yet widely accepted in academia. On the other hand, neoclassical economic
theory had a very important influence on the academization of business schools and the principles
they advocate, for instance the notion of shareholder value. In many aspects, also the normative
views of economics and management are similar - such as a shared belief in the invigorating and
socially desirable effects of competition, or the conviction that the private sector, not the
government, should coordinate economic activity. But the existence of these points of agreement
should not obscure the fact that the two disciplines are built upon very different intellectual
lineages, which disagree substantially about the nature and appropriate functioning of economic
markets (cross-reference to ‘The Managerial Turn of Governance’, this issue). While neoclassical
economics is built on theory-oriented academic debates concerned with questions regarding the
material welfare of entire societies (Amadae, 2003; Mirowski, 2002), the history of management
thought is much more closely associated to industry and the military (Amadae, 2016; Augier &
March, 2011; Khurana, 2007). Accordingly, management science’s focus is centered on practical
concerns surrounding industrial efficiency, the optimization of organizational decision-making
processes and how to secure relative gains in competitive games with rival firms (Khurana, 2007).
Dominant conceptions of the nature of economic markets forwarded by the two fields are notably
distinct: while neoclassical economic theory, swayed by Smith’s notion of the ‘invisible’ hand, is
committed to a harmonious view of economic markets, management theory is interested in the
‘visible’ hand (Chandler, 1977): the concocting of strategies how to take advantage from market
inefficiencies and asymmetric information to beat competitor firms.

14

The competitiveness discourse
Traditionally the work of business school scholars focused on the performance of specific firms
and industries, not entire economies. This started to change in the early 1980s when, amidst
widespread concerns about the perceived economic decline of the United States, a discourse of
national competitiveness became increasingly prominent in Capitol Hill, from where it soon after
spread around the globe (Sum, 2009).
The idea of national competitiveness has deep historical roots, which, according to some, go back
centuries (Reinert, 1995). Like the work of Joseph Schumpeter, to which it is often associated, it
is concerned with imperfect information, entrepreneurship, technology and productivity. The
specific articulation of associated debates and discourses have however evolved over time
(Fougner, 2006; Pedersen, 2010; Sum, 2009). In the post-1973 period mentions of the term
national competitiveness started to grow to refer to certain countries’ productivity problems
defined in terms of relative labour costs (cost competitiveness). In the 1980s it was appropriated
by business strategists and public policy scholars such as Michael Porter, Laura D’Andrea Tyson
and Lester Thurow who also held influential government-advising positions during that time. In
their hands, the notion of national competitiveness was both broadened and turned into a more
actionable concept (Pedersen, 2010, pp. 629–630; Sum, 2009, pp. 187–188). Drawing from
evolutionary and institutionalist economic theories they defined national competitiveness as being
related not merely to labour costs but countries’ broader demand conditions or “business
environment”. And they sought not merely to compare economies’ past performance in these
terms, but to understand how competitiveness can be created through policy interventions. In the
1990s, writers such as Robert Reich, Kenichi Ohmae or Susan Strange fused these frames with a
strong narrative of globalization. The resulting discourse, which became very prominent in the

15

aftermath of the Cold War, portrays the global economy as a game that revolves around national
economies which stand in direct competition with each other for the attraction of globally footloose
multinational firms (e.g. Ohmae, 1990; R. B. Reich, 1992; Strange, 1998).
Maybe not surprisingly in light of the eclectic mix of theoretical approaches that constitute it, the
globalist discourse of national competitiveness has been described as incoherent, ‘chaotic’ and
‘confused’ (Bristow, 2005, p. 285). Nonetheless, even though it is used in different ways, the
discourse has some important general traits. For one, it is an undisguised attack on mainstream
economics. Competitiveness scholars asserted that ‘the nature and character of international
transactions have so much changed in recent years … that the traditional apparatus of the
international economist is … no longer adequate to explain real-world phenomena’ (Dunning,
1995, p. 165). The theory of comparative advantage, they charged, was out-of-touch, overly
abstract and lacking an understanding of the ‘deeper reality of competition’ (Michael Porter in
Snowdon and Stonehouse 2006, p. 164; emphasis added). Secondly, competitiveness scholars
sought to distinguish themselves from mainstream economists through their prioritization of
directly applicable policy prescriptions over mathematically elegant formal models – an ambition
that also fostered their development of a view of the responsibilities of the state that is markedly
distinct from the axioms of neoclassical economics. Rather than entrusting the economy to the
‘invisible hand’ of the market, they advocate an active entrepreneurial state that aggressively
implements supply-side business-friendly industrial policies. But arguably the most important
imprint of competitiveness theory on broader economic discourses lies in its reconceptualization
of spatial hierarchies and the associated redefinition of the social purpose of national economies.
Whereas national economies were still taken for granted as the ‘primary object[s] of economic
management’ (Jessop, 2003, p. 175) in the work of neoclassical economists and first-generation

16

neoliberal discourse (i.e. as the very objects to be freed from state intervention), the national
competitiveness discourse sought to re-frame the ‘natural scale of economic processes’ (Jessop,
2003, p. 179). ‘Seeking to explain “competitiveness” at the national level … is to answer the wrong
question’, asserted Porter (1998 [1990], p. 43): ‘To find answers, we must focus not on the
economy as a whole but on specific industries and industry segments’ (ibid.; emphasis in original).
It is thus multinational firms, not national economies, who are the primary actors in the world
economy. And the economic success of the latter, in competitiveness thinking, is essentially a
function of their ability to serve the needs and preferences of the former (Porter, 1998 [1990], p.
52).
Competitiveness theorists’ prescriptions for how governments should cater to successful
multinationals evolved over time (Fougner, 2006): whereas competitiveness theories of the 1980s
reflected on government strategies aimed at strengthening “home-based” (not necessarily
nationally owned; cf. Porter 1998 [1990], p. 54) multinationals against their foreign rivals, the
globalist competitiveness discourse that became dominant in the 1990s had lost faith in the national
allegiance of globally mobile corporations. Because there are no more “American” corporations,
Robert Reich (1992) argued, ‘the well-being of Americans … no longer depends on the
profitability of the corporations they own, or on the prowess of their industries, but on the value
they add to the global economy through their skills and insights. Increasingly, it is the jobs that
Americans do, rather than the success of abstract entities like corporations, industries, or national
economies, that determine their standard of living.’ In this view, it is thus not anymore corporations
that need to be made competitive, but the immobile state (and the workforce and society that
constitute it) itself (Fougner, 2006, p. 175). In the globalized economy of the late twentieth century,
Susan Strange asserted, states ‘occupy a territorial space, but they no longer control what takes

17

place in that space’ (Strange, 1998, p. 113). As a result, their primary economic responsibility is
merely to ‘act as good landlords’ for multinational corporations, ‘assuring the investors that their
space has all the facilities, services and qualities necessary to business and to pleasure’ (Strange,
1998, p. 113). It is this transformation, which encapsulates what I refer to as the dis-embedding of
national economies.
At least inititally, mainstream economists showed themselves unimpressed by the national
competitiveness framework and ‘either ignored … or dismissed’ the approach (Neary, 2003, p.
458). They asserted that it didn’t add anything useful to theories of comparative advantage and
pointed to what they considered to be serious conceptual flaws and misunderstandings. One review
of The Competitive Advantage of Nations declared that ‘Porter misunderstood comparative
advantage … and reverted to a more primitive and long-rejected explanation for trade’ (H. Davies
& Ellis, 2000, p. 1198). It concluded bluntly that ‘academicians of international business would
be well advised to revisit the elementary economics of trade and growth before venturing too
boldly into the field of policy’ (H. Davies & Ellis, 2000, p. 1189). But economists did not only
question the intellectual merits of competitiveness theory; they furthermore uttered deep concerns
that the framework would encourage bad government policies, e.g. trade protectionism (Krugman,
1994), competitive devaluations (Boltho, 1996), or wasteful government spending (H. Davies &
Ellis, 2000). In the most scathing attack, Paul Krugman (1994, p. 30) dismissed the entire
framework as ‘meaningless’ and a ‘dangerous obsession’:
The idea that a country's economic fortunes are largely determined by its success on world markets
is a hypothesis, not a necessary truth; and as a practical, empirical matter, that hypothesis is flatly
wrong. … it is simply not the case that the world's leading nations are to any important degree in
economic competition with each other, or that any of their major economic problems can be
attributed to failures to compete on world markets.

18

Nonetheless, in disregard of many economists’ passionate hostility towards it, the narrative of
national competitiveness kept gaining political traction throughout the 1990s when concepts such
as the “business environment” gradually encroached economic policy discourses and governments
in all corners of the world were busily devising their own competitiveness strategies (Fougner,
2006; Pedersen, 2010; Sum, 2009).
The remarkable success of the competitiveness framework in becoming a dominant economic
policy framework against the will of mainstream economists can be related to at least three factors:
First, while being a thorn in the side of academic economists, the picture of the ”reality” of
competition that it paints makes intuitive sense to most other people, including practically oriented
decision-makers (cf. Bristow, 2005; W. Davies, 2014). Second, the skillful reinsertion of powerful
nationalistic feelings into an otherwise liberal world-view gives it considerable cultural appeal
(Bristow, 2005; Krugman, 1994). Calling for alertness and preparedness for battle, the discourse
taps into Martian sentiments, but does so with largely “pacifist” aims: the improvement of
economic performance and material well-being. Third, its emphasis on external constraints
imposed by global market forces make it an extraordinarily attractive – and politically malleable rhetorical device for politicians who can refer to these apparent external constraints to justify
almost any policy choice they prefer while deflecting blame to the anonymous “others” (Hay &
Rosamond, 2002; Rosamond, 2002).8

8

For instance, the Right could refer to the competitive imperative to propose spending cuts, while the Left used it to
call for greater investments in infrastructure and education (Sousa 2002).

19

The remainder of this article will assess the role of this discourse for the dis-embedding of the
national economy in British economic discourses and its implications for the predominant
interpretations of the meaning of IFDI.

The social representation of IFDI in British politics
The transformation of government attitudes towards IFDI has been a geographically widespread
phenomenon, encompassing jurisdictions at all levels of economic development (Linsi, 2016).
There is thus no lack in candidates for potential case studies. Since this investigation’s primary
aim lies in evaluating the influence of variants of neoliberal economic discourses on the shaping
and re-shaping of dominant perceptions of IFDI, I choose to focus on the UK. I do so primarily
for two reasons: As a sizable literature in constructivist IPE has argued, neoliberal economic
discourses have been particularly salient in the British polity. Furthermore, in contrast to more
ambiguous ”hybrid” versions adopted elsewhere (for instance Germany or Spain, cf. Ban, 2016),
those narratives were articulated in relatively “pure” form in the UK. This provides a useful setting
to trace nuances in the historical evolution of neoliberal discourses. Secondly, the UK is also a
case of relevance beyond considerations about its national politics. Prominent British politicians,
in particular Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair, provided important inspiration for the evolution
of political-economic discourses internationally in the late twentieth century. In this sense it can
be considered as some sort of a ”vanguard” case that played a central role in the development and
international diffusion of first- as well as second-generation neoliberal discourses.
The analysis builds upon a comprehensive review of previous scholarly analyses of the history and
politics of IFDI in Britain and a wealth of historical primary materials, focusing especially on
20

parliamentary debates in the Hansard collection and the historical archives of the Financial Times,
The Economist and The Guardian.
In close correspondence with the theoretical discussion above, the investigation uncovers three
demarcated periods in the evolution of political discussions about IFDI in Britain: economic
statism (1950s-70s), inward-looking first-generation neoliberalism (1980s), and globalist secondgeneration neoliberalism (1990s-2000s).

1950s-70s: Period of economic statism
In the immediate postwar period, the political legitimacy of nation-states was uncontested. It was
widely accepted that the state should play an active role in the economy. Predominant political
discourses about the economy were embedded in a narrative of economic statism. It described the
world economy as a system consisting of a diverse set of national units, which exchanged some
goods and capital with each other, but maintained an important degree of autonomy (Jessop, 2003).
Albeit mainstream political discourses in North America and Western Europe described a carefully
managed participation in the world economy as desirable, key determinants of economic prosperity
were considered to be located at the national level. Domestic, nationally-owned firms and
industries were considered as the main engines of national economic growth, and as such critical
actors in nation-states’ quest for sustainable economic development. Accordingly, while the
expansion of domestic firms abroad (i.e. outward FDI) was looked upon favorably, inflows of
foreign companies into the domestic economy were met with skepticism and distrust.
Being among the world’s largest outward investors and carrying the legacy of an exceptionally
strong commitment to the principles of economic liberalism, Britain’s stance towards foreign
21

capital inflows was initially more welcoming than that of most other advanced economies. Before
1945, when levels of cross-border capital flows were still low, IFDI was not considered to be an
issue of sufficient importance to require any kind of policy or monitoring (Jones 1990). After the
war, the 1947 Exchange Controls Act instituted a potentially powerful mechanism to regulate
IFDI. But the Treasury and Bank of England, both privileging capital inflows’ positive effect on
Britain’s balance of payments over considerations about industrial development, proved reluctant
to use these provisions. As a result, British IFDI policies remained formally relatively liberal in
comparative perspective (cf. Bailey et al. 1994; Safarian 1993).
However, despite the absence of drastic measures aimed at restricting IFDI (as those implemented,
for example, in Canada or France), concerns about FDI inflows were widespread in British politics
at the time. Expressing the worries of the political establishment at the time, Prime Minister Harold
Wilson warned in a speech held in 1969 (in Hodges, 1974, p. 228):
There is no future for Europe, or for Britain, if we allow American Business … so to dominate the
strategic growth industries of our individual countries, that they, and not we, are able to determine the
pace and direction of Europe’s industrial advance, that we are left in industrial terms as the hewers of
wood and drawers of water while they, because of the scale of research, development and production
which they deploy, based on the vast size of their single market, come to enjoy a growing monopoly in
the production of technological instruments of industrial advance … This is the road not to partnership
but to an industrial helotry, which, as night follows day, will mean a declining influence in world affairs,
for all of us in Europe.

In a heated debate about American IFDI in the House of Commons, a MP of the governing party
articulated these concerns in no less alarmist manner (UK Hansard, 1968):
The proud descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers and their friends have been returning in a massive
procession to our shores over the years (…) They are visitors we welcome, of course, but at times we

22

wish they would not always wear their boots when occupying our industrial and commercial beds. (…)
[U]nless the major modern industries of Europe not yet taken over can be kept under European control,
Europe will lose its inventive brains and higher technical skills to the New World, and will become little
more than a provincial production line for American industry, and a playground for tourists.

Although not always expressed with as much belletristic flair, similar views were widespread
across the political spectrum. A survey with a sample of 120 senior civil servants and 355
businessmen conducted by Michael Hodges in 1969 found that 43 percent of respondents agreed
that ‘the independence of business throughout Europe (…) is being threatened by American takeovers’ (Hodges 1974). The economics profession expressed similar concerns. In a 1973 policy
report commissioned by the UK government, LSE economist Max Steuer for instance wrote the
following (Steuer, 1973):
[F]rom the sole point of view of the implications for technology, working for a foreign subsidiary is like
working for its parent. Either way foreign interests are buying domestic ability to produce ideas. If it is
bad for British technology when a scientist emigrates, it is bad when foreign subsidiaries hire, or retain,
British scientists.

Even the Financial Times, stern advocate of liberal internationalist principles, called for regulatory
action to reduce levels of foreign company ownership in an editorial (“The General Makes One
Valid Point,” 1965):
[T]here can be no doubt that both Governments and industry in Europe have become increasingly
concerned at the growing importance of American-based companies in certain sectors of the economy.
(…) To say that this represents a danger is not to belittle the enormous contribution which, particularly
since the war, U.S. capital has made to the prosperity of Europe.

The policy stance ultimately adopted by British government administrations was relatively subtle.
It carefully avoided high-profile restrictions and focused instead on the encouragement of British
23

mergers in order to avoid American takeovers and foment the creation of ”national champions”
(especially in the automobile and computer industries, see Hodges, 1974). In brief: although the
reactions of British policy elites to increases in FDI inflows during the Bretton Woods era were
circumscribed, they observed the influx of foreign companies with serious concern. Even if IFDI
was considered to be beneficial in the short-run - especially in view of the country’s distressed
balance of payments - policy elites worried aloud about the detrimental consequences of IFDI for
British industry and long-term economic development. In stark contrast to contemporary
discourses, increases in IFDI were seen as signs of economic weakness rather than strength,
eliciting not feelings of national achievement, but concerns that something was going wrong with
the British economy.

1980s: Period of inward-looking first-generation neoliberalism
By the late 1960s, powerful sections in the Conservative Party had abandoned their short-lived
support of corporatist economic policies, and their return to power in the General Elections of 1970
put an end to the most ambitious attempts to pursue a state-led industrial policy in Britain (Hall,
1986). Labour won the general elections of 1974, but severe macroeconomic difficulties left only
little wiggle room for further policy experimentations before the New Right’s discursive
appropriation of the ’winter of discontent’ paved the way for Margaret Thatcher’s victory in the
elections of 1979 (Hay, 1996).
Adopting a political discourse that borrowed extensively from monetarist economic theory,
Thatcher - who fostered a personal relationship with Friedrich Hayek and also met Milton
Friedman several times in person (Bourne, 2013) – advocated for an unambiguous retreat of the

24

state from the economy. Promoting the use of market mechanisms to coordinate economic
expectations, her economic policy program prioritized the control of inflation rates and public
spending over anything else. The new leadership was deeply skeptical of activist industrial
policies, which they derided as ’grants to ”lame ducks” in the private sector’ (in Hall, 1986, p.
110). They pushed forward with the privatization of many state-owned companies and
significantly rolled back state subsidies to industry.
The free markets narrative articulated by the new government portrayed international competition
in a more favorable light. Sticking to the principles of classical liberalism, the free flow of goods
and capital across borders were described as forces stimulating desirable competitive pressures
and a more efficient allocation of capital. Yet, the Thatcher administration’s internationalism
remained significantly more restrained than the version to be pursued by her successors in the
1990s. Thatcher repeatedly stressed the importance of national sovereignty (cf. Gamble, 1988).
The removal of restrictions on cross-border capital flows and the abolishment of discriminations
against foreign firms were always only seen as a means to an end and not an end in themselves.
The goal was not to attract foreign firms or capital per se, but to use them as an instrument to
enhance the efficiency and international competitiveness of domestic British-owned industries. In
this sense, Thatcher’s administration clearly continued to attach importance to the nationality of
firm ownership. Although her government encouraged the fostering of international competition
in the domestic market, the ultimate purpose of this policy remained to strengthen ”British” firms.
In other words, the national economy – the very object to be freed from state intervention –
remained the overriding unit of analysis.
A critical case in which we can observe the thinking of the Thatcher government in these respects
– as well as the unintended consequences thereof – are the politics behind the ”Big Bang”, the
25

liberalization of the City of London in 1986. For reasons that remain unclear until today, the
London Stock Exchange in 1974 curiously missed the deadline to apply for exemptions from new
regulations on restrictive practices9. This instigated an official investigation by the Office of Fair
Trading into the City’s well-known anti-competitive practices. Contrary to the expectations of
many senior bankers (who had hoped that Thatcher would intervene against the investigation in
reward of their support of her campaign; Augar 2000, p. 43), the new Prime Minister gave it her
full support. The resulting Goodinson-Parkinson agreement forced the City to liberalize and
remove all barriers to foreign entry by 27 October 1986. But policy elites’ thinking motivating this
radical move was not based on any plans to make London a hub for foreign banks. Even less was
the intention to risk eroding the British-owned investment banking industry (which the policy
decision ended up doing in the medium-term, cf. Augar 2000). To the contrary, it was seen erroneously so in hindsight - as a way to expose British banks to greater international competition
that would make them stronger, bigger and able to compete with their U.S. rivals. The importance
of having and nourishing a British-owned sector was never questioned. One Tory minister
responsible for the Goodinson-Parkinson agreement affirmed the opposite (in Augar, 2000, p. 5):
If we want to maintain London as a prominent market, I think it is very important that the Stock
Exchange and the majority of the institutions here should remain very firmly in British hands.

The Financial Times observed that ‘authorities are anxious to see the emergence of strong British
securities firms, capable of competing with the big Wall Street and Japanese houses’ (Augar,
2000). The Bank of England pledged to use its powers to ensure ‘a strong and continuing British
presence in the banking system’ (Safarian, 1993, p. 354) and actively encouraged the formation of

9

In the ex post judgment of the responsible officer, the Stock Exchange would probably have been granted with
significant exemptions if it had applied (Kandiah, 1999).

26

conglomerates of British banks (Plender, 1986). As Peter Middleton, Permanent Secretary of the
Treasury at the time, explained in retrospect (Kandiah, 1999, p. 122):
We thought this was a business in which the UK had some real expertise and if the market was going
to be here, in order to keep it here we really did need some British players here as well.

1990s-2000s: Period of globalist second-generation neoliberalism
These views started to change significantly in the early 1990s. Sir David Walker, Governor of the
Bank of England from 1982-1993, had still ‘wanted to see some major British players emerge in
the new [liberalized] market’ (in Kandiah, 1999, p. 121). His successor Sir Edward George found
nationality of ownership to be of much less importance. Pressed upon the issue of waning British
ownership in the City of London in the aftermath of the Big Bang, he reportedly urged his audience
not to worry by recalling the Wimbledon Tennis Championships (in Augar, 2000, p. 3):
[H]eld in Britain, staffed by locals, dominated by foreigners but still generating bags of prestige and
money for the UK. The City [will] be the same: safe as Europe’s financial capital and a strong
environment in which Britain’s investment bankers could work.

A number of mechanisms, both internal as well as external to British politics, arguably contributed
to the uptake and diffusion of the competitiveness discourse throughout the government apparatus.
For one, several high-profile policymakers in government personally promoted the discourse. At
the beginning stages, Thatcher nemesis Michael Heseltine figured as an important catalyst who
prominently supported competitiveness thinking after his promotion to the position of secretary of
state for industry in 1992. Distancing himself from Thatcher’s principled commitment to nonintervention, he called for targeted ‘pro-market’ (Soederberg, Menz, & Cerny, 2005) regulatory
interventions on the supply-side. He went as far as publicly announcing to ‘intervene before
27

breakfast, before lunch, before tea and before dinner … get up the next morning and start all over
again’ (Heseltine, 2001, p. 431). During his leadership at the DTI, the agency released no less than
three White Papers on competitiveness, outlining an ambitious industrial strategy for Britain that
covered virtually ‘every aspect of government policy’ (Oughton, 1997, p. 1487).
After the elections of 1997, the leadership of New Labour played a crucial role in cementing the
competitiveness debate in British politics. New Labour maintained close contacts with the staff of
Bill Clinton (Wickham-Jones, 1995), the epicenter of the competitiveness ‘obsession’ that had
provoked Paul Krugman’s rant in Foreign Affairs (1994). It released a long series of policy
documents on UK competitiveness. And in the late 1990s it even hired competitiveness “guru”
Michael Porter personally as an advisor (Snowdon & Stonehouse, 2006, p. 172). Existing analyses
of the competitiveness narrative’s appeal for the Labour leadership have highlighted two factors
(Bristow, 2005; Hay & Rosamond, 2002; Watson & Hay, 2004): it provided an effective way to
communicate with the business community by partially adopting their “language”. And the
narrative’s emphasis on external constraints provided an appealing frame to justify the adoption
of pro-market economic policies to its traditional left-wing base by stressing its own ”logic of no
alternatives”.
In addition to key policymakers’ intellectual support and the narrative’s usefulness as a political
tool, less visible, deeper-rooted structural transformations towards the “MBAization” of the
British government administration also played a role. Inspired by the policy prescriptions of the
New Public Management school (cross-reference to ‘Public-Private Partnerships’, this issue),
Thatcher’s government had initiated reforms aimed at increasing the efficiency of the government
apparatus by making it more “business-like”. The ambition to implement private sector practices
in government came with a growing demand for managerial expertise. It was met via the hiring of
28

management consultants from professional consulting firms such as Andersen Consulting,
McKinsey, and Deloitte (Saint-Martin, 2002, p. 329; cross-reference to 'Contracting Development',
this issue). By the mid-1990s management consultants had started to play such a prominent role
in British public administration that some observers described the emergence of a ‘consultocracy’
as a new layer of government (Saint-Martin, 2002). Importantly for the argument at hand, a large
majority of these management consultants are hired from MBA programs where theories of
national competitiveness form an integral part of the curriculum. In this way, management
consultants’ infiltration of state institutions plausibly opened an additional channel that contributed
to the consolidation of national competitiveness thinking in British public administration.
Simultaneously, these forces internal to the British political ecology were complemented and
reinforced by powerful transnational dynamics. Under various disguises, many other governments
had also started to adopt the discourse of competitiveness in the early 1990s (cf. Pedersen, 2010;
Sum, 2009). The narrative came to be heavily promoted by EU institutions, which issued an
influential White Paper on European competitiveness in 1993, and reaffirmed their commitment
to competitiveness thinking in the Lisbon Agenda that proclaimed their ambition to make Europe
‘the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world’ (European Council,
2000). Another highly effective transnational advocate of the competitiveness discourse was the
World Economic Forum (WEF) (cross-reference to ‘Global Risk Management and the Davos
Consensus’, this issue), which developed a methodology aimed at ranking countries according to
their supposed level of “competitiveness”. Notwithstanding serious doubts about the
meaningfulness of these scores (Lall, 2001), the release of the rankings in the WEF’s flagship
publication, the Global Competitiveness Report, turned into a high-publicity annual media event.
The rankings became so influential that some political leaders went as far as declaring

29

improvements in the WEF table as official government policy (Fougner, 2008) – not least the
Labour Party under Tony Blair for which Britain’s position in the WEF’s competitiveness ranking
has been described as ‘the government’s own bottom line indicator of success’ (Krieger, 2007, p.
429).
It is this conjecture of internal and external mechanisms that together drove the diffusion of the
competitiveness discourse throughout British state institutions and public economic debates. Its
impact on how policymakers thought about foreign companies can be observed in a plethora of
policy statements and initiatives, such as repeated assurances of cabinet members that ‘any
company operating in the United Kingdom’ is a British company (Heseltine, 2001, p. 419); that
‘[o]nce overseas companies come to the United Kingdom, they are not foreign companies, they
are British companies that happen to have foreign owners’ (UK Hansard, 1994); and that the
government ‘shall fight for those companies … as hard as we fight for directly British-owned
companies’ (UK Hansard, 1994). It is mirrored in the mushrooming of regional and national
agencies dedicated to attract foreign companies (Lovering, 2003), and the prioritization of FDI
inflows as a key objective of British industrial policy (Pearce, 1997).
The change in the social interpretation of the meaning of IFDI that accompanied these
developments is truly remarkable in historical perspective: The same foreign multinationals, which
not too long ago were described as threats to Britain’s long-term economic development, were
now suddenly embraced enthusiastically: a ‘boon to the British economy’ (“Britain’s Many
Options,” 1996), which ‘infect the competitive spirit’ (“A Rentier Economy in Reverse,” 1990)
and ‘ginger up the economy’ (“Down but Not Out,” 2003).

30

Although concerns about foreign ownership did not disappear altogether, they were clearly
sidelined in British political debates of the 1990s-2000s. What is more, FDI inflows as an abstract
concept10 also started to acquire a powerful symbolic property as a supposed indicator of the
strength of the British economy as a whole. Arguing that ‘multinational businesses are free to
choose where to invest’ (UK Hansard, 1996) and that ‘all those foreign business men can’t be
wrong’ (UK Hansard, 1994), politicians and journalistic communities began suggesting that FDI
inflows represented a ‘vote of confidence’ (Jacquemin & Pench, 1997) or ‘seal of approval’ (“The
Cutting Edge,” 2001) of a nation’s economic policies and prospects. In the run-up to the 1997
General Election, the Conservative Party, which a few decades earlier had observed growing levels
of IFDI with mounting concern, was now eager to emphasize the increases in FDI inflows as
‘[h]ard economic evidence’ (Conservative Party, 1997) to defend their record. One Minister called
‘inward investment … one of the Government’s and this country’s greatest success stories’ (UK
Hansard, 1994). And a Tory MP even claimed it to be nothing less than ‘the single most dramatic
and furthest reaching economic and industrial success story for any Government in the post-war
period’ (UK Hansard, 1994). Labour MPs did not contest these interpretations of the presumed
meaning of FDI inflows, merely disputing the causes of the growing inflows: while Conservative
members attempted to frame increases in IFDI as the outcome of the Party’s controversial decision
to opt out of the EU’s social chapter, Labour saw it as a vindication of the world’s positive
assessment of Britain as a ‘manufacturing nation’. Beyond these tussles, a clear cross-partisan
agreement had crystallized by the mid-1990s: IFDI was seen as an unambiguously “good” thing.

Specific instantiations of foreign takeovers of popular British firms – such as Kraft’s acquisition of Cadbury (cf.
“Small island for sale,” 2010) – could still trigger political debates. But this realization interestingly did not lead to
a questioning of the merits of the more abstract overarching concept of IFDI.
10

31

Discussion and conclusions
Assertions that nation-states find themselves in a ”race” for IFDI are commonplace in
contemporary economic policy discourses. In line with the script of such narratives - and against
the advice of many economists and public policy scholars - governments around the world sacrifice
significant public resources for the provision of generous tax breaks and financial incentives in the
hopes of attracting foreign companies to their shores (Thomas, 2011). In IR scholarship, the
observation of such trends has fomented the development of landmark contributions that have
theorized logics of inter-state competitive dynamics in a global economy (e.g. Elkins et al., 2006;
Stopford et al., 1991). But the ideational foundations of these behaviors have so far remained
underexplored. As this article has attempted to show, neither the perception of the global economy
as a race among nation-states nor policymakers’ desire to attract IFDI is natural. Not too long ago,
UK policymakers saw IFDI as a menace rather than inherently desirable objects. Prominent
mainstream economists refuted the description of nation-states as economic competitors as
dangerous nonsense. The historical contingency of the taken-for-grantedness of the race for IFDI
in contemporary policy discourses thus calls for attention to the ideas that have given rise to these
perceptions. Tracing their origins in the context of the UK case, I have found them to be grounded
in ideas of management and corporate strategy theory. They came to be diffused in politics from
the early 1990s onwards through the long tentacles of the business school ecology. Interestingly
in the light of previous literature in constructivist IPE, the profession of economists was not only
sidelined, but at times actively opposed to the firm-centered view of the world economy that
thereby started to encroach public economic discourses.
Three important questions remain: to what extent were these changes in perceptions driven by
discursive transformations as opposed to “actual” material trends in the economy? How

32

generalizable are the findings from the UK case? And how different are the policy prescriptions
of second-generation neoliberalism from “standard” economic advice? As noted in the
introduction, the deeply intertwined relationship between the material and the ideational does not
allow us to draw a firm and conclusive causal distinction between “actual” and “imaginary” drivers
of changes in perceptions. But it is worth pointing out that a large body of empirical research raises
questions about the accuracy of the globalist discourse of national competitiveness. The world
economy has undoubtedly become more integrated over the past decades. And the emergence of
global value chains (cross-reference to ‘Global Value Chains as Entrepreneurial Capture’, this
issue) has affected what foreign subsidiaries “do”. But these are better understood as slow-moving,
gradual internationalizing trends that have unfolded over centuries (Cantwell, 1995; Ghemawat,
2011; Hirst, Thompson, & Bromley, 2009; Rugman, 2005), rather than a radical break around
1990 as the competitiveness discourse may make one think. In this light, it seems fairly clear that
structural transformations alone are insufficient to explain the changes in perceptions observed in
the UK case.
Second, how valid are these findings beyond the UK? In comparative perspective, the enthusiasm
for the competitiveness discourse has been relatively strong in Britain. But there are many
indications that developments have been similar elsewhere: numerous influential international
organizations, such as the EU, World Bank and WEF, have taken up the competitiveness discourse
and at times forcefully promoted it among their constituents. In IPE, a substantial field of literature
on the competition state (Cerny, 1997; W. Davies, 2014; Fougner, 2006; Jessop, 2003) has eluded
closely associated dynamics across a wide field of empirical cases. And there is also some evidence
indicating that the competitiveness narrative has become a prominent frame in country cases,
which from a structural perspective may seem less inclined to it than traditionally liberal Britain

33

with its relatively weak industrial base. In France, for instance, including the traditionally
globalization-skeptical Socialist Party has put international competitiveness at the heart of its
economic agenda, setting up a conseil supérieur de l’attractivité dedicated to attract IFDI while in
government (Les Archives de l’Assemblée Nationale, 2014). And also in industrial powerhouse
Germany, the influential Sachverständigenrat (Council of Economic Experts) made more than just
a nod to the competitiveness debate when it wrote the following (Sachverständigenrat, 1997, pp.
10–11; own translation, original in German):
The difficulties of the German economy to overcome its growth weaknesses are determined by
the dynamics of locational competition. In a world (…) in which capital and entrepreneurial
activity are mobile across borders, (…) the labour force, which is tied to one Standort [location],
can only find employment if their Standort can be made attractive to investments. (…) Neither
export figures nor the real exchange rate of the German mark are good indicators to judge the
quality of the Standort. What matters are investments, in particular investments of foreign
companies in Germany (…) Here we witness clear warning signs: foreign direct investment into
Germany have fallen to disappointingly low levels.

Of course, the competitiveness discourse will take on different forms in different places, and the
dynamics of “translation” to various domestic contexts (cf. Ban, 2016) cannot be addressed here.
Also the specific mechanisms of diffusion that the article highlights in the UK are case-specific
and developments will have unfolded somewhat differently elsewhere. But with regards to the
article’s key contention that the intellectual origins of this interpretive scheme originate in
management rather than economic thought, there are good reasons to believe that it is of general
validity.
Finally, how different are the national competitiveness discourse’s policy prescriptions from
standard economic advice? Mainstream economists’ initial worries that competitiveness thinking
34

will encourage defensive protectionist measures have not materialized (Hay, 2012). Instead,
competitiveness frames have come to be increasingly employed as a tool to justify policy
interventions which most mainstream economists would likely agree with (e.g. tax cuts, more
flexible labour markets). If this is the case, then why the need to emphasize the distinction between
first- and second generation neoliberal economic discourses? It is important for two reasons: even
if competitiveness-inspired policy advice nowadays is not fundamentally at odds with neoclassical
economics in terms of the outcomes that it seeks to achieve, it charts a distinct path towards
reaching those goals. For instance, in competitiveness thinking, it is not the market itself, but a
pro-market, entrepreneurial and activist state which is tasked to promote prosperity by upgrading
the business environment, aggressively marketing a country as a destination for foreign investors,
or leverage fiscal and other incentives to discriminate positively in favor of foreign firms.
Secondly, notwithstanding the initial hostilities, competitiveness frames have by now been taken
up by many mainstream economists themselves (Hay, 2012). In this sense, today’s similarity of
mainstream economic advice with national competitiveness frames is significant not least to
remind us that economic policy discourses are more eclectic and less closely aligned with the
discipline of neoclassical economics than we may assume. Economic discourses are not merely
about economics. They are also about management. And the competitiveness frames promoted by
business school and public policy scholars have played a central role in the transposition of
managerialism’s principles of order, rationality and control onto widely used macroeconomic
analytical frameworks, tinting the ways in which we think and argue about the economy in allimportant ways.

35

References
A Rentier Economy in Reverse. (1990, September 22). The Economist.
Abdelal, R. (2007). Capital Rules: The Construction of Global Finance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Amadae, S. M. (2003). Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy: The Cold War Origins of Rational Choice Liberalism.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Amadae, S. M. (2016). Prisoners of Reason: Game Theory and Neoliberal Political Economy. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Augar, P. (2000). The Death of Gentlemanly Capitalism: The Rise and Fall of London’s Investment Banks. London:
Penguin.
Augier, M., & March, J. (2011). The Roots, Rituals, and Rhetorics of Change: North American Business Schools
after the Second World War. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Back in fashion. (1993). The Economist.
Bailey, D., Harte, G., & Sugden, R. (1994). Transnationals and Governments: Recent Policies in Japan, France,
Germany, the United States, and Britain. London: Routledge.
Ban, C. (2016). Ruling Ideas: How Global Neoliberalism Goes Local. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Behrman, J. N. (1970). National Interests and the Multinational Enterprise: Tensions among the North Atlantic
Countries. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Best, J., & Widmaier, W. (2006). Micro- or Macro-Moralities? Economic Discourses and Policy Possibilities.
Review of International Political Economy, 13(4), 609–631.
Blyth, M. (2002). Great Transformations: Economic Ideas and Institutional Change in the Twentieth Century.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Boltho, A. (1996). The Assessment: International Competitiveness. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 12(3), 1–15.
Bourne, R. (2013, April 10). Lady Thatcher’s Relationship with Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman. Pieria.
Retrieved from
http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/lady_thatchers_relationship_with_friedrich_hayek_and_milton_friedman
Boyer, R. (1990). The regulation school: a critical introduction. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bristow, G. (2005). Everyone’s a “winner”: problematising the discourse of regional competitiveness. Journal of
Economic Geography, 5, 285–304.
Britain’s Many Options. (1996, April 6). The Economist.
Campbell, J. L., & Pedersen, O. K. (2014). The National Origins of Policy Ideas: Knowledge Regimes in the United
States, France, Germany, and Denmark. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Cantwell, J. (1995). The globalisation of technology: what remains of the product cycle model? Cambridge Journal
of Economics, 19(1), 155–174.
Carstensen, M. B. (2011). Ideas are not as stable as political scientists want them to be: A theory of incremental
ideational change. Political Studies, 59(3), 596–615.
Carstensen, M. B., & Matthijs, M. (2017). Of paradigms and power: British economic policy making since Thatcher.
Governance, Early View, 1–17.
Cerny, P. G. (1997). Paradoxes of the Competition State: The Dynamics of Political Globalization. Government and
Opposition, 32(2), 251–274.
Chwieroth, J. M. (2007). Neoliberal economists and capital account liberalization in emerging markets.
International Organization, 61(2), 443–463.
Chwieroth, J. M. (2009). Capital ideas: The IMF and the rise of financial liberalization. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Chwieroth, J. M., & Sinclair, T. (2013). How you stand depends on how we see: International capital mobility as a
social fact. Review of International Political Economy, 20(3), 457–485.
Conservative Party. (1997). 1997 Conservative Party General Election Manifesto: You can only be sure with the
Conservatives. Retrieved January 27, 2018, from http://www.conservativemanifesto.com/1997/1997conservative-manifesto.shtml
Davies, H., & Ellis, P. (2000). Porter’s Competitive Advantage of Nations: Time for the Final Judgement? Journal
of Management Studies, 37(8), 1189–1213.
Davies, W. (2014). The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty and the Logic of Competition. London:
SAGE Publishing.
Down but Not Out. (2003). The Economist.
Elkins, Z., Guzman, A. T., & Simmons, B. A. (2006). Competing for Capital: The Diffusion of Bilateral Investment
Treaties, 1960-2000. International Organization, 60(4), 811–846.

36

European Council. (2000). Presidency Conclusions: Lisbon European Council, 23 and 24 March 2000. Retrieved
May 16, 2018, from http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/00100-r1.en0.htm
Foreign, Redirected Investment. (2004). The Economist.
Fougner, T. (2006). The State, International Competitiveness and Neoliberal Globalization: Is There a Future
Beyond “the Competition State.” Review of International Studies, 32, 165–185.
Fougner, T. (2008). Neoliberal Governance of States: The Role of Competitiveness Indexing and Country
Benchmarking. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 37(2), 303–326.
Fourcade, M., & Khurana, R. (2013). From social control to financial economics: the linked ecologies of economics
and business in twentieth century America. Theory and Society, 42(2), 121–159.
Gamble, A. (1988). The Free Economy and the Strong State: The Politics of Thatcherism (Macmillan).
Houndsmills, UK.
Ghemawat, P. (2011). World 3.0: Global prosperity and how to achieve it. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.
Hall, P. A. (1986). Governing the Economy: The Politics of State Intervention in Britain and France. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Hay, C. (1996). Narrating Crisis: The Discursive Construction of the “Winter of Discontent.” Sociology, 30(2), 253–
277.
Hay, C. (2012). The “dangerous obsession” with cost competitiveness... and the not so dangerous obsession with
competitiveness. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 36, 463–479.
Hay, C., & Rosamond, B. (2002). Globalization, European integration and the discursive construction of economic
imperatives. Journal of European Public Policy, 9(2), 147–167.
Heseltine, M. (2001). Life in the Jungle: My Autobiography. London: Coronet Books.
Hirst, P., Thompson, G., & Bromley, S. (2009). Globalization in question. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Hodges, M. (1974). Multinational Corporations and National Government: A Case Study of the United Kingdom’s
Experience, 1964-1970. Lexington, MA: Saxon House.
Invest Japan. (2008). The Economist.
Jacquemin, A., & Pench, L. R. (1997). Europe Competing in the Global Economy: Reports of the Competitiveness
Advisory Group. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Jessop, B. (2003). The future of the capitalist state. Malden, MA: Polity.
Kandiah, M. (1999). Witness Seminar II: The October 1987 Stock Market Crash. Contemporary British History,
13(1), 141–165.
Kang, E. C. S. (1997). US Politics and Greater Regulation of Inward Foreign Direct Investment. International
Organization, 51(2), 301–333.
Kantola, A., & Seeck, H. (2011). Dissemination of management into politics: Michael Porter and the political uses
of management consulting. Management Learning, 42(1), 25–47.
Khurana. (2007). From Higher Aims to Hired Hands: The Social Transformation of American Business Schools and
the Unfulfilled Promise of Management as a Profession. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Knafo, S., Dutta, S. J., Lane, R., & Wyn-Jones, S. (2017). The Managerial Lineages of Neoliberalism. The Political
Economy of Management: At the Nexus of Public and Private Governance. London: SOAS.
Krieger, J. (2007). The Political Economy of New Labour: The Failure of a Success Story? New Political Economy,
12(3), 421–432.
Krugman, P. (1994). Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession. Foreign Affairs, March/Apri, 28–44.
Lall, S. (2001). Competitiveness Indices and Developing Countries: An Economic Evaluation of the Global
Competitiveness Report. World Development, 29(9), 1501–1525.
Les Archives de l’Assemblée Nationale. (2014). Question au gouvernment No 1606. Journel Officiel.
Linsi, L. (2016). How the beast became a beauty: the social construction of the economic meaning of foreign direct
investment inflows in advanced economies, 1960-2007. Retrieved from http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/3389/
Lovering, J. (2003). MNCs and Wannabes - Inward Investment, Discourses of Regional Development, and the
Regional Service Class. In N. A. Phelps & P. Raines (Eds.), The New Competition for Inward Investment:
Companies, Institutions and Territorial Development. Edward Elgar.
MacKenzie, D. (2006). An Engine, Not a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
McNamara, K. (1998). The Currency of Ideas: Monetary Politics in the European Union. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press.
Mirowski, P. (2002). Machine Dreams: Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

37

Mudge, S. L. (2008). What is neo-liberalism? Socio-Economic Review, 6, 703–731.
Neary, P. J. (2003). Competitive versus Comparative Advantage. The World Economy, 26(4), 457–485.
Nelson, S. C. (2017). The Currency of Confidence: How Economic Beliefs Shape the IMF’s Relationship with Its
Borrowers. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Ohmae, K. (1990). The Borderless World: Power and Strategy in the Interlinked Economy. New York: Harper
Business.
Oughton, C. (1997). Competitiveness Policy in the 1990s. The Economic Journal1, 107(444), 1486–1503.
Pearce, R. (1997). Industrial Policy, MNEs and National Technology. In R. Pearce (Ed.), Global Competition and
Technology: Essays in the Creation and Application of Knowledge by Multinationals (pp. 277–285).
Basingstoke, UK: MacMillan.
Pedersen, O. K. (2010). Institutional Competitiveness: How Nations Came to Compete. In G. Morgan, J. L.
Campbell, C. Crouch, O. K. Pedersen, & R. Whitley (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Comparative
Institutional Analysis. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Plender, J. (1986). London’s Big Bang in International Context. International Affairs, 63(1), 39–48.
Porter, M. E. (1998). The Competitive Advantage of Nations. London: MacMillan.
Porter, M. E. (2004a). Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York: Free
Press.
Porter, M. E. (2004b). The Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors. New York:
Free Press.
Reich, R. B. (1992). The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st Century Capitalism. New York: Vintage
Books.
Reich, S. (1989). Roads to Follow: Regulating Direct Foreign Investment. International Organization, 43(4), 543–
584.
Reinert, E. S. (1995). Competitiveness and its predecessors - a 500-year cross-national perspective. Structural
Change and Economic Dynamics, 6, 23–42.
Rosamond, B. (2002). Imagining the European Economy: “Competitiveness” and the Social Construction of
“Europe” as an Economic Space. New Political Economy, 7(2), 157–177.
Rugman, A. M. (2005). The Regional Multinationals: MNEs and “Global” Strategic Management. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Sachverständigenrat. (1997). Jahresgutachten 1996/97 des Sachverständigenrates zur Begutachtung der
gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung.
Safarian, E. (1993). Multinational Enterprises and Public Policy: A Study of Industrial Countries. Aldershot, UK:
Edward Elgar.
Saint-Martin, D. (2002). The New Managerialism and the Policy Influence of Consultants in Government: An
Historical-Institutionalist Analysis of Britain, Canada and France. Governance, 11(3), 319–356.
Servan-Schreiber, J.-J. (1979). The American Challenge. New York: Atheneum.
Small island for sale. (2010). The Economist. Retrieved from
https://www.economist.com/briefing/2010/03/25/small-island-for-sale
Snowdon, B., & Stonehouse, G. (2006). Competitiveness in a Global World: Michael Porter on the Microeconomic
Foundations of the Competitiveness of Nations, Regions, and Firms. Journal of International Business
Studies, 37(2), 163–175.
Soederberg, S., Menz, G., & Cerny, P. (Eds.). (2005). Internalizing Globalization: The Rise of Neoliberalism and
the Decline of National Varieties of Capitalism. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Steger, M. B., & Roy, R. K. (2010). Neoliberalism. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Steuer, M. (1973). The Impact of Foreign Direct Investment on the United Kingdom.
Stopford, J. M., Strange, S., & Henley, J. S. (1991). Rival States, Rival Firms: Competition for World Market
Shares. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Strange, S. (1998). Who are EU? Ambiguities in the Concept of Competitiveness. Journal of Common Market
Studies, 36(1), 101–114.
Sum, N.-L. (2009). The production of hegemonic policy discourses: “competitiveness” as a knowledge brand and its
(re-)contextualizations. Critical Policy Studies, 3(2), 184–203.
Sunshine, with a Chance of Showers. (2000). The Economist.
The Cutting Edge. (2001). The Economist, p. 127.
The General Makes One Valid Point. (1965). Financial Times.
Thomas, K. P. (2011). Investment Incentives and the Global Competition for Capital. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave
Macmillan.

38

Thurow, L. C. (1992). Head to Head: The Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe, and America. New York: Harper
Collins.
UK Hansard. (1968). Debates in the House of Commons. 757(cc1051-60), 29 January.
UK Hansard. (1994). Debates in the House of Commons. 248(cc1115-84), 28 October.
UK Hansard. (1996). Debates in the House of Lords. 568(cc1454-500), 31 January.
Watson, M., & Hay, C. (2004). The Discourse of Globalization and the Logic of No Alternative: Rendering the
Contingent Necessary in the Political Economy of New Labour. Policy and Politics, 30(4), 289–305.
Wickham-Jones, M. (1995). Anticipating Social Democracy, Preempting Anticipations: Economic Policy-Making in
the British Labor Party, 1987-1992. Politics and Society, 23(4), 465–494.
Zysman, J. (1977). The French State in the International Economy. International Organization, 31(4), 839–877.

Acknowledgements: I thank Jeff Chwieroth for his continuous support without which – for better or for
worse - I would not even have started thinking about the issues that the article aims to address. Very
helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper were provided by the RIPE editors and two anonymous
reviewers, as well as Milan Babic, Matthew Eagleton-Pearce, Sarah Sharma, Samuel Knafo, Daniel
Mügge and the entire Fickle Formulas team at the University of Amsterdam. Generous financial support
by the London School of Economics and the Swiss National Science Foundation (Early Postdoc Mobility
grant P2SKP1_168289) is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are my responsibility.

39

