"x"
"1" "How to Align Disciplinary Ideals with Actual Practices: Transparency and Openness in Archaeological Science"
"2" "Ben Marwick, Department of Anthropology, University of Washington,  bmarwick@uw.edu"
"3" "Li-Ying Wang, Department of Anthropology, University of Washington,  liying15@uw.edu"
"4" "Accepted for publication in"
"5" "Ethan  Watrall , Lynne Goldstein (eds) “Digital Heritage and Archaeology in Practice”. University Press Florida"
"6" "Abstract"
"7" "Archaeology is a highly diverse community of researchers without universally adopted methods,   concepts, or theoretical perspectives. One ideal that unites us is that we typically perceive ourselves as contributing to the public good by helping to understand and preserve the past (Chippindale 1994). We act as stewards for archaeological sites and artefacts, and we work to correct misinformed views of the past that might have sinister motives. However, many of the current norms of archaeological practice are at odds with these ideals of archaeology. We share   relatively little of our research with each other or the public.  Typically  we produce a journal article or monograph as a final product, but we rarely share the data files or computational methods that generated those final products, nor do we share our written work in ways that are readily accessible to the public. This suggests a gap between current practice and ideals. It also   limits the reproducibility of our research, and the efficiency with which new methods can spread through the discipline. We show that an exploration of this mismatch between ideals and practice can reveal the untapped potential for digital tools in archaeology to improve its sustainability as a research domain, and indicate new ways to engage with the public. We describe emerging norms in archaeology, and some new digital tools that archaeologists are using, that are helping to close the gap between ideals and current practices"
"8" "Introduction"
"9" "One of the characteristics of archaeology that draws many students and sustains many professional practitioners is the high diversity of methods, concepts and theoretical perspectives. We span the full range of human experience in the past, and consider every object and every trace of human  behaviour  as a potential source of information, and we entertain scholarly curiosity about all kinds of questions. A common thread that unites these diverse approaches is that by improving our knowledge of the human past, we improve the human condition in the present and future through a more effective (Stahl 2020) and accurate understanding of our origins. Not only is our work informational, but also practical by identifying archaeological resources for protection for public enjoyment and education, and for future research. There is a strong ideal that our work should be shared with the public to generate both tangible and intangible benefits. But how effective are we at achieving this ideal, and have we kept up with the most effective ways to do so?"
"10" "In this chapter we will explore how recent changes in scientific practice and scholarly communication generally mean that the ideal of archaeology as a public benefit is not as well aligned to the practice of archaeology as it might have been in the past. We draw a connection between the concept of archaeology striving for public good and norms of archaeological research, and the norms of research communities generally. We consider the tensions between ideals of openness and ethics of ownership, especially in the context of the Indigenous communities that many archaeologists work with. We then investigate new practices increasing the transparency and openness of research that have emerged recently in non-archaeological research communities to support these general norms of science. We conclude with some concrete directions on how archaeologists can close the gap between current practices and ideals in archaeology, using tools and services that other research communities have adopted."
"11" "Stewardship as a core ideal of archaeology"
"12" "We can see the ideal of archaeology as contributing to the public good formally encoded in the practice of archaeology via statements of ethics issued by numerous professional  organisations  of archaeologists. The first section of the Register of Professional Archaeologist’s ‘Code and Standards’ is dedicated to ‘The Archaeologist's Responsibility to the Public’ (Aitchison 2007). In the Society of American Archaeology’s  Principles of Archaeological Ethics  stewardship is the first principle, and the one from which all the other ethical principles are derived (Lynott 1997). The stewardship principle specifies that the primary responsibility archaeologists have is “to serve as caretakers of and advocates for the archaeological record,” to ensure its long-term conservation and to promote uses of the record “for the benefit of all people”.  Similar commitments to serve the public and other stakeholders are evident in the World Archaeology Congress First Code of Ethics (Davidson 1991) and the Archaeological Institute of America’s Code of Ethics ( Shoup  and Monteiro 2008), although their emphases differ somewhat from the SAA’s  Principles ."
"13" "The stewardship principle, although dominant in the Society of American Archaeology’s  Principles of Archaeological Ethics , has received some criticism, and has evolved over time.   Groarke  and Warrick (2006) have  criticized  it as inherently vague and as being unfairly based on implicit privilege of the archaeologist without considering the interests of the public.  Groarke  and Warrick (2006) suggest that the responsibility of archaeologists is to practice archaeology guided by honesty and openness. Wylie (1999) also points out that one of the fundamental values of stewardship is its “shared aspiration” not only for the domain of archaeology, but also for other interest groups outside archaeology that could be achieved by working within a framework of respectful and collaborative relationships. Wylie (2005) further describes the controversies that led to the prominence of stewardship in these ethical principles and shows how it could evolve to reflect an even greater commitment to public engagement with the concept of ‘collaborative stewardship’. This refers to the negotiated co-management of archaeological among local interests, rather than an exclusive stewardship resulting from the privileged oversight of professional archaeologists."
"14" "An issue that is directly related to stewardship is the question of who owns material culture and derivative products, such as data files. Warren (1999) discusses the ethical issue of ownership from three perspectives, including the restitution of cultural properties to their  origin countries, the restriction of imports and exports of cultural properties, and the rights of ownership, access, and inheritance retained by relevant parties from a philosophical point of view. She points out the inherent bias based on hierarchical rules or win-loss models that tend to solve conflicts of cultural properties ownership by providing value-hierarchical rankings without considering the diversity of claims of various groups to the dispute. Consistent with a stewardship-first approach to archaeological ethics, Warren proposes that an integrative perspective towards managing cultural heritage items that stresses compromise or consensus models could be an effective method for conflict resolution."
"15" "We can also draw a connection between stewardship and a more classical ethical issue in archaeology: looting, or subsistence digging. This can cause enormous losses of cultural heritage due to undocumented excavation that limits further interpretation of artifacts (Hollowell 2006,  Lipe  1996, Hollowell-Zimmer 2003). Hollowell (2006) further points out the underlying problems of the relationship of ‘ scientific   colonialism ’ between the knowledge holder-archaeologists and local subsistence diggers. Archaeologists obtaining data from communities without sharing back the knowledge generated from that data causes a sense of detachment for local people from their past and denies them opportunities to understand the importance of, and engage with, their cultural heritage. This failure to return knowledge, including the digital data files generated by the research, to the stakeholder communities is also a failure of stewardship because it denies people the benefits of the research. Collaborating and sharing the archaeological research with communities of artifact diggers or collectors can be a solution to minimize the risk of looting. In the context of reporting, documentation and communication of archaeological research, Hollowell-Zimmer (2003) also proposed the concept of “low-end looting” which is one end of the continuum that covers not only undocumented excavation but also research afterwards such as archaeologists doing “sloppy science” that could also result in the loss of archaeological records. We similarly consider the public unavailability of digital materials resulting from archaeological research to be “sloppy science” and a form of “low-end looting” that is a digital form of scientific colonialism."
"16" "Ideals of Archaeology and Ideals of Science"
"17" "We can  recognise  this ideal of archaeologists striving to produce public benefits, formally encoded as the stewardship ethic, as a specific instance of the Mertonian ideal of the communalism of science (Merton 1973). In his sociological analysis of scientific research communities, Merton proposed four concepts as collective expectations for, and understandings of, appropriate and desired behavior with scientific communities. He presented these as proscriptive norms, as informal, aspirational values that unite researchers as a social group, as a source of guidance for drafting institutional policies, and for identifying malpractice. He also intended that they might be useful for demarcating science from non-science. The four norms are  communality  (results and discoveries are not the property of the individual researcher; rather, they belong to the scientific community and society as a whole),  universalism  (scientific claims and results are to be judged regardless of the characteristics, such as class, race or religion, of their proponents; scientists are to be rewarded solely on the basis of their results),  disinterestedness  (every researcher pursues the primary goal of the advancement of knowledge, indirectly gaining personal recognition), and  organized skepticism  (researchers must be willing to subject all findings,  including their own, to critical appraisal, suspending definitive judgement until the necessary proof has been obtained)."
"18" "Merton originally proposed these four concepts as norms that guide how researchers work, and this use has attracted extensive criticism.  Mulkay  (1976) has argued that the norms are merely vocabularies of justification used to evaluate, justify and describe the actions of researchers, but have not been  institutionalized  in a way that binds researchers to specific  behaviors .  Mulkay  claims that the norms are only part of the public stereotype of science, used to create a facade to insulate research institutions from external interference and maintain their legitimacy. Similarly, historical analysis of scientific practice has raised questions about how well Merton’s norms match with how scientists behave in the course of doing their work. Barnes and Dolby (1970) review the character of scientific activity in England during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, in France and Germany just before World War One, and twentieth century science. These vignettes show that the norms are not uniformly apparent in each period and they do not describe well what scientists were actually doing. For example, during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, concerns about disinterest and  organized  skepticism were largely absent from scientific writings of the time. Similarly, they argue that the rise of military-industrial interests in science in the twentieth century means that the norms of communality and disinterestedness are less universally relevant. Barnes and Dolby (1970) conclude that Merton’s norms have never fully defined scientific practice at any single time. Furthermore,  Mitroff  (1974) interviewed 42 senior scientists  analyzing  materials collected by the Apollo 11 lunar landing and identified these scientists as acting directly opposite of what Merton’s norms would predict.  Mitroff   summarized  these  behaviors  into four point-for-point counter-norms to Merton’s norms: solitariness, particularism, interestedness, and organized dogmatism."
"19" "So  we see that Merton’s norms do not accurately describe the concrete  behavior  of every scientist. Instead, we might better  recognize  them as a repertoire of aspirations on which scientists can draw according to the situation in order to give sense to their actions and justify them to colleagues, policy-makers and public opinion ( Mulkay , 1979). We might then ask what kinds of practices and services have researchers been using to realize these ambitions, especially the communality ideal, which is relevant to understanding how archaeologists can fulfil their commitment to stewardship. Traditionally we think of sharing our results with the public via scholarly publication, conference presentations, public lectures, and a small number of other related activities. In the next section we will show that in some non-archaeological research communities there have been major shifts in research and scholarly publication practices in pursuit of the communality ideal. These shifts  center  on concerns about improving the transparency and openness of science generally. In reviewing these new practices and comparing to what is normal among archaeologists we raise the question of how well does the ideal of contributing to the public good match the actual  behaviors  of archaeologists?"
"20" "Current Norms of Archaeological Practice and Recent Developments in Transparency and Openness"
"21" "In this section we will briefly review three aspects of research practice and scholarly publication that have become prevalent in some research communities as  measures to, among other things, improve the public impact of research results. These are: Open Access, Open Data, and Open Methods. We will compare these recent developments in transparency and openness in other fields to what we observe archaeologists doing to assess how well current norms of archaeological practice fulfill the goal of contributing to the public good."
"22" "Open Access"
"23" "Open access refers to the permanent online access to the full text of scholarly work, especially publications, without charge to readers or libraries ( Willinsky  2006). There are many ways to accomplish this: for example, ‘Gold Open Access’ refers to the author paying a fee for publication (typically referred to an article processing charge or APC). Examples of this include archaeological reports published in  PLOS One , a high-volume multi-disciplinary journal that uses the Gold Open Access model. A small number of dedicated archaeology journals also operate in this way, such as  Internet Archaeology ,  Open Archaeology , and journals with a regional focus such as  Ancient Asia.  But this is not the only way to publish open access. An alternative approach, referred to as ‘Green Open Access’, is for authors to make their manuscripts freely available online as preprints prior to journal publication ( Bourne , et al. 2016; Desjardins-Proulx, et al. 2013). An advantage of Green Open Access is that it is free for authors to submit and free for readers to access - a vital consideration for making research results available for the public to access. Note that PDFs of final published papers on academia.edu and researchgate.net are not preprints. This is because these services are run by private, for-profit companies that do not own the rights to host most of their content. Papers submitted to these sites are vulnerable to legal action such as take-down notices. Trustworthy pre-print services are run by non-profit  organizations , provide persistent URLs (such as digital object identifiers or DOIs) for long-term sustainable access, and do not require registration to access."
"24" "This Green Open Access preprint method has been widely adopted in fields such as physics and biology, with some biology funding sources requiring preprints to be deposited prior to publication ( Dolgin  2016). Archaeologists are gradually starting to use preprints, with 61 papers deposited on the leading Social Science preprint service socarxiv.org (as of March 2020, these papers are labeled by the submitting author with the subject tag ‘anthropological archaeology’), with first archaeology pre-print appearing there in early 2017. Pre-print services specifically for archaeologists include  OARR: Open Anthropology Research Repository  (established by the American Anthropological Association,  https://www.openanthroresearch.org/ ), and  Peer Community in Archaeology  ( https://archaeo.peercommunityin.org/ , also offering open peer review of pre-prints). We can compare this to biorXiv.org, the pre-print service for biological sciences, with more than 10,000 papers as of 2017, and arXiv.org, for the physical sciences, which reached one million articles in 2014 ( Vence  2014). The popularity of open access publication methods, such as pre-prints appearing before the final published copy, may be partially explained by the fact that they often achieve increased impact by being cited more frequently and receiving more media coverage relative to closed access publications (see McKiernan, et al. 2016 and; Tennant, et al. 2016 for a summary of empirical work on this topic). Researchers may also benefit from their publications being easily accessible to prospective students and non-academic collaborators, such as local and Indigenous communities . Green Open  Access is an important mechanism for  decolonizing the field  by enabling more diverse participation in archaeological discourse (Marwick 2020) ."
"25" "Open Data"
"26" "Open data is a closely related concept, referring to the open availability of research data on trustworthy online repositories. Making data publicly available is substantially more complex than making publication pre-prints openly available because of the difficulty of answering questions about exactly what constitutes research data, who needs to be consulted before it is made public, and who or what might be put at risk by having the data available to the public. Among philosophers of science, research data has been defined as  any   thing  that is claimed as evidence for one or more phenomena ( Leonelli  2015). As a more concrete guide, we can define data as the files necessary to allow an informed researcher to precisely reproduce all of their published results. In this context open data typically means sharing the computer files ( e.g.  Excel files) that were analyzed to create the statistical figures ( e.g  graphs), tables and quantitative results that appear in a publication. We can see this sense of what data are in the policy of  Nature Communications  to require authors to ‘supply for publication the source data underlying any graphs and charts’ (Editors 2018). Currently no archaeological journals require data in this way, but multidisciplinary journals such as  eLife   and  PLOS One , which occasionally contain archaeological reports, have policies similar to  Nature Communications  that require authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction. However, enforcement of this policy is weak, as Marwick and  Pilaar  Birch (2018) show in their meta-analysis, where compliance of journal’s data policies has been studied in various research communities, the rate is never 100%.  One solution to this poor compliance may be for journals to appoint a ‘data editor’  or ‘reproducibility editor’  who has the responsibility of engaging with contributors to support their compliance with the data policy. Several large scholarly societies have been doing this for many years,  e.g.  the American Economic Association, and the American Statistical Association ( Vilhuber   2020) ."
"27" "The question of who needs to be consulted before making research data publicly available is essential to address because archaeologists, like other researchers working with local and Indigenous communities, governments, and international collaborators, generate research data that are intellectual property with many stakeholders. This can be contrasted with researchers in some laboratory-based fields that often have individual autonomy in sharing data, and once data are shared, they are free for all to use. When working with Indigenous communities, archaeologists may find that data are part of the group's identity and property, akin to tangible heritage (Nicholas 2014), with certain members entrusted to keep that data on behalf of the group, and sometimes it may be inappropriate for these people to share data with other members of the group or beyond the group (Tsosie 2007). This complexity of data ownership means that it is crucial for archaeologists to discuss data sharing plans during negotiations with representatives authorized by the Indigenous peoples whose cultural heritage is the subject of investigation. This negotiation process is important because only Indigenous peoples themselves can identify potential adverse outcomes to data sharing, and they can do this only if they understand the proposed research and anticipated results."
"28" "So  what should we do with data that has sensitive information, such as site locations, that might result in damage to the sites if the locations become widely known? Ideally these data would be stored securely (for example, on  tDAR , The Digital Archaeological Record, a trustworthy online digital data repository dedicated to archaeological data), with access restricted to qualified individuals, and a redacted or obfuscated version of the data would be made publicly available with the publication. We want the data to be somewhere, even if it is not open, to mitigate against total loss."
"29" "The need to be mindful about consultation, negotiation, and risk assessment when planning for public availability of archaeological data highlights the tensions between ideals of openness and ethics of ownership. Ownership of research data by Indigenous and descendant communities is worthy of special attention because the heritage of many of these groups has a long history of being destroyed or taken over by foreign political, legal, cultural, and economic impositions. In some contexts, thoughtful and consultative protection of the rights of Indigenous and descendant communities to manage their heritage, including digital forms, can be an act of restorative justice (Smith et al. 2019) and a therapeutic practice ( Schaepe  et al 2017;  Kiddey  2017). Sharing, or entirely giving, power over the management of archaeological data to Indigenous and descendant communities is generally consistent with widely-held desires to decolonize academic practice (cf. Haber and  Gnecc  2007; Habu, Fawcett, and Matsunaga 2007; Lydon and Rizvi 2016; Smith and  Wobst  2004). If the greatest benefit to the living members of the Indigenous and descendant communities that archaeologists work with comes from enabling their decision to protect the archaeological data as a private cultural property, then this must take priority over making the data available to the international research community. This may create a tension between the protection and privacy necessary for cultural survival of Indigenous groups, and the openness and transparency necessary for the survival of archaeology as a research community."
"30" "The variety and opacity of power relations among and between archaeologists and the communities they work with make it challenging to  generalize  patterns of engagement and negotiation on data sharing that will be effective for most situations. There are few hints in the Anglophone literature on  decolonizing  archaeology because of its limited focus on societies subjected to British settler colonialism, with notions of the continuity, homogeneity, and harmony of those societies often left unexamined.  Decolonizing  narratives in archaeology often neglect the wider public discourse regarding how archaeologists can produce socially relevant research about the past and contemporary politics of reactionary populism ( Hanscam  2019). The limited scope of  decolonizing  work leads to a restricted notion of what an Indigenous community is, and what is the proper relationship that archaeologists should have with them (González- Ruibal  2019). In addition, use of the term \"Indigenous\" to refer to minorities all over the world overlooks the variety of local experiences, diverse ontologies, and internal power structures (González- Ruibal  2018).   Noting the rich variability of Indigenous societies beyond the British settler colonial sphere, González- Ruibal  (2019) points out that there is ‘not a single Indigenous society and there are no general recipes for interaction with Indigenous  groups’ . To expand the ethics of community engagement, he proposes a concept of ‘ non-action ’, where archaeological research need not involve communities in research projects when they show no interest (and do not object to research), and to ‘allow Indigenous peoples to  have their own account of the past without external, unrequested interference, no matter how well-intentioned.’"
"31" "It may be hard for many archaeologists to accept that some of the communities we work with have little interest in reclaiming their heritage and learning more about their past. This is because archaeologists often project from their own ethical-political position a simplified,  idealized  notion of a ‘perfect subject’ onto the Indigenous and descendant communities they work with ( Gonzá lez-Ruibal ,  Gonz ález  and  Criado-Boado  2018). These perfect subjects hold their heritage as an intrinsically valuable part of their identity. But many communities do not concur with  the   progressive values  held by many archaeologists . This raises the question: are the prevailing patterns of  decolonizing  archaeology satisfying the cultural needs of the liberal and educated middle classes as an emotional palliative more than they provide objective benefits to the Indigenous and other groups they are intended to serve?"
"32" "Gonz ález-Ruibal  et al. (2018) propose that we need to abandon epistemic populism and accept that communities are extremely diverse and not always progressive. They argue that the proper role of the archaeologist is provocation, engagement and education, rather than flattery and symmetrical,  hybridised  collaboration. This expansion of the Indigenous and postcolonial critique of archaeology complicates the oppositional logic common in recent discussions of Indigenous archaeologies. While a data sharing model based on collaborative archaeology as a therapeutic practice to heal intergenerational trauma may be effective among some North American communities, its unique historical context means the ethics of ownership emerging from this model may be difficult to  generalise  to other contexts where Indigenous communities have different colonial histories   and internal power structures (e.g. Spanish, Dutch, Japanese, and Chinese colonies in East Asia, and Spanish colonies in Africa and South America). We can accept that authentic and ethical collaborations exist on a spectrum from ‘respectful co-existence to much more dynamic and generative forms of collaborative practice.’ (Wylie 2015, cf. Chang 2012)."
"33" "One model that may hold promise for  providing concrete ethical  guid ance on data sharing for  archaeologists is an international code of conduct for archaeological data sharing, similar to what has been proposed for genomic data (Phillips et al. 2020). A starting point for drafting this code could be the CARE principles for Indigenous data governance (Global Indigenous Data Alliance 2019). CARE stands for Collective benefit, Authority to control, Responsibility and Ethics, and is intended to complement the well-known FAIR principles for research data (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable, Wilkinson et al. 2016). These principles have guided Indigenous communities on managing epidemiological and ecological data (Carroll, Rodriguez- Lonebear  and Martinez 2019), and they are starting to receive attention from archaeologists ( e.g.  Gupta, Blair, and Nicholas 2020). A code of conduct inspired by the CARE principles would provide a structure to guide negotiations,  formalise  norms and expectations of ways of communicating about data management, and lay out how ethical and legal obligations can be satisfied to facilitate data protection and data exchange between communities and researchers. This code of conduct would need to consider several aspects relating to risk and control. Guidance is needed on location-sharing practices and standards to protect sites from destruction (Smith 2018). Levels of consent need to be defined to communicate when different types of data sharing permissions, for example is a dataset available for any  research purpose, only specific research purposes and groups, only for peer communities (for example for treaty and land rights negotiations), etc. Similarly, how should data owners be informed about how their data are used by others? Norms around return of data, portability and access need to be documented. For example, the code should lay out what steps are necessary for responsible communication of archaeological data to Indigenous and descendant communities. Researchers and communities need guidance on withdrawing data from public availability when consent to share is revoked. Guidance is also needed on how to deal with government requests for data, and what legal protections are available."
"34" "Data sharing is essential for enabling and promoting archaeological research in a way that will maximize the benefits to the communities we work with, and society generally. A code of conduct will help to ensure data sharing is done ethically (cf.  Knoppers  et al. 2011). Nevertheless, we foresee many challenges in enabling researchers to comply with such a code of conduct. Security mechanisms, especially relating to the identities and credentials of researchers and communities, and transitive credit need to be widely adopted. A governance framework that ensures integrity for the fundamental principles and procedures of the code of conduct. An oversight structure that is trusted by all parties involved is necessary to underpin the data sharing system. One starting point for this oversight for archaeology is the model of the Institutional Review Board (Joshua Wells, personal communication, 6 Sept 2019) used to protect the rights and welfare of people participating in research studies (Moon 2009). We can imagine an adaptation of this format that gives voice to the Indigenous and descendant communities involved in archaeological research, as well as the interests of local and international communities of archaeologists, but a full description is beyond the scope of this chapter."
"35" "It is important to note that participation in negotiations about data privacy and sharing need not be dependent on sharing a common epistemology. Chang’ s (2012: 269) concept of  ‘ tolerant   pluralism ’   indicates how this can be possible through co-existence while respecting and tolerating each other’s epistemologies. Archaeologists and non-archaeologists can collaborate using Wylie’s (2015:10) form of syncretic pluralism, where both groups can contribute to a project with an acceptance of their differences in knowledge traditions, ‘a recognition of difference without significant epistemic engagement’. Wylie argues that a cross-fertilization of epistemologies can be beneficial to archaeology. However, our point here is that while archaeologists have an ethical necessity to respectfully cultivate collaborations with communities and to expose their archaeological work to critical scrutiny (cf.  Longino  2002), ethical epistemic practice can exist anywhere on a wide spectrum from mere tolerance to complete integration."
"36" "Given these complications relating to making archaeological data open, we might expect rates of data sharing in archaeology to be lower than other research communities that have less diverse stakeholder groups, such as astronomy or  palaeontology . Robust data on this question is hard to find, and the problem has yet to be studied in detail. A small pilot study of data sharing  behaviours  by archaeologists by Marwick and  Pilaar  Birch (2018) found that response rates to email requests for data, and rates of availability of data files included with journal articles were actually consistent with other fields, such as psychology and biology. Among archaeologists they found an overall sharing rate of 20% in responses to private requests for data and 53% of sampled journal articles with openly available data. Although the sample size in this pilot work is small, the results may indicate that  archaeologists are already quite effective at managing the challenges surrounding consultation and risk management that relate to making research data openly available."
"37" "Open  Methods"
"38" "Open methods are perhaps the new est  development in scholarly transparency and openness that is most exotic and unfamiliar to archaeologists. When we first introduced the concept (Marwick et al. 2017a) we noted that in other fields open methods means using programming languages such as R and Python to  analyze  and visualize data, and sharing the code written in these languages with journal articles so that others can inspect the minutiae behind the published results. This general approach ranges from being a recommended ‘best practice’ or ‘good enough’ practice in some fields (Wilson et al. 2017), to a requirement for publication of a journal article. For example, since 2005, the  Quarterly Journal of Political Science  has required all submissions to be accompanied by a replication package, consisting of data and computer code for generating paper results (Eubank 2016). At the time of writing, no archaeology journals have this requirement, so authors have been independently exploring how to make their methods open. Since the time that we first called for open methods in archaeology, we have now become more confident that a trend may be emerging among archaeologists that indicates convergence on a specific set of tools to enable open methods."
"39" "To investigate the use of open methods by archaeologists, we used the 'Cited Reference Search' function provided by the Web of Science online scientific citation indexing service to identify journal articles that cite R. Although R has been available since the late 1990s ( Thieme  2018), a recommended format for citing the software did not appear until 2004, with the author given as \"R Development Core Team\". This recommended format for citing the software changed slightly in 2012 when the author was updated to \"R Core Team\". We searched the Web of Science using '\"R DEV COR TEAM\" OR \"R CORE\" OR \"R CORE TEAM\" OR \"R DEVELOPMENT CORE TEAM\"' in the CITED AUTHOR field. We then refined the results to keep only those articles published during 2007-2017 that are included in the Web of Science category 'Archaeology'. We identified the  Journal of Archaeological Science  as the journal with the largest number of articles citing R (n = 62), and examined the trend over time of citations of R in articles in this journal. A strong trend of increasing citations over time is indicated by Figure 22.1, although the proportion of articles citing R in each year remains under 10%."
"40" "{Figure  22.1}"
"41" "The increase in the use of R that we show in Figure 22.1 is evidence only of the  potential  for open methods in archaeology. This is because most of those papers that cite R do not share the code that was used to generate the results presented in the paper. We have presented a more detailed quantitative investigation of code use and code sharing  behaviors  by archaeologists in Schmidt and Marwick (2020). Here we focus on several noteworthy cases where, not only has the code been shared, but several archaeologists have independently converged on an efficient method for documenting the detail of their analysis. This method involves writing R code and regular narrative text in a single document, with paragraphs of text alternating with chunks, or blocks, of R code. This format is called 'R Markdown’ to signify the combination of R code with plain text that is  formatted using markdown ( Xie  et al. 2018). Markdown is a syntax to format text, for example to apply bold or italic decorations to a section of text, create lists, headings and subheadings, and so on. Since its introduction in 2014, it has become widely used across several research communities for writing reports and journal article manuscripts (Lowndes et al 2017;  Baumer  et al. 2014;  Kamvar  et al. 2017; Bond- Lamberty  et al. 2016). The advantage of R Markdown over R scripts is that it allows detailed commentary and narration to be interwoven with R code so that explanations are tied to instructions so that data analysis work can be recreated, better understood, and verified."
"42" "We curate a list of peer reviewed archaeology journal articles that include openly available R code and data at  https://github.com/benmarwick/ctv-archaeology , and at the time of writing there were 160 articles in this list. Here  we  briefly highlight  some  notable   examples of papers  on this list that demonstrate the  us e of  R Markdown. In their richly empirical paper on human responses to environmental uncertainty in the western Mediterranean during the late glacial, Barton et al. (2018)  include  three supplementary PDF files that are generated from their R Markdown documents. These files contain regular narrative text interwoven with blocks of R code and the plots and tables resulting from the execution of this code. In Figure 22.2 we can see the text, code and output are laid out on the page to produce the first figure appearing in the main text of their published paper. When Barton et al. wrote this supplemental file, they wrote it in R Markdown, which results in a plain text file (that can be opened and edited in any text editor), and saved it as a file with a  Rmd  extension. They do not provide this  Rmd  file in their supplementary materials. To create the PDF file to accompany their article, they executed, or rendered, the contents of the  Rmd  file. This process runs the R code in the  Rmd  document, and generates the plots and other output that we see in the PDF (Figure 22.2)."
"43" "In the example of Barton et al. we see the R code that documents every step of their analysis, from  subsetting  the raw data to excluding missing values, through to the exact statistical tests that they applied, and the choices they made in  visualising  their data. This level of transparency of the research process is difficult to obtain, and difficult to communicate to others, with point-and-click tools such as Excel and SPSS (Marwick 2017). Furthermore, the exact implementation of typical statistical operations such as ANOVA is not available for inspection or modification in point-and-click tools. This may be contrasted with the situation in  open source  programming languages such as R and Python where every detail of operation is available for inspection and modification by any user."
"44" "{Figure 2 2.2.}"
"45" "In the example of  McPherron  (2018) we see this commitment to transparency and reproducibility taken several steps further. In this case the author has used R Markdown to write not just a few supplementary PDFs, but the entire manuscript, and has included the original source  Rmd  file as a supplementary file. This means that a reader can download the  Rmd  file and the associated data files as a compendium of research materials (cf. Marwick et al. 2018), and re-generate the manuscript as it appears in the journal. In addition, a reader can freely modify the code in  McPherron’s   Rmd  file to run the R code on their computer to explore different choices in the analysis, and assess the robustness of his analysis to different assumptions. Other examples of this approach can be found in  Marwick et al. (2016, 2017b, 2017c) , Wang and Marwick (2020a, 2020b) ,  Belmiro  et al. (2020) ,  McPherron  et al. (2020) , and Weiss (2020) . Examples of variant approaches include  Negre  et al. (2016) ,  Mackay et al. (2018) , Schauer et al. (2020)  and Selden et al. (2020) ,  who include an  Rmd  file as a supplementary file to show how the key figures and tables were generated, but do not compose their entire manuscript in R Markdown."
"46" "{Figure  22.3.}"
"47" "How to Tackle the Mismatch Between Ideals and Practice?"
"48" "The path toward widespread open data practices in archaeology is currently not obvious to us because of the tensions between the importance of control of data by Indigenous and descendant communities and need for the archaeological community to access data to verify and extend past work. We suggest that a code of conduct based on the CARE principles, centering communication and negotiation between archaeologists and the communities they work with, and sponsored by the major professional societies, could be a productive and effective step forward toward widely practiced ethical open data  behaviours  for archaeologists."
"49" "The future of open methods, on the other hand, is clearer: in the examples discussed above, we see that several authors have independently converged on using R Markdown to make their methods open. In addition to using R Markdown, these authors also make available the raw data supporting their publications, thus making their data open also. This means that using R Markdown and sharing the source files with the final published article represents substantial commitment towards open methods and open data. This is important progress towards closing the gap between the ideal of contributing to the public good by collecting and sharing knowledge about the human past, and an actual practice of archaeology where the data and methods are transparently and openly shared with the public via R Markdown and associated files. In our view, working in this way is a vital step towards fulfilling our stewardship obligations. Although  McPherron  (2018) is published in an open access journal, and others noted above have deposited files on open data repositories, Barton et al. (2018) is a publication with supplementary files that are only accessible with a subscription. This suggests that progress still needs to be made in archaeologists publishing open access, and making these files openly available to people without journal subscriptions, which includes many of the stakeholder groups involved in archaeological research."
"50" "While it is encouraging to see some convergence on a common approach, we might ask how we can sustainably speed the adoption of this way of working that better aligns the ideals of stewardship of archaeological data and contributing to the public good to actual practice ?  One option would be to impose a requirement of publication that authors deposit code and data in a trustworthy repository, as some journals in other disciplines have done. However, the relatively crowded field of journals may limit the impact of this policy. We can imagine a situation where if one journal imposes conditions that the scholarly community are not fully prepared to fulfil, then authors will simply send their work to other, equivalent journals ,  that are less restrictive. Our view is that journal policies in archaeology tend to be reactive to the community’s demands rather than proactively  shaping the norms of the community. While we believe that journals should require code and data, we expect that the most impactful approach to changing research practices will be to reconsider the  organization  of our graduate training programs and the kinds of scholars they produce."
"51" "Typically  graduate training of archaeologists, like many other fields, aims to create a T-shaped scholar (Conley et al. 2017). That is, student training is intended to build deep disciplinary knowledge in archaeology at the core (the vertical dimension), while expanding the breadth of students’ awareness with a wide-but-shallow comprehension of other areas expertise, such as ecology, anthropology, biology, sociology, etc. (the horizontal dimension). To help with closing the gap between ideals and current practice, we suggest that our graduate training programs aim to create researchers with alternate geometries. For example, one option would be to attempt to produce  pi -shaped (Π) researchers that have a second vertical dimension that represents the computational skills necessary to use R Markdown and related software tools to enable open methods and open data. However, given the time and resources required for graduate training it may not be practical to develop a second vertical dimension of expertise. Acquiring expert-level depth of knowledge in two domains might be beyond the capacity of most graduate programs, without a disruptive degree of  reorganization . Instead, we might consider to produce gamma-shaped ( Γ ) scholars (Fiore- Gartland  2017) who have expert-level depth in one domain, such as archaeology, but also be well-versed and highly proficient in another domain, such as the computational tools and skills for transparent and reproducible research. The gamma-shaped individual would not be an expert in computer science, but would be sufficiently conversant to collaborate and learn from scholars in other fields to bring new skills and tools to advance their own work in archaeology.  One practical way to  train   pi -shaped or   gamma-shaped  scholars in archaeology  is   to incorporate  the training of using R or related  tools  into class assignments , as we document in   Marwick et al.  ( 2019 ) ."
"52" "Conclusion"
"53" "Many archaeologists are motivated by the ideal of contributing to the public good to improve our collective knowledge of the human past. This ideal is encoded into professional practice in several statements of ethics and conduct. However, work by philosophers of science shows that ideals held by research communities are often not closely related to actual practice, and may instead be used to justify their actions to stakeholders. We have shown that due to shifts and innovations in research and scholarly publication practices, the way that many archaeologists typically work is no longer the most effective way to  realize  their ideals. In many research communities outside of archaeology we see scholars adopting practices relating to open access, open data and open methods in pursuit of the communality ideal   and equality to knowledge .  Archaeologists have been slow to consider open access options to make their work  publicly  accessible, relative to Biologists and Physicists, for example."
"54" "However, we’ve identified a convergence by  many   archaeologists on R Markdown as an ideal format for enabling open methods. When we consider the transparency and openness that is demonstrated by these archaeologists using R Markdown, and then look back on the traditional journal article, we can see that the traditional format is severely constrained in the amount of detail that can be provided about many of the small but consequential decisions made during data analysis. In light of how we see R Markdown  used in archaeology recently, the limitations of the traditional journal article invoke Hollowell-Zimmer’s (2003) concept of “low-end looting” where the research is documented in such little detail that we may struggle to have confidence in the claims reported by the authors. The usefulness of the research presented in traditional publications, compared to those using R Markdown, is strongly limited by the unavailability of the raw data and the code used to generate the tables and figures presented in the article."
"55" "We have found that R Markdown is a practical, accessible, and immediately available toolkit for closing the gap between the traditional practice of archaeology and the ideals as they are encoded by our professional  organizations . However, these tools will not be the solution for every archeologist, and in a decade or two this technology may be obsolete, having been replaced by other tools. Although our short-term recommendation is that every archaeologist receives training in R Markdown, our long-term recommendation is for a more flexible and sustainable approach to closing the gap between ideals and practice. Specifically, we recommend a reconsideration of our graduate training programs to produce scholars that have been exposed to the research communities that are producing the tools that enable the kind of radical transparency and openness that R Markdown currently provides. We argue that the ideal archaeology graduate should resemble a  pi -shaped or gamma-shaped scholar, with proficiency in the tools and techniques for transparent and reproducible research to achieve the ideal of contributing to the public good."
"56" "References cited"
"57" "Aitchison, Kenneth"
"58" "2007  Ethical  Issues in European Professional Archaeology.  Public Archaeology  6, no. 2: 116-123."
"59" "Barnes, S Barry, and  Riki  GA Dolby"
"60" "1970  The  Scientific Ethos: A Deviant Viewpoint.  European Journal of Sociology/Archives    Europé ennes  de Sociologie  11, no. 1: 3-25."
"61" "Barton , C. M., Tortosa, J. E. A., Garcia- Puchol , O., Riel-Salvatore, J. G.,  Gauthier , N.,  Conesa , M. V., &  Bouchard , G. P."
"62" "2018   Risk and resilience in the late glacial: A case study from the western Mediterranean.   Quaternary Science Reviews  184: 68-84.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2017.09.015"
"63" "Baumer , B., M. Cetinkaya ‐ Rundel , A. Bray, L.  Loi , and N. J. Horton."
"64" "2014   R Markdown: integrating a reproducible analysis tool into introductory statistics.  Technology Innovations in Statistics Education  8:1-29."
"65" "Belmiro , J.,  Bicho , N., Haws, J.,  and   Cascalheira , J."
"66" "2020    The  Gravettian-Solutrean transition in westernmost Iberia: New data from the sites of Vale  Boi  and Lapa do  Picareiro . Quaternary International."
"67" "Bond- Lamberty , Ben, A. Peyton Smith, and Vanessa Bailey."
"68" "2016  Running  an Open Experiment: Transparency and Reproducibility in Soil and Ecosystem Science.  Environmental Research Letters  11, no. 8: 084004."
"69" "Bourne , PE, JK Polka, RD Vale and R Kiley"
"70" "2016  Ten  simple rules for considering preprints.  PeerJ  Preprints  4: e2669v1   https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.2669v1 ."
"71" "Chang,  Hasok ."
"72" "2012   Is  Water H2O? Evidence, Realism and Pluralism . London: Springer."
"73" "Chippindale , Christopher"
"74" "1994  Editorial .  Antiquity  68, no. 259: 191-199. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003598X00046512 ."
"75" "Carroll, S. R., Rodriguez- Lonebear , D., & Martinez, A."
"76" "2019 Indigenous Data Governance: Strategies from United States Native Nations.  Data Science Journal  18(1) . :   http://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2019-031"
"77" "Conley, Shannon Nicole, Rider W. Foley, Michael E. Gorman, Jessica Denham, and Kevin Coleman."
"78" "2017  Acquisition  of T-Shaped Expertise: An Exploratory Study.”  Social  Epistemology  31, no. 2 (March 4, 2017): 165-83.  https://doi.org/10.1080/02691728.2016.1249435."
"79" "Davidson, Iain"
"80" "1991  Notes  for a Code of Ethics for Australian Archaeologists Working with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage. Australian Archaeology, no. 32: 61-64."
"81" "Desjardins-Proulx, Philippe, Ethan P. White, Joel J. Adamson, Karthik Ram,  Timothée   Poisot  and Dominique Gravel"
"82" "2013  The  Case for Open Preprints in Biology.  PLOS Biology  11(5): e1001563."
"83" "Dolgin , E."
"84" "2016  Big  biology projects warm up to preprints.  Nature  (November 30, 2016)  http://www.nature.com/news/big-biology-projects-warm-up-to-preprints-1.21074"
"85" "Editors"
"86" "2018   Reproducibility :  Let ’s Get It Right from the Start.  Nature Communications 9 , no. 1 (September 12, 2018): 3716.   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06012-8 ."
"87" "Eubank , Nicholas"
"88" "2016  Lessons  from a Decade of Replications at the Quarterly Journal of Political Science.  PS: Political Science & Politics  49, no. 2, April: 273-76.   https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096516000196 ."
"89" "Fiore- Gartland ,  Brittany ."
"90" "2017  Hacked  Ethnographic Fieldnotes.  Data Science Studies  (blog), August 22, 2017.  https://medium.com/@dataethnography/hacked-ethnographic-fieldnotes-4e59bc95f4e5 ."
"91" "Global  Indigenous  Data Alliance."
"92" "2019  CARE  Principles for Indigenous Data Governance. Research Data Alliance International Indigenous Data Sovereignty Interest Group. October 22, 2019.  https://www.gida-global.org/care"
"93" "Gonz á lez-Ruibal , A."
"94" "2019  Ethical  Issues in Indigenous Archaeology: Problems with"
"95" "Difference and Collaboration.  Canadian Journal of Bioethics / Revue  canadienne  de"
"96" "bio é thique  2 (3): 34-43. https://doi.org/10.7202/1066461ar"
"97" "Gonz á lez-Ruibal , A."
"98" "2018 Ethics of archaeology.  Annual Review of Anthropology  47: 345-360."
"99" "Gonz á lez-Ruibal , A.,  Gonz á lez , P. A., & Criado- Boado , F."
"100" "2018  Against  reactionary populism: towards a new public archaeology.  Antiquity , 92(362 ):  507-515."
"101" "Groarke , Leo, and Gary Warrick"
"102" "2006  Stewardship  Gone Astray? Ethics and the SAA. In  The  Ethics of Archaeology: Philosophical Perspectives on Archaeological Practice , edited by  Scarre  and  Scarre , pp. 163-180."
"103" "Gupta, N., Blair, S., & Nicholas, R."
"104" "2020  What  We See, What We Don ’ t See: Data Governance, Archaeological Spatial Databases and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in an Age of Big Data.  Journal of Field Archaeology , 45(sup1), S39-S50.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00934690.2020.1713969"
"105" "Haber , A.,  Gnecco , C."
"106" "2007  Virtual  Forum: Archaeology and Decolonization.  Archaeologies  3: 390 – 412  http://doi.org/10.1007/s11759-007-9045-5"
"107" "Habu, J., Fawcett, C., & Matsunaga, J. M. (Eds.)."
"108" "2007   Evaluating  multiple narratives: Beyond nationalist, colonialist, imperialist archaeologies . Springer Science & Business Media, New York."
"109" "Hanscam , E."
"110" "2019   Postnationalism  and the Past: The Politics of Theory in Roman Archaeology.  Theoretical Roman Archaeology Journal , 2(1).  http://doi.org/10.16995/traj.370"
"111" "Hollowell-Zimmer, Julie"
"112" "2003  Digging  in the dirt- Ethics and \" low-end looting.\" In  Ethical issues in archaeology , edited by Larry J. Zimmerman, Karen D. Vitelli, Julie Hollowell-Zimmer, pp. 45-56."
"113" "Hollowell, Julie"
"114" "2006  Moral  arguments on subsistence digging. In  The  Ethics of Archaeology: Philosophical Perspectives on Archaeological Practice , edited by  Scarre  and  Scarre , pp. 69-93."
"115" "Kamvar ,  Zhian  N., Margarita M.  L ó pez ‐ Uribe, Simone  Coughlan , Niklaus J.  Gr ü nwald , Hilmar Lapp, and  St é phanie  Manel."
"116" "2017  Developing  Educational Resources for Population Genetics in R: An Open and Collaborative Approach.  Molecular Ecology Resources  17, no. 1 (January 1, 2017): 120 – 28.  https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.12558 ."
"117" "Kiddey , R."
"118" "2017   Homeless  Heritage: Collaborative social archaeology as therapeutic practice . Oxford University Press."
"119" "Knoppers, B.M., Harris, J.R.,  Tass é , A.M."
"120" "2011  Towards  a data sharing Code of Conduct for international genomic research.  Genome  Medicine  3: 46 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1186/gm262"
"121" "Leonelli, Sabina"
"122" "2015  What  Counts as Scientific Data? A Relational Framework.  Philosophy of Science  82 (5): 810-821."
"123" "Lipe , William D."
"124" "1996  In  Defense of Digging: Archeological Preservation as a Means, Not an End. In  Ethics in American Archaeology  edited by Lynott and Wylie, pp. 23-27."
"125" "Longino, H. E."
"126" "2002   The  Fate of Knowledge . Princeton University Press."
"127" "Lowndes, Julia S Stewart, Benjamin D Best, Courtney Scarborough, Jamie C  Afflerbach , Melanie R Frazier, Casey C O ’ Hara, Ning Jiang, and Benjamin S Halpern."
"128" "2017  Our  Path to Better Science in Less Time Using Open Data Science Tools.  Nature Ecology & Evolution  1 (6).  doi : 10.1038/s41559-017-0160"
"129" "Lydon, J., & Rizvi, U. Z. (Eds.)."
"130" "2016   Handbook  of Postcolonial Archaeology . Routledge, New York."
"131" "Lynott, Mark J."
"132" "1997  Ethical  Principles and Archaeological Practice: Development of an Ethics Policy.  American  Antiquity  62, no. 4: 589-99.  https://doi.org/10.2307/281879 ."
"133" "Mackay , Alex, Sam C. Lin,  Lachlan  S.  Kenna ,  and  Alex F. Blackwood."
"134" "2018  Variance  in the Response of Silcrete to Rapid Heating Complicates Assumptions about Past Heat Treatment Methods.  Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences , June 20, 2018, 1 – 12.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-018-0663-1."
"135" "Marwick , B."
"136" "20 20   Open Access to Publications to Expand Participation in Archaeology .  Journal of  Norwegian Archaeological Review   53 ( 2 ):  163-169   https://doi.org/10.1080/00293652.2020.1837233"
"137" "Marwick , B."
"138" "2017 Computational reproducibility in archaeological research: Basic principles and a case study of their implementation.  Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory  24(2): 424-450."
"139" "Marwick, B., & Birch, S. E. P."
"140" "2018 A standard for the scholarly citation of archaeological data as an incentive to data sharing.  Advances in Archaeological Practice  6(2): 125-143."
"141" "Marwick , B., C.  Boettiger  & L. Mullen"
"142" "2018 Packaging Data Analytical Work Reproducibly Using R (and Friends),  The American Statistician , 72:1, 80-88,  https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375986"
"143" "Marwick , B, d ’ Alpoim   Guedes , J.,  Barton , C. M.,  Bates , L. A.,  Baxter , M.,  Bevan , A.,  Bollwerk , E. A.,  Bocinsky , R. K.,  Brughmans , T., Carter, A. K., Conrad, C.,  Contreras , D. A., Costa, S., Crema, E. R., Daggett, A., Davies, B., Drake, B. L.,  Dye , T. S., France, P.,  Fullagar , R., Giusti, D., Graham, S., Harris, M. D.,  Hawks , J.,  Health , S.,  Huffer , D., Kansa, E. C., Kansa, S. W., Madsen, M. E.,  Melcher , J., Negre, J.,  Neiman , F. D.,  Opitz , R.,  Orton , D. C.,  Przstupa , P.,  Raviele , M., Riel- Savatore , J.,  Riris , P.,  Romanowska , I., Smith, J.,  Strupler , N.,  Ullah , I. I., Van  Vlack , H. G.,  VanValkenburgh , N.,  Watrall , E. C.,  Webster , C., Wells, J.,  Winters , J., and  Wren , C. D."
"144" "2017 a  Open  science in archaeology.  SAA Archaeological Record  17(4): pp. 8-14."
"145" "Marwick, Ben, Elspeth Hayes, Chris Clarkson and Richard  Fullagar"
"146" "2017b Movement of lithics by trampling: An experiment in the  Madjedbebe  sediments, northern Australia . Journal of Archaeological Science  79: 73-85.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2017.01.008"
"147" "Marwick, B., Hiscock, P., Sullivan, M., & Hughes, P."
"148" "2017c Landform boundary effects on Holocene forager landscape use in arid South Australia.  Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports  19: 864-874.  http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2017.07.004"
"149" "Marwick, B., Wang, L. Y., Robinson, R., & Loiselle, H."
"150" "2019    How  to use replication assignments for teaching integrity in empirical   archaeology.  Advances in Archaeological Practice , 1-9.  h ttps://doi.org/10.1017/aap.2019.38 ."
"151" "Marwick , B., Van  Vlack , H.G., Conrad, C.,  Shoocongdej , R.,  Thongcharoenchaikit , C., Kwak, S."
"152" "2016  Adaptations  to sea level change and transitions to agriculture at Khao  Toh  Chong  rockshelter , Peninsular Thailand,  Journal of Archaeological Science  77: 94-108.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2016.10.010"
"153" "McPherron , S. P."
"154" "2018  Additional  statistical and graphical methods for analyzing site formation processes using artifact orientations.  PloS   One , 13(1).  http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0190195"
"155" "McPherron , S. P.,  Abdolahzadeh , A., Archer, W., Chan, A.,  Djakovic , I.,  Dogandžić , T., ... & Weiss, M."
"156" "2020    Introducing  platform surface interior angle (PSIA) and its role in flake formation, size and shape.  Plos  one, 15(11), e0241714."
"157" "McKiernan, Erin C., Philip E.  Bourne , C. Titus Brown, Stuart Buck,  Amye   Kenall , Jennifer Lin, Damon McDougall, Brian A.  Nosek , Karthik Ram, Courtney K. Soderberg, Jeffrey R. Spies, Kaitlin  Thaney , Andrew  Updegrove , Kara H. Woo and Tal  Yarkoni"
"158" "2016  How  open science helps researchers succeed.  eLife  5: e16800."
"159" "Merton , Robert K."
"160" "1973  The  Normative Structure of Science.  In  The  Sociology of Science. Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, edited by Robert K Merton , pp. 267-278. Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"161" "Moon, M. R."
"162" "2009  The  History and Role of Institutional Review Boards: A Useful Tension.  AMA Journal of Ethics  11(4), 311-316. https://doi.org/10.1001/virtualmentor.2009.11.4.pfor1-0904."
"163" "Mulkay , Michael J."
"164" "1976  Norms  and Ideology in Science.  Social Science Information  15: no. 4-5 (August 1): 637-56.  https://doi.org/10.1177/053901847601500406 ."
"165" "Negre , J., Mu ñ oz , F.,  Lancelotti , C.,"
"166" "2016  Geostatistical  modelling of chemical residues on archaeological floors in the presence of barriers,  J  Archaeol   Sci   70: 91-101"
"167" "Nicholas, George P."
"168" "2014  Indigenous  Cultural Heritage in the Age of Technological Reproducibility: Towards a Postcolonial Ethic of the Public Domain. In  Dynamic Fair Dealing:  Creating Canadian Culture Online , edited by Coombe, Rosemary,  Wershler , Darren, and  Zeilinger , Martin, pp. 213-224. University of Toronto Press, Toronto."
"169" "Phillips, M.,  Moln á r-G á bor , F., Korbel, J. O., Thorogood, A., Joly, Y., Chalmers, D., &  Knoppers , B. M."
"170" "2020  Genomics : data sharing needs an international code of conduct.  Nature   548:  31-33."
"171" "Schauer, Peter, Andrew Bevan, Stephen  Shennan ,  Kevan   Edinborough , Tim  Kerig , Mike Parker Pearson"
"172" "2020    British  Neolithic axe distributions and their implications. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 27, 836–859.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-019-09438-6"
"173" "Schaepe , D. M.,  Angelbeck , B.,  Snook , D., & Welch, J. R."
"174" "2017  Archaeology  as therapy: connecting belongings, knowledge, time, place, and well-being.   Current Anthropology  (4): 502-533."
"175" "Schmidt, S. C., &  Marwick , B."
"176" "2020  Tool -Driven Revolutions in Archaeological Science.  Journal of Computer Applications in Archaeology .  3(1), 18 – 32.  http://doi.org/10.5334/jcaa.29"
"177" "Selden, R. Z.,  Dockall , J. E., &  Dubied , M."
"178" "2020.    A  quantitative   assessment  of  intraspecific  morphological variation in Gahagan bifaces from the southern Caddo area and central Texas. Southeastern Archaeology, 39(2), pp.125 - 145. "
"179" "https://doi.org/10.1080/0734578X.2020.1744416 ."
"180" "Shoup , Daniel,  and   Lyra  Monteiro"
"181" "2008  When  Past and Present Collide: The Ethics of Archaeological Stewardship.  Current Anthropology  49, no. 2: 328-33.   https://doi.org/10.1086/524385 ."
"182" "Smith, Celia"
"183" "2018 Ethics and Best Practices for Mapping Archaeological Sites.  Electronic document.  https://aejolene.github.io/SAA2018digigovt/mapping-smith.html .  accessed February 10, 2020."
"184" "Smith, C., &  Wobst , H. M. (Eds.)"
"185" "2004   Indigenous  Archaeologies:  Decolonising  Theory and Practice .   Routledge, New York."
"186" "Smith, C., Burke, H., Ralph, K. Pollard, A. Gorman, C. Wilson, S. Hemming, D. Rigney, D. Wesley, M. Morrison, D. McNaughton, I. Domingo, I. Moffat, A. Roberts, J.  Koolmatrie , J.  Willika , B.  Pamkal  & G. Jackson"
"187" "2019  Pursuing  Social Justice Through Collaborative Archaeologies in Aboriginal  Australia.   Archaeologies  15: 536 – 569  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11759-019-09382-7"
"188" "Stahl, A.B."
"189" "2020  Assembling   “ Effective Archaeologies ”  toward Equitable Futures.  American Anthropologist , 122: 37-50.   https://doi.org/10.1111/aman.13365"
"190" "Tennant , JP, F  Waldner , DC Jacques, P  Masuzzo , LB  Collister  and CHJ  Hartgerink"
"191" "2016  The  academic, economic and societal impacts of Open Access: an evidence-based review.  f1000 research  5: 632."
"192" "Thieme, Nick."
"193" "2018  R  Generation.  Significance  15, no. 4 (August 1): 14-19.   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2018.01169.x ."
"194" "Tsosie , Rebecca"
"195" "2007  Cultural  Challenges to Biotechnology: Native American Genetic Resources and the Concept of Cultural Harm.  Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics  35 (3): 396-411"
"196" "Vence, T."
"197" "2014  Q &A: 1 Million Preprints and Counting.  The Scientist Magazine . Accessed October 9, 2018. https://www.the-scientist.com/daily-news/qa-1-million-preprints-and-counting-36168 ."
"198" "Vilhuber , L."
"199" "2020. Reproducibility and Replicability in Economics .   Harvard Data Science Review , 2(4).  https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.4f6b9e67"
"200" "Wang, L. Y. and Marwick, B."
"201" "2020a   Ornaments as indicators of social changes  resulting    from  indirect effects of colonialism in northeastern Taiwan.  Archaeological Research in Asia  24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ara.2020.100226 ."
"202" "Wang, L. Y. and Marwick, B."
"203" "2020b   Standardization of ceramic shape: A case study from the Iron Age pottery from northeastern Taiwan.  Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports  33.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2020.102554 ."
"204" "Warren, Karen J."
"205" "1999  A  philosophical perspective on the ethics and resolution of cultural property issues .  In  The  Ethics of Collecting Cultural Property: Whose Culture? Whose Property?  Edited by Phyllis  Mauch  Messenger, pp. 1-26.  Alburquerque  :  University of New Mexico Press."
"206" "Weiss, M."
"207" "2020    The  Lichtenberg Keilmesser- it’s   all   about   the  angle.  Plos   one , 15(10), e0239718."
"208" "Willinsky , John"
"209" "2006   The  access principle: The case for open access to research and scholarship . MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. USA."
"210" "Wilkinson, M.,  Dumontier , M., Aalbersberg, I. et al."
"211" "2016  The  FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship..  Scientific Data  3: 160018  https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18"
"212" "Wilson, Greg, Jennifer Bryan, Karen Cranston, Justin  Kitzes , Lex  Nederbragt , and Tracy K. Teal.  2017  Good  Enough Practices in Scientific Computing.  PLOS Computational Biology  13: no."
"213" "6 (June 22): e1005510.   https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510 ."
"214" "Wylie, Alison"
"215" "1999  Science , conservation, and stewardship: Evolving codes of conduct in archaeology.  Science and Engineering Ethics  5(3): 319-336."
"216" "2005  The  Promise and Perils of an Ethic of Stewardship.  Embedding Ethics , edited by Lynn  Meskell  and Peter  Pells , Berg Press, London, pp. 47-68."
"217" "2015  A  plurality of pluralisms: Collaborative practice in archaeology. In  Objectivity in science :  New Perspectives from Science and Technology Studies,  edited by Flavia  Padovani , Alan Richardson, and Jonathan Y.  Tsoupp , pp. 189-210. Springer, Cham."
"218" "Xie ,  Yihui , J.J. Allaire, and Garret  Grolemund ."
"219" "2018   R  Markdown: The Definitive Guide .   CRC  Press ."
