Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.25

Pp.323-341

Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context of King Abdullah
Hospital
Hanan Sarhan Alsubaiai
Department of English
Faculty of Arts, King Khalid University
Bisha, Saudi Arabia
Abstract
This study aims to investigate how the dominance of the English language at Bisha King Abdullah
Hospital in Saudi Arabia affects service delivery. Specifically, the research focuses on the attitudes
of patients and staff towards communicating in English instead of Arabic, which is the primary
official language in Saudi Arabia. First, the study addresses the question of how the dominance of
English language in the selected medical context affects service delivery. Second, the study
explores the attitude of patients and medical staff towards the dominance of the English language.
Third, the study presents a comparison of the attitude of patients and medical staff towards the use
of English language. Finally, the study responds to the question of how patients' level of education
influences their attitude towards the use of English at the hospital. The study is based on
quantitative research, involving 60 participants, where 30 patients and 30 medical staff. The
findings reveal that 86.7% of medical staff members find it challenging to communicate with their
patients in English. On the same note, 60% of patients interviewed admitted that they find it
difficult understanding medical practitioners when they communicate in English. The findings can
have significant practical implications since they show a possible communication barrier that can
be addressed to improve patient experience at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital. The findings provide
statistical evidence to inform evidence-based strategies to improve communication between
patients and medical practitioners at the hospital.
Abbreviations and Acronyms Definition
Keywords: Communication barrier, language discordance, linguistic hegemony, medical context,
patient’s satisfaction
Cite as: Alsubaiai, H. S. (2019) Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical
Context of King Abdullah Hospital. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2). 323-341.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.25

323

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Introduction
Background
The dominance of English language in healthcare settings is one of the topics that have grabbed
the attention of researchers around the world. The dominance of a language can be defined as
linguistic hegemony, where one language is given a superior status in multilingual societies
(Mustapha, 2014). In brief, hegemony is characterized by leadership without force as well as
leadership through legitimization. It is based on the ability or willingness of all parties (medical
staff and patients) to use it. In Saudi Arabia, the use of English in the clinical setting is due to the
presence of medical staff from different countries that are not necessarily Arab-speakers, although
the majority of Saudis speak Arabic. Bisha King Abdullah Hospital is an excellent example of the
many Saudi Arabian hospitals, where the use of English and Arabic is the norm. This study is
informed by the need to measure the attitude of patients and medical staff towards the domination
of English in the medical context.
Problem Statement
In Saudi Arabia, foreign experts make a significant fraction of the Kingdom’s health care
workforce. According to a reliable media report, 66.6% of the 42,768 doctors who were serving in
public hospitals across the Kingdom were non-locals (Arab News, 2017). An earlier report by
Whitman (2015) shows that 76% of all doctors serving in Saudi hospitals were expatriates.
Therefore, the most critical question is how the current situation contributes to the linguistic
hegemony of English in these hospitals in a Kingdom where the majority of people speak Arabic.
Specifically, this research is based on the attitude of patients and medical staff at Bisha King
Abdullah Hospital in Saudi Arabia. On the same note, it is worth noting how linguistic hegemony
might affect service delivery. As Pino-Postigo (2017) notes, conveying information in a healthcare
setting is critical in achieving successful communication that leads to quick responses in terms of
effective treatment and follow-up.
Research Objectives
The current study addresses the following specific objectives
1. To find out how the dominance of English language in the medical context of Bisha king
Abdullah hospital affects service delivery.
2. To investigate the attitude of patients and medical staff towards the dominance of the
English language at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital
3. To compare the attitude of patients and medical staff towards the use of English language
at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital
4. To investigate the influence of patients’ level of education on their attitude towards the use
of English at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital
Significance of the Study
This study provides a platform for patients and medical staff to express views concerning the use
of English at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital. The findings can be used by the hospital's
management to initiate strategies aimed at reducing the language barrier between patients and
medical staff.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

324

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Literature Review
The domination of the English language in healthcare settings is seen as a process in which English
is regarded as a superior language that staff members and patients use to communicate with each
other. In a medical setting, understanding how the medical staff direct patients' attention is an
essential feature towards solving the problem of the language barrier. According to Meuter,
Gallois, Segalowitz, Ryder, and Hocking (2015), the success of communication depends on
whether the message has been packaged appropriately and the listener is capable of inferring the
speaker's intention. The Communication Accommodation Theory (CAT) can also be used to
understand the negative impact of a language barrier in a healthcare setting (Meuter et al., 2015).
The theory supports the dynamic nature of communication, where different parties bring their own
motivations. In this case, Saudi Arabian hospitals have become diversified workplaces where
experts from different parts of the world work together and serve a predominantly Arab-speaking
population. While English becomes a reasonable choice for the clinicians to communicate, it is
worth noting that the effectiveness of communication is affected.
The Saudi Arabian healthcare sector faces several challenges that need to be addressed
using country-specific approaches. As the government pushes for its Saudization Policy, which is
aimed at increasing the number of local experts in all the sectors, studies show that Saudis are not
ready to take the position of foreign experts. For instance, a study by Alboliteeh, Magarey, and
Wiechula (2017) reveals that most nurses (90.2% of males and 85.6% of females) perceive nursing
as a career that keeps them away from home. Also, 71.6% admitted that they would like to work
for shorter periods, while 23% indicated they would like to quit the profession in two years.
Therefore, the Kingdom’s healthcare sector will continue to rely on foreign experts. However, it
remains unclear how expatriates affect the dominating language in Saudi healthcare facilities. In
particular, it is interesting to know the composition of the workforce has influenced the decision
of hospitals such as King Abdullah to use English in a country where many people speak Arabic.
A study by Alqurashi (2016) examined the English language needs among Saudi Arabian
medical experts. The findings show that “knowing English has become a key requirement to
succeed as a specialist in any profession or field of knowledge” (Alqurashi, (2016, p. 243).
According to Alqurashi (2016), English facilitates communication between health professionals
from different countries that do not share the same language. These findings support the
assessment by Meuter et al. (2015) that miscommunication in the healthcare sector can be lifethreatening, especial when patients and healthcare professionals cannot understand each other. For
instance, the failure of a clinician to communicate effectively regarding the seriousness of risk can
lead to a negative consequence since a patient might fail to comply with instructions (Alkhamis,
2012; Meuter et al., 2015; Bello, 2017). The existence of evidence shows the seriousness of this
problem.
A recent study by a group of researchers demonstrates that communication barrier is one
of the factors contributing to medicine-related problems among patients with cardiovascular
diseases and diabetes (Al Hamid, Ghaleb, Aljadhey, and Aslanpour, 2017). For example, Al Hamid
quoted a Saudi Patient complaining by saying:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

325

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

No, they do not understand me. They never tell me anything. They write down my
medicine on a piece of paper to get them but they never explained anything. The doctor is
always busy and thinks that we understand his writing (p. 5).
Other previous studies also show that a language difference is a barrier to the provision of quality
healthcare in Saudi Arabia (Albougami, 2015; Almutairi, 2015; Aljuaid, Mannan, Chaudhry,
Rawaf, & Majeed, 2016). As Wong et al. (2011) note, effective communication is an important
component in a healthcare setting. Therefore, it is worth noting how the use of English in Saudi
Arabian hospitals is affecting the ability of hospitals to deliver quality healthcare services.
Studies from other parts of the world show the threats that a language barrier in a healthcare
setting can cause, especially when clinicians use a different language from what the majority of
the patients use. However, the findings cannot be applied universally since the level of language
barriers differ from one country to another. Looking at the country-specific studies on Saudi
Arabian healthcare sector, it is clear that the language barrier is a possible threat to the provision
of quality services. As Albougami (2015) and Almutairi (2015) and Aljuaid et al. (2016) note, the
language barrier is one of the main challenges facing Saudi Arabian hospitals. In a Kingdom where
foreign medical practitioners play a significant role in running hospitals, it is necessary for
researchers to take a bold step and find out how the problem of the language barrier can be solved.
In doing so, appropriate measures can be taken to address the language barrier leading to improved
service delivery.
3.0 Methodology
This chapter examines the research approach applied to address the research questions introduced
in chapter one. Specifically, the chapter shows how qualitative and quantitative research designs
were applied. The chapter also presents the data collection procedure applied and the sampling of
patients and medical staff at Bisha King Abdullah hospital. Finally, the chapter shows how data
analysis was conducted to achieve the goal of this study.
3.1 Procedure for Measuring Variables
In this study, several variables were investigated in line with the research questions. The attitude
of patients and medical staff towards effective use of the English language at Bisha King Abdullah
hospital was the dependent variable. This dependent variable was a function of the following
independent variables: (1) understanding, (2) satisfaction levels, (3) policy and rights, and (4)
language of communication.
3.2 Research Design and Instruments
Quantitative research method was applied in this study to provide statistical evidence. The research
approach was important in providing much–needed statistical evidence to address the specific
research objectives in order to achieve the main objective of the study (Atieno, 2009; Rahman,
2016). In particular, patients and medical practitioners were surveyed using questionnaires to gain
crucial insight regarding their viewpoints. In doing so, it will be possible to know their views
concerning the use of English at the hospital. On the same note, a cross-sectional research design
was applied to take a snapshot of the current situation at the hospital. The cross-sectional research
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

326

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

approach was ideal for this study since it allows for the collection of data at a given point in time
for both groups (patients and medical staff).
3.3 Population and Sample
The study targeted patients and medical staff. The inclusion of these two groups was important
since they are expected to communicate and interact with each other during the patients’ hospital
stay. Specifically, patients from the outpatient and inpatient department were free to participate as
long as their condition allowed them to fill the questionnaires. For the inpatients, patients from the
male, female, and the maternity wards at Bisha King Abdullah hospital were allowed to participate.
Similarly, medical staffs from the same departments were engaged to ensure that each department
was well-represented. In brief, a sample size of 60 participants was targeted through a random
stratified sampling technique to pick an equal number of participants from each sub-group. In so
doing, it was possible to compare the two groups and draw conclusions.
3.4 Data Collection Procedure
A formal approach was used to seek permission to conduct the study at the hospital. For the
participants, both patients and staff members, participation was voluntary. Also, the identities and
personal information were protected by identifying questionnaires with numbers rather than actual
names (Kelley, Clark, Brown, & Sitzia, 2003). Questionnaires were used to collect data. All
willing participants were issued with a questionnaire and given time to fill it. Giving them privacy
and time to fill the questions allowed them to fill accurate and factual information without fear
(Kelley, Clark, Brown, & Sitzia, 2003). Two questionnaires were used: one for the patients and
the other for the medical staff. For convenience reasons, the questionnaire for patients was in
Arabic, while the questionnaire for medical staff was in English. The questionnaires contained
close-ended questions to facilitate data entry into statistical software and analysis.
3.5 Data Analysis Procedure
With the aid of the SPSS, the data analysis focused on the descriptive analysis and comparison of
means. For the descriptive analysis, the thought was to statistically measure how often the staff
members use English and Arabic as well as their views about the possible staff- patient and staffstaff communication barriers. For the comparison of means, the analysis focused on comparing the
views of patients and staff members regarding the use of English to determine the degree of
agreement or disagreement. Also, a comparison analysis was done to show how the ability to
communicate in English influences the views of patients and staff members’ attitude towards the
use of the language. Finally, the analysis focused on determining the relationship between the
attitude of patients and their level of satisfaction with the use of English at the hospital.
3.6 Reliability of the Tools
Cronbach's alpha helped in testing the internal consistency. The results showed the calculated
Cronbach's Alpha for questionnaire sections: 0.760 for patients and 0.740 for medical staff, as
shown in the table.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Table 1. Cronbach’s Alpha reliability results
Number of phrases

Cronbach’s Alpha

Patients

9

0.760

Medical Staff

9

0.740

Whole Questionnaire

18

0.750

Questionnaire Sections

Cronbach's alpha ranges from r = 0 to 1, with r = 0.7 or greater which is considered as sufficiently
reliable (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994)(1).
4.0 Data Analysis and Findings
This chapter presents the analysis of data to address the research objectives introduced in chapter
one. The chapter is divided into three sections. The first section focuses on the analysis of
responses from the medical staff, while the second section covers the patients’ responses. The third
section presents a discussion of the findings.
4.1 Analysis of Responses for Medical Staff
4.1.1 Descriptive Analysis
Figure 1 shows the distribution of Medical Staff, according to Gender. Female had the highest
percentage, with 60% (n=18) of the total sample, while the remaining 40% (n=12) were male
medical staff members.

40%

60%

Male
Female

Figure Error! Main Document Only.. Medical staff participants by gender i.e., males and
females

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

328

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Effective use of English language (in %)
43.3

30

13.3

Very low

Low

Medium

6.7

6.7

High

Very High

Figure 1. Effective use of English language in the medical context of Bisha King Abdullah
hospital according to the Medical Staff.
Figure 2 illustrates the responses of Medical Staff towards effective use of English
language in the medical context of Bisha king Abdullah hospital. This outcome clearly shows that
medical staff members are aware of the language barrier that the use of the English language brings
at the hospital.
4.1.2 Attitude of the Medical Staff
Table 1: Attitudes of the Medical Staff towards the effectiveness of English language in the medical
context of Bisha King Abdullah Hospital

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

329

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Table 1 shows that creating an understanding between patients and medical practitioners is the
main problem that English dominance at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital brings.

Figure 2: The mean scores of the attitude of the Medical Staff towards the effectiveness of
English language in the medical context of Bisha King Abdullah Hospital
As Figure 3 below shows, the comparison of means provided crucial insights regarding
each of the four areas: understanding, satisfaction, policy and rights, and preferences of language
for communication. The items for measuring the aspect of understanding registered the highest
mean score.
Table 2. Attitudes of the Medical Staff towards the effectiveness of English language in the
medical context of Bisha King Abdullah Hospital in Saudi Arabia according to Gender

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

330

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

The researcher applied independent sample t-test to test whether there were significant
differences in responses of the Medical Staff towards effective use of the English language in terms
of gender. As summarized in Table 2 below, there was a significant difference between male and
female responses towards effective use of English language in the medical context of Bisha king
Abdullah Hospital in regard to satisfaction and language of communication.
4.2 Analysis of Patients’ Responses
4.2.1 Descriptive Analysis
Analysis of the patients’ demographic factors provides an essential overview before analyzing
their attitude towards the use of English in a hospital setting. The demographic factors analyzed were
gender, age, and education. As Figure 4 demonstrates, both genders were equally represented with 15
participants each. With adequate representation, it was possible to conduct further analysis using
gender as the independent variable. Concerning age, 46.7% of the respondents fell under the range of
20 and 40 years, while 26.7% were either below 20 years old or over 40 years. Although the two age
groups were poorly represented, it shows that the age of the patients surveyed spread over a wide
margin. Lastly, regarding the educational level, an equal number of patients (36.7%) received a
university education or did not reach the university level. A smaller percentage (26.7%) received
postgraduate degree. This outcome shows that patients with different educational attainment agreed to
participate in this study representing the members of the society well.

Figure 3. Patients demographic information (gender, age, and level of education)
Figure 5 shows the responses of patients towards the effectiveness of English language in
the medical context of Bisha king Abdullah hospital. This outcome shows that the majority of
patients are against the use of English due to language barriers it brings at the hospital between
them and their caregivers.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

331

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Figure 4. Effective use of the English language in the medical context of Bisha King Abdullah
4.2.2 Attitudes of the Patients
The attitude of patients surveyed on the effectiveness of English in the Saudi Arabian
medical context varied significantly. Concerning patients’ satisfaction, the majority of the patients
were unsatisfied with the domination of English at the hospital. Notably, the attitudes of patients
towards the policy and rights that should govern the use of English differed slightly. This shows
the negative attitude of patients towards the use of English as a language of communication in the
healthcare context. These responses brought the mean score of the responses to 4.60 out of 5
(Figure 6) below. The patients prefer the use of Arabic instead of English, whereby their views are
based on other genuine concerns such as satisfaction, and issues to do with policy and their rights
as recipients of medical services.

Figure 5: Mean scores on the attitude of patients towards the effectiveness of English in the
medical context
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

332

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Table 3. Attitudes of the Patients towards the effectiveness of English language in the medical
context of Bisha King Abdullah Hospital in Saudi Arabia based on Gender
Mean

Tvalue

P- value

Male

Female

1. I find difficulties to understand
medical practitioners when they
speak in English.

4.53

4.67

0.727

0.473

Not
Significant

2. I find difficult to know my
health status because I do not
understand the medical terms used
in English.

4.27

4.60

1.488

0.148

Not
Significant

3. I am not satisfied with the use of
English as the primary language in
the medical context.

4.07

4.80

3.157

0.004
**

Significant

4. I note a difference in doctors'
treatment with the patients, in favor
of patients who speak English.

4.67

4.80

0.807

0.426

Not
Significant

5. I feel that the use of English in
the medical context is not
compatible with the needs and
rights of patients in Saudi Arabia.

3.40

4.47

3.947

0.001
**

Significant

6. Policies which govern the use of
Arabic as a language that improves
service delivery in the hospital
should be developed.

3.53

4.53

3.949

0.000
**

Significant

7. Communication between
patients and medical practitioners
would be more natural if Arabic
was the primary mode of
communication.

4.53

8. I Prefer when health services are
provided in Arabic instead of
English in Bisha King Abdullah
Hospital.

4.53

Language of
communication

Policy and rights

Satisfaction

Understanding

Statements

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Not
4.67

0.581

0.566
Significant

5.00

3.500

0.004
**

Significant

333

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Independent sample t-test provided a platform for determining whether there were
significant differences in responses of the patients towards effective use of English language in the
medical context of Bisha king Abdullah hospital based on their gender. This is well illustrated in
Table 3 below. As Table 3 shows, there was a significant difference in regards to satisfaction,
policy, and rights as well as the language of communication.
Table 4. ANOVA results according to Age and Education

4.3 Comparison between Physicians’ and Patients’ Responses
The Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was applied to test whether there are significant
differences in Patient’s responses towards effective use of the English language in the medical
context based on age and education. The use of ANOVA was necessary since more than two
groups were included in the comparison. As Table 4 shows, the significance value for age and the
level of education was 0.884 (p>0.05) and 0.319 (p>0.05), respectively. Hence, the differences
between the groups were insignificant. The reason for the absence of significant differences was
the homogeneity of the responses.
A comparison between the views of physicians and patients towards the visibility of the
use of English language provide crucial insights. Interestingly, 43.3% of the medical staff members
considered the visibility of the use of English to be very low compared to 26.7% of patients who
share a similar view. The cumulative percentage, however, shows that both groups prefer the use
of Arabic instead of English. The mean score of 2.20 and 2.67 out of 5 for the medical staff and
patients respectively shows that both groups consider the use of English in the selected medical
context invisible.
The comparison shows that patients’ approval levels are higher than those of physicians
towards the visibility of the use of English language in the medical context of Bisha king Abdullah
hospital. With a lower approval rate from the physicians, this outcome shows the concern that
medical staff members share about the need for effective communication. Even though they are
comfortable using it, they are aware of the ineffectiveness and inconveniences that using English
brings to their patients.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

334

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Figure 6. A comparison of Attitudes of patients and physicians towards the visibility of the use
of English in the medical context
4.4 Discussion
In summary, the findings provide crucial insights regarding the view of healthcare providers and
patients on the use of English at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital. The willingness of patients and
medical staff members to participate made it possible to collect the much-needed data required to
address the specific research objectives introduced in chapter one. With the assistance of SPSS,
the analysis outcomes can be summarized in the findings below. Firstly, the findings show that the
views of medical staff and patients differ in regards to the use of English in the selected hospital.
On the one hand, the analysis on the views of the medical staff members revealed that the average
responses towards the visibility of the use of English language in the medical context of Bisha
king Abdullah hospital were 2.20 out of 5, which corresponds to (Low) in 5- point Likert scale.
This shows that medical staff members are concerned about the language barrier that English
brings at Bisha king Abdullah hospital. This outcome is different from previous findings by
Alqurashi (2016), which showed that medical staff members in various parts of the globe prefer
using English since it facilitates communication between health professionals from different
countries.
On the other hand, patients’ mean response towards effective use of English language in
the medical context of Bisha king Abdullah hospital was 2.67 out of 5, which correspond to
Medium in 5- point Likert scale. This outcome can be attributed to the possibility that patients
consider using English as problematic. Understandably, the majority of women with a lower level
of education (less than university) strongly agreed with the preference for the use of Arabic, which
they are good at, instead of English. This outcome shows that service delivery is adversely affected
when there is a language barrier between patients and health practitioners. For instance, 100% of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

335

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

female patients admitted finding it difficult to understand their doctors. In a medical context, such
communication barriers lead to poor service delivery. This outcome can be related to the studies
conducted in other parts of the globe on the importance of language in facilitating communication
between patients and healthcare givers (Al Hamid et al., 2017; Albougami, 2015; Almutairi, 2015;
Aljuaid et al., 2016). For instance, Al Hamid et al. (2017) revealed that communication barrier
contributes to medicine-related problems among patients with cardiovascular diseases and diabetes
since the healthcare giver finds it challenging to communicate with the patient about compliance
and other vital issues.
The analysis shows that gender is a significant independent variable. In some instances,
male and female patients and medical staff show different attitude towards the use of English in a
medical context. The Independent sample t-test revealed that women are more likely to have a
negative attitude towards the use of English in a medical context more than their male counterparts.
Female patients registered higher scores for the two items meant for policy and patients’ rights.
Similarly, a significant number higher for female patients were registered in one of the items meant
for measuring the satisfaction with the use of the English language at the hospital.
5.0 Conclusion and Recommendations
5.1 Conclusion
Just like other hospitals across the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Bisha King Abdullah
Hospital will continue to serve a predominantly Arab population. As discussed above, this study
has provided statistical evidence to show that patients prefer communicating in Arabic while the
caregivers do not mind speaking in English, although they would prefer a language that every
patient understands. The majority of patients prefer Arabic to English since they are concerned
about understanding their care providers.
The evidence has addressed the research gap by providing organization-specific evidence
for Bisha King Abdullah Hospital. It is worth noting how each hospital offers a unique working
environment depending on the proportion of medical staff members who can speak Arabic. As the
local language among Saudis, it is no doubt that patients will always prefer Arabic to English, as
the findings show. Therefore, the current study confirms that linguistic hegemony of English at
Bisha King Abdullah Hospital is a challenge to both patients and medical staff. Although medical
staff can use it, they are concerned about their patients and the language barrier that English creates
between them and their patients. In line with the findings discussed above, it is crucial to examine
the practical implications and the opportunity for further research that this study opens.
5.2 Recommendations
5.2.1 Recommendations for Practice
The current study provides crucial empirical evidence that policy-makers and hospital
management can use to make informed decisions. For Bisha King Abdullah Hospital, this study
provides hospital-specific statistical evidence that can be used to develop evidence-based programs
to enhance effective communication between patients and care providers. For instance, the
evidence can be used to justify the introduction of a training program, where medical staff
members from other parts of the world can learn Arabic. In doing so, the hospital can achieve the
objective of enhancing caregiver-patient communication at the same time, retaining the pool of
experienced expatriates working for the hospital.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

336

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

5.2.2 Recommendation for Future Research
This study provides a platform for researchers to conduct further studies regarding the domination
of English in the Saudi Arabian healthcare setting. Firstly, this study focused more on identifying
the problem. Therefore, further study is needed to identify and test the effectiveness of strategies
aimed at addressing the problem. Secondly, more study is required to expand the scope of the
study. For instance, researchers in the future should consider involving several hospitals rather
than a single healthcare facility. A study involving several cases will provide a platform for
comparison allowing the researcher to conclude whether the problem is a regional or national issue
or just an issue at Bisha King Abdullah Hospital only. Thirdly, the application of a cross-sectional
research design introduced a limitation since the data was collected at one point only. In the future,
researchers should consider applying a longitudinal research design to deal with the language
barriers caused by English dominance in the Saudi Arabian healthcare setting.
About the author:
Hanan Sarhan is both a lecturer and a dean assistant at Bisha University. She specializes in
teaching English and assisting the dean in academic affairs. Before starting her career at Bisha
University, she did her undergraduate and master’s degree at King Khalid University. Hanan has
excellent communication skills, a good public speaker and a docile learner who respects and
appreciates her superiors. ID ORCid- https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2909-8051
References
Alboliteeh, M., Magarey, J., & Wiechula, R., (2017). The Profile of Saudi Nursing Workforce: A
Cross-Sectional Study. Nursing research and practice, 2017.
Albougami, A., (2015). Role of language and communication in providing quality healthcare by
expatriate nurses in Saudi Arabia. Journal of Health Specialties, 3(3), 166-172.
Al Hamid, A. M., Ghaleb, M., Aljadhey, H., & Aslanpour, Z. (2017). Factors contributing to
medicine-related problems in adult patients with diabetes and cardiovascular diseases in
Saudi Arabia: a qualitative study. BMJ Open, 7(11), e017664.
Aljuaid, M., Mannan, F., Chaudhry, Z., Rawaf, S., & Majeed, A. (2016). Quality of care in
university hospitals in Saudi Arabia: a systematic review. BMJ Open, 6(2), e008988.
Alkhamis, A., (2012). Health care system in Saudi Arabia: an overview. Eastern Mediterranean
Health Journal, 18(10), 1078-1080.
Almutairi, K. M., (2015). Culture and language differences as a barrier to the provision of quality
care by the health workforce in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Medical Journal, 36(4), 425.
Alqurashi, F., (2016). English for Medical Purposes for Saudi Medical and Health
Professionals. Advances in Language and Literary Studies, 7(6), 243-252.
Arab News. (2017, May 16). 66.5% of doctors in Saudi public hospitals are foreigners. Retrieved
February 22, 2018, from http://www.arabnews.com/node/1100171/saudi-arabia
Atieno, O.P., 2009. An analysis of the strengths and limitation of qualitative and quantitative
research paradigms. Problems of Education in the 21st Century, 13(1), pp.13-38.
Bello, O. (2017). Effective Communication in Nursing Practice: A literature review. 1-55.
Kelley, K., Clark, B., Brown, V., & Sitzia, J. (2003). Good practice in the conduct and reporting
of survey research. International Journal for quality in health care, 15(3), 261-266.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

337

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Alsubaiai

Meuter, R. F., Gallois, C., Segalowitz, N. S., Ryder, A. G., & Hocking, J. (2015). Overcoming
language barriers in healthcare: A protocol for investigating safe and effective
communication when patients or clinicians use a second language. BMC health services
research, 15(1), 371.
Mustapha, A.S., 2014. Linguistic Hegemony of the English language in Nigeria. Íkala, revista de
lenguaje y cultura, 19(1), pp.83-97.
Perry, F. L. (2008). Research in applied linguistics: becoming a discerning consumer. New York,
NY: Routledge.
Pino-Postigo, A. (2017). Challenges in Doctor-patient Communication in the Province of Malaga:
A Multilingual Crossroads. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 237, 992-997.
Rahman, M. S. (2016). The advantages and disadvantages of using qualitative and quantitative
approaches and methods in language “testing and assessment” research: A literature
review. Journal of Education and Learning, 6(1), 102.
Whitman, E. (2015, December 2). Gulf Countries’ Migrant Workers: Health Care Providers Are
Mostly Foreigners In Saudi Arabia And Neighboring Countries. Retrieved February 22,
2018,
from
http://www.ibtimes.com/gulf-countries-migrant-workers-health-careproviders-are-mostly-foreigners-saudi-1814550
Wong, E. L., Yam, C. H., Cheung, A. W., Leung, M. C., Chan, F. W., Wong, F. Y., & Yeoh, E.
K. (2011). Barriers to effective discharge planning: a qualitative study investigating the
perspectives of frontline healthcare professionals. BMC health services research, 11(1),
242.
Appendices
Appendix A: Questionnaire for Patients
.............................................

‫ السيدة‬/ ‫عزيزي السيد‬

.‫هذا االستبيان يحاول التوصل إلى معرفة أثر هيمنة اللغة اإلنجليزية في الممارسات الطبية لألطباء السعوديين على تقديم الخدمات للمرضى‬
.‫يرجى قراءة األسئلة بعناية ووضع عالمة (*) في المربع الذي يعبر عن أفضل رأي لديك‬
.‫ويؤكد لك الباحث أن نتائج هذا االستبيان ستبقى سرية ولن تستخدم إال ألغراض البحث العلمي‬
.‫ أود أن أعرب عن شكري وتقديري لجميع الذين سيشاركون في هذا االستبيان‬،‫وأخيرا‬
ً
،،،‫شكرا لتعاونكم‬
ً
‫الباحثة‬
‫حنان سرحان السبيعي‬
:‫ المعلومات الشخصية‬/‫القسم األول‬
.‫يرجى ملء النموذج أدناه‬
………………………………. (‫ (اختياري‬:‫االسم‬
‫۝ أنثى‬
‫۝ ذكر‬
:‫ الجنس‬-1
‫ سنة وما فوق‬40 ‫۝‬
40 ‫ سنة إلى أقل من‬20 ‫ سنة ۝ من‬20 ‫۝ أقل من‬
:‫ العمـــر‬-2
‫۝ فوق الجامعي‬
‫۝ جامعي‬
‫۝ دون الجامعي‬
:‫ المؤهل‬-3
‫ فعالية استخدام اللغة اإلنجليزية في الممارسات الطبية داخل مستشفى الملك عبد هللا بمحافظة بيشة في المملكة العربية السعودية‬/‫القسم الثاني‬
:‫يرجى وضع دائرة حول اإلجابة التي تنطبق عليك بشكل أفضل‬
‫ ما مدى فاعلية استخدام اللغة اإلنجليزية في السياق الطبي بمستشفى الملك عبد هللا بمحافظة بيشة بالمملكة العربية السعودية؟‬-1
‫۝ ضعيفة جدًا‬
‫۝ ضعيفة‬
‫۝ متوسطة‬
‫۝ كبيرة جدًا ۝ كبيرة‬
‫ االتجاهات نحو استخدام اللغة اإلنجليزية في الممارسات الطبية داخل مستشفى الملك عبد هللا بمحافظة بيشة في المملكة العربية السعودية‬/‫القسم الثالث‬

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

338

‫‪Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019‬‬
‫‪Alsubaiai‬‬

‫‪Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context‬‬

‫يرجى قراءة هذه األسئلة بعناية ووضع عالمة على اإلجابات المناسبة‪.‬‬
‫المحـــــــاور‬
‫الفهم‬

‫الرضا‬

‫السياسة‬
‫والحقوق‬

‫لغة االتصال‬

‫العبـــــــــارات‬

‫أوافق‬
‫بشدة (‪)5‬‬

‫أوافق‬
‫(‪)4‬‬

‫محايد‬
‫(‪)3‬‬

‫ال أوافق‬
‫(‪)2‬‬

‫ال أوافق‬
‫بشدة‬
‫(‪)1‬‬

‫‪ -1‬أجد صعوبة في التواصل مع األطباء في‬
‫المستشفى بسبب عدم فهم المفاهيم الطبية‬
‫باللغة اإلنجليزية‪.‬‬
‫‪ -2‬أجد صعوبة في معرفة وضعي الصحي‬
‫بسبب عدم فهم المصطلحات الطبية‬
‫المستخدمة باللغة اإلنجليزية‪.‬‬
‫‪ -3‬أنا غير راض عن استخدام اللغة‬
‫اإلنجليزية كلغة أساسية في السياق الطبي‬
‫في المستشفى‪.‬‬
‫‪ -4‬أالحظ تفرقة في تعامل األطباء بشكل‬
‫أفضل مع من يجيد اللغة اإلنجليزية من‬
‫المرضى‪.‬‬
‫‪ -5‬أشعر أن استخدام اللغة اإلنجليزية في‬
‫السياق الطبي ال يتوافق مع احتياجات‬
‫وحقوق المرضى في المملكة العربية‬
‫السعودية‪.‬‬
‫‪ -6‬يجب تطوير السياسات التي تحكم‬
‫استخدام اللغة العربية كلغة تحسن من تقديم‬
‫الخدمات في المستشفيات في المملكة العربية‬
‫السعودية‪.‬‬
‫‪ -7‬أعتقد أن التواصل بين المرضى‬
‫واألطباء سيكون أسهل إذا كانت اللغة‬
‫العربية هي الوسيلة األساسية لالتصال‪.‬‬
‫‪ -8‬أفضّل تقديم الخدمة باللغة العربية ً‬
‫بدال‬
‫من اللغة اإلنجليزية داخل مستشفى الملك‬
‫عبد هللا في محافظة بيشة بالمملكة العربية‬
‫السعودية‪.‬‬

‫‪Appendix B. Questionnaire for Medical Staff Members‬‬
‫‪Dear Mr\ Mrs.....................................................................‬‬
‫‪This questionnaire attempts to explore how the dominance of English in medical practice among the Saudi‬‬
‫‪Arabian medical practitioners affects service delivery to patients. Please read the questions carefully and put a sign‬‬
‫‪(*) in the box that best expresses your opinion. The researcher assures you that the results of this questionnaire will‬‬
‫‪remain confidential and will be used only for scientific research purposes.‬‬
‫‪Finally, I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to all those who will complete this questionnaire.‬‬
‫‪Thank you for your cooperation‬‬
‫‪Researcher‬‬
‫‪Hanan Sarhan Alsubaiai‬‬

‫‪Part I - Personal Information:‬‬
‫‪Please fill in the form below.‬‬
‫‪Name (optional) ……………………………….‬‬
‫‪Female‬۝‬

‫‪339‬‬

‫‪Male‬۝‬

‫‪1-Sex:‬‬

‫‪Arab World English Journal‬‬
‫‪www.awej.org‬‬
‫‪ISSN: 2229-9327‬‬

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context
2-Age:

‫ ۝‬Less than 20 years

Alsubaiai

‫۝‬20 to less than 40 years ‫۝‬40 years and above

3-Education:
‫۝‬Less than University
‫۝‬University
‫ ۝‬Above University
Part II- Effectiveness of English language in the medical context of Bisha King Abdullah Hospital in Saudi
Arabia
Please circle the answer that best applies to you:
1- How effective is the use of English language in the medical context of Bisha king Abdullah hospital in Saudi
Arabia?

Policy and rights

Satisfaction

Understanding

‫ ۝‬Very High
‫ ۝‬High ‫ ۝‬Medium
‫ ۝‬low ‫ ۝‬Very low
Part III- Attitudes towards the effectiveness of English language in the medical context of Bisha King Abdullah
Hospital in Saudi Arabia
Please read these questions carefully and tick the appropriate answers.
Strongly Agree Neutral Disagree Strongly
Agree
(4)
(3)
(2)
disagree
Section
Statements
(5)
(1)

1. I find difficulties to understand medical practitioners
when they speak in English.
2. I find difficult to know my health status because I do not
understand the medical terms used in English.

3. I am not satisfied with the use of English as the primary
language in the medical context.
4. I note a difference in doctors' treatment with the patients,
in favor of patients who speak English.

5. I feel that the use of English in the medical context is not
compatible with the needs and rights of patients in Saudi
Arabia.
6. Policies which govern the use of Arabic as a language
that improves service delivery in the hospital should be
developed.

7. Communication between patients and medical
practitioners would be easier if Arabic was the primary
mode of communication.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

340

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Linguistic Hegemony of English Language in the Medical Context

Language of
communicat
ion

Section

Statements

Alsubaiai

Strongly Agree Neutral Disagree
Agree
(4)
(3)
(2)
(5)

Strongly
disagree
(1)

8. I Prefer to provide the service in Arabic instead of
English in Bisha King Abdullah Hospital in Saudi Arabia.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

341

