Isra Syed Hussain

Working Draft

Lessons learned: The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor
market integration policies on Bosnian refugees
Isra Syed Hussain, Fulbright Combined Research Grantee
University of Vienna, Fulbright Austria 2018-19

Abstract
The response to the recent influx of refugees in Europe indicates a need to reevaluate
systems of reception and integration in a global society that is marred by increased xenophobia
and nationalist rhetoric. Nearly three decades ago, the Austrian government deployed special
accommodations to handle a similarly sized influx of refugees entering Europe, individuals and
families who were fleeing ethnic cleansing from the Bosnian War. These accommodations, and
their eventual economic integration components, provide longitudinal data that indicates a
system that allowed employment rates of Bosnian refugees to match the rate of host country
populations within a generation.
Through thematic analysis of an extensive literature review and field consultations in
Vienna, this research will investigate what lessons the global community can learn from
Austria’s treatment of Bosnians refugees, and whether these lessons can contribute to improved
procedures for integrating refugees into host societies. Preliminary results indicate the role of
social capital, civil society, and religion as factors of labor market integration, while also
acknowledging rates of underemployment and stagnation in the asylum process as deterrents to
positive relationship formation between host societies and refugee populations. The culmination
of this year-long project will be a series of recommendations on how local and national actors
can enact services that will benefit the longer-term goals of both refugee populations and host
societies.

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

1 Introduction
The influx of Syrian refugees who arrived in Europe during years 2015-2017 led to a collapse of
asylum systems throughout Europe, indicating the vast lack of preparation among European
countries to handle crisis migration scenarios. Functioning in an emergency mode and hoarding
asylum seekers into camps ignored long-term outcomes of this brisk response and undermined
the many initiatives being carried out by civil society networks. Instead, asylum systems
throughout Europe became overburdened, adding to an atmosphere of increased economic fears
and xenophobia fueled by populist political parties.
From a historical perspective, the most efficient responses to refugee influxes have occurred
when European states instead operated on a model of rapid integration.1 Ideally, in this scenario,
governments and service providers work in conjunction with each other to provide basic needs
that quickly transition into a more thorough integration process for refugees, including systems
for education and entry into the labor market.2 Implementing effective integration measures
would benefit not only the refugee population in question, but also the economy and overall
stability of host countries.
The following research presents an investigation of longitudinal results of a state’s integration
policies towards refugees, focusing on long-term benefits to both the migrating population and
host community. The Bosnian refugee population, arriving in Western Europe during the
Bosnian War in the early 1990s and sharing several similarities to refugees seeking to integrate
into European society today, has emerged as a trademark population when studying the longterm effects of integration. This research is a critical analysis of Austria’s labor market
integration services in terms of how the state and partnering organizations handled the influx of
refugees during the 1990s. Are there aspects of these integration policies that could be replicated
to current day refugee populations in order to phase out of crisis-mode policies and enact more
sustainable, long-term solutions to migratory influxes?

i.

Measuring integration as a process

Integration is difficult to define, which may reflect the subjective character of integration as a
process. One persistent theory of integration, created by social psychologist John W. Berry in the
late 1990s, defines an integration process as one in which new identities emerge as migrant
1

Cheung, S.Y. & Phillimore, J. (2013). Refugees, Social Capital, and Labour Market Integration in the UK.
Sociology 48(3): 518-536.
2
Fyvie, A., Ager, A., Curley, G. and Korac, M. (2003). ‘Integration mapping the field volume II: distilling policy
lessons from the “mapping the field” exercise’. Home Office Online Report 29(3).
1

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

groups and host societies change in conjunction with one another over time. 3 Integration can also
be conceptualized as a process through which migrants pass en route to assimilation, when an
individual is interested in maintaining a balance between original culture and also taking part in
daily interactions with members of the host community. In this definition, social networks are
integral to the understanding of integration. 4,5
The Office of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) asserts that
integration policies which allow all newcomers to become economically productive “lead to selfreliance, dignity, and social interaction and are beneficial to individuals and the receiving
society”,6 while a society with large, unproductive segments may become socially and
economically segregated. The working definition of integration used in this research
characterizes the process of integration as not only something that happens passively to an
individual over time, but instead is a process where an individual and society actively and
selectively control aspects of integration. 7
The following research will rely on this notion of integration as a process, investigating social
interactions, demographic qualities, and service provisions from government and nongovernmental providers as indicators and important dimensions to labor market integration, and
overall integration, of refugees.

ii.

Introduction to labor market integration of refugees

The largest influx of refugees in Europe since the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s
occurred just recently, during the height of the Syrian refugee crisis. Official government
calculations indicate that over 180,000 refugees applied for asylum in Austria between 2014 and
2017; of this population, over 70,000 were granted work permits. 8 Despite access to work
permits for nearly half of all asylum requestors, refugee unemployment remained high, with only
15.2% of those having received work permits in 2015 and 2016 in positions of legal
employment.9

3

Berry, J. W. (1997) Immigration, acculturation and adaptation. Applied Psychology: An International Review
46(1): 5–68.
4
Ibid.
5
Conversely, within migration literature, migrants become assimilated if they do not maintain social networks with
individuals from their country of origin, separated if they do not create connections in their host country, or
excluded if they have no social networks and become marginalized. (Campos, D. G. (2018). Living with Immigrants
in a Context of Difference: Exclusion, Assimilation, or Pluralism. The Pluralist 13(2): 109-118.)
6
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2013). A New Beginning: Refugee Integration in Europe, 10.
7
Ibid.
8
Eggenhofer-Rehart, P. M., Latzke, M., Pernkopf, K., Zellhofer, D., Mayrhofer, W., Steyrer, J. (2018). Refugees’
career capital welcome? Afghan and Syrian refugee job seekers in Austria. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 105: 3145.
9
Ibid.
2

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

Despite these low percentages, employment is continuously cited as a crucial factor for
integration, for it not only allows economic stability for migrant families but it also improves
knowledge about the host society and creates networks outside of migrants’ immediate
families.10
However, specific barriers exist for refugees who are attempting to enter the labor market which
set them apart from typical migrant cases. Many refugees have lost or do not own identification
documents and qualification certificates. Oftentimes, educational attainment and certifications
from countries of origin are not accepted in host countries. Refugees may also have experienced
long periods of inactivity and unemployment during the asylum process. Limited social
networks, trauma, and anxiety over family separation may hinder motivation to seek new jobs.
As a result, refugees frequently suffer from underemployment, including downward professional
and social status.11 Though economic integration is vital to both refugees and host countries,
barriers have and continue to exist for those who seek to swiftly enter the labor market and
become productive members of society.

iii.

Historical context: Bosnian refugees’ entry into Austria

The difficulty of accessing the labor market in host countries points to the necessity of
investigating alternative methods to workforce integration for this population. An analysis of
Bosnian refugees entering Europe in the early 1990s allows society to look past “immediate
integration outcomes and take a longer-term view”12 on integration services that worked well
over time.
In order to understand the longer-term integration of Bosnians in Austria, it is important to
recognize the initial landscape they faced upon entry in Austria. Following the breakup of
Yugoslavia in the 1990s and the consequent ethnic cleansing of Muslim Bosniaks, over 1.2
million people fled Bosnia and Herzegovina as war refugees. 13 About half of the displaced
Bosnians fled to Western European countries, and due to geographical proximity, settled in and
travelled through Austria. Between 1992 and 1994, 86,500 refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina were registered in Austria, a total of 1.1% of the host country population. 14 While
refugee populations were typically inducted through guidelines of the 1951 Geneva Refugee
convention, special accommodations were enacted for Bosnians that would not allow them to
apply for convention asylum, the general consensus being that the Bosnian War would soon end
10

Lundborg, P. (2013). Refugees’ Employment Integration in Sweden: Cultural Distance and Labor Market
Performance. Migration and Culture 21(2): 219-232.
11
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2013). A New Beginning: Refugee Integration in Europe.
12
Barslund, M., Busse, M., Lenaerts, K., Ludolph, L., Renman, V. (2017). Integration of Refugees: Lessons from
Bosnians in Five EU Countries. Leibniz Information Centre for Economics. Intereconomics, 52(5): 257.
13
Ibid.
14
Ibid.
3

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

and refugees could return home. Because of this assumption, special temporary protected status
(TPS) was enacted with a ‘de facto’ suspension of asylum for Bosnian refugees.
If Bosnians had been granted asylum initially, then they could have moved freely to any area
within Austria, worked legally, and used the federal employment agency’s service to find jobs.
However, the Österreichs Bund-Länder Aktion, a federal-provincial relief scheme, was enacted
to allow Bosnians to bypass many of the administrative roadblocks other refugee populations
faced in the asylum process through TPS. Through this scheme, displaced Bosnians could
register with Austrian officials in exchange for food, health care, and for those placed in public
housing, cash payments, services which were often administered through partnering
organizations. Finances for these services were shared by the Ministry of the Interior and the
different provinces.
This scheme, however, did not allow initial access into the labor market. There is a dearth of
literature on the role of the black labor market, the Schwarzarbeit, in this time period, but
economic conditions indicate that many Bosnian refugees had access to this informal, illegal
employment through co-ethnic contacts.
In 1995, Bosnian war refugees finally began being granted work permits to find legal
employment in Austria through the updated Bund-Länder Aktion. However, the highly regulated
Austrian labor market allocated very limited number of work permits to be issued to Bosnian de
facto refugees. Austria had instituted a yearly fixed quota for work permits in 1990 to protect the
local workforce, which also applied to Bosnians. 15
In 1998, the Bosniergesetz, the ‘Bosnians Law’, regulated the transformation of the Bosnian
refugees’ de facto status into permanent residence status. Under certain conditions, such as proof
of legal employment or source of income, this status was transformed into guest-worker status
where Bosnians could be granted Beschäftigungsbewilligungen, or special work permits, that
allowed them to legally work. 16
There is general disagreement about whether the special accommodations Bosnians faced
through TPS and their ‘de facto’ status hindered or benefitted the initial integration of this
population. In many accounts, the accommodations allowed Bosnians to bypass many
restrictions that convention refugees faced by providing housing subsidies and granting large
numbers of work permits to refugees in 1995. On the other hand, the Bund-Länder Aktion
15

European Migration Network & International Organization for Migration. (2004). The Impact of Immigration on
Austria’s Society: A Survey of Recent Austrian Migration Research. The Impact of Immigration on Europe’s
Societies: Budget year 2003.
16
Franz, B. (2005). Uprooted & Unwanted: Bosnian Refugees in Austria and the United States. New York, New
York: Texas A&M University Press College Station.
4

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

provided basic amenities but blocked access to legal employment for several years, forcing
Bosnians to be reliant on provincial aid and tempting them to access illegal systems of
employment. This debate will be addressed during the field investigation component of this
research project.

iv.

Purpose of study

The question emerges: were tactics employed to allow the swift entry of Bosnians into Austrian
society successful in the long term, and if so, can these longitudinal results have any influence on
current day policies?
There are some positive aspects of the current refugee situation to consider while investigating
this question. In interviews of refugee attitudes toward integration in Austria in 2015, BuberEnnser and colleagues found that 67% of respondents intended to “search for a job” after having
been granted official asylum status, indicating a high intention to participate in the host society’s
labor market. An overwhelming majority of refugees (72%) also report having worked in their
home country’s labor market in the past, 17 therefore entering the Austrian labor market with
previous skills and professional experience.
An eagerness to integrate into the labor market would provide numerous benefits to the host
country. Effective participation by refugees and asylum seekers in the labor market of the host
society is considered to be a key indicator of integration 18, and rapid integration of refugees into
the labor market of Western European countries will help to “counter some of the adverse fiscal
effects of population aging”, 19 while simultaneously helping to reduce the fiscal costs associated
with the most recent inflow of refugees from the Middle East. 20
This study aims to provide support and recommendations for policies that initiate the rapid
integration of asylum seekers into host societies, based on results and perspectives of Austria’s
policies to integrate Bosnians in the 1990s, to counter any adverse effects of delayed asylum
procedures and to promote cost-effective solutions that benefit both refugees and host
communities.

17

Buber-Ennser, I., Kohlenberger, J., Rengs, B., Al Zalak, Z., Goujon, A., Striessnig, E., Lutz, W. (2016). Human
capital, values and attitudes of persons seeking refuge in Austria in 2015. PLoS One, 11(9).
18
UNHCR. A new beginning: Refugee integration in Europe. Geneva: The UN Refugee Agency; 2013.
19
Aiyar, S., Barkbu, B., Batini, N., Berger, H., Detragiache, E., Dizioli, A. et al. (2016). The refugee surge in
Europe: Economic challenges. Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.
20
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). Making integration work: Refugees and
others in need of protection. Paris: OECD Publishing.
5

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

2 Methods
Though there were still existing roadblocks and results indicating large scale underemployment,
the tactics used by Austrian service providers to integrate Bosnian refugees into the labor market
had successes which have the potential for benefitting current day refugee populations. This
research will analyze the longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor integration policies and services
that were implemented for Bosnian Muslims in the 1990s, and the themes and lessons learned
that are applicable to the current landscape of refugee integration.
This project design will include a review of existing literature and a field research component,
comprising of perspectives of key informants working within government and other serviceproviding organizations in Vienna. The consultations will be structured as guided interviews,
indicating that questions may shift so as to account for different areas of focus by interview
subjects.
For this reason, manipulated variables are not defined through this work. Instead, a series of key
questions will be employed throughout interviews relating to the overarching research question.
These key questions explore the history of service provision for refugees and the current day
landscape of refugees entering the workforce, based on each interviewee’s experiences and
expertise:
● What were the advantages and disadvantages of initial integration policies to help
Bosnian refugees enter the Austrian workforce in the 1990s?
● How is the integration of Bosnian refugees perceived today? Have Austrian policies of
employment integration had longitudinal success?
● What is the current landscape of service provision for refugees in Austria? Are there
aspects of past policies that could be applied for the labor market integration of today’s
refugee population?

i.

Research Sample and Participants

The primary sources for interviews are experts who work within organizations in Vienna that
provide services to refugees. Organizations of interest include contractors through the Austrian
government, nongovernmental organizations, and religiously affiliated organizations. This
research will portray as complete of a picture of services as possible by locating the sample
population within the specific realm of immigration services, but with a variety of disciplines
and roles.

6

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

ii.

Working Draft

Data Collection Tools

Primary semi-structured (guided) interviews are being conducted to collect data in conjunction
with a comprehensive review of existing literature. Interviews last between 60 and 90 minutes
and occur throughout the city of Vienna. Interviews are audio recorded and transcribed.

iii.

Data Analysis

Framework analysis, with a thematic analysis of content, is being employed in order to identify
and categorize recurrent or common themes. This analysis consists of a number of stages that
include familiarization with the transcribed interviews, indexing key themes and sub themes,
charting, and mapping. The audio accounts of the interviews are transcribed, and the transcripts
are then read and reread in order to ensure familiarity with the accounts and to maintain an
understanding of context. Following this, thematic analyses of the transcripts are conducted, with
the assistance of NVivo 12 for Mac (QSR International) for identification and documentation
purposes.

3 Introduction to thematic discussion on research findings
Several themes have emerged from the initial review of literature and several primary
consultations. These themes will be discussed in greater length in upcoming months with
evidence to support the importance and practicality of each component of integration, with the
goal of providing a clearer image of the landscape of historic and current day policies employed
in Austria to help refugees integrate into society. The initial identified themes are as follows:

i.

Labor market integration, underemployment, and the role of the
Schwarzarbeit

Austria indicated very positive results of labor market integration of Bosnians early on: the
employment rate for Bosnians had reached 64% in 1998, only 20 percentage points away from
the native population. By 2008, this gap had closed in Austria, though it is important to note that
there is a 10% difference in employment rates when disaggregated for gender (females are at a
greater disadvantage) for Bosnians as compared to Austria’s native population 21.
However, publicly available employment results do not specify the level of employment
Bosnians achieved, and whether this employment matched their educational and skills level.
Evidence may suggest that though Bosnians gained access to the labor market within just several
21

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). Making integration work: Refugees and
others in need of protection. Paris: OECD Publishing.
7

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

years of arrival, the initial gap in receiving work permits forced refugees into illegal forms of
employment; and once legally employed, Bosnians were relatively underemployed as compared
to the native Austrian population22. How does underemployment of Bosnian refugees compare to
the current and future underemployment rates of today’s refugee populations in Vienna? And
how does gender factor into opportunities for employment integration?

ii.

Social capital as a factor of integration

Social capital continues to be used as an indicator of migrant integration and success in host
country analyses. For the purposes of this research, social capital is defined as “the collection of
resources owned by the members of an individual's personal social network which may become
available to the individual”. 23 Oftentimes, capital forms for refugees may be strongly devalued
upon entry in the host country, especially once refugees encounter unfamiliar labor market rules
and status loss24. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between the actual value of prior capital
and the need to develop capital, especially social capital, which is relevant within host country
societies. This research will focus on bonding and bridging social capital in order to unearth the
advantages and disadvantages of developing distinct social connections in refugees’ initial
integration.

iii.

Civil society and service enhancement

Though migration policies are the responsibility of national governments, the concentration of
migrants in metropolitan areas give local governments and organizations the unique ability to
structure administrative and financial frameworks that enact location-specific policies for
migrant integration. Interviewees have suggested the important yet generally undocumented role
that civil society also played in welcoming Bosnians to Vienna in the 1990s. And since 2015,
Vienna has once again become part of a global network of municipalities that are supporting
refugees and the many opportunities they bring. Despite budget cuts at the national level, the city
of Vienna has continued to support refugees and NGOs seeking to assist refugees from its own
budget and additional European Union funds. This financial aid has contributed to peer
mentoring programs for refugees and groups where refugees study in order to re-qualify in their
professional discipline in order to join the Austrian workforce in their appropriate fields. 25 Expert
consultations throughout the city of Vienna will add to the growing recognition of the role of
22

Buber-Ennser, I., Kohlenberger, J., Rengs, B., Al Zalak, Z., Goujon, A., Striessnig, E., Lutz, W. (2016). Human
capital, values and attitudes of persons seeking refuge in Austria in 2015. PLoS One, 11(9).
23
Gericke, D., Burmeister, A., Löwe, J., Deller, J., & Pundt, L. (2018). How do refugees use their social capital for
successful labor market integration? An exploratory analysis in Germany. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 105: 48.
24
Eggenhofer-Rehart, P. M., Latzke, M., Pernkopf, K., Zellhofer, D., Mayrhofer, W., Steyrer, J. (2018). Refugees’
career capital welcome? Afghan and Syrian refugee job seekers in Austria. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 105: 3145.
25
Womack, H. (2018). Vienna learns the benefit of giving warm welcome to refugees. United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
8

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

civil society in integrating refugees, as well as proposed insights into how the relationship
between local and national governments can be restructured to ensure continued flow of funds to
service providing organizations.

iv.

Religion and the State: A mediating factor for improved public
perception

In terms of the current day refugee population, critics point to the role of their religious
affiliation as a major roadblock in successful integration into European societies. However, Islam
has been officially recognized as a religion in Austria since 1912,26 and the Islamische
Glaubensgemeinschaft in Österreich, the Islamic Community in Austria, was recognized as the
official representation of all Muslims residing in the country in 1979. Since then, it has been part
of the legal framework of Austria and granted the same status as other recognized religions.
Despite this legal recognition, the understanding that religion, and specifically Islam, indeed
plays a factor into societal isolation and integration factors remains important. This project aims
to investigate how an increased collaboration between state actors and the Muslim community
may benefit public perception and the labor and societal integration of this religious group,
increasing visibility of their commitment to integration while maintaining their own religious
identities without fear of ostracization.

4 Concluding recommendations
Among current integration literature, there are a collection of published recommendations for
policy makers to improve the system of integration into the labor market. Researcher
Eggenhofer-Rehart and colleagues summarize these recommendations in their 2018 report,27
which include expedited certification approvals and familiarity with foreign certifications;
publicly-sponsored internships as a stepping stone into regular employment; and comprehensive
training in local job search practices and trade license acquisition for refugees, organized through
a country’s labor market services division.
These common recommendations, however, do not consider one of the root problems of the
integration process: formal employment opportunities and government-sourced trainings remain
inaccessible to refugees until asylum procedures have been completed. The uncertain length of
26

Norris, Pippa, Inglehart, R. (2012). Muslim integration into Western cultures: Between origins and destinations.
Political Studies 60: 228–51.
27
Eggenhofer-Rehart, P. M., Latzke, M., Pernkopf, K., Zellhofer, D., Mayrhofer, W., Steyrer, J. (2018). Refugees’
career capital welcome? Afghan and Syrian refugee job seekers in Austria. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 105: 3145.
9

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

asylum proceedings forces asylum seekers to rely on state-sponsored assistance and the black
market for labor integration in the interim. This interim time period speaks to the need for a
restructuring of asylum and refugee employment opportunities, to allow for more swift
resettlement options and smaller service requirements by the state, consequently preventing
overburdened asylum systems. Though the TPS program for Bosnian refugees has sparked
controversial discussion, the general idea that special provisions could be made to accelerate the
integration process may be valid to handle a large influx of refugees. This solution will be
investigated further to better understand the merits of an accommodation system to bypass the
bureaucracy tied to lengthy asylum procedures.
Austria’s procedures for Bosnian refugees in the 1990s, albeit imperfect, indicate that it is
possible to make special accommodations for asylum seekers outside of administrative norms for
migration, in order for the host country to more effectively manage the high number of asylum
applications and not suffer from a stagnant economic workflow. These accommodations would
also benefit the individual asylum seekers. When planned in conjunction with refugees’
preexisting qualifications and social capital, and with an openness to their unique cultural and
religious identities, these services may positively affect the overall relationship between host
societies and the refugee populations residing within them.
Upcoming results will investigate what lessons, if any, the global community can learn from
Austria’s treatment of Bosnian refugees. The culmination of this year-long project will be a
series of recommendations derived from extensive literature and field research on how society
can improve procedures for integrating refugees into host societies.

10

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

References
Aiyar, S., Barkbu, B., Batini, N., Berger, H., Detragiache, E., Dizioli, A. et al. (2016). The
refugee surge in Europe: Economic challenges. Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.
Barslund, M., Busse, M., Lenaerts, K., Ludolph, L., Renman, V. (2017). Integration of Refugees:
Lessons from Bosnians in Five EU Countries. Leibniz Information Centre for Economics.
Intereconomics, 52(5): 257.
Berry, J. W. (1997) Immigration, acculturation and adaptation. Applied Psychology: An
International Review 46(1): 5–68.
Buber-Ennser, I., Kohlenberger, J., Rengs, B., Al Zalak, Z., Goujon, A., Striessnig, E., Lutz, W.
(2016). Human capital, values and attitudes of persons seeking refuge in Austria in 2015. PLoS
One, 11(9).
Campos, D. G. (2018). Living with Immigrants in a Context of Difference: Exclusion,
Assimilation, or Pluralism. The Pluralist 13(2): 109-118.)
Cheung, S.Y. & Phillimore, J. (2013). Refugees, Social Capital, and Labour Market Integration
in the UK. Sociology 48(3): 518-536.
Eggenhofer-Rehart, P. M., Latzke, M., Pernkopf, K., Zellhofer, D., Mayrhofer, W., Steyrer, J.
(2018). Refugees’ career capital welcome? Afghan and Syrian refugee job seekers in Austria.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 105: 31-45.
European Migration Network & International Organization for Migration. (2004). The Impact of
Immigration on Austria’s Society: A Survey of Recent Austrian Migration Research. The Impact
of Immigration on Europe’s Societies: Budget year 2003.
Franz, B. (2005). Uprooted & Unwanted: Bosnian Refugees in Austria and the United States.
New York, New York: Texas A&M University Press College Station.
Fyvie, A., Ager, A., Curley, G. and Korac, M. (2003). ‘Integration mapping the field volume II:
distilling policy lessons from the “mapping the field” exercise’. Home Office Online Report
29(3).
Gericke, D., Burmeister, A., Löwe, J., Deller, J., & Pundt, L. (2018). How do refugees use their
social capital for successful labor market integration? An exploratory analysis in Germany.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 105: 48.
11

Isra Syed Hussain
The longitudinal effects of Austria’s labor market integration policies on Bosnian refugees

Working Draft

Lundborg, P. (2013). Refugees’ Employment Integration in Sweden: Cultural Distance and
Labor Market Performance. Migration and Culture 21(2): 219-232.
Norris, Pippa, Inglehart, R. (2012). Muslim integration into Western cultures: Between origins
and destinations. Political Studies 60: 228–51.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). Making integration work:
Refugees and others in need of protection. Paris: OECD Publishing.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2013). A New Beginning: Refugee
Integration in Europe, 10.
Womack, H. (2018). Vienna learns the benefit of giving warm welcome to refugees. United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

12

