Intersectionality at the Grassroots

Michael T. Heaney
University of Glasgow and University of Michigan
michaeltheaney@gmail.com

Forthcoming in the journal Politics, Groups, and Identities.
Accepted on May 6, 2019.

Abstract: Intersectional activism is organizing that addresses more than one structure of oppression in the
struggle for social justice. The rise of the Women’s March as a massive effort to mobilize women primarily on
the basis of gender coincided with calls for it to pay greater attention to intersectionality. This study considers
the effectiveness of the Women’s March at using intersectional activism as a collective action frame. Drawing
on surveys conducted at Women’s March events in five cities and four other Washington, DC activist events in
2018, this study examines the extent to which activists think that the movements should place a priority on
intersectional activism. The results show that participants in Women’s March events were more supportive of
prioritizing intersectional activism than were activists at comparable protest events that were not mobilized
using intersectional collective action frames. Furthermore, the results demonstrate that ideology may be a
barrier to embracing intersectional activism, with more moderate and conservative activists placing a lower
priority on intersectionality than did more liberal activists. Women’s March activists were more likely to
prioritize intersectional activism if they were trans‐ or LGBTQIA+‐identified, or if they had a history of backing
intersectionally marginalized causes, than if they did not.
Keywords: Intersectionality, activism, grassroots, Women’s March, social movements, collective action,
framing, feminism
Acknowledgments. The author is grateful for helpful comments from Sara Angevine, Rhiannon Auriemma, Lisa
Disch, Dana Fisher, Anna Kirkland, Dara Strolovitch, Sid Tarrow, three anonymous reviewers, and participants
in symposia of the Institute for Research on Women and Gender at the University of Michigan in 2017 and
2018 and the 2018 Women’s History Month Symposium at Wayne State University. An earlier version of this
paper was presented at the 114th Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Boston,
Massachusetts, August 30‐September 2, 2018. Special thanks are owed to many surveyors, research
assistants, and anonymous survey respondents who contributed to this research. This research was funded by
grants from the National Institute for Civil Discourse and the University of Michigan, through the Institute for
Research on Women and Gender, the National Center for Institutional Diversity, the Undergraduate Research
Opportunity Program, and the Organizational Studies Program.

The Women’s March on Washington, first held on the day after the Inauguration of President
Donald Trump, has become a significant force in American politics. In its first three years of existence
(2017 to 2019), the March spurred millions of women (and men) to protest and inspired thousands to
become involved in local and electoral politics (Fisher 2019). At the same time, the March was
criticized for being insufficiently inclusive of marginalized groups of women. Many grassroots activists
called on the March to embrace intersectionality by centering issues that matter to these groups
(Quarshie 2018). They sought for the March to become a better reflection of intersectional activism,
which Sharon Doetsch‐Kidder (2012, p. 3) defined as “activism that addresses more than one structure
of oppression or form of discrimination (racism, classism, sexism, heterosexism, transphobia, ableism,
nationalism, etc.).”
The extent to which the Women’s March exemplified intersectional activism has been a
matter of debate among scholars and activists. Dana Fisher and her colleagues (Fisher et al. 2017;
Fisher et al. 2018) presented evidence that the March successfully assembled a coalition of
organizations and activists with interests in a wide range of social issues, reflecting an intersectional
approach to coalitions (Cole 2008). Rachel McKane and Holly McCammon (2018) depicted the nature
of the March (and its allied sister marches) more neutrally, describing it as having provided a venue for
activists to gather, rather than as helping activists to define their grievances. However, CindyAnn
Rose‐Redwood and Reuben Rose‐Redwood (2017) took a more critical view of the March, seeing it as
defined by a “whiteness” that created barriers to solidarity building. Along the same lines, Sierra
Brewer and Lauren Dundes (2018) emphasized the lack of inclusion felt by many African‐American
women who participated in the March. They saw the March as dominated by white women who were
concerned with relatively trivial issues, such as whether they could show their nipples in public, rather
than with issues of oppression, such as the shooting of unarmed black people. They were also
suspicious of the loyalty of the white women present, suggesting that many of them had voted for
Donald Trump, since he commanded the support of the majority of white women in the 2016 election.
1

As Evelyn Simien (2006, p. 24) documented, black women have historically raised similar objections
when they were concerned that the women’s movement “fail[ed] to address issues relevant to all
women”.
The goal of this article is to better understand the conflict between those who raised the
Women’s March as an exemplar of intersectional activism and those who depicted it as stoking
divisions among women. It does so by examining the March’s degree of success in using
intersectionality as a collective action frame (Terriquez et al. 2018). David Snow and his colleagues
(Snow et al. 2019, p. 395) explained that collective action frames “are relatively coherent sets of
action‐oriented beliefs and meanings that legitimize and inspire social movement campaigns and
activities.” The Women’s March’s use of intersectional activism may have met this criterion because
the March announced that it sought to be intersectional and called for women’s mobilization on that
basis, it presented an agenda that identified multiple forms of oppression, and it was co‐chaired by
women from diverse racial, ethnic, religious, and occupational backgrounds. But did the March
achieve frame alignment in its micro‐mobilization processes (Snow et al. 1986; White 1999)? That is,
were participants in the Women’s March motivated to participate because of the use of intersectional
activism as a collective action frame, or was that frame incidental to their participation? The more
that the participants prioritized intersectional activism, the greater the frame alignment in the
March’s micro‐mobilization; the more that participants were divided on intersectional activism, the
less successful the March was in aligning frames.
This article examines the extent of frame alignment among participants in the Women’s
March using an original survey of participants in the 2018 Women’s March on Washington and a
sample of its sister marches. Another survey of participants in comparable grassroots marches held in
Washington, DC in 2018 is considered in order to evaluate the extent to which the March’s embrace of
intersectionality can be attributed to the March’s framing, or if grassroots participants independently
brought these beliefs with them to their activism. Analysis of the survey data provides support both
2

for the view that the Women’s March successfully mobilized participants who embraced intersectional
activism and for the view that the issue of intersectional activism was divisive within the March.
Further, the results suggest that alignment with the intersectionality frame was partly due to its
deployment by the March as a collective action frame and partly due to grassroots participants
bringing this frame with them to their activism. These findings illustrate how intersectionality had a
complex role in helping to motivate and organize grassroots activism.
This article is organized into five parts. First, it discusses the concept of intersectionality and
its extension to the related concept of intersectional activism. Second, it briefly reviews the history of
the Women’s March and the controversies associated with it. Third, it describes the survey, the data‐
collection process, and the questions addressed by the research. Fourth, it explains the data analysis.
Fifth, it highlights the implications of this analysis for the Women’s March and concludes by suggesting
what these findings mean for future research on intersectional activism and social movements.

Intersectionality and Intersectional Activism
Intersectionality is an analytical tool for assessing the joint effects of power and complex
social structures on people’s lives (Weldon 2019). The core insight of this approach is that individuals
who have multiple marginalized identities (e.g., they are both undocumented immigrants and queer)
suffer from oppression from more than one direction, which creates a distinct experience of
subjugation from what would be felt while having only one marginalized identity. Social critics have
raised concerns along these lines for more than a century (Hancock 2016; May 2015; Tormos 2017).
As Vivian May (2015) underscored, intersectionality not only involves recognizing these concerns, it
further demands that its adherents challenge oppression through struggles for social justice.
The essential ideas of intersectionality theory came into sharper focus with the rise of the
black feminist movement in the 1970s and 1980s (Combahee River Collective 1995; hooks 1984). In
her foundational statement on the topic, bell hooks (1984) illuminated intersectionality using the
3

example of feminism. She explained that feminism traditionally had been dominated by the
viewpoints of white, middle‐class women who wrote without appreciating the life experiences of
women who had been oppressed by racism and classism. hooks (1984, p. 15) argued that the position
of being simultaneously oppressed by racism, sexism, and classism enables black women to develop a
critical consciousness that reveals the consequences of multiple, interacting social structures (see also
Simien 2006; White 1999). In this vein, critical race theorist Kimberlé Crenshaw (1989, 1991) coined
the term “intersectionality” in her analysis of how black women suffered the consequences of racism
and sexism in distinctive ways that were not recognized by existing discrimination law or programs to
cope with sexual violence.
Since the 1990s, interest in intersectionality has exploded throughout legal studies, the social
sciences, and society more broadly. Kathy Davis (2008) observed that this diffusion was enabled by
the concept’s ambiguity and incompleteness, along with the immediate recognition that it offers a
compelling explanation of important social phenomena. These features give the concept a symbolic
quality that enables it to be embraced by varied audiences for wide‐ranging purposes. Rita Dharmoon
(2011) pointed out that this “mainstreaming” facilitated the use of intersectionality beyond sex,
gender, race, and class to encompass dimensions such as territoriality, age, sexual orientation, ability,
language, and culture. This type of analysis helped to develop intersectionality into a more general
analytical tool for critical analysis (Collins and Bilgre 2016, p. 4; Hancock 2007; McCall 2005).
While there is no dispute that intersectionality has been applied beyond the scope of how it
was used by its progenitors, there is also no doubt that this extension has been controversial. Nikol
Alexander‐Floyd (2012) objected, for example, that stretching intersectionality beyond a black‐
feminist space serves to “disappear” the voices of women of color and, thus, re‐subjugates their
knowledge. According to Alexander‐Floyd, this approach serves to flatten, de‐historicize, de‐
contextualize, and tokenize intersectionality. Sumi Cho and her colleagues (Cho et al. 2013)

4

documented that this controversy was distributed across a variety of areas of intersectionality
research.
In applying intersectionality to the context of social movements and activism, scholars have
articulated a variety of similar but non‐identical concepts such as “intersectional activism” (Doetsch‐
Kidder 2012), “movement intersectionality” (Roberts and Jesudason 2013), “intersectional
mobilization” (Terriquez 2015), “affirmative advocacy” (Strolovitch 2007), and “intersectionally linked
fates” (Strolovitch 2007, p. 186). These different terms do not necessarily correspond with variations
in thinking on how intersectionality should be used in this arena. However, there were some notable
differences in how scholars saw the relevance of intersectionality to social movements and activism.
Many scholars emphasized the ways that movements fail to be intersectional or the ways that
intersectionality hindered the goals of social movements. Wendy Smooth and Tamleyn Tucker (1999)
exposed how black women were relegated to behind‐the‐scenes roles in organizing the Million Man
March in the Fall of 1995. In her analysis of the Pittston Coal strike, Karen Beckwith (2014) reported
that the intersection of class and gender served to marginalize the voices and roles of women who
participated in and supported the strike. Nancy Wadsworth (2011) documented how conservative
religious groups were able to use intersectionality as a way to draw the support of African Americans
away from same‐sex marriage rights in California. Dara Strolovitch (2007) discovered that many
advocacy organizations – even those ostensibly aimed at addressing inequalities of race, class, and
gender – were often responsible for directing their efforts away from disadvantaged subgroups among
their constituents.
Other scholars stressed that there are numerous ways that intersectionality can be used as a
tool to improve social movements. Dorothy Roberts and Sujatha Jesudason (2013), Erin Adam (2017),
and Ethel Tungohan (2016) separately explained how recognizing intersectionality may aid coalition
building. They each illustrated that coalitions of distinct marginalized groups may be unified around a
collective identity of marginalization and experiences of oppression. They also pointed out how
5

introducing an intersectional logic to a coalition potentially makes it harder for the coalition to put
forward coherent positions and manage the balance of power among member organizations (see also
Laperrière and Lépinard 2016). Marie Laperrière and Eléonore Lépinard (2016, p. 376) argued that
intersectionality not only requires bringing together marginalized groups in coalitions, but also
ensuring that “their specific needs are addressed in terms of service provision, and that they feel
comfortable inside the organization.” They explained that this strategy is a way to augment the power
of marginalized groups within the movement. Similarly, Strolovitch (2007) advocated – consistent
with the advocacy of the leaders of many social justice organizations – that addressing power
asymmetries demands that social movements and other advocacy organizations affirmatively
redistribute resources in the direction of disadvantaged subgroups within the
movement/organization, which is what she means by “affirmative advocacy.”
While many scholars emphasized the role of leaders in designing movements to address
intersectionality, Veronica Terriquez (2015) also documented the importance of individual‐level
collective identity in addressing intersectionality. In her study of undocumented LGBTQ youth
activists, she showed how individuals themselves brought consciousness of their multiple identities, as
well as notions of intersectionality, with them to collective organizing. This individual‐level activism
thus pressured organizations to incorporate multiple identities, and their intersection, into
organizational work. This study provided compelling evidence that intersectionality may flow from the
bottom up, rather than only from the top down, in social movements and activism.

The Women’s March and its Controversies
Shortly after the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States, a clamor began for a
major protest by women in the nation’s capital. This clamor was instigated by Trump’s misogynistic behavior
and statements during the 2016 presidential campaign, as well as disgust that he defeated a more qualified
woman for the office despite abundant evidence of this behavior. Organizing began by activists using
6

Facebook. On the night after the election, Teresa Shook (a retired attorney living in Hawaii) and Bob Bland (a
fashion designer living in New York) separately made posts calling for a march on Washington, DC (Tolentino
2017). The two activists quickly combined their efforts. The resulting Women’s March on Washington on
January 21, 2017 relied on intersectionality as a collective action frame. For example, Carmen Perez (2017:
4:15‐4:31), a national co‐chair of the March, told the crowd that “We will be brave, intentional, and
unapologetic in addressing the intersections of our identities. And, collectively, we will stand up for the most
marginalized among us, because they are us.” On the same weekend, hundreds of sister marches took place
around the world, together consisting of millions of people, making the 2017 Women’s March one of the
largest (if not the largest) protests in history (Chenoweth and Pressman 2018). Since January 2017, the
Women’s March held a Women’s Convention in October 2017, coordinated anniversary marches in 2018 and
2019, contributed significantly to mobilizing voters in the 2018 congressional midterm elections, and assisted
in staging other grassroots marches (Fisher 2019).
While the Women’s March has quickly risen as a significant political force, it has also been deeply
mired in political controversy since the outset of its organizing. The proposed march initially drew criticism
because its primary organizers, Shook and Bland, were both white women. Calls for including more women of
color in the organizing were met by adding three women of color – Linda Sarsour, Tamika Mallory, and
Carmen Perez – to the organizing committee who, along with Bland, became the national co‐chairs (Tolentino
2017). The proposed march was further critiqued because its initial name, the “Million Woman March”,
appropriated the name of an earlier march led by African‐American women in Philadelphia in 1997 (Tolentino
2017). Hence, the name was changed to the “Women’s March on Washington”, which still made, for some, an
uncomfortable connection with the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, an iconic part of the
civil rights movement of the 1960s. Pro‐life organizations were excluded from coalescing with the March early
in the organizing process in a nod to the pro‐choice organizations that provided substantial funding for the
March, as well as recognition by the organizers that pro‐choice beliefs are central to their notion of what
feminism is. The March encountered a new round of controversy in late 2018 when leaders of the March
7

were accused of anti‐Semitism because of ties to Louis Farrakhan, the religious leader of the Nation of Islam
(North 2018), who has made many negative statements about Jews. In part because of these controversies,
and in part for logistical reasons, the Women’s March has operated across many cities as a loose coalition – as
a sisterhood – rather than as a single corporate entity.
Despite the specific incidents that have brought criticism to the Women’s March and the clashing
personalities of individual activists, it would be a mistake to give too much weight to these idiosyncrasies. The
Women’s March is the most substantial effort in several decades to organize women primarily on the basis of
gender (Goss 2013). Such efforts typically prompt concerns about intersectionality, which is why women’s
organizations often turn to some form of hybrid organization to manage multiple‐identity considerations
(Goss and Heaney 2010). However, the Women’s March was conceived and executed as a bold and ambitious
endeavor that assembled myriad organizational and movement streams, such as supporters of Hillary Clinton’s
and Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaigns, pro‐choice organizations, the progressive Left, the remnants of
Occupy Wall Street, and legal and civic advocacy organizations (Berry and Chenoweth 2018). Given the
breadth of this effort, the ultimate source of divisions was more the deeply ingrained differences in
understanding about how women should organize together as women, if at all, than the actions of people who
occupied particular organizational niches or the agendas of specific organizations.

Research Design
This study involved surveys at events commemorating the first anniversary of the Women’s March,
which were held the weekend of January 20‐21, 2018. The events were a series of rallies and marches held
worldwide, which were planned by independent organizations acting in solidarity with one another. For
example, the event in Las Vegas was planned by Women’s March “Dot Com”, while the event in New York was
planned by the Women’s March Alliance. Collective action frames used by the organizers included
intersectionality, “Power to the Polls” (i.e., voting and/or running in the upcoming midterm elections),

8

#MeToo (i.e., stop sexual assault and harassment), and impeach President Trump. These frames were used
abundantly by organizers in media interviews and speeches, on social media, and in signage at events.
While much of the attention to the Women’s March has focused on its protests in Washington, DC, its
sister marches also constituted regionally significant political events in many places (Beyerlein et al. 2018). A
photo of an activist promoting intersectional activism at the Women’s March in Lansing, Michigan is contained
in Figure 1. To capture the views held by participants at these events, surveys were conducted in five cities in
the United States: New York, New York; Washington, DC; Lansing, Michigan; Las Vegas, Nevada; and Los
Angeles, California. These cities were selected in an attempt to represent the United States geographically as
well as possible (given limited resources) and because they were advertised with sufficient advance notice to
plan a survey. These rallies were among the largest Women’s March events held that weekend, with
hundreds of thousands attending in New York and Los Angeles, and thousands attending in Washington, Las
Vegas, and Lansing (Altavena 2018; Griffiths 2018; WUSA 2018; and surveyors’ observations).
INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE
In addition to surveying at Women’s March events, surveys were conducted at four comparable rallies
held on other issues in Washington, DC in early 2018. None of these rallies relied on intersectionality as a
collective action frame. These rallies were the March for Life (anti‐abortion, January 19), the People’s March
on Washington (pro‐impeachment, January 27), the March for Trump (March 4), and the March for Our Lives
(pro‐gun control, March 24). The purpose of these surveys was to assess the level of support for
intersectionality among the participants, despite this issue not being a part of the collective action frame for
the marches. These rallies were advertised broadly on social media and held on a weekend day, downtown in
the nation’s capital, around the same time as the Women’s March events. Coincidentally, they yielded a
desirable comparison of two liberal rallies (People’s March, March for Our Lives) and two conservative rallies
(March for Life, March for Trump).
The anonymous, pen‐and‐paper survey contained six pages of questions about topics such as political
attitudes, past electoral participation, past movement participation, social identity, and socio‐economic status.
9

To assess attitudes regarding intersectional activism, the survey asked participants at the event for their
opinion on how important it is for the movement to address the concerns of marginalized groups. Specifically,
the question was as follows:
How important is it that the women's movement center, represent, and empower the
perspectives of subgroups of women, such as women of color, LGBTQIA+ women, and low‐
income women? Please circle one.
• Equal to the highest priority for the movement
• A high priority, but not the highest priority
• A moderate priority
• A low priority
• Not a priority
• Don’t know / No opinion
This question deliberately did not use the phrase “intersectional activism”. The concern was that
asking explicitly about intersectionality would test the respondents’ familiarity with the term, rather than their
genuine support for the concept. Instead, the question asked how much the movement should prioritize “the
perspectives of subgroups of women”. By prioritizing the “perspectives” of these groups, the question
signaled that the movement should attend to the varied issues that they find pressing. The term “subgroups”
was drawn from Strolovitch (2007) and was intended to reflect the multiple identities stressed in
intersectional scholarship. For example, “black women” would constitute a subgroup of women, using this
language. The terminology “center, represent, and empower” was used to reflect the fact that action should
be taken by the movement’s leaders (i.e., centering), that subgroups should have a seat at the table (i.e.,
representing), and that grassroots activists should be able to act on their own, from the bottom up (i.e.,
empowering).
The question did not provide an exhaustive list of marginalized groups but used the phrase “such as”
to give the respondent a sense of the intended scope. For example, “black women” were not mentioned
10

specifically, but “women of color” were mentioned. The question was written with the expectation that the
reader would infer that if subgroups “such as” women of color were included, then black women were also
included implicitly. By prompting the reader with “LGBTQIA+ women” and “low‐income women”, the hope
was that the respondent would also think of other marginalized subgroups, such as disabled women and
immigrant women.
By signaling a high priority when answering this question, respondents indicated that they wanted the
women’s movement to prioritize the concerns of those that are intersectionally marginalized. In doing so,
they gave an indication of endorsing the struggle for social transformation.
The intersectional activism question was modified for the non‐Women’s March events to allow for
differences in the context. At the March for Life, it read “How important is it that the pro‐life movement
center, represent, and empower the perspectives of members of disadvantaged groups, such as African
Americans, women of color, LGBTQIA+ persons, and low‐income persons?” The other rallies used this wording
but substituted the names of the pertinent movement (e.g., “impeachment movement” for “pro‐life
movement”).
The intersectional activism question provides relevant insight into the degree to which respondents
support intersectional activism. However, a skeptical reader might prefer questions about other aspects of
intersectionality. For example, some readers might have preferred to see the question mention black women
specifically, since the foundational analyses of intersectionality focused on black women. Or, some readers
might have preferred for the question to include language about marginalization and oppression. Given these
considerations, it is important to acknowledge that a limitation of the empirical analysis is that it is based only
on one question to measure intersectional activism. Future studies in this domain might benefit from asking
multiple, intersectionality‐related questions and then combining them into an index (see Dawson 2001 and
Simien 2006 for examples of this approach). Thus, the current study provides leverage on understanding
relevant aspects of intersectional activism, but does not cover all aspects of intersectional activism.

11

To conduct surveys at each event, a team of surveyors began by positioning itself around the
perimeter of the rally. Each surveyor was instructed to look out into the crowd and select one person, called
“the anchor”. The anchor was not surveyed because of the assumption that this person was selected with bias
by the surveyor. The surveyors were instructed to count five persons to the right of their anchor and invite
that person to participate in the survey. Invitations were then issued to every fifth person until three surveys
were accepted, after which a new anchor was selected by each surveyor, and the process was repeated until
the end of the rally. Surveyors kept a record of nonresponses, making their best guesses of the race and
gender of persons refusing. This study followed the protocol established by Heaney and Rojas (2014; 2015),
though similar protocols have been employed by other studies, such as Fisher et al. (2005). Research shows
that when protest surveys are conducted with careful attention to selection issues, as was the case in this
study, they can provide a good representation of the protest population (Walgrave and Verhulst 2017;
Walgrave et al. 2016).
Data were gathered with the objective of answering three questions. First, did the use of
intersectionality as a collective action frame correspond with greater support for intersectional activism?
Second, were there divisions among participants that explained variations in frame alignment on
intersectional activism? If so, what factors corresponded with these cleavages? Third, was support for
intersectional activism driven by collective action frames presented by movement leaders or by frames that
participants brought with them?

Data Analysis
Overall Support for Intersectional Activism. Surveys at the five Women’s March events yielded a total
of 521 valid responses to the intersectional activism question. Surveys at the Women’s March events had a 72
percent response rate, while the response rate was 61 percent at the March for Life, 86 percent at the
People’s March, 73 percent at the March for Trump, and 78 percent at the March for Our Lives. The survey
results were weighted to account for nonresponse on the basis of estimated race and gender.
12

The results of the survey, presented in Figure 2, indicated strong support for intersectional activism
across each of the Women’s March events. The most common response to the survey question was that
intersectional activism should be “equal to the highest priority for the movement”. Support at this level
ranged from 67 percent in Los Angeles to 80 percent in New York. The next highest level of support was given
to the second strongest possible answer, “a high priority, but not the highest priority”. Support at this level
ranged from 13 percent in Las Vegas to 30 percent in Washington, DC. All other options received less than 8
percent support in every city. These differences are not statistically significant (2(16)=25.477, p≈0.07). Overall,
the survey responses suggested that while prioritizing intersectional activism was not universally endorsed
among Women’s March participants, it was viewed as important by most participants.
INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE
Surveys at the four comparison events yielded a total of 422 valid responses to the intersectional
activism question. The results of the survey, presented in Figure 3, revealed varied support for intersectional
activism across each of the non‐Women’s March events. The minimum level of support for intersectional
activism was registered at the March for Trump, at which 12 percent of respondents said this should be equal
to the highest priority for the movement. At the high end, 59 percent of participants in the People’s March
said that intersectional activism should be prioritized equal to the movement’s highest priority. This
percentage is sizable, but still less than the minimum support observed at any Women’s March event. While
hardly any (less than 3 percent) of Women’s March participants said that intersectional activism was “not a
priority”, 22 percent of participants at the March for Life gave this response. The differences between these
events are statistically significant (2(12)=83.793, p≤0.05). The differences between the liberal events (People’s
March, March for Our Lives) and the conservative events (March for Life, March for Trump) especially
underscore that the participants at ideologically distant events had very different ways of thinking about
intersectionality, if they thought about the issue at all.
INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE

13

The difference between the support for intersectional activism at the Women’s March events and the
comparison events was statistically significant (2(4)=59.801, p≤0.05). This test provides evidence in favor of
the view that the Women’s March gathered crowds that were more supportive of prioritizing intersectional
activism than were crowds at other comparable marches in Washington, DC. This result also held when the
two conservative marches were excluded from the data (2(4)=22.228, p≤0.05).
It is important to note that some respondents may not have supported intersectional activism as
strongly as they indicated in answering this question. For example, some respondents may have simply
acquiesced to the survey question (Wright 1975). Or, respondents may have underreported their support
even if they were more directly concerned with marginalization and oppression. Nonetheless, the results are
consistent with the conclusion that participants in the Women’s March considerably agreed with prioritizing
intersectional activism, much more than was typically the case at other activist events.
Barriers to Frame Alignment. The previous section documents that not all participants in the
Women’s March, or in comparable marches in Washington, DC, participated for reasons that were aligned
with the intersectional activism collective action frame. This section considers the structural and political
factors that may have been barriers to that alignment, as well as how those barriers may or may not have
differed between the Women’s March and other grassroots protests. Four potential sources of division were
social identity, political attitudes, political involvement, and participants’ socio‐economic status. The
statistical analysis tests these factors for whether they help to explain alignment with the intersectional
activism frame.
Social identity is the first and most obvious potential explanation for cleavages over intersectional
activism. The pursuit of intersectional activism was potentially of deep personal importance to activists who
embraced intersectionally marginalized identities (Tungohan 2016). Aaronette White (1999, p. 77) explained
that experiences of marginalization help to promote the success of frame alignment strategies linked to
“racialized, gendered, and class‐based micromobilization.” Joseph McCormick and Sekou Franklin (2000)
demonstrated that micromobilization may depend on participants’ degree of racial consciousness (see also
14

Dawson 1994). Eric Swank and Breanne Fahs (2013) documented that these strategies were also relevant for
sexual minorities. Of course, it is not necessarily the case that there are differences in support for
intersectionality between members of marginalized and advantaged groups. Instead, members of advantaged
groups may choose to see themselves as allies to marginalized groups, and vice versa, thus potentially muting
the effects of the difference (Droogendyk et al. 2016).
Political attitudes are a second potential source of division regarding support for intersectional
activism. Beliefs about activism are likely to be embedded within a broader package of ideas that individuals
have been offered by political elites, which are generally presented as existing along the liberal‐conservative
continuum and/or through the platforms of political parties (Converse 1964; Noel 2013).
Political involvement is a third potential source of divisions. Activists’ views may be developed
through contact with activist and advocacy organizations (Munson 2008; Walker 1991, pp. 129‐30). As Heaney
and Rojas (2015) argued, movement organizations may play a notable role in advising activists about how to
think about contemporary political issues and partisan politics. As a result, it is reasonable to expect that
activists who identify themselves with parties, ideologies, and/or activist organizations may align their views
on intersectionality with these entities (Mason 2018). Individual activists may be inclined to take what they
learn through one social movement and use it to shape their involvement in future movements (Meyer and
Whittier 1994).
Fourth, socio‐economic status may play a role in whether activists support intersectionality.
Schlozman et al. (2018) document that persons with lower socio‐economic status are less likely to be recruited
by social movement organizations and less likely to volunteer on their own to participate in activism than are
persons with higher socio‐economic status (but see Schussman and Soule 2005 for contrary evidence). As a
result, persons of lower socio‐economic status may feel more isolated within social movements and,
therefore, may be more sympathetic with appeals to intersectionality and inclusion.
The relevance of these four factors to frame alignment was examined using an Ordered Probit model
of responses to the question on intersectional activism. Table 1 contained two models. Model 1 used data
15

from the Women’s March events and Model 2 used data from the four comparison events. Event dummy
variables were included to account for average differences across events, with the Women’s March in
Washington, DC excluded as the base event in Model 1 and the March for Our Lives excluded as the base
event in Model 2. The estimates were weighted to account for variations in survey nonresponse by gender
and race and adjusted for stratification across events. Missing values were imputed using complete‐case
imputation, which is an appropriate method when there is a relatively low incidence of missing data, as was
the case in this study (Little 1988; Wood et al. 2005; King et al. 2001). Descriptive statistics for these models
are provided in Table 2, including survey‐weighted means, standard deviations, and the percentage of
observations imputed.
INSERT TABLE 1 AND TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE
The results reported in Model 1 indicate the factors that were associated with support for
intersectional activism in the Women’s March. Trans‐ and LGBTQIA+‐identified individuals were more likely
than people with other social identities to support intersectional activism, suggesting that they may have seen
a greater urgency for these issues than did cis‐gendered and straight individuals. However, there were no
differences in support for intersectional activism between men and women, between nonwhites and whites,
or on the basis of age, indicating that these groups had relatively close agreement on the prioritization of
intersectional activism. Given the controversies surrounding the Women’s March, a significant difference
between white and nonwhite respondents was expected. However, the results hint that the March may have
been more unified on the basis of race at the grassroots level than among movement elites.
In contrast to the Women’s March, Model 2 indicates that gender was the only statistically significant
social identity variable for the comparison events. Women attending the comparison events were more likely
than men to say that they supported intersectional activism for the movements behind the comparison events
that they attended, even though the organizers of those events did not stress intersectionality in their
collective action frames. It appears that women were more inclined than men to bring intersectionality with
them to their non‐gender‐focused activism.
16

The Women’s March exhibited similarity with comparison events with the respect to the relevance of
political attitudes. In both models, the coefficient on ideology was positive and statistically significant, though
the coefficient on partisan identification was not statistically significant. These results demonstrated that
ideology was a factor that tended to divide activists in their views on intersectional activism. More liberal
ideological views were associated with a greater desire to prioritize intersectional activism. As a result, the
Women’s March – which was heavily dominated by activists on the left side of the political spectrum – may
expect that less liberal or more moderate women may be more likely than activists on the far Left to resist
initiatives that are motivated by intersectional considerations.
Past political involvement was associated with prioritizing intersectional activism among Women’s
March activists but not among those activists at the comparison marches. The results of Model 1 show that
activists who had participated in a greater number of movements for marginalized constituencies (specifically,
Black Lives Matter, civil rights, immigrant rights, and women’s rights) tended to assign a higher priority to
intersectional activism than did activists who participated in fewer of these movements. This finding also
lends support to the view that activists brought their interest in intersectionality with them from past activism
to the Women’s March.
Neither socio‐economic status nor event dummy variables were significantly associated with
variations in prioritization for intersectional activism.
Were framing effects top down or bottom up? A final question to address using the survey data is
whether activists prioritized intersectional activism because movement leaders emphasized this concept in
their collective action frames? Or, did activists bring this idea with them to the activist events that they
choose to participate in? An Ordered Probit analysis on the combined Women’s March and comparison
events data indicated that Women’s March participants were significantly more likely to be aligned with the
intersectional activism frame, holding constant the independent variables included in the regression, than
were participants in other marches (t=2.94, p≤0.05). Figure 4 reports the marginal effects in this equation of
participation in the Women’s March on the prioritization of intersectional activism. It illustrates that most of
17

the marginal effects were on increasing the probability of observing “equal to the highest” and decreasing the
probability of “high, but not highest”, with other effects being relatively flat. A problem with this analysis,
however, is that it did not account for the fact that activists participating in the Women’s March may have
been compositionally different from those participating in comparison events. That is, was the Women’s
March attended by people who prioritized intersectional activism, or did the March convince attendees to
prioritize intersectional activism?
INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE
Propensity‐score matching is a statistical technique that provides some leverage on the top‐down,
bottom‐up question (Dehejia and Wahba 2002). This procedure weights the data so that Women’s March
participants were effectively compared with comparison‐event participants as if they were statistically alike in
all respects except having attended the Women’s March. For example, a young nonwhite woman who had
participated in two prior movements for marginalized constituencies at the Women’s March is compared with
a weighted‐equivalent person at a comparison event. When this method was applied, the average treatment
effect indicated that a Women’s March participant was likely to assign a higher priority to intersectional
activism than was a weighted‐equivalent participant at a comparison event (t=2.05, p≤0.05). This result also
held if the conservative events were excluded from the data (t=3.70, p≤0.05). The implication of these
findings is to support the view that attendance at the Women’s March amplified the priority attached to
intersectional activism. Thus, the evidence suggests that the collective action frame used by the Women’s
March leadership had at least some positive effect on encouraging participants to prioritize intersectional
activism at the grassroots.
It would be incorrect to assume, however, that the effect of top‐down framing rules out the possibility
of bottom‐up frame alignment. As is reported in the previous section, Women’s March participants gave
higher priority to intersectional activism the more that they had previously participated in movements for the
interests of marginalized groups. These findings together indicate that processes of both bottom‐up and top‐
down alignment were simultaneously at work.
18

Conclusion
Efforts at organizing women primarily on the basis of gender have historically prioritized the
concerns of white, middle class, straight women. Thus, when the Women’s March began a massive
effort at organizing along these lines after the election of President Trump, activists concerned about
intersectional marginalization raised red flags. They pressured the March to modify its organizing
plans to accommodate the interests of marginalized constituencies. In response, the March adopted
intersectionality as a collective action frame and took other concrete steps to align with an
intersectional approach to activism. Subsequently, the March staged protests that – as demonstrated
in this study – mobilized large groups of women (and others) that signaled their desire to see
intersectionality as a high priority for the women’s movement. This preference was greater at
Women’s March events than was the case of other comparable activist events held in Washington,
DC. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that the March achieved some reasonable degree of frame
alignment with respect to intersectionality. While credit is owed to the March’s leaders for projecting
this frame, the evidence suggests that grassroots participants also learned about intersectionality
from their prior activism.
It would be a misreading of this study, however, to claim that the Women’s March
transcended the problems of intersectional marginalization that tend to emerge when large groups of
women organize together as women. As Kathleen Blee (2012) and Paul Lichterman (1995)
emphasized in their research on organizational processes, collaborating on problems that differently
affect vulnerable groups requires trust, which is often lacking between communities that do not
frequently work together. Ideology was a factor that divided Women’s March participants regarding
intersectional activism, with more liberal activists placing a higher priority on this cause than did more
moderate and conservative activists. Similarly, intersectional activism was not as important to cis‐
gendered and straight Marchers as it was to trans and queer Marchers. Activists with a history of
19

involvement in movements for marginalized communities were more prone to endorse intersectional
activism than were those without this background.
At the same time that it advances our understanding of intersectionality at the grassroots, this
article leaves numerous questions unresolved for future research to address. For example, this study
considered the support that respondents gave to intersectional activism but did not probe the diverse
ways that activists may be oriented toward intersectionality or feminism (Greenwood 2008; Harnois
2005). How do participants understand the need to embrace the concerns of subgroups? How do
participants understand the ways that issues are intersectionally constituted? These and other
questions may be addressed not only by developing more complex batteries of survey questions about
intersectionality but also by incorporating more qualitative analysis of movement activity into future
studies.

References
Adam, Erin. 2017. “Intersectional Coalitions.” Law & Society Review 51(1): 132‐167.
Alexander‐Floyd, Nikol 2012. “Disappearing Acts.” Feminist Formations 24(1): 1‐25.
Altavena, Lily. 2008. “Las Vegas Women's March 2018 Draws Thousands to Sunday Event.” azcentral.
Revised January 21, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018
(https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/nation/2018/01/21/2018‐womens‐march‐las‐vegas‐nevada‐
draws‐thousands/1052368001/).
Beckwith, Karen. 2014. “Gender, Class, and the Structure of Intersectionality.” Politics, Groups, and Identities
2(1): 17‐34.
Berry, Marie, and Erica Chenoweth. 2018. “Who Made the Women’s March?” Pp. 75‐89 in David S. Meyer
and Sidney Tarrow (eds.), The Resistance. New York: Oxford University Press.
Beyerlein, Kraig, Peter Ryan, Aliyah Abu‐Hazeem, and Amity Pauley. 2018. “The 2017 Women’s March.”
Mobilization 23(4): 425‐449.
20

Blee, Kathleen. 2012. Democracy in the Making. New York: Oxford University Press.
Brewer, Sierra, and Lauren Dundes. 2018. “Concerned, Meet Terrified.” Women’s Studies International
Forum 69: 49‐55.
Chenoweth, Erica, and Jeffrey Pressman. 2018. “One Year After the Women’s March on Washington, People
Are Still Protesting en Masse.” Washington Post. Published on January 21, 2017. Retrieved February
9, 2019 (https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey‐cage/wp/2018/01/21/one‐year‐after‐the‐
womens‐march‐on‐washington‐people‐are‐still‐protesting‐en‐masse‐a‐lot‐weve‐counted/).
Cho, Sumi, Kimberlé Crenshaw, and Leslie McCall. 2013. “Toward a Field of Intersectionality Studies.” Signs
38(4): 785‐810.
Cole, Elizabeth. 2008. “Coalitions as a Model for Intersectionality.” Sex Roles 59(5): 443‐453.
Collins, Patricia, and Sirma Bilge. 2016. Intersectionality. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Combahee River Collective. 1995 [1977]. “A Black Feminist Statement.” In Beverly Guy‐Sheftall (ed.), Words
of Fire. New York: New Press.
Converse, Philip. 1964. “The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics”. Pp. 206‐61 in David E. Apter (ed.),
Ideology and Discontent. New York: Free Press.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé. 1989. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex.” University of Chicago Legal
Forum 140: 139‐67.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé. 1991. “Mapping the Margins.” Stanford Law Review 43(6): 1241‐99.
Davis, Kathy. 2008. “Intersectionality as Buzzword.” Feminist Theory 9(1): 67‐85.
Dawson, Michael. 1994. Behind the Mule. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dawson, Michael. 2001. Black Visions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dehejia, Rajeev, and Sadek Wahba. 2002. “Propensity Score‐Matching Methods for Nonexperimental Causal
Studies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(1): 151‐161.
Dhamoon, Rita. 2011. “Considerations on Mainstreaming Intersectionality.” Political Research Quarterly
64(1): 230‐243.
21

Doetsch‐Kidder, Sharon. 2012. Social Change and Intersectional Activism. New York: Palgrave MacMilan.
Droogendky, Lisa, Stephen Wright, Micah Lubensky, and Winnifred Louis. 2016. “Acting in Solidarity.” Journal
of Social Issues 72(2): 315‐334.
Fisher, Dana. 2019. American Resistance. New York: Columbia University Press.
Fisher, Dana, Dawn Dow, and Rashawn Ray. 2017. “Intersectionality Takes it to the Streets.” Science
Advances 3 (September 20): 1‐8.
Fisher, Dana, Kevin Stanley, David Berman, and Gina Neff. 2005. “How Do Organizations Matter?” Social
Problems 52(1): 102‐121.
Fisher, Dana, Lorien Jasny, and Dawn Dow. 2018. “Why Are We Here?” Mobilization 23(4): 451‐468.
Goss, Kristin. 2013. The Paradox of Gender Equality. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Goss, Kristin, and Michael T. Heaney. 2010. “Organizing Women as Women.” Perspectives on Politics 8(1):
27‐52.
Greenwood, Ronni. 2008. “Intersectional Political Consciousness.” Psychology of Women Quarterly 32(1): 36‐
47.
Griffiths, Brian. 2018. “Hundreds of Thousands Protest in D.C., Across Country on Women's March
Anniversary.” Politico. Revised January 20, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018
(https://www.politico.com/story/2018/01/20/womens‐march‐anniversary‐dc‐352231).
Hancock, Ange‐Marie. 2007. “When Multiplication Doesn’t Equal Quick Addition.” Perspectives on Politics
5(1): 63‐79.
Hancock, Ange‐Marie. 2016. Intersectionality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Harnois, Catherine. 2005. “Different Paths to Different Feminisms?” Gender & Society 19(6): 809‐828.
Heaney, Michael T., and Fabio Rojas. 2014. “Hybrid Activism.” American Journal of Sociology 119(4): 1047‐
1103.
Heaney, Michael T., and Fabio Rojas. 2015. Party in the Street. New York: Cambridge University Press.
hooks, bell. 1984. Feminist Theory. Boston: South End Press.
22

King, Gary, James Honaker, Anne Joseph, and Kenneth Scheve. 2001. “Analyzing Incomplete Political Science
Data.” American Political Science Review 95(1): 49–69.
Laperrière, Marie, and Eléonore Lépinard. 2016. “Intersectionality as a Tool for Social Movements.” Politics
36(4): 374‐382.
Lichterman, Paul. 1995. “Piecing Together Multicultural Community.” Social Problems 42(4): 513‐32.
Little, Roderick. 1988. “Missing Data Adjustments in Large Surveys.” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 6(3): 287–96
Mason, Lilliana. 2018. Uncivil Agreement. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
May, Vivian. 2015. Pursuing Intersectionality, Unsettling Dominant Imaginaries. New York: Routledge.
McCall, Leslie. 2005. “The Complexity of Intersectionality.” Signs 30(3): 1771‐1800.
McCormick, Joseph, and Sekou Franklin. 2000. “Expressions of Racial Consciousness in the African American
Community.” Pp. 315‐336 in Yvette Alex‐Assensoh and Lawrence Hanks (eds.), Black and Multiracial
Politics in America. New York: New York University Press.
McKane, Rachel, and Holly McCammon. 2018. “Why We March.” Mobilization 23(4): 401‐424.
Meyer, David, and Nancy Whittier. 1994. “Social Movement Spillover.” Social Problems 41(2): 277‐298.
Munson, Ziad. 2008. The Making of Pro‐Life Activists. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Noel, Hans. 2013. Political Ideologies and Political Parties in America. New York: Cambridge University Press.
North, Anna. 2018. “The Women’s March Changed the American Left.” Vox. Revised December 21, 2018.
Retreived February 8, 2019 (https://www.vox.com/identities/2018/12/21/18145176/feminism‐
womens‐march‐2018‐2019‐farrakhan‐intersectionality).
Perez, Carmen. 2017. “CARMEN PEREZ Speech.” YouTube. Published on February 2, 2017. Retrieved August
23, 2018 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=32uPDwdKGQ8).
Quarshie, Mabinty. 2018. “Is the Women’s March more inclusive this year?” USA Today. Revised January 20,
2018. Retrieved February 9, 2019 (https://eu.usatoday.com/story/news/2018/01/18/womens‐march‐
more‐inclusive‐year/1038859001/).
23

Roberts, Dorothy, and Sujatha Jesudason. 2013. “Movement Intersectionality.” Du Bois Review 10(2): 313‐
328.
Rose‐Redwood, CindyAnn, and Reuben Rose‐Redwood. 2017. “‘It definitely felt very white’.” Gender, Place &
Culture 24(5): 645‐654.
Schlozman, Kay, Henry Brady, and Sidney Verba. 2018. Unequal and Unrepresented. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Schussman, Alan, and Sarah Soule. 2005. “Process and Protest.” Social Forces 84(2): 1083‐1108.
Simien, Evelyn. 2006. Black Feminist Voices in Politics. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Smooth, Wendy, and Tamelyn Tucker. 1999. “Behind but Not Forgotten.” Pp. 241‐258 in Kimberly Spring
(ed.), Still Lifting, Still Climbing. New York: New York University Press.
Snow, David, Burke Rochford, Steven Worden, and Robert Benford. 1986. “Frame Alignment Processes,
Micromobilization, and Movement Participation.” American Sociological Review 51(4): 464‐481.
Snow, David, Rens Vliegenthart, and Pauline Ketelaars. 2019. “The Framing Perspective on Social
Movements.” Pp. 392‐411 in David Snow, Sarah Soule, Hanspeter Kreisi, and Holly McCammon (eds.),
The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Social Movements, Second Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons.
Strolovitch, Dara. 2007. Affirmative Advocacy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Swank, Eric, and Breanne Fahs. 2013. “An Intersectional Analysis of Gender and Race for Sexual Minorities
Who Engage in Gay and Lesbian Rights Activism.” Sex Roles 68(11‐12): 660‐674.
Terriquez, Veronica. 2015. “Intersectional Mobilization, Social Movement Spillover, and Queer Youth
Leadership in the Immigrant Rights Movement.” Social Problems 62(3): 343‐362.
Terriquez, Veronica, Tizoc Brenes, and Abdiel Lopez. 2018. “Intersectionality as a Multipurpose Collective
Action Frame.” Ethnicities 18(2): 260‐276.

24

Tolentino, Jia. 2017. “The Somehow Controversial Women’s March on Washington.” The New Yorker.
Revised January 18, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2018 (https://www.newyorker.com/culture/jia‐
tolentino/the‐somehow‐controversial‐womens‐march‐on‐washington).
Tormos, F. 2017. “Intersectional Solidarity.” Politics, Groups, and Identities 5(4): 707‐720.
Tungohan, Ethel. 2016. “Intersectionality and Social Justice.” Politics, Groups, and Identities 4(3): 347‐362.
Wadsworth, Nancy D. 2011. “Intersectionality in California’s Same‐Sex Marriage Battles.” Political Research
Quarterly 64(1): 200‐216.
Walgrave, Stefaan, and Joris Verhulst. 2011. “Selection and Response Bias in Protest Surveys.” Mobilization
16(2): 203‐22.
Walgrave, Stefaan, Ruud Wouters, and Pauline Ketelaars. 2016. “Response Problems in the Protest Study
Design.” Mobilization 21(1): 83‐104.
Walker, Jack. 1991. Mobilizing Interest Groups in America. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Weldon, Laurel. 2019. “Power, Exclusion and Empowerment.” Women’s Studies International Forum 72: 127‐
136.
White, Aaronette. 1999. “Talking Feminist, Talking Black.” Gender & Society 13(1): 77‐100.
Wood, Angela, Ian White, Melvyn Hillsdon, and James Carpenter. 2005. “Comparison of Imputation and
Modeling Methods in the Analysis of a Physical Activity Trial with Missing Outcomes.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 34(1): 89–99.
Wright, James. 1975. “Does Acquiescence Bias the ‘Index of Political Efficacy?’” Public Opinion Quarterly
39(2): 219‐226.
WUSA. 2018. “Thousands Gather for 2018 Women’s March in DC.” WUSA9. Revised January 20, 2018.
Retrieved September 3, 2018 (https://www.wusa9.com/article/news/local/dc/thousands‐gather‐for‐
2018‐womens‐march‐in‐dc/509711469).

25

Figure 1. Intersectional Activism at the Women’s March in Lansing, Michigan, January 21, 2018

Note: Photo by Michael T. Heaney.

26

Figure 2. Support for Intersectional Activism at Women’s March Events, 2018
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
New York, New York

Washington, DC

Lansing, Michigan

Las Vegas, Nevada

Los Angeles, California

Not a priority

A low priority

A moderate priority

A high priority, but not the highest priority

Equal to the highest priority for the movement

Note: N=521.

27

Figure 3. Support for Intersectional Activism at Comparative Events in Washington, DC, 2018
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
March for Life

People's March

March for Trump

March for Our Lives

Not a priority

A low priority

A moderate priority

A high priority, but not the highest priority

Equal to the highest priority for the movement

Note: N=422.

28

Table 1. Factors Associated with Support for Intersectional Activism
Independent Variable
Model 1
Model 2
Women’s
Comparison
March Events
Events
Social Identity
Gender is Female = 1
Gender is Trans = 1
Race is Nonwhite = 1
LGBTQIA+ = 1
Age in Years
Political Attitudes
Ideology (Conservative to Liberal 1 to 9)
Party Identification (Republican to
Democrat 1 to 7)
Political Involvement
Member of Political Organization = 1
Past Movement Participation (Count
of Marginalized Movements, 0 to 4)
Socio‐Economic Status
Income in Thousands of Dollars
Level of Education (Less than High
School Grad. to Grad. Degree 1 to 6)
Event
New York Women’s March = 1

0.258
(0.144)
1.658*
(0.723)
0.297
(0.158)
0.563*
(0.206)
‐0.008
(0.004)

0.356*
(0.131)
1.002
(0.554)
‐0.008
(0.191)
0.273
(0.196)
‐0.004
(0.005)

0.232*
(0.053)
0.492
(0.469)

0.132*
(0.049)
‐0.004
(0.041)

‐0.186
(0.136)
0.182*
(0.066)

0.070
(0.138)
0.139
(0.076)

0.000
(0.001)
‐0.046
(0.051)

0.001
(0.001)
0.043
(0.051)

0.235
(0.174)
‐0.030
(0.204)
0.063
(0.188)
‐0.208
(0.180)

Lansing, Michigan Women’s March = 1
Las Vegas Women’s March = 1
Los Angeles Women’s March = 1
March for Life = 1

‐0.520
(0.299)
0.109
(0.136)
‐0.100
(0.339)

People’s March = 1
March for Trump = 1

29

Table 1 Continued. Factors Associated with Support for Addressing Intersectionality
Cut Points
Cut Point 1
Cut Point 2
Cut Point 3
Cut Point 4
Model Statistics
Sample Size
F Statistic
F degrees of freedom

0.653
(1.379)
0.970
(1.142)
1.617
(1.398)
2.698
(1.395)

‐0.923
(0.453)
‐0.617
(0.462)
‐0.067
(0.464)
0.945
(0.470)

521
4.04*
15, 502

422
5.21*
14, 405

Notes: *p ≤ 0.05. Models estimated using an Ordered Probit estimator. Standard errors in parentheses.

30

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics – Survey‐Weighed Mean / (Standard Deviation) / [Percent Imputed]
Variable
Women’s March
Comparison
Events
Events
Dependent Variable
Support for Addressing Intersectionality
(1 to 5)
Social Identity
Gender is Female = 1
Gender is Trans = 1
Race is Nonwhite = 1
LGBTQIA+ = 1
Age in Years

4.648
(0.671)

N.A.

4.192

N.A.

0.789
(0.400)
0.006
(0.076)
0.268
(0.453)
0.212
(0.411)
43.610
(17.398)

[13.13%]

0.625
(0.480)
0.016
(0.129)
0.193
(0.401)
0.171
(0.386)
41.942
(18.417)

[17.50%]

Political Attitudes
Ideology (Conservative to Liberal 1 to 9)

Level of Education (Less than High
School Grad. to Grad. Degree 1 to 6)
Event
New York Women’s March = 1

[12.46%]
[36.36%]
[14.48%]

7.552
(1.325)
6.226
(1.156)

[15.15%]

0.474
(0.500)
1.561
(1.277)

[10.94%]

99.257
(104.233)
4.506
(1.439)

[16.67%]

0.213
(0.410)
0.300
(0.458)
0.123
(0.327)
0.179
(0.386)
0.184
(0.389)

[0.00%]

Party Identification (Republican to
Democrat 1 to 7)
Political Involvement
Member of Political Organization = 1
Past Movement Participation (Count
of Marginalized Movements, 0 to 4)
Socio‐Economic Status
Income in Thousands of Dollars

[13.13%]

Washington, DC Women’s March = 1
Lansing, Michigan Women’s March = 1
Las Vegas Women’s March = 1
Los Angeles Women’s March = 1
March for Life = 1

[8.08%]

[13.97%]

[12.29%]

6.702
(2.007)
5.475
(1.749)

March for Trump = 1
March for Our Lives = 1

31

[16.90%]
[38.77%]
[19.48%]

[19.88%]
[10.74%]

0.334
(0.472)
1.122
(1.213)

[11.53%]

102.189
(100.640)
4.323
(1.660)

[22.27%]

[16.90%]

[16.90%]

[0.00%]
[0.00%]
[0.00%]
[0.00%]
0.177
(0.366)
0.226
(0.424)
0.031
(0.176)
0.565
(0.494)

People’s March = 1

[17.50%]

[0.00%]
[0.00%]
[0.00%]
[0.00%]

Figure 4. Marginal Effects of Women’s March Participation on Prioritization of Intersectional Activism

32

