Halting the momentum? The effect of social buffering
on the craft focus of wholesaler portfolios *
TÜNDE CSERPES†

INGO KLEINDIENST‡

Aarhus University

Aarhus University

June 20, 2019
Abstract: We identify which specific types of wholesalers were distributing products from an

increasingly important niche segment of the beer industry, namely craft beer. As traditional
recommendations of the strategy literature disregard lock-ins from previous market ties are
present, we introduce the notion of social buffering to indicate the embeddedness of
organizations into their history of cumulative relationships. We use longitudinal data on
distributor establishments and their local portfolio composition between 1997–2016 from three
different U.S. states. Our results reveal that it is distributors that are able both to leverage
positional strategies in their local portfolios and free themselves from the lock-in associated with
their historically beneficial social and market relationships with the large brewers who distribute
craft.
Keywords: intermediary organizations, distributor portfolios, industry evolution, positional

strategies, social buffering

* We thank Dmitry Sharapov, Olav Sorenson, William Bielby, Rachel Gordon, Paul-Brian McInerney, Pamela
Popielarz, Christopher Rider, Adam Slez and Tomi Laamanen for thoughtful discussions and comments. Lyann
Pimentel and Hector Dominguez provided superb research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the University of Illinois at Chicago Chancellor’s Graduate Research Fellowship, Provost’s Fellowship, and
the Kauffman Foundation Dissertation Fellowship. We take responsibility for all mistakes.
†

Corresponding author. Postdoctoral Fellow, Ph.D. Department of Management, Aarhus BSS. Fuglesangs Allé
4, DK-8210 Aarhus V., office: 2628 (M)-332, phone: +1(312) 756-9351, tunde.cserpes@mgmt.au.dk
‡
Department of Management, Fuglesangs Allé 4, DK-8210 Aarhus V, iklein@mgmt.au.dk

1

INTRODUCTION
“The current momentum of craft can change the dynamics of the beer industry.”
(Beer Business Daily (BBD), 12/07/2011)
What determines whether wholesalers add products from an up-and-coming product category to their
portfolio when their upstream market is undergoing industry evolution? Changes in product markets—such
as the emergence or disappearance of product niche categories—affect the competitive conditions in
downstream markets (Chen et al., 2010). In particular, product market changes provide a built-in ecological
momentum for firms to act on in the downstream market. However, though firms in downstream markets,
that is, wholesalers, are likely to make efforts to respond to the ecological momentum, it is unclear what
determines whether they can use it to drive their own strategic momentum. As we show in this paper,
addressing the issues recommended in the ecology and strategy literatures gives an incomplete answer
unless we also consider the buffering of prior social commitments between producers and wholesalers.
Faced with ecological momentum in a producer market, wholesalers face a quandary (Dobrev et al.,
2006a; Singh, 2006; Stern et al., 2004). When addressing the question of which firms will act on that
momentum, previous research has typically focused on whether or not the firm has positional advantage
(Dobrev et al., 2006a). Research in both strategy and population ecology highlights that differences in firm
strategy and ecological position are in most cases reasonably well determine whether firms can or cannot
act on the momentum (Hannan, 2005; Porter, 2008).
Why do firms act on the momentum at different rates, even though they are similar in terms of market
position and positional advantage (Dyer et al., 2018; Sorenson, 2000)? To explain this heterogeneity, we
bring in a new perspective: the tension between past and current positional advantage. Firms that previously
experienced an advantageous market position may find themselves unable to act on the current ecological
momentum—a situation that is known as lock-in (Burgelman, 2002). To better understand what determines
whether firms can reap the benefits of ecological momentum, we need to understand the social buffering
2

that stems from a firm being embedded in a series of social relationships that it has built up over time.
To investigate empirically how social buffering affects which firms act on ecological momentum, we
look at the market of beer distributors. This market provides an appropriate context for the following
reasons. First, the upstream market, that is the beer producer market, has experienced an ecological
momentum: the rise of craft breweries (Carroll et al., 2000; Frake, 2016; Mathias et al., 2018). Using this
particular industry context therefore allows us to observe how ecological momentum affected firms in the
wholesaler segment, namely the beer distributors. Whereas distributors previously only had to carry
traditional, mass-produced beer, they now had the chance to act on industry momentum and add the up-andcoming product category of craft beer to their portfolio.
Second, some distributors may be locked in by long-standing relationships with large brewers, which
leave them no scope to act on an ecological momentum. The structure of the beer distribution market allows
us to find those distributors that have the capability—either via their competitive position or via their
organizational resources—to act on ecological momentum. Most distribution networks that carry physical
products have a spatial limit, that is, a physical boundary within which it is still profitable to do business
and maintain trust-based market relationships. In the U.S. beer distribution market this spatial constraint is
reinforced by a legal one: state governments require distributors to obtain licenses to carry products. As a
result, wholesalers are only able to distribute in counties in which they have a license to distribute, and in
several cases this coincides with where they have warehousing facilities. This specific legal feature of the
beer industry allows us to reliably measure a wholesaler’s positional advantage compared to its local
competitors’ (Bigelow, 2006; Bigelow et al., 1997).
We use longitudinal data on distributor establishments and their local portfolio composition between
1997–2016 for three different U.S. states—Florida, Illinois, and Texas—to assess the differential effect of
social buffering on the relationship between a distributor’s positional strategy and the focus on craft beer in
its portfolio. Our main finding highlights an important boundary condition on the extent to which
distributors can mobilize their positional strategies to act on the ecological momentum of their upstream
3

market. Market ties to large brewers that were previously useful in certain portfolio compositions can lock
in distributors and inhibit them from acting on ecological momentum. These distributors, despite having a
positional advantage, do not add craft producers to their portfolio, which has a damaging effect on their own
firm-level momentum. Our results are robust to a research design that considers firms’ selection into
competitive versus non-competitive environments and to different historical treatments as indicated by the
presence or absence of industry-leading producers.
Overall, our results highlight that social buffering constrains distributors from acting on ecological
momentum in their upstream market. Moreover, our results push the literature on interorganizational
relationships as a firm-level consideration towards considering local portfolios as a focus for strategic
decision-making (Dyer et al., 2018; Kay, 2000) within the competitive ecology of the industry (Sorenson,
2000). The theoretical contribution of this perspective is that it follows up on Dyer et al. (2018) and
identifies a boundary condition regarding the widespread use of positional strategies. Furthermore, we find
both quantitative and qualitative support for our proposed mechanism—social buffering—which adds to the
mechanism of governance inseparability (Argyres et al., 1999, 2002) and highlights the social element in
the economic and contractual pressures underlying market relationships. As such, we argue for a distinctly
social understanding of the theory of the firm and its underlying mechanisms (Gulati et al., 2008).

1. ACTING ON THE MOMENTUM
What creates an ecological momentum and how does it translate to a distinct strategic momentum across
segments? The resource space in every industry is limited (Carroll, 1985). As an industry matures, the level
of concentration within it increases, as does the death rate of incumbents who compete fiercely to obtain
control over the center of the industry (Swaminathan, 2001). The surviving incumbents are fewer and larger
and concentrate on the center of the industry, because economies of scale in production and marketing
imply that this is the best location. However, incumbents’ move to the center opens up resource space at the
periphery of the industry. This allows the emergence of niche producers that can exploit peripheral market
4

segments without directly competing with the larger incumbents (Carroll et al., 2002; Swaminathan, 2001).
Provided sufficient resources are available, both the survival chances and the founding rates of niche
producers should increase, creating ecological momentum in the industry (Carroll et al., 2000). Importantly,
the dynamics in the product domain of the industry also affect firms in other industry segments. As modern
industries typically exhibit a transactional structure, products go through different industry segments,
including wholesaling, before they reach the customer. Hence, wholesalers—as the next link in the supply
chain—have an opportunity to act on the changes occurring in the product domain, and can thereby build
their own distinct strategic momentum, with the aim of achieving positional advantage.
Firms draw on courses of action and directions they have taken in earlier stages of their evolution
when formulating their current strategies and structures (Amburgey et al., 1992; Miller et al., 1980). Such
persistence can be explained by theories on organizational routines and managerial cognition (Amburgey et
al., 1992). As firms carry out actions, over time they develop routines and competencies (Cyert et al., 1963;
Levitt et al., 1988). These routines and competencies enable firms to undertake similar actions more
effectively and they therefore become a mechanism for keeping to previous ways of doing things. As
highlighted by Amburgey et al. (1992), firms undertake some activities simply because they know how to
do them. Similarly, cognitive limitations may result in the development of mechanisms that reinforce
previous actions. Members of the top management team develop a common mindset or dominant logic that
affects both the perception of the (information) environment and that affects both how they perceive the
environment and what actions they consider to be appropriate (Bettis et al., 1995; Prahalad et al., 1986). As
experience of a specific action increases, this action will then be viewed as the solution to a wider range of
problems (Amburgey et al., 1992; Prahalad et al., 1986; Turner et al., 2013). Hence, firms engage in an
action simply because it has been considered to be a solution to the same or a similar problem in the past—
such as how to create positional advantage.
An industry may be conceptualized as a multidimensional environmental (Carroll et al., 2002).
Accordingly, there is a great diversity in the positional strategies pursued by firms. However, research has
5

shown that the main trade-off wholesalers have to make is between the length of the portfolio and its
composition (Dowell, 2006; Eggers, 2012; Sorenson, 2000). Accordingly, we now develop two
hypotheses—one for portfolio length and one for portfolio composition—to predict whether wholesalers
use the ecological momentum in their upstream market for their own strategic momentum, thereby helping
to improve their strategic position. While we acknowledge that there are underlying costs to maintaining
portfolios (Dowell, 2006), we focus primarily on the firms’ need to differentiate that are influenced by the
competitive ecology of the industry (Campbell-Hunt, 2000; Deephouse, 1999; Sorenson, 2000). We do so,
because one key aspect of strategic momentum theory is that firms engage in the repetition of the action
without considering the consequences. Hence, unlike other closely related behavioral theories such as
learning, strategic momentum theory suggest that firms do not consider the performance outcome of a
particular action (Greve, 2013). In fact, research has shown that firms would persist with an action
irrespective of negative performance feedback (Amburgey et al., 1992).
Prior to an ecological momentum, an industry will typically offer standard products. Hence, in a
supply chain context, one of the fundamental competitive decisions for a wholesaler is how many different
standard producers should be included in its portfolio. A wholesaler that decides to distribute for a large
number of standard producers by comparison with its competitors chooses to position and differentiate itself
strategically based on portfolio length (Deephouse, 1999). All else being equal, such a wholesaler should—
following strategic momentum theory—be more likely than other wholesalers to act on the ecological
momentum occurring in the product market and add a niche producer to its portfolio. By doing so, the
wholesaler maintains or even extends its portfolio length.
Any strategic position implies a different set of organizational arrangements, control procedures, and
incentive systems (Porter, 1980). Thus, wholesalers with a large number of standard producers in their
portfolio set up their organization to make it consistent with the desired strategic position (Tushman et al.,
1985). In doing so, they develop the competency to manage the complexity of distributing products from a
large number of producers. However, the effect of this competency may be either active or passive
6

(Amburgey et al., 1992). The firm may decide to actively leverage its capabilities (Stalk et al., 1992), and
this includes managing an expanding portfolio of producers. Similarly, the competency may play out
passively by reducing the perceived complexity and the associated risk of handling a large portfolio.
Apart from considerations regarding the length of its portfolio, a wholesaler may also take a strategic
position that focuses specifically on distributing niche products. Here the position chosen is based on the
composition of the portfolio, and on the variety of producers represented within it (Dowell, 2006;
Lancaster, 1990). Theoretically, a wholesaler may take any position on the continuum ranging from
distributing no niche products at all to distributing only products from niche products. However, for the
wholesaler to achieve a clear strategic position, it needs to differentiate itself decisively in terms of its
portfolio composition (Deephouse, 1999; Lancaster, 1990; Porter, 1980). This differentiation or
distinctiveness may be based on niche producers being either more or less important in the wholesaler’s
portfolio than in the portfolio of its competitors. In both cases, that is, positive or negative distinctiveness—
as reflected by niche producers being of either more or less relative importance in the portfolio—there is a
strategic momentum effect. Importantly, however, the type of strategic momentum is different. In the case
of positive distinctiveness, the momentum is positional, and is aimed at aimed at strengthening the strategic
position already obtained (Amburgey et al., 1992). Conversely, in the case of negative distinctiveness this
leads to change-based momentum, where the wholesaler attempts to act on ecological momentum within the
industry by pursuing a new trajectory (Jansen, 2004).
The decision regarding the relative importance of niche producers in the portfolio defines the
wholesaler’s strategic position. Where a new product category is only just emerging, a wholesaler that
emphasizes niche producers in its portfolio positions itself as a pioneer. Being an early entrant into the
market of niche product distribution, the wholesaler may be able to preempt resources (Lieberman et al.,
1988, 1998). For a wholesaler, the preemption of resources may specifically concern the customer’s
perceptual space, with customer in this case referring to both niche producers and retailers. Two main
mechanisms underlie the preemption of resources. First, customers may develop switching costs as they
7

accumulate experience of the pioneer (Lieberman et al., 1998). Second, the marketing literature provides
evidence that being first in the market creates a distinct pioneer status, which significantly affects
customers’ preferences with regard to the pioneer. For example, customers perceive pioneering companies
as more credible and trustworthy, and as having more expertise than later market entrants (Niedrich et al.,
2003). Preemption of resources gives the pioneering wholesaler a head-start in the development of routines
and competencies that are key in the distribution of niche products, which shapes top management’s
mindset and dominant logic accordingly. Together this creates the self-reinforcing sequence—the strategic
momentum—that ultimately solidifies the wholesaler’s strategic position. Accordingly, the more a
wholesaler emphasizes a niche product in its portfolio, the more likely it is to include other producers of
niche products.
Conversely, a wholesaler that places less emphasis on niche products than its competitors when there
is ecological momentum in the industry displays a behavior that marks a deviation from conventional
behavior. As its deviation from the conventional behavior of its competitors increases, the wholesaler may
perceive this as a threat to its social status (Phillips et al., 2001). The perceived threat associated with
underemphasizing niche producers is therefore likely to trigger a momentum for change, designed to align
the firm’s behavior with that of its competitors (Jansen, 2004), aimed at making the wholesaler’s behavior
conform with the behavior of its competitors (Phillips et al., 2001). In the context of an industry ecological
momentum, this process leads the wholesaler to include more niche products in its portfolio.
In sum, combining arguments from ecology and strategy (Dobrev et al., 2006b), we suggest that
wholesalers are likely to behave according to their strategic momentum and seize the opportunity provided
by the ecological momentum occurring in the product segment of their industry. Therefore, we suggest that:
Hypothesis 1: The more a wholesaler's strategic position is characterized by portfolio length
distinctiveness, the greater the likelihood that the wholesaler will include niche producers in its
portfolio.
Hypothesis 2: The more a wholesaler's strategic position is characterized by portfolio composition
distinctiveness–both positive and negative–the greater the likelihood that the wholesaler will include
niche producers in its portfolio.
8

2. HALTING THE MOMENTUM
In their current strategic behavior, firms typically maintain their previous direction or even expand the
scope of their activities in that direction (Amburgey et al., 1992). As such, a firm’s history is central to
explaining its strategic momentum. However, to date research has focused somewhat narrowly on the
actions that help to create a firm’s strategic momentum. Significantly less attention has been given to
important boundary conditions that originate from the past, which may affect its ability to maintain the
direction of prior strategic actions in its current strategic behavior. One such boundary condition relates to
lock-ins that stem from a firm’s historical choice of alliances (Burgelman, 2002; Sydow et al., 2009).
To shield themselves against disturbances in their task environment, firms engage in buffering
(Thompson, 1967). Organizational linkages serve as one important buffer (Miner et al., 1990). Such
linkages may, for example, reduce the effect of environmental uncertainty, ensure a constant flow of critical
resources, or enhance innovative processes in firms (Goes et al., 1997; Pfeffer et al., 1978). Overall,
interorganizational linkages are beneficial for firms as they typically offer protection against organizational
failure (Miner et al., 1990) and contribute to several aspects of market performance. However, from a pathdependency perspective, it is not clear whether such linkages are beneficial for all firms, under all
conditions (Sorenson et al., 2006).
Indeed, the literature on governance inseparability highlights that interorganizational linkages may
limit a firm’s ability to differentiate or to change its governance mode over time (Argyres et al., 1999, 2002;
Uzunca et al., 2015). For one thing, firms typically engage in interorganizational linkages that are based on
long-term contractual commitments. Given that such commitments are costly—if not impossible—to
reverse, they create governance inseparability. Also, changes in relative bargaining power (Dencker,
2009)—understood as one party’s ability to influence the terms and conditions of the current contract or
subsequent contracts—may result over time in governance inseparability. Those parties that acquire a
greater bargaining power may be able to force a firm to stick to a previous mode of governance—even if
this represents a suboptimal mode for that firm (Argyres et al., 1999, 2002). This, however, has far-reaching
consequences, because a poor choice of governance structures and associated decisions regarding the firm’s
9

boundary reduce the firm’s prospects of survival (Bigelow, 2006).
Governance inseparability highlights the lock-ins firms experience due to contractual commitments.
However, in addition to the contractual aspect of interorganizational linkages, there is a social aspect to a
firm’s economic calculus.
There is an underlying social aspect to economic and contractual interorganizational linkages, which is
governed not by contracts but by the active management of the social aspect of the market relationship
between partners. It is these experiences that are likely to limit a firm’s ability to act on opportunities. Thus,
firms are subject to a condition that we refer to as social buffering—a condition in which a firm’s past
interorganizational linkages influence its ability to act on emerging opportunities, even though the
contractual base governing the interorganizational linkages stays the same.
From an evolutionary perspective, firms may start searching for interorganizational linkages to buffer
themselves against disturbances in the task environment. At the outset, the search process may be guided by
whether the firm deems a potential partner to be a suitable buffer. From a wholesaler’s perspective, the
perception of whether an interorganizational linkage with a producer represents a suitable buffer is likely to
be linked to the producer’s ability to provide economic certainty. When the producer is judged able to do
this, this gives the wholesaler an incentive to form an interorganizational linkage (Dyer et al., 2018).
However, inasmuch as the upstream markets are experiencing ecological momentum, it may affect the
value-creating potential of the interorganizational linkage. Wholesalers are motivated to act by the prospect
of appropriating part of the value associated with the ecological momentum of the upstream market.
However, their long-standing social relationships to large brewers—which they engaged with in the first
place in order to shield themselves from environmental—are likely to lock them in and constrain their
ability to act, not because of any change in the underlying contractual commitment but because of the social
buffer associated with these relationships. Therefore, we suggest that:
Hypothesis 3: The social buffer originating from the specific composition of a wholesaler’s portfolio
negatively moderates the relationship between a wholesaler’s strategic position and the likelihood
that this wholesaler will include niche producers in its portfolio.
10

3. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
3.1. Social buffering in U.S. beer distribution
The U.S. beer industry is a market with an unusual institutional structure. The three-tier system of alcohol
distribution has been in place since the end of Prohibition (1933) and requires that the brewer (or producer)
uses a distributor (or wholesaler) to reach the retailer (or, directly, the consumer). Furthermore, it is
forbidden to vertically integrate production and wholesaling activities in a single firm. This is an important
industry characteristic as vertical integration has been found to shield firms from ecological dependence,
especially in volatile environments (Negro et al., 2006; Sorenson, 2003). Where there is no vertical
integration, there is an overwhelming emphasis on legal contracts to guide the relationship between
wholesalers and brewers (Beer Business Daily, 2008/05/07). Our entire fieldwork1, however, showed that
firm-level outcomes vastly differ even if firms have the same types of contracts, which can only be
explained if we take into consideration the distinct social elements in the economic and contractual
pressures underlying market relationships.
When the three-tier system was introduced in 1933, no one predicted the emergence of a national
industry, let alone a niche segment, which, in this industry is called “craft” (Choi et al., 2005). The industry
went national and was able to create standard products after World War II due to the scale economy the new
reach facilitated. Producer numbers dropped: By 1961 there were breweries in only 32 states (Horowitz et
al., 1965), and by the 1980s the total number of U.S. breweries had fallen to below 100. The producer
landscape was dominated by national brands (e.g., Anheuser-Busch, Miller, and Coors), and only a few
regional breweries (e.g., Falstaff, Carling, Hamm, Schaefer, and Stroh) were able to compete.
Scholars explained how these conditions paved the way for new craft beer producers, which, instead

1

The authors had access to the archives of an industry periodical—the Beer Business Daily (BBD)—and other
historical materials relating to wholesalers from the Anheuser-Busch Corporate Library. The BBD frequently
publishes quotes from industry participants as well as analyses of the state of the industry. Furthermore, we attended
several industry events and maintained a personal relationship with the National Beer Wholesalers Association's
(NBWA) chief economist. We do not claim to have done any systematic ethnographic work; we just “hung out”
(Martin, 2017) (Martin, 2017). Our fieldwork allowed us to see how our research questions about the effects of
social buffering on the change in strategic direction of wholesaler portfolios played out in our empirical setting.
11

of competing on scale with the large-scale incumbents, competed on product variety (Carroll et al., 2000).2
However, we know less about how the other actors in the supply chain adapted their ways of doing business
as the result of the emerging niche producer segment. Nonetheless, when there is a push from a connected
market segment, what a wholesaler does on a daily basis undergoes some transformation as well (BBD,
04/28/2011, Appendix A.1.).
Previously, when large producers dominated the production landscape, wholesalers moved beer boxes,
managed inventories, and built brands locally (BBD, 07/22/2003). They developed a single focus as they
were in an exclusive relationship with a single producer. They became a family, with all of the associated
benefits and constraints (Appendix A.2.). In return, the large brewers took extreme measures to maintain
their wholesaler networks, organized yearly meetings, personal visits, and regular social gatherings to keep
their distributors satisfied (Appendix A.3.). However, once craft producers entered the landscape,
expanding local portfolios and managing existing relationships became the key issue in portfolio
management.
Under these new conditions, the business interests as well as the bargaining power of distributors
shifted. The previously unilateral bargaining power of the large brewers started to dissipate (BBD,
03/22/2004; BBD, 2006/11/29/2006; BBD, 05/02/2008; BBD, 09/24/2009; BBD, 04/08/2010; Appendix
A.4.), despite the brewers’ efforts to prevent this (BBD, 02/07/2008). Some wholesalers were able to
leverage their position more than others, even though they were bound by similar contracts with brewers
(Appendix A.5.). In response, brewers modified their distributor incentive programs to reflect the fact that
they no longer had sole control over the wholesaler–brewer relationship (BBD, 11/19/2015). Overall, our
observations highlight that the key for wholesalers in managing this tension was the social aspect.
Wholesalers who now were able to free themselves from the restrictions of their historical
relationships did so by managing their local portfolios (Appendix A.6.), and adding craft labels one by one.

2

Besides ecological forces, institutional changes also facilitated the emergence of the craft producer segment. In 1979,
homebrewing became legal, easing access to the industry. Also, between 1984–1999, the brewpub became a legal
organizational form across the country, which further eased entry into the industry (Tremblay et al., 2011)
12

Many were simply not able to do this, however, and exited the market, which resulted in consolidation in
the number of wholesalers over the years. Those who were left still had to consider local market conditions
carefully when taking on new craft producers. This made them increasingly attuned to maximizing
efficiency and scale to achieve higher local productivity and a larger market share, fundamentally shifting
the general characteristics of the market. As one participant at the industry association conference put it:
“yesterday’s distributors wore flannel shirts but today’s distributors are all suited up.” Overall, the
distributors who broke free from the constraints of historical producer relationships did so by leveraging
market efficiencies in their local portfolios.

3.2. Empirical design
We needed data from specific geographic areas of the industry segment to test our hypotheses about how
social buffering moderates the relationship between competitive strategies and the craft focus of distributor
portfolios. We used longitudinal data on distributors between 1997–2016 from three different states:
Florida, Illinois, and Texas. We manually collected and digitized archival data at the Anheuser-Busch
Corporate Library. This institution holds copies of the yearly publications of the Beverage Marketing
Directory (BMD), which lists the characteristics of beer distributors operating in each county within each
states. For each county, these also provide details of the composition of distributor portfolios, listing the
specific beer producers carried (but no other information about them). According to the BMD’s mission
statement, the directories provide a comprehensive list of distributors in each county. We triangulated the
BMD information and compared its published establishment numbers to those of another industry
publication, the Modern Brewery Age Blue Book (MBA BB). As the results are similar, we used the BMD
as our main data source primarily because of its detailed data on local portfolio composition.
Scope of dataset. The unit of analysis was distributor establishment or plant. These physical locations
are owned by firms, and some firms can have multiple establishments. Our research assistants digitized the
data based on the yearly lists of establishments. One of the authors—who was very familiar with the
13

research context and had access to industry stakeholders—manually created the longitudinal identifiers
among establishments, traced the changes in ownership structure over time, and assigned firm-level
identifiers. This task was subject to multiple checks and involved several iterative rounds to ensure the
consistency of the results. Overall, in our archival panel dataset, each spell corresponded to a year in the life
of an establishment. Checks highlighted a high level of internal consistency in the panel dataset: there were
no missing years from an organization’s life course due to data entry errors.
Due to the intensive work it involved, we decided to clean the data for only three states. All were
strong states with regard to distributor presence and they represented around 10 percent of the country’s
distributors in any one year. Our models controlled for the innate differences between the three states.
Overall, we set the boundary around the industry segment based on where establishments operated, which is
a reasonable definition as distributors need to obtain licenses from the government in every county they
operate in.
Final sample. The final sample only included establishments that were on the market between 1998
and 2016. We chose this specific starting year because distributors rarely carried craft producers in earlier
years. We followed the establishments up to 2016 because that was the latest BMD publication at the time
of data collection. We used linear interpolation to predict sales and number of vehicles for establishments
that were missing data on these variables for one year but for which we had data for at least two other years.
This way we retained 17 establishment-year observations out of the 60 missing values. We did not have to
deal with missing data on other variables.

3.3. Measures
Dependent variable. Strategic direction of portfolio (craft focus). Our outcome variable of interest
indicated whether a distributor portfolio contains any niche producers in a given year. In the period we
examined, 15 percent of portfolios include craft producers, as reported in Table 1. However, this average
number masks significant changes in the industry structure: Figure 1 reveals that the proportion of
14

distributor portfolios that included craft producers increased steadily over time. By 2016, nearly half of the
wholesalers had at least one craft producer in their portfolio. At the same time, however, there was a
significant concentration in the overall market: The number of industry participants decreased by at least 50
percent in all three states (Figure 2).

15

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
1997

2000

2003
Big & craft

2006

2009

Only big

2012

2015

Only craft

# wholesalers as proportion of 1997 values

Figure 1: Percentage of wholesalers with different portfolio compositions

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1997

2000

2003
Florida

2006

2009

Illinois

2012

2015

Texas

Figure 2: Percentage of wholesalers as percentage of 1997 values in three U.S. states
Independent variables. Length Distinctiveness as Positional Strategy. This variable was measured as
the extent of positive strategic deviation from the local average of portfolio length of wholesalers in a given
year. As such, it had a mean of zero (as seen in Table 1); positive values signaled that the wholesaler had a
16

portfolio with a product line longer than the average in the county and year, while negative values meant
that the wholesaler’s product line was shorter than average. As this variable measured difference from local
competitors, values were defined only for wholesalers located in counties with competition. Our positive
length distinctiveness as a measure of competitive strategy is a variant of Deephouse's original measure of
strategic deviation (1999: 156).
Composition Distinctiveness as Positional Strategy. This measure focused on what portfolio depth
strategies other wholesalers were following in the focal wholesaler's area and how the focal wholesaler
fared compared to them. We created this variable by calculating the absolute difference between a
wholesaler's portfolio composition—the proportion of number of craft producers compared to the total
number of producers—and that of all other wholesalers operating in the same county and year. Then, we
averaged out the pairwise differences at the wholesaler level and subtracted the resulting number from 100.
The final variable theoretically ranged from zero to 100, where higher values indicated that the portfolio
was more distinct from its local competitors in terms of its craft composition. In a given county, this
variable was highest for wholesalers who already had craft in their portfolio but faced no craft competition.
The variable, however, could be also high for wholesalers that had no craft in its portfolio but whose local
competitors were too similar in terms of their craft portfolios. As this variable measured difference from
local competitors, values were defined only for wholesalers located in counties with competition. Similar
measures by other scholars that measure essentially the same concept are called product-line rivalry and
business relatedness (Gilbert et al., 1993; Gulati et al., 2003).
Moderator. Social buffering. We created a variable to act as proxy for social buffering. This variable
captured how reliant the specific wholesaler is on its portfolio members. To create this variable, we
realigned the dataset to producer-year as the unit of analysis and calculated how many wholesaler portfolios
included the same beer producers in a given year. Essentially, each beer producer was assigned a weight,
representing how many other wholesaler establishments were carrying them in that year. Switching back to
portfolio-year as the unit of analysis, these weights then constituted a matrix. We took each wholesaler's
17

portfolio matrices and summarized the producer-level weights by creating the arithmetic mean: We added
up the weights and divided this sum by the total number of beer producers in the portfolio.
For a numerical example, let us consider the portfolios of two distributor (A and B), both of which
include three beer producers. Distributor A’s portfolio features a beer producer that is in a total of 100
wholesaler portfolios in that year in the three states, while another producer is in ten, and a third is only in
five. Social buffering is (100+10+5)/3=38.3. Distributor B’s portfolio, on the other hand, features two beer
producers with 20 other contracts and a third producer with five contracts. On average, the beer producers
are represented in (20+20+5)/3=15 contracts. If we compare the two portfolios, we can see that on average,
wholesaler A has less bargaining power than wholesaler B: The social pressure that the producer with 100
contracts can exert is considerable.
We are well aware of the aggregation challenge inherent in creating portfolio-level measures from
producer data (Dyer et al., 1998). We ran two additional tests to check whether the measure indeed is a
proxy for social buffering. First, we reran our main models with two different specifications: by defining
social buffering as a measure of the largest contract number in the portfolio and as a measure of the
proportion of producers that have more contracts than the industry average in that year (available upon
request). Second, we used a linear model with an instrumental variable to explain away some of the
endogeneity in the effect of social buffering on craft focus in the robustness tests section.
Controls. Productivity. To measure a firm’s intrinsic strength, we added variables that control for
organizational characteristics. Instead of using indicators for employment, sales, and vehicle numbers—
three measures that tap into the underlying productivity potential of wholesaler establishments—we created
a composite measure of productivity based on the covariance matrix of the three indicators (Cronbach's
alpha: 0.84). Portfolio length measured the length of the product line. This measure was not added to
models that include length distinctiveness. Multi-unit firm was a dichotomous measure indicating that the
establishment belongs to a firm that owns other establishments. We used this variable to control for quality
differences that come from firm-level capabilities. Using firm-level fixed effects was not very meaningful
18

in our empirical case, because half of the sample was dropped due to there being no variance on craft
representation. Thus, we only used models with firm-level fixed effects in our robustness checks. In all
models, however, we added indicators for the calendar year and the three geographic states.
Stratifying variable. Local competition. A potential source of bias that could affect our estimates is
the presence or absence of local competitors in a given county. The average number of competitors in the
first case was 3.51, as reported in Table 1. A comparison of the two subsamples from the same table
indicated that, although wholesalers do not differ in their general propensity of distributing craft, they do
differ in terms of their general characteristics such as productivity, social buffering, and the length of their
portfolio. We used the subsample of wholesalers that face no local competition to investigate the main
effect of social buffering on craft focus. We then used the sample with competition to add the moderating
effect of social buffering on the relationship between positional strategies and strategic direction of
wholesaler portfolios.
We have already presented some evidence that that the dynamism in the industry was driven by
establishment deaths, not establishment entries (Figure 1). Out of the 463 establishments, 408 already
existed in the first year of our dataset. This indicates a relative stability in the competitive environment of
distributors. A switch from a competitive to a non-competitive environment happened only in 45
establishment-year spells, while a switch the other way only took place seven times, representing less than 1
percent of the overall sample. This relative taken-for-grantedness of local competitive conditions that we
observe is supported in Table 3.

4. RESULTS
Our main research interest is to model the association between the two measures of positional strategies and
craft focus and to estimate how much of the halting effect in this relationship was due to social buffering.
Table 2 reports the correlations among our main variables of interest. A negative relationship between
social buffering and craft focus is already evident. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that while there is no
19

correlation between the two positional strategy measures, they are both positively associated with craft
focus. This indicates that different establishments opt to use these two distinctiveness strategies, supporting
the observation in the literature that the two generic strategies are rarely pursued together (Porter, 1985).

Table 3 reports odds ratios and robust standard errors from maximum likelihood models with a
logistic function. The models only include covariates that are measured in both the presence and absence of
local competition. The odds ratios in both subsamples are lower than one, which is indicative of a negative
20

association between social buffering and craft focus. Furthermore, we run a probit model (available on
request) to predict the presence or absence of competition and use it to calculate an indicator for sample
selection (inverse Mills’ ratio). When we add the inverse Mills’ ratio to the sample with competition, the
results of the focal relationship remain unchanged. The robustness of the results indicates that our main
relationship of interest is unaffected by the selection bias that the sample selection introduced. Nevertheless,
we add the inverse Mills’ ratio every time we run models on the competition-only sample.
Table 4 reports the main results from our association tests. All maximum likelihood models are
specified with a logistic function, use indicators for state and year fixed-effects, and include the inverse
Mills’ ratio as control. The results shown in column 2 support the hypothesized positive relationship
between the two measures of positional strategy and craft focus (Hypotheses 1 and 2). The effects of both
length and composition distinctiveness are positive, indicating that establishments employing these tactics
are also more likely to have craft producers in their portfolios. Column 3 reveals that the direction of these
strategy measures remains unchanged even after controlling for social buffering. Moreover, this model also
reveals that the main effect of social buffering on craft focus is negative and remains so throughout all
further model specifications with the magnitude unchanged. An additional increase in the average number
of producer contracts included within a portfolio is associated with a four percent decrease in the odds that
the portfolio will include any craft producers.
From the model reported in column 3, we calculate the average standard deviation change for the three
independent variables of interest on the outcome. As we have already reported in Table 1, the average
predicted probability of craft being represented in a portfolio is 15 percent. Holding other variables at their
observed values, a one standard deviation increase in length distinctiveness increases the probability of craft
representation by 6.2 percent. Furthermore, the second competitive strategy variable has the same
magnitude and direction: Composition distinctiveness is associated with an average change of 7.0 percent in
craft representation. We have already reported that social buffering decreases the likelihood of craft focus.
However, this exercise reveals that its effects are of approximately the same magnitude as those of strategy,
21

albeit in the opposite direction: a one standard deviation increase in social buffering decreases the
probability of craft representation by 5.9 percent.
Columns 4 and 5 report the results on the differential effect of social buffering on the relationship
between competitive strategies and craft representation. The main takeaway is that as distributors’
bargaining power dissipates, the available gains from different organizational strategies disappear. These
results stay robust when we use the two positional strategy measures in separate models and in a fully
saturated model as well, supporting Hypothesis 3. Model fit statistics also indicate that our model-building
strategy was sound as the fully saturated model fits the data best.
Visualizations of the differential effect from the fully saturated model also reveal that the strategy
gains dissipate rapidly. In Figure 3, the X axis shows the range of values of social buffering between the
fifth and 95th percentiles. The median is around 66. We can see that if a distributor portfolio is in the 50th
percentile, different positional strategies do not work to predict craft focus anymore; the gap between
different levels of competitive strategy (low, medium, and high) closes. This is the case regardless of which
positional strategy we plot. Taking another look at the differences, it is also apparent that when there is a
low level of social buffering and organizations do not have to manage these constraint-heavy relationships,
the gains accruing from highly distinctive positional strategies are disproportionate: Establishments with
high bargaining power (in the lowest fifth percentile on the social buffering score) and high scores on any
of the positional strategy measures opt to represent craft producers eight or nine times out of 10.

22

The moderating role of length distinctiveness
1

The moderating role of composition distinctiveness
1

Length distinctiveness

Composition distinctiveness

low

low

medium

medium

high

high
.8

Probability of craft focus

Probability of craft focus

.8

.6

.4

.2

.6

.4

.2

0

0
15

45

75

105

15

Social buffering

45

75

105

Social buffering

Figure 3: The moderating role of social buffering

5. ROBUSTNESS CHECKS
One weakness of the associational models presented here is that the relationship between social buffering,
positional strategies, and craft focus might be misspecified if variables affecting those relationships are
omitted. Aiming to provide a less noisy estimate of the moderating effect of social buffering (Bun et al.,
2018), we opt to use linear models with an instrumental variable specification.
We work with the notion that the presence or absence of one of the historical industry-leading
producers (Anheuser-Busch or Miller) affects not only their direct relationship with the distributor but also
indirectly how the distributor sets up the rest of its portfolio. We acknowledge that the problem of
nonrandom decision to become the distributor for either of these producers is valid, but we posit that it is
not a factor in the decision to have craft within the portfolio, as it happened before the craft movement
started and when there was no anticipation of a new market segment. Most establishments were already on
the market by the time our dataset starts, which means that their contracts with these large producers
predate the emergence of the microbrewery movement. This long history implies that the social imbalance
24

that stems from having a historical industry leader in the portfolio—both variables are measured as dummy
variables—affects craft focus solely through the aggregate effect it has on the social pressure of managing
the local portfolio.3 Thus, we argue that our instrument meets the exclusion restriction of an instrumental
variables specification (Wolfolds et al., 2019).
Before presenting the models, we use visual assessment to see whether the instrument reliably pushes
portfolios in one direction only (Appendix Figure 1). These graphs show that establishments that do not
represent an industry-leading producer have lower social buffering scores, while establishments that do
have higher ones. This feature of the data suggests that the monotonicity assumption of the instrumental
variable design is valid.
We also investigate the correlation between the instruments and observable characteristics to assess
the independence assumption. In practice, we regress the instruments on observable characteristics except
for social buffering (available on request). The coefficient estimates are all insignificant, which reinforces
our trust in our instrumental variable. However, the two positional strategy variables—length and
composition distinctiveness—are significant correlates of portfolios that include the leading producers thus
being important control variables and, by our theory, moderators in the analyses to come.
Although our instruments are relevant and fulfill the exclusion restriction, being an Anheuser-Busch
distributor is not randomly assigned, thus we cannot eliminate entirely the worry that unobserved
characteristics may affect the instrument and both the employed positional strategies and craft focus of the
portfolio. Without making strong claims of causality, we therefore use linear models with instrumental
variable specification as a robustness test to explain away some of the endogeneity inherent in the
relationship between social buffering and craft focus, while being aware that our design is not perfect. As
our tests for heteroscedasticity failed, we use heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors. We compare these
estimates to non-instrumented linear models. We use both subsamples stratified by the presence or absence
3

Here we rely on the theoretical case and qualitative evidence provided previously to support the argument that there
is an underlying social element in the economic and contractual pressures of market relationships. This means that a
wholesaler’s economic calculus and understanding of the constraints on governance switching are dependent on the
active management of the social aspect of its supplier relationships.
25

of proximate competitive environment and, other than the two measures for distinctiveness, we use the
same model specification.
The naive linear models (columns 3 and 6) allude to the same results as were presented in Table 4; the
effect of social buffering is negative. When we implement the instrumental variable strategy, our first-stage
estimates show that distributors that represent industry leading producers are more likely to score high on
social buffering (columns 1 and 4), regardless of the competitive environment. Not only can we see strong
first stages, but the general relevance of the instruments is also strongly supported by the Kleibergen–Paap
F-statistic. This value is 597, which exceeds the critical threshold of 19.93 recommended by Stock and
Yogo, and means that the two-stage least squares estimates have no more than 10 percent of the linear
regression bias. The second-stage estimate of the social buffering and craft focus link is negative and its
magnitude does not change compared to the non-instrumented estimates. Overall, the instrumental variables
specification reinforces our previous result and finds a negative effect of social buffering on craft focus.

26

Our main question, however, dealt with the halting effect of social buffering on the relationship
between positional strategies and craft focus. To account for the joint endogeneity of strategy selection and
social buffering, we again use instrumental variables strategy but this time with two endogenous regressors
and their interaction. Accordingly, we estimate three first-stage models. The specification requires us to
raise the number of instruments in the models as well. In the models reported in Appendix B1, we use four
more instruments than shown in Table 5: interaction terms between the two industry-leading brewers’
presence, length distinctiveness, and social buffering.
In Appendix B1, the interaction term is specified with composition distinctiveness. In the first two
columns, the first-stage models show that the relevance assumption holds: Besides the magnitude of the
coefficients, the F-values far exceed the Stock–Yogo cut-offs. The second-stage estimates also highlight
that our results from the correlational analysis have been sound: The sign of the interaction between social
buffering and competitive strategies does not change even after scaling by the appropriate first stage. All in
all, these results further boost our confidence in our main finding that when distributors have limited
bargaining power compared to brewers, this nullifies the advantages of positional strategies.
Besides accounting for two main sources of endogeneity in the effect of social buffering and strategy
selection, we also tried models (available on request) in which we controlled for quality differences
between firms and added firm-level fixed effects to the models reported in Table 4. Our argument was that
accounting for firm-level differences might explain away the associations that we saw at the establishment
level. However, the outcome does not change for several firms over the examined period, which means they
never decide to include craft labels in their portfolios. These firms drop out of the fixed-effects models due
to multicollinearity. Even in these models that use data on a reduced sample size, the sign of the coefficients
remains unchanged. Thus, we conclude that our establishment-level results remain robust to firm-level
differences in quality.
Finally, we consider an alternative mechanism, which could account for the observed negative effect
between social buffering and craft focus (Swamidass et al., 1999; Teece et al., 1994). There is a possibility
28

that the variable we intended to use as proxy for social buffering might just be measuring loss of focus in a
distributor's business strategy (Lamberg et al., 2009). This explanation would still produce the negative
effect; loss of focus would increase the probability of expanding into craft products. However, were this
mechanism in play, and firms were indeed representing craft because loss of focus, we could then expect to
observe subsequent reductions in productivity among these distributors. Additional models indicate that this
is not the case. We find craft focus to have a positive effect on productivity (available on request). In sum, it
is unlikely that our results are generated by loss of focus, providing further support for our proposed
mechanism of social buffering.

6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper our empirical quest was to identify which specific types of wholesalers were distributing
products from an increasingly important niche segment of the beer industry, namely craft beer. Our results
reveal that it is distributors that are able both to leverage positional strategies in their local portfolios and
free themselves from the lock-in associated with their historically beneficial social and market relationships
with the large brewers. Three general arguments come to the fore with this finding, which contribute to the
growing literature on the historical conditions of firm strategy.
First, the finding highlights how important it is to consider the role of strategies alongside prior social
commitments in order to understand which organizations change their portfolio composition (Dyer et al.,
2018; Ghemawat, 1991; Ghemawat et al., 1998). Locked-in distributor portfolios provided a context in
which no strategic positioning could have increased the likelihood of changing the strategic direction of the
portfolio. We are not the first to advocate this type of perspective. Previous studies in the transaction cost
economics literature have suggested the mechanism of governance inseparability to account for the lock-in
effects that come from prior contractual commitments (Argyres et al., 1999; Gilbert et al., 1993; Mayer et
al., 2004). We are, however, speaking specifically to the ecology and organization theory literatures as our
term—social buffering—directs attention to the social aspect underlying market relationships.
29

When there is built-in ecological momentum in an industry, although the contractual base that governs
relationships stays the same, there are shifts in bargaining power that change the strategies available to
transaction partners (Gibbons et al., 2012; Gulati et al., 2011; Gulati et al., 2008). With our proposed term,
we are able to explain why we observe differences in the downstream partner's ability to respond differently
to built-in ecological momentum, even if this firm holds the same type of contract with its upstream
supplier (Mayer et al., 2004). By analyzing what happens to socially biased market relationships when they
are part of different local portfolios, we highlight how the social buffering in lock-in relationships
moderates the feasibility of competitive strategies (Aldrich et al., 2003; Chang et al., 2014).
The second takeaway is that, with local portfolios, it matters how all the brands in a portfolio fit
together, not just whether a specific wholesaler represents one of the leading producers (Jiang et al., 2010).
Our measure of social buffering is a portfolio-level indicator and its value changes based on the extent to
which the producers represented in the portfolio depend on that specific wholesaler. Locating the effect of
prior social commitments at the portfolio level has consequences for the strategic management of business
relationships. Previously, the literature has conceptualized relationship management as a strategic decision
taken solely at the firm level (Kale et al., 2007; Rothaermel et al., 2007). However, our results highlight
that, besides considering the organizational characteristics of the transaction partner, firms should consider
separately how the new relationship may affect the composition of contracts they already have in place, in
each of their establishments. These results contribute to the literature on organizational theory, as they
emphasize the relationship between product variety strategy and structural characteristics of markets
(Barnett et al., 2001; Sorenson, 2000; Zhou et al., 2017).
A managerial implication of our findings is that, by signing a contract with a new producer, firms are
making not just a single strategic decision but a series of portfolio-level strategic decisions. In our empirical
context, this tension is highlighted by a recent event. Different stakeholders in the industry differ in their
answer to the question of who is a craft-friendly distributor (BBD, 02/08/2016). The two main industry
associations representing craft brewers and distributors—the Brewers Association and the National Beer
30

Wholesalers Association—have different guidelines for their Craft Beer Distributor of the Year Award, and
thus recognize different distributors. What our results indicate is that, in their quest to find firms that fulfill
the characteristics they deem valuable, they both have overlooked local portfolio fit as part of the answer.
Finally, the third general point is that, while we exploited the strengths of the observational data in
order to make our results more robust, there are still some limitations to our study. We addressed two issues
of endogeneity that might have driven our associational results on the moderating effect of social buffering
on the relationship between positional strategy and the strategic direction of the portfolio. To do so, we
followed the steps outlined in the econometrics literature (Wooldridge, 2010: 809-811) and first accounted
for firms’ selection into non-competitive versus competitive environments and to different historical
treatments as indicated by the presence or absence of industry-leading producers. We were able to apply
this research design to the distinctive context of the beer distribution industry. Although these specific
conditions of the setting might not necessarily generalize to other industries, we would expect that further
studies, conducted in other industries, could throw more light on the extent to which social buffering has a
negative effect on the link between positional strategies and craft focus. Overall, we used the uniqueness of
this particular empirical context as the pillars of our research design, but kept the mechanism of social
buffering generalizable to other social contexts.
Our research design has nevertheless some weaknesses that should be addressed in further work. For
example, we used a crude measure of portfolio diversity. To address this limitation, taking an ecosystems
perspective seems promising from a theoretical point of view to disentangle the complex dependencies of
firms in different parts of the supply chain. From an empirical point of view, a good way forward might be
to access data on he organizational characteristics of firms represented in the portfolio and to examine the
amount of exchange in specific business-to-business relationships.
Moreover, our current models do not control for demand-side mechanisms such as attributes of beer
drinkers. While we contend that our current controls for productivity correlate closely with population
characteristics, the lack of demand-side factors is potentially worrisome, because omitting these factors
31

might lead us to understate the direct effect of positional strategy but to overstate the effect of social
buffering. However, the omitted variable bias is expected to affect only the magnitude of our findings—the
percentile at which social buffering halts the momentum of positional strategies—without affecting the
general link between social buffering and craft focus.
Overall, this paper demonstrated that there is no one-size-fits-all recommendation to successfully
exploit new ecological opportunities that arise due to changes in connected markets, even if firms have
previously acquired positional advantage. Instead, we showed that there is much value to gain from thinking
about organizations in the context of their prior commitments, which have a distinctive social element.
Considering prior commitments and the social buffering they involve allowed us to investigate the apparent
heterogeneity in the strategic decisions of otherwise similar firms. We focused on an unsettled market
characterized by an industry push from an up-and-coming producer segment to examine the effect of social
buffering in dynamic contexts. These types of research settings allow us to understand the conditions in
which socially embedded and once beneficial market ties to industry leaders become so much of a
hindrance that they halt the firm’s current strategy.

REFERENCES
Aldrich HE, Cliff JE. 2003. The pervasive effects of family on entrepreneurship: Toward a family
embeddedness perspective. Journal of Business Venturing 18(5): 573-596.
Amburgey TL, Miner AS. 1992. Strategic momentum: The effects of repetitive, positional, and contextual
momentum on merger activity. Strategic Management Journal 13(5): 335-348.
Argyres NS, Liebeskind JP. 1999. Contractual commitments, bargaining power, and governance
inseparability: Incorporating history into transaction cost theory. Academy of Management Review 24(1):
49-63.
Argyres NS, Liebeskind JP. 2002. Governance inseparability and the evolution of US biotechnology
industry. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 47(2): 197-219.
Barnett WP, Freeman J. 2001. Too much of a good thing? Product proliferation and organizational failure.
Organization Science 12(5): 539-558.
Bettis RA, Prahalad CK. 1995. The dominant logic: Retrospective and extension. Strategic Management
Journal 16(1): 5-14.
Bigelow LS. 2006. Technology Choice, Transaction Alignment, and Survival: The Impact of SubPopulation Organizational Structure. In Advances in Strategic Management. Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.
32

Bigelow LS, Carroll GR, Seidel M-DL, Tsai L. 1997. Legitimation, geographical scale, and organizational
density: Regional patterns of foundings of American automobile producers, 1885–1981. Social Science
Research 26(4): 377-398.
Bun MJ, Harrison TD. 2018. OLS and IV estimation of regression models including endogenous interaction
terms. Econometric Reviews: 1-14.
Burgelman RA. 2002. Strategy as Vector and the Inertia of Coevolutionary Lock-in. Administrative Science
Quarterly 47(2): 325-357.
Campbell-Hunt C. 2000. What have we learned about generic competitive strategy? A meta-analysis.
Strategic Management Journal 21(2): 127-154.
Carroll GR. 1985. Concentration and specialization: Dynamics of niche width in populations of
organizations. American Journal of Sociology 90(6): 1262-1283.
Carroll GR, Dobrev SD, Swaminathan A. 2002. Organizational processes of resource partitioning. Research
in Organizational Behavior 24: 1-40.
Carroll GR, Swaminathan A. 2000. Why the microbrewery movement? Organizational dynamics of
resource partitioning in the US brewing industry. American Journal of Sociology 106(3): 715-762.
Chang SJ, Wu B. 2014. Institutional barriers and industry dynamics. Strategic Management Journal 35(8):
1103-1123.
Chen EL, Katila R, McDonald R, Eisenhardt KM. 2010. Life in the fast lane: Origins of competitive
interaction in new vs. established markets. Strategic Management Journal 31(13): 1527-1547.
Choi DY, Stack MH. 2005. The all-American beer: a case of inferior standard (taste) prevailing? Business
Horizons 48(1): 79-86.
Cyert RM, March JG. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Deephouse DL. 1999. To be different, or to be the same? It’sa question (and theory) of strategic balance.
Strategic Management Journal 20(2): 147-166.
Dencker JC. 2009. Relative bargaining power, corporate restructuring, and managerial incentives.
Administrative Science Quarterly 54(3): 453-485.
Dobrev SD, Kim T-Y. 2006a. Positioning among organizations in a population: Moves between market
segments and the evolution of industry structure. Administrative Science Quarterly 51(2): 230-261.
Dobrev SD, van Witteloostuijn A, Baum JA. 2006b. Introduction: Ecology versus strategy or strategy and
ecology? In Advances in Strategic Management. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Dowell G. 2006. Product line strategies of new entrants in an established industry: Evidence from the US
bicycle industry. Strategic Management Journal 27(10): 959-979.
Dyer JH, Singh H. 1998. The relational view: Cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational
competitive advantage. Academy of Management Review 23(4): 660-679.
Dyer JH, Singh H, Hesterly WS. 2018. The relational view revisited: A dynamic perspective on value
creation and value capture. Strategic Management Journal 39(12): 3140-3162.
Eggers JP. 2012. All experience is not created equal: learning, adapting, and focusing in product portfolio
management. Strategic Management Journal 33(3): 315-335.
Frake J. 2016. Selling out: The inauthenticity discount in the craft beer industry. Management Science
63(11): 3930-3943.
Ghemawat P. 1991. Commitment: The Dynamics of Strategy. Free Press.
Ghemawat P, Del Sol P. 1998. Commitment versus flexibility? California Management Review 40(4): 2642.
Gibbons R, Henderson R. 2012. Relational contracts and organizational capabilities. Organization Science
23(5): 1350-1364.
Gilbert RJ, Matutes C. 1993. Product line rivalry with brand differentiation. The Journal of Industrial
Economics: 223-240.
Goes JB, Park SH. 1997. Interorganizational links and innovation: The case of hospital services. Academy
of Management Journal 40(3): 673-696.
33

Greve HR. 2013. Microfoundations of management: Behavioral strategies and levels of rationality in
organizational action. Academy of Management Perspectives 27(2): 103-119.
Gulati R, Lavie D, Madhavan RR. 2011. How do networks matter? The performance effects of
interorganizational networks. Research in Organizational Behavior 31: 207-224.
Gulati R, Nickerson JA. 2008. Interorganizational trust, governance choice, and exchange performance.
Organization Science 19(5): 688-708.
Gulati R, Wang LO. 2003. Size of the pie and share of the pie: Implications of network embeddedness and
business relatedness for value creation and value appropriation in joint ventures. In The Governance of
Relations in Markets and Organizations. Buskens V, Raub W, Snijders C (eds.), Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.
Hannan MT. 2005. Ecologies of organizations: Diversity and identity. Journal of Economic Perspectives
19(1): 51-70.
Horowitz I, Horowitz AR. 1965. Firms in a declining market: The brewing case. The Journal of Industrial
Economics: 129-153.
Jansen KJ. 2004. From persistence to pursuit: A longitudinal examination of momentum during the early
stages of strategic change. Organization Science 15(3): 276-294.
Jiang RJ, Tao QT, Santoro MD. 2010. Alliance portfolio diversity and firm performance. Strategic
Management Journal 31(10): 1136-1144.
Kale P, Singh H. 2007. Building firm capabilities through learning: the role of the alliance learning process
in alliance capability and firm-level alliance success. Strategic Management Journal 28(10): 981-1000.
Kay NM. 2000. The growth of firms. In Competence, Governance, and Entrepreneurship: Advances in
Economic Srategy Research. Foss N, Mahnke V (eds.), Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Lamberg JA, Tikkanen H, Nokelainen T, Suur-Inkeroinen H. 2009. Competitive dynamics, strategic
consistency, and organizational survival. Strategic Management Journal 30(1): 45-60.
Lancaster K. 1990. The economics of product variety: A survey. Marketing Science 9(3): 189-206.
Levitt B, March JG. 1988. Organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology 14(1): 319-338.
Lieberman MB, Montgomery DB. 1988. First-mover advantages. Strategic Management Journal 9(S1): 4158.
Lieberman MB, Montgomery DB. 1998. First-mover (dis) advantages: retrospective and link with the
resource-based view. Strategic Management Journal 19(12): 1111-1125.
Martin JL. 2017. Thinking through Methods: a Social Science Primer. University of Chicago Press.
Mathias BD, Huyghe A, Frid CJ, Galloway TL. 2018. An identity perspective on coopetition in the craft
beer industry. Strategic Management Journal 39(12): 3086-3115.
Mayer KJ, Argyres NS. 2004. Learning to contract: Evidence from the personal computer industry.
Organization Science 15(4): 394-410.
Miller D, Friesen PH. 1980. Momentum and Revolution in Organizational Adaptation. Academy of
Management Journal 23(4): 591-614.
Miner AS, Amburgey TL, Stearns TM. 1990. Interorganizational linkages and population dynamics:
Buffering and transformational shields. Administrative Science Quarterly: 689-713.
Negro G, Sorenson O. 2006. The competitive dynamics of vertical integration: Evidence from US motion
picture producers, 1912–1970. In Ecology and Strategy. Baum JA, Dobrev SD, Witteloostuijn AV (eds.),
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Niedrich RW, Swain SD. 2003. The influence of pioneer status and experience order on consumer brand
preference: A mediated-effects model. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 31(4): 468-480.
Pfeffer J, Salancik GR. 1978. THE EXTERNAL CONTROL OF ORGANIZATIONS: A Resource
Dependence Perspective. Harper & Row, Publishers: New York.
Phillips DJ, Zuckerman EW. 2001. Middle-status conformity: Theoretical restatement and empirical
demonstration in two markets. American Journal of Sociology 107(2): 379-429.
Porter ME. 1980. Competitive Strategy. Free Press: New York, NY.
Porter ME. 1985. Competitive Advantage. Free Press.
34

Porter ME. 2008. The five competitive forces that shape strategy. Harvard Business Review 86(1): 78-93.
Prahalad CK, Bettis RA. 1986. The dominant logic: A new linkage between diversity and performance.
Strategic Management Journal 7(6): 485-501.
Rothaermel FT, Hess AM. 2007. Building dynamic capabilities: Innovation driven by individual-, firm-,
and network-level effects. Organization Science 18(6): 898-921.
Singh JV. 2006. Ecology, strategy and organizational change. In Advances in Strategic Management.
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Sorenson O. 2000. Letting the market work for you: An evolutionary perspective on product strategy.
Strategic Management Journal 21(5): 577-592.
Sorenson O. 2003. Interdependence and adaptability: organizational learning and the long–term effect of
integration. Management Science 49(4): 446-463.
Sorenson O, Waguespack DM. 2006. Social structure and exchange: Self-confirming dynamics in
Hollywood. Administrative Science Quarterly 51(4): 560-589.
Stalk G, Evans P, Shulman LE. 1992. Competing on capabilities: The new rules of corporate strategy.
Harvard Business Review 70(2): 57-69.
Stern I, Henderson AD. 2004. Within-business diversification in technology-intensive industries. Strategic
Management Journal 25(5): 487-505.
Swamidass PM, Nair SS, Mistry SI. 1999. The use of a neural factory to investigate the effect of product
line width on manufacturing performance. Management Science 45(11): 1524-1538.
Swaminathan A. 2001. Resource partitioning and the evolution of specialist organizations: The role of
location and identity in the US wine industry. Academy of Management Journal 44(6): 1169-1185.
Sydow J, Schreyögg G, Koch J. 2009. Organizational path dependence: Opening the black box. Academy of
Management Review 34(4): 689-709.
Teece DJ, Rumelt R, Dosi G, Winter S. 1994. Understanding corporate coherence: Theory and evidence.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 23(1): 1-30.
Thompson JD. 1967. Organizations in Action. McGraw-Hill: New York, NY.
Tremblay CH, Tremblay VJ. 2011. Recent economic developments in the import and craft segments of the
US brewing industry. In The Economics of Beer. Swinnen J (ed.), Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Turner SF, Mitchell W, Bettis RA. 2013. Strategic momentum: How experience shapes temporal
consistency of ongoing innovation. Journal of Management 39(7): 1855-1890.
Tushman ML, Romanelli E. 1985. Organizational evolution: A metamorphosis model of convergence and
reorientation. Research in Organizational Behavior.
Uzunca B, Sharapov D, Tee R. 2015. Competition and Cooperation in Ecosystems: How Industry Evolution
and Governance Inseparability Shape Value Capture over Time. Paper presented at DRUID15, Rome.
Wolfolds SE, Siegel J. 2019. Misaccounting for endogeneity: the peril of relying on the Heckman twostep
method without a valid instrument. Strategic Management Journal 40(3): 432-462.
Wooldridge JM. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT press.
Zhou YM, Wan X. 2017. Product variety and vertical integration. Strategic Management Journal 38(5):
1134-1150.

35

