Running head: ICORE

iCoRe: The GDELT Interface for the Advancement of Communication Research

Frederic R. Hopp1
James Schaffer2
Jacob T. Fisher1
Rene Weber1*

1

University of California, Santa Barbara – Department of Communication
Media Neuroscience Lab
2

Sysco Labs, Sysco Corporation

* Please address correspondence to René Weber (renew@comm.ucsb.edu); University of
California Santa Barbara, Department of Communication - Media Neuroscience Lab, Santa
Barbara, CA 93106-4020 (renew@comm.ucsb.edu)

ICORE

1
Abstract
This article introduces the interface for communication research (iCoRe) to access,

explore, and analyze the Global Database of Events, Language and Tone (GDELT; Leetaru &
Schrodt, 2013). GDELT provides a vast, open source, and continuously updated repository of
online news and event metadata collected from tens of thousands of news outlets around the
world. Despite GDELT’s promise for advancing communication science, its massive scale and
complex data structures have hindered efforts of communication scholars aiming to access and
analyze GDELT. We thus developed iCoRe, an easy-to-use web interface that (a) provides fast
access to the data available in GDELT, (b) shapes and processes GDELT for theory-driven
applications within communication research, and (c) enables replicability through transparent
query and analysis protocols. After providing an overview of how GDELT’s data pertain to
addressing communication research questions, we provide a tutorial of utilizing iCoRe across
three theory-driven case studies. We conclude this article with a discussion and outlook of
iCoRe’s future potential for advancing communication research.
Keywords: online news, event data, big data, global database of events language and tone,
computational social science, open science

ICORE

2

iCoRe: The GDELT Interface for the Advancement of Communication Research
The study of news has enjoyed a long and fruitful history within communication
scholarship. Many of the most notable theories to emerge from communication research within
the last half century have been largely based on the study of news and journalism. These include
framing (Entman, 1993; Scheufele, 1999), agenda-setting (McCombs & Shaw, 1972; McCombs,
2005), the spiral of silence (Noelle-Neumann, 1974), and many others. The advent of online
journalism has brought with it an explosion in the amount of data that are available to
communication scholars. At the same time, the increasing quantity and ephemerality of news
data creates challenges for researchers using sampling methods and analysis techniques
developed for use with more traditional media sources (Hester & Dougall, 2007; Hopkins &
King, 2010; Grimmer & Stewart, 2013). For this reason, communication scholars are
increasingly turning to large scale, open source datasets to assist in filtering, document selection,
and analysis of news data (M. Weber, 2018).
The increasing size and diversity of these news datasets presents numerous challenges
and opportunities for computational communication research (CCR; Van Atteveldt & Peng
2018). As communication scholars navigate through this novel data landscape, they are
frequently required to determine the value of a particular dataset for advancing communication
research. This endeavor is often compromised by several factors: (a) lack of documentation
regarding how data in the dataset are collected or stored (b) the presence of complex,
unprocessed data structures and noise, and (c) lack of access to or knowledge of the tools that are
needed to ingest, parse, and organize the data for scientific work. Furthermore, method sections
describing how particular large-scale datasets were acquired, preprocessed, and analyzed are

ICORE

3

frequently not comprehensive enough to allow for scientific replication (Peng, 2011). Without
clearer documentation, open-access interfaces, and collaborative research efforts, CCR is at risk
to be constrained to a few privileged researchers (Huberman, 2012) and may be subject to
increased replicability problems in the future (Wallach, 2016).
With these issues in mind, we introduce the Global Database of Events, Language, and
Tone (GDELT; Leetaru & Schrodt, 2013) in conjunction with our newly developed GDELT
interface for Communication Research (iCoRe). GDELT is an open-source, large-scale
repository of global online news and events metadata collected from diverse media formats and
updated in near real-time. GDELT has sparked considerable interest within cognate social
science disciplines, for example, to forecast and understand the latent structure of political unrest
and violence in East Asia (Qiao et al., 2017) and the Middle East (Smith, Smith, Legg & Francis,
2017). Despite its clear utility for addressing these critical questions, GDELT has been used by
only a handful of communication scholars for conducting theory-driven research. These studies
are primarily aimed at harnessing GDELT as a data source to aid the selection and analysis of
news articles for subsequent human annotation (R. Weber. et al., 2018, study 6). Furthermore,
GDELT has proven useful for advancing research on agenda-setting (Guo & Vargo, 2017; Vargo
& Guo, 2017) and fake-news (Guo & Vargo, 2018; Vargo, Guo, & Amazeen, 2018).
We argue that GDELT’s limited use within communication research can at least partially
be attributed to several pitfalls common to many large-scale datasets. These shortcomings have
increasingly been voiced within the broader computational social science literature (e.g., boyd &
Crawford, 2012; Lazer et al., 2009; Van Atteveldt & Peng 2018; Wallach, 2016): First, although
GDELT’s datasets are de facto “open-access,” the sheer size, complex structure, and opaque
documentation of these datasets pose significant challenges to communication researchers trying

ICORE

4

to query, parse, and explore GDELT. Because of this, GDELT is a clear case in which
availability of data does not assure accessibility. For example, parsing GDELT’s raw,
unstructured Global Content Analysis Measures (GCAM) requires significant amounts of time,
advanced computational programming and pattern matching skills, along with the technical
knowledge of how to store and wrangle these massive amounts of data. Thus, an interface is
required in order to grant communication researchers without a strong computational background
access to GDELT, thereby flattening the hierarchy around “who can read the numbers” in large
datasets (boyd & Crawford, 2012).
Second, scripts and algorithms utilized to query and parse GDELT have to this point
largely remained closed “black boxes” solely available and interpretable to the user or research
group that develops these tools. This hinders endeavors to comprehend and replicate studies that
have drawn on GDELT’s datasets. Hence, making GDELT accessible to communication
scholarship necessitates transparent guidelines on how its data are being accessed and analyzed,
replacing opaque scripts and algorithms with replicable, comprehensive data-analytic pipelines
(Trilling & Jonkman, 2018).
Third, similar to other large-scale datasets, GDELT was not initially developed and
tailored with the purpose of advancing communication scholarship, but rather to serve as a
“passive crowdsourcing” platform (Leetaru, 2011) to monitor global societal changes. Thus, data
processing pipelines are needed to shape GDELT’s datasets in a manner that meets the
requirements of communication scholars aiming to address theory-driven research questions. In
fact, choosing the operations that are employed in a preprocessing pipeline for large-scale web
archives is often a critical research question in its own right, with its own theoretical
considerations (M. Weber, 2018). In the same vein, an increasing number of large-scale news

ICORE

5

and event datasets have recently become available. Prominent platforms include MediaCloud
(https://mediacloud.org/), Crimson Hexagon (https://www.crimsonhexagon.com/), Phoenix
(http://eventdata.utdallas.edu/), and the Integrated Crisis Early Warning System (ICEWS; https://
www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/research-labs/advanced-technology-labs/
icews.html). While an extensive review of these datasets is beyond the confines of this paper, we
argue that GDELT has several advantages over these datasets. First, GDELT enables users to
download the automatically derived news article metadata (see Global Knowledge Graph below)
for conducting independent, research-driven analyses. In contrast, other platforms (e.g.,
MediaCloud) only provide the output of a few available analyses without granting access to the
underlying news data. Second, GDELT’s unprecedented Global Content Analysis Measurement
(GCAM) system provides the output of over 40 automatic content analytic measures. To the best
of our knowledge, no other available news dataset administers such an extensive content
analytical data stream. Third, GDELT processes global online news sources daily at 15-minute
intervals and thus offers an unparalleled spatiotemporal resolution. Fourth, GDELT provides
access to both news and event metadata. While other platforms (e.g., ICEWS, Phoenix) rely on
the same Conflict and Mediation Event Observations codebook (CAMEO; Gerner, Schrodt,
Yilmaz, & Abu-Jabr, 2002) to extract events from news records, GDELT is unprecedented in
providing both news and event metadata.
Despite these advantages that GDELT offers, without a research agenda that adopts a
strong synergy between method and theory (Greenwald, 2012), granting mere accessibility to
GDELT risks simply stacking up the “tool pile” that showcases data-mining capabilities while
neglecting the advancement of knowledge for communication research (see “better science
versus better engineering”; Lin, 2015).

ICORE

6
In order to leverage the strengths of GDELT while taking measures to avoid these

pitfalls, we have developed the GDELT interface for Communication Research (iCoRe). iCoRe
is an easy-to-use web interface specifically tailored to diminish the aforementioned challenges of
harnessing GDELT for communication research. In this manuscript, we describe three
advantages of iCoRe that emphasize its utility for communication research. First, iCoRe makes
GDELT’s data accessible to scholars independent of their computational skills or technical
knowledge. Second, iCoRe encourages the replication of analyses conducted using the system by
providing transparent, standardized query and analysis protocols. Third, iCoRe is designed from
a theory-driven perspective to allow the advancement of pressing communication research
questions.
In the following sections, we accomplish three primary goals. First, we provide an
overview of GDELT’s datasets as they pertain to addressing communication research questions.
Second, we introduce iCoRe and provide usage guidelines. Finally, we present three theorydriven case studies that draw on iCoRe. These case studies serve to illustrate the capability of
iCoRe for addressing pertinent communication questions. We conclude with a discussion of
iCoRe’s future potential to advance communication research by bridging large-scale, macrolevel analyses and controlled, micro-level studies.

GDELT: An Introduction for Communication Researchers
The Global Database of Events, Language, and Tone (GDELT; Leetaru & Schrodt, 2013)
arose out of a collaborative project between Google Jigsaw and the Center for Social Complexity
at George Mason University. GDELT monitors tens of thousands of news websites around the
globe and automatically extracts entities, themes, quotes, sentiment, images, and events present

ICORE

7

in articles posted on these sites. Article metadata is archived at 15-minute time intervals 24 hours
a day. In addition to analyzing text content from monitored sites, GDELT transcribes video and
audio broadcasts from monitored sites, and translates them from 65 different languages into
English text. Further, the database currently contains over a quarter of a billion unique event
references and adds over three quarters of a trillion sentiment assessments, 1.5 billion location
references, and 70 billion images on a yearly basis, made possible by the overall global increase
in the capacity to store, communicate, and compute information (Hilbert & López, 2011).
GDELT was designed to serve as a “passive crowdsourcing” platform (Leetaru, 2011),
providing a dashboard that keeps a pulse on global events and news reporting by assessing
linkages between communication processes and societal-scale physical behavior. GDELT’s main
database can be divided into three interrelated sub-datasets: the Global Knowledge Graph
(GKG), Events, and Special Collections. We now provide an overview of each dataset and
illustrate how their components may be harnessed to address communication relevant questions.
The Global Knowledge Graph
GDELT’s Global Knowledge Graph (GKG) serves as the main database for storing
metadata extracted from print, broadcast, and news web portals. Once a news report appears
online, GDELT scrapes and computationally analyzes its content by relying on various image
recognition and natural language processing techniques. On each obtained textual news report,
GDELT employs more than 40 content-analytic dictionaries to extract over 2,230 identified
emotions, topics, themes, and named entities. These dictionary-based content analysis pipelines
draw on a preselected list of keywords (i.e., the dictionary) that are assumed to reflect a construct
of interest. The respective goal of these dictionaries is to measure “the rate at which keywords
appear in a text to classify a document into categories or to measure the extent to which

ICORE

8

documents belong to particular categories” (Grimmer & Stewart, 2013, p. 274). In the GCAM
string of the GKG, each dictionary and its subcategories is assigned a variable. In turn, these
variables indicate how frequently certain keywords pertaining to certain categories appeared in a
news document.
Among the currently implemented dictionaries are the popular Linguistic Inquiry and
Wordcount (LIWC; Pennebaker, Francis, & Booth, 2001), the Moral Foundations Dictionary
(MFD, Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009), Hogenraad’s (2003) Motive Dictionary, and numerous
sentiment analysis libraries such as SentiWordNet 3.0 (Baccianella, Esuli, & Sebastiani, 2010)
and VADER (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014). Yet, it must be emphasized that the validity of these
GCAM measures is bound to the validity of the respective dictionaries. Thus, users drawing on a
certain dictionary that is implemented in the GCAM string should critically evaluate the validity
of this dictionary based on previous research. We recommend that users consider the following
factors in their evaluation: First, were the words for the creation of the dictionary drawn from
news texts or other, structurally different media formats? Second, was the dictionary validated
against reliable human codings and across media formats? Third, does the dictionary extract
enough signal to allow statistically powerful analyses? In a similar vein, communication
researchers may be interested in drawing on GDELT’s theme dictionaries (Leetaru, 2013) to
identify news articles that discuss certain topics. Currently, GDELT monitors the presence of
284 topics by applying various pattern matching techniques. For example, news articles
attributed the PROTEST theme contain mentions of protesting, demonstrating, rioting, striking,
activists, agitators, and so forth. Furthermore, GDELT has started to assign topics certain metatags to allow a higher level of aggregation of similar topic areas. For instance,
HEALTH_PANDEMIC, HEALTH_SEXTRANSDISEASE, and HEALTH_VACCINATION all

ICORE

9

refer to discussion of human health, albeit from various perspectives. A researcher interested in
analyzing general trends in the discussion of health topics can thus rely on these meta-tags as
means to aggregate semantically similar topics.
After a news report has fully been processed and analyzed, its extracted content metadata
is stored in a distinct GKG record, along with the article’s associated news outlet, time of
publication, and Uniform Resource Locator (URL). Notably, GDELT does not provide the full
text of the article due to copyright restrictions. This limitation is common across many other
large scale news databases (e.g., MediaCloud). Computational communication scholars can often
overcome this limitation by creating web scrapers that follow the URL associated with each
individual GKG record (see R. Weber et al., 2018, study 6).
The GKG offers numerous applications for conducting theory-driven and/or data-driven
communication research. For communication scholars interested in framing, the dictionary-based
GCAM metrics open several avenues to assess news framing. According to Entman’s (1993)
conceptualization, news frames can be identified via “the presence or absence of certain
keywords” (p. 52). Hence, the dictionary-based analyses pipelines included in the GCAM allow
to detect keywords that signal the presence of a certain frame. For example, researchers have
examined news framing by relying on LIWC and the MFD; dictionaries that are implemented in
the GCAM. Fulgoni and colleagues (2016), for instance, have relied on the MFD to measure
partisan differences in moral news framing, whereas Sagi and Dehghani (2014) utilized the MFD
to assess generic moral frames surrounding the 9/11 terror attacks and issue specific moral news
frames surrounding abortion debates. Further, such fine-grained analyses on the moral framing of
a discussed topic may reveal meaningful partisan differences in news coverage that drive present
polarization debates (Boxell, Gentzkow, & Shapiro, 2017). Lastly, the framing of certain topics

ICORE

10

(e.g., terror, climate change, democracy, science, etc.) can be assessed by relating the GCAM
content metrics to topics identified via GDELT’s theme dictionaries.
Beyond these wordcount based dictionary approaches, latent framing and agenda-setting
aspects may also be uncovered through the use of network-analytical approaches on GCAM data.
For example, constructing networks that link co-occurring entities and topics across news
articles and outlets has proven useful for advancing intermedia agenda-setting research (Guo &
Vargo, 2017; Vargo & Guo, 2017). Moreover, the integration of identified fake news websites
within the GKG stream (Guo & Vargo, 2018; Vargo, Guo, & Amazeen, 2018) may prove useful
to better understand and counter misinformation as it is constructed and spread.
GKG metadata may also have merit in manual content-analytic paradigms. As R. Weber
and colleagues (2018) have demonstrated, the GKG can be utilized to preselect URLs of news
articles based on certain criteria of interest, such as date of publication, source, topic, or average
article length. After scraping the respective text of these URLs, R. Weber and colleagues (2018)
employed a crowd-sourced content analysis procedure to extract the fine-grained, latent moral
information represented in these articles, leading to the development of improved moral
foundations dictionaries (Hopp, Cornell, Fisher, Huskey, & R. Weber, 2018). In a similar vein,
Fisher, Cornell, Hopp, and R. Weber (2018) have relied on the GKG to preselect and scrape
articles that were subsequently subjected to a semantic network analysis, uncovering latent
partisan and entity framing in large news corpora.
Lastly, the GKG presents a rare opportunity to bridge macro (i.e., large-scale, behavioral
data) and micro (i.e., experimental/self-report data) paradigms. Scholars interested in the
perception of climate change frames (Nisbet, 2009), for example, may obtain articles discussing
the issue from various sources and framing perspectives. Subsequently, participants in an

ICORE

11

experiment could be exposed to these preselected articles. In turn, variance in cognitive
processing or behavioral intentions may be explained via GKG’s automatically derived content
features, such as keywords pertaining to fear appeals. Likewise, the GKG presents a fruitful
resource to further advance the science of news sharing (Milkman & Berger, 2014; Scholz et al.,
2017). While GDELT does currently not provide the share counts of a given GKG record, freelyavailable application programming interfaces (APIs) such as sharedcount.com can be utilized to
obtain social media sharing counts of a certain URL. Combined with the GKG’s article metadata,
sharing counts can be linked to topics and keywords of interest on a cross-national scale.
Events
The main purpose of GDELT’s EVENT database is to store geopolitical events that are
recorded in news articles. To computationally extract a mentioned event from a news report,
GDELT relies on the CAMEO codebook (Gerner, et al., 2002). CAMEO consists of manually
predefined and extensively validated verb phrases to detect up to twenty different types of event
occurrences concerned with international and domestic conflict, ranging from diplomatic event
categories (e.g., "APPEAL" , or "AGREE") to conflict categories (e.g., "REDUCE
RELATIONS", or "USE CONVENTIONAL FORCE"). Each event type is then attributed one of
the twenty EventRootCodes that specify its type, as well as a more detailed EventCode that
specify the event type in a more fine-grained fashion. For example, EventRootCode 14 reflects
any PROTEST event, whereas EventRootCode 1422 reflects a hunger strike for policy change.
Finally, all event types are ultimately organized under four primary classifications: Verbal
Cooperation, Material Cooperation, Verbal Conflict, and Material Conflict. This Quadclass
variable supports the analysis of event types at the highest level of aggregation and is less prone

ICORE

12

to GDELT’s automated coding errors in the underlying events data (Wang et al., 2016), due to
the higher levels of aggregation in mapping event types to symbols.
Beyond assessing the event type, CAMEO also extracts the two main actors that
characterize an event. Accordingly, CAMEO assesses actions where actor 1 performs a
respective action (the event type) on actor 2. Hence, additional information about these actors is
provided—for example, whether the actors belong to a certain country, ethnic/religious group, or
are part of a governmental, military, or educational institution. Furthermore, GDELT provides
the geographical location of the actors and the event by recording the location information
closest to the point in the event description that contains the actual statement of action.
Geographic information is provided in various resolutions, spanning country, administrative
region, city, and latitude-longitude coordinates.
Moreover, each event type is assigned a value on the Goldstein index (Goldstein, 1992),
which assesses the conflictive-cooperative nature of the event on a scale from -10 (very
conflictive) to +10 (very cooperative). In addition, during the first 15 minutes after an event has
been recorded for the first time, GDELT provides the total number of mentions of this event
across all source documents (NumMentions), the total number of information sources (e.g., news
outlets) containing one or more mentions of this event (NumSources), the total number of source
documents containing one or more mentions of this event (NumArticles), and the average
sentiment of all documents containing one or more mentions of this event (AvgTone) on a scale
from -100 (extremely negative) to +100 (extremely positive). The average sentiment of an event
reflects the average “tone” of all documents containing one or more mentions of this event
during the 15 minute update in which it was first seen.

ICORE

13
While GDELT’s event metadata–to the best of our knowledge–has not yet been explored

with a CCR lens, we argue that it provides various interesting avenues to examine
communication-relevant questions. First, we see merit in advancing traditional news value theory
(see Eilders, 2006 for an overview) from novel methodological perspectives utilizing GDELT’s
event data. For example, drawing on classical typologies of news factors (e.g., geographical
distance, conflict, human interest, positivity and negativity, etc.), one could examine the
“shareworthiness” (Trilling, Tolochko, & Burscher, 2017) of news records mentioning event
types that vary in the degree to which they pertain to these news factors. Furthermore, GDELT’s
NumSources, NumArticles, and AvgTone variables may prove useful in linking an event’s news
factor to the density and significance of coverage it receives within its first minutes of
occurrence.
Second, communication scholars interested in issue-specific news framing, i.e., frames
surrounding the depiction of certain event types, may find a worthwhile research avenue in
combining GDELT’s automatically assessed event types with underlying automatically extracted
content features of articles that discuss these events. For example, one could investigate how
(densely) a terror attack in France is subsequently covered by European, Middle-Eastern, EastAsian, or North American news outlets. Third, combining the news frames provided by the GKG
with event records made available through the EVENT table may yield novel insights into the
temporal dynamics in which events drive certain types of news frames and vice versa, which
types of news frames become motivationally relevant and contribute to the development of novel
events, culminating in dynamic-transactional event-news careers (Früh & Schönbach, 1982).

ICORE

14

Special Collections
GDELT applies its automated GKG content-analytical pipeline on a selection of “special
collections” spanning American television, academic literature discussing the Middle East and
Africa, human rights reports, and historical American books. While the primary focus of this
article is on GDELT’s GKG and EVENT data, we envision that these special collections provide
additional, unexplored research outlets for computational communication scholarship. For
instance, the dataset on human rights reports may provide a worthwhile archive for
communication researchers interested in the framing and spatio-temporal development of human
rights issues (e.g., Barel, Hopp, & Weber, 2018). Likewise, the American television repository
may prove useful to uncover latent differences in news coverage between print and broadcasting.
Furthermore, broadcasting coverage may be linked to geopolitical events and complemented
with audience ratings to explore the impact of outstanding events on television audience ratings
(R. Weber, 1993).

The GDELT Interface for Communication Research (iCoRe)
In light of GDELT’s massive datasets, GDELT’s data has been integrated into Google
BigQuery, a web service designed to store and provide access to large-scale datasets through
standard SQL queries. Accordingly, the majority of studies accessing GDELT have utilized
Google BigQuery (e.g., Qiao et al., 2017) or developed independent scripts that download and
parse the raw GDELT data in comma-separated value (CSV) format to address a specific
research question (e.g., Guo & Vargo, 2017; R. Weber et al., 2018). While Google BigQuery
provides unprecedented querying speed, it is a fee-based service that can quickly become
expensive with increasingly data-heavy operations. Likewise, relying on independently

ICORE

15

developed scripts necessitates knowledge and details about their execution and the specific
purpose, preprocessing, and analysis steps undertaken to obtain the data from GDELT. In
addition, GDELT has started to provide their own APIs for data analysis. Yet, these APIs are
unwieldy, largely exploratory in nature, and restricted to a limited number of returned data
points. In addition, instead of being tailored to specific research questions, they serve as a “proof
of principle” demonstrating that the data can be accessed. Hence, none of the above approaches
appear helpful to (a) spur collaboration among experienced and novice computational
communication researchers (b) standardize querying, preprocessing, and analysis pipelines that
are increasingly becoming common practice in other data-heavy fields and (c) fulfill guidelines
for conducting reproducible, open-science communication scholarship (e.g., scalability, open
source, adaptability, and easy-to-use interfaces; Trilling & Jonkman, 2018).
With these issues in mind, we set out to develop the GDELT interface for
Communication Research (iCoRe; http://icore.medianeuroscience.org/), a freely-available, webbased API that mitigates the aforementioned shortcomings of GDELT by providing the
following features: First, iCoRe provides fast, scalable, and open-source access to an unlimited
number of GKG and EVENT records contained in GDELT. In contrast, GDELT’s own API
restricts the number of rows allowed to be indexed at any given time, limiting the scale of
computational analyses. Second, iCoRe allows a user to filter data queries to only include
content-analytic measures of interest, parsing GDELT’s complex GCAM string and returning
these values in a preprocessed, human-readable format. Third, iCoRe allows users to select news
articles from specific, carefully pre-selected news sources. This enables fast comparisons across
relevant news sources, and more efficient query protocols. In addition, this pre-selection
substantially improves data quality by excluding non-news websites (such as blogs or classified

ICORE

16

advertisements), which are also monitored by GDELT, but usually provide uninteresting
information for communication scholars. Fourth, iCoRe is actively under ongoing development
by communication researchers. The platform will very soon contain query protocols that allow a
combined retrieval of GKG and EVENT records for direct insights into the framing of events as
well as for examining news-event careers. Finally, iCoRe is unique in that its technical backend,
its integrated analyses, and usage guidelines are well documented, facilitating collaboration and
future extension of the platform.
Technical Backend Overview
Given the large amount of unstructured data contained within GDELT, traditional
relational database management systems (RDBMSs; e.g., PostgreSQL) quickly reach their
computational limits when it comes to data ingest and scalability across spatiotemporal datasets
(Fox et al., 2013). Hence, researchers and corporate institutions are increasingly turning to
distributed databases in which data is stored across a cluster consisting of multiple virtual
machines (for an overview, see Moniruzzaman & Hossain, 2013). The data is usually distributed
and partitioned according to shared properties (e.g., time, location, etc.), resulting in a faster
execution of query protocols. These distributed databases necessitate larger storage capacities as
data is being duplicated in the process, but they simultaneously ensure higher throughput and
availability as the chances of having a single point of failure (SPF; e.g., downtime due to a single
machine failure) are mitigated.
Accordingly, we built iCoRe on a distributed database (Apache Cassandra) across a
virtual cluster currently consisting of ten nodes. iCoRe contains multiple tables to store the
GDELT data according to different partition keys to speed up queries that span, for example,
certain locations or time periods. Queries are driven by the DataStax Cassandra connector, with a

ICORE

17

lightweight front end written in Java and hosted in Apache Tomcat. Cassandra queries are
enhanced by Apache Spark support, which allows for in-memory distributed queries, such as
filters and joins. Each query consists of an AJAX HTTP request, where the endpoint specifies
the data source and the URL query string specifies the filters or constraints on the data. Users are
able to acquire data in CSV or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) formats depending on need.
Moreover, iCoRe is delivered by a lightweight HTML5 user-interface. This interface offers
documentation on how to query, interpret, and analyze data and provides an intuitive, easy-to-use
query interface. Both the interface and the complete API specification are available at
http://icore.medianeuroscience.org/. Interested readers can gain further insights into the technical
backend of iCoRe via the dedicated, open-source Github repository1.
Data Ingest and Preprocessing
Instead of querying all of the thousand sources monitored by GDELT, iCoRe is currently
drawing on a specifically constructed and extendable whitelist of 111 international, major news
outlets.2 This whitelist serves as a first attempt to increase the quality of data obtained via iCoRe.
By pre-selecting major news sources and excluding rather insignificant sources for large-scale
communication research (i.e., sources with a small audience), iCoRe maintains a focus on news
reporting, thereby excluding non-news websites (such as blogs or classified advertisements) that
are also monitored by GDELT. In addition, for each source, iCoRe’s whitelist provides its
country of origin, whether it is state-run or not, and its political orientation (conservative,
centrist, liberal) - information that GDELT does not provide. This information was gathered with
the help of research assistants who collected information on a news outlet through the source’s
website and online encyclopedias. iCoRe in turn allows the selection of articles from any of the
1 https://github.com/medianeuroscience/icore
2 See source_whitelist in the Open Science Framework repository of this project: https://osf.io/24n6a/

ICORE

18

111 whitelisted sources, along with the stored metadata of a given news outlet. Yet, we
emphasize that this whitelist serves as a first data quality filter and will continuously be extended
based on communication researchers’ needs. For example, iCoRe’s current whitelist only
considers news outlets in the English language or foreign-language outlets that feature an
English online version. Yet, in the near future this whitelist will be extended to include nonEnglish news sources using GDELT’s various translation capabilities.
Applying the aforementioned filters, iCoRe utilizes a Python script that automatically
retrieves and parses GDELT’s GKG and EVENT data at 30-minute intervals. Since the GKG
GCAM string contains over 2,230 variables with varying length from document to document, we
adopted various automated and manual pattern matching strategies to parse and preprocess this
large and complex string. Currently, among other variables, iCoRe provides the GCAM output of
all categories included in LIWC (Pennebaker et al., 2001), the MFD (Graham et al., 2009),
Hogenraad’s Motive Dictionary (2003), and GDELT’s theme dictionaries. Importantly, while
GDELT’s EVENTS table dates back to 1979, the GKG was introduced in February 2015. Hence,
iCoRe currently includes only events and GKG records that were mentioned/published after
January 1st, 2015.

Computational Communication Research with iCoRe: Three Case Studies
We present three distinct, theory-driven use cases that highlight how iCoRe can be
harnessed to address communication research questions from various theoretical and data-driven
perspectives. In the first case study, we draw on a classical framing paradigm to demonstrate
how iCoRe can be utilized to conduct a macro-level analysis of how U.S. based news sources
differ in their framing of climate change and how the obtained article metadata can be harnessed

ICORE

19

to explore the large-scale, behavioral outcomes of climate change framing. In the second study,
we demonstrate iCoRe’s potential utility within news value and agenda-setting theory, exploring
how countries differ in their news coverage patterns following the death of journalist Jamal
Khashoggi, an event that attracted global media attention in October and November of 2018. The
third case study taps into the largely unexplored dynamic-transactional nature of news-event
careers by highlighting how densities of news coverage following certain events ebb and flow in
the United States.3
First Case Study: Framing Climate Change
In recent years, public and scientific interest in framing messages that relate to climate
change has increased (Feinberg & Willer, 2013; 2015; Markowitz & Shariff, 2012; Nisbet,
2009). Scholars from communication and social psychology have started to examine how
messages can be tailored to maximize the persuasive appeal of environmental messages among
certain audiences. One branch of this scholarship investigates how individuals’ moral
sensibilities play a central role in shaping the effectiveness of environmental messages
(Markowitz & Shariff, 2012). For instance, when focusing on the political orientation of
audiences, liberals tend to place greater value on individualizing moral values that are concerned
with care and fairness, whereas conservatives are more likely to emphasize binding moral values
that emphasize loyalty, authority, and purity (Graham et al., 2009).
In light of these differences, Feinberg and Willer (2013; 2015) demonstrated that liberals
are more receptive to environmental messages that conform more strongly to individualizing
moral values (e.g., “an animal species will go distinct if global temperature levels keep rising”).
In contrast, conservatives were more receptive to messages that emphasize the binding moral
3 All of the code, queries, data, and analyses for the following case studies can be viewed and executed interactively
on the Open Science Framework repository for this project. https://osf.io/24n6a/

ICORE

20

values over individualizing moral values (e.g., “protecting the soil of one’s nation from
damage”). In addition, communication research has demonstrated that such morality subcultures
not only exist among members of certain political camps, but also among producers (Bowman,
Lewis, & Tamborini, 2014) and respective audiences (Mastro, Enriquez, & Bowman, 2012) of
media content.
With these findings in mind, we use iCoRe to provide a brief example of how liberal
versus conservative newspaper sources (a) differ in their climate change framing, specifically
with regard to moral attitudes and (b) how these differences become motivationally relevant
when predicting share counts of climate change articles among liberal and conservative
audiences. To address these questions, we used iCoRe to pull articles and their URLs from two
liberal-leaning news sources (The Huffington Post and The New York Times) and two
conservative-leaning news sources (Breitbart and Fox News).4 Further, we only considered
articles that were published in 2017 and that contained the “ENV_CLIMATECHANGE” topic as
proxy whether an article discusses climate change. This resulted in a total of 3,043 articles (see
Figure 1, for a comparison of article counts across sources).
-----------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE
-----------------------------------To explore differences in climate change framing between sources, we used iCoRe to pull
the content-analytic output from the MFD and LIWC stored in the GCAM string of the GKG.
The MFD contains preselected wordlists that aim to reflect the five moral foundations as
identified by Moral Foundations Theory (MFT, Graham et al., 2009) such as notions of care and
fairness. Each moral foundation in the MFD is further split into “virtue” and “vice” categories,
4 To replicate these queries, all query endpoints are available at https://osf.io/47b5m/

ICORE

21

with respective word lists that aim to capture whether a foundation has been adhered to or
violated. The content-analytic output of the MFD reflects word counts showing how often a
given concept (e.g., “care” in the MFD) appeared in form of a single word in a document.
Likewise, the LIWC dictionary contains wordlists pertaining to a larger, more general array of
concepts (see http://liwc.wpengine.com/compare-dictionaries/), such as perceptual (e.g., seeing,
hearing, and feeling), cognitive (e.g., insight, cause, certainty), and biological (e.g., body, health/
disease, sexuality) processes. We also included the total article length of each news document in
our query and divided the MFD and LIWC wordcounts by the total number of words per article
to control for the influence of variations in article length across sources. Figure 2 provides an
interpretation of the returned CSV data.
-----------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE
-----------------------------------As a first analysis, we contrasted LIWC’s Biology (e.g., words pertaining to health,
illness, and the human body) and Personal Concerns (e.g., words pertaining to money, religion,
or death) categories across all four sources (see Figure 3). While all sources appear to frame
climate change more strongly in biological terms, liberal sources show slightly higher means
than conservative sources in the Biology category. Likewise, conservative sources stress the
Personal Interest slightly more strongly than liberal sources, suggesting that conservative news
sources tend to frame climate change in regard to its relevance to the well-being of individuals
and families whereas liberal outlets tend to focus more on the effects of climate change on
humans and non-human organisms on a broader scale.
-----------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE
------------------------------------

ICORE

22
Next, to address differences in moral framing, we contrasted the ten moral foundation

categories contained within the MFD across sources (see Figure 4). Interestingly, despite the
hypothesized differences in moral message framing for liberal versus conservative audiences, all
sources appear to adopt a similar framing strategy when discussing climate change: Words
pertaining to loyalty, followed by authority, are most prevalent across all news sources
independent of their political leaning. In addition, there seems to be no clear pattern between
individualizing and binding moral foundations when comparing liberal and conservative sources
as all included news sources score higher on the binding foundations than the individualizing
foundations. This finding is unexpected, since results by Feinberg and Willer (2013; 2015)
suggest that newspaper outlets would be more successful in communicating issues of climate
change towards their audiences when considering the underlying moral cognitive structures of
message receivers.
-----------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE
----------------------------------Finally, to test whether news documents of liberal (conservative) outlets that emphasize
the individualizing (binding) moral foundations are of greater behavioral relevance to their
respective audiences, we entered the URLs of the obtained GKG records into the SharedCount (
https://www.sharedcount.com/ ) API to obtain the number of times a given URL has been shared
on Facebook. After obtaining the share counts for each article, we grouped the data according to
the liberal and conservative news outlets. We excluded articles that were shared less than one
time or more than 1000 times and randomly selected 500 articles from each of the two (i.e.,
liberal and conservative) news source groups. Next, we estimated two negative binomial

ICORE

23

regressions to predict the number of times each article was shared within audiences of liberal and
conservative news outlets (see Table 1).
-----------------------------------INSERT TABLE 1 HERE
----------------------------------When comparing the model fit between liberal and conservative sources, the conservative
news source model indicates a slightly better fit, suggesting that moral values are of stronger
motivational relevance among audiences of conservative outlets than liberal news outlets. This
partially supports earlier research suggesting that conservatives tend to place greater emphasis on
all moral foundations compared to liberals (Graham et al., 2009), which would explain the
greater motivational relevance of moral values for news article sharing among conservative
audiences. Furthermore, there are interesting commonalities and differences among the direction
of coefficients when predicting share counts: Whereas violations of the purity and authority
foundation seem to decrease share counts, adherences to the purity and authority foundation
appear to increase share counts across political camps. Likewise, climate change articles that
highlight unfairness and human harm appear to be positively related to share counts. Yet,
considering the rather small sample size of 500 articles per group, only the Subversion category
was a statistically significant predictor for share counts among liberal audiences, and the Loyalty
and Degradation categories the only significant predictors among conservative outlets. Hence,
we remain cautious with the interpretation of the aforementioned findings and invite
communication researchers to utilize iCoRe for obtaining a broader range of articles, spanning
multiple years and a greater, more heterogeneous selection of news outlets.
Drawing a short conclusion, the aim of the first case study was to demonstrate iCoRe’s
utility for communication researchers interested in exploring macro-level news framing

ICORE

24

differences with regard to a certain topic of public interest. By relying on GCAM’s contentanalytic outputs such as LIWC and the MFD, we showed how differences in message framing
across news sources can be crystallized. Furthermore, we demonstrated how data obtained via
iCoRe can be complemented with additional behavioral data in the form of news article sharing
to explore the macro-level effects of message framing among audiences. Finally, we encourage
fellow computational communication researchers to scrape the article text of URLs obtained
through iCoRe. The obtained articles, along with their computationally derived content metrics,
may then be used in an experimental paradigm to better understand what micro-level cognitive
processes give rise to large-scale behavioral outcomes in the form of news article sharing or
commenting behaviors (see Scholz et al., 2017). We envision that a combination of such micromacro analyses through iCoRe opens numerous fruitful future research directions.
Second Case Study: The Death of Jamal Khashoggi
In our second case study, we demonstrate the utility of iCoRe for communication
scientists interested in trans- and international media coverage following certain outstanding
events (see Wessler & Brüggeman, 2012). For example, according to news value theory (Galtung
& Ruge, 1965), certain characteristics of an event (i.e., news factors) such as proximity, conflict,
human interest, or positivity and negativity determine the value of an event to become news in a
given country. In determining a recent event that received international attention, we chose to
focus on the death of Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi-Arabian journalist and U.S. green card holder
who died on October 2nd, 2018 in Turkey.
To approach this case study, we first illustrate how the average tone (i.e., sentiment) of
news coverage of six countries (Canada, China, Germany, India, United Kingdom, and the
United States) mentioning Saudi Arabia shifted over time leading up to and following the death

ICORE

25

of Khashoggi. We were curious whether the physical proximity of Saudi Arabia to various
countries shapes the tone of country-level news coverage leading up to and following the death
of Khashoggi. Using iCoRe, we pulled all articles, along with their publication date and average
tone that were published in 2018 and contained ‘SA’ (i.e., FIPS country code for Saudi Arabia)
in their named entities. We decided to compare the news coverage of the following countries:
Canada, Germany, United States, India, United Kingdom, and China. This resulted in a total of
36,113 articles being selected. As can be seen in Figure 5, the average tone of news coverage
mentioning Saudi Arabia across all countries started to decline in July 2018 and witnessed a
significant drop towards the end of October 2018, the month in which Khashoggi died. However,
our analysis does not suggest a direct association between the proximity of a reporting country
and the tone of news coverage. While German news sources appear to adopt the most negative
tone through the obtained time period, similarly distant countries like India or China adopt a
more positive tone, whereas Canada appears to produce more negative coverage.
-----------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE
-----------------------------------To further distill how countries covered the killing of Khashoggi, we adopt a mediated
associations paradigm. Following Arendt and Karadas (2017), we conceive of mediated
associations as the repeated pairing of an object (e.g., Khashoggi) with specific attributes (e.g.,
topics and themes) and other mentioned objects (e.g., entities, organizations, etc.). We
operationalize these associations as the co-occurrence of Khashoggi within news articles along
with certain themes and entities as identified by GDELT. For example, if the same article
mentions Khashoggi, Donald Trump, and a topic concerned with assassination, then a connection
(i.e., an edge) is incremented between these objects (i.e., nodes). Furthermore, while previous

ICORE

26

research utilizing such mediated associations to study media stereotyping of certain issues and
entities has remained restricted to media outlets within single countries, iCoRe enables the
comparison of mediated associations of media outlets across countries.
To explore these mediated associations across countries, we utilized iCoRe and selected
articles that were published between September 1st 2018 and November 20th 2018 and
mentioned the entity “jamal khashoggi”. Furthermore, to allow for a subsequent country-level
comparison, we focused on articles that were published by news sources situated in Canada, the
United States, and the United Kingdom. Lastly, we selected themes and named entities as
provided by GDELT. This query resulted in a total of 2,260 articles. After querying these
articles, we first grouped articles together based on their country of publication. Next, for each
country, we constructed a co-occurrence network that highlights how often Khashoggi was
mentioned along with certain themes and other named entities (see Figure 6).
---------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE
----------------------------------When comparing the resulting networks, it is salient that all three countries most often
refer to Khashoggi along with the topic of armed conflict, followed by the topic of alliance.
When examining associated entities, the Washington Post shares the same edge weight across all
three countries, highlighting that news coverage in each country emphasized Khashoggi’s
position as a columnist for the Washington Post. Each co-occurrence network also contains King
Salman, Tayyip Erdogan, Donald Trump, and Mike Pompeo, highlighting the roles of these
individuals in the developing narrative. To further study these differences, future studies could
test the statistical significance or equivalence of differences in mediated associations between
countries. For instance, the networks could be reduced to nodes that occur in each country to

ICORE

27

allow for a comparison of their edge weight across countries. A simple analysis of variance may
be computed in which nodes and associated edge weights are entered as factors and countries as
group levels to detect statistically significant differences in coverage about Khashoggi.
Third Case Study: Event-News Careers in the United States
In the third case study, we set out to demonstrate iCoRe’s utility for examining the
dynamic nature of the relationship between real-world events and the reporting of these events in
news media. Early research by Früh and Schönbach (1982) has recognized that there exist
dynamic transactions between real-world events and news coverage that accompany these
events, culminating in reciprocal event-news careers. Certain events (e.g., a nation-wide protest)
will likely lead to intensified news coverage, which in turn may evoke heightened attention
among news audiences, who subsequently seek additional information about the event, driving
sustained coverage of the issue until either audiences’ interest in the issue attenuates or other,
more newsworthy events occur (R. Weber, 1993). Yet, except for a few recent attempts (e.g.,
Hopp, Fisher, & Weber, 2019), it has remained largely untested to what extent these dynamic
associations indeed exist, and if they do exist, whether they are more prevalent for certain topics
and events that may differ in motivational relevance. The empirical assessment of these
dynamics from a communication perspective has remained restricted, largely due to the limited
access to large-scale archival datasets of real-world event prevalence and the diffusion of events
into news coverage.
iCoRe circumvents this data access problem as it provides insights into the spatiotemporal trajectories of real-words events and news coverage in regards to specific topics (and
other content dimensions covered by iCoRe not shown in this case study). To provide a basic
example of such an analysis, we apply classical time series analysis approaches (ARIMA and

ICORE

28

Temporal Causal Modeling; Box, Jenkins, & Reinsel, 1994) in combination with time series
transfer functions (Montgomery & Weatherby, 1980) to examine how the occurrence of events
concerned with immigration policies in the United States are related to news coverage about
immigration and vice versa.
Using iCoRe, we pulled articles that were (a) published by a U.S. news source between
January 1st, 2017 and November 20th, 2018, and (b) contained the theme “IMMIGRATION.”
This query resulted in a total of 87,372 articles. Next, we pulled events from iCoRe that (a)
occurred between January 1st 2017 and November 20th, 2018, (b) happened on U.S. soil, and (c)
contained the EventRootCode 14, which reflects any mention of a protest event (see the CAMEO
codebook for an overview of event types and associated codes)5. To ensure that we are capturing
news coverage about protests that are concerned with immigration, we only included social
movements that were identified within the above news articles discussing immigration. This
resulted in a total of 902 retrieved protests. Figure 7 illustrates the z-standardized counts of news
articles about protest events and news articles discussing immigration for each week in 2017 and
2018.
---------------------------------INSERT FIGURE 7 HERE
----------------------------------As a first visual validation for GDELT’s events and news data, it becomes salient that
spikes in protest events targeting immigration policies correspond to major social movements
that were happening at that respective time point (see Table 2). To capture a few other
mentionable events as “interventions” in transfer functions for demonstration purposes we
dummy coded three of President Trump’s top retweeted tweets with an immigration background
5 data.gdeltproject.org/documentation/CAMEO.Manual.1.1b3.pdf

ICORE

29

(Change Immigration Law, 6/18/17; Abolish DACA, 9/7/17; Migrant Caravan, 10/18/18), and
three extraordinary government events in which immigration played an important role
(Government Shutdown, 1/21/18; Senate Immigration Debate, 2/12/18; Midterm Elections,
11/6/18). For simplicity in this example case study, all interventions were considered as a onetime pulse (see Montgomery & Weatherby, 1980). As can easily be spotted in Figure 7, both
time series follow a slightly negative trend, but using first temporal differences resulted in two
stationary time series.
---------------------------------INSERT TABLE 2 HERE
----------------------------------As a first, simple analysis of the dynamic relationship between immigration protest
events and news articles discussing immigration, we looked at the cross-correlation function of
the stationary time series at 1 to 7 lags (i.e. immigration discussions lagging protest events) and 1
to 7 leads (i.e. protest events lagging immigration discussion). Specifically, we inspected
whether the occurrence of protest events is more likely to precede the discussion of immigration,
or vice versa. This analysis, for this specific topic area, revealed no particular (direct) dynamic
relationship between protest events and immigration discussions. While both variables were
clearly cross-correlated at a lag/lead of zero (r = .37, p < .05, n = 105), all cross-correlations at
higher order lags and leads for properly stationarized time series were insignificant and close to
zero. However, simple cross-correlations at different lags and leads cannot fully represent the
potentially more complex dynamics between two time series, and they do not take into account
the dynamic influence of non-probabilistic (i.e. without measurement error) interventions in form
of pulse transfer functions.

ICORE

30
Hence, as a next step, we identified appropriate ARIMA models to accurately account for

the data generating process in the protest event and immigration discussion time series, and then
used both the pre-defined interventions and one of the time series as predictor of the other at
various lags and leads. Due to the sharp increase in variables and parameters for such a temporal
causal modeling approach it is advisable to consider more than just 105 weeks or data points.
Thus, we conducted a simplified version of this analysis using daily (instead of weekly) data
pulled from iCoRe (n = 688 days; otherwise the same query commands as above).
We found that protest events can be more accurately predicted by previous protest events
(F (5, 642) = 4.81, p < .001) and previous immigration discussions (F(5, 642) = 5.63, p < 001)
than immigration discussions by previous immigration discussions (F(5, 642)=20.68, p < .001)
and protest events (F(5, 642)=1.57, p = .17). More specifically, given the temporal dependencies
in this dataset and using a Granger causality perspective, the results suggest that our selected
non-probabilistic event interventions (e.g. President Trump’s top retweeted tweets and the
midterm elections) drove the immigration discussions to some extent which in turn were the
cause of subsequent protest events.
In summary, our example analysis demonstrated that iCoRe can be used to study the
complex dynamics between events, news coverage, and other relevant interventions. More
detailed analyses should cover a wider range of topics, a longer time frame, specific hypotheses
about the nature of interventions and their influence (not just one-time pulses), and more
sophisticated modeling of the interdependence between real-world events and their diffusion into
news coverage. In addition, future analyses should also consider audiences’ general media use
behaviors (including audience behavior on social media).

ICORE

31
Conclusion and Future of iCoRe
The goal of this article was to introduce the GDELT interface for communication

research (iCoRe) and to showcase its value for communication scientists to answer theory-driven
questions. Part of this effort is to provide a workable solution for problems facing
communication researchers attempting to use large-scale open-source datasets like GDELT.
iCoRe is a well-documented, thoughtfully pre-processed, and easy-to-use interface that allows
communication researchers to easily access one of the most promising extant datasets for
communication research. iCoRe is built on a robust, scalable architecture and uses non-relational
database technology in conjunction with pre-programmed partition keys. This ensures that the
system is reliable, interpretable, and quick to use for researchers of a variety of skill levels. In
addition, iCoRe is open-source and under continuous development,6 ensuring that new features,
user interfaces, and analysis pipelines will become available within the API.
To demonstrate the utility of iCoRe for addressing questions of interest to communication
scholars, this manuscript presented three example case studies. In the first case study, the iCoRe
interface was used to access the GDELT Global Knowledge Graph and pulled 3,403 GDELT
records. Subsequently, we demonstrated how the obtained records can provide insights into the
framing of climate change using moral language in liberal and conservative news sources. In the
second case study presented here, the iCoRe interface was used to pull 36,113 articles that
mentioned Jamal Khashoggi, a Washington Post journalist who died on October 2nd, 2018 in
Turkey and whose death attracted global media attention. This analysis investigated the tone of
international news articles mentioning Saudi Arabia before and after Khashoggi’s death as well
as the mediated associations between Khashoggi and various entities and themes. The final case
6 https://github.com/medianeuroscience/icore

ICORE

32

study presented here highlighted iCoRe’s capability to combine GDELT’s Global Knowledge
Graph and event database in order to probe the dynamic transactional relationship between U.S.
immigration protests and news articles that preceded and followed these events. We
demonstrated that protest events can be more accurately predicted by previous protest events and
previous immigration discussions than immigration discussions by previous immigration
discussions and protest events.
Limitations
While iCoRe circumvents many pitfalls concerned with large-scale datasets (e.g.,
accessibility, transparency, and scalability), various limitations remain that need to be addressed.
First, iCoRe is inevitably constrained by the validity and reliability of GDELT’s automated
content-analytic measurement systems. Therefore, erroneous data points that exist within
GDELT are transferred via iCoRe. Based on our experience, discrepancies may occur between
GDELT’s reported article length and publication date and the actual length and date of the story
when manually scraping and examining the news document. Although initial concerns by the
International Studies Association (ISA) have limited the publication of papers drawing on
historical GDELT data, the ISA has recently revoked their decision to “unsubmit” manuscripts
that include GDELT data (see https://www.isanet.org/Publications/ISQ/Posts/ID/321/GDELT)
As of now, the ISA “will treat articles using GDELT like any other submissions. Such papers
will be subject to any and all rules related to replication data as enacted by the ISA.”
Furthermore, Wang and colleagues (2016) have demonstrated that GDELT’s event
detection algorithms may at times over-report the densities of certain events at given time points.
Communication scholars concerned with these discrepancies may engage in a two-step data
acquisition process: First, iCoRe can be utilized to quickly obtain a large selection of news

ICORE

33

articles that fulfill certain inclusion criteria (e.g., discussion of a certain topic). In a second step,
manual coders can assess the accuracy of these content-analytic metrics by comparing them to
the real-world online news article. For example, similar procedures have been applied for
constructing the Global Terrorism Database (GTD; LaFree, & Dugan, 2007). Yet, we argue that
these discrepancies become largely negligible when mining large quantities of GDELT’s data.
As our case-studies and other research drawing on GDELT has demonstrated (e.g., Qiao et al.,
2017; Vargo & Guo, 2017; Vargo, et al., 2018), GDELT does provide meaningful, valid insights
into larger societal trends and news coverage patterns. Second, communication researchers using
iCoRe to obtain computationally derived content-analytic measures must be conscious of the
opportunities and shortcomings that underlie these methods (Grimmer & Stewart, 2013). Lastly,
due to copyright restrictions, iCoRe does not provide the actual text of a news document.
Scholars wishing to obtain the full text of an article hence need to rely on a scraper that utilizes
the URL of an article to download its text.
Future Directions
We envision that the herein provided case studies can serve as a helpful “jump start” for
scholars in communication that are interested in conducting computational analyses, but are
unsure where to begin. Likewise, we look forward to seeing how advanced computational
communication researchers utilize GDELT’s data provided through iCoRe and extend the herein
discussed case studies to novel contexts. In addition, we argue that iCoRe will serve as an
important outlet to complement large-scale, content-analytical studies with lab-controlled
experiments to better understand how groups and individuals respond to certain content
characteristics that, for instance, drive polarization, message virality (Brady et al., 2017; Scholz

ICORE

34

et al., 2017), or protest behaviors (Leetaru, 2011; Mooijman, Hoover, Lin, Ji, & Dehghani,
2018).
Furthermore, we emphasize that iCoRe’s capabilities can be vastly extended by
collaborative efforts among communication scholars using and further developing iCoRe. For
instance, we imagine that our current source whitelist of 111 sources can be extended with
additional sources to monitor a broader selection of the world’s news media. In addition, this
whitelist may be extended with news sources that have been identified as “fake news” and are
monitored by GDELT (Guo & Vargo, 2018). We hence invite our fellow communication
scholars to submit data to iCoRe to enable and complement certain analyses. We are currently in
touch with various institutions and research groups whose datasets may serve as valuable,
additional asset to iCoRe, such as country levels of press freedom (see www.freedomhouse.org ),
densities and metadata of geo-located terror events (see https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/ ), and
regional levels of historical pathogen stress (Murray & Schaller, 2010) and moral sensibilities
(Graham et al., 2011).
In conclusion, we hope that the development and application of iCoRe will “push the
envelope” of computational communication research by making GDELT, a promising, vast
repository of online news and events, more accessible and relevant to many of our fellow
communication scientists.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Andreas Boschke and Jeff Oakes from Aristotle Cloud
Federation for their assistance with virtual machine image development and cloud training, made

ICORE
possible by National Science Foundation grant ACI-1541215. We extend our thanks to J.
Michael Mangus, who contributed to an earlier version of the database backend.

35

ICORE

36

References
Arendt, F., & Karadas, N. (2017). Content analysis of mediated associations: An automated textanalytic approach. Communication Methods and Measures, 11(2), 105–120.
doi:10.1080/19312458.2016.1276894
Baccianella, S., Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2010, May). Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Lrec, 10, 2200–2204. Retrieved
from: https://esuli.it/publications/LREC2010.pdf
Bowman, N., Lewis, R. J., & Tamborini, R. (2014). The morality of May 2, 2011: A content
analysis of US headlines regarding the death of Osama bin Laden. Mass Communication
and Society, 17(5), 639–664. doi:10.1080/15205436.2013.822518
Barel, A., Hopp, F. R., & Weber, R. (2018). The moral framing of human rights reports: An
exploratory data analysis of the human rights global knowledge graph. Poster presented
at the 2018 Summer Undergraduate Research Experience Project Showcase, University
of California, Santa Barbara, USA.
Boxell, L., Gentzkow, M., & Shapiro, J. M. (2017). Greater Internet use is not associated with
faster growth in political polarization among US demographic groups. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 114(40), 10612–10617. doi:10.1073/pnas.1706588114
Box, G. E. P., Jenkins, G. M. , & Reinsel, G. C. (1994). Time series analysis: Forecasting and
control (3rd edition). Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
boyd, d., & Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data: Provocations for a cultural,
technological, and scholarly phenomenon. Information, Communication & Society, 15(5),
662–679. doi:10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878

ICORE

37

Brady, W. J., Wills, J. A., Jost, J. T., Tucker, J. A., & Van Bavel, J. J. (2017). Emotion shapes
the diffusion of moralized content in social networks. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(28), 7313–7318. doi:10.1073/pnas.1618923114
Eilders, C. (2006). News factors and news decisions. Theoretical and methodological advances
in Germany. Communications, 31(1), 5–24. doi:10.1515/COMMUN.2006.002
Entman, R. M. (1993). Framing: Toward clarification of a fractured paradigm. Journal of
Communication, 43(4), 51–58. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1993.tb01304.x
Feinberg, M., & Willer, R. (2013). The moral roots of environmental attitudes. Psychological
Science, 24(1), 56–62. doi:10.1177/0956797612449177
Feinberg, M., & Willer, R. (2015). From gulf to bridge: When do moral arguments facilitate
political influence? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41(12), 1665–1681.
doi:10.1177/0146167215607842
Fisher, J., Cornell, D., Hopp, F. R., Weber, R. (2018, May). But how are they talked about?”: A
novel measure of entity framing in online news. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the International Communication Association (ICA), Prague, Czech Republic, Prague,
CZ.
Fox, A., Eichelberger, C., Hughes, J., & Lyon, S. (2013). Spatio-temporal indexing in nonrelational distributed databases. IEEE International Conference on Big Data (pp. 291–
299). doi:10.1109/BigData.2013.6691586
Früh, W., & Schönbach, K. (1982). The dynamic-transactional approach. A new paradigm of
media effects. Publizistik, 27, 74–88.

ICORE

38

Fulgoni, D., Carpenter, J., Ungar, L. H., & Preotiuc-Pietro, D. (2016). An empirical exploration
of moral foundations theory in partisan news sources. LREC. Retrieved from: www.lrecconf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/1076_Paper.pdf
Galtung, J., & Ruge, M. H. (1965). The structure of foreign news: The presentation of the
Congo, Cuba and Cyprus crises in four Norwegian newspapers. Journal of Peace
Research, 2(1), 64–90. doi:10.1177/002234336500200104
Gerner, D. J., Schrodt, P. A., Yilmaz, O., & Abu-Jabr, R. (2002). Conflict and mediation event
observations (cameo): A new event data framework for the analysis of foreign policy
interactions. International Studies Association, New Orleans.
Goldstein, J. S. (1992). A conflict-cooperation scale for WEIS events data. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 36(2), 369–385.
Grimmer, J., & Stewart, B. M. (2013). Text as data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic
content analysis methods for political texts. Political Analysis, 21(3), 267-297.
doi:10.1093/pan/mps028
Guo, L., & Vargo, C. J. (2017). Global intermedia agenda setting: A big data analysis of
international news flow. Journal of Communication, 67(4), 499–520.
doi:10.1111/jcom.12311
Guo, L., & Vargo, C. J. (2018). “Fake news” and emerging online media ecosystem: An
integrated intermedia agenda-setting analysis of the 2016 US presidential election.
Communication Research, 1–23. doi:10.1177/0093650218777177
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and conservatives rely on different sets of
moral foundations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(5), 1029–1046.
doi:10.1037/a0015141

ICORE

39

Graham, J., Nosek, B. A., Haidt, J., Iyer, R., Koleva, S., & Ditto, P. H. (2011). Mapping the
moral domain. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101(2), 366–385.
doi:10.1037/a0021847
Greenwald, A. G. (2012). There is nothing so theoretical as a good method. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 7(2), 99–108. doi:10.1177/1745691611434210
Grimmer, J., & Stewart, B. M. (2013). Text as data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic
content analysis methods for political texts. Political Analysis, 21(3), 267–297.
doi:10.1093/pan/mps028
Hester, J. B., & Dougall, E. (2007). The efficiency of constructed week sampling for content
analysis of online news. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 84(4), 811–824.
doi:10.1177/107769900708400410
Hilbert, M., & López, P. (2011). The world’s technological capacity to store, communicate, and
compute information. Science, 332(6025), 60–65. doi:10.1126/science.1200970
Hogenraad, R. (2003). The words that predict the outbreak of wars. Empirical studies of the Arts,
21(1), 5–20. doi:10.2190/HJWQ-QRBX-0C2E-VJYA
Hopkins, D. J., & King, G. (2010). A method of automated nonparametric content analysis for
social science. American Journal of Political Science, 54(1), 229–247.
doi:10.1111/j.1540-5907.2009.00428.x
Hopp, F. R., Fisher, J., & Weber, R. (2019, May). The dynamic relationship between news
frames and real-world events: A hidden markov model approach. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the International Communication Association (ICA), Washington
D.C., USA.

ICORE

40

Hopp, F. R., Cornell, D., Fisher, J., Huskey, R., & Weber, R. (2018, November). The moral
foundations dictionary for news (MFD-N): A crowd-sourced moral foundations
dictionary for the automated analysis of news corpora. Paper presented at the annual
Convention of the National Communication Association, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Huberman, B. A. (2012). Sociology of science: Big data deserve a bigger audience. Nature,
482(7385), 308. doi:10.1038/ 482308d
Hutto, C.J. & Gilbert, E.E. (2014). VADER: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment
analysis of social media text. Eighth International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media (ICWSM-14). Ann Arbor, MI.
LaFree, G., & Dugan, L. (2007). Introducing the global terrorism database. Terrorism and
Political Violence, 19(2), 181–204. doi:10.1080/09546550701246817
Lazer, D., Pentland, A., Adamic, L., Aral, S., Barabási, A. L., Brewer, D., ... & Jebara, T. (2009).
Computational social science. Science, 323(5915), 721–723.
doi:10.1126/science.1167742
Leetaru, K. (2011). Culturomics 2.0: Forecasting large-scale human behavior using global news
media tone in time and space. First Monday, 16(9). Retrieved from
https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3663/3040
Leetaru, K. (2013). The GDELT global knowledge graph (GKG). Available at
http://gdeltproject.org/
Leetaru, K., & Schrodt, P. A, (2013). GDELT: Global data on events, location and tone, 1979–
2012. Paper presented at the International Studies Association Meeting, San Francisco,
CA, USA. Retrieved from
http://data.gdeltproject.org/documentation/ISA.2013.GDELT.pdf

ICORE

41

Lin, J. (2015). On building better mousetraps and understanding the human condition:
Reflections on big data in the social sciences. The ANNALS of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science, 659(1), 33–47. doi:10.1177/0002716215569174
Markowitz, E. M., & Shariff, A. F. (2012). Climate change and moral judgement. Nature
Climate Change, 2(4), 243–247. doi:10.1038/nclimate1378
Mastro, D., Enriquez, M., & Bowman, N. D. (2012). Morality subcultures and media production:
How Hollywood minds the morals of its audience. In Tamborini, R. (Ed.) Media and the
moral mind (pp. 99–116). Routledge.
McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1972). The agenda-setting function of mass media. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 36(2), 176–187. doi:10.1086/267990
McCombs, M. (2005). A look at agenda-setting: Past, present and future. Journalism Studies,
6(4), 543–557. doi:10.1080/14616700500250438
Milkman, K. L., & Berger, J. (2014). The science of sharing and the sharing of science.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(Supplement 4), 13642–13649.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1317511111
Mooijman, M., Hoover, J., Lin, Y., Ji, H., & Dehghani, M. (2018). Moralization in social
networks and the emergence of violence during protests. Nature Human Behaviour, 2,
389–396. doi:10.1038/s41562-018-0353-0
Moniruzzaman, A. B. M., & Hossain, S. A. (2013). Nosql database: New era of databases for big
data analytics-classification, characteristics and comparison. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1307.0191. Retrieved from: https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.0191

ICORE

42

Montgomery, D.C., & Weatherby., G. (1980). Modeling and forecasting time series using
transfer function and intervention methods, AIIE Transactions, 12(4), 289–307.
doi:10.1080/05695558008974521
Murray, D. R., & Schaller, M. (2010). Historical prevalence of infectious diseases within 230
geopolitical regions: A tool for investigating origins of culture. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 41(1), 99–108. doi:10.1177/0022022109349510
Nisbet, M. C. (2009). Communicating climate change: Why frames matter for public
engagement. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 51(2), 12–
23. doi:10.3200/ENVT.51.2.12-23
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1974). The spiral of silence: A theory of public opinion. Journal of
Communication, 24(2), 43–51. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1974.tb00367.x
Peng, R. D. (2011). Reproducible research in computational science. Science, 334(6060), 1226–
1227. doi:10.1126/science.1213847
Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M. E., and Booth, R. J. (2001). Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Qiao, F., Li, P., Zhang, X., Ding, Z., Cheng, J., & Wang, H. (2017). Predicting social unrest
events with hidden Markov models using GDELT. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and
Society, 2017. doi:10.1155/2017/8180272
Sagi, E., & Dehghani, M. (2014). Measuring moral rhetoric in text. Social Science Computer
Review, 32(2), 132–144. doi:10.1177/0894439313506837
Scheufele, D. A. (1999). Framing as a theory of media effects. Journal of Communication, 49(1),
103–122. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1999.tb02784.x

ICORE

43

Scholz, C., Baek, E. C., O’Donnell, M. B., Kim, H. S., Cappella, J. N., & Falk, E. B. (2017). A
neural model of valuation and information virality. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 201615259. doi:10.1073/pnas.1615259114
Smith, E. M., Smith, J., Legg, P., & Francis, S. (2017). Predicting the occurrence of world news
events using recurrent neural networks and auto-regressive moving average models. In
Chao, F., Schockaert, S., & Zhang, Q. (Eds.) Advances in Computational Intelligence
Systems (pp. 191–202). Wiesbaden: Springer.
Trilling, D., & Jonkman, J. G. (2018). Scaling up content analysis. Communication Methods and
Measures, 12(2–3), 158–174. doi:10.1080/19312458.2018.1447655
Trilling, D., Tolochko, P., & Burscher, B. (2017). From newsworthiness to shareworthiness:
How to predict news sharing based on article characteristics. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, 94(1), 38–60. doi:10.1177/1077699016654682
Van Atteveldt, W., & Peng, T. Q. (2018). When communication meets computation:
Opportunities, challenges, and pitfalls in computational communication science.
Communication Methods and Measures, 12(2-3), 81–92.
doi:10.1080/19312458.2018.1458084
Vargo, C. J., & Guo, L. (2017). Networks, big data, and intermedia agenda setting: An analysis
of traditional, partisan, and emerging online us news. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, 94(4), 1031–1055. doi:10.1177/1077699016679976
Vargo, C. J., Guo, L., & Amazeen, M. A. (2018). The agenda-setting power of fake news: A big
data analysis of the online media landscape from 2014 to 2016. New Media & Society,
20(5), 2028–2049. doi:10.1177/1461444817712086

ICORE

44

Wallach, H. (2016). Computational social science: Towards a collaborative future. In R. M.
Alvarez (Ed.), Computational social science: Discovery and prediction (p. 307).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wang, W., Kennedy, R., Lazer, D., & Ramakrishnan, N. (2016). Growing pains for global
monitoring of societal events. Science, 353(6307), 1502–1503.
doi:10.1126/science.aaf6758
Weber, M. S. (2018). Methods and approaches to using web archives in computational
communication research, Communication Methods and Measures, 12(2–3), 200–215,
doi:10.1080/19312458.2018.1447657
Weber, R., Mangus, J. M., Huskey, R., Hopp, F. R., Amir, O., Swanson, R., ... & Tamborini, R.
(2018). Extracting latent moral information from text narratives: Relevance, challenges,
and solutions. Communication Methods and Measures, 12(2–3), 119–139.
doi:10.1080/19312458.2018.1447656
Weber, R. (1993). The impact of outstanding events on television audience ratings of the
Tagesschau against the background of the dynamic transactional model. Master thesis,
University of the Arts, Berlin, Germany.
Wessler, H., & Brüggemann, M. (2012). Transnational communication. An introduction.
Wiesbaden: Springer-Verlag.

ICORE

45
Tables

Table 1
Negative Binomial Regressions Predicting the Number of News Article Shares on Facebook for
Liberal and Conservative News Outlets
Liberal News Outlets
MFD Categories

Conservative News Outlets

Coefficient

0.025

0.975

Coefficient

0.025

0.975

Care

– 6.53

– 41.93

28.86

7.71

– 22.09

37.53

Harm

24.06

– 10.72

58.85

6.93

– 22.65

36.52

Fairness

– 4.45

– 52.53

43.62

20.76

– 28.52

70.04

Cheating

79.80

– 111.09

270.69

20.79

– 222.38

263.96

Loyalty

7.04

– 8.06

22.14

– 16.75*

– 32.81

– 0.69

Betrayal

– 25.66

– 82.21

30.88

8.18

– 30.48

46.85

Authority

2.87

– 28.24

33.99

4.56

– 18.52

27.65

– 186.23**

– 318.33

– 54.14

– 0.76

– 48.71

47.18

42.41

– 6.47

91.29

26.91

– 24.57

78.40

– 33.03

– 128.67

62.60

–127.54*

– 231.32

– 23.75

Subversion
Purity
Degradation
AIC

6327.56

6076.19

BIC

– 2021.15

– 1923.45

Log Likelihood

– 3152.8

– 3027.1

Note. Coefficients with confidence intervals. N = 500 articles per source. * p > .05. ** p > .01.

ICORE

46

Table 2
Identified Protest Events Linked to Immigration in the United States From January 1st 2017 –
November 20th 2018
Protest Event

Date

Nation Against Trump

1/22/17

Travel Ban

1/5/17

Day without Immigrants

2/12/17

Million Hoodie March

2/26/17

March for Trump

3/5/17

May Day

5/7/2017

Protest after Trump rally in Phoenix

8/20/17

Protests against phasing out of the
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals
(DACA) program

9/10/17

Families Belong Together

7/1/18, 1/29/18

ICORE

47
Figures

Figure 1
Frequency of Articles Discussing Climate Change Per Source in 2017

Figure 2
Excerpt and Description of Query Result for the First Case Study

Note. For each news article, from left to right: unique record identifier; publication date; URL;
average tone/sentiment (–100 most negative through +100 most positive); wordcounts for
identified care and harm words (other dictionary categories omitted for visualization purpose);
identified themes/topics; identified entities; news source; article length; FIPS country code of
news source location.

ICORE
Figure 3
Comparison of Selected LIWC Categories Across Sources

Figure 4
Comparison of MFD Categories Across Sources

48

ICORE

Figure 5
Average Tone of News Sources by Country Mentioning Saudi Arabia

Note. Average tone was computed using a two-week moving average.

49

ICORE

50

Figure 6
Comparison of Mediated Association Networks Between the United States, the United Kingdom,
and Canada

Note. Top-left: United States, Top-right: United Kingdom, Bottom: Canada. Red nodes reflect
GDELT themes, blue nodes reflect named entities. Edge weights reflect normalized cooccurrence frequencies between J. Khashoggi and the top ten themes and named entities that
were mentioned with J. Khashoggi in news sources within each country. Networks were
visualized with Gephi.

ICORE
Figure 7
Time Series of Immigration Protest Events and News Articles Discussing Immigration in the
United States

Note. Counts were computed with a one-week moving average and then z-transformed

51

