"x"
"1" "Using a factorial survey approach   to deal with the endogeneity of happiness beliefs"
"2" "Francisco Olivos*"
"3" "The Chinese University of Hong Kong"
"4" "Orcid   0000-0001-6395-6593"
"5" "Acknowledgment"
"6" "The author acknowledges the support of the Hong Kong PhD Fellowship Scheme in the final stage of this article."
"7" "*Corresponding author. Email: fjolivos@link.cuhk.edu.hk. Tel: (852) 39436625. The corresponding author will share all data and codes for replication purpose upon request. All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards."
"8" "Usin g a factorial survey approach   to deal  with  the  endogeneity of happiness beliefs"
"9" "Abstract"
"10" "Measuring beliefs  in quality of life research  requires researche r s to deal with endogeneity and social desirability  issues . The connectionist theory of cognition  suggests  that individuals have mental models composed of associations between concepts. Moreover, structuralist perspectives consider beliefs form an interrelated system. Therefore, the estimation of causal effects of beliefs is undermined by these interdependent relationships of beliefs. This article introduces  factorial surveys   ( FS )  as  a  useful  method  to solve th e se potential problems.  To demonstrate the appropriateness of this method, this study presents a design and application of  FS  to a representative sample of Chileans  and their beliefs about what  determines happiness.  The findings provide a folk theory  (or  a  lay theory)  of happiness determinants ,  where health is the most important determinant of happiness, followed by income and lifestyles.  In addition,  the  reliability and cognitive bias  of  FS s  are addresse d ,  finding  support  for  their  applicability in developing countries.   A p otential  reduction  o f  social desirability bias  in  FS s  is discussed in the conclusions."
"11" "Key words:  Factorial survey , happiness beliefs, endogeneity , folk theory"
"12" "Introduction"
"13" "Beliefs play an important role  in  motivating and justifying action   (Vaisey 2009) . In  their  pursuit of happiness,  humans  ma ke  choices  where different kinds of beliefs are involved,  based on  what happiness  is  and what makes people happy.  Decisions are not taken in a cultural  vacuum;  they are guided by  elements such as  embedded cultural dispositions , tacit or implicit beliefs  and  worldviews, among other s .  A  growing   body of  literature  has highlighted the role of beliefs in quality of life studies   (Huang 2019; Sirgy 2018; Sirgy, Joshanloo, and Estes 2019; WHOQOL 2006; Wiersma et al. 2019) .  A holistic approach to quality of life implies c oncern  for material well-being and non-material dimensions such as personal beliefs  (WHOQOL 2006) .   However , quality of life studies excluding beliefs as a component may  still  consider  their  relational relevance. For instance, Lamé and colleagues  (2005)  have shown that beliefs about pain are stronger determinants of quality of life than pain intensity.  Nonetheless ,  understand ing  th e se beliefs requires  overcoming  several methodological challenges concomitant with the study of culture."
"14" "This article aims to  present  factorial surveys (FS s )  as a  survey methodology  to solve  a  foundational problem that cultural studies  o n quality of life may  encounter  endogeneity  of beliefs .  As I will explain in detail, FS s  consist of hypothetical units describing persons, institutions,  or any phenomenon  in  the  form of vignettes .   Respondents read a  group of  vignette s  and evaluate each one  following  a rating task.  This rating task is the  individual’s  judgment. Therefore, the relationship of th e se pre-defined characteristics and the rating task is the causal belief that leads to  a  certain judgment."
"15" "For this purpose, an  FS   was conducted  to generate a folk  or lay  theory   of causal attributions of happiness , that is,  individuals’ beliefs about determinants of happiness . Its application  to  happiness beliefs  ha s  practical and theoretical motivations. In practical terms, happiness is a concept  commonly used  by ordinary people.  As Swidler  (2001)  explained  in reference to  love, happiness is a core theme  in  our popular culture (songs, self-help books, soap operas, etc.). Unlike social or political issues, happiness  genuinely  matters to ordinary people.  Therefore,  happiness is a familiar topic for lay  pe ople , which  contributes to the  validation  of  FS s   in  general population  studies . In theoretical terms, as defined by Ve e nhoven  (2001) , happiness is a constitutive part of the subjective enjoyment of life and is concurrent  with  the other two dimensions of quality of life: quality of the living environment and quality of performance. On the other hand, although happiness is a common concept in daily life, its meanings are much less clear  in comparison  with  the other two dimensions of quality of life . Thus, a folk theory of happiness determinants is a step forward  in  understand ing  those conceptualizations."
"16" "This  study   makes  a contribution  to quality of life studies in several aspects. First, to  the best of  my knowledge,  the  FS  is a methodological tool that has not been applied in the field. Its application in diverse fields such as social justice, criminology and  the  labor market   (Wallander 2009) , among others, is proof of its  versatility and explanatory power .  By applying  a  factorial survey, I expect to open the black box of judgments and beliefs about happiness.  Second , the analysis provides validation of  FS  applicability in a Latin American country ,  Chile. Although the methodology has a long tradition in social research for industrialized societies, only in  recent  years  have  FS s  been applied in developing countries  (Castillo, Olivos, and Azar 2019; Liebe et al. 2017; Mateo Piñones and Valenzuela Carvallo 2017; Olivos 2015) .   Therefore,  the present study  is a contribution to the growing literature on factorial surveys.  E xperiments and quasi-experiments are  usually  criticized  for their  context-dependency.  However,   FS s  are  an attempt to bring experiments into  large-scale  surveys.  Thus, this study seeks to show they are also applicable in a more adverse context (e.g. lower educational level and institutional trust).   Finally, this is the first attempt to outline a folk theory of happiness determinants addressing issues of endogeneity.  Several studies have be en  conducted to understand  the  meanings of happiness across   cultures  (Chiasson, Dube, and Blondin 1996; Delle Fave et al. 2016; Lu and Gilmour 2004; Pflug 2009) , but none of them has estimated causal effects of beliefs on judgments about happiness .  Hence, t he cross-cultural comparison and dense interpretation of happiness narratives ,  a subject of considerable attention  in the state - of -   the - art literature,   are  complemented  by  the methodological strength of this single-country study.   C ausation is not only an aspect of statistics, it allows  us to uncover the  workings of the world that traditional methods alone  cannot   (Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell 2016) .  As proponents of the credibility revolution suggest   (Angrist and Pischke 2010) ,  good questions are complemented with good research designs."
"17" "Th is article is structured in four sections . First, I  review  the literature  seeking  to define folk theories of happiness. Second, FS s  are  presented  as  a solution to  endogeneity challenge s  in cultural studies. This section aims to provide theoretical foundations  for  the method, which  are   often absent in methodological reviews.  Third , the application of FS s  to  the  understand ing of  causal attributions of happiness in the eyes of common people is presented  in detail .  Finally,   several conclusions are drawn regarding FS s  and quality of life studies.  A potential reduction of social desirability bias and the need for further testing of this  positive outcome  are also discussed in the last section."
"18" "Happiness beliefs"
"19" "A  research agenda in cultural psychology  has  outlined  a cultural theory of happiness, whose main concern is to  investigate  the meanings of happiness for people from different cultural settings.  By using  Folk Theory  (Bruner 1990) , researchers have   sought  to explain everyday intuitive theories about how our own mind and the mind s  of others work  and are shaped by culture .  Thus, lay   people have beliefs about what happiness  is  and how it is achieved.  Folk Theory  understands  happiness as a psychological process,  and  its   meanings  are  culturally constituted   (Lu and Gilmour 2004) . P syche and culture are mutually i nvolved  in an iterative  process .  Meanings, conceptions and interpretative schemes  are activated or constructed in social participation and practices  (Shweder and Haidt 2000) . Therefore, happiness beliefs may change across cultural communities.   In cultural sociology  (Vaisey 2009; Vaisey and Valentino 2018) , beliefs are part of a cultural system of symbols and meanings that motivate and justify action. Beliefs about limits of in-group and out-group identity, beliefs about how the world works or beliefs about the link of certain facts are  idiosyncratic aspects of culture.    Thus, we should not assume homogeneity in the conception  of  happiness across  groups or subgroups of population , implying  that happiness is embedded in a s ystem  of meaning s  and values built for a unique cultural tradition  (Lu and Gilmour 2004) . Therefore,  beliefs about happiness are idiosyncratic ."
"20" "In this  perspective , culture and happiness are mutually constituted. From  a  cultural psychological approach and  a  Folk Theory  perspective , several studies have been conducted to understand how happiness and its factors are conceptualized, used and  understood  in specific contexts   (Chiasson et al. 1996; Delle Fave et al. 2016; Lu and Gilmour 2004; Pflug 2009) . A prevailing explanation of differences across cultural settings is the distinction between individualistic and collectivist societies   (Chiasson et al. 1996; Diener et al. 1995; Lu and Gilmour 2004; Pflug 2009) . Collective societies emp hasize belonging to groups ,  and individual societies are focused on individuals. Markus and Kitayama  (1991)  conceptualize d  independent self-construal - predominant in individualistic societies- as the individual's view of him/herself as an autonomous, bounded, unitary agent, and  interdependent self-construal - predominant in collectivistic societies -  as flexible and variable, changing between contexts and relationships. Overall, Easter n  countries were found to be highly collectivist, whereas developed Western societies  are  more  individualistic   (Eaton and Louw 2000) . Th us , individualism and collectivism are considered by Chiasson and colleagues   (1996)   to explain   the  importance  of interpersonal factors  in  determining happiness in some contexts and intrapersonal factors in others. The individual interest is served by hedonistic and   self-oriented values, which are predominant in some societies. Likewise, liberal attitudes strongly promote individual values as well as individual freedom."
"21" "In th is  regard, Lu and Gilmour  (2004)  compare d  conceptions of happiness between Americans  (usually considered as individualistic)  and Chinese  (usually considered as collectivistic) . Their results suggest a difference in the orientation of  the conceptualization of  subjective well-being mandated by cultural traditions in the East and the West.  In  Chinese culture, happiness was conceptualized as harmonious homeostasis within individual s  as well as between  them  and  their  surroundings, while Americans ’  conceptualization was more emotionally charged, upbeat, and unmistakably positive. Their interpretation  may  be  understood  in relation  to  the individualistic-collectivistic distinction because Americans  were shown to  generally emphasiz e   concrete achievement and   positive evaluations of the self, whereas the Chinese ,  as  a  collectivist society ,  emphasized positive evaluations of self by others. Although  the  individualistic-collectivistic distinction captures the core implication of  meanings of  happiness , Lu and Gilmour  (2004)   pointed out that  these dimensions have different meanings in each cultural context. For instance, the importance of social relationships is  notably  universal, but the features of these relations differ across countries. In the US ,  a good relationship is one in which each person  remains independent  while negotiating an accommodation to the other. On the other hand,  the  Chinese  respondents  consider ed  a good relationship as one in which alters merge to reach independence. P fl ug   (2009)  suggest ed   that, to understand the difference across countries,  other dimensions of analysis could be   considered ,   such  as philosophical traditions, living circumstances and linguistic conceptions shaping ways of thinking (e.g.  i n German, Glüuck means both “happiness\" and “luck\", which produces an unconscious association of happiness with good fortune)."
"22" "In  a  more recent large-scale cross-cultural study, Delle Fave at al.  (2016)  found a substantial similarity across countries in the central definitions of happiness, as well as  a  slight variance across sociodemographic categories. Surprisingly, lay definitions did not identify personal life satisfaction with happiness as the scientific use of happiness may suggest.  Two lay conceptualizations were identified. First, at the psychological level, happiness is an inner harmony and a positive  relationship between  different facets of self. Second, at the relational level, harmonic family and social relationships are pivotal components of happiness. Thus,  rather  than  forming  a collectivistic-individualistic distinction, th e se definitions coexist and are share d   by  a  heterogeneous  sample of countries from five continents."
"23" "Beliefs about  determinants  of happiness  also  have a significant place in cross-cultural happiness studies. In the study  by  Chiasson et al .   (1996) ,   certain elements occur regularly  in all  countries. For the se authors , culture  rather than gender explain s  more differences in the perception of happiness resources. Nevertheless,  as Delle Fave et al.  (2016)  showed for happiness definitions,  factors contributing to happiness are similar across countries. This is explained  by drawing  on the argument  that fulfillment of  basic need s   ha s  an impact on happiness   (Tay and Diener 2011) . The underlying argument is that everyone has the same basic needs  that need to be satisfied  ( e.g.   drinking  water) .   T herefore ,  once the minimum level of needs  is  satisfied ,  a  certain level of happiness is  also  reached.  Overall, t he most important factors contributing to happiness  a re the importance of the family relationship, of having a meaning in life, and a positive self-concept for happiness.  Despite  the overall pattern, differences appear in specific domains. In the case of El Salvador, religio n  and good sociopolitical conditions are perceived as more salient  in  reach ing  a higher level of happiness , whereas in North America  hedonistic factors  predomina te . Lu and Shih   (1997)  i nterpreted  the perceived sources of happiness  according to  inhabitants of Taiwan and Westerners. They  identify  nine categories of sources, such as harmony of interpersonal relationships, the satisfaction of material needs and pleasure. However, the emphasis differs between cultural traditions producing , once again,  an idiosyncratic configuration. While Westerners emp hasize  intrapersonal or internal evaluation and contentment, the  Taiwanese  conception of happiness places greater emphasis on interpersonal or external evaluation and satisfaction. Their findings are consistent with the individual  vs.  collective values approach."
"24" "In methodological terms, happiness studies are dominated by  a  quantitative  approach . As  the literature acknowledges   (Delle Fave et al. 2016; Mathews 2012; Olivos and Ernst 2017) , the application of standardized scales developed by scholars leads to biased operationalization of happiness toward western definitions.  However, in the following section ,  I will discuss other limitation s  of this approach , n amely endogeneity of beliefs . In addition,  some studies have used open-ended question to understand lay definitions of happiness. Delle Fave et al.  (2016)    analyze  2799 answers from 12 countries to  the   question  “What is happiness for you?”,  Pflug  (2009)  analy z es free-format essays in response to the same question in Germany and South Africa.  As Vaisey suggest s   (2009) , these methods capture discursive consciousness alone and  do  not engage necessarily with internalized schematic associations that motivate judgments about happiness.  “ Culture comes in the form of platitudes and clichés as well  as  deeply held beliefs ”  (Swidler 2001:43) , and the lat t er  tend not to be  captured by the current methods used in cultural studies of happiness.  By answering a given task, open-ended questions offer a view of how people make   sense  of,  and justify ,  certain beliefs but do not  necessarily  unveil dispositions and tacit beliefs that drive daily-life conceptualizations  and determinants  of happiness."
"25" "M easuring beliefs  using  factorial surveys"
"26" "As I will discuss in  this section , the complexity of reasoning and the structure of happiness beliefs  give rise to  issues of endogeneity that m ust  be addressed. FS s  are  presented  as a  survey method  for  dealing with these  potential problems."
"27" "Beliefs refer to subjective propositions about the world  of  which a person is at least minimally confident   (Fishbein and Ajzen 1975; Hedström 2005; Rydgren 2009) .  For instance,  individuals  could believe subjectively in a relationship between age and happiness, and subsequently ,  possess some degree of certainty about it.  Beliefs are  also  part of culture in  the  form of narratives, frames or elements of boundary-making  (Vaisey and Valentino 2018) , and forced-choice surveys leverage the understanding of how people make judgments  in  a way that  is limited in the  traditional interview-based approach.   I nfluential cultural sociologists have highlighted the important contribution of choice experiments to the study of culture   (Vaisey 2009) .   Although  FS s  and choice experiments are different methods, both provide similar solutions to overcom e   the  methodological problems  of  dealing with beliefs  and judgment  measures. As described by Liebe et al.  (2017) , both methods  require  respondents  to  evaluate scenarios which var y  in their characteristics.  However , in choice experiment s ,  respondents compare two alternatives and choose  between  them ,   while  in  FS s ,  respondents evaluate each of these situations according to criteria such as agreement, approval or fairness.  This methodology was created by Peter Ross i   to  understand household status in the eyes of others  (Rossi and Anderson 1982) ,  and is a widespread technique  in  different developed countries in  a  myriad  of  fields .  Following Vaisey  (2009) , several  explanations could be posited as to  why choice surveys  and  FS s  are better suited to study the  link between  culture  and  judgment.  F ixed-response format s  lead us to better estimates of moral decision processes  and  are less cognitively demanding than open or semi-structured interviews. Moreover, t hey rely more on heuristics and practical consciousness, wh at   make s   people  take  decision s  in daily li fe  as oppos ed  to  discuss ing  these decisions .  Respondents’ rat ings  may  more accurately  reveal the underlying cultural schemas  to which  their  beliefs belong , because  they  reproduce  everyday decision-making processes ."
"28" "FS s  consist of hypothetical units  such as  persons, institutions, facts or short stories  in  the  form of texts, videos or pictures  called vignettes. These units are composed of different dimensions that describe  them . Respondents may read a  group of  vignette s  and evaluate each one based on a rating task. The basic idea of the analysis is the explanation of single judgments  through the  dimensions of the vignettes. A universe of vignettes is obtained from the full combination of values of dimensions and, usually, respondents  are  face d by  a sample  from this universe of  vignettes. Thus,  FS s   enable methodological  challenges   of endogeneity  to be solved ."
"29" "In statistical terms, a variable is endogenous when there is  a  correlation between an independent variable and the error term (effects of the variables that were omitted from the equation).  Moreover, a variable could be defined as endogenous when it is explained by relationships between functions within the explanatory model.  For instance, the belief that money makes happiness could be confounded by the belief that education cause s  happiness, because in the “real world” money and educational level are highly correlated."
"30" "Theoretically, t he endogeneity of beliefs  could be explained by  cognitive science  and sociological theories. In social  cognition , the   representational  theory of cognition indicates that individuals have mental models  composed of associations between  beliefs and thoughts   (Aizawa 2003; Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988) .   Beliefs are structured . The belief that X causes Y is true only if the belief about X is true. Fodor  and  Pylyshyn   (1988)  argue that thoughts are productive and systematic. We  may  believe  a large number of  things (productive), but if they are unrelated, each new idea should be an independent state . Our beliefs are also systematic in the sense that humans are able to understand something by understanding another. For instance, nobody who understands “X causes Y” is unable to understand “Y causes X”."
"31" "Furthermore, philosophers have argued   (Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson 1996; Camp 2007)  that our cognitive representations have a map-like structure  which  is  also productive and systematic .  The conception of t hinking as a map is an ideal representation of the endogeneity of  the  belief problem. Any slight change of a border in one of the representations will be associated  with  the simultaneous change of others. If you change the position of a city farther south, it will  involve  multiples changes in other aspects of the map. Therefore, beliefs within the representational map are endogenous.  Using a belief as an independent variable lead s  us to  issues   of  endogeneity because it is probably related  to  other beliefs of the map-like structure that have been omitted from our model."
"32" "In sociology,   b elief systems could be understood as networks. Beliefs  are interrelated  nodes. Converse   (2006[1964])   described a system of beliefs as elements held together by pairwise constraints or functional interdependence.  In a dynamic case, constraint or interdependence of beliefs refers to the probability that any change  in  a certain belief would require a compensating change in the structure.  For instance,  “ if a person is opposed to the expansion of Social Security, he is probably a conservative and is probably opposed as well to any nationalization of private industries ”  (Converse 2006[1964]:3) .  If the belief about social security change s , the belief about nationalization  o f private industries could also change because of the constraint of logic.  These constraints  could  also  be psychological or social.  In a recent study,  Boutyline and Vaisey  (2017)  showed that political beliefs are organized around political identity, which works as  a  heuristic to process information from the political field. Thus, egalitarian beliefs  may be  related to  moral relativism, which in turn may be related to group-specific rights, and everything tied to political identity. Therefore, this structural interdependence of any belief system  gives rise to  the problem of identifying independent causal effects of  beliefs .  In cultural sociology ,  this foundational princip le  is termed relationality  (DiMaggio et al. 2018) . Survey data could reveal  many   cultural secrets  if it addresse d  this relationality.   Beliefs are related and confound each other .  Methods addressing this relationality are needed in order to isolate causal effects of beliefs."
"33" "FS s  are a methodological tool that enables  us  to solve  th ese   endogeneity issues o n   beliefs  about happiness determinants or any other kind of attributional belief . In cultural sociology, they are called narratives   and refer to the causal link of phenomena establish ed  by individuals (Vaisey, 2019). These causal beliefs  present  the same problem  as  estimations of causal inference in the “real world”. Lay   people, as social scientists, have to make causal judgments based on complex realities. A belief about income as a determinant of happiness could be connected with the belief about health as  a  predictor of happiness. Beliefs about th e se determinants usually  work together in explaining people’s happiness , because they belong to the same belief system . A counterfactual is need ed ."
"34" "For instance, ordinary people have an idea about how happy a lottery winner  might  be. However, people may also evaluate the happiness status of those who do no t  win the lottery under the same conditions .   T his  could be  called “the  counterfactual  of winning the lottery”. The difference between those beliefs will be the causal belief about the impact of winning the lottery on happiness.   However, people may also have beliefs about who play s  the lottery or who ha s  better luck.  Thus , beliefs about lottery winners could  also  be confounded. Let  us  say that  people that are more religious  have  a greater  likelihood of winning the lottery and  older people  play the lottery more often than youth. Now, the narrative of the happy lottery winner is confounded by religion and age. Nevertheless,  FSs address  this problem  by “breaking” this relationality  of beliefs."
"35" "The hypothetical units to be evaluated  by  respondents (vignettes) are the product of a full factorial combination of pre-defined characteristics. In the example  above , there are 2 possible states for  a  lottery winner (winner or  loser ), 2 possible states for religion (with religion or without) and 2 possible states for age (18-60 or 61+ years). In a factorial design, we will have 2x2x2=8 possible scenarios. Any evaluation of these 8 scenarios will provide unbiased causal beliefs. Respondents will evaluate the effect of  winning the  lottery,  considering  all the possible states of religion and age.  A  FS could be considered a multitreatment experiment, where each dimension of the vignette  is a single treatment. By randomly assign ing  a group of vignettes with uncorrelated dimensions, systematic differences in post-treatment answers (rating task) are attributable to the experimental manipulation of dimensions  (Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014) ."
"36" "In  the literature on  causal influence, Hainmueller et al.  (2014)  ex plain that FS s  enable  us to non-parametrically identify average marginal component effects (AMCE),   which is the effect of a dimension averaged over the joint distribution of the remaining dimensions.   Thus, the AMCE of winning the lottery represents the average effect of this dimension on the level of happiness, where the average is identified over the distribution of the dimensions (age and religion) across repeated samples.  In addition to AMCE, analysts could also estimate interaction among vignette dimensions , referred to as the  average component term effect (ACIE).  In other words , the causal effect of winning the lottery could vary with the values of the other treatments. Both AMCE and ACIE are causal mechanism s  unbiasedly estimated through FS s . As Hainmueller et al.  (2014)  indicate, in  the  FS approach ,  mechanisms are equated  with  the combination of causal components that produce the outcome."
"37" "In sum,  the  literature in happiness beliefs ha s   developed  a deep understanding of meanings related to happiness, as well as extensive cross-cultural comparison of th e se cultural systems. Nevertheless, FS s  offer the opportunity  to  identify a folk theory of causal attributions of happiness ,  overcoming  the  methodological limitations of previous studies.  In the following section,  I  show an application of  an  FS  to the study of ca u sal  attributions of happiness : What do people think  makes  others  happy?   The aim  o f this application is twofold. First,  I   provide a   detail ed account of   FS  in the field of quality of life studies. And second,  a  folk theory  of  happiness beliefs  in  a  probabilistic  sample  of an entire developing country  is explored ."
"38" "Application and Results"
"39" "Data"
"40" "I  analyze data from the 2015 edition of  El Barómetro de la Felicidad  [The Happiness Barometer] , which is the only data set, to my knowledge,  specialized  i n quality of life and  which  contains  a  FS  for measuring  happiness  beliefs in a large probabilistic sample. This combination of measurements makes this dataset a unique resource for  quality of life studies . The sample  comprises  2,267 Chileans over the age of 18 ,  who were interviewed face-to-face between. With respect to the sampling of interviewees, the probabilistic sample was based on a multistage stratified design. Firstly, the Chilean territory was divided into four zones as strata. Secondly,  a  random selection of the following units  was conducted  in a multistage procedure: cities with more than 25,000 inhabitants, blocks, houses and, finally, habitual residents of the houses over the age of 18. The selection of cities and blocks  was  carried out proportionally to the population size.  The original sample was further restricted under two conditions. First, respondent s  with missing data in the vignette module were deleted (N=124), as  were  respondent s   who showed  no variance in  their ratings of the  vignettes (N=11). After deletion of incomplete observation s  in the variables  under  analysis, the study use d  an analytic sample of 2 , 103   respondents.  All the analyses  we re weighted by population distribution of gender, educational level, region and age for the year of the data collection  according to  national  official statistics .  Table 1 shows a  s ummary  of the  statistics  of  the  respondents ."
"41" "[Table 1]"
"42" "F actorial survey  design"
"43" "The main characteristic of  the  FS  is that respondents rate a set of fictitious vignettes, which describe plausible cases by different dimensions. The interviewees have to rate each vignette (i.e., happiness evaluation). The design of  the  FS  study consisted of three main stages  described in this section : definition of the dimensions, sampling of the vignette population, and design of the questionnaire ."
"44" "The number of dimensions  has  a major limitation: reading lengthy vignettes can be a demanding task for respondents   (Atzmüller and Steiner 2010; Auspurg and Hintz 2014; Jasso 2006) . The pretest of the survey suggested  the inclusion of  up to  eight  dimensions, which were selected  drawing  on  the literature and  previous qualitative fieldwork.   E ight  characteristics were included as dimensions: gender,  age,  partner relationship , family relationships, income, health status, style of life and  intergenerational  mobility.   This  is a crucial stage in  designing   FS s   aimed  at capturing  practical consciousness. As Vaisey  (2009)  suggests regarding fixed- alternatives  format,   if a “relevant”  characteristics is  not available, then the respondent will still guess or randomly rate the vignette. A good line-up may be a function of theoretical reasoning and previous research.  Table  2  shows the detail of dimensions and levels .   To indicate  gender,  female and male names considered  common   according  to national statistics  were  used. Other studies have successfully used naming as  an  operationalization of vignette dimensions in the same context under study   (Castillo et al. 2019; Mateo Piñones and Valenzuela Carvallo 2017) .  In the questionnaire, the respondents were asked to evaluate the given description in each vignette on an 11-point scale ranging from  completely  unhappy (0) to  completely  happy (10)."
"45" "[Table  2 ]"
"46" "Once the vignettes' dimensions and levels were defined, the  number  of possible cases  (termed vignette population)  was calculated based on the full y  crossed combination of the  levels of  dimensions, in this case: 2(sex) x 6(age) x 5( marital  status) x 4(family relationship) x 8(income) x 4(health status) x 4(style of life) x 5( intergenerational  mobility) = 253,000 (vignettes). In  the  second stage of the design, it was necessary to draw a smaller number of representative vignettes that could be answered by the respondents.  Any factorial design may consider only plausible combinations of dimensions ; o therwise, rules of combination should be defined  at the  risk of increasing correlation  (e.g. ,  level 2 of dimension 1 should never appear with level 3 of dimension 2 in a  single  vignette) .  Although there is zero correlation  between  dimension s  in the vignette population,   restricting th e se combinations would have destroyed  the  orthogonality of the experimental vignette design  (Auspurg, Hinz, and Sauer 2017) .   In our case, n either  implausible  n or illogical cases  we re detected.  This situation  would have been  problematic because the design  is  intended to generate a population of cases with uncorrelated (orthogonal) dimensions; otherwise, the parameter estimates would be  confounded by other dimensions or beliefs . Therefore, an efficient sample that minimized the covariance of coefficients was obtained with a D-efficient measure (99.6153), which provides the smallest possible sample with the lowe st  degree of correlation  between  dimensions   (Dülmer 2007; Kuhfeld, Tobias, and Garratt 1994) . This procedure was carried out using an algorithm in SAS (Statistical Analysis Software). Th e  procedure generated a (D-efficient) sample of 120 vignettes .  Overall, after completion of the sampling design, the correlations between the dimensions remained zero.  Therefore, endogeneity  was  overcome.  A random selection of vignettes does not ensure th is  orthogonality .     A sample of  a  rated vignette is shown in Figure 1."
"47" "[Figure 1]"
"48" "A common  problem  in designing  FS s  is defin ing  the number of vignettes and respondents. Several aspects should be considered . First, in order to conduct multilevel analysis ,  at least 50 respondents (level 2) are needed in order to produce unbiased standard errors at respondent - level  (Maas and Hox 2005) .   Nevertheless,  the  literature in political analysis ha s  show n  that multilevel Bayesian models produce efficient estimations with  a  smaller number of clusters  (Stegmueller 2013) ,  but this approach has not yet been used in FS analysis .  Second, the total number of vignettes is indicated by D-efficient. A design with around 7 or 8 dimensions will have a n  efficient design of around 100 to 200 vignettes  (Auspurg and Hintz 2014) . Third, method o logical studies have show n  consistency and fatigue problems with more  than 20 vignettes per respondent  (Sauer et al. 2011) . Finally, each vignette should be rated at least 5 times  (Auspurg and Hintz 2014) .  The m ore conservative literature in choice experiments recommend s  at least 50 rates per vignette  (Bennett and Adamowicz 2001) . However,  this later criterion  has no t  been statistically probed."
"49" "The final step was the distribution of the vignettes into questionnaires. The total of 120 cases was still too large to be rated by each respondent; in such situations,  allocating the vignettes to different questionnaires called decks is recommended . Vignettes were randomly assigned to 10 decks ,  each contain ing  12 vignettes.   Thus , all the criteria described above  we re fulfilled.  The decks were randomly assigned to respondents. With the original sample of 2,267 respondents, it was possible to calculate the total number of vignettes to be evaluated: 2,267 (respondents) x 12 (vignettes) = 27,204. As mentioned, the final sample of respondents after constrain t s  wa s restricted to  2,103 . Therefore,  a  total  of 25,236  vignettes  were  rated  and considered in the analysis ."
"50" "The random combination of  the levels of the dimensions  enables us to estimate  all the main effects  independently  of each other. As mentioned, the correlation among dimensions is zero after D-efficient sampling. In addition, Table  3   shows the  correlation matrix of the dimensions for the final sample of respondents. Although they are not zero, the correlations are low.  T he orthogonality of the final sample of rated vignettes is supported.  The slightly correlated dimensions are explained by the unbalanced application of decks. Therefore, each multivariate model includes dummy variables by deck."
"51" "[Table  3 ]"
"52" "Several scholars  indicate  that the main advantage of  FS s  is the combination of the causality of experiments and the external validity of surveys  (Auspurg and Hintz 2014; Jasso 2006; Wallander 2009) .  However,  despite   the  care taken  in  designing  the evaluations , there  is a  significant   risk of cognitive bias   (Sauer et al. 2011) .  A body of methodological literature  with best practices in   FS s  ha s   emerged  in  recent  years   (Atzmüller and Steiner 2010; Auspurg and Hintz 2014; Dülmer 2007; Eifler 2010; Lang 2018; Liebe et al. 2017; Sauer et al. 2011) . Validations have been  conducted  in European countries with evidence support ing   their  application  (Atzmüller and Steiner 2010; Eifler 2010; Sauer et al. 2011) .  However,  there has been a noteworthy lack  of discussion   on  the  feasibility  of  apply ing   FS s  in  less developed  countries.   FS  applications in developing countries  are  recent   (Castillo et al. 2019; Liebe et al. 2017; Mateo Piñones and Valenzuela Carvallo 2017; Olivos 2015) .  In particular,  Latin American   countries   are characterized by lower educational levels   (Barro and Lee 2013) , high levels of institutional mistrust   (Zmerli and Castillo 2015)  and high levels of social disorganization and  fearful  communities   (Valenzuela et al. 2008) .  Therefore, the feasibility of applying  FS s  in less developed countries  cann ot be  taken for  granted."
"53" "In addition , an analysis of reliability and cognitive bias was conducted  using a measurement of perceived difficulty  of the vignette module at the end of the questionnaire . As  is shown  in Table   A1  in the appendix, a small group of respondents considers the vignette module difficult or very difficult ( 4.55 % and 1. 17 %). Although this is a small fraction of respondents, the X 2  test suggests an association of age and educational level with perceived difficulty  (Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix) . However,  the  Cramer's V indicates that these associations are weak. Similar evidence is reported by Saeur et   al.     (2014)  for the case of the  FS  module of the German Socio-Economic Panel. Furthermore, a straightforward measure of consistency was conducted with the squared residual of the vignette dimensions predicting the rating task as the dependent variable. Following  Sauer ,   Auspurg, Hinz and   Liebig,   the  “ inconsistency   of   responses   was   measured   by   the   squared   level-one   residuals from   random   intercept   regressions   with   the   vignette   rating   serving   as   dependent   variable   and   all vignette dimensions   as   predictors \"   (2011:94) .   As   shown in  Table   A3   in   the   appendix,   education and age   are   not   related   to   the   consistency   of   the   judgments.  Moreover, the effect of vignette position (linear, quadratic and cubic effects) is significant. These are indicators of a learning effect because the U-shape shows a decreasing inconsistency while moving forward in the vignette module. In sum, the analysis suggests a high degree of robustness of the  FS  module."
"54" "Analytical strategy"
"55" "For  a straightforward interpretation, Auspurg and Hinz  (2014)  recommend linear models when using 11-points rating scales , being  a common practice in  FS  studies  (Wallander 2009) . In addition, as mentioned above,  FS s  have a hierarchical structure of at least two levels: vignettes and respondents. Thus, the assumption of independent observations of OLS models is violated. In our case, each respondent rated 12 vignettes, which leads to correlated errors. Moreover, an  FS  analysis  aims  to estimate the effect of two kind s  of independent variables. First  are  the vignette dimensions and  their  levels, which could include interaction terms , and  second, how these coefficients vary according to respondents’ characteristics. Therefore, hierarchical linear models are used to simultaneously estimate coefficients at vignette and respondent levels  (Auspurg and Hintz 2014; Hox, Kreft, and Hermkens 1991; Lyons 2008) . Two equations are estimated : o ne for vignette effects within respondents and another for respondents’ effects between respondents. The within-respondent equation is defined as follows:"
"56" "(1)"
"57" "where   is the happiness rating of the respondent  i  (for  i  = 1, …, 2,103) corresponding to the vignette (fictitious person)  j  (for  j  = 1, …, 12);   is the value of the vignette characteristics for vignette  j  and respondent  i  (for n = 1, …,8) ;   is the regression coefficient within respondent  i  for n vignette dimensions; and   is the random error."
"58" "Furthermore, individual happiness ratings on the respondent   level are predicted by the values of vignette dimensions. Thus, for each within-respondent coefficient , the  between-respondent equation  can be expressed as :"
"59" "(2)"
"60" "where   refers to the within-respondent regression coefficient for vignette dimension  m  and respondent  i ;    is  the values of the individual characteristics for respondent  i ;   represents the regression coefficients describing the effect of respondent characteristics on  ; and   the random error."
"61" "Results"
"62" "Table  4  present s  the  effects of  vignette  dimensions  only. As Model 1 suggests, the dimensions of the vignette explain  12% of the happiness judgment variance (Vignette-level R 2  = 0.115). Column 1 of Model 1 shows the  unstandardized  effects of each dimension on the rating task , which  could be considered as the beliefs of the Chilean population over 18 years about determinants of happiness.  According to the respondents, females (B=0.075, p<0.01) and older persons (B=0.024, p<0.001) are happier. Regarding partner relationships, Chileans believe that persons with a recent breakup (B=-0.128, p<0.001) are less happy than those who have had a partner for 5 years. However, persons will be happier in a 1-year relationship (B=0.105, p<0.01) or having been single for a year (B=0.099, p<0.05), compared to a 5-year relationship. There are no differences in the happiness belief regarding individuals who have been single or in a relationship for 5 years.   The effect of family relationship s  supports the logic al  idea that better family relationships increase the happiness level (B=0.168, p<0.001). The belief about  a positive impact of  income  on happiness (B=0.142, p<0.001)  is strong ,   with  the variable rang ing  between  1  and  8 ($210,000. to $5,000,000). Chileans believe that bad health decreases the level of happiness (B=-0.451), while intergenerational mobility increases it (B=0.095, p<0.001). Finally, the lifestyle of the fictitious persons  described  is believed to  generate a  certain happiness level.  Specifically , persons with an exciting life were considered happier than persons with  a  boring (B=-0.561, p<0.001) or stressful life (B=-0.657, p<0.001). Nevertheless, there is no significant difference between having  an  exciting or quiet life.  However,  this analysis does not indicate which dimensions are most important as determinant s  of happiness ,  according to  the beliefs of  Chileans. Thus,  following a common practice in  FS  research   (Liebig and Mau 2016; Shepelak and Alwin 1986; Shlay 2010) ,  Model 1 is estimated considering standardized coefficients (β), which are reported in the third column. In the case of nominal dimensions (partner relationship and lifestyle) ,  each level is recoded into a dummy variable and the original reference category  in the unstandardized model  is omitted to avoid collinearity.  Since dimensions explain rating  a cross individuals, they are standardized over the entire sample, and not within each respondent.  The standardized coefficients  indicate  that health is the most important predictor of happiness for Chileans, followed by  i ncome and lifestyles.  Despite being  significant  predictors , gender, age, and partner relationships showed   lower relevance."
"63" "[Table  4 ]"
"64" "The  universe of  universe of vignette s  includes all the possible combinations. Hence, the analysis of vignette dimensions could also consider the interaction among them. These results provide more fine-grained detail s  of respondents’  judgements and  is one of the advantages of fictitious generated scenarios  that are  difficult to find in real settings. To illustrate this potential direction of analysis,  I  test ed  the beliefs about buffering effects of wealth and family support. The  buffering hypothesis   proposes that higher  income and  better  family relationships could compensate  for  the negative impact of certain life events   (Bozo, Tathan, and Yılmaz 2014; Lin, Li, and Chen 2017; Mikucka 2014; Mikucka and Rizzi 2016) .  Considering our vignette dimensions,  I  tested beliefs about  the  buffering effect of income and family relationship s  for bad health and recent breakup."
"65" "Model 2 in Table  4  reports these interactions. Regarding beliefs of partner relationships, the negative effect of a recent breakup is reduced with better family relationships (B=0.084, p<0.05).  However, the effect of a recent breakup is increased with higher income (B=-0.036, p<0.05). Therefore, family relationships buffer endings of relationships, but income intensifies the negative effect of breaking up (B=-0.036, p<0.05). Despite the contradictory effects of income and family, both buffer the negative effect of bad health on happiness according to the beliefs of Chileans."
"66" "As t he hierarchical structure of  FS s   enables  the estimation of  the variation  in the  vignette dimensions by respondents’ characteristics ,   I  introduce  respondents’ life satisfaction as a respondent-level measurement  to explore  i n those variations .  Respondents are asked, “ Overall,  h ow satisfied are you with your life  at  this moment? ”  The range of  responses   was  from 1 to 10, where 1  is  “ Completely  unsatisfied” and  10   is  “ Completely  satisfied”.  I  expect ed   an  experience of higher levels of li f e satisfaction  to  modif y  beliefs about happiness determinants. Hence,  I  explore d  these variations by interacting income and family relationships  in  the vignette  with respondents ’  life satisfaction.  As Table A4 in the appendix indicates, after the introduction of the respondent-level life satisfaction, the parameter estimates of the vignette dimensions are not substantially altered, which once again demonstrates that fictitious vignettes  were  successfully  distributed randomly to individual respondents  (Model 1, Table A4) ."
"67" "Figure 2 shows the marginal effect of income by respondents’ life satisfaction (B=-0.014, p<0.001) ,  drawn from the multilevel model. The negative slope indicates that the positive effect of income decreases when the life satisfaction of respondents increases. In other words,  respondents with higher levels of life satisf action  will no longer consider income as a relevant determinant of happiness. In addition,  Figure 3 plots the interaction of  the  family relationships dimension and respondents’ life satisfaction  (B=0.015, p<0.05)  In contrast to  the  income dimension, the belief about the positive effect of better family relationships will increase with higher respondent life satisfaction."
"68" "[ Figure  2]"
"69" "[ Figure  3]"
"70" "In sum, these results provide a picture of  the  happiness beliefs of Chileans. This application of  an  FS   facilitated understanding of   judgments about what make s  people happy, and how these judgments change when respondents’ life satisfaction is  taken into account ."
"71" "Conclusions"
"72" "Several methodological issues should be addressed when studying beliefs.  Theories of human cognition and cultural sociology suggest that beliefs are highly endogenous.  Estimating  the  causal effect of beliefs on choices or judgments may overcome the potential bias br ought  about by relationality of beliefs.  By means of appl ying  FS s  to the study of  causal  attribution s  of  happiness, this article  showed how endogeneity bias could be  addressed .  The orthogonality of dimension s  in the vignette sample and the random assignment of decks to respondents provide unconfounded causal effects.  Moreover, th e s e   FS s   were  applied in a develop ing  country, which contribute s  to a more general validation of its applicability  in different contexts . As Liebe et al.  (Liebe et al. 2017)  showed for African countries, this analysis suggests that  FS s  are applicable in the case of a Latin American  c ountry."
"73" "Researchers advocating a credibility revolution ha ve  been criticized for seeking good answer s  instead of good question s   (Angrist and Pischke 2010) . What ha s  been done throughout this article is to introduce a method which answer s  a n important  question about  the  quality of life. Moreover, unlike lab experiments, FS s  seek causation in general population surveys. Therefore, a generalizable good answer about happiness beliefs is also provided. In addition, a broad discussion about  the  relationality of beliefs in social cognition and sociology provide s  a  theoretical  ground for  using this survey method. FS s  ha ve  been posited as a theoretically guided  tool ."
"74" "By applying FS s , t his study  suggests  a  folk theory  of happiness determinants .  Previous studies have used semi-structured interviews or non-experimental surveys to identify  the  conceptualization of happiness and beliefs about  its  determinants   (Chiasson et al. 1996; Delle Fave et al. 2016; Lu and Gilmour 2004; Pflug 2009) .  With FS s , this study enabled  causal beliefs to be identified  as part of practical consciousness. In this regard, Chileans  believe health and income  are  the most  significant   predictors of happiness. This is an interesting finding which posits these beliefs  o n the individualistic side of the collectivistic-individualistic axis. However, for those who have a higher life satisfaction ,  income  is less important and family relationships emerge  as a pivotal determinant of happiness. This suggest s  that not only factors  external  to the individual  might  explain  variance in  happiness  meanings , but also the ir  own experience of  subjective well-being.  Moreover, another conceptualization of value system s  could provide an interpretation of these results. Welzel and Inglehart  (2010)  defined survival versus self-expression values. The  former  emphasizes economic and physical security, which is consistent with the prominence of health and income as determinants of happiness in our study. Thus, self-expressive elements such as interpersonal relations and lifestyle are relegated to a second tier.  Therefore, Chileans ’  beliefs are consistent with a survival value system."
"75" "Further research could extend this analysis beyond measurement s  of quality of life beliefs. For instance, a longstanding research agenda in social stratification ha s  discussed beliefs  about  poverty determinants  (Homan, Valentino, and Weed 2017; Kluegel and Smith 1981) , and this question  raises  the same methodological challenges . Concepts such as “welfare queen” or “culture of poverty” are highly contest ed  by both lay   people and scholars.  FS s , as  a form of  indirect questioning, could be a strategy to overcome social desirability  i n this field  and provide unconfounded estimations ."
"76" "The  FS literature has highlighted that this survey experiment could  address the  social desirability bias.  This  is defined as the “tendency of people to deny socially undesirable traits and to ‘admit’ socially desirable ones”  (Phillips and Clancy 1970:504) . This style of  response  is an inherent problem  in  survey -based  studies. It has been acknowledged as a serious source of bias in quality of life studies because a large component of the variance of well-being scales is related to social desirability  (Carstensen and Cone 1983; Pavot and Diener 2009) . Although social desirability provides valuable information about people ’s  judgment and behavior, the bias could lead either to under - reporting socially undesirable beliefs, states, events or behaviors (e.g. stress, drinking, divorce), or over-reporting positive ones (e.g. life satisfaction, good luck, friendship)."
"77" "The problem of social desirability is also  solved  by FS s, but a s Auspurg et al.  (2015)  pointed out,  this  is still an untested advantage of FS s . Although the aim of the study is not to test the reduction of social desirability bias, the potential benefit of FS s in addressing  social desirability could be highlighted. FS s  are an indirect questioning technique. Instead of asking what people think about a certain dimension, they evaluate it in a fictitious scenario. According to Lusk and Nordwood  (2010) , the assumption underlying indirect questioning  is that when answering direct questions people want to make themselves look good , but they are not concerned with making others look good. For instance, answering the direct question “ Does money  make you happy ? ” could be affected by the avoidance of  seeming  materialistic. However, in FS s , we could include “money” as a dimension describing a fictitious person and ask  about  the level of happiness of this person. From a dual-process perspective  (Vaisey 2009) , beliefs may have a dual role in the relationship with judgment: both motivation and justification. If we are unable to avoid social desirability, beliefs may play the role of justification or sense- maker of choice  (Swidler 1986, 2001) . For instance, in semi-structured interviews, people  tend not to  admit they believe money  brings  happiness. Any answer about happiness determinants is a discursive elaboration to justify  an  adopted position. However, in FS s , rating will unveil practical consciousness or tacit  beliefs that  motivate every-day decision-making and  are  not affected by social desirability as defined by survey research .  Future studies could be extended by  incorporat ing   a  social desirability scale  ( e.g.  Crowne and Marlowe 1960)  in combination with  a  random assignment of  vignettes , while  single-item measurements could be a direction for  the  validation of   FS s ."
"78" "In sum, beliefs are both motivation and justification  for  decision-making. For quality of life research, defin ing  accurately causal attributions of happiness is a crucial step in the understanding of life satisfaction attainment. If we understand life as a decision tree where life satisfaction is the goal, each node is a  decision that  consider s  conscious evaluations of objective conditions and culture in its conscious and unconscious dimensions.  FS s are  a useful tool  to  unveil those unconscious elements of judgment in the pursuit of happiness."
"79" "References"
"80" "Aizawa, Kenneth. 2003.  The Systematicity Arguments . Dordrecht:  Kluwer."
"81" "Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2010. “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: How Better Research Design Is Taking the Con out of Econometrics.”  Journal of Economic Perspectives  24(2):3–30."
"82" "Atzmüller, Christiane and Peter M. Steiner. 2010. “Experimental Vignette Studies in Survey Research.”  Methodology  6(3):128–38."
"83" "Auspurg, Katrin and Thomas Hintz. 2014.  Factorial Survey Experiments . New York: Sage."
"84" "Auspurg, Katrin, Thomas Hinz, Stefan Liebig, and Carsten Sauer. 2015. “The Factorial Survey as a Method for Measuring Sensitive Issues.” Pp. 137–49 in  Improving survey methods : lessons from recent research , edited by U. Engel, B. Jann, P. Lynn, A. Scherpenzeel, and P. Sturgis. New York: Routledge."
"85" "Auspurg, Katrin, Thomas Hinz, and Carsten Sauer. 2017. “Why Should Women Get Less? Evidence on the Gender Pay Gap from Multifactorial Survey Experiments.”  American Sociological Review  82(1):179–210."
"86" "Barro, Robert J. and Jong Wha Lee. 2013. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950–2010.”  Journal of Development Economics  104:184–98."
"87" "Bennett, J. and V. Adamowicz. 2001. “Some Fundamentals of Environmental Choice Modelling.” Pp. 37–72 in  The choice modelling approach to environmental valuation , edited by J. Bennett and R. Blamey. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar."
"88" "Boutyline, Andrei and Stephen Vaisey. 2017. “Belief Network Analysis: A Relational Approach to Understanding the Structure of Attitudes.”  American Journal of Sociology  122(5):1371–1447."
"89" "Bozo, Özlem, Ece Tathan, and Tuğba Yılmaz. 2014. “Does Perceived Social Support Buffer the Negative Effects of Type C Personality on Quality of Life of Breast Cancer Patients?”  Social Indicators Research  119(2):791–801."
"90" "Braddon-Mitchell, David and Frank Jackson. 1996.  Philosophy of Mind and Cognition: An Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"91" "Bruner, Jerome. 1990.  Acts of Meaning . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press."
"92" "Camp, Elisabeth. 2007. “Thinking with Maps.”  Philosophical Perspectives  21:145–82."
"93" "Carstensen, L. L. and J. D. Cone. 1983. “Social Desirability and the Measurement of Psychological Well-Being in Elderly Persons.”  Journal of Gerontology  38(6):713–15."
"94" "Castillo, Juan Carlos, Francisco Olivos, and Ariel Azar. 2019. “Deserving a Just Pension: A Factorial Survey Approach.”  Social Science Quarterly  100(1):359–78."
"95" "Chaudhuri, Arijit. 2010.  Randomized Response and Indirect Questioning Techniques in Surveys . New York: Chapman and Hall/CRC."
"96" "Chiasson, Nicole, Lise Dube, and Jean-Pierre Blondin. 1996. “Happiness: : A Look into the Folk Psychology of Four Cultural Groups.”  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology  27(6):673–91."
"97" "Converse, Philip E. 2006. “The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics.”  Critical Review  18(1–3):1–74."
"98" "Crowne, Douglas P. and David Marlowe. 1960. “A New Scale of Social Desirability Independent of Psychopathology.”  Journal of Consulting Psychology  24(4):349–54."
"99" "Delle Fave, Antonella, Ingrid Brdar, Marié P. Wissing, Ulisses Araujo, Alejandro Castro Solano, Teresa Freire, María Del Rocío Hernández-Pozo, Paul Jose, Tamás Martos, Hilde E. Nafstad, Jeanne Nakamura, Kamlesh Singh, and Lawrence Soosai-Nathan. 2016. “Lay Definitions of Happiness across Nations: The Primacy of Inner Harmony and Relational Connectedness.”  Frontiers in Psychology  7(30):1–23."
"100" "Diener, Ed, Eunkook M. Suh, Heidi Smith, and Liang Shao. 1995. “National Differences in Reported Subjective Well-Being: Why Do They Occur?”  Social Indicators Research  34(1):7–32."
"101" "DiMaggio, Paul, Ramina Sotoudeh, Amir Goldberg, and Hana Shepherd. 2018. “Culture out of Attitudes: Relationality, Population Heterogeneity and Attitudes toward Science and Religion in the U.S.”  Poetics  68:31–51."
"102" "Dülmer, Hermann. 2007. “Experimental Plans in Factorial Surveys.”  Sociological Methods & Research  35(3):382–409."
"103" "Eaton, Liberty and Johann Louw. 2000. “Culture and Self in South Africa: Individualism-Collectivism Predictions.”  The Journal of Social Psychology  140(2):210–17."
"104" "Eifler, Stefanie. 2010. “Validity of a Factorial Survey Approach to the Analysis of Criminal Behavior.”  Methodology  6(3):139–46."
"105" "Fishbein, Martin and Icek Ajzen. 1975.  Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior : An Introduction to Theory and Research . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co."
"106" "Fodor, Jerry A. and Zenon W. Pylyshyn. 1988. “Connectionism and Cognitive Architecture: A Critical Analysis.”  Cognition  28(1–2):3–71."
"107" "Hainmueller, Jens, Daniel J. Hopkins, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2014. “Causal Inference in Conjoint Analysis: Understanding Multidimensional Choices via Stated Preference Experiments.”  Political Analysis  22(01):1–30."
"108" "Hedström, Peter. 2005.  Dissecting the Social: On the Principles of Analytical Sociology - Kindle Edition by Peter Hedstrom. Politics &amp; Social Sciences Kindle EBooks @ Amazon.Com.  NewYork: Cambridge University Press."
"109" "Homan, Patricia, Lauren Valentino, and Emi Weed. 2017. “Being and Becoming Poor: How Cultural Schemas Shape Beliefs About Poverty.”  Social Forces  95(3):1023–48."
"110" "Hox, Joop, Ita Kreft, and Piet Hermkens. 1991. “The Analysis of Factorial Surveys.”  Sociological Methods & Research  19(4):493–510."
"111" "Huang, Jiawen. 2019. “Income Inequality, Distributive Justice Beliefs, and Happiness in China: Evidence from a Nationwide Survey.”  Social Indicators Research  142(1):83–105."
"112" "Jasso, Guillermina. 2006. “Factorial Survey Methods for Studying Beliefs and Judgments.”  Sociological Methods & Research  34(3):334–423."
"113" "Kluegel, James and Eliot Smith. 1981. “Beliefs About Stratification.”  Annual Review of Sociology  7:29–56."
"114" "Kuhfeld, Warren F., Randall D. Tobias, and Mark Garratt. 1994. “Efficient Experimental Design with Marketing Research Applications.”  Journal of Marketing Research  31(4):545–57."
"115" "Lamé, Inge E., Madelon L. Peters, Johan W. S. Vlaeyen, Maarten v. Kleef, and Jacob Patijn. 2005. “Quality of Life in Chronic Pain Is More Associated with Beliefs about Pain, than with Pain Intensity.”  European Journal of Pain  9(1):15–24."
"116" "Lang, Volker. 2018. “Scaling Sensitive Factorial Survey Analysis.”  Sociological Methods & Research  1–34."
"117" "Liebe, Ulf, Ismaïl M. Moumouni, Christine Bigler, Chantal Ingabire, and Sabin Bieri. 2017. “Using Factorial Survey Experiments to Measure Attitudes, Social Norms, and Fairness Concerns in Developing Countries.”  Sociological Methods & Research  1–32."
"118" "Liebig, Burden Stefan and Steffen Mau. 2016. “When Is a Taxation System Just? Attitudes towards General Taxation Principles and towards the Justice of One’s Own Tax.” Pp. 97–122 in  Social Justice, Legitimacy and the Welfare State , edited by S. Mau and B. Veghte. London: Routledge."
"119" "Lin, Wei-Fang, Tsui-Shan Li, and Lung Hung Chen. 2017. “Sacrifice in a Supportive Marriage: Social Support as a Moderator Buffers the Negative Effects of Sacrifice in Marriage.”  Journal of Happiness Studies  18(2):575–89."
"120" "Lu, Luo and Robin Gilmour. 2004. “Culture and Conceptions of Happiness: Individual Oriented and Social Oriented Swb.”  Journal of Happiness Studies  5(3):269–91."
"121" "Lu, Luo and Jian Bin Shih. 1997. “Sources of Happiness: A Qualitative Approach.”  The Journal of Social Psychology  137(2):181–87."
"122" "Lusk, Jayson L. and F. Bailey Norwood. 2010. “Direct Versus Indirect Questioning: An Application to the  Well-Being of Farm Animals.”  Social Indicators Research  96(3):551–65."
"123" "Lyons, Christopher J. 2008. “Individual Perceptions and the Social Construction of Hate Crimes: A Factorial Survey.”  The Social Science Journal  45(1):107–31."
"124" "Maas, Cora J. M. and Joop J. Hox. 2005. “Sufficient Sample Sizes for Multilevel Modeling.”  Methodology  1(3):86–92."
"125" "Markus, Hazel and Shinobu Kitayama. 1991. “Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation.”  Psychological Review  98(2):224–53."
"126" "Mateo Piñones, Mariel and Eduardo Valenzuela Carvallo. 2017. “Being Mapuche Today in Chile: Judgement Criteria for Ethnic Identification among the New Generation.”  Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies  43(9):1580–96."
"127" "Mathews, Gordon. 2012. “Happiness, Culture, and Context.”  International Journal of Wellbeing  2(4):299–312."
"128" "Mikucka, Małgorzata. 2014. “Does Individualistic Culture Lower the Well-Being of the Unemployed? Evidence from Europe.”  Journal of Happiness Studies  15(3):673–91."
"129" "Mikucka, Małgorzata and Ester Rizzi. 2016. “Does It Take a Village to Raise a Child?”  Demographic Research  34:943–94."
"130" "Olivos, Francisco. 2015. “Construcción de Juicios de Confianza Hacia Compañías Mineras En El Norte de Chile.”  Estudios Gerenciales  31(136):310–18."
"131" "Olivos, Pablo and Ricardo Ernst. 2017. “Feel Good or Be Happy : Distinctions between Emotions and Development in the Environmental Psychology Research of Wellbeing.” Pp. 546–65 in  The Routledge International Handbook of Critical Positive Psychology , edited by N. J. L. Brown, T. Lomas, and F. J. Eiroa-Orosa. London: Routledge."
"132" "Pavot, William and Ed Diener. 2009. “Review of the Satisfaction With Life Scale.” Pp. 101–17 in  Assessing Well-Being , edited by Diener Ed. Dordrecht: Springer."
"133" "Pearl, Judea, Madelyn Glymour, and Nicholas P. Jewell. 2016.  Causal Inference in Statistics : A Primer . West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd."
"134" "Pflug, Jan. 2009. “Folk Theories of Happiness: A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Conceptions of Happiness in Germany and South Africa.”  Social Indicators Research  92(3):551–63."
"135" "Phillips, Derek L. and Kevin J. Clancy. 1970. “Response Biases in Field Studies of Mental Illness.”  American Sociological Review  35(3):503."
"136" "Rossi, P. H. and A. B. Anderson. 1982. “The Factorial Survey Approach: An Introduction.” Pp. 15–67 in  Measuring social judgments: The factorial survey approach , edited by P. H. Rossi and S. L. Nock. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage."
"137" "Rydgren, J. 2009. “Beliefs.” Pp. 72–93 in  The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology , edited by P. Bearman and P. Hedström. Oxford University Press."
"138" "Sauer, C., K. Auspurg, T. Hinz, and S. Liebig. 2011. “The Application of Factorial Surveys in General Population Samples: The Effects of Respondent Age and Education on Response Times and Response  Consistency.”  Survey Research Methods  5(3):89–102."
"139" "Sauer, Carsten, Katrin Auspurg, Thomas Hinz, Stefan Liebig, and Jurgen Schupp. 2014.  Method Effects in Factorial Surveys: An Analysis of Respondents’ Comments, Interviewers’ Assessments, and Response Behavior . 629. Berlin."
"140" "Shepelak, Norma J. and Duane F. Alwin. 1986. “Beliefs about Inequality and Perceptions of Distributive Justice.”  American Sociological Review  51(1):30."
"141" "Shlay, Anne B. 2010. “African American, White and Hispanic Child Care Preferences: A Factorial Survey Analysis of Welfare Leavers by Race and Ethnicity.”  Social Science Research  39(1):125–41."
"142" "Shweder, Richard and Jonathan Haidt. 2000. “The Cultural Psychology of the Emotions: Ancient and New.” Pp. 397–414 in  Handbook of emotions , edited by M. Lewis and J. M. Haviland-Jones. New York: Guilford."
"143" "Sirgy, M. Joseph. 2018. “The Psychology of Material Well-Being.”  Applied Research in Quality of Life  13(2):273–301."
"144" "Sirgy, M. Joseph, Mohsen Joshanloo, and Richard J. Estes. 2019. “The Global Challenge of Jihadist Terrorism: A Quality-of-Life Model.”  Social Indicators Research  141(1):191–215."
"145" "Small, Mario Luis, David J. Harding, and Michèle Lamont. 2010. “Reconsidering Culture and Poverty.”  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science  629(1):6–27."
"146" "Stegmueller, Daniel. 2013. “How Many Countries for Multilevel Modeling? A Comparison of Frequentist and Bayesian Approaches.”  American Journal of Political Science  57(3):748–61."
"147" "Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.”  American Sociological Review  51(2):273."
"148" "Swidler, Ann. 2001.  Talk of Love: How Culture Matters . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press."
"149" "Tay, Louis and Ed Diener. 2011. “Needs and Subjective Well-Being around the World.”  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  101(2):354–65."
"150" "Vaisey, Stephen. 2009. “Motivation and Justification: A Dual‐Process Model of Culture in Action.”  American Journal of Sociology  114(6):1675–1715."
"151" "Vaisey, Stephen and Lauren Valentino. 2018. “Culture and Choice: Toward Integrating Cultural Sociology with the Judgment and Decision-Making Sciences.”  Poetics  68:131–43."
"152" "Valenzuela, E., S. Schwartzman, A. Biehl, and J. Valenzuela.  2008.  Vinculos, Creencias e Ilusiones: La Cohesion Social de Los Latinoamericanos .  Santiago, Chile: Uqbar."
"153" "Veenhoven, Ruut. 2001. “Quality-of-Life and Happiness: Not Quite the Same.” Pp. 67–95 in  Health and Quality of Life , edited by G. De Girolamo, P. Becchi, F. Coppa, D. De Leo, G. Neri, P. Rucci, and P. Scocco. Torino, Italia: Centro Scientifico Editore."
"154" "Wallander, Lisa. 2009. “25 Years of Factorial Surveys in Sociology: A Review.”  Social Science Research  38(3):505–20."
"155" "Welzel, Christian and Ronald Inglehart. 2010. “Agency, Values, and Well-Being: A Human Development  Model.”  Social Indicators Research  97(1):43–63."
"156" "WHOQOL. 2006. “A Cross-Cultural Study of Spirituality, Religion, and Personal Beliefs as Components of Quality of Life.”  Social Science & Medicine  62(6):1486–97."
"157" "Wiersma, Miriam, Narcyz Ghinea, Ian Kerridge, and Wendy Lipworth. 2019. “‘Treat Them into the Grave’: Cancer Physicians’ Attitudes towards the Use of High-Cost Cancer Medicines at the End of Life.”  Sociology of Health & Illness  41(2):343–59."
"158" "Zmerli, Sonja and Juan Carlos Castillo. 2015. “Income Inequality, Distributive Fairness and Political Trust in Latin America.”  Social Science Research  52:179–92."
"159" "Note: 210,000 Chileans pesos  was  equivalent to 320 USD at the time of the  survey  and is the minimum legal wage in Chile."
"160" "Figure 1"
"161" "Sample vignette translated into English."
"162" "Note: Interval of confidence at 95%.  Margins estimated at the means of covariates."
"163" "Figure 2"
"164" "Average Marginal Effects of Vignettes’ Income by Respondents’ Life Satisfaction."
"165" "Note: Interval of confidence at 95%.  Margins estimated at the means of covariates."
"166" "Figure 3"
"167" "Average Marginal Effects of Vignettes’ Family Relationships by Respondents’ Life Satisfaction."
"168" "Table 1"
"169" "Descriptive statistics"
"170" "Variable"
"171" "Mean"
"172" "Standard Deviation"
"173" "N"
"174" "Min"
"175" "Max"
"176" "Male"
"177" "0.50"
"178" "0.50"
"179" "2103"
"180" "0"
"181" "1"
"182" "18-35"
"183" "0.36"
"184" "0.48"
"185" "2103"
"186" "0"
"187" "1"
"188" "36-52"
"189" "0.33"
"190" "0.47"
"191" "2103"
"192" "0"
"193" "1"
"194" "53-95"
"195" "0.31"
"196" "0.46"
"197" "2103"
"198" "0"
"199" "1"
"200" "Primary Education"
"201" "0.31"
"202" "0.46"
"203" "2103"
"204" "0"
"205" "1"
"206" "High School"
"207" "0.32"
"208" "0.47"
"209" "2103"
"210" "0"
"211" "1"
"212" "Higher Education"
"213" "0.37"
"214" "0.48"
"215" "2103"
"216" "0"
"217" "1"
"218" "Life Satisfaction"
"219" "7.46"
"220" "2.02"
"221" "2103"
"222" "1"
"223" "10"
"224" "Deck 1"
"225" "0.10"
"226" "0.29"
"227" "2103"
"228" "0"
"229" "1"
"230" "Deck 2"
"231" "0.08"
"232" "0.27"
"233" "2103"
"234" "0"
"235" "1"
"236" "Deck 3"
"237" "0.06"
"238" "0.24"
"239" "2103"
"240" "0"
"241" "1"
"242" "Deck 4"
"243" "0.07"
"244" "0.26"
"245" "2103"
"246" "0"
"247" "1"
"248" "Deck 5"
"249" "0.08"
"250" "0.28"
"251" "2103"
"252" "0"
"253" "1"
"254" "Deck 6"
"255" "0.14"
"256" "0.35"
"257" "2103"
"258" "0"
"259" "1"
"260" "Deck 7"
"261" "0.13"
"262" "0.34"
"263" "2103"
"264" "0"
"265" "1"
"266" "Deck 8"
"267" "0.11"
"268" "0.31"
"269" "2103"
"270" "0"
"271" "1"
"272" "Deck 9"
"273" "0.10"
"274" "0.30"
"275" "2103"
"276" "0"
"277" "1"
"278" "Deck 10"
"279" "0.12"
"280" "0.33"
"281" "2103"
"282" "0"
"283" "1"
"284" "Perceived Difficulty"
"285" "3.96"
"286" "0.85"
"287" "2103"
"288" "1"
"289" "5"
"290" "Note: Calculations based on weighted data."
"291" "Table  2"
"292" "Dimensions and levels of vignettes"
"293" "#"
"294" "Dimension"
"295" "Levels"
"296" "1"
"297" "Gender"
"298" "Male/Female"
"299" "2"
"300" "Age"
"301" "20/30/40/50/60/70"
"302" "3"
"303" "Partner relationship"
"304" "Without  partner  for 5 years/Without  partner  for 1 year/Recent break up/ With  partner  for 1 year and/With  partner  for 5 years"
"305" "4"
"306" "Family relationships"
"307" "Very bad/Bad/Good/Very good"
"308" "5"
"309" "Income"
"310" "$210,000/$400,000/ $600,000/ $800,000/$1,000,000/ $2,000,000/ $3,000,000/$5,000,000"
"311" "6"
"312" "Health 1"
"313" "Very bad/Bad/Good/Very good"
"314" "7"
"315" "Life style"
"316" "Exciting/Quiet/Boring/Stressful"
"317" "8"
"318" "Intergenerational mobility"
"319" "Much worse/Worse/Same/Better/Much better"
"320" "Note:  1  This dimension is reversed in the multilevel analyses and re-labeled as bad health."
"321" "Table  3"
"322" "Orthogonality of vignettes’ dimensions"
"323" "Sex"
"324" "Age"
"325" "Partner relationship"
"326" "Family relationships"
"327" "Income"
"328" "Health"
"329" "Life style"
"330" "Inter. Mobility"
"331" "Sex"
"332" "1"
"333" "Age"
"334" "0.024"
"335" "1"
"336" "Partner relationship"
"337" "0.039"
"338" "-0.044"
"339" "1"
"340" "Family relationships"
"341" "-0.059"
"342" "0.049"
"343" "0.044"
"344" "1"
"345" "Income"
"346" "0.014"
"347" "-0.002"
"348" "0.002"
"349" "-0.049"
"350" "1"
"351" "Health"
"352" "-0.022"
"353" "-0.011"
"354" "-0.027"
"355" "-0.021"
"356" "-0.040"
"357" "1"
"358" "Life style"
"359" "0.017"
"360" "0.060"
"361" "0.002"
"362" "-0.052"
"363" "-0.004"
"364" "0.034"
"365" "1"
"366" "Inter. Mobility"
"367" "0.025"
"368" "-0.010"
"369" "-0.040"
"370" "0.000"
"371" "-0.016"
"372" "0.010"
"373" "-0.022"
"374" "1"
"375" "Note:  Polychoric  correlations  reported.  Calculations based on weighted data."
"376" "Table  4"
"377" "Results of Multilevel Linear Models for Happiness Evaluation"
"378" "Model  1"
"379" "Model  2"
"380" "VARIABLES"
"381" "B"
"382" "SE"
"383" "β"
"384" "B"
"385" "SE"
"386" "Female"
"387" "0.075**"
"388" "(0.025)"
"389" "0.038"
"390" "0.112***"
"391" "(0.027)"
"392" "Age"
"393" "0.024***"
"394" "(0.007)"
"395" "0.041"
"396" "0.017*"
"397" "(0.007)"
"398" "Ref. Cat.: With  partner  for 5 years"
"399" "Without   partner   for  5  years"
"400" "-0.063"
"401" "(0.041)"
"402" "-0.025"
"403" "-0.379**"
"404" "(0.130)"
"405" "Without   partner   for  1  year"
"406" "0.099*"
"407" "(0.039)"
"408" "0.040"
"409" "-0.311*"
"410" "(0.158)"
"411" "Recent  break up"
"412" "-0.128***"
"413" "(0.038)"
"414" "-0.051"
"415" "-0.224"
"416" "(0.127)"
"417" "With  partner for 1 year"
"418" "0.105**"
"419" "(0.037)"
"420" "0.042"
"421" "-0.001"
"422" "(0.120)"
"423" "Family   relationships"
"424" "0.168***"
"425" "(0.012)"
"426" "0.188"
"427" "0.306***"
"428" "(0.036)"
"429" "Income"
"430" "0.142***"
"431" "(0.007)"
"432" "0.326"
"433" "0.185***"
"434" "(0.019)"
"435" "Bad   health"
"436" "-0.451***"
"437" "(0.015)"
"438" "0.503"
"439" "-0.169***"
"440" "(0.040)"
"441" "Ref. Cat.:  Exciting   life"
"442" "Quiet"
"443" "0.001"
"444" "(0.035)"
"445" "0.001"
"446" "-0.012"
"447" "(0.036)"
"448" "Boring"
"449" "-0.561***"
"450" "(0.040)"
"451" "-0.241"
"452" "-0.602***"
"453" "(0.041)"
"454" "Stressful"
"455" "-0.657***"
"456" "(0.038)"
"457" "-0.283"
"458" "-0.676***"
"459" "(0.040)"
"460" "Intergenerational   mobility"
"461" "0.095***"
"462" "(0.010)"
"463" "0.135"
"464" "0.090***"
"465" "(0.010)"
"466" "Ref. Cat.: With  partner  for 5 years X Family Relationships"
"467" "Without  partner  for 5 years X Family Relationships"
"468" "0.062"
"469" "(0.036)"
"470" "Without  partner  for  1 year  X Family Relationships"
"471" "0.148***"
"472" "(0.042)"
"473" "Recent break up X Family Relationships"
"474" "0.084*"
"475" "(0.036)"
"476" "With  partner  for  1 year  X Family Relationships"
"477" "0.029"
"478" "(0.035)"
"479" "Bad health X Family Relationships"
"480" "-0.082***"
"481" "(0.011)"
"482" "Ref. Cat.: With  partner  for 5 years X Income"
"483" "Without  partner  for 5 years X Income"
"484" "0.038*"
"485" "(0.017)"
"486" "Without  partner  for  1 year  X Income"
"487" "0.004"
"488" "(0.018)"
"489" "Recent break up X Income"
"490" "-0.036*"
"491" "(0.018)"
"492" "With  partner  for  1 year  X Income"
"493" "0.015"
"494" "(0.018)"
"495" "Bad   health  X  Income"
"496" "-0.017***"
"497" "(0.005)"
"498" "Constant"
"499" "2.824***"
"500" "(0.110)"
"501" "5.258"
"502" "3.721***"
"503" "(0.164)"
"504" "Vignette-level   variance"
"505" "0.837"
"506" "(0.040)"
"507" "0.839***"
"508" "(0.040)"
"509" "Respondent-level   variance"
"510" "3.081"
"511" "(0.055)"
"512" "3.066***"
"513" "(0.055)"
"514" "Vignette-level   R 2"
"515" "0.115"
"516" "0.118"
"517" "Vignette-level   observations"
"518" "25,236"
"519" "25,236"
"520" "Respondent-level   observations"
"521" "2,103"
"522" "2,103"
"523" "Note: Unstandardized regression coefficients are reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Age, family relationships, income, health and intergenerational mobility are assumed to be continuous for the sake of simplicity.  Dummies for decks included, but not reported.  Restricted maximum likelihood estimation. R 2  shown is the proportional reduction of the mean squared error of prediction for the level 1 modeled proportion of variance, defined as: 1 − [var( Y ij  −  X ij /var( Y ij )]   (Snijders and Bosker 2012:352) .  Calculations based on weighted data.  *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05."
"524" "Table A1"
"525" "Perceived difficulty by age (%)"
"526" "Age"
"527" "18-35"
"528" "36-52"
"529" "53-95"
"530" "Total"
"531" "Very easy"
"532" "32.92"
"533" "25.62"
"534" "17.41"
"535" "25.73"
"536" "Easy"
"537" "48.00"
"538" "54.37"
"539" "52.09"
"540" "51.37"
"541" "Fair"
"542" "14.22"
"543" "14.67"
"544" "23.38"
"545" "17.18"
"546" "Difficult"
"547" "3.78"
"548" "3.98"
"549" "6.06"
"550" "4.55"
"551" "Very difficult"
"552" "1.08"
"553" "1.36"
"554" "1.07"
"555" "1.17"
"556" "Total"
"557" "100"
"558" "100"
"559" "100"
"560" "100"
"561" "Pearson X 2 (8)"
"562" "59.108  Pr  = 0.000"
"563" "Cramer’s V"
"564" "0.121"
"565" "Note:  Calculations based on weighted data . X 2  and Cramer’s V were estimated with non-weighted sample."
"566" "Table A2"
"567" "Perceived difficulty by educational level"
"568" "Educational Level"
"569" "Primary Education"
"570" "High School"
"571" "Higher Education"
"572" "Very easy"
"573" "33.63"
"574" "26.06"
"575" "18.91"
"576" "Easy"
"577" "45.53"
"578" "52.36"
"579" "55.35"
"580" "Fair"
"581" "15.62"
"582" "15.17"
"583" "20.20"
"584" "Difficult"
"585" "3.57"
"586" "4.78"
"587" "5.15"
"588" "Very difficult"
"589" "1.65"
"590" "1.64"
"591" "0.38"
"592" "Total"
"593" "100"
"594" "100"
"595" "100"
"596" "Pearson X 2 (8)"
"597" "50.079  Pr  = 0.000"
"598" "Cramer’s V"
"599" "0.111"
"600" "Note:  Calculations based on weighted data . X 2  and Cramer’s V were estimated with non-weighted sample."
"601" "Table A3"
"602" "Regression on squared residuals"
"603" "Model  1"
"604" "VARIABLES"
"605" "B"
"606" "SE"
"607" "Vignette  position (1-12)"
"608" "4.441***"
"609" "(0.170)"
"610" "Squared   vignette  position (1-12)"
"611" "-0.703***"
"612" "(0.029)"
"613" "Cubic   vignette  position (1-12)"
"614" "0.034***"
"615" "(0.002)"
"616" "Ref. Cat.:  Higher   education"
"617" "High  school"
"618" "-0.121"
"619" "(0.090)"
"620" "Primary   school"
"621" "-0.166"
"622" "(0.102)"
"623" "Ref. Cat.: 18-35  years"
"624" "36-52  years"
"625" "0.067"
"626" "(0.095)"
"627" "53-95  years"
"628" "0.012"
"629" "(0.101)"
"630" "Constant"
"631" "19.870***"
"632" "(0.307)"
"633" "Vignette-level   variance"
"634" "2.81 e -23***"
"635" "(2.52 e -23)"
"636" "Respondent-level   variance"
"637" "63.96 0 ***"
"638" "(0.569)"
"639" "Vignette-level   R 2"
"640" "0.042"
"641" "Vignette-level   observations"
"642" "25,236"
"643" "Respondent-level   observations"
"644" "2,103"
"645" "Note: Unstandardized regression coefficients are reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Restricted maximum likelihood estimation. R 2  shown is the proportional reduction of the mean squared error of prediction for level 1 modeled proportion of variance, defined as: 1 −  [var( Y ij  −  X ij /var( Y ij )]   (Snijders and Bosker 2012:352) .  Calculations based on weighted data .  *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05"
"646" "Table A4"
"647" "Full multilevel linear model with cross-level interactions"
"648" "Model  1"
"649" "Model   2"
"650" "Model   3"
"651" "VARIABLES"
"652" "B"
"653" "SE"
"654" "B"
"655" "SE"
"656" "B"
"657" "SE"
"658" "Vignette-level  variables"
"659" "Female"
"660" "0.075**"
"661" "(0.025)"
"662" "0.072**"
"663" "(0.025)"
"664" "0.083***"
"665" "(0.025)"
"666" "Age"
"667" "0.024***"
"668" "(0.007)"
"669" "0.024***"
"670" "(0.007)"
"671" "0.028***"
"672" "(0.007)"
"673" "Ref. Cat.: With  partner  for 5 years"
"674" "Without   partner   for  5  years"
"675" "-0.063"
"676" "(0.041)"
"677" "-0.075"
"678" "(0.041)"
"679" "-0.051"
"680" "(0.042)"
"681" "Without   partner   for  1  year"
"682" "0.099*"
"683" "(0.039)"
"684" "0.106**"
"685" "(0.038)"
"686" "0.078*"
"687" "(0.039)"
"688" "Recent  break up"
"689" "-0.128***"
"690" "(0.038)"
"691" "-0.134***"
"692" "(0.037)"
"693" "-0.133***"
"694" "(0.038)"
"695" "With  partner  for 1 year and"
"696" "0.105**"
"697" "(0.037)"
"698" "0.106**"
"699" "(0.037)"
"700" "0.099**"
"701" "(0.037)"
"702" "Family   relationships"
"703" "0.168***"
"704" "(0.012)"
"705" "0.168***"
"706" "(0.012)"
"707" "0.056"
"708" "(0.046)"
"709" "Income"
"710" "0.142***"
"711" "(0.007)"
"712" "0.246***"
"713" "(0.029)"
"714" "0.143***"
"715" "(0.007)"
"716" "Bad   health"
"717" "-0.451***"
"718" "(0.015)"
"719" "-0.451***"
"720" "(0.015)"
"721" "-0.457***"
"722" "(0.015)"
"723" "Ref. Cat.:  Exciting   life"
"724" "Quiet"
"725" "0.001"
"726" "(0.035)"
"727" "-0.002"
"728" "(0.034)"
"729" "-0.001"
"730" "(0.034)"
"731" "Boring"
"732" "-0.561***"
"733" "(0.040)"
"734" "-0.555***"
"735" "(0.038)"
"736" "-0.563***"
"737" "(0.040)"
"738" "Stressful"
"739" "-0.657***"
"740" "(0.038)"
"741" "-0.655***"
"742" "(0.037)"
"743" "-0.671***"
"744" "(0.038)"
"745" "Intergenerational   mobility"
"746" "0.095***"
"747" "(0.010)"
"748" "0.100***"
"749" "(0.010)"
"750" "0.092***"
"751" "(0.010)"
"752" "Respondent-level  variables"
"753" "Life   satisfaction"
"754" "0.033*"
"755" "(0.013)"
"756" "0.097***"
"757" "(0.019)"
"758" "-0.005"
"759" "(0.019)"
"760" "Cross- level   interactions"
"761" "Life   Satisfaction  X  In come"
"762" "-0.014***"
"763" "(0.004)"
"764" "Life Satisfaction X Family Relationships"
"765" "0.015 *"
"766" "(0.006)"
"767" "Constant"
"768" "4.869***"
"769" "(0.163)"
"770" "4.372***"
"771" "(0.186)"
"772" "5.172***"
"773" "(0.185)"
"774" "Random   effects"
"775" "Income"
"776" "0 .031 1***"
"777" "(0 .003 )"
"778" "Family   Relationships"
"779" "0 .064 ***"
"780" "(0 .01 1)"
"781" "Vignette-level   variance"
"782" "0 .829"
"783" "( 0 .0 40 )"
"784" "1.02 3"
"785" "(0 .083)"
"786" "1.209"
"787" "(0.115)"
"788" "Respondent-level   variance"
"789" "3.081"
"790" "( 0 .055 )"
"791" "2.900"
"792" "(0 .05 7 )"
"793" "2.993"
"794" "(0.056)"
"795" "Vignette-level   R 2"
"796" "0.117"
"797" "0.117"
"798" "0.116"
"799" "Vignette-level   observations"
"800" "25,236"
"801" "25,236"
"802" "25,236"
"803" "Respondent-level   observations"
"804" "2,103"
"805" "2,103"
"806" "2,103"
"807" "Note: Unstandardized regression coefficients are reported. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Age, family relationships, income, health and intergenerational mobility are assumed to be continuous for the sake of simplicity.  For controlling purpose, d ummies for decks  as well as age, educational level and gender of respondents were included but not reported . Restricted maximum likelihood estimation. R 2  shown is the proportional reduction of the mean squared error of prediction for the level 1 modeled proportion of variance, defined as: 1 -  [var( Y ij  −  X ij /var( Y ij )]  (Snijders and Bosker 2012:352) .  R 2  are calculated without random slopes.   Calculations based on weighted data . *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05."
