ABMLS Pilot Report 2018-2019
Methodology and preliminary findings

Rosan van Niekerk
Arjen de Wit
Naresh Mathoera
René Bekkers
September 20, 2019

Contents
Contents .................................................................................................................................................. 2
1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 3
2. Methodology: validity and reliability of measures in the ABMLS ....................................................... 5
3. Data: students in the ABM Course and ABMLS respondents ........................................................... 19
4. The Broader Mind of Students at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam ...................................................... 33
5. Working Paper: Too busy to volunteer? Time use and civic participation among university students
.............................................................................................................................................................. 41
6. Master Thesis: Contact and trust: A qualitative study among ABM participants. ........................... 49
7. Appendix: Questionnaire .................................................................................................................. 53

Acknowledgements
We thank Bob Bringle, Rolinka Schippers, Theo Bakker, Jos Akkermans, Rowena Blokker, Bas van der
Klaauw, Martijn Meeter, Daniel Drittij, Tom Paffen, Govert Buijs, Robin van der Velde, Frank
Wanders, Laura Mulder, Carlijn van Alphen, Marieke Slootman, Ingrid van Tienen, Alice de Boer,
Marjolein Zweekhorst, Luuk Terbeek, Nadine Blignaut‐Van Westrhenen, Femke Hilverda, Gjalt de
Graaf, Wim Haan, and seminar participants at the Center for Philanthropic Studies and the Faculty of
Social Sciences for suggestions on the design, analysis and reporting on the ABMLS. We thank
students from the participant pool of Communication Science and respondents to the survey for
their participation. We thank Kirstin de Boer, Nynke Rodenhuis, and Mirjam van Praag for general
support for the ABMLS.

Funding
This study was funded by grants from the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, the Goldschmeding
Foundation and Porticus.
2

1. Introduction
This report documents the development of the A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey at the Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam. The Vrije Universiteit (VU) Amsterdam is a university in the capital of the
Netherlands providing education to about 24,500 students in higher education. During their time at
the VU, students not only gain knowledge and skills. VU Amsterdam greatly values providing
students with opportunities to develop personally, and think about their responsibility in society.
Reflecting these values, the university formulated the ambition in its strategic plan (VU, 2014) to
engage students in society through community service and other activities.
A key program at VU Amsterdam that allows students to reflect on societal issues is A Broader Mind
(ABM). This is an innovative educational program launched in the academic year 2018‐2019,
consisting of three components. The first component is a blended learning course open to bachelor
students from all programs and mixing them in small groups. In its inaugural year, the A Broader
Mind course was offered as an extracurricular course designed to stimulate personal development,
moral sensibility and civic engagement. In February 2019 a pilot of the A Broader Mind course
started among first‐year Bachelor students at VU Amsterdam.
The second component of A Broader Mind is a set of courses that include Community Service
Learning activities. While some programs have offered Community Service Learning courses,
typically in the second or third year of Bachelor programs, opportunities for students to take such
courses have been expanded greatly in the academic year 2018‐2019.
The third component of A Broader Mind is the A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey (ABMLS). The
survey is designed to track the personal, academic, civic, and professional development of students
as they progress through their study program. We survey students at VU Amsterdam at least every
year to measure the attitudes, values, skills and behaviors reflecting “A Broader Mind” among
students at VU Amsterdam. The survey provides a barometer of student life: how are students doing
with respect to civic‐mindedness, student engagement, professional orientation?
In due course, the data collected will enable an assessment of how students develop socially,
academically, professionally and personally during their time at VU Amsterdam. To what extent do
students get a broader mind during their studies at university? How do changes in the curriculum
and the choices that students make affect their development?
In this report we present three products related to the pilot of the A Broader Mind Longitudinal
Survey project: the questionnaire, the results of analyses of pilot data, and a master thesis on the A
Broader Mind project.
Chapter two contains the methodology of the ABMLS. We summarize the process of designing the
survey, present the composition and reliability of measurement instruments and explain how we
sampled the first‐year students at VU Amsterdam.
The next chapter examines self‐selection into the A Broader Mind Course and the ABMLS.
Participation in the A Broader Mind Course and the ABMLS is on voluntary basis, and the sample is
likely to be not representative for the broader population of VU students.
Although the sample size is small, we present descriptive results of the ABMLS 2019 pilot based on
the sample of first‐year students at VU Amsterdam in chapter four. This chapter gives an indication
of the research possibilities with ABMLS data.

3

In chapter five we present a working paper on time use and civic participation among students. How
are time use and time pressure related to civic participation among students? To answer this
research question we analyzed ABMLS data from the VU sample and data from a sample recruited
through the online platform Prolific.
Naresh Mathoera, sociology student at VU Amsterdam, contributed to the A Broader Mind project
with his master thesis on the role of contact, diversity and generalized trust among students
participating in the A Broader Mind course. Chapter six contains a summary of his master thesis
project.

4

2. Methodology: validity and reliability of measures in the ABMLS
This chapter describes the methodology of the ABMLS. First, we describe how we developed the
survey, what the rationale was for the inclusion of measures in the questionnaire and how we pre‐
tested the survey. Second, we discuss the most important measurement instruments in the
questionnaire. Finally, we describe the sampling method in the second semester of the academic year
2018‐2019.

In September 2018 a team led by Prof. René Bekkers started working on the development of a
longitudinal survey to measure the Broader Mind among VU students and alumni, called the A
Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey (ABMLS). We started with identifying the key concepts of the ‘A
Broader Mind’ in four clusters of outcomes: a) civic‐mindedness; b) student engagement; c)
professional orientation; d) personality characteristics. Table 1 shows the final ABMLS instruments
per outcome cluster.
Based on an extensive literature search in the fields of service learning, civic education and
development among young adults we collected a longlist of constructs per outcome cluster. We then
formulated criteria on which we based a further selection of constructs. As a first criterion, the
construct should be subject to change among adolescents. Second, the construct fits as much as
possible in the content of the Broader Mind course and Community Service Learning activities.
Finally, constructs should be relevant in the long‐term, even if the content of A Broader Mind
curriculum changes in the future. To measure these constructs we selected survey instruments that
proved to be valid and reliable and consumed as little time to administer as necessary in order to
prevent the questionnaire from becoming too extensive. We attempted to construct scales
consisting of a maximum of 5 items, because of the strongly decreasing marginal utility of additional
items (Cortina, 1993).
We programmed an extended version of the survey (25 minutes) in Qualtrics. We pretested this
extended version of the survey on Prolific. Prolific is an online platform where researchers can
recruit participants in a quick and reliable way in exchange for financial compensation. Through
Prolific we collected data on a sample of 201 students from several European countries. With these
data we were able to test and compare different measurements instruments. We conducted factor
and reliability analyses and analyzed the correlations between measures. The majority of the scales
included in the pretest pilot questionnaire behaved as predicted and demonstrated good to
excellent reliability. In addition, we included 11 survey experiments in this survey in which we
manipulated the order and formulation of questions and items. Table 2 summarizes the results of
these survey experiments. Based on these statistical analyses we were able to decide whether to
keep or remove measurement instruments and items.
We tested the revised version of the survey in focus groups with first year students from the
participant pool of Communication Sciences at VU Amsterdam. Two plenary sessions gave us useful
insights on top of the quantitative analyses in Prolific. It became clear that for first‐year students
some of the scales were too complex or too long, some items needed rephrasing and some
questions were generally misunderstood. Based on these sessions we decided to exclude several
instruments and rephrased items that were too complex or included words the students were not
familiar with. Table 1 shows the final ABMLS instruments we used to survey first‐year students at VU
Amsterdam in February 2019.

5

Table 1: ABMLS instruments per outcome cluster
Background

Housing
Mother’s/father’s educational level
Sense of place
Religious affiliation
Religious participation
Future

Civic‐mindedness

Civic efficacy
Civic behavior
Life goals
Social trust
Diversity scale
Issues in society
Social distance

Student engagement

Sense of university belonging
Interest in study activities
Time use
Academic and social interaction

Professional orientation

Type of organization
Entrepreneur intentions
Work abroad
Future job
Job preferences
Labor Market preparation
Service motivation
Responsible employer

Personality characteristics

Life satisfaction
Subjective physical health
Subjective mental health
Perceived pressure
Big five personality domains
Meaning in life
Sense of place
General self‐efficacy
Dispositional greed
Empathic concern

In the next section we briefly explain the scale composition and reliability of the scales we use in the
ABMLS. In addition, we list the measurement instruments we based on existing literature.

6

Table 2. Survey experiments tested with Prolific sample
Instrument

Question

Experiment

Result

Sense of place

How does including the items ‘the student
population’ and ‘my religion’ (two social groups
students belong to) affect answers on the other
items? We may expect different mean scores on the
‘my college’ item if ‘the student population’’ is
included, because respondents disentangle their
feelings towards the institute from their peers. In
addition, these non‐geographic references may
influence the option that respondents may add in
‘Other identity I belong to, namely’.

A split‐ballot design with four
conditions that vary on including or
excluding ‘The student population’
and ‘My religion (if applicable)’ or
both in the list of places.

There was no clear effect of including the two items
on the responses to the other items. There was no
significant difference between the means on the item
‘my college’ for the conditions with and without ‘the
student population’. Including ‘The student
population’ and ‘my religion’ or both did not resulted
in more responses on ‘Other identity I belong to,
namely’. We decided not to include ‘the student
population’ and ‘My religion’ so this questions refers
only to geographic belonging.

Brief versions of the Big Five Personality Domains
include a 10‐item and a 15‐item instrument. Do
both versions measure the five personality domains
in a reliable way?

A split‐ballot design with two
conditions, either a 10‐item or 15‐item
version of the Big Five Personality
Domains.

We conducted a Principal Component Analysis with
Varimax Rotation, forced to 5 factors. The 15‐item
version proved to be the best solution with factor
loadings of at least 0.63 with no cross loadings. In the
10‐item version only one item had a high factor
loading (0.87) on the domain ‘Agreeableness’. We use
the 15‐item version in the ABMLS.

Does replacing ‘quarrelsome’ with ‘confrontational’
improve the instrument? With a majority non‐
native English speakers in the final sample at VU
university, we are concerned that respondents do
not understand the word ‘quarrelsome’. We think
that ‘confrontational’ would be a reasonable
alternative.

A split‐ballot design with two
conditions within the 10‐item version
of the Big Five Personality Domains,
either using the word ‘quarrelsome’ or
‘confrontational’.

Using ‘Confrontational’ does not improve the
instrument. We conducted a Principal Component
Analysis with Varimax Rotation, forced to 5 factors.
Using the word ‘confrontational’ did not result in a
solution with five factors. Using the word
‘quarrelsome’ did result in a five factor solution but
with only one high loading on ‘Agreeableness’. We
decided to use quarrelsome in the 15‐item version in
the ABLMS.

asks respondents to
what extent they
feel themselves as
belonging to
different places or
groups: my college,
my neighborhood,
the town I live in, my
country, etc.

Big Five
Personality
Domains
5 or 10 items

Big Five
Personality
Domains
Agreeableness:
quarrelsome or
confrontational

7

Sense of
university
belonging

Surveys include single‐item measures of university
belonging, with different wordings. What is the
validity of both single‐item measures?

Split‐ballot design with two
conditions, either item 1: ‘I feel proud
of belonging to <name college>’ or
item 2: ‘I see myself as a part of the
<name college> community’.
We examined Pearson correlation
coefficients with other student
engagement instruments.

Item 1 correlated with teacher interaction and the
Psychological Sense of School Membership Scale while
item 2 correlated stronger to peer interaction. Peer
interaction is covered with the Academic and Social
Interaction Scale. To cover all aspects of student
engagement, including teacher interaction, we use
item 1 in the ABMLS.

What is the factor structure and reliability of the
two instruments? We rephrased items of the
Psychological Sense of School Membership to make
them fit for universities and to have two negatively
framed items per subscale. Subscales are
‘Connection to teachers’, ‘Fitting in among peers’
and ‘Identification and participation’. The Academic
and Social Interaction scale has four subscales:
formal/informal peer interaction, and
formal/informal teacher interaction.

Split‐ballot design with two
conditions, respondents either receive
the Psychological Sense of University
Membership scale or the Academic
and Social Interaction scale.

The factor structure of both instruments did not
correspond to the original subscales. Principal
Component Analysis with Varimax Rotation for The
Psychological Sense of School Membership resulted in
two factors; no belonging vs. belonging. For Academic
and Social Interaction PCA with Varimax rotation
resulted in a six factor solution. PCA with Varimax
rotation forced to four factors resulted in three stable
factors (loadings above 0.57): ‘contact with peers’,
‘informal contact with teachers’ and ‘formal contact
with teacher’s’. We use these three subscales from
the Academic and Social Interaction scale with four
items per subscale in the ABMLS. All subscales had a
reliability coefficient of α = 0.77 or higher.

Does the order of the items of the DGS impact the
answers? The first three items of the scale are
phrased in a way that it is clear that it measures
how greedy you are, facing the risk of social
desirability bias. The latter four items are phrased in
a more subtle way. We would expect that if
respondents first answer the original first three

A split ballot design with 3 conditions:
33,3% receives a random order of
items, 33,3% receives the original
order of items, and 33,3% receives a
manipulated order. In the
manipulated order the original first
three items, (‘1. I always want more’,

Contrary to our expectation, the mean of the original
scale was higher (3) than the adjusted scale (2.7)
which would indicate less social desirability bias in the
original scale. A t‐test revealed that the difference in
means between the original scale and the adjusted
scale is significant t(132)=2,15, p=0,03. Reliability
analysis showed that a random order of items has a

two 1‐ item
questions

Psychological
Sense of School
Membership vs.
Academic and
Social Interaction
Psychological Sense of
School Membership
(Goodenow, 1993; Ye
& Wallace, 2014) .

Dispositional
Greed Scale
Range (1 Strongly
disagree‐5 Strongly
agree)

8

Attitudes towards
diversity
Pluralistic Orientation
Scale consists of 5
items. The self‐
constructed scale
(Diversity Scale)
consists of 7 items. The
range for both scales is
(1 Strongly disagree ‐5
Strongly agree).

Perceived
problems A
Open question

Perceived
Problems B
Open question

items, this will increase social desirability bias
resulting in a lower scale mean.

‘2. Actually, I’m kind of greedy’, ‘3.
One can never have too much
money’), are the latter three items.

better reliability (α = 0.8) than the original order of
items (α = 0.77). We use a random order of items in
the ABMLS.

What is the validity and reliability of the POS and
the self‐constructed scale? In the POS respondents
rate their own strength in openness towards others.
We expect respondents to rate their own strengths
in a social desirable way, which leads to high scores
on all items. We constructed a scale with items on
attitudes and skills related to diversity, phrased in
way social desirability is less evident.

A split ballot design with 2 groups:
50% of the respondents receive the
Pluralistic Orientation Scale (POS)
(Engberg & Hurtado, 2011) and 50% of
the respondents receive a self‐
constructed scale (Diversity Scale) on
diversity attitudes.

Reliability analysis showed better reliability for the
self‐constructed Diversity Scale (α = 0.7) compared to
the POS (α = 0.6). The average of the Diversity Scale
was lower (3.8) compared to the POS (4.1). The
correlation coefficient with empathic concern is 0.2
for POS and 0.3 for the Diversity Scale. PCA with
Varimax Rotation did not result in an appropriate two‐
factor solution (skills vs. attitudes) for the Diversity
Scale. Because the Diversity Scale has a better
reliability and a lower mean we use this scale in the
ABMLS.

In this question we ask respondents to name the
five most important issues facing either 1) ‘your
country’, (2) ‘society’, (3) ‘the world’. How do the
three different conditions affect the answers? We
expect that the answers will vary per condition as
they trigger different associations.

A split ballot design with 3 conditions:
we ask respondents to name the five
most important issues facing either (1)
‘your country’, or (2) ‘society’, or (3)
‘the world’.

Condition 1 (‘your country’) yielded significantly more
answers around government and politics, migration
and integration, traffic and housing, and the welfare
state. Condition 2 (‘society’) prompted significantly
more answers on discrimination and minority rights,
and crime and security. Condition 3 (‘the world’)
yielded significantly more answers on international
issues, climate change and the environment, and
poverty and famine. We use ‘society’ in the ABMLS
because it is not restricted to a geographic area.

How does the order of the questions in the survey
affect the answers on the Perceived Problems
question? We expect that if the questions from the
civic‐mindedness block precede the Perceived
Problems question, this will affect the answers.

Question order experiment: 50% of
the respondents receive this question
after six other questions on civic
attitudes and 50% of the respondents

There are no differences in the type of issues
respondents name depending on the placement of the
Perceived Problems question.

9

Future A
Open question

Future B
Open question

Thinking about topics like life goals, diversity and
civic efficacy may bring about certain associations
which in turn provoke certain issues at the
‘Perceived problems’ question.

receive this question before the six
other questions on civic attitudes.

How does the use of certain words in the open
question affect the answers of respondents? We
manipulate the timeframe of the question because
we expect the answers to have a different character
depending on if you imagine you are halfway in
your career or retired. In addition, we expect that
the words ‘proud’ and ‘satisfied’ trigger different
associations and therefore lead to different
answers.

Split ballot design with 4 conditions.
‘<(A.1)> If you think about yourself
and your career <(A.2)>, when would
you be <B>?’
25% receives A1: Imagine you are
retired B: proud
25% receives A2: in 20 years B: proud
25% receives A1: Imagine you are
retired B: satisfied
25% receives A2. in 20 years
B:Satisfied

The formulation of the open question did affect the
answers. Latent Diettrich Allocation (LDA)
analdistinguished three topics in the open answers,
reflecting the importance of (1) a steady job, (2)
sufficient time for family, and (3) a contribution to
society. ANOVA tests revealed that topic 1 was
significantly less often mentioned in the retired
condition (F(1)=6.628, p=0.011), while topic 3 was
more often mentioned in this condition (F(1)=12.480,
p=0.001). Using the word ‘proud’ vs. ‘satisfied’ did not
yield significantly different answers. Because we are
mainly interested in what people value in life in
general and not necessarily in their career, we decided
to use ‘retired’ in the formulation in the ABMLS.

How does the order of the questions in the survey
affect the answers on the Future question? We
expect that answering questions on work
expectation, career motivation, job preferences and
career competences will influence respondents to
give career‐related answers to the Future question.

Question order experiment: we
randomly place the Future question as
either the first question on the
professional orientation block or the
last question on the professional
orientation block.

Topic 2 (time for family) was less often mentioned
when the open question was placed after the other
professional questions, which is marginally significant
in an ANOVA test (F(1)=2.950, p=0.087). Ultimately we
decided to make this question the final question of
the survey. Because we also changed the order of the
survey blocks, the Future question is now placed after
the background questions.

10

Scales: composition, reliability and references
Table 3: ABMLS scales and reliability
Scale

Scale reliability

Scale reliability in the
ABMLS

Big five Personality Domains
Hahn et al. (2012)

15 items (n=598)

15 items (n=100)

Neuroticism α = 0.66
Extraversion α = 0.76
Openness α = 0.58
Agreeableness α = 0.44
Conscientiousness α = 0.60

Neuroticism α = 0.81
Extraversion α = 0.85
Openness α = 0.65
Agreeableness α = 0.57
Conscientiousness α = 0.56

General Self‐Efficacy Scale
Jerusalem & Schwarzer (1979);
Romppel et al. (2013)

10 items (n=19719)
α = 0.85

5 items (n=911)
α = 0.76

Dispositional Greed Scale
Seuntjes et al. (2015)

7 items (n=78‐215)
α = 0.86 to α = 0.90

5 items (n=67)
α = 0.78

Empathic Concern
Ingoglia et al. (2016)

4 items (n=1104)
α = 0.69

4 items (n=201)
α = 0.84

Academic and Social Interaction
Meeuwisse et al. (2010)

28 items (n=523)
Formal peer interaction α =
0.79
Informal peer interaction α =
0.87
Informal teacher interaction α
= 0.80
Formal teacher interaction α =
0.72
5 items (n=426)
α = 0.80

12 items (n=95)
Peer interaction α = 0.83

Civic efficacy Scale
Weber et al. (2004)

Informal teacher
interaction α = 0.81
Formal teacher interaction
α = 0.77
5 items (n=201)
α = 0.75

Service Motivation Scale
based on: Public Service
Motivation (PSM), Civic Minded
Graduate (CMG), Civic Minded
Professional (CMP); Bringle et al.
(2004) Steinberg et al (2011);
Hatcher (2008)

PSM 24 items (n=375)
α = 0.90
CMG 30 items (n=606)
α = 0.96
CMP 32 items (n=373)
α = 0.95

5 items (n=201)
α = 0.76

Diversity Scale
based on: Pluralistic Orientation
Scale (POS), Diversity
Perspectives Questionnaire
(DPQ); Engberg & Hurtado
(2011); Podsiadlowski et al.
(2013)

POS 5 items

7 items (n=100)
α = 0.71

DPQ 27 items

11

Table 3 summarizes the scales we use in the ABMLS. In the second column we present the reliability
coefficient (Cronbach’s alpha) of the scale presented in the seminal paper. In the third column we
present the results of the reliability analyses we conducted with data from the Prolific sample.
Because we did not include the General Self‐Efficacy Scale in the Prolific survey, we used sample
data made available online to test reliability of the GSE (Jerusalem & Schwarzer, 1981). We present
Cronbach’s alphas for the scales we included in the final version of the ABMLS.
Big Five ‐ 15 items
The Big Five framework has become the most extensively used model of personality (Gosling et al.,
2003). In this questionnaire we use the 15‐item version, originally developed for the German Socio‐
Economic Panel Study (Hahn et al., 2012). In this scale, every personality trait is measured with three
items. We tested the 15‐item instrument in the Prolific sample, and obtained sufficiently high
reliability coefficients.
General Self‐Efficacy scale – 5 items
The General Self‐efficacy Scale consists of ten items and is originally developed by Jerusalem and
Schwarzer in 1979. Romppel et al. (2013) shortened the scale to six items testing the scale with
several samples (alphas ranging from 0.79 to 0.88). We conducted reliability analysis on sample data
of the Netherlands, made available online by Ralf Schwarzer (Jerusalem & Schwarzer, 1981) (data
retrieved from http://userpage.fu‐berlin.de/health/selfscal.htm). To reduce the 6‐item scale of
Romppel et al. (2013) to a five‐item scale we eliminated the item with the lowest item‐scale
correlation (‘If someone opposes me, I can find means and ways to get what I want’). The 5‐item
scale obtained a reliability coefficient of α = 0.76.
Dispositional Greed Scale ‐ 5 items
Seuntjes et al. (2015) formulated a two‐dimensional definition of greed: the tendency to always
want more and never being satisfied with what one currently has. In addition, they developed a 7‐
item scale that captures individual differences in greed. We analyzed data from the Prolific sample.
To reduce the scale we eliminated the two items with the lowest item‐scale correlations (‘It doesn’t
matter how much I have, I’m never completely satisfied’ and ‘One can never have too much
money’). The 5‐item scale obtained a reliability coefficient of α = 0.78.
Empathic concern‐ 4 items
The Interpersonal Reactivity Index is originally developed by Davis in 1994 and the subscale
‘empathic concern’ measures empathy with 7 items (Wilhelm & Bekkers, 2010). We use the
shortened 4‐item version developed and tested by Ingoglia et al. (2016) (α = 0.69). We tested this 4‐
item scale with the Prolific sample (α = 0.84).
Academic and Social Interaction‐12 items
The Academic and Social Interaction scale is developed by Meeuwisse et al. (2010). The scale
consists of 28 items on four subscales measuring formal and informal interactions with teachers and
peers. Some items are negatively framed. A factor analysis on the 28 items in the Prolific sample
resulted in three clear factors, measuring general interaction with students, formal interaction with
teachers and informal interaction with teachers. We selected four items per subscale based on the
items with the highest factor loadings (ranging from 0.57 to 0.86) and including a negatively worded
item in every subscale. The four subscales are contact with students (α = 0.83), informal contact with
teachers (α = 0.81), formal contact with teachers (α = 0.77).

12

Life Goals – 8 items
To measure life goals, we formulated items for two dimensions: materialistic life goals and
postmaterialistic life goals. We use one item from the Monitoring the Future project and two items
from the American Freshman project (Twenge, Campbell and Freeman, 2012). The other items are
based on this study and on the Material Value Scale (Richins, 2004) but slightly rephrased. In the
ABMLS respondents are asked to rank two sets of four life goals in order of importance.
Meaning in Life ‐ 2 items
Steger et al. (2006) developed a 10‐item instrument to measure the meaning in life. The instrument
consists of two subscales; the presence of meaning in life and the search for a meaning in life. For
every subscale we selected the item with the highest corrected item total correlation.
Social Distance – 11 items
To measure social distance, we adopted this question from the World Value Survey, first used in
1981 (Inglehart, 2000). To the list of social groups we added ‘low‐class people’, ‘high‐class business
people’, ‘Moroccan‐Dutch people’, ‘Turkish‐Dutch people’, ‘Surinamese‐Dutch people’, ‘Antillean‐
Dutch people’, ‘Native Dutch people’.
Diversity Scale – 7 items
We constructed this instrument to measure skills and attitudes towards diversity. Several items are
based on the Pluralistic Orientation Scale (Engberg & Hurtado, 2011) and the Diversity Perspectives
Questionnaire (Podsiadlowski et al., 2013). We rephrased items and formulated new items resulting
in two subscales. One subscale with four items that refers to skills and one subscale with three items
that refers to attitudes. Out of these seven items, three items are negatively phrased.
Civic Efficacy Scale – 5 items
This scale is based on the Self‐Efficacy Towards Service Scale (five items) developed by Weber et al.
(2004). We rephrased the original item ‘Each of us can make a difference in the lives of the less
fortunate’ so it is negatively worded and removed the item ‘I can help people with handicaps’
because we considered it to be too specific. In addition, we added the item ‘Realistically, an
individual person can do little to bring about changes in our society’ from Astin et al. (1999). We
tested this scale with the Prolific sample (α = 0.75).
Job preferences – 8 items
The job preferences scale is based on the eight item instrument used by Esser & Lindh (2018). To
cover extrinsic and intrinsic job preferences we excluded two items from this instrument and added
two items (‘easy work load’ and ‘good relations with your colleagues’) based on the instrument of
Gallie, Felstead & Green (2012). In the ABMLS respondents are asked to rank the items in order of
importance, so respondents are forced to think about which job characteristics they value most.
Service Motivation Scale – 5 items
We constructed this scale by selecting items from existing scales and questionnaires. ‘Doing well
financially is definitely more important to me than doing good deeds’ is selected from the Public
Service Motivation Scale (Bringle et al. 2004). The other four items are selected from the Civic
Minded Graduate Scale (Steinberg et al. 2011) (‘I would say that the main purposes of work are to
improve society through my career’ and ‘I feel a deep conviction in my career goals to achieve
purposes that are beyond my own self‐interest’) and the Civic Minded Professional Scale (Hatcher,
2008) (‘the education and knowledge that I have gained should be used to serve other’s’ ‘My
personal values and beliefs are well integrated and aligned with my work and career). We tested this
scale with the Prolific sample (α = 0.76).
13

Perceived Pressure – 1 item
This item is based on items used in the project ‘DP Student Workload and Well‐being’, a study into
student workload and well‐being among students in the International Baccalaureate Diploma
(Ganzeboom, 2017). The original item in this project is ‘During the past four weeks how often have
you…. – found that you could cope with all the things that you had to do?’.
Issues in society – 1 item
This question is inspired by research from The Netherlands Institute for Social Research. In the study
‘Continu onderzoek burgerperspectieven’ respondents are asked what they find the five most
important societal problems.
Trust – 1 item
We use a 1‐item instrument to measure generalized social trust (Ingen & Bekkers, 2015).
Responsible employer and future job – 2 items
We adopted two questions from a survey developed by the Macquarie Graduate School of
Management (Haski‐Leventhal, 2014).
Entrepreneur intentions – 1 item
To measure entrepreneurial intentions we adopted a 1‐item measure of Oosterbeek et al (2010).
The final questionnaire of the ABMLS for the February 2019 pilot is presented in the Appendix.

Sampling
The fieldwork was conducted between February 20 and March 6. Two weeks after the kick‐off event
on of the A Broader Mind course on February 5th, 2019, we sent out invitations for the survey to
students enrolled in the A Broader Mind course via e‐mail. At the same time we posted an
announcement in the digital learning environment of the A Broader Mind course, encouraging
students to participate in the survey. In the following weeks we sent reminders via e‐mail and the
digital learning environment. We also attended several meet‐ups to personally encourage students
to fill out the survey.
To protect the anonymity of the participants in the survey, they were not asked to enter their e‐mail
addresses or any other information that would personally identify participants. Qualtrics was
programmed not to collect the IP address or location of the participant. In this way, individual
respondents cannot be identified.
Because a large number of students dropped out of the A Broader Mind course the number of
students that we could invite for the survey was substantially reduced. We sent the e‐mail invitation
to all 146 students enrolled in the course on 5 February 2019 but a substantial share of this group
dropped out of the course before and during the fieldwork, which makes it hard to provide an
accurate response rate. Among the invited students, 28 students gave consent to participate in the
survey, 21 students answered the first question of the survey and 19 students finished the survey.

14

References
Astin, A. W., Sax, L. J., Avalos, J. (1999). Long‐term Effects of Volunteerism During the Undergraduate
Years. The Review of Higher Education, 88, 187‐202.
Bringle, R. G., Phillips, M. A., & Hudson, M. (2004). The Measure of Service Learning: Research Scales
to Assess Student Experiences. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Cortina, J. M. (1993). What Is Coefficient Alpha? An Examination of Theory and Applications. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 78(1), 98‐104.
Davis, M. H. (1994). Empathy: A Social Psychological Approach. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Engberg, M. E., Hurtado, S. (2011). Developing Pluralistic Skills and Dispositions in College: Examining
Racial/Ethnic Group Differences. The Journal of Higher Education, 82(4), 416‐443.
Esser, I., Lindh, A. (2018). Job Preferences in Comparative Perspective 1989–2015: A
Multidimensional Evaluation of Individual and Contextual Influences. International Journal of
Sociology, 48(2), 142‐169.
Gallie, D., Felstead, A., Green, F. (2012). Job preferences and the intrinsic quality of work: the
changing attitudes of British employees 1992–2006. Work, Employment and Society, 26(5),
806‐821.
Ganzeboom, H. (2017). Student Workload and Well‐Being During the International Baccalaureate
Diploma Programme: A Three‐Wave Panel Study. Presented at American Educational Research
Association Annual Meeting, San Antonio, United States.
Goodenow, C. (2003). The Psychological Sense of School Membership Among Adolescents: Scale
Development and Educational Correlates. Psychology in the Schools, 30, 79‐90.
Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., Swann Jr., W. B. (2003). A very brief measure of the Big‐Five
personality domains. Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 504‐528.
Hahn, E., Gottschling, J., Spinath, F. M. (2012). Short measurements of personality – Validity and
reliability of the GSOEP Big Five Inventory (BFI‐S). Journal of Research in Personality, 46, 355–
359.
Haski‐Leventhal, D. (2014). MBA Student Values, Attitudes and Behaviors: A Cross‐Cultural
Comparison of PRME Signatory Schools. S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal, 79(4), 29‐41.
Hatcher, J. A. (2008). The public role of professionals: Developing and evaluating the Civic Minded
Professional scale. Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University.
https://scholarworks.iupui.edu/handle/1805/1703
Inglehart, R., C. Haerpfer, A. Moreno, C. Welzel, K. Kizilova, J. Diez‐Medrano, M. Lagos, P. Norris, E.
Ponarin & B. Puranen et al. (eds.). 2014. World Values Survey: Round One ‐ Country‐Pooled
Datafile 1981‐1984. Madrid: JD Systems Institute.
Ingoglia, S. Lo Coco, A., & Albiero, P. (2016) Development of a Brief Form of the Interpersonal
Reactivity Index (B–IRI), Journal of Personality Assessment, 98(5): 461‐471.
15

Meeuwisse, M., Severiens, S. E., & Born, M. P. (2010). Learning environment, interaction, sense of
belonging and study success in ethnically diverse student groups. Research in Higher
Education, 51(6), 528‐545.
Oosterbeek, H., Van Praag, M. (2010) The impact of entrepreneurship education on
entrepreneurship skills and motivation. European Economic Review, 54, 442 – 454.
Podsiadlowski, A., Gröschke, D., Kogler, M., Springer, C., Van der Zee, K. (2013) Managing a culturally
diverse workforce: Diversity perspectives in organizations. International Journal of
Intercultural relations, 37, 159‐176.
Richins, M. L. (2004). The Material Values Scale: Measurement Properties and Development of a
Short Form. Journal of Consumer Research, 31, 209‐219.
Romppel, M., Herrmann‐Lingen, C., Wachter, R., Edelmann, F., Düngen, H., Pieske, B., Grande, G.
(2013). A short form of the General Self‐Efficacy Scale (GSE‐6): Development, psychometric
properties and validity in an intercultural non‐clinical sample and a sample of patients
at risk for heart failure. GMS Psycho‐Social‐Medicine, 10, 1‐7.
Schwarzer, R., & Jerusalem, M. (1995). Generalized Self‐Efficacy scale. In J. Weinman, S. Wright, & M.
Johnston, Measures in health psychology: A user’s portfolio. Causal and control beliefs (pp. 35‐
37). Windsor, England: NFER‐NELSON.
Seuntjens, T. G., Zeelenberg, M., Van de Ven, N., Breugelmans, S. M. (2015). Dispositional Greed.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 108(6), 917‐933.
Steger, M.F., Frazier, P., Oishi, S., Kaler, M. (2006). The Meaning in Life Questionnaire: Assessing the
Presence of and Search for Meaning in Life. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53(1), 80‐93.
Steinberg, K. S., Hatcher, J. A., Bringle, R. G. (2011). Civic Minded Graduate: A North Star. Michigan
Journal of Community Service Learning, 19‐33.
Twenge, J. M., Campbell, W. K., Freeman, E. C. Generational Differences in Young Adult’s Life Goals,
Concern for others, and Civic Orientation, 1966‐2009. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 102(5), 1045‐1062.
Van Ingen, E., Bekkers, R. (2015). Generalized Trust Through Civic Engagement? Evidence from Five
National Panel Studies. Political Psychology, 36(3), 277‐294.
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (2014). Vision 2015‐2020. Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
https://www.vu.nl/en/Images/VU_Instellingsboek_ENG_lowres_tcm270‐424291.pdf
Weber, P. S., Weber, J. E., Sleeper, B. J., Schneider, K. C. (2004). Self‐efficacy Toward Service, Civic
Participation and the Business Student: Scale Development and Validation. Journal of Business
Ethics, 49(4), 359‐360.
Wilhelm, M. O., Bekkers, R. (2010). Helping Behavior, Dispositional Empathic Concern, and the
Principle of Care. Social Psychology Quarterly, 73(1), 11‐32.
Ye, F., Wallace, T. L. (2014) Psychological Sense of School Membership Scale: Method Effects
16

Associated With Negatively Worded Items. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 32(3),
202‐2015.

17

18

3. Data: students in the ABM Course and ABMLS respondents
Students at VU Amsterdam participate in the A Broader Mind Course and the ABMLS on a voluntary
basis. The sample of participants is not representative for the broader population of VU students. In
this chapter we present an analysis of the characteristics of the sample of students who participated
in the Course and the Survey. First, we compare our sample with first‐year VU students who did not
participate in the A Broader Mind Course. Students from Sociology, Health Sciences and Criminology
were most likely to participate in the ABM Course. These students are more likely to be female, to
have completed a program of vocational education (HBO) and to talk about their study topics in daily
life. The average grades of students in the ABM Course are comparable with those of their peers.
Second, we compare survey answers of VU students in the ABM Course with survey answers of
participants that are recruited through the online platform Prolific. Compared to participants on
Prolific, ABMLS participants are more connected with their university, more conscientious, in better
health, and more motivated to contribute to social problems.

Service learning and self‐selection
In Community Service Learning programs students engage in unpaid activities that benefit others,
often in cooperation with a community organization (Van Goethem et al., 2014). There is a large
literature on service‐learning and the potential positive impact on students personal development
and civic engagement. However, many studies into the effects of service‐learning programs are
unable to disentangle participation effects from selection effects (Meyer et al., 2019). If participation
in community‐service programs is voluntary, it is very likely that the participating students differ
from the non‐participating students. If these students differ on specific traits that the service‐
learning activity aims to stimulate, you can attribute effects to the service‐learning program while
this is actually due to students self‐selecting into the programs.
Recently, scholars studied the effect of a voluntary community service program at a European
university on self‐efficacy, generalized trust, empathy and attributions to poverty. Using a pre‐post
design with a control group, they showed that empathic and trusting students self‐selected into the
program and that there were no participation effects (Meyer et al., 2019). In addition, females were
more likely to participate, while students who were already volunteering were less likely to
participate in the community service program.
In this chapter we try to examine self‐selection into the A Broader Mind course and the ABMLS by
comparing A Broader Mind participants with non‐participants.

First‐year VU Students: who joined A Broader Mind?
For a first analysis we used data from VU Analytics (2019). VU Analytics collects data on VU students
from different data sources, including government agencies (CBS, DUO), a research agency (NOA)
and different VU departments (e.g. C&M, IO, SOZ). In April 2019, we obtained a dataset with
relevant variables and the anonymous ABMLS Participant ID. With this ID we were able to identify
three groups: (1) students who dropped out of the ABM Course, (2) students who joined the Course
but did not fill in the ABMLS, and (3) students in the Course who filled in the ABMLS.

19

Participation in the ABM Course and the ABMLS
Figure 1 shows these three groups of students for the five programs (see the Appendix of this
chapter for tables corresponding to the figures). In total, there are 977 students in the dataset. For
every study program, participation in the ABMLS is very low. For Sociology this is 15,6%, for Health
Sciences 7,2%, for Criminology 3,9%, for IBA 1,2% and for Medicine this is 1,4%. The participation
rate in ABM is the highest among Sociology and Health Sciences. Participation in ABM as well as the
ABMLS is very low among Medicine and IBA.

Sociology

Health Sciences

Criminology

IBA
Medicine
0

50

100

150

Not in ABM

200

In ABM

250

300

350

400

In ABMLS

Figure 1: Participation in ABM and ABMLS by study program. Source: VU Analytics

Figure 2 shows the previous education of the three groups. The share of students that comes from
Higher Vocational Education (hbo) is higher in the ABM Course and in the ABMLS compared to the
non‐participating group.

In ABMLS

In ABM, not in ABMLS

Not in ABM

0%

20%

VO

HBO

40%

60%

WO

Abroad

80%

100%

Figure 2: Previous education by participation in ABM and ABMLS. Source: VU Analytics

20

Figure 3 shows that over three quarters of the ABM participants are. Males are a minority in the
participating study programs, and are also less likely to join the course and the survey.

In ABMLS

In ABM

Not in ABM

0%

20%

40%

Female

60%

80%

100%

Male

Figure 3: Share of men and women in ABM and ABMLS. Source: VU Analytics

Participation in the A Broader Mind Course across five study programs
Because the group of students that participated in the ABMLS is very small, we will focus our
analyses on participation in the A Broader Mind Course. What makes first‐year students participate
in the Course? The data from VU Analytics allow us to analyze the association between educational
performance, student characteristics and student attitudes with ABM participation. Most variables
in these analyses come from the so‐called matching survey that students fill in before the start of
their studies.
Female and older students are generally more likely to participate in A Broader Mind. Educational
performance, measured by the average high school grade and the amount of obtained EC’s does not
explain ABM participation. This suggests that students in ABM are not necessarily the most
ambitious or intelligent students. Participation in ABM is not related to time use of students,
measured by the hours they spend on study, work and extracurricular activities. Time pressure does
not seem to hinder students to participate. Interestingly, ABM participation is also not affected by
the study situation of students, for instance to what extent they experience barriers due to their
financial situation, caring responsibilities for others or the absence of support from their
surroundings.
Self‐rated academic skills and scores on study program orientation do significantly influence ABM
participation. Students who score higher on academic skills like setting study goals, the ability to
concentrate, planning and self‐discipline are less likely to participate in ABM, controlled for gender
and age. Students who have a clear image of the content of their study program and are certain
about their study choice are less likely to participate in ABM, controlled for gender and age.

21

To what extent students agree with certain statements about their study program differs for ABM
participants and non‐participants. In Figure 4 we see, for instance, that students who read and talk a
lot about the topics discussed in their study programs are more likely to participate in ABM, while
students who have a clear idea what they want to achieve with their study program participate less
in ABM.

"I am very curious about what I will learn in my study
program"

"I have a clear idea what I want to achieve with this
ecucation"

"I expect to find a good job with this education"

"I read and talk a lot about the topics that will be
discussed in my study program"
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 4: Percentage of students that agrees with statements by participation in ABM with 95% confidence intervals.
Source: VU Analytics.

Participation in the ABM Course by study program
Thus far we analyzed factors that influence ABM participation for the full sample. However, we get
very different results if we take into account that students are clustered within study programs. In a
multiple regression model, the significant differences on other characteristics disappear and ABM
participation is only explained by study program. This is partly due to the fact that almost all
Sociologists and almost no IBA students participate in ABM. 64% of the chances of participating in
ABM is explained by study program. These results indicate that the characteristics of students that
are related to ABM participation vary more strongly between the study programs, and not so much
within each study program.
Examples are academic skills like planning study tasks and the ability to concentrate. Students who
participate in ABM score lower on these academic skills and the average scores for Health Sciences
and Sociology, the programs with the highest participation rates, are lower. Figure 5 shows the
averages of the ability to concentrate for the five study programs. To gain more insights into who
participates in the ABM we further visualize some average scores for ABM participants and non‐
participants within study programs.

22

Sociology
Criminology
IBA
Health Sciences
Medicine
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Academic skills: ability to concentrate
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 5: Average score by ABM participation per study program with 95% confidence intervals (excluding Sociology). n=974
Source: VU Analytics.

Sociology

Criminology

IBA

Health Sciences

Medicine
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Share of women:
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 6: Share of women in ABM‐participants and non‐participants per study program. Source: VU Analytics.

The percentage of female students per study program is 66% for Sociology, 85% for Criminology,
34% for IBA, 82% for Health Sciences and 74% for Medicine. In Figure 6 we can see that within study
programs there is no large gender gap between students who participate in ABM and students who
do not participate. (There is only one female Sociology student who is not participating in ABM).

23

Sociology
Criminology
IBA
Health Sciences
Medicine
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90% 100%

"I have a clear idea what I want to achieve with this education"
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 7: Percentage of students that agrees for ABM‐participants and non‐participants with 95% confidence intervals.
Source: VU Analytics.

In Figure 7 we can see that within study programs the differences between ABM participants and
non‐participants are smaller than between study programs in the share of students that selected the
statement “I have a clear idea what I want to achieve with this education”.
To find out what explains participation within study programs we separately analyzed ABM
participation for Health Sciences, Criminology and Medicine. We did not run the analyses for
Sociology and IBA as almost everyone or no one participates in ABM in these study programs. There
are only a few indicators that explain what makes students participate in A Broader Mind for Health
Sciences and Criminology. For Medicine, we could not find any factors that significantly influence
ABM participation.

Health Sciences

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Academic skills: setting study goals
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 8: Average score for ABM participants and non‐participants with 95% confidence intervals.
Source: VU Analytics.

24

Within Health Sciences, students who participate in the ABM course have more difficulty with
setting study goals (Figure 8).

Health Sciences

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Percentage of students having highest interest score for study he or
she signed up for
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 9: Percentage for ABM participants and non‐participants with 95% confidence intervals.
Source: VU Analytics.

In the matching survey student interest is measured by presenting them statements related to the
study they signed up for and to four closely related study programs. For Health Sciences students,
the share of students who had the highest interest score for Health Sciences (the study they signed
up for), is significantly lower among the ABM participants (Figure 9). It is important to note that
among all Health Sciences students, only 42% had the highest interest score. Many students in this
study program actually prefer to study Medicine.

Criminology

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Academic skills: self‐discipline
In ABM

Not in ABM

Figure 10: Average score for ABM participants and non‐participants with 95% confidence intervals.
Source: VU Analytics.

25

Criminology students who have more self‐discipline are less likely to participate in the A Broader
Mind course (Figure 10).

Criminology

"I am very curious about what I will learn in
my study program"

"I read and talk a lot about the topics that
will be discussed in my study program"

0%
In ABM

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Not in ABM

Figure 11: Percentage of students that agrees for ABM‐participants and non‐participants with 95% confidence intervals.
Source: VU Analytics.

Criminology students who are curious about what they will learn during their studies are more likely
to participate in ABM. The opposite is true for criminology students who read and talk a lot about
study program topics. They are less likely to participate in ABM.

Discussion
Our analyses show that females and students who previously followed Higher Vocational Education
(hbo) are more likely to participate in A Broader Mind. Most characteristics of ABM participants are
clustered within study programs: students in Sociology, Health sciences and Criminology share
certain characteristics which makes them more likely to participate in the ABM program, but within
these programs, the difference between ABM participants and non‐participants is much smaller. This
suggests that participation strongly depends on the study program in which students are recruited,
with some programs having a student population that is more likely to participate than others. In
other words, self‐selection into A Broader Mind is largely similar to self‐selection into study
programs. This is a highly relevant insight. Future interdisciplinary courses based on voluntary
participation will probably not attract an equal proportion of students in each Bachelor program,
even when the appeal and incentives to participate are the same for everyone.
Only a few characteristics do vary within studies. Within Health Sciences, students who participate in
the ABM course have more difficulty setting study goals. Criminology students who are curious
about what they will learn during their studies are more likely to participate in ABM, while
Criminology students who read and talk a lot about study program topics are less likely to participate
in ABM.
There could be other factors that explain differences in ABM participation across students and study
programs, which we were not able to measure. Those who filled in the survey seem to stand out in
26

personality traits like agreeableness (see next section), but we do not have such information from
VU students who are not in ABM. Future waves of the ABMLS could also target students who are not
in the ABM Course in order to compare groups of students on their survey answers.

The Survey: How representative are the answers?
One of the goals of the A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey is to be able to make inferences about
attitudes and behaviors of the broader population of VU students. To get an idea of the
representativeness of the survey sample, we compare the answers provided by ABMLS participants
with answers provided by participants in a pre‐test version of the survey. In the pre‐test, we
surveyed participants on the online platform Prolific, where participants receive a reward which
equals at least the minimum wage in the UK.
Participants at Prolific were selected to be university students. They had to fill in the name of their
institute, which served as an extra check. The average age in the Prolific sample is higher, ranging
from 18 to 66. To make the samples more comparable, we selected only participants aged 24 or
younger.
Even though we compare two samples of young students, the Prolific participants differ in some
important respects from our VU students. The Prolific group comes from different countries in
Western‐Europe, with most participants residing in the United Kingdom (73%). They come from all
different study backgrounds, while our sample is restricted to the five programs that were part of
the ABM pilot.
Still, a comparison gives an impression of the differences between the selective ABMLS participants
compared with a broader sample of university students who are not taking an extra course on
societal issues and who are getting paid for the survey.
In general, the standard deviations of survey answers are larger in the Prolific sample. This means
that there is more variance in the Prolific sample, while the answers in ABMLS sample are closer to
each other.

Personality and attitudes
Figure 12 shows the average scores on a number of scales and items, the blue bars representing the
ABMLS group and the red bars representing the Prolific group. In terms of personality, ABMLS
participants are more agreeable and conscientious, which are two domains of the Big‐5 Personality
Index. Furthermore, ABMLS participants score lower on the Greed Scale.
Compared with Prolific participants, ABMLS students are in better physical health and feel less
pressured by the obligations of everyday life. They are relatively proud to belong to VU Amsterdam.
Regarding civic attitudes, ABMLS students feel that they are able to contribute to solving social
problems (civic efficacy) and find it important to serve society through their work (service
motivation). These are attitudes that are very close to the goals of A Broader Mind, suggesting that
students who voluntarily enter the program are already relatively sensitive to their role in society.
In Figure 12 we only showed the items that are significant at p=0.1 or lower. There are more items
that are not statistically significant, but almost all differences point in the same direction: the ABMLS

27

participants are relatively open and empathic, are in good (mental) health and go along well with
fellow students.
Part of the differences in Figure 12 may be confounded by variables like gender (the ABMLS contains
a relatively large share of female participants) and country of residence (the Prolific group is largely
based in the UK). In OLS regression models that control for female, age and country of residence (not
shown), most differences become even more pronounced. This holds for civic efficacy, service
motivation, university belonging, physical health and conscientiousness. Students in the UK are
generally more civic‐minded, healthy and conscientious than students in the Netherlands, but the
ABMLS group is an exception.
With regard to agreeableness, greed and perceived pressure, the differences between ABMLS and
Prolific disappear when controlled for background characteristics.

Big 5: Agreeableness (1‐7)
Big 5: Conscienciousness (1‐7)
Dispositional Greed Scale (1‐5)
Physical health (1‐5)
Perceived pressure (1‐5)
University belonging (1‐5)
Civic efficacy (1‐5)
Service motivation (1‐5)
0

1

2
Prolific

3

4

5

6

7

ABMLS

Figure 12: Average score on survey scales or items with 95% confidence intervals.

Civic behavior
Figure 13 shows the percentages of students who were active in different forms of civic participation
during the last 12 months.
Only two of the differences are statistically significant. ABMLS participants are less likely to have
voted for student board elections, which may be due to the fact that the student board elections at
VU Amsterdam were held after the survey was taken. Sharing, liking or commenting on a post about
political or social issues is more common for the Prolific group.
This difference is no longer significant when controlled for country of residence in multiple
regression, suggesting that the Dutch students in the sample are generally less likely to engage with
social issues online.
28

The Prolific group scores higher on most other types of civic behavior as well, except for sharing
belongings and talking with others about social or political issues, but those differences are not
significant.

Read campus magazines
Vote for student board elections
Participate in a student association
Share or lend any of your belongings
Participate in a fundraising event
Donate
Volunteer
Member
Peaceful march or rally, a sit‐in or an
occupation
Sign (online) petition
Posting a recommendation, suggestion or
rating
Sharing, liking, commenting
Talk with others about your views
‐0,2

0
Prolific

0,2

0,4

0,6

0,8

1

1,2

ABMLS

Figure 13: Percentage of respondents who participated in civic behavior during the last 12 months with 95% confidence
intervals.

Discussion
Overall, the survey answers from ABMLS participants do not substantially differ from survey answers
provided by a broader group of students who were recruited online. In terms of civic participation
and social interactions with teachers and peer students, for example, the differences between both
groups are negligible.
Yet, the ABMLS sample differs in some important respects. Controlling for age, female and country
of residence, ABMLS participants score higher on university belonging, physical health,
conscientiousness, civic efficacy and service motivation. These indicators are to some extent
connected with the goals of A Broader Mind, reflecting the type of student that is attracted by the
program. Students who feel connected with VU University and who are motivated to contribute to
social problems are more likely to join the ABMLS.
We have to be careful to infer strong conclusions from these analyses. We are mostly interested in
inferring conclusions about the population of VU students, but the online sample contains students
29

from all kinds of universities that differ in many respects. More generally, there is a substantial
academic literature on the issues with samples that are surveyed through online platforms like
MTurk or Prolific (see Hauser, Paolacci & Chandler, 2018). Although our Prolific sample seems to
have taken the survey seriously, we cannot rule out the possibility that the data contains non‐serious
answers and that certain categories of students self‐selected into the sample. This further
complicates sensible analyses on the representativeness of either of the two samples.

Conclusion
Our analyses showed that selection in the A Broader Mind Course is similar to selection into study
programs. This is the case for the five study programs that were selected for the 2019 pilot of A
Broader Mind. It would be interesting to see if the same conclusions apply if more and other study
programs at VU Amsterdam participate in A Broader Mind in the following years. To gain further
insights into self‐selection on attitudes and characteristics that the A Broader Mind program aims to
foster, future waves of the ABMLS should also target students who are not in the ABM Course.

References
Hauser, D., Paolacci, G., & Chandler, J. J. (2018, September 1). Common Concerns with MTurk as a
Participant Pool: Evidence and Solutions. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/uq45c
Meyer, M., Neumayr, M., Rameder, P. (2019). Students’ Community Service: Self‐selection and the
Effects of Participation. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 00(0), 1‐24.
Van Goethem, A., Van Hoof, A., Orobio de Castro, B., Van Aken, M., Hart, D. (2014). The Role of
Reflection in the Effects of Community Service on Adolescent Development: A Meta‐Analysis.
Child development, 85(6),2114‐2130.
VU Analytics, afdeling Student‐& Onderwijszaken Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (2019).
Export_Student_Analytics_2019‐04‐24_A_Broader_Mind_Effectstudie_hashed. Delivered at
April, 24, 2019.

Appendix: Tables corresponding to Figure 1, 2, 3, 6
Table 1: Participation in ABM and ABMLS by study program (Figure 1)

Medicine
Health
Sciences
IBA
Criminology
Sociology
Total

Not in ABM
In ABM
In ABMLS
328
18
5
68
335
99
1
831

48
3
23
26
118

9
4
5
5
28

30

Table 2: Previous education by participation in ABM and ABMLS (Figure 2)
Not in ABM
VO
HBO
WO
Abroad
Total

In ABM
699
42
11
79
831

In ABMLS

91
18
2
6
117

21
6
0
1
28

Table 3: Share of men and women in ABM and ABMLS (Figure 3)
Not in ABM
Male
Female
Total

In ABM
332
449
831

In ABMLS

31
87
118

6
22
28

Table 4: Share of women in ABM‐participants and non‐participants per study program (Figure 6)
Not in ABM

In ABM
0
11
1
20

Sociology

Male
Female

Criminology

Male
Female

14
85

4
24

IBA

Male
Female

222
113

4
3

Health Sciences

Male
Female

10
58

12
45

Medicine

Male
Female

86
242

6
17

831

146

Total

31

32

4. The Broader Mind of Students at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Although the sample size was limited in this pilot phase of the A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey,
the data provide preliminary insights in the values, attitudes and behaviors of VU students. In this
chapter we show some descriptive results from the survey, providing a first glance of the possibilities
that the ABMLS has for future research.

ABMLS Sample
21 students started with the A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey. The
average age of this group is 19 years old and three quarters of the
ABMLS participants are female.
The majority of the participants in the ABMLS are students from Health
Sciences (see Figure 1). Only a few Sociology students filled out the
survey. If we compare this with the distribution of study programs in
the A Broader Mind Course, quite some IBA students filled out the
survey, while the share of Sociology students that filled out the survey is
low.
A large majority looks forward to the ABM Course. 37% of the students
who filled out the survey is somewhat excited to participate in the ABM
Course, while 32% is very excited and 16% is extremely excited to
participate. 21% considers the A Broader Mind Course as slightly
important and 26% considers the course as somewhat important.
Almost half of the sample (47%) considers the A Broader Mind Course as
very important.

Civic Mindedness

Figure 1: Distribution of study programs in
the ABMLS

To measure how civic‐minded students at VU Amsterdam are, the ABMLS contains questions on civic
attitudes as well as actual civic behavior. Below we present a selection of the results.
The concept of ‘civic efficacy’ refers to your belief in your ability to have an impact on problems in
society. To measure civic efficacy in the ABMLS we used the Self‐Efficacy Towards Service Scale
developed by Weber et al. (2004) and added a negatively phrased item (Astin et al., 1999). A sample
item is ‘I have confidence in my ability to help others’. ‘Service motivation’ refers to the idea that you
want to contribute to a better world through your career. We used five items to construct a Service
Motivation Scale. The items for this scale are selected from three instruments: the Public Service
Motivation Scale (Bringle et al. 2004), the Civic Minded Graduate Scale (Steinberg et al. 2011) and
the Civic Minded Professional Scale (Hatcher, 2008). A sample item is: ‘The education and knowledge
that I gain should be used to serve others’.

33

Figure 2 shows the average
scores on the Civic Efficacy
Scale and the Service
Motivation Scale for men and
women. There are no
substantial differences
between men and women.

Figure 2: Average scores on civic efficacy and Service motivation by gender.

Almost all students in the ABMLS talk to others about political and social issues and follow the news
online (Figure 3). Civic activities that are more time consuming like volunteering and participating in
an event to raise money are less popular. Only 15% of the sample voted for the student board
elections, which has to do with the fact that the student board elections at VU Amsterdam were held
after the survey was conducted.

Figure 3: Share of students participating in different civic activities

34

The majority separates glass and
paper and half of the sample
separates electronics and textile
(Figure 4). If we ask students how
environmentally aware they
consider themselves, 20%
considers themselves as
‘somewhat aware’ while 75%
considers themselves as ‘aware’.

Student engagement

Figure 4: Share of students separating different types of waste

The measures in the student engagement module try to capture to what extent and in what way
students are engaged with their study program and VU Amsterdam. For 37% of the students it is
‘absolutely true’ that they feel proud of belonging to VU Amsterdam, while this is ‘mostly true’ for
47%.
Figure 5 shows the level of interest of the two groups in several study activities. There are no big
differences between study activities and between study programs. For both groups, presentations
are less popular compared to lectures.

Figure 5: Average
on
interest
in Academic
studyscores
activities
by study
Figure 6:scores
Average
Figure
scores
4: Average
on
and
on Social
interest
Interaction
inprogram.
study activities,
by study program
by study program

35

Figure 6: Average scores on Academic and Social Interaction by study program

Figure 6 shows average scores on Academic and Social Interaction at VU Amsterdam by study program. Students from IBA, Criminology and
Sociology score somewhat higher on involvement with peers. Students from Medicine and Health Sciences score higher on the statement that
teachers have time to answer questions compared to the students from the other study programs.

36

Professional orientation
How do students see their future career? This may be a difficult question for some first‐year
students and the ABMLS allows us to analyze how their attitudes change during their time at VU
Amsterdam and when they enter the labor market.
Table 1 shows which characteristics students find most important and which on the least important
in their future job. Column 1 shows results for the full sample. An interesting job, a job that is useful
to society and a secure job are considered the most important. For Medicine and Health Sciences
students good relations with your colleagues is more important than a secure job. Good
opportunities for advancement are more important for Criminology, IBA and Sociology students
compared to Medicine and Health Sciences students.

Table 1: Ranking of most important characteristics of future job, by study program

Full sample
1. Interesting job
2. A job that is useful
to society
3. Secure job
4. Good relations with
your colleagues
5. A job that allows
you to work
independently
6. Good opportunities
for advancement
7. High income
8. Easy work load

Medicine, Health Sciences
1. Interesting job
2. A job that is useful to
society
3. Good relations with
your colleagues
4. Secure job

Criminology, IBA, Sociology
1. Interesting job
2. Secure job

5. A job that allows you to
work independently

3. A job that is useful to
society
4. Good relations with
your colleagues
5. Good opportunities for
advancement

6. Good opportunities for
advancement
7. High income
8. Easy work load

6. A job that allows you to
work independently
7. High income
8. Easy work load

To measure entrepreneur intentions, we included the question: ‘Do you expect to start up a new
firm or take over an existing firm within the next fifteen years?’ 58% of the sample indicated this is
probably not the case and only 26% answered ‘possibly’. Working abroad seems more popular for
this group of students; 42% considers this as possible, 16% indicates they will probably work abroad
and 26% indicates they definitely consider to work abroad.
Are students satisfied with how VU Amsterdam prepares them for the labor market? 58% of the
students agrees with the statement that their education at VU Amsterdam is a good preparation for
the labor market, while 26% neither agrees or disagrees. Students indicate that practical knowledge
and the opportunities for extra activities and courses at VU Amsterdam benefit their preparation for
the labor market. According to the students, internships could be a way to improve their preparation
for the labor market.

37

Personality characteristics
Most students consider their mental and
physical health as good. On mental health,
females score lower than male students. To
the question: ‘How often do you have the
feeling you cannot cope with all the things
that you have to do?’ 21% of the women
answered ‘often’ or ‘very often’, while this
was 0% among men.
If we look at the time use of this group
(Figure 8), students spend most hours per
week on preparing for class, being in class
and on social media. Medicine and Health
Figure 7: Average health by gender.
Sciences students spend less time on
preparing for class and social media compared to Criminology, IBA and Sociology students. However,
they spend more time in the classroom. There also is a considerable difference between the two
groups in how much time they spend on caring responsibilities. We should be cautious with these
results as the sample size is very small and outliers can distort the results.

Figure 8: Average number of hours spent on different activities, by study program.

38

Figure 9: Scatterplot of preparing for class vs social media use in hours. The grey arear represents 95%
confidence intervals for predictions from a linear model.

Figure 10: Scatterplot of preparing for class vs paid work in hours. The grey arear represents 95% confidence
intervals for predictions from a linear model.

39

With a larger sample size it would be interesting to analyze the relationships between different
variables. We could, for example, analyze how social media use relates to preparing for class. Figure
9 shows this relationship. There seems to be a negative relationship between preparing for class and
social media use. The more you prepare for class, the less hours you are on social media. Figure 10
shows that the more hours you spend on paid work, the less hours you prepare for class. However,
from these scatterplots it becomes clear that outliers, respondents with extreme scores on of the
variables, have a big impact on the results. Based on this sample we cannot draw any conclusions.
Figure 11 shows to what extent students feel they belong to a certain place. Students feel the
strongest belonging to the world, followed by Europe and the Netherlands. Students feel less
belonging to the VU Campus and their neighborhood, but the differences are small.

Figure 10: Average scores on the feeling of belonging to different places
Figure 11: Average scores on sense of place.

42% of the sample is not considering him‐or herself as belonging to a particular religion, 16% feels as
belonging to the Protestant religion and 11% to the Islam.

40

5. Working Paper: Too busy to volunteer? Time use and civic
participation among university students
In this paper we map students time use patterns and perceived time pressure in relation to civic
participation. Do students who spend more time on studying, work, or have caring responsibilities
engage less in student activities and volunteer work? Do students who feel they have to cope with
too many things also spend more time on studying, paid work and social media? Are the ‘stressed’
students the ones who refrain from civic activities and volunteer work? Overall, the findings suggest
that civic participation is not hindered by time constraints. Although different activities compete with
each other, like working and studying, students are often able to be active in multiple areas.
Providing care for a family member is most strongly associated with negative health outcomes.

Key findings
 Time pressure does not hamper civic participation among university students
 Students with a paid job spend less time on their studies, but are more likely to volunteer
and to provide informal care
 Social media use does not hinder time spent on studying, nor is it related with stress
 Caring for a family member gives a lot of time pressure and is related to negative health, but
it does not withhold students from studying, working and volunteering
 Students who volunteer are also likely to contribute online and to work

Motivation
University students can participate in different civic activities, including student boards, editorial
boards, student associations and voluntary organizations outside the university campus. However,
not all students participate in such activities and there is even a debate on a generational decline in
civic engagement (Hustinx et al. 2012) Why do we not engage in civic activities? Time demands is
often mentioned by people to refrain from participating in civic activities or to quit with volunteer
work (Barraza, 2011; Hustinx, 2010). In addition, burn‐out and stress among university students is
receiving increasing attention. This could have negative effects on many areas, like mental and
physical health and academic performance. It also creates a barrier for students to participate in
extra‐curricular activities (Lisa O’ Heary, 2012).
How do time use patterns of students actually look like? And what are the consequences for
civic participation? In 2010, 145 students participated in a diary study at a Dutch university
(Meeuwisse et al., 2011). During a regular week students spend a bit more than 3 hours per day on
their study (being in class and preparing for class) compared to 5,6 hours in an exam week. Most
time is spend on relaxing activities (4,5 hours) and students spent only 1 hour on work. Fosnacht et
al (2018) studied time expenditure of a sample of 3000 first‐year students from bachelor’s degree
granting U.S. institutions in 2014/2015. On average, most time was spend on preparing for class
(13,8 hours per week) and relaxing and socializing (12,3 hours per week), followed by co‐curricular
activities/community service (7 hours per week) and working for pay (6,3 hours per week).
Research on volunteering among students is primarily on student motives to participate in
volunteering. Examples of such motives are the development of new skills, the possibility to live
according to personal values and career benefits (Gage & Thapa, 2012). Less attention has been paid
to what keeps students from being active (Hyde & Knowles 2013). Scholars find that time demands is
often the most important reason for students to refrain from or quit with volunteer work (Barbarza,
41

2011; Hustinx, 2010; Hyde & Knowles, 2013; Lisa O’Heary, 2012; Gage & Thapa, 2012, Simha et al.,
2011). Paid work and study leaves little time for civic participation. In addition, commitments to
social life or caring responsibilities contributed to this lack of time (Hyde & Knowles, 2013; Simha et
al., 2011).
Economic theory predicts that discretionary time is limited and that time spent on work and
studies would displace time contributed to voluntary organizations. In line with such substitution
theories, recent longitudinal research shows that part‐time workers volunteer most hours, while
working overtime is associated with reduced volunteering (Qvist, 2018).
With most research in the nonprofit literature is focusing on formal volunteering, it is the
question to what extent the same mechanisms hold for new forms of volunteering. Online
volunteering is more popular among people in their 20s and 30s and may attract volunteers who
otherwise would not participate (Ackermann & Manatschal, 2018; Liu et al., 2016). In a study among
Dutch and Belgian university students, Hustinx et al. (2012) describe how the younger generation
may not be less engaged but rather participates in more diverse ways, both online and in person.
Online participation is more flexible than traditional formal volunteering and it is unsure how this is
influenced by time constraints.
The goal of this paper is to gain insights in the relation between time use patterns of and
time pressure on students and how this relates to different types of civic participation. If you spend
more hours on studying, paid work and social media, do you participate less in student activities and
volunteer work? Do students who indicate to experience stress also participate less in civic
activities? These insights will help us to understand why students decide or refrain from spending
their time on civic participation.
This study
The first group of participants were recruited from Prolific, an online platform where researchers can
recruit participants in a quick and reliable way in exchange for financial compensation. The second
group of participants are first‐year’s studying at VU Amsterdam, recruited from a group of students
who voluntarily participate in a pilot of an interdisciplinary and mainly online‐based course ‘A
Broader Mind’. The total sample consists of 219 students, of which the majority resides in the UK
(66%) and the Netherlands (18%).
Participants filled out a survey with questions on personality traits, academic belonging,
civic‐mindedness and professional orientation. To measure time use patterns we included the
question ‘About how many hours do you spend in a typical 7‐day week doing the following? (If you
don't know the number of hours exactly, please provide a reasonable estimate)’, which was followed
by a list of activities (e.g. being in class, volunteer work). The responses, in hours per week, are
Winsorized at the 99th percentile to prevent outliers from having a disproportionally large influence
on the results.
To measure civic participation we included the question ‘In the last 12 months, did you
participate in any of the following activities outside of your education?’ which was followed by list of
civic activities. Participants could tick boxes with ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Not applicable’.
Time use
How do students spend their time? Figure 1 shows the number of hours per week that students
spend on different activities. The study requires most time. Students spend on average more than 24
hours per week on average on being in class and preparing for class. The average time in paid labor,
including the 56% who do not have a job besides their studies, is 8 hours per week. More than a fifth
of respondents provide care for a family member, which (including the zeros) requires 2.6 hours on
average, with outliers up to tens of hours a week.
42

Figure 5: Violin plots of the number of hours that students spend per week on different activities

Participation
Figure 6 shows the percentage of
respondents who engaged in different forms
of participation. Most students sometimes
talk to others about social or political issues
(85%), signed an (online) petition (74%) and
donate to charitable causes (65%). Online
participation is relatively popular, too, with
63% who likes or shares online messages
about a social or political issue and 53%
posting a recommendation, suggestion or
rating on an online platform so others can
benefit from it. With regard to campus
activities, 50% participates in student or
study associations, 35% reads campus
magazines and 31% votes for student board
elections.
Three forms of volunteering are
Figure 6: Percentage of respondents who engaged in
different types of participation during the last 12 months
used in further analyses: participation in a student
or study association; volunteering for an
organization; and posting a recommendation, suggestion or rating on an online platform. Figure 7
shows that these three forms are strongly interrelated: most students who are active in one way,
also participate in another way. There is a core of 11% that participates in three ways. This is a group
of students that Hustinx et al. (2012) have labeled ‘civic omnivores’ in the sense that they participate
43

in multiple ways, both conventional and unconventional. 23% is not active in either of the three
forms of participation under study, a group that may be the ‘disengaged’ (Hustinx et al., 2012).

Figure 7: Venn Diagram of three forms of participation

Do time constraints hinder civic participation?
The correlation matrix in Table 3 shows bivariate correlations between different measures of time
use, participation, perceived pressure and well‐being. All three forms of civic participation correlate
positively with each other.
An active study life does not go well together with a large paid job on the side. Those who
work more hours spend less time on their study. Yet, working does not substitute all other activities:
students who have a paid job are more likely to volunteer and to provide informal care. Working
more hours is positively correlated with time pressure, measured by the feeling of having too little
time for all the things you have to do.
Social media use is positively correlated with time spent on the study and is not related to
stress and well‐being, which is contrary to expectations about the supposed threats that social
media present for serious studying.
Interestingly, online participation is also positively correlated with time pressure. Those who
volunteer online are more likely to be offline volunteers and spend more time on social media.
Those who care for a family member experience more time pressure and report significantly
lower mental health, physical health and life satisfaction. Yet, such a relatively stressful life does not
withhold these students from studying, working and volunteering.
In sum, a busy life does not hamper civic participation. Spending more time on studying,
working, social media and informal care is not clearly related to different forms of participation.
Students who experience more time pressure are not less likely to participate; instead, time
pressure is positively related to online volunteering.

44

Table 3: Correlation matrix

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Participation: Study or
student association
no/yes
Participation:
Volunteering no/yes
Participation: Online
volunteering no/yes
Time: Studying no/yes
Time: Studying h/wk
Time: Paid work no/yes
Time: Paid work h/wk
Time: Social media no/yes
Time: Social media h/wk
Time: Caring for family
no/yes
Time: Caring for family
h/wk
Pressure (1‐5)
Mental health (1‐5)
Physical health (1‐5)
Life satisfaction (1‐11)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

1

0.13

0.11

0.12

0.08

0.04

‐0.11

0.01

0.11

0.13

0.09

0.07

0.01

0.05

‐0.03

0.13

1

0.19

0.08

‐0.01

0.16

0.07

0.09

0.02

0.09

0.1

0.12

0.03

‐0.06

0.05

0.11
0.12
0.08
0.04
‐0.11
0.01
0.11

0.19
0.08
‐0.01
0.16
0.07
0.09
0.02

1
0.05
‐0.03
0.07
0.06
0.13
0.2

0.05
1
0.22
‐0.05
‐0.18
‐0.04
‐0.04

‐0.03
0.22
1
‐0.15
‐0.31
0.12
0.16

0.07
‐0.05
‐0.15
1
0.72
0.02
‐0.01

0.06
‐0.18
‐0.31
0.72
1
0.04
‐0.13

0.13
‐0.04
0.12
0.02
0.04
1
0.32

0.2
‐0.04
0.16
‐0.01
‐0.13
0.32
1

0.07
0.06
0.13
0.09
0.01
‐0.03
‐0.06

0.07
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.02
‐0.09
0.05

0.14
0.07
0.13
0.11
0.17
‐0.07
‐0.06

0.02
‐0.08
‐0.04
0.08
0.12
‐0.07
‐0.07

‐0.01
‐0.1
0.01
0.07
0.05
0.1
0.01

‐0.07
‐0.11
0.13
‐0.05
‐0.06
‐0.01
‐0.09

0.13

0.09

0.07

0.06

0.13

0.09

0.01

‐0.03

‐0.06

1

0.54

0.19

0.03

‐0.12

‐0.1

0.09
0.07
0.01
0.05
‐0.03

0.1
0.12
0.03
‐0.06
0.05

0.07
0.14
0.02
‐0.01
‐0.07

0.04
0.07
‐0.08
‐0.1
‐0.11

0.08
0.13
‐0.04
0.01
0.13

0.12
0.11
0.08
0.07
‐0.05

0.02
0.17
0.12
0.05
‐0.06

‐0.09
‐0.07
‐0.07
0.1
‐0.01

0.05
‐0.06
‐0.07
0.01
‐0.09

0.54
0.19
0.03
‐0.12
‐0.1

1
0.25
‐0.16
‐0.26
‐0.23

0.25
1
‐0.13
‐0.15
‐0.13

‐0.16
‐0.13
1
0.44
0.53

‐0.26
‐0.15
0.44
1
0.35

‐0.23
‐0.13
0.53
0.35
1

Coefficients in bold are significant at p < 0.05

45

Discussion
In contemporary academic and public debates, much attention is paid to supposed time pressure on
university students. With obligations ranging from preparing for exams and following lectures to
earning money on the side and maintaining an active in social life, students are said to be too busy
to participate in civic activities.
Our results challenge this view. Overall, voluntary participation inside and outside university
is not reduced by the time students spend on studying, working, social media and providing informal
care. Instead, many students seem to be able to volunteer in different ways besides their other
activities.
Some activities cause pressure. Providing a lot of informal care for family members is related
to more stress and lower mental and physical health, and students who work more hours experience
more time pressure in their lives. Yet, this generally does not prevent them from contributing their
time to student clubs, voluntary organizations and online platforms.
Limitations and gaps
The results are preliminary and there is reason to be cautious about their implications. The sample
size under study is small, and random variation can easily lead to false positives or negatives.
Although we Winsorized the time use variables, outliers can easily distort the results.
The aim of this paper is to study how time pressure affects civic activities, but causality can
also be the other way around. Rather than time pressure to be a barrier for participation, it can be
that participation causes stress. Students who volunteer besides their study, work and social life
have another obligation to deal with, which leads to more time pressure.
More research with larger samples and preferably longitudinal data can test the validity of
the conclusions.

References
Ackermann, K., & Manatschal, A. (2018). Online volunteering as a means to overcome unequal
participation? The profiles of online and offline volunteers compared. New Media & Society,
20(12), 4453‐4472.
Barraza, J. A. (2011). Positive emotional expectations predict volunteer outcomes for new
volunteers. Motivation and Emotion, 35(2), 211‐219.
Fosnacht, K., McCormick, A. C., & Lerma, R. (2018). First‐year students’ time use in college: A latent
profile analysis. Research in Higher Education, 59(7), 958‐978.
Gage, R. L., & Thapa, B. (2012). Volunteer motivations and constraints among college students:
Analysis of the volunteer function inventory and leisure constraints models. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 41, 405– 430.
Hyde, M. K., & Knowles, S. R. (2013). What predicts Australian university students' intentions to
volunteer their time for community service?. Australian Journal of Psychology, 65(3), 135‐145.
Hustinx, L. (2010). I quit, therefore I am? Volunteer turnover and the politics of self‐actualization.
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 39(2), 236‐255.
Hustinx, L., Meijs, L. C., Handy, F., & Cnaan, R. A. (2012). Monitorial citizens or civic omnivores?
Repertoires of civic participation among university students. Youth & Society, 44(1), 95‐117.
Liu, H. K., Harrison, Y. D., Lai, J. J., Chikoto, G. L., & Jones‐Lungo, K. (2016). Online and virtual
volunteering. In: David H. Smith, Robert A. Stebbins, & Jurgen Grotz (Eds.) The Palgrave
Handbook of Volunteering, Civic Participation, and Nonprofit Associations. Palgrave Macmillan,
London, pp. 290‐310.

OCW (2011). Studiesucces in de Bachelor. Drie onderzoeken naar factoren die studiesucces in de
bachelor verklaren. Retrieved from
https://onderwijsonderzoekblog.files.wordpress.com/2016/03/studiesucces‐in‐de‐bachelor‐
rapport.pdf.
Qvist, H.P. (2018). Does Time Spent on Paid Work Substitute or Complement Volunteering? Evidence
from Two‐wave Panel Data from Denmark. ARNOVA's 47th Annual Conference.
Simha, A., Topuzova, L. N., & Albert, J. F. ( 2011). V for volunteer(ing): The journeys of undergraduate
volunteers. Journal of Academic Ethics, 9, 107– 126.

47

48

6. Master Thesis: Contact and trust: A qualitative study among ABM
participants.

During the pilot phase, Sociology student Naresh Mathoera did qualitative research on the A Broader
Mind program for his Master Thesis. A Broader Mind is an interesting case for research on social
trust in different groups. Usually, social groups are relatively homogenous: ‘Birds of a feather flock
together’. But in A Broader Mind, students from different backgrounds are randomly mixed. How
does this affect trust in other students? This chapter provides a summary of Mathoera’s research
design and empirical findings.

Over the past three years, the population of the Netherlands increased with 280.000 inhabitants,
three quarters of which stemmed from international migration (Central Bureau of Statistics, 2018).
An empirical study shows that people with a migration background often have less or no contact
with people from the native majority group (De Vroome et al., 2013). In addition, several studies
(both quantitative and qualitative) indicate that there is a relationship between contact between
different groups and trust in others (Krishna, 2002; Warren, 2001; Svendsen, 2006; Putnam, 2007;
Lancee & Dronkers, 2008; Uslaner, 2010, Savelkoul et al., 2017). Before we discuss the societal
relevance of this research, we first briefly look at what ‘trust in others’ means.
Trust in others is described as the belief that others will not act against the interests of the individual
and that it is not necessary to monitor the behavior of the other to ensure trust in the other
(Uslaner, 2018). For this research, 'trust in others' is divided into different forms of trust. First and
foremost there is institutional trust, or trust in institutions, laws and regulations. Secondly, there is
trust in disposition, which is based on trust in the goodness of the other. The third form of trust is
interpersonal trust, or trust in others we know personally. Finally, there is ‘particularized trust’,
which describes trust in others who are similar to us (Uslaner, 2018; Mcknight & Chervany, 2001).
For this research, we look at ‘trust in others’ among VU students and how the degree and quality of
contact play a role in this. The research question is: "How do VU students who belong to minority
groups with a migrant background or the majority group experience trust in others and how does
(inter‐ethnic) contact play a role in this?"
To answer this research question, the A Broader Mind program is used as a case study. The A
Broader Mind program brings first‐year bachelor's students together. By discussing current social
themes in the A Broader Mind program, VU Amsterdam aims to stimulate the personal and social
skills of students. Students from different (disciplinary) backgrounds are placed together in groups
on the basis of chance. This makes the program a good case to study if mutual contact leads to
change in the trust of others.
With the A Broader Mind program, VU Amsterdam wants to improve the quality of education by
using the diverse community to learn from each other. According to Nikolas Rosie (in Delanty, 2009,
p.68), government institutions (such as VU Amsterdam) are able to develop new programs (such as
the A Broader Mind program) by encouraging and controlling the formation of identity, including
personal ethics and collective trust. This research focuses on the experiences and perceptions of
trust in others among VU students, both with and without a migrant background. It also examines to

49

what extent VU Amsterdam succeeds in promoting trust in others through the A Broader Mind
program, which should ultimately lead to inclusion and social equality within society.
This thesis applied a mixed‐method approach. The quantitative data of the A Broader Mind
Longitudinal Survey are used to describe the levels of generalized trust among students. The most
important part of the thesis is based on ten semi‐structured interviews with first‐year students
participating in the A Broader Mind program. To include more students with a migrant background
in the study, three first‐year students not participating in the A Broader Mind program were
interviewed.
For this research a distinction was made between people with or without a migration background.
This categorization is based on the self‐identification of the respondent. An interesting finding of this
research is that individual self‐identification depends on the social system in which the individual
finds himself. Persons who feel involved in the majority group within all social systems are
categorized as persons without a migrant background in this study. People who in one or more social
systems identify with the ethnic minority group are categorized as people with a migrant
background.
The most important finding is that among VU students, both with and without a migration
background, the degree and quality of contact seems to promote trust in others, if this contact is
frequent and close. In addition, institutional trust, or trust in the group guides (which were senior
students), appears to lead to a higher degree of trust in others (generalized trust). However,
institutional trust is closely related to an equal status between the student and the group guide.
The A Broader Mind course is a blended‐learning course that combines online and offline
assignments and activities. For VU students physical contact in daily life with people with and
without a migrant background seems to be more important in guaranteeing interpersonal trust in
the other than contact in an online environment.
A more diverse environment leads to more interethnic contact which leads to more trust in others.
Another research finding is that if an individual experiences an increase in trust in others, this also
affects the trust level of the other group members. This is because the individual passes on his or her
perspectives of ‘the other’ with a different (ethnic) background, to people within his or her group.
Although this research has led to interesting findings at the micro level, it also has some limitations.
The A Broader Mind program started this year with a pilot in which student participation was not
compulsory. This has led to a low turnout which makes generalization of the quantitative results to
the student population very difficult. Making the program mandatory would lead to a higher
turnout. However, making the program compulsory could lead to participation of less motivated
students, which in turn can be important in mechanisms that affect trust in others. A
recommendation is therefore to award credits to the A Broader Mind program, which will make
students more motivated to participate in the program.
In addition, the results of the in‐depth interviews show that in contact with others the personality of
the other is experienced as a more important factor than the ethnic background, which in turn
affects trust in others. A follow‐up study could look at personality, using the Big Five model (McCrae
& Costa in Jackson & Poulsen, 2005, p. 669), among all VU students participating in the A Broader
Mind program. This can be used to determine whether the personality of the individual actually has
an effect on the degree and quality of contact and also changes the degree of trust in others.

50

Finally, it is important that quantitative research will be done within the program in the coming
years. With a higher participation of VU students, the quantitative results can be a valuable addition
to the results of this study.
In addition, it is recommended to set‐up qualitative studies to gain more insights into how students
experience institutional trust, interpersonal trust, trust in disposition and ‘particularized trust’. This
is important for VU Amsterdam in order to be able to contribute as an institution to a higher degree
of trust in others among VU students, which ultimately results in a higher degree of trust in others
throughout society.

References
Delanty, G. (2003). Community. Routledge.
De Vroome, T., Hooghe, M., & Marien, S. (2013). The origins of generalized and political trust among
immigrant minorities and the majority population in the Netherlands. European Sociological
Review, 29(6), 1336‐1350.
Jackson, J, W., Poulsen, J, R. (2005) Contact Experiences Mediate the Relationship Between Five‐
Factor Model Personality Traits and Ethnic Prejudice. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
35(4), 667‐685.
Krishna, A. (2002). Active social capital: Tracing the roots of development and democracy. Columbia
University Press.
Lancee, B., & Dronkers, J. (2008). Etnische diversiteit, sociaal vertrouwen in de buurt en contact van
allochtonen en autochtonen met de buren. Migrantenstudies, 24(4):224‐249.
McKnight, D. H., & Chervany, N. L. (2000). What is trust? A conceptual analysis and an
interdisciplinary model. AMCIS 2000 Proceedings, 382.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Palgrave Macmillan.
Putnam, R. D. (2007). E pluribus unum: Diversity and community in the twenty‐first century the 2006
Johan Skytte Prize Lecture. Scandinavian Political Studies, 30(2), 137‐174.
Savelkoul, M., Gesthuizen, M., & Scheepers, P. (2017, July 24). Etnische diversiteit versterkt sociale
banden. Retrieved at January 10, 2019, from https://www.socialevraagstukken.nl/etnische‐
diversiteit‐versterkt‐sociale‐banden/
Statistics Netherlands (2018, October 24). CBS StatLine. Retrieved at February 26, 2019, from
https://statline.cbs.nl/Statweb/publication/?DM=SLNL
Svendsen, G. L. (2006). Studying social capital in situ: A qualitative approach. Theory and Society,
35(1), 39‐70.
Uslaner, E. M. (2010). Segregation, mistrust and minorities. Ethnicities, 10(4), 415‐434.
Uslaner, E. M. (Ed.). (2018). The Oxford handbook of social and political trust. Oxford University
Press.
Warren, M. R. (2001). Dry Bones Rattling: Community Building to Revitalize American Democracy.
Princeton University Press.

51

52

7. Appendix: Questionnaire

A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey ‐ Questionnaire
20 February 2019

René Bekkers
Arjen de Wit
Rosan van Niekerk
E‐mail: abmls@vu.nl

53

A BROADER MIND

Thank you for your interest in this survey. Answering the questions will take about 15‐20 minutes.
This survey is part of the A Broader Mind program, alongside the Course you are currently participating in. The A Broader
Mind Longitudinal Survey (ABMLS) aims to follow the development of students at VU Amsterdam. The survey consists of
questions regarding your attitudes towards social issues, your experiences at the university, your ideas about your future
career, and your life and personality.
Several times during your study career, we will ask you to participate in this survey. Your responses provide important
insights in how different aspects of your studies contribute to your development.

CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN THE SURVEY

The information provided by you in this survey will only be used for scientific research purposes. The aim of this research is
to describe and understand the ‘Broader Mind’ of students. How do students differ in their beliefs towards life and society
and how do students develop over time?
Some of the questions are of a personal nature, such as questions on your housing situation, religious beliefs and religious
participation. If you are not comfortable answering a specific question, you can always skip the question or choose the
option that you do not want to answer.
In the analysis, the survey data will be combined with data archived at VU Amsterdam, including your age, sex and
information on your study program and results. By agreeing to participate in this survey, you also agree that your
responses will be matched to individual information that has been archived at VU Amsterdam. Your data will not be used
for individual evaluations or profiling, and none of your personal data will be disclosed to third parties.
The survey does not collect information on your IP address and geographic location. Information will not be used in any
manner which would allow identification of your individual responses. The ‘Reglement bescherming persoonsgegevens
studenten VU Amsterdam’ ‘Student personal data processing regulations Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam’ applies to this
research and contains the most important regulations concerning the usage of personal information at VU Amsterdam.
The data that is collected in this survey will be saved in Qualtrics, a US‐based corporation. Qualtrics follows the technical
and privacy related regulations set by VU Amsterdam and the European Union. However, we would like to inform you that
the US government may request access to data collected by US corporations.
You can exit the survey at any time without consequences. After you have finished the survey you can still decide that you
want to withdraw from the research. If you would like to withdraw, please write an email to abmls@vu.nl and mention the
personal ID number you received in the e‐mail so that we can remove your data from the dataset.

I have read the information and agree to participate in this study.
o
o

Yes
No

54

CONSENT LINKING SURVEY DATA TO CBS DATA

Statistics Netherlands (CBS) collects data from citizens in the Netherlands. By combining survey data with CBS data, we can
link your responses to information on, for example, your labor participation and income of yourself and your family. CBS is
legally bound to strict regulations that protect the privacy of citizens. Researchers can only access CBS data at an
aggregated level, not on the individual level. The data will not be used in any manner which would allow identification of
your individual responses.
I agree that the data collected through this survey will be linked to data from Statistics Netherlands (CBS).
o
o

Yes
No

CONSENT LINKING SURVEY DATA TO BROADER MIND COURSE MATERIAL

During the A Broader Mind Course you will be asked to answer questions about the themes in the Canvas environment.
The researchers will use these answers for analyses that do not reveal your personal identity.
The personal reflections that you submit through Canvas will not be used for research purposes.
I agree that my answers about the themes in the Broader Mind Course in Canvas will be used and linked to the data
collected through this survey.
o
o

Yes
No

55

A.

CIVIC‐MINDEDNESS

The survey will start with a number of questions about your views towards society.

Issues in society
According to you, what are the most important issues facing society? Write down a minimum of three issues. Please, write
your answers in English.

Thematic knowledge
How would you rate your knowledge in the following areas?
Very poor

Below
average

Average

Above
average

Excellent

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

1. The definitions and individual consequences of
poverty
2. The developments in bio‐technology and the
related ethical issues
3. The development of digital innovations and
it’s ethical consequences for society
4. Current environmental problems and its
implications

Civic efficacy
Please indicate whether you agree or disagree with the following statements.

1. I can have a positive impact on social
problems
2. Realistically, I can do little to bring about
changes in our society
3. I have confidence in my ability to help others
4. I can make a difference in my community
5. None of us can make a difference in the lives
of the less fortunate

Strongly
disagree

Disagree

Neither
agree nor
disagree

Agree

Strongly
agree

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

Thematic efficacy
In my own life, I think I can make a contribution to…

1. Solutions to reduce poverty
2. The debate on ethical questions concerning
bio‐technology
3. Societal challenges through the application of
digital innovations
4. Solutions to environmental problems

No contribution
0
1
2

3

4

5

6

7

A large contribution
8
9
10

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

56

Civic behavior
In the last 12 months, did you participate in any of the following activities outside of your education?

1. Talk to others about your views on political or social issues
2. Sharing, Liking or commenting on another person’s online post regarding a political or social
issue (e.g. on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube or news websites)
3. Following news channels on social media or using a news app on your phone
4. Posted a recommendation, suggestion or rating on an online platform so others can benefit
from it
5. Sign an (online) petition
6. Take part in a peaceful march or rally, a sit‐in or an occupation
7. Be a member of an organization for a social, political, cultural or environmental cause
8. Volunteer for a social, political, cultural or environmental cause
9. Donate money to charities (e.g. cash giving, bank transfer, online donations, crowdfunding)
10. Donate any of your belongings to charities (e.g. clothes, shoes, furniture).
11. Participate in an event to raise money for charities (e.g. running, cycling, swimming for a good
cause)
12. Share or lend any of your belongings to help someone you don’t know personally
13. Participate in a student association
14. Vote for student board elections
15. Read campus magazines (e.g. AdValvas)
16. Participate in university activities outside class (e.g. debates, film festivals, international trips)

Yes

No

○

○

○
○

○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○

Environmental‐friendly attitude
How environmentally aware do you consider yourself?
o Not aware at all
o Not so aware
o Somewhat aware
o Aware
o Very aware

Environmental‐friendly consumption
How often do you eat meat or fish each week?
o Every day meat or fish
o Flex ‐ 2 or 3 times a week
o Vegetarian – never
o Vegan ‐ never and I don’t eat dairy or eggs

Environmental‐friendly behavior
What kind of waste do you separate?
□ Plastic
□ Paper
□ Glass
□ Organic waste
□ Batteries
□ Electronics
□ Textiles
□ None

57

Life goals 1
Four individual goals are mentioned below. If you have to choose from those four, which goal do you find most important
and which one the least important? And which goals are second and third? You can select the answers in the order of
importance. Please first select the answer of the goal you find most important.
1. Creating artistic work (writing, painting, music, decorating, etc.)
2. Being able to afford the things I like
3. Having a large income
4. Developing a meaningful philosophy of life

Life goals 2
Another set four individual goals are mentioned below. Again, if you have to choose from those four, which goal do you
find most important and which one the least important? And which goals are second and third? You can select the answers
in the order of importance. Please first select the answer of the goal you find most important.
1. Being able to find steady work
2. Having leisure time to enjoy my own interests
3. Possessing high‐quality and nice goods (clothes, car, house, furniture etc.)
4. Discovering new ways to experience things

Social trust
Generally speaking, would you say that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people, or that most people can be trusted?
Please give your answer on a scale from 1 (can't be too careful) to 10 (most people can be trusted).
o Can’t be too careful
o Most people can be trusted

Social distance
Various groups of people are listed below. Please indicate on a scale from 1 to 10 to what extent it is acceptable to you to
have that kind of people as your neighbors.

1. High‐class business people
2. People of a different religion
3. People with a different ethnic background
4. Low‐class people
5. People who speak a different language
6. Heavy drinkers
7. Drug addicts

Not acceptable
1
2
3

4

5

6

7

8

Acceptable
9
10

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

58

Diversity scale
Would you like to indicate whether you agree or disagree with the following statements?

1. I am able to understand why people think
differently than I do
2. I find it more difficult to work in group with
diverse people than in a group with people who
are like me
3. I find it easy to discuss controversial issues
4. It’s hard for me to make friends with people
who have different beliefs than me
5. I don’t like it when someone disagrees with
me
6. I like to learn how others think about social
and ethical issues, even if their views are very
different from mine
7. I like to participate in a diverse class because it
helps me to develop new skills and approaches

Strongly
disagree

Disagree

Neither
agree nor
disagree

Agree

Strongly
agree

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

59

B.

ACADEMIC ENGAGEMENT

The following questions concern your studies and study environment at VU Amsterdam.

Sense of university belonging
I feel proud of belonging to VU Amsterdam.
o Absolutely untrue
o Mostly untrue
o Can’t say true or false
o Mostly true
o Absolutely true

Interest in study activities
How much do each of the following study activities and assignments interest you?

1. teacher lectures
2. discussions and debates (for
example during seminars)
3. individual readings
4. individual writing assignments
5. research projects
6. lab assignments
7. group projects
8. giving presentations and speeches
9. internship or traineeships

Not
interesting
at all

Slightly
interesting

Moderately
interesting

Very
interesting

Extremely
interesting

Not
applicable

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

Time use
About how many hours do you spend in a typical 7‐day week doing the following? (If you don't know the number of hours
exactly, please provide a reasonable estimate)

Hours

1. Being in class (lectures, seminars, practicums etc.)
2. Following online lectures
3. Preparing for class (studying, reading, writing, doing homework or lab work, analyzing data,
rehearsing, and other academic activities)
4. Participating in student activities outside of your study like study associations, campus publications,
student board etc.
5. Internship or traineeship
6. Paid work
7. Volunteer work
8. Caring for a family member of friend who is physically or mentally ill or disabled. Examples are
helping with household chores and keeping someone company.
9. Following the news offline (newspaper, TV news)
10. Social media (Facebook, Instagram, Twitter etc.)

___
___
___
___
___
___
___
___
___

60

Care
Please indicate whether you provide care for the following persons.
□ Father
□ Father in law
□ Mother
□ Mother (in law)
□ Brother
□ Sister
□ Grandfather
□ Grandmother
□ Friend or acquaintance
□ Roommate
□ Other person

ABM excitement
How excited are you to participate in the A Broader Mind Course?
o Not excited at all
o Slightly excited
o Somewhat excited
o Very excited
o Extremely excited

ABM importance
How important do you consider the A Broader Mind Course as a part of your personal development?
o Not important at all
o Slightly important
o Somewhat important
o Very important
o Extremely important

Academic and Social Interaction
Please indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements regarding VU Amsterdam.

1. Fellow students invite me to work together on
study tasks
2. Peer students are involved with me
3. Fellow students are interested in me
4. It is difficult to find a group of students to
collaborate with
5. I talk about my personal situation with
teachers
6. Teachers are not interested in my personal
situation
7. Teachers know my name
8. Teachers tell me about themselves
9. I learn a lot from the teachers at this
institution
10. Teachers have time to answer questions
11. Teachers are never available for their
students
12. My contacts with teachers have a positive
influence on my academic performance

Absolutely
untrue

Mostly
untrue

Can’t say
true or false

Mostly true

Absolutely
true

○

○

○

○

○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○

○

○

○

○

61

C.

PROFESSIONAL ORIENTATION

Now, we would like to ask a few questions about how you see your professional career after your studies.

Type of organization
For what type of organization would you like to work after your studies? You may select more than one answer.
□ Government
□ Non‐profit
□ Profit
□ Social enterprise (a for‐profit firm with a social, environmental purpose, like Fairphone or Tony’s Chocolonely)

Entrepreneur intentions
Do you expect to start up a new firm or to take over an existing firm within the next fifteen years?
o Definitely not
o Probably not
o Possibly
o Probably
o Definitely

Work abroad
Do you consider to work abroad?
o Definitely not
o Probably not
o Possibly
o Probably
o Definitely

Future job
What kind of job do you expect to have when you are about 30 years old? Please, write the job title.

Job preferences
Some job characteristics that you may find in a paid job are mentioned below. Which characteristics do you find most
important and which ones the least important in your future job? Please, rank the job characteristics in order of
importance, where the first characteristic is the most important to you.
1. Secure job
2. Good opportunities for advancement
3. Job that is useful to society
4. Job that allows you to work independently
5. High income
6. Good relations with your colleagues
7. Easy work load
8. Interesting job

Labor Market Preparation
Please, indicate whether you agree or disagree with the following statement. My education at VU Amsterdam is a good
preparation for the labor market.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Agree nor disagree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

62

Labor Market Preparation – Good
What aspects of your education at VU Amsterdam benefit your preparation for the labor market?

Labor Market Preparation – Bad
And what aspects of your education at VU Amsterdam could be improved to better prepare you for the labor market?

Service Motivation
Would you like to indicate whether you agree or disagree with the following statements?

1. Doing well financially is definitely more
important to me than doing good deeds.
2. I would say that the main purposes of work
are to improve society through my career.
3. The education and knowledge that I gain
should be used to serve others.
4. It is important that my personal values and
beliefs will be well integrated and aligned with
my work and career.
5. I feel a deep conviction in my career goals to
achieve purposes that are beyond my own self‐
interest.

Strongly
disagree

Disagree

Neither
agree nor
disagree

Agree

Strongly
agree

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

Responsible employer
How important is it for you to work for an employer who is socially and environmentally responsible?
o Not important at all
o Not so important
o Moderately important
o Quite important
o Very important

63

D.

PERSONALITY

The following questions concern your personality and your meaning in life.

Life satisfaction
In general, how satisfied are you with your life? Please rate your life satisfaction on a scale from 0 (completely dissatisfied)
to 10 (completely satisfied).
o 0 Completely dissatisfied
o 1
o 2
o 3
o 4
o 5
o 6
o 7
o 8
o 9
o 10 Completely satisfied

Subjective physical health status
How is your physical health in general? Would you say it is very good, good, fair, bad or very bad?
o very good
o good
o fair
o bad
o very bad

Subjective mental health status
How is your mental health in general? Would you say it is very good, good, fair, bad or very bad?
o very good
o good
o fair
o bad
o very bad

Perceived pressure
How often do you have the feeling you cannot cope with all the things that you have to do?
o Never
o Seldom
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very Often

64

Big Five Personality Domains
Now you see a number of statements about how you see yourself. For each statement, select the answer option that fits
best.
I see myself as someone who:

1. Worries a lot
2. Gets nervous easily
3. Is relaxed, handles stress well
4. Is talkative
5. Is outgoing, sociable
6. Is reserved
7. Is original, comes up with new
ideas
8. Values artistic, aesthetic
experiences
9. Has an active imagination
10. Is sometimes rude to others
11. Has a forgiving nature
12. Is considerate and kind to almost
everyone
13. Does a thorough job
14. Tends to be lazy
15. Does things efficiently

Disagree
strongly

Disagree
moderately

Disagree
a little

Neither
agree nor
disagree

Agree a
little

Agree
moderately

Agree
strongly

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

Meaning in life
Please take a moment to think about what makes your life feel important to you. Respond to the following statements as
truthfully and accurately as you can, and please remember that there are no right or wrong answers. Please answer
according to the scale below.

1. I understand my life’s meaning.
2. I am searching for meaning in my
life.

Absolutely
untrue

Mostly
untrue

Somewhat
untrue

Can’t say
true or
false

Somewhat
true

Mostly
true

Absolutely
true

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

Sense of place
To what extent do you feel yourself as belonging to:

1. The VU campus
2. The neighborhood I live in
3. The town I live in
4. Another town, namely ______
5. The Netherlands
6. Europe
7. The world

Very weak
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Very strong
9
10

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○

65

General self‐efficacy
To what extent do the following statements apply to you?

1. It is easy for me to stick to my aims and
accomplish my goals.
2. I am confident that I could deal efficiently with
unexpected events.
3. I know how to handle unforeseen situations.
4. I can remain calm when facing difficulties
because I can rely on my coping abilities.
5. No matter what comes my way, I’m usually
able to handle it.

Absolutely
untrue

Mostly
untrue

Can’t say
true or false

Mostly true

Absolutely
true

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○

○

○

○

○

Dispositional Greed
Would you like to indicate whether you agree or disagree with the following statements?

1. I always want more.
2. Actually, I’m kind of greedy.
3. As soon as I have acquired something, I start
to think about the next thing I want.
4. My life motto is “more is better”
5. I can’t imagine having too many things.

Strongly
disagree

Disagree

Neither
agree nor
disagree

Agree

Strongly
agree

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

○
○

Empathic concern
The following statements inquire about your thoughts and feelings in a variety of situations. For each item, indicate how
well it describes you by choosing the appropriate option on a scale from 1 (Does not describe me well) to 5 (Describes me
well).

1. I often have tender, concerned feelings for
people less fortunate than me.
2. When I see someone being taken advantage
of, I feel kind of protective toward them.
3. When I see someone being treated unfairly, I
feel very much pity for them.
4. I would describe myself as a pretty soft‐
hearted person.

Does not
describe me
well
1

Describes
me well
2

3

4

5

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

○

66

E.

BACKGROUND

Finally, we would like to ask some background questions about you. Please note that you can always refuse to answer
specific questions.

Housing
What is your current housing situation?
o I live with (one of) my parents and/or caregivers
o I live in a student house at Uilenstede
o I live in a shared (student) house at a different place
o I live on my own
o I live together with my partner
o Other, namely _____________________
o Do not want to say

Mother’s educational level
What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? If this were abroad, please select the most
similar level of education.
o No education
o Primary education
o Lower vocational education (LBO, VBO)
o Secondary vocational education (MAVO, ULO, MULO)
o Senior secondary vocational education (MBO)
o Higher secondary education (HAVO, MMS)
o Higher secondary preparatory scholarly education (VWO, HBS, atheneum, gymnasium)
o Higher professional and university education (HBO, kandidaats, bachelor)
o University education (doctoraal, master)
o Postdoctoral education
o I don’t know

Father’s educational level
What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? If this were abroad, please select the most
similar level of education.
o No education
o Primary education
o Lower vocational education (LBO, VBO)
o Secondary vocational education (MAVO, ULO, MULO)
o Senior secondary vocational education (MBO)
o Higher secondary education (HAVO, MMS)
o Higher secondary preparatory scholarly education (VWO, HBS, atheneum, gymnasium)
o Higher professional and university education (HBO, kandidaats, bachelor)
o University education (doctoraal, master)
o Postdoctoral education
o I don’t know

67

Sense of place
To what extent do you feel yourself as belonging to:

1. The Netherlands
2. Belgium
3. Germany
4. Morocco
5. Turkey
6. Surinam
7. Netherlands Antilles
8. Another country, namely________

Very weak
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Very strong
9
10

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

○
○
○
○
○
○
○
○

Religious affiliation
To which religion do you consider yourself as belonging to?
o Roman Catholic
o Protestant
o Islam
o Judaism
o Hinduism
o Buddhism
o Other, namely ____________
o No particular religion
o I am not sure whether I belong to a religion / I am agnostic
o I prefer not to answer this question

Religious participation
How often do you attend religious services, for example in a mosque, church, synagogue or temple?
o (Almost) never
o Once or a few times a year
o Once a month
o Twice or three times a month
o Once a week
o More often than once a week
o I prefer not to answer this question

Future
We would like to ask you one final question.
If you think about yourself when you are retired, when would you be satisfied? Elaborate on several aspects of your life.
Please, describe this in a minimum of four lines.

68

COMMENTS
You have reached the end of the questionnaire. This survey is part of the A Broader Mind program, alongside the Course
you are currently participating in. At the end of the A Broader Mind Course in May, we will again ask you to participate in
this survey. In this way, it becomes clear how the attitudes, values, skills and behaviors have changed among students who
participate in A Broader Mind.
We would like to hear your suggestions about this survey. Did you find things unclear, or did you miss certain aspects that
you find important when thinking about ‘A Broader Mind’?
If you have any remarks or suggestions about this survey, please enter them below.

THANK YOU
Thank you for your participation in the A Broader Mind Longitudinal Survey. If you have any questions about this study, you
can get in touch by sending an email to abmls@vu.nl.

69

