Unproductive by choice: substitution and the slowdown
in aggregate productivity growth in the United States
Zach Flynn∗
December 31, 2019
Abstract
I propose a new decomposition of aggregate total factor productivity. I model
productivity as an index of unmeasured factors of production, and decompose the
conditional factor demand for this index. With this model of productivity, changes in
the price of labor or capital cause substitution to or from productivity. I study whether
such changes explain the slowdown in US productivity growth from 2005 to 2016. I
find that the declining growth rate of the effective price of labor and capital encouraged
substitution away from productivity. If labor and capital prices had remained constant,
productivity growth would be accelerating.

Keywords: aggregate productivity, productivity measurement, endogenous productivity
growth
JEL Codes: E23, D24, E13

∗
E-mail: zlflynn@gmail.com. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in
the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

1

1. Introduction
Total factor productivity growth has decelerated in the past decade. The causes and consequences of the slowdown matter for long run economic welfare. The two leading explanations
are that technological improvement itself has truly slowed down or that productivity is increasingly mismeasured so that our measures of productivity do not capture the full value
of new innovations. If the fall in the growth rate of productivity is the result of slowing
technological growth, welfare-per-person is improving less rapidly now than it used to. If the
declining growth rate is illusory, the result of some error in how we measure productivity, it
may not matter at all1 . I propose a model of productivity that offers a different explanation
than these two leading theories.
I model productivity as a function of the factors of production that we do not include in
the production function. In this model, there is a new avenue through which productivity
can rise or fall. As the prices of labor and capital change, the economy will substitute
to or from productivity. Substitution has a different economic consequence than either
slowing technological growth or mismeasurement. If productivity is mismeasured, there
is no slowdown. If technological progress has slowed, then perhaps either the economy
no longer innovates as rapidly as it once did (Gordon, 2016) or it is inefficiently allocating
resources (Baqaee and Farhi, 2019). In this paper, I argue there is a slowdown in productivity
growth but it is not from slowing technological progress: the factors of production that
determine productivity have a higher effective price relative to capital and labor than they
did previously. Productivity is growing more slowly because the economy is substituting
away from productivity and towards capital and labor.
This factor model of productivity, while new as an explicit model used for empirical measurement, goes back to at least Griliches and Jorgenson (1967). They argue that there would be
little left of the productivity residual if we could accurately and fully account for all the various factors of production in the economy. They memorably call productivity, “the measure
of our ignorance”, because it reflects our lack of knowledge about how output is produced
not necessarily technological progress. What I add to the literature is a simple framework
for modeling how the unmeasured factors of production change in response to changes in the
price of labor and capital.
A related part of the productivity measurement literature aims to pull various factors out of
the Solow residual by using observable proxies for factors traditionally included in productivity. The growth literature on human capital accumulation pulls human capital out of the
productivity residual. The literature on intangible capital and factor utilization (Basu and
Kimball, 1997; Fernald, 2014; Fernald and Wang, 2016) does the same for these difficult-tomeasure factors. Instead of trying to pull individual factors out of productivity, I assume
productivity is determined by many unobserved factors and model how an index of those
factors changes in response to other changes in the economy.
My framework is entirely within the standard neoclassical model. I model the economy with
1
See Syverson (2017) and Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016) for a comparison of these two competing
explanations for falling productivity growth.

2

a representative firm. Returns to scale are constant. Prices are equal to marginal cost. The
firm has a Cobb Douglas production function. As a consequence, my measure of productivity
itself is no different than Solow (1957)’s measure so I am not arguing productivity is typically
mismeasured. The difference in this paper is in what changes in the economy influence
productivity.
Because productivity is an index of unobserved factors, it has a conditional demand function.
I develop a new decomposition of productivity based on this function. The decomposition has
five terms: changes in the effective price2 of labor, changes in the effective price of capital,
changes in the effective price of productivity, changes in aggregate demand, and changes
in the overall technology of using labor and capital. I use this decomposition to measure
the extent to which substitution from productivity and to labor and capital is behind the
slowdown in productivity growth. I find that the growth rate of the effective price of labor
and capital has declined over the past decade. If it had not declined, productivity growth
would have accelerated. The decrease in productivity growth is not a sign of a slowdown in
technological progress because I find the cost to the economy of producing productivity is
actually falling at an accelerating rate. The decrease in productivity growth is the result of
changes in relative factor prices.
Section 2 introduces the factor model of productivity, deriving the factor demand equation
for productivity and the decomposition of productivity that forms the basis for my empirical
analysis.
Section 3 uses this decomposition to study the economy of the United States from 1987 to
2016. I decompose the causes of the recent decline in total factor productivity from 2005 to
2016. I find two main trends: (1) the effective prices of labor and capital are growing at a
slower rate than they used to so the economy is substituting from productivity to labor and
capital and (2) productivity growth has decelerated even as the price of productivity (an
index of the prices of the unobserved factors of production) has fallen rapidly, suggesting
that less demand for productivity is behind the productivity slowdown.
Section 4 concludes with the implications of this interpretation of the recent slowdown in
productivity growth.

2. The factor model of productivity
2.1. What is productivity?
In the neoclassical growth model and other standard macroeconomic models (like the endogenous growth models following Romer 1986), productivity is an exogenous process: it
is a shock to the economy that affects other decisions, not an equilibrium outcome itself.
Productivity in period t is At and in period (t + 1) productivity is At+1 = (1 + gt ) At where
gt is an exogenous growth rate.
2

“Effective price” is the ratio of an input price to the corresponding output elasticity, a buck-per-bang
measure.

3

I model productivity differently. I suppose that if we were to accurately measure all factors of
production in the economy that there would not be a residual in the production relationship,
Output = F (Inputs) .

(1)

Productivity is then the part of output that we cannot explain with the set of inputs we
measure. But this part of output is also produced using factors of production because all
output is produced by some factor. The main implication is that shocks that affect the
wage of labor or the rental rate of capital can result in changes to productivity. This cannot
happen if we treat productivity as an exogenous sequence.
I show that we can measure the cost of productivity and the other parameters of the economy’s cost minimization problem even though we do not observe the individual inputs that
make up productivity. I then use the conditional factor demand function for productivity to
understand how changes in wages or the price of capital affect productivity.
2.2. The pure factor production function
Let Q be output, L be labor, K be capital, and Z ∈ RM be a vector of unobserved factors
of production. The aggregate production function is Cobb Douglas,
θL

Q = F0 × L K

θK

×

M
Y

γm
Zm
.

(2)

m=1

Suppose the economy minimizes its costs like a representative firm would,
min WL L + WK K +

L,K,Z

WZ> Z

θL

st: F0 × L K

θK

×

M
Y

γm
Zm
≥ Q.

(3)

m=1

I model productivity (A) as the contribution of unobserved factors of production to output,
M
Y

A=

γm
Zm
.

(4)

m=1

The economy will minimize the cost of producing A from the Z inputs given whatever
decision it makes about labor and capital. So we can define the cost of producing the index
A,
C (A) =

min WZ> Z

st:

M
Y

γm
Zm
≥ A.

(5)

m=1

From textbook algebra on the cost function of the Cobb Douglas production function, C (A)
has the following functional form,
C (A) = C0 (WZ , γ) A
4

P 1
m γm

.

(6)

P
Define θA = m γm . We can think of the sum of the Z output elasticities as the output
elasticity of productivity.
The economy’s cost minimization problem in terms of (L, K, A) is then,
1

min WL L + WK K + C0 (WZ , γ) A θA

L,K,A

st: F0 × LθL K θK A ≥ Q.

(7)

1

e = A θA and treat A
e symmetrically to (L, K),
Equivalently, we can define A
e st: F0 × LθL K θK A
eθA ≥ Q.
min WL L + WK K + C0 (WZ , γ) A

(8)

e
L,K,A

2.3. Measuring productivity and the parameters of the cost function
I make two assumptions that are firmly in the tradition of the neoclassical model.
Assumption 1. The price of the economy’s output is equal to its marginal cost,
P = MC.

(9)

Assumption 2. The production function has constant returns to scale,
θL + θK +

M
X

γm = θL + θK + θA = 1.

(10)

m=1

I choose F0 to normalize productivity so that its units remain constant even as θL and θK
−θK
L
change. I set F0 = L−θ
2012 K2012 where L2012 is labor use in 2012 and K2012 is capital use in
2012. Productivity is then always the amount of output that would be produced if L = L2012
and K = K2012 .
Let λ be the Lagrange multiplier on the economy’s output constraint in its cost minimization
problem. The first order conditions with respect to L and K give,
WK K
= θK
λ×Q

WL L
= θL ,
λ×Q

(11)

From the envelope theorem, λ is marginal cost. Therefore, by Assumption 1, λ = P . So,
WL L
= θL ,
PQ

WK K
= θK .
PQ

(12)

(θL , θK ) can then be measured using data on nominal output and spending on labor and
capital. The first thing to notice is that (θL , θK ) would be measured in the same way
regardless of whether we treated productivity as a factor or as an exogenous sequence of
shocks. Because A = QF0−1 L−θL K −θK , the measure of productivity does not change with
5

this model only the interpretation of it. My measure of productivity is exactly the classic
Solow residual.
From Assumption 2, I recover θA ,
θA = 1 − θL − θK .

(13)

The first order condition with respect to A then allows us to recover the last parameter of
the economy’s cost minimization problem, C0 .
A
C0 1−θ
A θA = λF0 LθL K θK
θA

(14)

Because we can recover A = QF0−1 L−θL K −θK given our measure of (θL , θK ) and because
λ = P , I have the following measure of C0 ,
C0 = P × F0 θA LθL K θK A

θA −1
θA

= P × θA ×

Q
1

.

(15)

A θA
So all parameters of the economy’s cost minimization problem can be measured.
2.4. Conditional factor demand for productivity
My goal is to understand the role of labor and capital prices in driving productivity growth.
To do so, I decompose productivity using its conditional factor demand function. The
decomposition allows us to write productivity as the product of cross-price effects (labor
and capital prices), own-price effects (productivity prices), demand effects, and labor-capital
technology effects.
1

e = A θA in the economy’s cost minimization
It is useful to write the problem replacing A
problem as mentioned above because the problem is then symmetric in three inputs,
e st: F0 LθL K θK A
eθA ≥ Q
min WL L + WK K + C0 A

(16)

e
L,K,A

e is,
From the first order conditions, the conditional factor demand for A

−θL 
−θK  −θA
θ
θ
θA
θA Q
K
L
e=
×
A
WL
WK
C0
C0 F 0

(17)

Exponentiating both sides with respect to θA , I then have the conditional factor demand for
A,

−θA θL 
−θA θK  −θA2 
θ
θL
θK
θA
θA Q A
(18)
A=
×
WL
WK
C0
C0 F0

−θA θL 
−θA θK  θA (1−θA )
θL
θK
θA
=
× QθA × F0−θA
(19)
WL
WK
C0
6

Taking logs, the conditional factor demand decomposes productivity into terms corresponding to the effective price of the labor input, the effective price of the capital input, the
effective price of productivity, output, and the baseline technology for labor and capital,

 



WK
C0
WL
+ θA θK log
− θA (1 − θA ) log
+ θA log Q − θA log F0
log A = θA θL log
| {z }
| {z }
θL
θK
θA
{z
} |
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Output
Baseline technology
Effective labor price

Effective capital price

Effective productivity price

(20)
The first two terms capture the substitution effect. Increases in the effective price of labor
and capital relative to productivity price increase productivity. The third term captures own
price effects. Increases in the effective productivity price will lower productivity all else equal.
The fourth term captures demand effects because this equation is the conditional factor
demand so supply determinants of output are already incorporated. The model says larger
economies are more productive for fixed effective prices mimicking results in the industrial
organization literature on production theory (Flynn, 2019). The fifth term captures pure
technological progress in using labor and capital. Naturally, improvements in technology (F0
decreasing) increase productivity.

3. Productivity and its cost in the United States
3.1. Data
I use annual data on the US economy from 1987 to 2016. All of the data is publicly available.
I downloaded it from FRED at the St. Louis Federal Reserve. In Table 1, I tabulate exactly
how each piece of data I use translates into the model’s variables. The original data comes
primarily from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
All of the data, its source series, and my R code are available on Github at https://github.
com/flynnzac/factprod-data/.
Table 1: Data and parameters
Parameter

Description

Series Name

P , output price
Q, output
L, labor
WL , labor price
K, capital
WK , capital price

Consumer Price Index/100
CPIAUCNS
Private Nonfarm Business Sector Output / P
MPU4910101
Private Nonfarm Hours Worked (by salary workers)
PRSCA
Total Private Nonfarm Business Sector Labor Compensation / L MPU4910121
Private Nonfarm Business Sector Capital Services
MPU4910042
Private Nonfarm Business Sector Capital Income / K
MPU4910111

The data I used can be fetched by visiting https://alfred.stlouis.org/series?seid=
SERIESNAME where SERIESNAME is what appears in the Series Name column above.

7

Figure 1: Productivity in the United States (1987-2016) (solid lines are smoothed by Tukey’s
smoothing and dashed lines are original series)
(a) Productivity

(b) Productivity Growth

3.2. Productivity growth from 1987-2016
Total factor productivity grew sharply starting after the 2001 recession, before growth decelerated around 2005 (see Figure 1). The annual growth rate of productivity from 1987 to
2005 was 0.33%. From 2005 to 2016, the annual growth rate of productivity was only 0.22%.
The annual growth rate dropped by a third. I decompose productivity using the model in
Section 2 to understand the causes of this slowdown in productivity growth.
3.3. Decomposition of productivity growth from 1987-2016
I find the productivity slowdown is the result of a fall in demand for productivity. I demonstrate this result by showing that (1) the declining growth rate of effective price of labor and
capital is causing substitution from productivity to labor and capital and (2) the price of the
unobserved factors are declining at an accelerating rate, a sign that productivity is becoming
significantly cheaper (technical progress), at the same time as the quantity purchased of the
unobserved factors is growing at a slower rate.
The full decomposition is in Table 2.
3.3.1

Declining effective prices of labor and capital

Between 1987 and 2005 the effective price of labor increased at a rate of 0.15% annually,
and the effective price of capital increased at a rate of 0.09%. But between 2005 and 2016,
the effective price of labor declined at a 0.03% annual rate and the effective price of capital
increased at an annual rate of only 0.02%. This drastic reduction in the growth rates of
8

effective labor and capital prices caused substitution away from productivity and towards
labor and capital, and it is a major driving force behind declining productivity growth. If
the effective prices of labor and capital grew at the same rate after 2005 as they did before
(holding all else constant), productivity would have grown 0.46% annually, more than 40%
greater than it did from 1987 to 2005. So productivity growth would be accelerating were it
not for the declining growth rate of the effective price of labor and capital.
The reduction in productivity growth is then the result of substitution towards labor and
capital as they became cheaper relative to productivity. If productivity were becoming more
expensive — in an absolute sense as opposed to relative to capital and labor prices — this
would still be an argument that technological stagnation in production of the unmeasured
factors of production is behind declining productivity. But the cost of productivity is declining and the pace at which it is declining is accelerating.
3.3.2

Falling cost of productivity

Table 2 shows that a large fraction of the recent productivity growth there has been is, in
fact, a consequence of the falling effective price of productivity, consistent with either technological progress in using the unobserved factors of production or more effective technology
for supplying them. From 1987 to 2005, the price of productivity actually rose, rising by
0.24% on average annual. Between 2005 and 2016, the price of productivity term fell by
0.64% on average annually. So productivity is becoming increasingly cheap to produce. If
everything else had remained constant, we would be seeing accelerating productivity growth
instead of declining growth. And, if the cost of productivity had grown at the same rate
as it had prior to 2005, productivity would have substantially declined by −0.59% annually
from 2005 to 2016.
The cost of productivity has two components: (1) the technology of the unobserved factors
of production (θA ) and the price of the unobserved inputs (WZ ). From Figure 3b, we can
see that θA has barely changed at all from around 0.06 in the past thirty years. The falling
cost of productivity is primarily driven by falling WZ .
Because WZ is falling faster and productivity growth is slowing, we have that prices are
declining and quantity supplied is growing at a decreasing rate. So demand for productivity
must be growing less quickly than it did previously. Because if prices fall and quantity
demanded shrinks, it must be that the demand curve shifts in. The decline in productivity
growth is the result of lower demand for productivity.
The lower demand cannot be driven by a change in the technology of producing productivity
because θA has remained constant over time. Instead, productivity demand is weaker because
the effective prices of labor and capital are not growing as rapidly as they once did.

9

Figure 2: Non-cost of productivity components of productivity (solid lines are smoothed by
Tukey’s method, dashed lines are original series, and dotted line is at 1.0)
(a) Effective price of capital component of
productivity (Index: 2012 = 1.0)

(b) Effective price of labor component of productivity (Index: 2012 = 1.0)

(c) Output component of productivity (Index: 2012 = 1.0)

(d) Technical progress in labor and capital
component of productivity (Index: 2012 =
1.0)

10

Table 2: Decomposition of productivity growth
Part of productivity

Annual Growth Rate (1987-2005)

Annual Growth Rate (2006-2016)

0.33%
0.15%
0.09%
0.28%
0.06%
0.24%

0.22%
−0.03%
0.02%
−0.25%
−0.16%
−0.64%

All
Labor Price
Capital Price
Output
Technical Progress
Productivity Price

Each row corresponds to a different term in the productivity decomposition. So the row
for Technical Progress is −θA × log F0 (recall that decreases in F0 reflect increases in laborcapital technology).

Figure 3: Cost of productivity and the elasticity of its inputs
(a) The falling effective price of productivity
(solid lines are smoothed by Tukey’s smoothing, dashed are original series, dotted line is
at 1.0)

11

(b) θA over time

4. What do these results imply about the slowdown in productivity
growth?
A prominent theory for the decline in productivity is that technology is improving more
slowly than it used to (Gordon, 2016). But from the perspective of the model in this paper,
this is not the whole story. The price of becoming more productive has fallen dramatically
and has continued to decline without slowing down. But the growth rate of the effective price
of labor and capital have declined, encouraging relatively more substitution towards those
factors of production and away from productivity. The decline in the rate of productivity
growth is not then a sign of technological stagnation, but a sign that labor and capital are
relatively cheaper than they used to be. There is less benefit to the economy of being more
productive even as the cost of being so falls.
In this paper, I developed a method of decomposing productivity supposing that it is produced by unobserved factors of production. I applied this decomposition to study productivity growth in the United States over the past thirty years. The analysis offered a new
interpretation of part of the slowdown in productivity. It suggests that the slowdown is a
reallocation across the various factors that determine the economy’s output, not a decline in
our technological capacity.

12

References
Baqaee, D. and E. Farhi (2019). A short note on aggregating productivity. NBER Working
Papers (25688).
Basu, S. and M. Kimball (1997). Cyclical productivity with unobserved input variation.
NBER Working Papers (5915).
Byrne, D., J. Fernald, and M. Reinsdorf (2016). Does the united states have a productivity
slowdown or a measurement problem? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 109–182.
Fernald, J. (2014). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper (2012-19).
Fernald, J. and C. Wang (2016). Why has the cyclicality of productivity changed? what
does it mean? Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series (2016-07).
Flynn, Z. (2019). Identifying productivity when it is a factor of production. RAND Journal
of Economics (Forthcoming).
Gordon, R. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living
since the Civil War. Princeton University Press.
Griliches, Z. and D. Jorgenson (1967). The explanation of productivity change. The Review
of Economic Studies 34 (3), 249–283.
Romer, P. (1986). Increasing returns and long-run growth. The Journal of Political Economy 94 (5), 1002–1037.
Solow, R. (1957). Technical change and the aggregate production function. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 312–320.
Syverson, C. (2017). Challenges to mismeaurement explanations for the us productivity
slowdown. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (2), 165–186.

13

