"x"
"1" "European Journal of Epidemiology, October 2019, Volume 34, Issue 10, pp 979–982"
"2" "https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10654-019-00539-w"
"3" "Paolo Vineis  1,2 *   Michelle Kelly ‑ Irving  3"
"4" "*p.vineis@imperial.ac.uk"
"5" "1  School of Public Health, MRC Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial College, Norfolk Place, London W21PG, UK"
"6" "2  Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, Turin, Italy"
"7" "3  LEASP, UMR 1027, Inserm-Université Toulouse III Paul Sabatier, 31000 Toulouse, France"
"8" "Abstract"
"9" "At the crossroads between sciences, epidemiology brings together the social and the biological to examine social inequalities in health. The concept of biological capital represents the accumulated history of biological experiences, alongside the other forms of accumulated capital, notably cultural, economic and social. The ability to access the three other forms of individual capital and therefore position in life depends on inherited biological health/skills, epigenetic imprinting and the accumulation of embodied biological changes that make an individual more or less successful in life. We present results from analyses carried out within the Lifepath consortium, showing that the socioeconomic environment, from early life and over the lifecourse, is an important risk factor for health and partly works through its effects on biological mechanisms. We show that socially stratified pre-disease states related to ageing may be examined using biomarkers, and help underline areas and mechanisms to promote healthy ageing."
"10" "Key-words life-course epidemiology; biomarkers; allostatic load"
"11" "Biography and Biological Capital"
"12" "Epidemiology is at the cross-roads between social and natural sciences. This is particularly evident when we consider social inequalities in health. However, there is still a wide gap between the two fields, both methodologically and conceptually. Natural sciences focus in particular on biological mechanisms and outcomes, i.e. they deal with “zoe”, the biological life, while social sciences have to do with “bios”, the biographical life, according to the terminology used by Ronald Dworkin (1). It is obvious that what we epidemiologists try to do is to connect zoe and bios in a meaningful way, though this attempt has rarely been made explicit, except e.g. in the work of Nancy Krieger through the concept of “embodiment” (2)."
"13" "But there is another way – more practical – we can look at the relationships between social and natural sciences, that is the transfer of epidemiological knowledge into the concept of “biological capital” in addition to the better known economic, social and cultural capital. The French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, in particular, has explained the role of social and cultural capital in the functioning of  societies and in social inequality. Like “the social world is accumulated history” (3), so is the individual life at any particular time/age: it is the accumulated history of all economic, social, cultural and eventually biological experiences that had an impact on the body. Biology and biography meet for example through health status, depending on social position at a given age. According to Bourdieu, “capital can present itself in three fundamental guises: as economic capital, that is immediately and directly convertible into money and may be institutionalized in the form of property rights; as cultural capital, which is convertible, on certain conditions, into economic capital and may be institutionalized in the form of educational qualifications; and as social capital, made up of special obligations (“connections”), which is convertible, in certain conditions, into economic capital and may be institutionalized in the form of a title of nobility”(3). Students of social inequalities may recognize here a reflection of the three tenets of socio-economic position as they have been investigated and classified in epidemiology, i.e. occupation, income and education. However, how this connects to biology is not explained by Bourdieu, and biological capital is the missing concept. Nevertheless, the ability to access the three other forms of individual capital and therefore position in life depends on inherited biological health/skills, epigenetic imprinting and the accumulation of embodied biological changes that make an individual more or less successful in life."
"14" "These principles start to be incorporated into epidemiological research, via the integration of social contexts and biomarkers in a life-course approach, as we have done in the Lifepath consortium (4). The results from analyses carried out within Lifepath show that the socioeconomic environment, from early life and over the lifecourse, is an important risk factor for health and partly works through its effects on biological mechanisms."
"15" "An evolutionary perspective of biological capital"
"16" "Let us consider successful ageing and the impact of socio-economic position. Malakov et al (2015)(5) state the evolutionary “problem” of ageing as such:"
"17" "“Aging is deleterious for Darwinian fitness, yet is a pervasive feature of most living beings. Given the large number of known repair mechanisms, it is not clear why organisms should senesce. This apparent paradox is resolved by the evolutionary theory of aging, which relies on the fundamental principle that the strength of natural selection declines with age, because of extrinsic (non aging-related) mortality resulting from the cumulative effects of a variety of biotic and abiotic factors” (5)."
"18" "This highlights the “universal” and cross-species nature of ageing, and its relationship with evolutionary theory. The demands and challenges of living each day result in a depletion of biological resources to restore organisms to full function. Adaptive biological strategies to maximise survival and fitness occur from conception onwards. The literature on developmental origins of adult health and disease is rife with instances of biological adaptive responses to external conditions. These are proxies of ageing, just occurring very early in the maturation process. Evidence stemming from animal studies supports the proposal that a biological event occurring during a critical period of animal development can permanently ‘program’ the organism. Lucas provides a working definition of this notion of programming, whereby “an early stimulus or insult, operating at a critical or sensitive period, results in permanent or long-term change in the structure or function of the organism” (6). By being ‘programmed’ an organism responds to stimuli from its environment by optimally adapting itself to the prevailing conditions, thus potentially prolonging its survival in such an environment. However, this adaptation is only beneficial to the individual in the short-term because, by fixing its adaptation so early, the organism is accommodating to one set of circumstances, but is not necessarily adapted if those circumstances should change."
"19" "Our environment is highly variable requiring the permanent adaptation of physiological systems. This adaption through changes is crucial for survival and refers to allostasis (7). Multiple physiological systems, nervous, endocrine and immune, are involved in the allostasis processes, all of which mature during the postnatal period into adulthood. Chronic exposures to stressors but also interindividual differences in the susceptibility to environmental stressors are associated with a prolonged activation of allostatic systems. This may lead to an allostatic overload with potentially detrimental health consequences. Allostatic load (AL) is therefore the price paid by the body over time for adapting to challenges. It refers to the concept of biological multisystem wastage, whereby “the strain on the body produced by repeated ups and downs of physiologic response, as well as by the elevated activity of physiologic systems under challenge, and the changes in metabolism and the impact of wear and tear on a number of organs and tissues, can predispose the organism to disease” (8). The MacArthur Study of Successful Aging was the first to propose an AL score (9). Various scores of AL have since been proposed and have been shown to be better predictors of mortality and functional limitations than the metabolic syndrome or any of the individual components used to measure AL when analysed separately (9). AL score is also associated with an increased incidence of cardiovascular disease, and poorer cognitive function (9). Recent research also suggests a link between early environment and AL and AL-related outcomes (10-12). As a measure of the global cost of adapting to (and coping with) the environment, AL may be a relevant tool for measuring biological health, and therefore healthy ageing."
"20" "Epigenetics, specifically DNA methylation modifications, has recently been proposed as a biomarker of biological ageing and as one of the plausible mechanisms through which social exposures become biologically embodied, affecting physiological systems and cellular pathways leading to disease susceptibility (13). The ‘epigenetic clock’ is one of the main mechanisms contributing to age-related methylation changes (14). It refers to specific sites on the genome where methylation levels constantly change as the body ages and can therefore be used to predict chronological age with high accuracy (15). The usefulness of this type of clock is that it can identify deviations between the epigenetic clock and chronological age that may be driven by social exposures. It means that the biological ageing of one social group can be compared to another, a useful tool when examining the socially driven differences in healthy ageing."
"21" "Connecting the social and the biological: measuring biological capital"
"22" "In the Lifepath consortium, we have taken an interest in capturing the overall cost of biological adaptive functioning through concepts like AL, but also others that may capture more specific aspects, such as epigenetic mechanisms or inflammation. An extensive literature refers to wide-ranging associations between markers of inflammation and many pathological processes leading to premature morbidity and mortality. As such, the term “inflammaging” has emerged, referring to the role of the inflammatory system in ageing processes (16). One of the big advantages of using biomarkers in health research, is that they offer the opportunity to capture a wide range of processes underlying health states, thus exploring the individual’s biological capital at a given age. Pathological conditions may be identified, but pre-disease and ‘normal’ or ‘optimal’ biological processes may be measured as well. This ultimately allows us to question what “normal” is, how our biology functions under optimal conditions, and the early stages of biological deterioration."
"23" "Disadvantaged socio-economic position (SEP) in early life may shape lifestyle and health-related behaviours, which then affect health in adulthood (Figure 1). In fact, it may be associated with poor early life nutrition; tobacco exposure in utero, infancy and childhood; foetal growth restriction or premature birth. A child’s development is clearly sensitive to the surrounding environment in early childhood and to the availability of sufficient economic resources. Psychosocial stress is also a key factor, since is thought to affect brain development in childhood by affecting glucocorticoid and  catecholamine levels which impact executive function, emotional and behavioural control and analytical thinking. Socioeconomic disadvantage in childhood may result in educational disadvantage, which in turn drives economic disadvantage in adulthood. As a whole, this evidence has important implications for health and social policy."
"24" "Figure 1. Risk factors of cardiometabolic health by age and cumulative neighbourhood socioeconomic disadvantage (25) (blue=less disadvantaged; red=more disadvantaged)."
"25" "In the Lifepath consortium we found that disadvantaged SEP can create chronic psychosocial stress with long term effects through physiological wear-and-tear involving inflammatory responses, impaired immune function and epigenetic acceleration of ageing (17). Differences in SEP are revealed in cells, tissues and organs causing earlier disease onset and mortality among more socially disadvantaged groups. One approach taken by Lifepath was to examine allostatic load as a composite measure of overall physiological wear-and-tear. For example, data from the 1958 British birth cohort indicated that lower maternal education and manual paternal occupation were associated with a  higher (meaning worse) allostatic load at 44 years (18). The research suggests a pathway whereby parental occupation and education affect children’s education and this then impacts on later life. Psychosocial adversity during childhood, described as adverse childhood experiences (ACE), was also related to allostatic load at 44 years (19) in the 1958 British birth cohort. Path analysis models showed that the association of ACE with allostatic load was strongly mediated by health behaviours (principally smoking) at 23 years and socioeconomic status (through education level at 23 years and SES at 33 years). In another paper, using data from one wave of Understanding Society including 9088 participants, a synthetic Biological Health Score (BHS) was defined as an extension of AL, capturing the wear-and-tear of four physiological systems (endocrine, inflammatory, cardiovascular and metabolic systems) and two organs (liver and kidney). A systematic decreasing education-related gradient of the BHS (p<0.001) was identified, leading to lower biological risk in participants with longer education. Education-related differences in the BHS were detected early in life, and were not attributable to lifestyle and behavioural factors (20). Allostatic load and BHS are composite measures influenced probably by stress, diet, infection, risk behaviours and other variables, thus it is currently hard to determine what the implications for policy are."
"26" "A more specific inflammatory marker, connected to the allostatic load score, is the C-Reactive Protein (CRP). A study conducted among 18,349 individuals from Britain, Ireland, Portugal and Switzerland (21) has shown that socioeconomic position could affect biological health by acting on the concentration of C-reactive protein and found that between-country differences in overall health and mortality may be better explained by variation in income inequality than by national income and wealth. Mean inflammation levels were highest in Portugal, the country with the highest income inequality and lowest in Switzerland, the lower income inequality country. Another study by Berger et al (22) has shown that socioeconomic disadvantage in young adulthood is associated with later life CRP concentrations. The research was conducted in 23,008 individuals from Britain, Italy and Switzerland, and also revealed a significant association between low educational attainment and high inflammation levels in adulthood, while body-mass index stands out as an important intermediate factor between socioeconomic condition and inflammation."
"27" "Other Lifepath analyses focused specifically on how differences in SEP are revealed in the DNA of our cells. DNA methylation is used to represent overall biological ageing and has been linked with educational attainment of individuals (23). Disadvantaged SEP was associated with accelerated ageing. The results suggest that biological ageing was more rapid in individuals with fewer years of education. Individuals who experienced life course SEP improvement had intermediate levels of accelerated ageing compared to extreme SEP categories, suggesting a possible reversibility of the effect that could be of great importance in terms of policymaking. The relevance of this measure is supported by a study by Dugue et al. (24), which showed that the age acceleration DNA-based indicator was able to predict cancer mortality longitudinally in the course of the follow-up. This study provides increasing evidence for the existence of social-to-biological processes that go beyond the behavioural element. Socioeconomic adversity is associated with accelerated epigenetic ageing, implicating biomolecular mechanisms that may link SEP to age-related diseases and longevity."
"28" "Conclusions"
"29" "These early but consistent findings show the value of using biological markers to understand the relationship between social factors and health, and materialize the concept of biological capital in epidemiology and the social sciences. Pre-disease states can be identified using markers such as DNA methylation and composite indicators like the allostatic load, picking up on the phenomenon of socially patterned accelerated ageing before the onset of diseases. Biomarkers can be used to explore the impacts of income inequality: more unequal societies are thought to produce higher levels of  biological damage via chemical and physical stressors (including unhealthy behaviours), but also via psychosocial stress in response to ‘status anxiety’ at the individual level, and a growing amount of evidence highlights the role of chronic inflammation in this connection."
"30" "Acknowledgments – This work was partially funded by the “Lifepath” grant - European Commission H2020 grant number 633666 to P.V."
"31" "References"
"32" "1. Dworkin R. Life's Dominion: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993"
"33" "2. Krieger N. Living and Dying at the Crossroads: Racism, Embodiment, and Why Theory Is Essential for a Public Health of Consequence. Am J Public Health. 2016 May;106(5):832-3."
"34" "3. Bourdieu, P. (1986) The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.) Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology of Education (New York, Greenwood), 241-258."
"35" "4. Vineis, Paolo, Mauricio Avendano-Pabon, Henrique Barros, Marc Chadeau-Hyam, Giuseppe Costa, Michaela Dijmarescu, Cyrille Delpierre, Angelo Errico, Silvia Fraga, Graham Giles, Marcel Goldberg, Marie Zins, Michelle Kelly-Irving, Mika Kivimaki, Thierry Lang, Richard Layte, Johan P. Mackenbach, Michael Marmot, Cathal McCrory, Cristian Carmeli, Roger L. Milne, Peter Muennig, Wilma Nusselder, Silvia Polidoro, Fulvio Ricceri, Oliver Robinson, and Silvia Stringhini. 2017. \"The biology of inequalities in health: the LIFEPATH project.\"  2017 8 (4):33. doi: 10.14301/llcs.v8i4.448."
"36" "5. Maklakov, A. A., L. Rowe, and U. Friberg. 2015. \"Why organisms age: Evolution of senescence under positive pleiotropy?\"  Bioessays 37 (7):802-807. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500025."
"37" "6. Lucas, A. 1991. \"Programming by early nutrition in man.\" In The childhood environment and adult disease, edited by Whelan J Bock GR. Chinchester: John Wiley & Sons."
"38" "7. Sterling, P., and J. Eyer. 1988. \"Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain arousal pathology.\" In Handbook of life stress, cognition and health, edited by J. Reason and S. Fisher, 629-649. Chichester: Wiley."
"39" "8. McEwen, B. S., and E. Stellar. 1993. \"Stress and the individual - mechanisms leading to disease.\"  Archives of Internal Medicine 153 (18):2093-2101. doi: 10.1001/archinte.153.18.2093."
"40" "9. Seeman, T., E. Epel, T. Gruenewald, A. Karlamangla, and B. S. McEwen. 2010. \"Socio-economic differentials in peripheral biology: Cumulative allostatic load.\" In Biology of Disadvantage: Socioeconomic Status and Health, 223-239. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing."
"41" "10. Danese, A., T. E. Moffitt, H. Harrington, and et al. 2009. \"Adverse childhood experiences and adult risk factors for age-related disease: Depression, inflammation, and clustering of metabolic risk markers.\"  Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 163 (12):1135-1143. doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2009.214."
"42" "11. Danese, Andrea, and Bruce S. McEwen. 2012. \"Adverse childhood experiences, allostasis, allostatic load, and age-related disease.\"  Physiology & behavior 106 (1):29-39Environment AL"
"43" "12. Shonkoff, Jack P., Andrew S. Garner, Benjamin S. Siegel, Mary I. Dobbins, Marian F. Earls, Laura McGuinn, John Pascoe, David L. Wood, and Committee on Early Childhood Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child Family Health, Adoption, Dependent Care, Section on Developmental Behavioral Pediatrics. 2012. \"Early Childhood Adversity, Toxic Stress, and the Role of the Pediatrician: Translating Developmental Science Into Lifelong Health.\"  Pediatrics 129 (1):e224-e231. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-2662."
"44" "13. Demetriou CA, van Veldhoven K, Relton C, Stringhini S, Kyriacou K, VineisP Biological embedding of early-life exposures and disease risk in humans: a role for DNA methylation. Eur J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar;45(3):303-32."
"45" "14. Jones, M. J., S. J. Goodman, and M. S. Kobor. 2015. \"DNA methylation and healthy human aging.\"  Aging Cell 14 (6):924-32. doi: 10.1111/acel.12349."
"46" "15. Horvath, S. 2013. \"DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types.\"  Genome Biol 14 (10):R115. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r115."
"47" "16. Franceschi, Claudio, and Judith Campisi. 2014. \"Chronic Inflammation (Inflammaging) and Its Potential Contribution to Age-Associated Diseases.\"  The Journals of Gerontology: Series A 69 (Suppl_1):S4-S9. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glu057."
"48" "17. McCrory C, Fiorito G, Ni Cheallaigh C, Polidoro S, Karisola P, Alenius H, Layte R, Seeman T, Vineis P, Kenny RA. How does socio-economic position (SEP) get biologically embedded? A comparison of allostatic load and the epigenetic clock(s). Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2019 Jun;104:64-73."
"49" "18. Barboza Solís, C, Romain Fantin, Raphaële Castagné, Thierry Lang, Cyrille Delpierre, and Michelle Kelly-Irving. 2016. \"Mediating pathways between parental socio-economic position and allostatic load in mid-life: Findings from the 1958 British birth cohort.\"  Social Science & Medicine 165:19-27. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.07.031."
"50" "19. Barboza Solís, C, Kelly-Irving M, Fantin R, Darnaudéry M, Torrisani J, Lang T, Delpierre C, Adverse childhood experiences and physiological wear-and-tear in midlife: Findings from the 1958 British birth cohort. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015. 112(7): p. E738-E746."
"51" "20. Karimi, Maryam, Raphaële Castagné, Cyrille Delpierre, Gaëlle Albertus, Eloïse Berger, Paolo Vineis, Meena Kumari, Michelle Kelly-Irving, and Marc Chadeau-Hyam. 2019. \"Early-life inequalities and biological ageing: a multisystem Biological Health Score approach in Understanding Society.\"  Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health:jech-2018-212010. doi: 10.1136/jech-2018-212010."
"52" "21. Layte R, McCrory C, Cheallaigh CN, Bourke N, Kivimaki M, Ribeiro AI, Stringhini S, Vineis P. A Comparative Analysis of the Status Anxiety Hypothesis of Socio-economic Inequalities in Health Based on 18,349 individuals in Four Countries and Five Cohort Studies. Sci Rep. 2019 Jan 28;9(1):796."
"53" "22. Berger, E., R.  Castagné, M.  Chadeau-Hyam, M.  Bochud, A. d’Errico, M. Gandini, M. Karimi, M. Kivimäki, V.  Krogh, M. Marmot, S. Panico, M. Preisig, F. Ricceri, C.  Sacerdote, A.  Steptoe, S. Stringhini, R. Tumino, P.  Vineis, C.  Delpierre, and M. Kelly-Irving. 2018. \"Social determinants of systemic inflammation over the life course: a multi-cohort study.\"  Nat Commun. 2019 Feb 15;10(1):773."
"54" "23. Fiorito, Giovanni, Silvia Polidoro, Pierre-Antoine Dugué, Mika Kivimaki, Erica Ponzi, Giuseppe Matullo, Simonetta Guarrera, Manuela B. Assumma, Panagiotis Georgiadis, Soterios A. Kyrtopoulos, Vittorio Krogh, Domenico Palli, Salvatore Panico, Carlotta Sacerdote, Rosario Tumino, Marc Chadeau-Hyam, Silvia Stringhini, Gianluca Severi, Allison M. Hodge, Graham G. Giles, Riccardo Marioni, Richard  Karlsson Linnér, Aisling M. O’Halloran, Rose A. Kenny, Richard Layte, Laura Baglietto, Oliver Robinson, Cathal McCrory, Roger L. Milne, and Paolo Vineis. 2017. \"Social adversity and epigenetic aging: a multi-cohort study on socioeconomic differences in peripheral blood DNA methylation.\"  Scientific Reports 7 (1):16266. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16391-5."
"55" "24. Dugue, P. A., J. K. Bassett, J. E. Joo, L. Baglietto, C. H. Jung, E. M. Wong, G. Fiorito, D. Schmidt, E. Makalic, S. Li, M. Moreno-Betancur, D. D. Buchanan, P. Vineis, D. R. English, J. L. Hopper, G. Severi, M. C. Southey, G. G. Giles, and R. L. Milne. 2018. \"Association of DNA Methylation-Based Biological Age With Health Risk Factors and Overall and Cause-Specific Mortality.\"  Am J Epidemiol 187 (3):529-538. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwx291."
"56" "25. Kivimäki, M., Vahtera, J., Tabák, A. G., Halonen, J. I., Vineis, P., Pentti, J., Pahkala, K., Rovio, S., Viikari, J., Kähönen, M., Juonala, M., Ferrie, J. E., Stringhini, S., Raitakari, O. T. (2018). Neighbourhood socioeconomic disadvantage, risk factors, and diabetes from childhood to middle age in the Young Finns Study: a cohort study. Lancet Public Health, 3, e365-e373."
