"x"
"1" "Biocitizenship: the politics of bodies, governance and power , edited by  Kelly E. Happe, Jenell Johnson  and  Maria Levina ,  New York ,  NYU Press , 201 8 ,  340  pp.,  $32.00  (paperback), ISBN 978- 1-4798-6053-1"
"2" "This collection offers a rich diversity of perspectives on what has come to be known as “biological citizenship,” or “biocitizenship.”  Quoting Nikolas Rose, editors Johnson, Happe ,  and Levina define biocitizenship as  compri sing   “all those citizenship projects that have linked their conceptions of citizens to beliefs about the biological existence of human beings, as individuals, as men and women, as families and lineages, as communities, as populations and as species”  ( P. 1 ). On the one hand, biocitizenship entails the positive , active  efforts of human beings  demanding their  rights to health and well-being.  On the other hand, biocitizenship is also understood as an extension of  ‘ biopolitics ’  in the Foucauldian sense, so that biocitizenship disciplines and controls subjects even as it affords them certain rights. While this duality and its various complexities have generated a sizeable body of literature,   there has to date been no edited volume on the subject of biocitizenship. Johnson, Ha pp e, and Levin a   helpfully fill this gap,  bring ing  together disparate voices  from various disciplines  into a  volume that is  provocative and insightful ."
"3" "By contrast to   the uncritical rosiness of some previous biocitizenship literature , several authors in this volume convincingly  demonstrate how  biocitizenship is  bound up with  the  institutional regulation of life and death.  In Chapter 2, Burgess and Murray  examine the  “carceral biocitizenship”  of  Ashley Smith, a young woman who died by self-strangulation while on suicide watch in an Ontario prison. Burgess and Murray effectively argue that the criminal justice system made Ashley into a figure who was already socially dead and  therefore unfit for protection  from the state .  But whereas Burgess and Murray’s account of Ashley Smith expresses the carceral system’s tendency to  ‘ make die, ’  Chapter 7 by Shah demonstrates the opposite tendency: to  ‘ make live, ’  even by force. Specifically, Shah looks at hunger-strikers and their reception by the biopolitical establishment. For Shah, hunger-striking appears as an unlikely form of biocitizenship, an assertion of bodily autonomy that goes so far as to risk the destruction of that same body. Consequently, biomedical and governmental institutions, driven by the biopolitical imperative to “make live,” ironically revoke hunger-strikers ’  biocitizenship by subjecting them to cruel and painful force-feedings.   In Chapter 5, Chávez characterizes the U.S.’ travel ban on HIV-positive immigrants as a necropolitical sacrifice of those whose racial, sexual, and national characteristics exclude them from biocitizen protection.  Similarly, in Chapter 6, Elliott and Bedor Hiland shed light on the necropolitical exploitation of the mentally ill in the service of biomedical advancement for the rest of us.  Lastly,  Levina  in Chapter 11  extends this line of reasoning further to account for the exploitation of nonhuman lab animals ."
"4" "Though less central to the overall thrust of the volume, another fruitfully examined theme is the intersection of biocitizenship with sexual regulation.  Chapter 1 by Epstein expands the usual conception of biocitizen to intersect with “sexual citizenship,” framing 20 th  century sexual health campaigns as “biosexual citizenship” projects . Specifically, Epstein accounts for the popular and governmental outcry against sexually transmitted diseases, which reflected not only a  biopolitical concern for disease prevention  but also a  ‘purity  crusade ’  against the  social disease of sexual impropriety .  Epstein’s notion of biosexual citizenship is especially fruitful when applied to  Bennett’s discussion of queer community HIV prevention in Chapter 4 . In this chapter, Bennett describes  how some queer men, having internalized ideas about sexual purity ,  tend to present  themselves as “risk-free” and sexually normative  in opposition to images of diseased AIDS bodies . He goes on to argue that the introduction of Truvada, a daily  pre-exposure prophylactic for HIV prevention, has the promise of dissolving the “risk/risk free” binary and encouraging  the ambiguous risk state of  what he calls “chronic citizenship . ”    Although  Bennett’s  argument may   put inordinate   faith  in a consumer pharmaceutical product to heal the wounds of collective trauma , Bennett’s concept is nonetheless promising and warrants further exploration .  Also worth mentioning with regard to biosexual citizenship is Chapter 5 , wherein Chávez explains  how HIV/AIDS was used as a basis for immigrant exclusion in the U.S. between 1987 and 2010 .  Although the  chapter makes  s urprisingl y little  mention of sexual identity or behavior ,  the reader can  easily  infer a link between such exclusion and sexual taboos."
"5" "Having addressed   various  mechanisms of biopolitical control, the book helpfully pivots t o some explorations of biocitizen activism and resistance. This begins with Chapter 7, which, as discussed earlier, characterizes the hunger striker’s body as a cite of fleeting yet powerful resistance to biopolitical logics. Chapters 8 and 9 document the growth of such biocitizen resistance into full-fledged movements of health activis m . In Chapter 8, Chowkwanyun charts the trajectory of medical student activism in the 1960s and 1970s, a remarkable time in which the convergence of biomedical con c erns and social justice allowed for a veritable “medical governance revolution . ”  Despite some lasting impact, various social factors made the revolution unsustainable in the long term. This segues quite neatly into Roberts and Tutton’s assessment of health activism and its limitations in chapter 9. Here, the authors  offer  a much-needed reflection on the role of class , race, gender and other systems in  empowering certain biocitizens over others  and generating disparate  health outcomes. Finally, in  Chapter 10,  well-known health activists Aspell, Cerrone, and Schultz reflect on the concept of biocitizenship through their own experiences navigating institutions as chronically ill individuals.  Though  these activists acknowledge the limitations of biocitizenship as a privileged position  not  accessible to  everyone , the ir accounts   may also provide the reader a welcome sense of hope in the potential for art and social media to level the uneven terrain of biocitizen advocacy."
"6" "Biocitizenship  brings together an impres s ively wide array of perspectives that illuminate both the limitations and the potentialities of biocitizenship in theory and practice.   Th e  collection  serves as a  helpful  introduction  to the concept of biocitizenship and is highly recommended for students, academics ,  and no n-academics with interests in  public  health, biomedicine,  science, disability,  social movements, and power. Some chapters will also be of great interest for those focusing in race, class, gender, and queer studies.  Overall, I applaud the various authors for their novel, provocative assessments and the editors for their commitment to making this collected volume into a reality."
"7" "Andrew Shapiro"
"8" "The Graduate Center, City University of New York"
"9" "ashapiro3@gradcenter.cuny.edu"
