Morad Moazami

Below Ground, They’re Dancing:
How Electronic Music Challenges Iran’s Culture Industry
from the Undergraduate Awards Library, 2014
On a rainy December night, a group of young students found themselves huddled together
in the basement of an apartment block in northwest Tehran. They had all been informed of
the event earlier in the day by text message, and only an elite few had been invited. A
concert featuring electronic music was the main attraction of the night. The atmosphere’s
distinction from “overground”1 Tehran was immediately detectable as the guests swarmed
into the cramped basement home. The musical artist, Bozkido, was setting up his
equipment, while those surrounding him were dancing to the familiar tunes of Western
bands such as the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, Nine Inch Nails, and Depeche Mode. Such Western
music had been banned by the country’s government at the dawn of the Iranian Revolution
in 1979, chiefly due to the music’s association with what the Islamic regime considered to
be nefarious bodily movements. 2 Subsequent to the Revolution, Western music and
dancing of any kind, along with other activities such as drinking, were constricted to the
underground, which provided the Iranian youth with a space to express their personal
freedom and subversively declare their independence from the country’s theocracy. The
electronic music performed by the artist Bozkido on that December night fully captured
the subversive civil society that is gradually developing among the Iranian youth. By
technologically manipulating the commonly-heard sounds of Iranian commercials and
remodeling them into musical works, Bozkido provided his audience with a special
environment that allowed them to not only reject the norms of the Iranian culture industry,
but also challenge the notions of national identity through the very act of musicking in an
underground space.
Even though musicians such as Bozkido are forced underground due to Iran’s
socio-political setting, the constriction provides the artist’s music and the space that it is
performed in an essence that it could not attain over-ground. The performance, as a result
of its illicitness, comes to serve not only a musical purpose, but a communal one as well.
The “sense of alienation” that drives musicians underground fosters a burgeoning
Nooshin, Laudan. "Underground, Overground: Rock Music and Youth Discourses in Iran." Iranian
Studies. 38.3 (2005): 463.
2 Ibid. 469.
1

1

Morad Moazami

subversive space for music enthusiasts to “share their misanthropic feelings about the
prevailing… culture.”3 This creates a feeling of solidarity among the attendees, and as a
result, helps strengthen the underground “scene.” 4 The women who have fled to the
underground are allowed to rebel against the regulations that limit them above, because the
subterranean civil society allows them to “shed their headscarves and coats to reveal skin,
glam and the height of Western fashion.” 5 The men, too, are permitted freedom from
patriarchal Iran’s austere strictures of virility. They dissent and find solidarity simply by
unknotting their grown-out hair and accompanying the music that is being played with the
“bodily movements”6 that their regime finds vile and iniquitous.
The disorganized basement setting, which is irrefutably ill-suited to compliment
any musical performance that strives for faultlessness, actually improves the music’s
intimacy and sense of urgency. In the Shahrak-e Gharb basement, the only technology
available to the musicians was a laptop, a mixer, and four outmoded living room speakers.
The sound quality, therefore, was not as exemplary as is often expected from an electronic
concert. The inadequate space that had resulted from the unsuited basement setting, along
with the obsolesced speakers used to mediate the music, however, benefitted the musical
performance due to the overall context of the concert itself. Considering that the basement
is both a social space and a musical venue, it serves a function similar to a great number of
Western bars, where “people drink, make new friends, shout, and fall down… [which, in
turn, impels the performers] to play loud enough to be heard above [the commotion].”7 In
contrast with the Western bar-like setting, however, the musician in underground Tehran
must not only employ the limited technology available to him to play loud enough in order
to amass the attention of his audience, but he must also be cautious that the loudness does
not seep over-ground so as to catch the attention of Iran’s constantly-patrolling Morality
Police.
Both social and technological limitations hinder the music’s ability to be as wide
reaching as it is perhaps meant to be, but they also greatly substantiate the musical

Byrne, David. How Music Works. McSweeney’s, 2012. 228.
Ibid. 223-236.
5 Johnston, Sholeh. "Persian Rap: The Voice of Modern Iran's Youth." Journal of Persianate Studies. 1.
(2008): 102.
6 Nooshin, Laudan. "Underground, Overground: Rock Music and Youth Discourses in Iran." Iranian
Studies. 38.3 (2005): 469.
7 Byrne, David. How Music Works. McSweeney’s, 2012. 10.
3
4

2

Morad Moazami

performance itself. Although the volume and quality of the auditory transmission is crucial
to a musical performance, “the social and the cultural message embedded in the music”8 is
just as elemental. The frayed technology forces the listeners to pay closer attention, and to
“fill in the blanks, [and] complete the picture.”9 As a result, the audience becomes more
involved with the music that is being performed on stage. The technological imperfection,
therefore, cultivates “an intimacy and involvement… that perfection might have kept at
bay.”10 Space, and even bad space, is therefore utilized as an instrument in the underground
setting in order to further grab the audience’s attention and prompt them to listen closely
and to make more direct and personal connections with the music that is being performed.
Furthering the subversive nature of the underground show was Bozkido’s incessant
use of dissonance in twisting and disfiguring the repetitious sounds of the Iranian culture
industry. The country’s televised advertisements served as the artist’s principal point of
reference for outlining the local culture industry. Iran’s methodology in advertising is no
different than the approach of every other capitalistic culture. The advertisements pride
themselves on their process of “requiring multiple iterations of the same stimulus to
produce a rising curve of attention, interest, and desire – leading, ultimately, to a successful
transaction at the point of sale.”11 The approach is unvaryingly utilized in the promotion of
all kinds of products, ranging from national banks to bathroom supplies to common cuisine.
Accordingly, Bozkido employed the vocalized taglines of these myriad commercials in his
musical performance, transforming the commonplace annoyance of advertisements into a
self-conscious musical soundscape. The taglines were oftentimes played in unaltered form,
and then repeated cyclically until Bozkido gradually soaked them in dissonance. The
audience would laugh as they carried on with their dancing, and like some ironical mantra,
they would repeatedly shout out the replayed taglines jestingly. Through the simple act of
musicking, the audience was adding a wholly new dimension to the performance: a
collective derision of their country’s substandard media.
By electronically defacing the everyday sound of the Iranian culture industry,
Bozkido was also creating a space for parody, relief, as well as critique. According to
Theodor Adorno, laughter is indicative of liberation from either domination or physical
Ibid. 115.
Ibid. 116.
10 Byrne, David. How Music Works. McSweeney’s, 2012. 116.
11 Fink, Robert. "The Media Sublime." Repeating Ourselves: American Minimal Music as Cultural
Practice . Berkley: University of California Press, 2005. 121.
8
9

3

Morad Moazami

danger.12 Therefore, as the young students laughed at Bozkido’s deliberately malformed
soundscapes in the shelter-like confines of the suburban basement, they were laughing both
in disdain and conciliation. The familiar commercials that were being played back to them
by the artist were reminders of the outside world. As a result, the audience laughed in order
to demonstrate their resentment for the disordered state of affairs that had forced them to
band together underground. Concurrently, they were also laughing in conjunction, and
therefore, quashing their dread for over-ground Tehran with the solidarity that they had
attained underneath the city. Additionally, by ridiculing Iran’s culture industry with their
laughter, the unified subterranean audience was also asserting its self-determinacy as a
subversive unit. Adorno further elucidates this notion of collective laughter as selfassertion:
To laugh at something is always to deride it, and the life, which in laughter
breaks through the barrier, is actually an invading barbaric life, self-assertion
prepared to parade its liberation from any scruple when the social occasion
arises. Such a laughing audience is a parody of humanity. Its members are
monads, all dedicated to the pleasure of being ready for anything at the
expense of everyone else. Their harmony is a caricature of solidarity.13
Though Adorno’s perspective on laughter’s capacity to evoke self-assertion in mockery is
accurate, his disparaging statement regarding a culture industry’s laughing community
does not apply to the Iranian subculture. Tehran’s underground community is wholly
unconnected to the homogenized collective that Adorno mocks. The subversive culture
present in underground Tehran is not seeking to simply go “beyond what is quasi-officially
sanctioned or forbidden” 14 in the country, nor, in the case of arrest, are they simply
“forgiven because [their] departures from the norm are regarded as calculated mutations
which serve all the more strongly to confirm the validity of the system.”15 The musical
communities that meet underground and perform music similar to Bozkido’s are
Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer. "The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception." The
Cultural Studies Reader. 39.
13 Ibid.
14 Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer. "The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception." The
Cultural Studies Reader. 36.
15 Ibid. 36.
12

4

Morad Moazami

unwelcome in the deftly-surveilled atmosphere that pervades in theocratic Iran. On August
1st 2007, for example, over 230 individuals were arrested and incarcerated for simply
attending an underground concert in the outskirts of Tehran.16 The rare congregation of
Iran’s “subversive youth culture”17 in the context of a musical performance is therefore not
only embraced, but also treasured by its constituents.
The digital elements of Bozkido’s music further accentuate the all-important social
function of the underground performance. One of the most idiosyncratic attributes of live
electronic music is that it “can be viewed as a soundtrack for a spectacle, a gathering, a
show of camaraderie.” 18 Because the music itself is pre-programmed, the electronic
musician is unable to re-interpret his music in a live setting like a musician with a rockoriented sound is able to. The performance, therefore, becomes largely dependent on the
space in which it is presented and the audience that is reacting to it. The live, digitized
performance, therefore, serves as a soundscape to the social gathering that it had initially
attracted. Correspondingly, David Byrne attests that “a century of technological innovation
and the digitization of music has inadvertently had the effect of emphasizing its social
function.”19 The space that is engendered by this trade-off between electronic performer
and audience is similar to what Jerry Grotowski describes as “Poor theatre,” a theatrical
form that emphasizes:
The discarding of masks, [and] the revealing of the real substance: a totality of
physical and mental reaction… Here we can see theater’s therapeutic function
for people in our present-day civilization. It is true that the actor accomplishes
this act, but he can only do so through an encounter with the spectator.20
Pre-programmed melodies and digitized soundscaping, therefore, allow Bozkido to
generate a new space within an already-existing social setting.
Bozkido’s use of digitized instrumentation also challenges the notion of
national musical identity, and consequently, what it means to be Iranian. Iranian
Johnston, Sholeh. "Persian Rap: The Voice of Modern Iran's Youth." Journal of Persianate Studies. 1.
(2008): 103.
17 Ibid.
18 Byrne, David. How Music Works. McSweeney’s, 2012. 121.
19 Byrne, David. How Music Works. McSweeney’s, 2012. 124.
20 Grotowski, Jerry. Toward a Poor Theatre. London: Routledge, 2002. 255.
16

5

Morad Moazami

music and national identity are most often closely bound together as a result of the
country’s historic musical heritage. 21 In contemporary times, however, with the
intercession of non-traditional genres such as pop, electronica, and rock and roll into
the county’s musical culture, defining “Iranian-ness”22 solely by aesthetic criteria has
proved problematic. Bozkido further challenges this very idea of nationalism by
introducing a musical style that is completely divergent with the country’s musical
heritage and national identity. Bozkido’s fusion of non-traditional electronic
soundscapes with elements that specially serve as representations of the Iranian
culture industry pushes beyond the notion of mere nationalism, and instead, embraces
a more internationalist position. This internationalist stance, according to Laudan
Nooshin, implies the “rejection of narrow nationalism”23 and “the need for… music
to look beyond national borders.”24 By soundtracking a purely Iranian social function
with original and locally crafted electronic music, Bozkido is, consequently,
reshaping what it means to be Iranian in the country’s underground youth subculture.
So much occurs in those few hours when those few dozen students assemble
in underground Tehran. A simple musical performance transmutes into a space for
self-assertion and cohesion, while also serving as a shelter from those weary of the
repressed atmosphere of a polluted city. The tempered communal setting, however,
is especially contingent on the correct use of technology in fostering the sounds that
result in such solidarity. On that December night, Bozkido’s command over
electronic soundscaping proved vital in bolstering the subversive temperament of the
space, as it allowed for not only a sense of community, but also questioned and
confronted the socio-political circumstances that had made the entire collective so
drained and so eager to subvert the establishment that looms over their daily lives.
On that one night, music and technology allowed this small audience a space to
convene and to free themselves from the unpleasant reality of their city.

Nooshin, Laudan. "Underground, Overground: Rock Music and Youth Discourses in Iran." Iranian
Studies. 38.3 (2005): 481.
22 Nooshin, Laudan. "Underground, Overground: Rock Music and Youth Discourses in Iran." Iranian
Studies. 38.3 (2005): 481.
23 Ibid. 482.
24 Ibid. 483.
21

6

Morad Moazami

Works Cited
Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer. "The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass
Deception." The Cultural Studies Reader. Ed. Simon During. London and New
York: Routledge, Print.
Byrne, David. How Music Works. McSweeney’s, 2012. eBook.
Fink, Robert. "The Media Sublime." Repeating Ourselves: American Minimal Music as
Cultural Practice . Berkley: University of California Press, 2005. 120-166. Print.
Grotowski, Jerry. Toward a Poor Theatre. London: Routledge, 2002. Print.
Johnston, Sholeh. "Persian Rap: The Voice of Modern Iran's Youth." Journal of
Persianate Studies. 1. (2008): 102-119. Print.
Nooshin, Laudan. "Underground, Overground: Rock Music and Youth Discourses in
Iran." Iranian Studies. 38.3 (2005): 463-494. Print.

7

