Cartograms, hexograms and regular grids: minimising
misrepresentation in spatial data visualisations
Samuel Langton1 and Reka Solymosi2
1

Department of Sociology, Manchester Metropolitan University
Centre for Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of Manchester

2

Corresponding author: Samuel Langton (samuel.langton@stu.mmu.ac.uk)
Funding: Samuel Langton’s research contribution was completed under a Vice Chancellor's doctoral
scholarship at Manchester Metropolitan University.

Introduction
Thematic maps are powerful, accessible and aesthetically appealing visualisations widely applied to
represent spatial data (Barrozo et al., 2016). In urban analytics, spatial data visualisation is important to
effectively communicate and engage with stakeholders (Billger, Thuvander and Wästberg, 2017) and
can even serve to analyse geographical information (Rae, 2011). However, irregularly shaped polygons
and large differences in the sizes of areas being mapped can introduce misrepresentation. The message
researchers want to get across might be lost, or misunderstood by readers. To address this issue, methods
have been developed to distort the shape and size of areas, either by turning irregular polygons (such as
neighbourhoods) into regular or hexagonal grids (Bailey, 2018), or by using cartograms, where the
distortions of size and shape are made explicit and communicate meaning (Dorling, 1996; Tobler,
2004). However, it is unclear how these different transformations can impact on viewers’ interpretation
of the map. Using a crowdsourced survey, we explore the extent to which alternative methods of
visualising spatial data can improve communication of an intended message by testing people’s
understating of maps transformed using four different methods. We hope that these findings highlight
the issue of misrepresentation in spatial data for the urban analytics community, but more specifically,
we aim to provide some guidance as to which methods might the most appropriate.
Thematic maps have various issues (see Dorling, 1996), however we address a specific problem
common to traditional area-based choropleth maps, whereby variation in the size and shape of areas
being visualised may affect map legibility (Stigmar and Harrie, 2011). In extreme cases, larger areas
come to dominate the map and render smaller regions almost invisible. Census data in England and
Wales, for instance, is published at spatial scales designed to be uniform by population (e.g. Lower
Super Output Area). Consequently, sparsely populated areas dominate visualisations at the expense of
those that are densely populated. In such cases, even the most well-intentioned researcher, using
geographically accurate spatial data, may introduce a degree of misrepresentation in their visualisations
or fail to communicate their message to readers as intended.
To date, a popular method for overcoming these obstacles has been the cartogram. Although there
are numerous methods of operationalising cartograms (Dougenik, Chrisman and Niemeyer, 1985) the
underlying premise is that areas are rescaled according to a variable (Nusrat and Kobourov, 2016). By
rescaling areas by some uniform variable (such as population in the example of Lower Super Output
Areas) an effort is made to minimise the misrepresentation that can be introduced by using raw area
boundaries. Larger areas become smaller, and less dominant, and ‘invisible’ areas are expanded to
become more visible. That said, this approach has come under some criticism for alleviating
mispresentation through invisibility at the expense of introducing misrepresentation through distortion
(Harris et al., 2017a). Even well-specified scaling variables can cause alterations which result in some
polygons appearing as lines, for instance (Coltekin, 2015).
A recent development is the ‘balanced area’ cartogram, which aims to minimise the distorting sideeffects of cartograms (see Harris et al., 2017a; 2017b). The balance is achieved by predefining an

‘interpretability threshold’ which is the smallest legible unit size given the dimensions of the final
published map. In producing the cartogram, any areas that fall below this areal threshold are ‘protected’
from the rescale, and instead are set as the minimum unit size. Harris and his colleagues demonstrated
the benefits of this approach using Local Authority data on residential geography in England. The
degree of error, defined as the percentage of non-overlap between the original map and the cartogram,
was minimised with the balanced cartogram compared to a solely attribute-scaled (e.g. population)
cartogram (Harris, 2017).
This approach has also been extended to include a ‘hexogram’, whereby an iterative binning
algorithm assigns the centroid of polygons from the balanced cartogram to tessellated hexagons, each
representing the original polygons. In doing so, the data is said to maintain spatial accuracy whilst also
being uniform in shape and size (Harris, Charlton and Brunsdon, 2018a; 2018b). Comparable
alternatives to this approach are tile maps which use a distance-based procedure (e.g. Hungarian
algorithm) to assign original polygons to a grid of uniform shapes, such as a hexagons or squares, in a
manner that minimises the distance between the original and the new synthetic boundaries (Bailey,
2018). In doing so, tile maps generate an aesthetically appealing contiguous grid of polygons which can
introduce topological inaccuracies, such as previously separated polygons becoming neighbours. The
hexogram prioritises the maintenance of the original topological links but is not contiguous. In each
case, the stylised map retains the same number of observations as the original map, but the boundaries
have been transformed into something more uniform and less distracting, which may be better suited
for conveying the message of the researcher.
That said, little is known about how different methods of visualising spatial data impact on people’s
interpretation of the information presented. This study aims to rectify this shortcoming through the use
of a crowdsourced online survey questionnaire designed to measure the extent to which various
alternatives to a traditional thematic map can more accurately convey geographic information. We begin
by providing an outline of the survey design and methodology, followed by the reporting of results, and
conclude with a discussion on our findings and suggestions for future research.

Survey design
Studies have made some attempt to gauge how people interpret different visualisations of the same data
to draw conclusions (e.g. Borgo et al., 2012; Borkin et al., 2016; Skau and Kosara, 2016). Specific to
maps, Coltekin et al (2015) asked respondents to complete a series of tasks using various different tools
available in Google Maps (e.g. 2D default map, 3D satellite images, Street View) and found that the
degree of accuracy with which people completed questions varied by the tool used. That said,
“visualization researchers have been increasingly leveraging crowdsourcing approaches to overcome a
number of limitations of controlled laboratory experiments, including small participant sample sizes
and narrow demographic backgrounds of study participants” (Borgo et al., 2018: 573).
Here, we use a crowdsourced survey to assess the ability of different thematic mapping

techniques to visualise and communicate a situation where high values spatially cluster in small areas.
Descriptive maps can play an important role in identifying and understanding spatial clusters in urban
analytics, despite continued advances in more complex statistical methods (e.g. Jones et al., 2018). We
used electoral result data from the 2016 European Union (EU) referendum at Local Authority level in
England to create a map considered to be a good example of high value clustering which is obscured
by significant differences in area sizes. Areas with a high proportion of Remain votes are concentrated
in Greater London (Hobolt, 2016), which has geographically small Local Authorities compared to the
rest of the country. On a traditional thematic map, using original boundaries as defined by the Office of
National Statistics, strongly Leave areas dominate the visual at the expense of densely populated
Remain areas, which became almost ‘invisible’ (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: proportion of Remain votes in 2016 EU referendum by Local Authority area in England
using original boundaries.

Alternatives to this original map were then generated using four different techniques for
transforming the Local Authority area polygons. Balanced area-based cartograms and hexograms were
created in R (version 3.5.1) using the default minimum threshold options (see Harris, 2017). Uniform
hexagonal and square tile grids were generated using the geogrid R package using the default options
regarding the optimisation of cell sizes (Bailey, 2018). A decision was made to create the uniform grids
from the balanced cartogram rather than from the original boundaries to produce a more optimal
outcome and reduce computation time. A result of this was that the outputted boundaries were not
completely contiguous, contrary to what was produced using the original boundaries. In total, five

visualisations were created: the original (see Figure 1), balanced cartogram, hexogram, hexagonal grid
and square grid (see Figure 2). Polygons were shaded according to the percentage of Remain voters in
each Local Authority.
These maps were then collated in a survey, and for each map, participants were asked to rate the
extent of their agreement with a statement considered to be a true and accurate description of the data:
“High values (in yellow) appear to be clustered near one another, with a handful of outliers elsewhere
in the country”. Respondents viewed the five maps in isolation and reported their agreement with the
statement using a 5-point Likert scale (Strongly agree, slightly agree, neither agree nor disagree, slightly
disagree, strongly disagree). There was an additional option for ‘Don’t know’. If respondents agreed
with the statement, the map was considered to be representing the data accurately and conveying the
message of high value clustering as intended.

Figure 2: proportion of Remain votes in 2016 EU referendum by Local Authority area in
England using (a) balanced cartogram, (b) hexogram, (c) square grid, (d) hexagonal grid.

The survey itself did not include any reference the referendum or the method used to generate each
map. Options were shown in the same order for every respondent (starting from the balanced cartogram,
hexogram, hexagonal grid, original and finally the square grid). In the interests of keeping the survey
as short as possible, and to minimise dropout, no demographic information (e.g. gender, education) was
asked of the respondents. The survey was created using Google Forms and distributed via social media
platforms Twitter and Reddit (using the r/samplesize subreddit).

Results
The survey was deployed for three days, generating a sample size of 768 respondents, all of which had
completed the questionnaire in its entirety. Overall, the map with the highest proportion of respondents
agreeing with the statement was the balanced cartogram, with 94% of respondents reporting agreement
(either ‘strongly agree’ or ‘slightly agree’). Only two respondents did not know and a total of 4%
disagreed with the statement in some way (either ‘strongly disagree’ or ‘slightly disagree’). This was
followed by the hexogram, for which 91% of respondents showed some degree of agreement, two
respondents did not know and 6% either strongly or slightly disagreed with the statement. Although in
general, respondents appeared to interpret the original map as intended, with 77% reporting some level
of agreement with the statement, this was still lower than the balanced cartogram and hexogram. The
original map also had the highest number of don’t know responses (12). The regular hexagonal and
square grids had the highest level of disagreement, with only 53% and 51% either strongly or slightly
agreeing with the statement respectively.
For further analysis, the 5-point Likert scale was recoded to a binary outcome variable to
indicate whether respondents ‘agreed’ (strongly agreed, slightly agreed) or ‘disagreed’ (strongly
disagreed, slightly disagreed) with the true statement for use in a logistic regression model. Whilst we
acknowledge that the sample is not random, thus compromising generalisability to a wider population,
this analysis was considered useful to gauging effect sizes. Respondents who answered “Don’t know”
or “Neither agree nor disagree” were excluded from this analysis. The outcome variable (agreedisagree) was regressed on a single categorical variable indicating which map type respondents were
observing when answering the Likert scale question, with the original map set as the reference category.
Odds ratio estimates confirm the descriptive findings (see Table 1). The odds of respondents agreeing
with the true statement were 3.8 and 2.6 times that of the original map for the balanced cartogram and
hexogram respectively. When viewing the hexagonal or square grids, people were about 3 times less
likely to agree with the statement compared to the reference category of the original map. These odds
were significant at p < 0 .001 alpha, noting the issue regarding generalisability of these results to a wider
population due to self-selection in the crowdsourced sample.

Table 1: logistic regression results, response variable recorded from Likert-scale to binary
agree (1) disagree (0); original map is reference category; 95% confidence intervals reported.

Map type

B

Se

Z ratio

Probability

Original
(reference)

-

-

-

-

Balanced
cartogram

1.3364

0.2047

6.529

< 0.001

Hexogram

0.9478

0.1827

5.187

< 0.001

Square grid

-1.3205

0.1320

-10.000

< 0.001

Hexagonal
grid

-1.3130

0.1314

-9.989

< 0.001

Odds
3.80 (CIs:
2.57-5.76)
2.58 (CIs:
1.81-3.72)
0.27 (CIs:
0.21-0.34)
0.27 (CIs:
0.21-0.35)

Model Chi Square: 553.418 (p = < 0.001)
Likelihood ratio R2: 0.155
AIC: 3036.5

Discussion
Overall, findings suggest that it is possible to improve communication of a message by transforming
map boundaries, in particular using balanced cartogram and hexogram approaches. However, it is also
possible to impair interpretation, as seen with transformations into tiled grids (square and hexagonal),
where fewer people interpreted the visualisation as intended. In interpreting these results, there are a
number of discussions points to consider.
Firstly, the research design assumes that the ‘true’ statement was both an accurate description
of the raw data and a fair means of gauging the extent to which respondents were understanding each
map. We acknowledge that the statement could have been written differently, with some respondents
demonstrating lack of understanding (e.g. those that answered ‘Don’t know’) possibly as a product of
the research design, rather than the visualisations themselves. Secondly, due to a lack of individual
characteristic data, we were unable to control for other factors that might have impacted on how
respondents interpreted the task. For instance, those familiar with cartography, or data visualisation
more generally, may have been more sensitive to the issues that can arise when creating maps. The
degree to which our sample was representative of a wider population, whether it be the general public
or geographers, is unknown. Thirdly, although the survey contained no reference to the EU referendum,
respondents familiar with England’s social geography may have drawn upon other personal information

to inform their decision. For instance, many other social phenomenon (e.g. income) are commonly
known to cluster in the urban areas where Remain voters also clustered.
The findings from this survey mark a first attempt to empirically examine how people interpret
different methods of visualising area-based thematic maps. As such, we highlight some key directions
for future research. Firstly, as mentioned above, collecting individual characteristics on respondents
could help control for confounding factors such as expertise and assess generalisability of findings.
Secondly, questions could be added to test different dimensions of misrepresentation or improve
objectivity. For instance, respondents could be asked to manually identify areas of high clustering by
clicking or selecting on the map interactively, which could then be compared to the ‘true’ results from
a Local Indicators of Spatial Autocorrelation analysis. Thirdly, there are other methods of generating
thematic maps that we did not consider. It would be interesting to compare the balanced cartogram to
standard cartograms scaled by a selection of variables, or alternatives such as the Dorling cartogram.
Future research could consider making these advancements using synthetic data, to mitigate the impact
of prior knowledge of the study area.

Software
For those interested in reproducing these methods in R for their own research, the balanced cartogram
and hexogram used open source code (see Harris, 2017) which included the packages cartogram
(Jeworutzki, 2018), fMultivar (Wuertz, Setz and Chalabi, 2017) and sp (Pebesma and Bivand, 2005).
Spatial data handling and visualisations were carried out using sf (Pebesma, 2018) and tidyverse
(Wickham, 2017).

Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

References
Bailey, 2018. geogrid: Turn Geospatial Polygons into Regular or Hexagonal Grids. R package version
0.1.0.1. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=geogrid
Barrozo, L.V., Pérez-Machado, R.P., Small, C. and Cabral-Miranda, W., 2016. Changing spatial
perception: dasymetric mapping to improve analysis of health outcomes in a megacity. Journal of
Maps, 12(5), pp.1242-1247.
Billger, M., Thuvander, L. and Wästberg, B.S., 2017. In search of visualization challenges: The
development and implementation of visualization tools for supporting dialogue in urban planning
processes. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science, 44(6), pp.1012-1035.
Borgo, R., Abdul-Rahman, A., Mohamed, F., Grant, P.W., Reppa, I., Floridi, L. and Chen, M., 2012.
An empirical study on using visual embellishments in visualization. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(12), pp.2759-2768.
Borgo, R., Micallef, L., Bach, B., McGee, F. and Lee, B., 2018, June. Information visualization
evaluation using crowdsourcing. In Computer Graphics Forum (Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 573-595).
Borkin, M.A., Bylinskii, Z., Kim, N.W., Bainbridge, C.M., Yeh, C.S., Borkin, D., Pfister, H. and
Oliva, A., 2016. Beyond memorability: Visualization recognition and recall. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics, 22(1), pp.519-528.
Coltekin, A., Lokka, I.E. and Boér, A., 2015, August. The utilization of publicly available map types
by non-experts—A choice experiment. In Proceedings of the 27th International Cartographic
Conference (ICC2015), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil(pp. 23-28).
Dorling, D., 1996. Area cartograms: their use and creation. Concepts and Techniques in Modern
Geography (CATMOG).
Dougenik, J.A., Chrisman, N.R. and Niemeyer, D.R., 1985. An algorithm to construct continuous area
cartograms. The Professional Geographer, 37(1), pp.75-81.
Garnier, S., 2018. viridis: Default Color Maps from 'matplotlib'. R package version 0.5.1.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=viridis
Harris, R., 2017. Hexograms: better maps of area based data. Retrieved from
https://rpubs.com/profrichharris/hexograms
Harris, R., Charlton, M., Brunsdon, C. and Manley, D., 2017a, January. Tackling the curse of
cartograms: Addressing misrepresentation due to invisibility and to distortion. In Proceedings of the
25th GIS Research UK Conference, Manchester. Retrieved from http://huckg.
is/gisruk2017/GISRUK_2017_paper_29. pdf.
Harris, R., Charlton, M., Brunsdon, C. and Manley, D., 2017b. Balancing visibility and distortion:
Remapping the results of the 2015 UK General Election. Environment and Planning A, 49(9),
pp.1945-1947.
Harris, R., Charlton, M. and Brunsdon, C., 2018a. Mapping the changing residential geography of
White British secondary school children in England using visually balanced cartograms and
hexograms. Journal of Maps, 14(1), pp.65-72.
Harris, R., Charlton, M., and Brunsdon, C., 2018b. Using hexograms to map areal data. In
Proceedings of the 26th GIS Research UK Conference, Leicester. Retrieved from

https://www122.lamp.le.ac.uk/download/GISRUK2018_Contribution_023.pdf
Hobolt, S.B., 2016. The Brexit vote: a divided nation, a divided continent. Journal of European
Public Policy, 23(9), pp.1259-1277.
Jeworutzki, S., 2018. Cartogram: Create Cartograms with R. R package version 0.1.1.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=cartogram
Jones, K., Manley, D., Johnston, R. and Owen, D., 2018. Modelling residential segregation as
unevenness and clustering: A multilevel modelling approach incorporating spatial dependence and
tackling the MAUP. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science, 45(6), pp.11221141.
Nusrat, S. and Kobourov, S., 2016, June. The state of the art in cartograms. In Computer Graphics
Forum (Vol. 35, No. 3, pp. 619-642).
Pebesma, E., 2018. Simple Features for R: Standardized Support for Spatial Vector Data. The R
Journal, https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2018/RJ-2018-009/
Pebesma, E.J. and Bivand, R.S., 2005. Classes and methods for spatial data in R. R News 5 (2),
https://cran.r-project.org/doc/Rnews/.
R Core Team, 2018. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/.
Rae, A., 2011. Flow-data analysis with geographical information systems:
approach. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 38(5), pp.776-794.

a

visual

Skau, D. and Kosara, R., 2016, June. Arcs, angles, or areas: Individual data encodings in pie and
donut charts. In Computer Graphics Forum (Vol. 35, No. 3, pp. 121-130).
Stigmar, H. and Harrie, L., 2011. Evaluation of analytical measures of map legibility. The
Cartographic Journal, 48(1), pp.41-53.
Tobler, W., 2004. Thirty five years of computer cartograms. ANNALS of the Association of American
Geographers, 94(1), pp.58-73.
Wickham, H., 2017. tidyverse: Easily Install and Load the 'Tidyverse'. R package version 1.2.1.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=tidyverse
Wuertz, D., Setz, T. and Chalabi, Y., 2017. fMultivar: Rmetrics - Analysing and Modeling
Multivariate Financial Return Distributions. R package version 3042.80. https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=fMultivar

