"x"
"1" "Corey Lee Wrenn , PhD"
"2" "Monmouth University"
"3" "Department of Political Science and Sociology"
"4" "Bey  Hall 234"
"5" "400 Cedar Avenue"
"6" "West Long Branch, New Jersey"
"7" "07764-1898"
"8" "United States of America"
"9" "Corey.wrenn@gmail.com"
"10" "The Land of Meat and Potatoes?  Exploring  Ireland’s Vegan  and Vegetarian  Food scape"
"11" "While it would not be accurate to suggest that Ireland  i s  a  hub of veganism  or vegetarianism , too often it is  written off as inherently  unsympathetic to   the  ethics of  plant-based eating and anti-speciesist politics.  While it is true that Irish culture is  historically tied to  speciesism  and its economy is especially dependent upon “meat” and dairy production ,  Ireland’ s  relationship with other animals is complex and sometimes forgiving.  This essay seeks to bring shape to the Irish vegan ethic, one that can be traced along its history of  animism ,  agrarianism,   ascendency,  adaptation, and   a ctivism .  From its pagan roots to its  legacy  of vegetarianism, Ireland’s history has been more  receptive  to Nonhuman Animal  interest s than might be currently understood. Its contributions to the modern Nonhuman Animal rights movement and developments in green agriculture must also be taken into account. More than a land of “meat” and potatoes, Ireland exists as a relevant, if overlooked, participant in Western vegan thought."
"12" "The Land of Meat and Potatoes? Exploring Ireland’s Vegan and Vegetarian Foodscape"
"13" "In the  introduction to a  “ green ”   travel  guide to  Ireland ,  author Rachelle Kaufman (2014)  entertains  an  expected question from her  foreign  readers:  “Is it true that Ireland is a land of meat and potatoes? Will I be able to find vegetarian food?”  She  responds carefully, noting  that stereotypes of this kind obscure the  true  diversity of Irish  cuisine .   It  is fair to say that   vegan dining  is not a commonality  in the region ,  but Kaufman’s guide  asserts   nonetheless that  there are a few restaurants that would be very welcoming for vegans.   As this example demonstrates, some  guides are clearly picking up on the Irish vegan foodscape, but  stereotypes of a monotonous and carnivorous Irish diet persist. A  vegan guide to Ireland published by  The Huffington Post  insists that to be vegan  in Ireland  is “a challenge” that  necessitates “research,” “patience,” and  some degree of  “compromise”  that will  have to  accommodate  nonvegan  ingredients  (Pure Adventures Travel, 2013)."
"14" "Certainly , Ireland is   similar to other Western countries  in its  h eavy  consumption of animal  products . G overnment research  finds that  over 99% of the population con sumes about 280 grams of dairy  every day . Most of the Irish are eating “meat” 1  on a daily basis as well,  80%  of which are consuming pig’s flesh, 71%  chicken’s flesh, and 55% cow’s flesh (Kiely, 2001).  Veganism is therefore  statistically  uncommon  in Ireland , but it is not entirely absent. B etween 5 and 10 percent  of  its  population identifies as vegetarian ( Irish Nutrition and Dietetic Institute, 2004;  Leahy et al., 2010;  Pichler  &  Blackwell, 2007).  These modern demographic descriptions may not be especially impressive ,  but   the Irish foodscape is much more accommodating to vegan ethics than is  commonly  acknowledged."
"15" "Ireland  is certainly not  a species-egalitarian society, but the role of Nonhuman Animals 2  in the Irish way of life is unmistakable.  Outnumbering human  inhabitant s, Irish c ows  sprawl across the countryside. T housands of visitors board ferries  hoping  to spot whales  off the coast of Cork  or  meet  Fungi the free-living dolphin in Dingle’s harbor .  Celtic and early Christian history and folklore heavily feature  Nonhuman Animals .  In fact, f or much of its history, Ireland’s relationship with other  animals was much less oppressive . As an animist culture, the early Irish acknowledged other animals almost as equals  and as  fellow inhabitants of the natural world. For that matter, t he bulk of the  traditional Irish  diet  has been   plant-based   until industrialization and modernization would make animal products cheaper , more accessible, and nearly unavoidable."
"16" "The  introduction of Christianity and British colonization  would ensure  that  relationships with other animals would become much more human supremacist . This influence   also increased  “meat” and dairy production i n Ireland  significantly.  S pecifically, t he increased oppression of Nonhuman Animals was  tightly  linked with the increased oppression of the Irish under  colonialism .   The production of animal commodities  swelled , but it did so  primarily  for the benefit of the British people  and  at the expense of the Irish peasantry. This oppressive relationship would famously push the Irish onto the potato, a vulnerability that would spell disaster when  the crops  would fail  from  disease ."
"17" "F ood memory in Ireland is compelling ,  and consumption patterns are highly political and deeply connected to the Irish identity . In addition to the  legacy of  famines  in the  19 th  century, for instance, Irish nationalists would employ hunger strikes during the Troubles of the latter half of the 20 th  century to protest  British imperialism  ( O’Malley, 1990 ) .  Nationalists of years earlier  also politicized food,  sometimes merging  anti-speciesist vegetarianism with their efforts for Irish independence.   Today,  development in  sustainable and regional food  production  has been  prioritized  as a means of achieving Irish self-sufficiency and competition in an international market beyond  the harbors of  Great  Britain. This move has been especially harmful for Nonhuman Animals by institutionalizing their oppression, but this new green imagination  in a global society  has also supported  the growth of  Irish Nonhuman Animal advocacy."
"18" "Human/nonhuman relationships have heavily influenced the trajectory of  Irish culture and  the Irish state , and t his essay will explore the development of this relationship from  Neolithic  times to that of today. Specifically, this exploration will be grounded in the cultural, political, and economic developments of Ireland in the context of trans-species oppression.  I will argue that this principle of intersectionality is foundational to  Irish  vegetarianism and veganism.  The role of agrarianism, colonialism, and the modern capitalist concerns with marketplace competition and environmental protection will be examined as particularly influential  in shaping the identities and experiences of  both humans and nonhumans.  The paper will  therefore be divided into sections  that will address  ancient Ireland prior to its incorporation into the modern world system, Ireland under British colonization, and modern Ireland in the era of intensified globalization."
"19" "Human-Nonhuman Relationships in  Neolithic ,  Celtic , and Early Christian Ireland"
"20" "Ancient Ireland and Animism"
"21" "T he relationship between Irish culture and  flesh  consumption has a fluctuating history.  While it has been anima l -based, it has not always been animal-intensive. Early  Irish  peoples  relied on Nonhuman Animal flesh  and milk  as a major source of calories for thousands of years  ( Green, 1992;  O’Kelly, 2001) .  Human c ommunities of this region were uniquely lactose tolerant, a recent evolutionary adaptation to the  limiting  climate.  F ood systems of this time were certainly  speciesist,  but  Neolithic  human relationship s  with the natural world w ere  profound ly meaningful  and often sacred.  This animism was particularly  marked with the arrival of  Celtic culture . Archaeologist Miranda  Aldhouse -Green summarizes: “ To the Celts, animals were special and central to all aspects of their world” (1992, p.4).  For instance, t he ancient Irish domesticated ravens and wrens for the purposes of augury and divination, a Druid craft that was particularly complex  (Spence, 1999).  Many species were also thought to have healing properties and were regularly included in  traditional  remedies.   This association was strong with bees, for example,  who were  seen  by the Celts  as healers with strong connections to the afterlife . These  associations would continue into later  Irish folklore  as manifested  in  the  practice s of fortunetelling with bees’ wax candles,  “telling the bees” (a ritual of announcing news to resident bee hives) , and  covering hives with black c loth  when a human of the househo ld expires  ( Chaomhánach , 2002) .  Irish  folklore, too,  regularly features human characters who can turn into nonhumans  and back into humans  (t hough, the reverse  is less frequently fabled ) ."
"22" "The predominance of nonhuman figures in ancient Irish epistemologies demonstrates some rec ognition that other animals enjoyed a social status much closer to that of humans.  Irish historian Niall  MacCoitir  explains:"
"23" "Animals are special to us because they are ‘flesh and blood’ creatures like we are, with recognizable drives and motivations. Crucially we can see that many animals are unique individuals, with personalities of their own, just like us. For this reason it is inevitable that we should project our own fears and desires on to them, and ascribe human motives and characteristics to them ( MacCoitir , 2010, p.236)."
"24" "This elevated status, however, would not prote ct them from human oppression, as Nonhuman Animals were nevertheless  subject to systemic violence to suit human interests.  The inability of  Nonhuman Animals to become human in  Irish  myths and stories  indicates   a recognition  of human supremacy despite the high regard nonhumans were granted.  Indeed, these t ales often feature human-to-nonhuman shape-shifting as a form of punishment or as a means of serving the interests of humans in some way (Green, 1992).  The animist culture, in other words, is still human-centric.  B ecause violence against Nonhuman Animals necessitates significant psychological distancing, it  is  speculated that mythologizing them allows  humans to  connect to other species  in a way that also normalizes  speciesism ideologically ( Poloczek , 2015)."
"25" "Relationships with Free-Living Animals"
"26" "Humans treated various species differently based on their socially constructed purpose in Irish society.  Domesticated animals were  most often  consumed  as food, but free-living animals were less frequently so. More often, “hunting” was engaged for  ritual purposes , attaining skins,  to reassert male and human supremacy,  or for the entertainment of the nobility .   Archaeological evidence suggests that Iron Age communities before the arrival of the Celts w ere  even less interested in “hunting.”  Nonetheless, free-living species like  wolves , brown bear s ,  lynxes   “wild” boars  and  cats, red  deer s ,   and  red squirrel s  would  eventually  be driven to  near or complete  extinction , 3  if not from “hunting ”  for human consumption or to reduce competition,  then by human encroachment and habitat destruction , much of w hich was  linked  with  the keeping of domesticated animals  ( Yalden , 1999 ) . 4   The killing of free-living animals sometimes required the  assistance  of  oppressed  domesticated animals such as horses , hawks,  and dogs.  For commoners who could not afford these nonhuman accomplices, s nares, traps, and spears were  popular  killing  instruments."
"27" "The  exaltation of  human relationships with free-living animals and the symbolic importance of the “hunt” surfaces regularly in Irish mythology.  A number of  these tales , notably that of  Fionn  mac  Cumhaill , feature   those  such as stags and boars who act as emissaries to the supernatural.   These tales serv ed to normalize the role of domination in the human social order  by  figuratively  subordinating  vulnerable humans and other animals , and also by   exploiting the  admired qualities  of other animals  to achiev e  and maintain hierarchies of power .  In other words,  Nonhuman Animals would become  the  vessels  of  human efforts for social control. N onhuman Animal imagery would also prominently appear in   war mythology and surviving  artifacts of  Celtic battle accoutrements. This imagery could be utilized to instill fear, or to evoke prediction and protection in combat.  Liath  Macha (the Grey of Macha), a  chariot horse from  the tale of  Cú   Chulainn ,  was for instance  thought  to possess clairvoyance, as were  the “ Badbh  Catha,”  or battle field  ravens who could take human form  ( Sjoestedt , 2000) . 5"
"28" "Relationships with Domesticated Animals"
"29" "Domesticated animals such as horses,  sheeps , pigs, oxen, and cows  represented wealth, and this economic function would aggravate their vulnerability to human violence and exploitation.  Most of these species are thought to have been introduced  to Ireland  with human settlers (van  Wijngaarden -Bakker, 1974).  As pr ized possessions, they are  heavily referenced in historical narratives, myths, pottery and cooking utensils, jewelry, and art (Green, 1992; Mac  Coitir , 2010).  Animals were also given as tribute to early clan leaders in pre-colonial Ireland, as is fabled  of  the famous Brian  Boru  (otherwise known as Brian of the Cattle Tributes) ( Newman, 2011 ).  As  is the case in  other human societies, the status of other animals hinged more on their socially constructed worth than their biological predispositions. Ancient Irish culture created  taboos against the exploitation of some animals, while it ensured the mass slaughter of others. Of those animals oppressed by ancient Irish peoples, killing seems to have been  committed  by throat-cutting and corpses were generally cooked in large cauldrons. Their remaining body parts would be formed into clothing, drinking and utensils, tools, and other items of use."
"30" "Despite the  prominence of  violence against  Nonhuman A nimals  in Irish culture , the Irish diet  prior to British colonization  was rather low on “meat . ”  C ows  were  exploited  primarily for dairy production  and ploughing  and  sheeps  for  their hair  and milk .  It was primarily  older, unproductive animals  who  would be killed to procure their flesh  ( Green, 1992;  Hickey, 2015;  Lucas, 1960)  or male young who could not produce prized breastmilk .  Those that were killed for this purpose were largely  reserved for  aristocrats (Cowan and Sexton, 1997).  Indeed, dairying  easily reaches  back to Neolithic times, as pottery   from the era has tested positive for milk   lipids. L andscape archaeology indicates an economy that relied heavily on the oppression of milking cows and their children (Caulfield, 2013)."
"31" "Of those animals that were consumed, pigs appear to be the most victimized.  The Celts regularly killed free-living and domesticated pigs, sometimes using them in harvesting rituals or sacrifice  ( Simoons , 1994) . In later years,  monasteries  systematically exploited  pigs and  many Ir ish saints began as pig  “ herders . ”   Pre-Christian Irish peoples ate horse flesh as well, and Roman propagandists reported Celtic rituals that involved raping a  mare  before killing and eating her. Horses were also heavily exploited for plowing, transportation, and war."
"32" "Although exploitation varied   by  species, most  n o nhuman  communities  were vulnerable  in one way or another . Lough Gur in County Limerick , a popular  living and worshiping  site for Neolithic peoples where Ireland’s oldest and largest stone circle is located,  was found to contain the bones of a wide variety of both domestica ted and undomesticated animals  ( Grogan et al.,  1987;  Ó  Ríordáin  &  MacDermott , 1949) , as was  Newgrange  in County  Meath  (van  Wijngaarden -Bakker, 1974) .  Archeological evidence also supports  that sea inhabitants were a   part of the early Irish d iet, as might be expected for a human-dominated  island with considerable coastline, marsh es , and rivers (Lucas, 1960)."
"33" "As has been eluded to, t he precious nature of domesticated animals would account for their regular use in ritual killings. Dogs, cats,  sheeps , cows, pigs, and other animals  (or their body parts)  were regularly  deposited in  ritual pits, grain stores, and graves. Domesticated animals were also slaughtered and consu med in large numbers for ritual  feasting.  There are some  contemporary  repo rts of Celtic sacrifices which note  the burning of both human and nonhuman animals in wicker structures.   The sacred role that the consumption of Nonhuman Animals played in early Irish life surfaces  often  in  lore and  folk  custom. Some  myths depict doomed pigs as regenerative,  remaining alive after being butchere d  to provide never ending sustenance  (Green, 1992).  For some animals, these myths would become protective , particularly  by way  of  totemism . The Eurasian crane, now extinct in Ireland, for example , was believed to have  mystic qualities and was associated with  the divine. This is thought to explain  a traditional Irish taboo on their consumption (O’Toole &  O’Flahert , 2011)."
"34" "Early Irish Diet"
"35" "Despite these decidedly  speciesist  practices , it would probably be mo st  accurate to describe ancient Ireland as agr arian , with “meat” consumption rese rved for the wealthy. The early  Irish diet was  cereal- based  and heavy  in  barley, flax, and  oats  ( Monk, 2013;  Salaman , 1985) ,  and many homes had small milling stones or  querns .  These grains  (and sometimes wheat)  were regularly made into bread or porridge (Lucas, 1960).  In Celtic legends, successful  kingdoms were marked by bountiful fruit and vegetable harvest, indicating the cultural importance of plant foods (Sexton, 1995).   Dairy  (or  what would later be referred to as  “white meat”  or “ bàn   bídh ” )  was also a staple  that was  drunk  both fresh and sour. It was also  eaten as butter on bread, milk in porridge,  cheese,  and so on . Forgotten  stores and ritual deposits  of butter are still found in  naturally preserving  bogs today  (Earwood, 1997) .  Seaweed, wild vegetation , nuts,  crab apples,  berries , and fungi were gathered  and  sometimes managed,  though fruit and vegetables were not widely cultiv ated until the late Middle Ages  (Hickey, 2015; Lucas, 1960 ; Monk, 2013 ) .  Beans, peas,  cabbage,  and  innovative  horticultural techniques  appear to have been introduced with the establishment of monasteries , but also through Norman development in the area (Sexton, 2013) ."
"36" "Analyses of Ireland’s famous bog mummies often show that the victim’s last meal was vegan or  vegetarian. This could  indicate the time of death was in warmer seasons when Nonhuman Animals were not usually slaughtered, or  it could be  that the plant-based meal held some sort of ritual significance  (most bog bodies are victims of sacrifice)  ( Ahlstrom, 2011;  Lobell & Patel, 2010 ).   Indeed, a number of Irish plants were known to have medicinal properties or were thought to have spiritual  or magical  significance (Mac  Coitir , 2006) .   This relationship would continue into early  Christian and even modern times . For instance, cabbages were used in fortunetelling, specifically for the prediction of future marital partners (Sexton, 1995). M onasteries  practic ed  herbalism and native plants  such as   shamrock  or wood sorrel  ( valued by the Druids for its healing and strengthening powers )   became  embedded within Christian theology  ( MacConnell , 2016) ."
"37" "The Impact of Christianity on Irish Human-Nonhuman Relationships"
"38" "Ireland may have  avoided colonization by the Romans,  but  Irish traders  and marauders  did interact with Roman Brit ai n ,  and  missionaries were common  beginning in the 5 th  century . Inevitably,  Christianity would come to transform  early  medieval Ireland . For one, Roman influence and increased nutrition made available by agricultural advancements would increase the size, and ,  presumably , the health  of domesticated Nonhuman Animal species . Despite these improve d   “husbandry” practices , most domesticated animals were  of course  still destined for slaughter.  If anything, new  Christian  ideologies would worsen Nonhuman Animals’ welfare overall.  While animis t Celts respected other animals as sacred, Roman thought would shift the Irish relationship with other animals  to one of anthrop ocentrism w hereby   Nonhuman Animals  would be further subordinated  and viewed as divinely-sanctioned resources  (Green, 1992)."
"39" "The transition to Christianity was not abrupt,  however, and  involved considerable intermingling, borrowing, and accommodation.  This surfaces in trans-species mythology that narrates the cultural shifts of the era.   The  tale of the Children of  Lir , for instance, merged traditional Irish animism with emerging Christian values. In this story, a jealous mother transfor ms her stepchildren into swans  who could only be freed after 900 years   by  the ringing bells of  Christendom .  There is also the  tal e of “Mad Sweeney,” a pagan king banished to an avian -like  existence for  attacking  a sain t. After a long existence  exiled to treetops in woodlands  and  traveling by flight as a bird would, he   would eventually find  refuge in a monastery ( Bergholm , 20 05 ;  Sailer , 1998)."
"40" "The  Catholic denomination  that  would come to characterize  Ireland  is not especially dedicated to anti-speciesism.  For example,  Saint Patrick is famously fabled to have driven snakes from the island  (snakes were likely a metaphorical representative of  “ sinful ”  paganism) (Owen, 2014) .  Likewise,  Saint Patrick’s Day was the traditional time for the killing of pigs for human  consumption  in Ireland  (Cowan and Sexton, 1997)  (pigs’ heads  in particular  were a favored dish) (Sexton, 1995) ,  and Saint Stephen’s Day historically involved the killing of wrens. 6   Saint  Modomnoc  is thought to have doomed generations of bees to suffering when he supposedly brought bees and their honey production to Ireland, and bees’  wax and  honey became a religious staple in Christian ceremonies  ( Cró n í n , 1995)   ( Saint  Gobnait , too,  is  h eavily associated with bees  and their ability to heal humans )  ( Chaomhánach , 20 02 ) .  There is also  Saint Martin’s Eve ,  featuring a   sacrificial  ritual that  necessitated the killing of a sheep, chicken, or goose, whose freshly spilling blood was sprinkled in the corners   of homes  and applied to doorposts  (Morris, 1939)."
"41" "Nonetheless, some concern for other animals does emerge from the new faith.  By the 9 th  century, the church was penalizing the pagan practice of consuming horse flesh ( Simoons , 1994).  To this day, t he Catholic faith encourages believers to abstain from animal flesh on Fridays, particularly during Lent . A lthough fishes would not be spared by the observance , carrageen moss was traditionally gathered on Good Friday in preparation for mostly “meat”-free fare (Cowan and Sexton, 1997).  There is also the  Feast Day of Saint Francis of Assisi  that  may incl ude ecumenical service for Nonhuman A nimals.  A number of  early Christian saints of Ireland, in fact,  were believed to  harbor a strong connection to  Nonhuman Animals and nature (Green, 1992).  The Book of  Kells   liberally utilizes  Nonhuman Animal characters  and representations  to tell the story of Christianity  (Casey & Ryan, 2015 ;  Mussetter , 1977 ) .   Neither has this tradition has been lost to modern Catholicism.  Formed in 1929, the Catholic Concern for the Animals  (CCA)  (formerly the Catholic Study Circle for Animal Welfare) seeks to increase awareness  of   anti- speciesism and vegetarianism in the religion ’s ideologies and rituals. 7   Though London-based, it has been q uite active in Ireland as well . 8"
"42" "The adoption of Christianity would significantly alter the Irish relationship with other animals, but this shift was at least congruent with preexisting Irish values. The role of colonialism and Ireland’s introduction into the modern world system would arguably have a more dramatic impact on Ireland’s  nonhumans .  Under British rule,  Ireland’s meadows, farms, and pastures were  increasingly placed under the jurisdiction of  absentee  British landlords  who were especially  interested in   producing “beef” for  export.  The  indigenous Irish population  would soon find itself  with out political representation, land rights, or food security. This meant that “ meat” would become an  item  of luxury and  privilege .  In  a  time of increased agricultural  sophisticatio n, animal products would ironically become less accessible to the overwhelming majority of Ireland’s populace."
"43" "Post-1500  Tenant Farming , Famine, and British Colonialism"
"44" "The Irish relationship with food is one that remains  somewhat tainted by  cultural  memories  of oppression, poverty, and hunger .  A modern Irish vegan ethic must therefore be cognizant of the political history of food and eating, particularly in the context of colonialism. In addition to  early tensions with Viking invaders in the Dark Ages, Ireland was also  occupied  by the Normans in the 12 th  century. Following Norman colonization, many native Irish lost control over their land and would  thereafter  become tenants or otherwise  destitute.   While this early contention is certainly relevant to Ireland’s trajectory, h istorians generally divide Irish history  at the point of  earnest  English colonization in the 1500s  following the monarchy’s split from the Catholic  C hurch and  its  commitment to creating a Protestant kingdom  inclusive of Ireland .  This is also a time when European trade was greatly expanding into what would become a world system (Halley, 2012).  England’s renewed interest in subduing the Irish  in tandem with  Ireland’s  now  vulnerable position in the periphery of a new global economy  would significantly transform  traditional  ways of life.  English taxation over the Irish was extreme ,  technological advancements i n agriculture would be stunted , 9   and the population grew  very rapidly with the support  of the potato  (Hickey, 2015) . As a result  of this troubled i ncorporation into the British system , the  majority of the Irish population experienced impoverishment well into the 19 th  century ( Salaman , 1985) ."
"45" "Changing Diets under Imperialism"
"46" "Most  of the Irish  lacked the same rights and privileges afforded to the people of England  in regard to food accessibility . For instance , the killing of free-living animals was forbidden for Irish persons  under English rule .  In fact, c olonialism ensured that m any of the Irish poor ate plant-based diets as a result  of their class position  (Cotter, 1996) ,  while  the English population’s diet  w ould become  much more varied  (Clarkson & Crawford, 2001) .   Pre- F amine w orkhouse records show that meals consisted primarily of potatoes, supplemented with cow’s milk  and the occasional fish flesh . H owever cows’ milk  would become too precious for the peasantry to afford as industrialization increased demand  in larger cities and inflated prices  ( Wiley, 2011 ) .   To supplement thei r  meager diet, c ows were regularly bled to access a renewable source of protei n (Clarkson & Crawford, 2001)  (though the practice dates back at least to the Middle Ages) (Cowan and Sexton, 1997 ; Sexton, 1995 ) , and b lood sausages and puddings remain  moderately  popular in Irish cuisine today.  Animal products were considered precious, and generally reserved for special occasions such as  holidays,  weddings ,  and to a lesser extent wakes (Sexton, 2002) , though the pre-Famine proliferation of potatoes meant that many more families could afford to keep pigs for eventual consumption , as pigs could be cheaply fed on potatoes as well  (Sexton,  1995) .    “Meat” and dairy production was  actually rather  lively in the 1 7 th , 1 8 th , and 1 9 th  centuries,  but  most of it would be exported or otherwise consumed by wealthier cl asses and landowners in Ireland.  The more perishable organs and entrails  of nonhuman victims were   unsuitable for export and subsequently  expanded in Irish  diets , particularly  so for  the lower classes  (Sexton, 1995).  Likewise , the Irish butter industry dominated agricultural export  for some time , most of which , again,  went to Britain (Donnelly, 1971) .   This  polarization between the classes in diet  continued into the 19 th  century, with about 90% of the Irish population  eventually coming to depend  singularly on the potato ( Salaman , 1985).  With a growing population and less available land (due to both British imperialism and the shift away from communal inheritance practices in Ireland), potatoes were affordable and adaptable."
"47" "The Double-Edged Potato"
"48" "I n the context of political powerlessness  and landlessness  under British exploitation,  this singular dependency on the potato  would prove disastrous.  The very same conditions that helped potatoes to thrive in the wet and cool climate of Ireland would  also  welcome blight .  By this time, traditional methods of food production had been largely lost, long since subsumed by potato production (Lucas, 1960).  A  large  peasant population   was  subsisting on small landholdings with severe restrictions  on  what tenants could grow . This was compounded by  the introduc tion of British Corn Laws that would  r estrict  Irish tr ade to the  benefit of Britain and balloon  grain prices for Irelan d. As a result,  potatoes had become essential for sustaining the poor.  This extreme reliance on the potato aggravated Ireland’s vulnerability. Following the blight, a  quarter of a million would be evicted from their homes , and o ver a million would perish from hunger or disease. Many more would leave the country  if they had the means to do so. A considerable  number of these refugees  would not survive the journey on overcrowded ships.  The Great Famine of the 1840s would have a lasting impact on the country’ s population, reducing it from 8.2 million to 6.6 million. In the half century following this decline, the population would further reduce to 4. 6  million, mainly due to emigration and changes in family structure  (Public Record Of fice of Northern Ireland, n.d.) . 10"
"49" "The Nature of  Relief Efforts"
"50" "Acknowledgement and assistance from Britain was minimal  and  inadequate . Indeed, English reports from the time minimized the extent of the damage or even suggested  that  Irish diets were nutritionally sufficient (Clarkson & Crawford,  2001).  A  Malthusian  philosophy  that put faith in  laissez-faire  market  ideology   was prevalent as well. This  Darwinian  reasoning understood  poverty and overpopulation  to be  part of an  evolutionary process  of eradicating weaker  economic  participants  in society , meaning that the Irish themselves were  sometimes  blamed for the disaster.  Meanwhile, British landowners saw the  crisis  as an opportunity to exploit Irish powerlessness  and   intensified  exploitative agricultural practices  to  dramatically  increase “meat” production  (Ross, 198 7 ) .   Historian Tim  Pat   Coogan  (2013) goes so far as to describe the event as an act of deliberate genocide."
"51" "Here, the vegan ethic, which is critical of state economic manipulations that entrench speciesism and ensure systemic suffering, becomes especially relevant  for explaining this tragedy . The vegan ethic also surfaces to some extent in resistance.  Famine  survival strategies and  relief efforts were  large ly plant-based.  Parsley, nettles, sorrel, charlock , leeks,  and other native herbs and wild-growing plants were gathered and eaten.  Cabbage could  often  be relied upon as an emergency foodstuff, especially valuable in the mid-summer months when other  crops could not yet be harvested (Cowan and Sexton, 1997). Indeed, cabbage was so heavily consumed in at was known as  Iúil   an   cabáiste   (July of the Cabbage)  (today more commonly remembered as “Hungry July”) , the sk in of the populace was said to be tinted green ( Kinmonth , 2006).  C orn and rice  were  imported with mixed success.  Many of the foods imported for relief were foreign to the Irish  poor , and improper cooking due to ignorance or lack of cooking utensils and fuel aggravated their condition (Hatton, 1993).  Some  charities  offered  assistance  that was  vegetarian. The Quakers provided a number of grains and staple goods in addition to monetary relief. 11   Oatmeal in particular would enjoy a resurgence at this time (Cowan and Sexton, 1997).  Asenath  Nicholson, a n American  philanthropist who worked with Irish immigrants in  the United States  also traveled to Ireland during famine to report on conditions , rally for relief,  and offer assistance . She was  a dietary reformer  who  published  on plant-based living  and  operated a  vegetarian  boardinghouse  in the slums of New York City (Murphy, 2015). 12   She, too, offered soup and other vegetarian forms of sustenance to the suffering  survivors ."
"52" "Th e role that plants played in assistance  is not to negate the suffering of Nonhuman Animals. In times of starvation and natural disaster, Nonhuman Animals  tend to become  especially vulnerable  in human-centric spaces . They are often  the last to eat and  likely to be eaten themselves.  For instance, t here  are contemporary observations of  starving dogs  who had resorted  to consuming the corpses of human victims, while these dogs were themselves targeted by starving humans (Hatton, 1993).  “Livestock” rustling increased tenfold during this time as well ( BBC, 2016 ), and presumably these animals met lethal fates.   Communities of sea dwellers, such as fishes and cockles, were hard hit as well.  Eels, at least, would be spared in future generations, as their consumption had been stigmatized by the poverty and desperation associated with the practice during famine times (Cowan and Sexton, 1997)."
"53" "The Legacy of Famine"
"54" "Additional potato blights would attack crops throughout the  remainder of the  century, but the Irish peasantry had greater ability to improve their land following the 1870 Land lord and Tenant  Act . They also  enjoyed higher wages and had access to a greater variety of food stuffs , thereby staving off famine conditions  of earlier   magnitude  ( Salaman , 1985).  Re call that I reland had been producing ample foodstuffs during famine times as well, but political conditions meant that food would be exported while  the  exploited Irish poor could  generally  only afford access to the potato. Even in a time of plenty, the failure of the potato had ensured starvation . Indeed, for those who could afford it, foods were varied and plentiful enough (Walsh, 2016), and, f or this reason, it may be inappropria te to term the event a “famine” ."
"55" "Though Poor Law Unions attempted to discourage Ireland’s reliance on the potato  with  the promotion of  turnip s  and cereal s ( Friel  & Nolan, 1996), p otatoes  would  remain a staple of the Irish diet . Today,  over 99% of the population consum e  an average of 225 grams each day  (the equivalent of one large potato)  (Kiely, 2001).  The relationship between the Irish and the potato is, however, notably transformed. Historian  Redcliffe   Salaman  observes, “[…] the potato is eaten because it is liked, not because it is necessary. […] The potato is happily, no longer the arbiter between a bare sufficiency and starvation ”  (1985, p.331)."
"56" "The post-Famine diet appears to have become increasingly plant-based as Ireland continued to export expensive animal products (Clarkson & Crawford, 2001). Cheese-making declined significantly, and few could afford to eat butter.  Meanwhile , the increasing availability of processed foods and sugar  would have  a deleterious effect on the population  ( Friel  & Nolan,  1996) .   Although Ireland was seeing some improvements in its agriculture,  Britain’s hold over Irish production and ability to  consume was still quite strong . T here were , however,   pockets of Irish mobilization  seeking  to attain some degree of self-sufficiency and self-governing . This uneasy relationship in the shadow of The Great Famine  would ultimately lead to a  renewed  push for independence  and the eventual formation of a republic ."
"57" "Intersecting Oppressions"
"58" "Britain’s  oppression of the Irish was intimately tied to the oppression of other animals.  Indeed,  one  sociologist suggests that  the British  colonial system is  b uilt on violence against domesticated animals, which , in turn,   also requires  systemic violence against the  Irish  (Nibert 2013) . 13  The exploitation of vulnerable peripheries  such as Ireland  provided the wealth and resources necessary to increase “meat” and dairy production. 14  One source reports that, in 1880, over half of the island and two-thirds of its wealth w ere   tied up in the cattle industry  alone (Ross, 198 7 ). Ireland had essentially b ecome an outsourced cattle farm, providing the English with luxurious animal products  while  milli ons of Irish were food insecure,  undernourished , or forced to emigrate .   T he suffering of the Irish people , therefore,  cannot be fully appreciated or understood without also acknowledging the suffering of the Irish cows, pigs,  sheeps ,  fishes,  and other animals  and the oppressive ideologies that accommodated it ."
"59" "As far back as the 17 th  century, as tensions between Protestants and Catholics grew more perilous, portray als of  the Irish as wild, untamable, and barbaric helped to justify English colonization as  a sort of philanthropic effort. They  also  shaped the English identity of superiority in the process (Laurence, 1988; Noonan, 1998; O’Connor, 2010). The Irish were described as   savage,  “wolf-like ,”  and  lacking pedigre e. They were also animalized by the English based on  their tendency to live and work  closely with  sheeps  and cows .  Irish women  in particular  were likened to “livestock” in their supposed ability to give birth frequently and painlessly without  need for  assistance  or recovery .  Likewise ,  Irish women  were transported in great numbers to Australia as “breeding stock” by the English government  in  its  attempt  to control  crime and instill order in Ireland while strengthening its foothold in Oceania  (BBC, 2016)."
"60" "The entangled   subordination of Irish peoples and Nonhuman Animals   is further evidenced  in English 19 th  and early 20 th  century depictions of  “Paddy”   which  animalized the  Irish  as ape-like in appearance and behavior   as a means to subvert Ireland’s post-Famine nationalist organizing  (Curtis, 1997) .  So, too, were the Irish represented  by pigs or associated with pigs   based on  their  shared  agricultural connection and supposed filthiness (O’Connor, 2010).    The Irish were  likened to  dogs  as well, a consequence  of  their  perceived propensity for disease and  supposed link to  rabies . This  stereotype  derived from  the English  valuation of   pu rity  in  morals, class, and race,  but also from  their fear of foreign invasion  (Pemberton &  Worboys , 2007)  (America also attributed disease stigma to animalized Irish immigrants for similar reasons) (Kraut, 1994) .    Much of this  association  stemmed from  the English desire to civilize and control  the presence of  “mongrel s ”  in the empire, a n   intent  that   en dangered humans and dogs alike . 15"
"61" "In fact, a number of  practices associated with the lower Irish classes  would be  scrutinized  or judged more  harshly   than that of the English ascendency (Collins, 2015). Imperialist  Britain often romanticized  noble  British traditions l ike fox and stag “hunting” as a symbol of  Britain’s   supremacy, while  it  simultaneously  presented  cock fighting and other  customs associated with the  lower class es and colonies  as evidence to their need for  British rule  ( Deckha , 2013).   Even in  medieval  Ireland , Anglo-Normans and church leaders who sought   to control a conquered Ireland and reform its churches  would propagandize  their  ill treatment of other animals to demonstrate  Irish barbarism  (Connolly, 2011 ) (r ecall, for example, the  gruesome  storie s of Nonhuman Animal sacrifice  discussed previously ) .  Beyond pagan practices, t he Irish were also thought negligent in minding their cattle, who  reportedly  graze d  to the point of exploding  ( Freeman, 2001 ).   Ireland’s cruelty to Nonhuman Animals and improper attention to their welfare  thus  became a justification for British sovereignty there."
"62" "C onsumption patterns , too,  help ed frame this class divide. T he Irish were thought brutish in their consumption of blood and raw flesh o n one hand (Fitzpatrick, 2004) , 16  while presumed weakened by the  scant amount of  “meat” in their diet on the other (Noonan, 1998).  Furthermore , the consumption of Irish vegetables was stigmatized in England,  perhaps  because eating inferior or “tainted” foods from a stereotyped region was thought to undermine English cultural superiority."
"63" "The Modern Irish Food System"
"64" "Though times of mass hunger and deprivation are associated with times gone past, historians note that the  poignant  memory of The Great Famine would shape Irish culinary imagination (or lack thereof) well into the 20 th  century. It would not be until relatively r ecently that Ireland’s food scape would begin to witness any significant change , thanks in part to  the influx of   economic  security and prosperity .  A food consumption survey completed in  the year  2000 suggests that “increasing affluence and changing lifestyles” had resulted in a dramatic change in Irish dietary habits (Kiely ,  2001).  Certainly, the industrialization of Nonhuman Animal agriculture was partly responsible, with Ireland seeing a 74% increase in “meat” consumption since the 1930s   ( and a tripling of fish consumption )  ( Friel  & Nolan, 1996).  As recently as 2003, Ireland ranked 10 th  in  global  consumption of “meat” and also ranked quite high in its  consumption of dairy (Speedy, 2003). As with other developed nations  in the West , Nonhuman Animals killed for human consumption are primarily chickens, cattle, and pigs. In 2011, 30 kg of pig’s flesh, 25 kg of chicken flesh, and 20 kg of cow flesh was consumed per capita (Central Statistics Office, 2012)."
"65" "Ireland’s reliance on animal products runs deeper than dietary preference , of course, as it intimately shapes the island’s  economic development .  At the turn of the 20 th  century, agricultural production  remained   the  primary Irish industry. Relationships between tenants and landowners had improved, but international competition was straining Irish farmers and  impoverishing  rural dwellers. The resulting co-operatives movement  and the Irish Agricultural Organization Society formed to coordinate  it  would create a sense of self- reliance, granting Irel and some leverage in the market. Unfortunately for cows, it also  increas ed  dairy production  considerabl y  (King & Kennedy, 1994)."
"66" "The Irish food industry   experienced significant restructuring in the mid-1980s ,  and animal agriculture would see  even greater  growth thanks in part to  rationalization, concentration, and product diversification  (Harte, 1997) .  Although entry into the  European Union would expand  Ireland’s previously agricultural ly dominant  economy  into other areas of  production such as technology services   and pharmaceuticals,  “meat” and dairy  remains   a high priority  business  ( Friel  & Nolan, 1996;  McDonagh  &  Commins , 1999 ; Tovey, 1991 ) . Indeed, it dominates  the modern  Irish economy   much  as it did under British rule , accounting for 69% of food and drink exports .  In 2014, t he country co n vey ed approximately 6.6 billion  euro s  worth of living and nonliving Nonhuman Animals  and  their excrements   ( Bord   Bia , 2015) .   The  agri -food sector has become the island’s leading indigenous industry, with dairy and “seafood” demonstrating the strongest growth ( Bord   Bia , 2015).  While only responsible for 1% of the global dairy supply,  there are 18,000 dairy farmers and about a million dairy cows farmed in Ireland with Irish dairy exports rising by as much as 30% in some  recipient  countries ( Bord   Bia , 2015). With 7,500 kilometers of coastline, Ireland ’s   sizable “seafood” sector  is strong . The value of aquatic exports ha s  risen by 70% since 2009, and  11,000  are currently employed in the industry ( Bord   Bia , 2015).   In addition to the 18,000 dairy farmers and 11,000 “seafood” workers, there are also over 10,000 people working in the Irish “meat” industry (Food and Drink Industry Ireland, 2015). At least 39,000  of Ireland’s population of 4. 6  million are directly employed in businesses o f speciesism.  Incidentally, the modernization of the Irish economy has also ensured that many nonhuman species are subjected to vivisection, likely a consequence of  modern  Ireland’s robust pharmaceutical industry. Despite the European Union’s intention to phase out Nonhuman Animal testing, Ireland was responsible for the exploitation of about a quarter of a million animal  subject s  in 2014  (D’Arcy, 2015).  Ireland has also been slow to monitor the trade in exotic species. Following the economic collapse in the early 2000s, a large number of snakes (purchased as status symbols on an island where snakes are not native) were abandoned in large numbers ( Chozick  2013)."
"67" "Loving Ireland, Buying Local"
"68" "As a semi-periphery nation in the wake of British imperialism, Ireland remains heavily agricultural  and  reliant on tourism with  high unemployment and  high emigration.  Economic policies in Ireland of the early 20 th  century were heavily protectionist, discouraging foreign competition ( Baker, 1990;  Tovey and Share, 2000). Today’s global Ireland celebrates and supports Irish farmers while also capitalizing on global markets. The response has been a  more  or less  positive and profitable one , though the increasing role transnational  corporations  play in the Irish economy may be cause for concern  and benefits of growth are  unevenly distributed."
"69" "One notable  development  in  Ireland’s animal-based economy  as it modernized and eventually joined the European Union in   1973  is   its   concerted  interest in sustainable food systems  (Tovey, 2006) .  A number of events and arrangements have encouraged the resurgence in local, sustainable production and consumption including t he collapse of the Celtic Tiger  and Ireland’s  loss of global competitiveness;  several  devastating outbreaks of disease borne from animal  agriculture ; 17  and  the   1994 introduction of Ireland’s Rural Environmental Protection Scheme  in tandem with the  EU’s Common Agricultural  Policy (CAP) .  Rising  incomes, increased vacationing,   greater  media attention to gastronomic cultures ( McDonagh  &  Commins , 1999), and the efforts of Irish celebrity chef s  Myrtle  and Darina  Allen (Sage, 2003)  have  further  piqued Ireland’s attention to locally-produced food stuffs.  Perhaps, also, the violent legacy of The Great Famine  continues to undergird Ireland’s   concerns   with  self-sufficiency in food production  (it certainly informed the politics of Irish nationalism in the 19 th  and 20 th  centuries) ( Kinealy , 2001 ) ."
"70" "Buying Irish has become an important political action that resists the “colonization” of Irish economies by international corporations and imported goods and energy.   It  i s a means  of reskilling Irish farmers and supporting rural communities (Tovey, 1997).  In addition to ensuring food security within its borders, these food initiatives are also providing Ireland an international presence and allowing for  greater  political and economic cooperation.  As one of several examples , Ireland currently  participates with the European Union in the Transa tlantic Ocean Research Alliance  with the United States and Canada  to monitor  and manage ocean “resources” as part of its  blue economy  initiative  (Heffernan, 2014).   Subsequently,  Tov e y and Share (2000) insist that Ireland’s  vigorous  commitment to agriculture represent s  not it s  late modernization or  “backwardness,” bu t rather its forward thinking.  This   “ agrarianization ”  is not an indication of slow development, but  is  instead a marker of achievement."
"71" "Beyond self-sufficiency,  these new food systems are  a means of locating a sense of trust and confidence in a time where there is much economic insecurity.   The use of regional imagery in marketing is often engaged to denote quality of product and stimulate under-developed areas in Ireland ( Henchion  & McIntyre, 2000).  Alternative food systems highlight the social  embeddedness of the economy. That is, they  facilitate  an element of moral awareness, community, personal relationships, and rec iprocal exchange  in the market  (Sage, 2003).  It is an added value that can be commodi fie d."
"72" "The Irish Food Board’s “Origin Green”  initiative embodies   this relationship to benefit the Irish economy , but several  privately-owned grocers  and  food  brands  are  adopting the approach  as well .  German-owned  Irish discount grocer Aldi  launched  a  “Love Ireland” campaign  in 2012  to  lend itself a sense of authenticity and quality by encouraging  customers to buy locally and support Irish farmers and businesses  (Barrington, 2012) .   EURO SPAR ’s “Yes to Irish!”  campaign  attempt s  the same  (Retail News, 2011) .   L ikewise, d ozens  of Irish brands  came into cooperation   in 2009  to form the “Love Irish Food” association, specifically to promote Irish products and protect Irish jobs ( Cullen, 2010; Love Irish Food, 2014 ).  All of th ese efforts rely heavily on mobilizing images of family, nationalism, nostalgia, and a romanticized Irish countryside. And they work.  The campaign s  ha ve  thus far been  quite  successful, increasing sales dramatically by tapping into the Irish population’s desire to  support the local economy as well as t he perception that local Irish products are superior in quality  (Guardian, 2013) .  Indeed,  research conducted by Love Irish Food finds that over three quarters of Irish customers seek out Irish-made products when shopping."
"73" "Greenwashing Speciesism"
"74" "It is critical to acknowledge that, w hile the considerable agricultural growth in Ireland has brought wealth and independence to Irish farmers, these benefits have been unevenly experienced. Indeed, some researchers point to reforms such as the aforementioned Common Agricultural Policy as exploitative  and stratifying  (Crowley, 2006).   Corporatized and productivity-oriented, t his  modern  Irish  agri -food sector has unfortunate consequences for Nonhuman Animals  living in Ireland , too,  as agriculture moved from subsistence to surplus .   In addition to reinvigorating domestic consumption, e vocatio ns of Irish regionalism  and post-speciesist imagery of happy, healthy, and consenting Nonhuman Animals have  been successfully promoted to the effect of significantly increasing the international market’s interest in Irish animal products ( Henchion  & McIntyre, 2000)  and thereby the number of Nonhuman Animals who will be exploited .   While nonhuman domesticates experience  unimaginable violence   in farms of  all  make , smaller farms are less able to compete as larger , intensive  operations flourish under  new agricultural policies (Crowley, 2006).  Intensive farms equate to more  intensive oppression, as well as more  victims."
"75" "As modern Irish agricultural policy exacerbates human inequality, widening the gap between the haves and have - nots among farmers, so , too, is it worsened  for Nonh uman Animals  whose   output and  death toll s  shoot ever  higher.   T he  encroachment  of large farms  brought   not just  growth in Nonhuman Animal production , but also the  environmental degradations inherent to the practice.  Indeed, Ireland’s export-focused  agrarianization  is increasingly industrialized and its ownership concentrated.   In 2014, the  overall  value of “meat” and  “ livestock ”  export rose by 3%.  Violence against cows, in particular, undergirds a large part of this growth.  Irish cow’s flesh  is   available in more countries than any other nation’s “beef” ( Bord   Bia , 2015). Just before The Great Famine, the Irish cow population was 1.8 million (Clarkson & Crawford, 2001). Today that population has increased  by  three and a half times to 6.3 million (Central Statistics Office, 2015).  Despite the remarkable growth the food sector has already experienced, the Irish state  at the time of this writing  hopes to further increase exports to the tune of 19 billion  e uros by 2025 under its “Food   Wise” 10 year initiative.  The primary focus of Food Wise 2025 is “meat,” dairy, and “ seafood” (Department of  Agriculture, Food  and the Marine, 2015)."
"76" "Because expected growths in export will necessitate even greater growth in the Irish  Nonhuman Animal  population and the environmental impacts of increased flesh and dairy production are likely to be significant, some have criticized the Irish strategy as dangerous (Burke-Kennedy, 2015 ; Crowley, 2006 ).  The Department of Agriculture ,  Food an d t h e Marine  (DAFM)   projects t hat much of the growth will come from technological advancements  and not  from an increase to  the number of Nonhuman Animals. While this  may   mollify  environmental impacts, it will nonetheless ensure greater strain on Nonhuman Animals who will be forced (and genetically manipulated) to produce in greater capacities.  Furthermore ,  despite the Irish focus on “environmentally-friendly” practices,  “over-fishing,” over-grazing, pollution , and the heavy use of water, grain, and energy   are inherent to  speciesist industries  and   will continue to  threaten Irish ecosystems  (Hogan, 2012). Greater international interaction resulting from increased trade has also opened the island to “invasive” species which further threaten  natural   systems  (Montgomery et al., 2012). A number of free-living Nonhuman Animal communities have been significantly threatened by the encroachment of speciesist agriculture, such as otters, horseshoe bats, bottle-nosed dolphins,  natterjack  toads, and a host of bird species (Crowley, 2006)."
"77" "Without further  environmental  protection  commitments , Ireland’s “green” branding could be jeopardized.   Research warns that capitalist  pressure on sustainable operations to compete, turn a profit, and find new markets can threaten the integrity of smaller industries and their ability to maintain control along supply channels ( McDonagh  &  Commins , 1999). Increasing privatization of agricultural production has also been undermining Ireland’s long history of cooperative farming ( Breathnach , 2000; Harte, 1997).  Compounding this, the numerous  health risks associated with animal pr oduction and cons umption   (an is sue that might otherwise   discourage consumption )  have  been mitigated by  Ireland’s   strategic  emphasis on local, value-added  production   (Mahon & Cowan, 2004; O’Donovan & McCarthy, 2002).  In sum , while pasture-based, loc ally-produced “meat” and dairy systems are   generally  believed to be in the interest of  both  vulnerable humans and  Nonhuman Animals (at least before they are inevitably killed),  corrupting  market forces ,   in tandem with the unavoidable health and environmental burdens associated with animal agriculture ,   challenge  the integrity of this  “sustainable”  system (Wrenn, 2013)."
"78" "Emerging  Vegetarianism and Veganism in Modern Ireland"
"79" "Although animal products dominate agricultural production, they are not the only areas of growth. Ireland’s mushroom sector has also expanded significantly and is considered one of the most successful in the world ( Teagasc , 2013).  Thanks to subsidies and advertising programs, the industry now provides over 3,000 Irish jobs and is worth over a  hundred  million euros  (McCall, 2015) .  The Mushroom Bureau  (n.d.)  bills mushrooms as a healthy alternative to  animal protein and  deliberate ly situates them within  Ireland’s  growing interest  with  plant-based and vegetarian eating, even suggesting mushroom -based  meals for “meat free Mondays.” 18   However, t he  mushroom sector’s success also lies in its ability to make profitable the burdensome waste products from animal agriculture like chicken litter and cow’s manure. This could mean that even vegetable alternatives to Ireland’s animal-based economy will have difficulty disentangling from speciesist institutions. 1 9"
"80" "Nonetheless,  an  awareness to alternatives is alive in Ireland and   t he Irish Nutrition and Dietetic Institute (2004)  even declares  that a well-planned vegan or vegetarian diet is nutritiously sound.  The April  9, 2016 edition of  The Irish Times  features a  story on the consequences of Ireland’s standard diet, warning readers: “ Shift ing away from excessively meat- based diets will benefit human health while reducing hunger among the poor, easing animal-welfare concerns and offeri ng farmers a sustainable future” (Gibbons, 2016). While t he number of vegans and vegeta rians in Ireland is rather low,  research does indicate an interest in plant-based eating.  Commercial soy-based replacements have been in production in Ireland since 1981 (Shurtleff and Aoyagi, 2015), and a bout half of respondents in the North/South Ireland  f ood  c onsumption  s urvey perceived a need to eat healthier (Kiely, 2001). Of those who did make changes to their diets, 70% worked to reduce fat intake while 67% worked to increase their fruit and vegetable intake.   Other r esearch finds that  the Northern Irish   (especially middle-aged women)  are interested  in organic foods  based on  concerns for the environment as well as  their personal  health, but  they felt  hindered by availability and cost (Davies et al., 1995).   Indeed, health ful   eating and plant-based diets can  be difficult for many vulnerable groups . In an ironic flip from previous circumstances when plant-based diets were common in Ireland as a result of poverty and necessity, now the heavy consumption of Nonhuman Animal products in an industrialized society becomes pervasive for similar reasons .  As was true in the past,  Irish persons of lower socioeconomic status  today  are especially likely to be living in  restrictive  food environments  which  are conducive to poor quality of diet ( Layte  et al., 2011).  Of relevance, n ot all interest in alternative consumption is related to health.  Concerns with Nonhuman Animal welfare accounts for the vast majority of the Vegetarian Society of Ireland’s membership , for instance  (O’Brien, 2011).   As was  previously explored, the number  of vegeta rians in Ireland is quite small while  the n umber of vegans is negligible, b ut this is changing."
"81" "In a story covering  the growing vegan scene in Ireland, the  Dublin Inquirer  writes: “The vegans are coming” (Murphy, 2015).  V egan restaurants may be few, but vegetarian restaurants are not difficult to find in larger cities like  Belfast,  Dublin, Cork, Galway , and Limerick . As Murphy reports, demand for vegan opti ons in restaurants is build ing.  Cornucopia, Dublin's most prominent   vegetarian restaurant in successful operation since 1986, he reports, is now almost exclusively vegan  in an effort to meet  demand.  Even  Cork’s  historic  English Market,  a leading representative of Ireland’s local and sustainable branding initiative  which i s  known for its selection of regionally-produced animal flesh, now includes a natural foods vendor. The English Market’s restaurants also offer explicitly vegetarian menu items.    In fact, a ll major grocery chains in Ireland now sell specialty vegan options, including soya milk and veggie  patties .   As o ne Irish vegetarian cookbook author explains it: “[. .  . ]  Ireland is in the middle of a culinary revolution” (Cotter, 1996, p.5).  Even  The Irish Catholic  reports that “vegetarianism seems to be everywhere these days,”  providing readers  an overview of vegetarian and vegan ethics and  offering  advice on how to best transition to the diet  ( Keery , 2014) . The culmination of  Ireland’s vegan  metamorphosis   is evidenced in the 2015 arrival of Dublin  Vegfest . Held on World Vegan Day (November 1 st ), the festival celebrates vegan food, culture, and anti-speciesism ethics.  As one participant reminisced, “One of the things I remember most of the day is the number of Irish activists who came up saying words to the effect: ‘where have all these vegans come from?’   They were remarking on the huge numbers of people who no-one active in the Irish movement had seen before   [ .  . . ] ” (Yates, 2015).  Sealing this successful year was Guinness’s announcement that same month that the legendary brew  and popular symbol of Irish cuisine  would no longer be made with  nonvegan  ingredients  extracted  from the bodies of fish. This change in recipe, the company insists,  comes from its  desire to market the beer as suitable for vegans and vegetarians  (Stack, 2015) ."
"82" "The Irish Nonhuman Animal Rights Movement"
"83" "Victorian Intersectional Advocacy"
"84" "Importantly, Ireland’s  flirtation with v egan ism i s not just a matter of diet, but also of politics.  The British Nonhuma n Animal rights movement that em erged in the early 19 th  century  was  dependent on Irish agit ation. Iris h politician Richard Martin , for instance,  succeeded in passing the  1822  Cr uel Treatment of Cattle Act in the United Kingdom , one of the first Nonhuman Animal rights laws in the West.  He  further  campaigned against a number of especially cruel forms of speciesism and was also  partially responsible for  the formation of the first Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) ,   as  the 1822  “Martin’s Act” placed  the power of prosecution in the hands of the public  and thus necessitated  some degree of organization  ( Phelps, 2007 )."
"85" "The behemoth of Victorian campaigni ng  Frances Power Cobbe was Irish born  as well . In addition to her social reform and women’s rights work, she founded the National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) and later the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV) when she determined that NAVS had lost its effectiveness and radical edge (Phelps, 2007). Both organizations are still in successful operation today . Anglo-Irish nationalist  Charlotte  Despard  was also deeply engaged in vegetarianism and anti-vivisection in addition to her socialist, feminist, and anti-prison work , as was  prominent  Irish  revolutionary  and feminist Eva Gore-Booth  ( Leneman , 1997).   In fact, a  number of feminist activist s of this era  worked for Irish Independence in addition to  their Nonhuman Animal advocacy (O’Connor, 2010).  These activists understood the connections between speciesism, sexism,  and  colonialism  to be  deeply related systems of oppression, with vegetarianism  acting as a form of resistance. This was particularly salient for Ireland, which, like many other British colonies, was feminized and denigrated as weak and inferior for its plant-based eating, while Britain’s “beef” eating was taken as evidence to  it s strength and superiority  (Adams, 2000; Kellogg, 1923 ) ."
"86" "Modern Irish Advocacy"
"87" "Today,  Ireland also hosts  many  indigenous organizations , and a  number of groups specifically catering to  concerns with ant i-speciesism and veganism h ave emerged  in the new  millennium .  As with other developed nations, th is  social movement space typically sees much larger, professionalized organizations  at tending primarily to dog and cat welfare  or  to  issues facing  popular  free-living animals , while medium-sized organizations with some degree of professionalization focus  more  so up on  food animals,  but also free-living  and other at-risk species.    A number of less organized,  unprofessionalized  grassroots groups also exist, usually with a more radical, vegan-centric focus."
"88" "The Irish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ISPCA) is the largest animal welfare charity on the island. Established in 1949, it now hosts 20 affiliated member societies  across the counties . 20   The ISPCA and other welfare groups in Ireland enjoy state support and can receive large grants to fund operations ( The Irish Times , 1998).  As with large welfare  organizations in the United States and the United Kingdom, the ISPCA has been unclear on its position regarding  th o se  species commonly exploited by industries and elites ( Kiernan, 1999 ). This hesitant stance has created tension with more rights-based organizations.  Likewise, the Irish Wildlife Trust (IWT) is inconsistent in its protection of free-living animals, denouncing “hunting” and badger “culling,” for instance, but condoning killing as an option for deer “management .” 21  Groups such as t he Irish Whale and Dolphin Group (IWDG)  are even further species-specific. The IWDG monitors  regional cetacean communities and was instrumental in achieving sanctuary s tatus for Irish Waters in 1991. 22  C ounty C ork’s Donkey Sanctuary is a popular visitor’s attraction and , as of this writing,  has rescued over 4,000 donk eys since its founding in 1987. 23  N ot all sanctuaries in Ireland are single-issue.  With a more explicitly anti-speciesist framework, Eden Farm Sanctuary cares for a number of nonhuman refugees while also enga ging in public vegan education .   24  In 2015, it launched Ireland’s first large scale public awareness campaign advocating a vegan lifestyle across busses, billboards, and other public spaces (O’Reilly, 2015) ."
"89" "Irish groups with interests beyond harm reduction  tend to be much more political and progressive in agenda .  Formed in 1994, t he Animal Rights Action Network (ARAN) resembles many other established British and American  rights-based  organizations that rely heavily on fundraising and focus on  a number of anti-speciesist single-issue campaigns. 25  ARAN regularly hosts public demonstrations in Dublin on  familiar  issues such as  circuses and  the live export of  Nonhuman A nimals for  slaughter .   Also based in Dublin, the Vegan Society of Ireland (also known as Vegan Ireland) launched in 2009 and, unlike its American and British counterparts, explicitly promotes veganism within an anti-speciesist framework . 26  Formed in 1978, t he  much older  Vegetarian Society of Ireland  (VSI)  is a registered charity that  also  heavily  supports vegan  aims and concerns itself with  ethical issues beyond veganism as a diet such as  Nonhuman Animal welfare  (Hillis, 2012/2013)  (an earlier incarnation, the Irish Vegetarian Society,  was active much earlier in the era of Irish independence) . 27   The Vegetarian Society of Ireland hosts World Vegetarian Day in Dublin  each September."
"90" "There is  a lively grassroots presence in Ireland as well.  A  number of local meetup groups serve for socializing, pot  lucking, or dining out. 28   In addition to Dublin activity, a 201 3  issue of  The Irish Vegetarian  makes mention of vegetarian groups in Clare, Galway,  Kerry,  Kilkenny ,  Northern Ireland , and  Sligo . Cork Vegans  exists  in the southern part of the country, primarily focusing on supporting other vegans in navigating restaurants and accessing specialty vegan products (Slater, 2011).  Active since about 2013, t he  Vegan  I nformation  Project (VIP ) adheres to a more radical approach  of  abolitionist education which  prioritizes  anti-speciesism  and anti-oppression values. 29   It  can be found tabling regularly in downtown Dublin."
"91" "T he National Animal Rights Association (NARA)  (formerly the Irish branch of the Coalition to Abolish the Fur Trade)  was formed in 2005 and  is also Dublin-based,  vegan-centric, and grassroots . 30  While t his group mirrors the activities of the larger, professionalized organizations  in  that it   rel ies  on single-issue campaigning and public demonstrations , it is opposed to reform and draws  on the “direct action” approach to anti-speciesism . This is an approach that tends to  advocate or  otherwise  allow for aggressive or illegal tactics. 31   There is also  ALiberation  in Dublin, which more closely adheres to the direct action approach, though it appea rs to be less active than NARA . 32   Based in County Westmeath, the Irish Council Against Blood Sports  (ICABS)  has been advocating against “hunting,” “coursing,” “fighting,” and some forms of trapping . F ormed in 1966, it once  operated  support groups  in major cities across the  country .  I t relies heavily on petitioning today, though it engaged more direct interference with these speciesist pr actices in the past. 33"
"92" "Anti-Speciesism and the Irish State"
"93" "Anti-speciesism agitation in Ireland is considerably robust, but these efforts have been just as robustly countered.  Ethnographic research in  Irish  movement  ranks  unveils a  belief  that the Irish  protest imagination  i s inherently apathetic or discouraged by state repression (Yates, 20 11).  Others point to research emphasizing the stagnating effect of low cultural modernization in the wake of colonialism ,  or the tenuousness of  Irish  industry  which necessitated  attention paid to survival over progress (Tovey and Share, 2000).  However,  the groundswell response to landlordism, gay marriage, abortion, and water charges  in addition to a  rich history of Irish protest against British imperialism tells another story.  Indeed, Ireland’s oppressive history under British rule may actually have sharpened its concern for social justice ( Baker, 1990 ). For that matter, Ireland’s  traditional culture may not always act as an impediment to social progress . It  can also be employed as a powerful and resonant framework for protecting and respecting nature and its inhabitants."
"94" "Although the Irish  vegan  movement may not exist to the same scale as its British and American counterparts, collective action on behalf of other animals is probably proportionate given Ireland’s limited geographic space and small population. I n any case, i t is enough activity for the Irish state to take some notice.  Similar to collectives  working  in other parts of the West, direct action a ctivist s in Ireland have met with police surveillance, intimidation ,  and arrest (Fitzgerald, 2011) .  P eaceful protestors , too,  are also experiencing  similar  state   management  and interference   (Yates, 2011) .  As in the United States and many parts of Europe,  anti-speciesism   advocacy of any kind is increasin gly considered a terrorist act. Change is happening, however,  as is  evidenced in the ban on  Nonhuman Animal  use  in  Irish  circuses. When a German circus visited Ireland in 2016  with a large number of nonhumans in tow , it  sparked  considerable protest . 34   Nonhuman Animal rights activism (and activism in general)  tends to be negatively covered (if  covered at all )  in mainstream media spaces (Freeman, 2009).   Hence, it is quite telling that  the circus protests  garnered extensive  and positive press coverage ."
"95" "T he resonance of anti-speciesist and vegan claimsmaking has fluctuated based on economic conditions and socio-political circumstances. The Irish reliance on animal flesh in diet and export reflect s  its new relative wealth  in the global system  and  a  determination for self-sufficiency . It also accounts for the state’s interest in repressing anti-speciesism activism.  Yet , Ireland’s   deepening  relationship with other nations and cultures has popularized veganism and plant-based eating to some extent.  In addition to Irish  advocacy efforts and culinary advances  as  previously discussed ,  this consciousness  is also surfacing in the emerging realm of Irish  c ritical  a nimal  s tudies ( Kirkpatrick &  Faragó , 2015; O’Connor, 2010 ).  This field explores how  Ireland’s own heritage has encouraged  relationships  and respect with other animals . Bu t modernity, too, can offer some connections.   U rbanization  may have increased the use of Nonhuman Animals in food and science, but it has also  diminished the popularity of some traditional  institution s of speciesism. The ICABS writes of Ireland in 1996:"
"96" "[ . . . ]  there  is the disappearance of the rural/urban divide. [ . . . ]. No longer do country dwellers live their lives exclusively in their rural environment and it is no longer the case that city dwellers view the countryside as a different (even alien) environment. Country dwellers now have access to entertainment and leisure activities to an extent not possible  a generation ago. \"Country\" pastimes like hare coursing and foxhunting are no longer the only diversions and they are losing support.  (Ramsey & March, 1996)"
"97" "It is also worth noting that Christopher Fettes, founder of the Irish Green Party, is also the founder of the Vegetarian Society of Ireland (and former chairman of the Irish Anti-Vivisection Society).  While its influence is limited in Irish government, the Green Party does include a strong position on Nonhuman Animal welfare in its policy. 35   The Irish state, then, while deeply reliant on speciesist systems, is also  experiencing some important  resistance  to its oppressive economic structures as  made apparent by   transforming values, a changing geography, and the  hard work  of a  diverse  advocacy  community.   Veganism  is creeping into the Irish consciousness."
"98" "Conclusion"
"99" "Ireland is often stereotyped as  inherently incompatible with  veganism . B ut Ireland is an island, not a vacuum.  More than homegrown, Ireland’s culture is also globally grown.  Its  intermingling with various invaders, traders, and immigrants   has  manifested  a culture more diverse in values than is commonly acknowledged. This  transfer r al  of culture and capital has entrenched speciesism, but it has also created awareness to alternatives.  Similar to other developed nations in the West, Ireland has abso rbed concerns about  the healthfulness and  environmental impact  of animal-based consumption . Ireland has a lso played an important role   in  the formation of  the  Nonhuman Animal rights movement,  and  it  continues to participate with its  own indigenous  contributions  to vega n and anti-speciesist activism today.  I reland exhibits a greater anti-speciesism consciousness that is generally  given credit for ."
"100" "Another  concept o ften o bscured from  it s legacy is t he  Irish  intersection of human and nonhuman oppression in Ireland.  While pre-colonial Irish society was certainly reliant on the  oppression of Nonhuman Animals, this oppression would escalate dramatically with the imposition of British rule.  The diet of Ireland’s populace from prehistory until modernization in the 20 th  century  was largely plant-based.  This diet would amplify under colonialism as animal products were shipped to England and  became m uch too expensive for Ireland’s poor. Recall that t he versatility of the potato  would be  responsible for a dramatic increase in the Irish population in the 18 th  and 19 th  centuries , but this reliance also created extreme vulnerability in the context of colonialism .  As one historian describes it:   “The collapse of Ireland’s population along with the potato crops only emphasizes how important a lacto-vegetarian diet was to most Irish people ”  (Cotter, 1996, p.5).  Given this history, it is strange that Ireland’s dietary heritage is today eclipsed by stereotypes of flesh-eating, as the relationship between  plant-based eating and  Ireland’s development is so tightly connected. It is possible that modern Ireland’s carnivorous identity  is not so much an accident as it is a result of  governmen t and  industry campaigning to normalize and encourage speciesist consumption.  The  Irish state is  heavily  vested in speciesism and may reconstruct or obscure any Irish history that is adverse to its economic interests."
"101" "A s with many other human societi es, Ireland’s vegan heritage remains  bound with  that of  its  nonvegan , and it is difficult to  identify an unadulterated  anti-s peciesist ethic in a  world so steeped in oppression and inequality.  Again , Ireland’s “meat” culture today stems from that very oppression. It is a  legacy of British colonization,  one  th at has strengthened  over many years  and economic developments . It  ensured that  millions of  Ireland’s  poor  would  starve or flee while Nonhuman Animals were raised on British-owned Irish land to be  killed and  exported to feed  the privileged . Perhaps, then, it would be accurate to understand Ireland as a “land of meat and potatoes” insofar as  Irish  suffering and resilience will always be bound to the killing of animals  for absentee  elites , the  meager  consolation potatoes would bring, and the  struggle s  of the  vulnerable  in a speciesist, postcolonial society .  The state today has embra ced “meat” and dairy production with ambitious plans of expansion in international markets,  banking on the world’s romantic  fascination with the Irish  rural idyll  despite concerns that  the strategy will  have serious consequences for  human, nonhu man, and environmental  wellbeing .  Indeed, as speciesist agriculture expl odes under  productivist  policies, Nonhuman Animals— both domesticated and free-living —h ave been further oppressed , and   i nequality has dramatically increased among Irish farmers as well (Crowley, 2006)."
"102" "Fortunately,  there are pockets of  anti-speciesist  activism  that  bring renewed attention  to  nonviolent ,  plant-based eating  and alternative economies .  Ireland’s quickly expanding mushroom sector has positioned itself as relevant to increasing inter e st in vegetarianism, while vegan  alternatives  are becoming more and more familiar to Irish grocery stores and restaurants.   The rich variety of Nonhuman Animal welfare and rights organizations a cross the country a lso speaks to another side of Irish identity, one that is less about “meat and potatoes” and more relevant  to contemporary social justice efforts .  VIP spokesperson and sociologist Roger Yates (2013) declares: “Not long ago, people said that Ireland was not ready for veganism. Well, it is now.”"
"103" "Notes"
"104" "Euphemistic or otherizing  language that objectifies Nonhuman Animals is placed in q uotation marks to denote its c ontested nature."
"105" "The term “Nonhuman Animal(s)” is capitalized to denote their status as a distinct  and politically relevant  social group."
"106" "Some species once extinct in  Ireland, such  as re d squirrel s , have been repopulated.  Not all of the  species  listed here  went extinct in ancient Ireland; some  survived into the industrial age."
"107" "Ireland’s famous giant elk  appears to have gone  extinct due to climactic changes before the arrival of humans approximately 9,000 years ago and was not a victim of human oppression ( Barnosky , 1986)."
"108" "Cú   Chulainn  was also fabled to have gained his superhuman status from the killing of a formidable guard dog and then offering to take the place of the lost animal (he is sometimes referred to as the “Hound of Ulster” for this reason). Later in the tale, his demise  is thought a result from  his  “ cannibalistic ”  consumption of d og’s flesh  and  killing of a n otter (known as a “water dog”)  before battle, which apparently weakened him  ( Sjoestedt , 2000) ."
"109" "Wren’s Day is also rooted in Irish pagan heritage with wrens used in augury and mid-winter’s festivals  while also  surfacing in mythology  (Spence, 1999) .  The event  involved the capture of wrens who were paraded door-to-door through villages on sticks before being killed."
"110" "Information on Catholic Concern for Animals can be found online at:  http://catholic-animals.org/  and  http://www.all-creatures.org/ca/ . Additional information on the relationship between Catholicism and anti-speciesism can be found in the CCA’s magazine publication,  The Ark ,  which is  available on CCA’s website."
"111" "The first newsletter of the Vegetarian Society of Ireland in 1978 makes mention of a CCA branch in Ireland. Many Nonhuman Animal rights and welfare organizations of the 1970s and 1980s were democratically operated and locally based in this way  before   eventually  centraliz ing  in the 1980s or 1990s as their wealth and stability was secured (Wrenn, 2016). I was not able to locate any recent mention of branches."
"112" "Salaman   (1985)  notes that the delay of technological advancements in farming had  negative  consequences for domesticated animals. S heep’s hair was plucked by hand, for instance,  and horses pulled ploughs by the tail, a practice the English unsuccessfully sought to eradicate until well into the 19 th  century."
"113" "The Great Famine decimated the poorer classes, who were more likely to marry young and to have large families."
"114" "Although the Quakers often offered vegetarian fare  and seeds for vegetable gardening ,  another important  part of  their  relief  strategy   involved the development of  Ireland’s “fishing” industry  (Hatton, 1993) .  The Quakers also operated soup kitchens, and contemporary reports  of their fare  suggest that “meat” was  thought  an essential ingredient for achieving quality. Apparently, devout Irish Catholics would refuse this  non vegetarian   soup on Fridays, even when facing starvation.  Furthermore, the Quakers were also heavily involved in cereal and corn production  and the Irish disaster may have presented an opportunity for profiteering , which is thought to explain why these particular goods were pushe d so heavily (Wells, 1994)."
"115" "In  her  1835 publication,   Nature’ s o wn  b ook , Nicholson lists rules for her temperance boardinghouse: “No animal food of any kind (including fowl and fish—salt and fresh) should be brought upon the breakfast table; nor should any such food be eaten by any of the boarders for their breakfast”  (p. 15). However, the establishment does not appear to be strictly vegetarian. “Those who eat flesh” are allowed to have a small amount of it at dinner. Nicholson also provides advice written by celebrity reformer Sylvester Graham on the appropriateness of animal flesh which concedes for the consumption of some species.   Eggs  and butter are allowed at breakfast, but in limited  quantities . Of butter, she writes, “Butter, at best, is a questionable article, and should be very sparingly used by the healthy, and not at all  by the diseased” (p.16).  Milk (presumably from animal sources)  is  regularly included in the recipes provided.  Horseback riding is also listed as an option for fulfilling the boardinghouse exercise regimen .  “Horseback riding is very good, if well regulated,” Nicholson advises (p.21 ).  Although a number of plant-based enterprises of the 19 th  century did consider the welfare of other animals as a reason for eschewing Nonhuman Animal products  and labor , Nicholson’s  was not one of them. Her  approach appears to be primarily grounded in concerns for human physical and spiritual health, advocating simplicity  of  diet to reduce the contraction of disease, discourage vice, and increase godliness among adherents."
"116" "Nibert further argues that the institution of domestication itself is at the root of inequality and the suffering of  humans and nonhumans alike. Because  so much of  Ireland’s development has been based in the domestication and exploitation of other animals, there are likely further implications for Irish human/nonhuman relationships to be derived beyond the era of English ascendency  that Nibert identifies .  For instance,  O’Connor (2010)  and Halley (2012)  explore these Irish intersections  from a feminist perspective , noting the entangled experience of women and other animals ."
"117" "The colonizat ion of Ireland not only harmed  humans and nonhumans of the island  to increase  “meat” production for Britain, but this “meat” and dairy industry was also necessary for supporting the British slave trade in the Caribbean  (Ross, 1987)  and the bloody Napoleonic wars (Cowan and Sexton, 1997) ."
"118" "Suspicious dogs were preemptively killed in all manner of gruesome executions, particularly in the hot days of summer when rabies was thought to proliferate. Other dogs underwent painful surgeries of the tongue as a means of lessening their danger to humans should they contract the disease. Dogs were  already  highly vulnerable to human violence as they were  thought a nuisance and blamed for interfering with other speciesist institutions such as “hunting” and Nonhuman Animal agriculture (Griffin, 1994)."
"119" "English propaganda of this time also described the Irish as cannibals  and partakers of blood rituals (Fitzpatrick, 2004). Ancient Greeks and Romans   described Ireland as cannibalistic  as well  (Freeman, 2001)."
"120" "The discovery of equine DNA in imported flesh intended for human consumption has been cited as a source of distrust among Irish cu stomers ( Bord  Bia 2013), as ha ve outbreaks of  foot-and-mouth disease , Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (mad cow disease),  and  dioxin contamination in the   2008 Irish “pork” crisis that resulted in a massive international recall ( Bánáti , 2011 )."
"121" "See justaddmushrooms.com"
"122" "Ireland has historically used seaweed as a fertilizer ( Friel  & Nolan, 1996), which could act as a n ethical and sustainable  replacement for animal manure."
"123" "A brief history of the ISPCA is available on its website:  http://www.ispca.ie/who_we_are/"
"124" "IWT position statements can be found on its website:  http://www.iwt.ie/about-us/iwt-policy"
"125" "IWDG can be found online at  http://www.iwdg.ie"
"126" "The Donkey Sanctuary can be found online at: http://www.thedonkeysanctuary.ie/"
"127" "Eden Farm Sanctuary can be found online at: http://www.edenfarmanimalsanctuary.com/"
"128" "ARAN  maintains a website at:  http://www.aran.ie/ , though its Facebook page is more regularly updated at the time of this writing:   https://www.facebook.com/pages/ARAN-Animal-Rights-Action-Network/155913217835225"
"129" "Vegan Ireland can be found online at:  http://www.vegan.ie/about-us/"
"130" "The Vegetarian Society of Ireland can be found online at: http://www.vegetarian.ie/about/ .  Leneman  (1997) makes mention of the Irish Vegetarian Society when describing the activities and affiliations of early vegetarian suffragettes.  I contacted the Vegetarian Society to inquire of its earlier history and it was not able to verify."
"131" "Some of these meetups are affiliated with or are supported by the larger organizations."
"132" "VIP can be  found online at:  http://veganinformationproject.cf/"
"133" "NARA can be found online at:  http://www.naracampaigns.org/  and https://www.facebook.com/NARAcampaignsIRELAND"
"134" "From  the guidelines posted on the NARA website : “As members of N.A.R.A., we adhere to A.R. strategy and protocol. This includes; being assertive in confrontational situations and acquiring knowledge on demo topics to respond to the public and to maintain the integrity of the group.” The guidelines also emphasize “sticking together” and prioritizing the organization , and the website encourages prisoner support for incarcerated activists . This could be said to reflect the ethos of other direct action organizations  that  often come into conflict with  the police and are plagued with surveillance and snitching (Wrenn, 2016).   Further evidence to its direct action approach is provided in t he group’s Facebook page  which shares  images of protest signs that refer to targets as “scum” or “sick,”  images of  protesters wearing Animal Liberation Front paraphernalia (the  Western movement’s  most notorious direct action organization), and  images of  demonstrations where activists surround private resistances to picket and chant."
"135" "ALiberation  can be found online at:  http://aliberation.vegaplanet.org/"
"136" "ICABS and its archive of newsletters can be found online at:  http://www.banbloodsports.com/"
"137" "See the March 23, 2016 edition of  The Irish Mirror , “Six people arrested after brawl between circus members and animal rights activists in Dublin.” Available here:  http://www.irishmirror.ie/news/irish-news/six-people-arrested-after-brawl-7617274 .  See also the March 18, 2016 episode of  Liveline   with Joe Duffy:  http://www.rte.ie/radio/utils/radioplayer/rteradioweb.html#!rii=b9%5F10547459%5F53%5F18%2D03%2D2016%5F"
"138" "More information on Fettes and the Irish Green Party can be found on the party’s website: www.greenparty.ie"
"139" "Works Cited"
"140" "Adams, C. (2000).  The sexual politics of meat: a feminist vegetarian critical theory . London: Continuum."
"141" "Ahlstrom, D. (2011 , September 8 ). Solving a 2,000-year-old death.  The Irish Times .  Retrieved from:   http://www.irishtimes.com/news/science/solving-a-2-000-year-old-death-1.593646"
"142" "Baker, S. (1990). The  evolution of the Irish  ecol ogy movement. In W.  Rüdig  (Ed.),  Green politics .   Rotterdam: Erasmus University Press."
"143" "Bánáti , D. (2011). Consumer response to food scandals and scares.  Trends in food Science & Technology ,  22  (2-3), 56-60."
"144" "Barrington, B. (2012 , December 9 ). Aldi launches advertising campaign focused on buying Irish.  Business & Leadership .  Retrieved from: http://www.businessandleadership.com/marketing/item/37131-aldi-launches-advertising"
"145" "Barnosky , A. (1986). “Big game” extinction caused by late Pleistocene climactic change: Irish elk ( Megloceros   giganteus ) in Ireland.  Quaternary Research , 25 (1), 128-135."
"146" "BBC Alba. (2016). Banished women. Retrieved from:  http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07b367s"
"147" "Bergholm , A. (2005). Academic and  neopagan  interpretations of shamanism in  Buile   Suibhne : a comparative approach.  Studia   Celtica   Fennica ,  2 , 30-46."
"148" "Bord   Bia . (2015).  Export performance & prospects 2014-2015 .    Dublin: Irish Food Board."
"149" "Bord   Bia . (2013).  Retaining loyalty to Irish brands . Dublin: Irish Food Board."
"150" "Breathnach , P. (2000). The evolution of the spatial structure of the Irish dairy processing industry.  Irish Geography ,  33  (2), 166-184."
"151" "Burke-Kennedy, E. (2015 , July 3 ). Analysis:  agri -food roadmap fails to assess environmental impact.  The Irish Times .  Business. Retrieved from: http://www.irishtimes.com/business/agribusiness-and-food/analysis-agri-food-roadmap-fails-to-assess-environmental-impact-1.2271717"
"152" "Caulfield, S. (2013).  Ceide  fields: Europe’s oldest surviving dairy fields? In M.  Jebb  and C. Crowley (Eds.),  Secrets of the Irish landscape  (pp. 95-100). Cork: Atrium."
"153" "Casey, C. & F. Ryan. (2015 , April 1 ). The Book of  Kells : ‘The most purely Irish thing we have’ – James Joyce.  The Irish Times . Retrieved from: http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/the-book-of-kells-the-most-purely-irish-thing-we-have-james-joyce-1.2159952"
"154" "Central Statistics Office. (2012).  Meat supply balance 2011 . Dublin: Central Statistics Office."
"155" "Central Statistics Office (2015).  Livestock survey December . Retrieved from: http://cso.ie/en/releasesandpublications/er/lsd/livestocksurveydecember2014"
"156" "Chozick , A. (2013, March 15). Boom over, St. Patrick’s isle is slithering again.  The New York Times . Retrieved from:  http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/16/world/europe/boom-over-st-patricks-isle-is-slithering-again.html?_r=0"
"157" "Clarkson, L. & E. Crawford. (2001).  Feast and famine: a history of food and nutrition in Ireland 1500-1920 . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"158" "Collins, L. (2015). ‘Our  sep’rate  natures are the same’: reading blood sports in Irish poetry of the Long Eighteenth Century. In K. Kirkpatrick & B.  Faragó  (Eds.),  Animals in Irish literature and culture  (pp.1-12). London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"159" "Connolly, M. (2011, November 11).  The story of Ireland:  the age of conquest  [Television broadcast]. London: British Broadcasting Corporation."
"160" "Coogan , T. (2013).  The famine plot: England’s role in Ireland’s greatest tragedy . London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"161" "Cotter, P. (1996).  Irish vegetarian cookery . Cork: Killeen Books."
"162" "Cowan, C. and R. Sexton. (1997).  Ireland’s traditional foods: an exploration of Irish local and typical foods and drinks . Dublin:  Teagasc ,  The  National Food Centre."
"163" "Cró n í n , D. (1995).  Early medieval Ireland, 400-1200 . New York: Routledge."
"164" "Crowley, E. (2006).  Land matters: power struggles in rural Ireland . Dublin: The Lilliput Press."
"165" "Cullen, P. (2010, September 28). Love Irish Food campaign hailed.  The Irish Times . Retrieved from: http://www.irishtimes.com/news/love-irish-food-campaign-hailed-1.864728"
"166" "Curtis, L. (1997).  Angels and apes: the Irishman in Victorian caricature . DC: Smithsonian Institution Press."
"167" "D’Arcy, C. (2015 , July 20 ). Nearly 225,000 animals used for scientific tests in 2014.  The Irish Times . Retrieved from: http://www.irishtimes.com/news/science/nearly-225-000-animals-used-for-scientific-tests-in-2014-1.2290257"
"168" "Davies, A., A.  Titterington ,  &  C. Cochrane. (1995). Who buys organic food ?:   a  profile of the purchasers of organic food in Northern Ireland.  British Food Journal, 97  (10), 17-23."
"169" "Deckha , M. (2013). Welfarist  and  imperial: the contributions of anticruelty laws to civilizational discourse.     American Quarterly ,  65  (3), 515-548."
"170" "Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine. (2015).  Local roots, global reach: Food Wise 2025: a 10-year vision for the Irish  agri -food industry . Retrieved from: http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/media/migration/agri-foodindustry/foodwise2025/report/FoodWise2025.pdf"
"171" "Donnelly, J. (1971). Cork market: its role in the nineteenth century Irish butter trade.  Studia  Hibernica ,  11 , 130-163."
"172" "Earwood, C. (1997). Bog butter: a two thousand year history.  The Journal of Irish Archaeology ,  8 , 25-42."
"173" "Fitzgerald, J. (2011).  Bad  hare  days: one man’s fight against a cruel blood sport .  Kilkenny : Callan Press."
"174" "Fitzpatrick, J. (2004). Food and foreignness in Sir Thomas More.  Early Theatre ,  7  (2), 33-47."
"175" "Food and Drink Industry Ireland. (2015).  Meat industry overview . Retrieved from:  http://www.fdii.ie/meat"
"176" "Freeman, C. (2009). This little piggy went to press: the American news media’s construction of animals in agriculture.  The Communication Review ,  12  (1), 78-103."
"177" "Freeman, P. (2001).  Ireland and the classical world . Austin: University of Texas Press."
"178" "Friel , S.  &  G. Nolan. (1996).  Changes in the food chain since the time of the Great Irish Famine . Galway: National Nutrition Surveillance Centre."
"179" "Gibbons, J. (2016 , April 9 ). Meat is madness: why it leads to global warming and obesity.  The Irish Times .  Retrived  from:  http://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/food-and-drink/meat-is-madness-why-it-leads-to-global-warming-and-obesity-1.2602027"
"180" "Guardian, G. (2013 , March 3 ). Good news for local suppliers and farmers as Aldi continues to grow.  I rish I ndependent . Retrieved from: http://www.independent.ie/regionals/goreyguardian/news/good-news-for-local-suppliers-and-farmers-as-aldi-continues-to-grow-29124164.html"
"181" "Green, M. (1992).  Animals in Celtic life and myth . New York: NY: Routledge."
"182" "Griffin, B. (1994). ‘Mad dogs and Irishmen’: dogs and rabies in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.  Ulster  Folklife ,  40 , 1-15."
"183" "Grogan, E., G.  Eogan , J. Rees, V. Butler, & J. Henderson. (1987). Lough Gur excavations by  Seán  P. Ó  Ríordáin : further Neolithic and Beaker habitations on  Knockadoon .  Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy. Section C: Archaeology, Celtic Studies, History, Linguistics, Literature ,  87  (C), 299-506."
"184" "Halley, J. (2012).  The parallel lives of women and cows: meat markets . London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"185" "Harte, L. (1997).  C reeping privatization of Irish c o-operatives: a transaction cost explanation.  In J. Nilsson & G. van  Dijk  (Eds.),  Strategies and structures in the agro-food industries  (pp.32-54).  Assen : Van  Gorcum  & Comp."
"186" "Hatton, H. (1993).  The largest amount of good: Quaker relief in Ireland, 1654-1921 . Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press."
"187" "Heffernan, P. (2014). The Galway statement on the establishment of a Trans-Atlantic ocean research alliance.  In E.  Svensson  & L. Pendleton (Eds.),  Transitioning to a new blue economy: proceedings of the December 2013 economics of the ocean summit  (pp.  36-38 ) .  Durham, NC: Duke University."
"188" "Henchion , M. & B. McIntyre. (2000). Regional imagery and quality products: the Irish experience.  British Food Journal ,  102  (8), 630-644."
"189" "Hickey, K. (2015 , July 17 ). The history of Irish cuisine – over 8,000 years old and hardly any potatoes.  Irish   Central . Retrieved from: http://www.irishcentral.com/culture/food-drink/The-history-of-Irish-cuisine---over-8000-years-old-and-hardly-any-potatoes.html"
"190" "Hillis, G. (2012/2013 ,  Winter ). A trip down memory lane.  The Irish Vegetarian, 137 ,  6."
"191" "Hogan, T. (2012 , June 26 ). Native animals ‘at risk of extinction’ as pollution and over-fishing take toll.   New Irish News . Retrieved from: http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/native-animals-at-risk-of-extinction-as-pollution-and-overfishing-take-toll-26868955.html"
"192" "Irish Nutrition and Dietetic Institute. (2004).  A guide to vegetarian eating . Retrieved from: http://www.irishhealth.com/clin/documents/vegetarian.pdf"
"193" "Kaufman, R. (2014).  Kaufman green guide: Dublin . Self-published."
"194" "Kellogg, J. (1923).  The natural diet of man . Battle Creek: Modern Medical Publishing Company."
"195" "Kiely, M. (2001). Summary  r eport.  North/South Ireland  f ood  c onsumption  s urvey . Dublin:  Food Safety Promotion Board ."
"196" "Kiernan, P. (1999 , Spring/Summer ). ISPCA branch may face dis-affiliation over blood sports stance.  Animal Watch ,  11 ."
"197" "Kinealy , C. (2001).  The Great Irish Famine: impact, ideology and rebellion . London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"198" "King, C. & L. Kennedy. (1994). Irish co-operatives: from creameries at the crossroads to multinationals.  History Ireland ,  4  (2)."
"199" "Kinmonth , C. (2006).  Irish rural interiors art . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press."
"200" "Kirkpatrick, K. & B.  Faragó  (2015).  Animals  in Irish literature and culture . London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"201" "Keery , A. (2014 , July 17 ). Becoming vegetarian is increasingly popular.  The Irish Catholic . Retrieved from:  http://www.irishcatholic.ie/article/becoming-vegetarian-increasingly-popular"
"202" "Kraut, A. (1994).  Silent travelers: germs, genes, and the ‘immigrant menace.’  Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press."
"203" "Laurence, A. (1988). The cradle to the grave: English observation of Irish social customs in the seventeenth century.  The Seventeenth Century ,  3  (1), 63-84."
"204" "Layte , R., J. Harrington, E. Sexton, I. Perry, J. Cullinan,  &  S. Lyons. (2011). Irish exceptionalism?  Local   food   environments   and   dietary   quality . Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health ,  65 ,  881-888."
"205" "Leahy, E., S. Lyons,  &  R.  Tol . (2010).  National  d eterminants of  v egetarianism . Working paper. Dublin: Economic and Social Research Institute."
"206" "Leneman , L. (1997). The awakened instinct: vegetarianism and the women’s suffrage movement in Britain.  Women’s History Review ,  6  (2), 271-287."
"207" "Lobell, J. & S. Patel. (2010 , May/June ).  Clonycavan  and Old  Croghan  men .  Archaeology ,  63  (3). Retrieved from: http://archive.archaeology.org/1005/bogbodies/clonycavan_croghan.html"
"208" "Love Irish Food. (2014).  About  us . Retrieved from: http://www.loveirishfood.ie/about-us/"
"209" "Lucas, A. (1960). Irish food before the potato.  Folk Life ,  3  (2), 8-43."
"210" "Mac  Coitir , N. (2010).  Ireland’s animals: myths, legends & folk l ore .  Cork:  Collins Press."
"211" "Mac  Coitir , N. (2006).  Irish wild plants: myths, legends & folklore . Cork: Collins Press."
"212" "MacConnell , C. (2016, March 10). Everything you know about the St. Patrick’s Day shamrock is a lie.  Irish Central . Retrieved from:  http://www.irishcentral.com/opinion/others/truths-about-the-shamrock-for-st-patricks-day-everything-you-think-you-know-about-the-symbol-of-irishness-is-a-lie-198438781-238173881.html"
"213" "Mahon, D. & C. Cowan. (2004). Irish consumers’  perception of food safety risk in minced beef.  British Food Journal ,  106  (4), 301-312."
"214" "McCall, B. (2015, February 2). Strong growth continues for mushroom industry.  The Irish Times . Retrieved from:  http://www.irishtimes.com/sponsored/strong-growth-continues-for-mushroom-industry-1.2085451"
"215" "McDonagh , P.  &  P.  Commins . (1999). Food chains, small-scale food enterprises and rural development: illustrations from Ireland.  International Planning Studies, 4  (3), 349-371."
"216" "Monk, M. (2013). The first farmers: who they were and how they lived. In M.  Jebb  and C. Crowley (Eds.),  Secrets of the Irish landscape  (pp. 103-111). Cork: Atrium."
"217" "Montgomery, I., M. Lundy, and N. Reid. (2012). ‘ Invasional  meltdown’: evidence for unexpected consequences and cumulative impacts of multispecies invasions.  Biological Invasions ,  14  (6), 1111-1125."
"218" "Morris, H. (1939). St. Martin’s Eve.  Folklore of Ireland Society ,  9  (2), 230-235."
"219" "Murphy, D. (2015 , June 2 ). The vegans are coming.  Dublin Inquirer .  Retrieved from: http://dublininquirer.com/2015/06/02/the-vegans-are-coming/"
"220" "Murphy, M. (2015).  Compassionate stranger:  Asenath  Nicholson and the Great Irish Famine . Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press."
"221" "Mushroom Bureau. (n.d.).  Healthy eating with mushrooms  [Resource guide/Campaign material]. Justaddmushrooms.com."
"222" "Mussetter , S. (1977). An animal miniature on the monogram page of  The  book of  Kells .  Mediaevalia ,  3 , 119-130."
"223" "Nibert, D. (2013).  Animal oppression & human violence:  domesecration , capitalism, and global conflict . New York: Columbia University Press."
"224" "Nicholson, A. (1835).  Nature’s own book . 2 nd   ed . New York, NY: Wilbur & Whipple Printers."
"225" "Newman, R. (2011).  Brian  Boru : King of Ireland . Cork: Mercier Press."
"226" "Noonan, K. (1998). ‘The  cruell  pressure of an enraged, barbarous people’: Irish and English identity in Seventeenth-century policy and propaganda.  The Historical Journal ,  41  (1),  1 51-177."
"227" "O’Brien, C. (2011 ,  Autumn ). Vegetarians in the UK and Ireland.  The Irish Vegetarian, 133 ,  7."
"228" "O’Connor, M. (2010).  The female and the species: the animal in Irish women’s writing . Bern: Peter Lang AG, International Academic Publishers."
"229" "O’Donovan, P. & M. McCarthy. (2002). Irish consumer preference for organic meat.  British Food Journal ,  104  (3/4/5), 353-370."
"230" "O’Kelly, M. (2001).  Early Ireland: an introduction to Irish prehistory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"231" "O’Malley, P. (1990).  Biting at the grave: the Irish hunger strikes and the politics of despair . Boston: Beacon Press Books."
"232" "O’Reilly, S. (2015, November 30). World vegan month in full swing.  The College Tribune . Retrieved from:  http://collegetribune.ie/world-vegan-month-in-full-swing/"
"233" "Ó  Ríordáin , S.  & M.  MacDermott . (1949). Lough Gur excavations.  The Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland ,  79  (1/2), 126-145."
"234" "O’Toole, L. & O’Flaherty. (2011). Out of sight, out of mind? On the trail of the forgotten Irish bird.  Archaeology Ireland ,  25  (1), 13-16."
"235" "Owen, J. (2014). Did St. Patrick really drive snakes out of Ireland?  The National Geographic . Retrieved from:  http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/03/140315-saint-patricks-day-2014-snakes-ireland-nation/"
"236" "Pemberton, N. & M.  Worboys . (2007).  Mad  dogs and Englishmen: rabies in Britain, 1830-2000 . London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"237" "Phelps, N. (2007).  The longest struggle: Animal advocacy from Pythagoras to PETA . New York, NY: Lantern Books."
"238" "Pichler , R.  &   G. Blackwell . (2007). How  m any  v eggies  … ?   European Vegetarian Union . Retrieved from: http://www.euroveg.eu/lang/en/info/howmany.php"
"239" "Poloczek , K. (2015). ‘Their disembodied voices cry’: marine animals and their songs of absence in the poetry of  Sinéad  Morrissey,  Caitríona  O’Reilly, and Mary  O’Donoghue . In K. Kirkpatrick & B.  Faragó  (Eds.),  Animals in Irish literature and culture  (pp.75-91). London: Palgrave Macmillan."
"240" "Public Record Office of Northern Ireland. (n.d.).  The Great Irish Famine . Belfast: Public Record Office of Northern Ireland."
"241" "Pure Adventures Ireland. (2013 , June 17 ). A vegan’s survival guide to travelling in Ireland.  The Huffington Post . Retrieved from: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/pure-adventures-travel/a-vegans-survival-guide-t_b_3455243.html"
"242" "Ramsey, A. & G. March. (1996 , Summer ). Chairman’s address.  Animal Watch ,  1 ."
"243" "Retail News (2011b , July/August ).  EUROSPAR: the super easy supermarket.  Retail News , 38-39."
"244" "Ross, E. (1987). An overview of trends in dietary variation from hunter-gatherer to modern capitalist societies. In M. Harris & E. Ross (Eds.),  Food and evolution: toward a theory of human food habits  (pp. 7-56). Philadelphia: Temple University Press."
"245" "Sailer , S. (1998).  Suibne   Geilt : puzzles, problems, and paradoxes.  The  Candian  Journal of Irish Studies ,  24  (1), 115-131."
"246" "Salaman , R. (1985).  The history and social influence of the potato . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"247" "Sage, C. (2003). Social embeddedness and relations of regard: alternative ‘good food’ networks in south-west Ireland.  Journal of Rural Studies, 19 , 47-60."
"248" "Shurtleff, W. and A. Aoyagi. 2015.  History of soybeans and  soyfoods  in the United Kingdom and Ireland (1613-2015): extensively annotated bibliography and sourcebook . Lafayette, CA:  Soyinfo  Center."
"249" "Sexton, R. (1995). ‘I’d ate it like chocolate! ’:  the disappearing offal food traditions of Cork City. In H. Walker (Ed.),  Disappearing foods: studies in foods and dishes at risk. Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 1994  (pp. 172-188). Devon: Prospect Books."
"250" "Sexton, R. (1998).  A little history of Irish food . Dublin: Gill and Macmillan Ltd."
"251" "Sexton, R. (2002). Food and drink at Irish weddings and wakes. In L. Mason (Ed.),  Food and the rites of passage: Leeds symposium on food history  (pp. 115-142). Devon: Prospect Books."
"252" "Sexton, R. (2013). Plant foods in Ireland before AD 1500. In M.  Jebb  and C. Crowley (Eds.),  Secrets of the Irish landscape  (pp. 155-163). Cork: Atrium."
"253" "Simoons , F. (1994).  Eat not this flesh: food avoidances from prehistory to the present . Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press."
"254" "Sjoestedt , M. (2000).  Celtic Gods and Heroes . Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, Inc."
"255" "Slater, B. (2011 ,  Autumn ). New  l ocal  m eetup  g roup:  t he Cork Vegans.  The Irish Vegetarian, 133 , 20."
"256" "Speedy, A. (2003). Global production and consumption of animal source foods.  The Journal of Nutrition, 133  (11), 4048S-4053S."
"257" "Spence, L. (1999).  The magic arts in Celtic Britain . Mineola, NY: Dover Publication, Inc."
"258" "Stack, L. (2015, November 4). Guinness is going vegan.  The New York Times . Retrieved from:  http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/05/business/guinness-is-going-vegan.html"
"259" "Teagasc  Mushroom Stakeholder Consultative Group. (2013).  Mushroom Sector Development Plan to 2020 .  Carlow : Agriculture and Food Development Authority."
"260" "The Irish Times. (1998 , December 23 ). Grants awarded to animal groups.  The Irish Times .  Retrieved from:  http://www.irishtimes.com/news/grants-awarded-to-animal-groups-1.228295"
"261" "Tovey, H. (2006). New movement sin old places? The alternative food movement in rural Ireland. In L. Connolly and N. Hourigan (Eds.),  Social  m ovements and Ireland  (168-189). New York: Manchester University Press."
"262" "Tovey, H. (1997). Food, environmentalism and rural sociology: on the organic farming movement in Ireland.  Sociologia   Ruralis ,  37  (1), 21-37."
"263" "Tovey, H. (1991). “Of cabbages and kings”: restructuring in the Irish food industry.  The Economic and Social Review ,  22  (4), 333-350."
"264" "Tovey, H. and P. Share. (2000).  A sociology of Ireland . Dublin: Gill & Macmillan Ltd."
"265" "van   Wijngaarden -Bakker, L. (1974). The animal remains from the Beaker settlement at  Newgrange , Co.  Meath :  first report.  Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy. Section C: Archaeology, Celtic Studies, History, Linguistics, Literature ,  74 , 313-383."
"266" "Vegetarian Society of Ireland. (1978 , October/November ).  Irish Vegetarian News ,  1 . Dublin: Vegetarian Society of Ireland."
"267" "Walsh, J. (2016, February 16).   Cork wealthy dined on “turtle soup and champagne” during Ireland’s Great Hunger .  Irish Central . Retrieved from:   http://www.irishcentral.com/roots/history/Cork-dined-on-turtle-soup-and-champagne-during-Irelands-Great-Hunger.html"
"268" "Wiley, A. (2011).  Re-imagining milk: cultural and biological perspectives . New York: Routledge."
"269" "Chaomhánach , E. (2002).  The lore of the bee, its keeper and produce in Irish and other folk traditions . Dublin: University College Dublin."
"270" "Wells, R. (1994 , April ). Review:  The largest amount of good: Quaker relief in Ireland, 1654-1921 .  Canadian Journal of History ,  29 , 208-211."
"271" "Wrenn, C. (2013). Nonhuman Animal rights, alternative food systems, and the non-profit industrial complex.  Phaenex ,  8  (2), 209-242."
"272" "Wrenn, C. (2016).  Professionalization, factionalism, and social movement success:  A case study on Nonhuman Animal rights mobilization .  Dissertation. Forthcoming."
"273" "Yalden , D. (1999).  The history of British mammals . London: Academic Press."
"274" "Yates, R. (2011). Criminalizing protests about animal abuse. Recent Irish experience in global context.   Crime, Law and Social Change ,  55 , 469-482."
"275" "Yates, R. (2013 , April 5 ). Veganism is the new black: the growth of the vegan movement in Ireland.  Indymedia Ireland .  Retrieved from:  http://www.indymedia.ie/article/103502"
"276" "Yates, R. (2015, November 11). Tim  Barford’s   VegFestUK  helping to bring the vegan animal rights grassroots together and to the fore.  On Human Relations with Other Sentient Beings . Retrieved from :  http://onhumanrelationswithothersentientbeings.weebly.com/the-blog/tim-barfords-vegfestuk-helping-to-bring-the-vegan-animal-rights-grassroots-together-and-to-the-fore"
