A New Era in the Study of Global
History is Born but it Needs to Be
Nurtured
Please note: This is a preprint of a manuscript that has been accepted for publication in
the Journal of Cognitive Historiography. The final published version may contain small
differences such as formatting and copy editing. Please direct correspondence to
harvey.whitehouse@anthro.ox.ac.uk.
Recommended citation: Whitehouse, H., François, P., Savage, P. E., Currie, T. E.,
Feeney, K. C., Cioni, E., … Turchin, P. (In press). A new era in the study of global history
is born but it needs to be nurtured. Journal of Cognitive Historiography. doi:
10.1558/jch.39422

Harvey Whitehouse
University of Oxford
Email: harvey.whitehouse@anthro.ox.ac.uk
Pieter François
University of Oxford
Email: pieter.francois@stb.ox.ac.uk
Patrick Savage
Keio University
Email: psavage@sfc.keio.ac.jp
Thomas E. Currie
University of Exeter
Email: T.Currie@exeter.ac.uk
Kevin C. Feeney
Data Chemist
Email: kevin@datachemist.com
Enrico Cioni
Seshat project
Email: enrico.a.cioni@gmail.com
Rosalind Purcell
Seshat project
Email: rosalindpurcell@gmail.com
Robert M. Ross

1

Macquarie University
Email: robross46@gmail.com
Jennifer Larson
Kent State University
Email: jlarson@kent.edu
John Baines
University of Oxford
Email: john.baines@orinst.ox.ac.uk
Barend ter Haar
University of Hamburg
Email: barend.ter.haar@uni-hamburg.de
Alan Covey
University of Texas
Email: r.alan.covey@austin.utexas.edu
Peter Turchin
University of Connecticut
Email: peter.turchin@uconn.edu

Abstract
In this issue, Slingerland et al. criticize the quality of the data from Seshat: Global
History Databank utilized in our Nature paper entitled “Complex Societies Precede
Moralizing Gods throughout World History”. Their critique centres around the
roles played by research assistants and experts in procuring and curating data,
periodization structure, and so-called ‘data pasting’ and ‘data filling’. We show
that these criticisms are based on misunderstandings or misrepresentations of the
methods used by Seshat researchers. Overall, their critique does not call
into question any of our main findings, but it does highlight various shortcomings
of Slingerland et al.’s rival database project. Our collective efforts to code and
quantify features of global history hold out the promise of a new era in the study
of global history but only if critique can be conducted in good faith, rivalries kept
in check, and both promises and pitfalls of open science fully recognized.

Keywords
Religion, evolution, social complexity, global history databank, open science.

Introduction
In this issue of the Journal of Cognitive Historiography, Slingerland et al. (2019)
criticize the methodology in our recent paper in Nature (Whitehouse et al. 2019),
hereafter the ‘moralizing gods paper’, based on our analysis of Seshat: Global
History Databank (for an introduction, see Turchin et al. 2019, in this issue).
Although framed as a critique of the moralizing gods paper, none of the
2

arguments presented by Slingerland et al. would significantly alter the main
findings of that paper (see also Savage et al., Under review). Anyone coming to
their critique hoping to learn more about whether moralizing gods appeared
before or after the sharpest rises in social complexity, might be disappointed.
Slingerland et al.’s criticisms focus on issues of data quality, arguing that almost
70% of Seshat data represent ‘coding errors’. They attempt to detail issues that
they claim underlie such coding errors including the role of research assistants,
periodization structure, and so-called “data pasting”, “data filling”, and alleged
failure to freeze the datasets used in publications. We have shown elsewhere
(Savage et al. Under review) that the statistical analysis leading to their claim of
70% coding errors is invalid and instead measures limitations of their own rival
project, the Database of Religious History (DRH; Slingerland and Sullivan 2017),
more than it measures Seshat coding errors. Here we will show that their
qualitative criticisms also reflect misunderstandings by Slingerland et al. and/or
limitations of the DRH. More worryingly still, Slingerland et al. make serious
allegations of research malpractice that are demonstrably false. Although we
fully support open science and are pleased that the debate has been carried out
using some of its principles, we argue that abuse of the affordances of open
science could endanger the future of newly emerging and fragile fields, to the
detriment of all.

Data that Disagree
Slingerland et al.’s central argument is that the quality of Seshat’s data is poor.
The main evidence they cite for this is in their Table 1, where they claim to find
almost 70% disagreement between codings of key ritual and religion variables in
Seshat and the DRH. As we argue elsewhere, this analysis is invalid because it
explicitly assumes that where data coded in Seshat fails to agree with data coded
in the DRH, the data in Seshat constitute ‘coding errors’, but in fact there is so
much disagreement and missing data within the DRH itself that this method
guarantees high levels of Seshat “coding errors” regardless of whether or not
Seshat data is correct. For example, Slingerland et al.’s method compares
Seshat’s coding of supernatural enforcement of fairness in Wei Dynasty China
against five different DRH entries, but these five different entries give three
different answers (two present, two absent, and one unknown). Thus, whatever
coding Seshat gives is guaranteed to be measured as at least 60% “Seshat coding
errors”, simply because that is the level of internal disagreement within the five
different DRH entries for this variable. Slingerland et al.’s analysis is further
invalidated by inappropriate comparison of different time periods, inappropriate
treatment of missing DRH data as Seshat coding errors, and basic arithmetic
errors (see Savage et al., Under review for details).
The qualitative criticisms presented by Slingerland et al. are similarly invalid. For
example, their claim that “the first instance of a “moralizing” god in the Seshat
dataset for Susiana does not occur until the Achaemenid period, almost two
thousand years later” is wrong: Figure 1, Extended Data Table 1, and Table S2 of
our original paper show that the first attestation of moralizing gods in Susiana as
3

being in the Akkadian Empire ca. 2200BCE, where Slingerland et al. agree it
should be.
Another misrepresentation is found in Slingerland et al.’s criticism of “such
absurdities as using an observation about Late Shang (1800 BCE) [sic] ritual
practice to code the ‘ritual frequency’ variable for every polity from the Western
Zhou (1122 BCE) to the Ming (1643 CE)”. We do nothing of the sort. Ritual
frequency is coded in Seshat as daily in the Late Shang (1250-1045BCE [not
1800BCE]), seasonally in Western Zhou, and monthly in the Ming, each
supported by one or more different references (Keay 2009 and Thorp 2006 for
Late Shang, Hsu and Linduff 1988 for W. Zhou, and Zhu 1991 for Ming). Even had
this criticism been legitimate, it would have been entirely irrelevant to our main
finding that complex societies precede moralizing gods.
The goals of Seshat and the DRH are not identical and failure to realize this might
account for some of Slingerland et al.’s misunderstandings. Seshat seeks to
gather and store vast amounts of data on world history in a way that allows
people to access, review, and comment on coding decisions. This allows data to
be discussed and improved prior to scientific analysis and publication, a process
requiring rigorous quality checks with expert input on particular variables (such
as those in Table S2 of the moralizing gods paper). By contrast, the DRH seeks to
ensure that all the data it contains, whether being used for statistical analysis or
not, have been subjected to exactly the same quality control checks. One
possible reason for this is that the DRH is intended to serve as a resource for
undergraduate teaching (Slingerland and Sullivan, 2017; Slingerland et al., 2019).
Much of the Slingerland et al. critique stems from the assumption that the DRH
approach is superior when it is simply a product of different goals. The key point
to emphasise is that key data relevant to findings reported in Seshat publications
are subjected to stringent quality checks as described in our methods sections.

Seshat vs. DRH: Appearance of moralizing gods after
China’s Shang-Western Zhou transition
In an effort to understand how Slingerland et al. arrived at putative ‘coding
errors’, it is illuminating to consider a more detailed example: the first evidence
of moralizing gods in Middle Yellow River Valley China. Slingerland et al. claim
that our coding of this in Western Zhou (ca. 1000BCE) rather than a century
earlier in Late Shang China is a crucial error, and that correcting it “would
seriously undermine Whitehouse et al.’s conclusion”. This is not true: Savage et
al. (Under review) show that reanalysis using Slingerland et al.’s preferred date
has no qualitative effect on our conclusions. Nevertheless, this is a good example
of a putative “coding error” that reflects limitations of the DRH, not of Seshat.
The data coded in Seshat and analyzed in our Nature paper suggest that
moralizing gods appear in North China during the Western Zhou period (ca.1040–
771 BCE). The first truly large-scale societies in North China appeared at least a
millennium earlier (Liu and Chen 2012). During the Erligang periods (1650–1250
BCE) the population of the Early Shang polity was at least 1 million, and probably
4

more (Liu and Chen 2012, Wang 2014). The Shang city at Zhengzhou was huge,
sprawling over 2500 hectares (Bagley 1999) with a population numbering in the
hundreds of thousands. In other words, the North China sequence – first largescale societies, then moralizing gods – supports the general conclusions of the
moralizing gods paper.
Because records became abundant during the Late Shang (1250–1040 BCE), we
can document such a transition in the case of China. Di (帝), the High God of the
Shang, was the god of rain, snow, hail, wind, thunder, and disasters (Keightley
2000: 97). Di could summon natural phenomena to, for example, ruin harvests,
but also could support or ruin political and military endeavours (Eno 2009: 71).
The Shang king acted as an intermediary to appease Di through the correct ritual
sacrifices. There is no evidence in the oracle bone records for Di as a moralizing
force (Eno 2009: 100). The Mandate of Heaven (Tian, 天) became a central
concept in the Western Zhou, making a significant change in the Chinese
religious landscape. The first mention of the Mandate of Heaven is in a 998 BCE
Western Zhou inscription in which King Kang claims that the Shang had lost the
Mandate because of poor behaviour like drunkenness and overall bad
governance (Eno 2009: 101; Li 2013: 144). It seems that Tian took on the role of
ethical guardian, punishing rulers according to moral standards and the quality of
their stewardship of the state (Eno 2009: 101).
Given that the first signs of a moralizing high god appear only during the Western
Zhou period, why did the DRH experts code it differently? Consider the DRH data
for “Chinese State Religion (Shang and Western Zhou)”. For China, 1750–850
BCE, the DRH asks whether there was supernatural monitoring of prosocial norm
adherence. The answer provided by their expert coder is “yes.” It would be
interesting to know what their expert thinks about the Shang–Zhou transition,
but all we are given is a “yes”. The period encompasses four distinct eras that
Seshat codes as such: (1) the last century of Erlitou, (2) Erligang (Early Shang), (3)
Late Shang, and (4) Western Zhou. For the first two periods there are no written
records and, therefore, it is not clear on what basis “supernatural monitoring of
prosocial norm adherence” is coded as present. This surprising coding – one
could use Slingerland et al.’s term and refer to it as a “coding error” – highlights a
serious limitation of the DRH. In the end, however, it seems that what appears to
be disagreement is actually agreement that moralizing gods were present in the
Western Zhou dynasty, but the DRH’s 900-year time window puzzlingly
extrapolates this presence back to the Shang period and beyond.

The Role of Research Assistants
Slingerland et al. repeatedly refer to the Seshat methodology as “Research
Assistant (RA)-sourced data.” This is a misrepresentation of the data collection
process on our project. For a more detailed description of the approach, see the
accompanying introduction to Seshat by Turchin et al. Briefly, data collection in
Seshat is accomplished as a collaboration between long-term trained RAs, expert
historians/archaeologists who possess specialized knowledge about past
societies, and social scientists who have deep knowledge about the scientific
5

theories that are to be tested with the Seshat data and analytic methods with
which data will eventually be analyzed. Our experience over the past eight years
has convinced us that only a truly collaborative effort can result in sufficient
quantity and quality of data.
We agree with Slingerland et al. that expert historians and archaeologists are key
to data collection. But they, by themselves, are not enough. Our initial trials
showed that one cannot expect academic experts on past societies to have the
time to answer hundreds of questions in detail. Coding data in Seshat is not a
simple matter of answering ‘yes’ or ‘no’. Seshat strives for nuance allowing for
interpretive diversity and envisaging the data as dynamic rather than fixed. A
Seshat record has a complex structure, in which the code can be associated with
various qualifiers that can indicate uncertainty and/or disagreement between
sources. Most records include a narrative paragraph explaining the logic for
selecting a particular code, accompanied by one or more references. Coding
even one Seshat record is a significant amount of work and relying on university
faculty to code hundreds of records is simply unrealistic. Fortunately, it is not
necessary to do so, because, depending on the variable to be coded, most data
can be coded by highly trained RAs using published sources (which are typically
suggested by the experts). The rest of the data are coded by specific targeted
questions to experts via in-person workshops (Levine et al. 2017), video
conferencing sessions, and emails, which explain the various choices and ask for
their feedback. This process takes time.
Contrary to what Slingerland et al. imply, Seshat RAs do not work in isolation.
Their work is supervised by social scientists associated with the Seshat project,
including the Directors, Editors for various regions or kinds of variables, and
postdoctoral researchers (http://seshatdatabank.info/seshat-about-us/seshatwho-we-are/). This team-based approach has significant advantages over the
DRH’s reliance on regional experts coding independently. Most professional
archaeologists and historians, while deeply knowledgeable about their societies,
are not steeped in the relevant social science theories that inform why (and how)
we need to code a particular variable.

“Data Pasting” and “Data Filling”
Slingerland et al. observe that where a particular variable is judged to be present
or absent at particular points in time, this is the only information that can be
coded, whereas continued presence or absence of that same variable before,
after, or between those time points constitutes “data pasting” and “data filling”
– practices they imply are deliberately misleading. Seshat data is organized in a
continuous time series, and coders seek to populate empty boxes with
information about the presence, absence, or magnitude of a given variable at
successive points in history for a given polity. If, for instance, we have direct
evidence that iron smelting was widely practised in a given polity at certain
known dates several centuries apart, we consider it reasonable to infer (in the
absence of evidence to the contrary) that is was also practised in between those

6

time points. This is the type of entirely appropriate inference that Slingerland et
al. describe as “data pasting”.
Closely related to this is what they call “data filling”, referring to the
generalization of data from one, mostly proximate place and time source to
another. This practice is essential under many circumstances. For example,
when the Achaemenid Empire expands to occupy Susiana and Sogdiana, it is
crucial to reflect this conquest by copying relevant data from the Achaemenid
Empire to these regions during the time that it is in political control there. Most
importantly, our approach is transparent, carefully justified, and its implications
for data reliability and analysis open to discussion and critique.
Both methods described above are explicitly designed to address the problem
that the historical record has many gaps. Experts commonly disagree on quite
fundamental issues. Seshat was designed to capture not only the information
about past societies (“what we know”), but also uncertainty and lack of
knowledge. But while we do not want the database to exaggerate the precision
of what we know, it is equally an error not to reflect such evidence as we may
have, even if it is imprecise.
Slingerland et al. accuse us of applying brief snippets across wide swathes of
time, arguing that this practice “promulgates false belief in a static Christian
religiosity and organization, which is extremely misleading for inexpert users and
not useful for academic researchers.” Nevertheless, Seshat is not an effort to
code all the richness of religious ideation and organization but focuses on specific
aspects of it. For example, once Christianity becomes established in a region, its
internal evolution is irrelevant to the question of whether moralizing gods are
present (unless, of course, this evolution takes a drastic new direction in which
beliefs in moral judgement in this life and the next are abandoned).

Data Freezing
Slingerland et al. claim that data used in the moralizing gods paper, which should
have been frozen for the purposes of replication and reanalysis purposes, was
altered subsequently. This is false. Papers published as a result of the Seshat
project routinely freeze the data used for replication purposes, and the Nature
paper was no exception. In the moralizing gods paper, Table S2 summarized all of
the key data used in our analyses along with over 90 references supporting
them, and the entire dataset containing tens of thousands of records used for
our analyses was published as a Supplementary Data file. These data were frozen
at Nature’s online website and cannot be altered.
Nevertheless, Slingerland et al. mistakenly interpret the data provided on the
Seshat website (http://seshatdatabank.info/data/) as a replication dataset and
castigate us for updating the information it contains. In reality, not only did we
publish the full dataset on Nature’s website, we also voluntarily published all
analysis scripts necessary to replicate our analyses to GitHub

7

(https://github.com/pesavage/moralizing-gods), as stated in our paper. Thus, our
research and the data that we published to support it meets (and indeed,
exceeds) all the normal standards for openness and reproducibility in scientific
research.
In contrast with the machine-readable format published at Nature, the Seshat
web viewer was designed to allow us to share our research and the sources from
which the data were drawn with colleagues and interested members of the
public. We incorporated features into this site that allow us to capture feedback
and spot errors in the data. As data are added or amended in the Seshat
Triplestore, the web viewer automatically incorporates these changes. In
addition, a data mirror on http://Seshatdatabank.info/nature/ was provided to
the reviewers of the Nature article so that they could see the as yet unpublished
variables. Once the paper was published, we replaced it with a public link to the
permanent Seshat web viewer.

Periodization Structure
We have considered above many drawbacks in relying exclusively on experts to
construct a database. Another serious limitation of this approach is that it
produces an unbalanced sample of past societies. There are hundreds, perhaps
thousands of scholars studying Ancient Greece, many fewer experts on Ancient
Persia, and one or two or even none on many regions of Melanesia. A
community-based coding effort, advocated by the DRH groups, results in a
plethora of data on a few well-studied past societies, and little or none on most
others.
As an example, Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of pre-1800 societies
in the DRH with an answer to the DRH question as to whether there is
“supernatural monitoring of prosocial norm adherence”. Note that sampling
outside the “civilization belt”, stretching from the Mediterranean to China, is
extremely sparse. In contrast with the DRH, Seshat’s global approach is in tune
with concerns among historians for whom Western-centric bias and
peripheralization of the rest of the world is no longer acceptable. The Seshat
project has gone to great lengths to design a balanced sample of past societies,
stratified by world region and the timing (early, intermediate, late) of the
appearance of politically centralized societies (Turchin et al. 2015).

8

Figure 1. The geographic distribution of pre-1800 societies in the DRH with an
answer to the DRH question as to whether there is “supernatural monitoring of
prosocial norm adherence”.
The DRH sample is even less useful for analysis than the map above indicates. A
key innovation of Seshat is that the databank traces how societies develop over
time. For that, it is useful to have a time sequence of how particular variables
changed. Thus, having data for only a single time-period in a given region (e.g.,
the Mongol Empire in Mongolia) tells us nothing about how religion evolved in
this region.
Slingerland et al.’s critique of several aspects of the Seshat methodology shows
basic misunderstandings of the Seshat sampling procedure, particularly in the
Appendix which claims to provide “specific examples of errors in coding in the
Seshat Databank.” Here they state, for example, that “the polity defined as
‘Latium’ is inherently problematic.” Yet Latium is not a polity in our scheme, it is
a natural geographic area (NGA; cf. Turchin et al. 2015). In several other places,
the ‘errors’ attributed to Seshat result from a failure to appreciate this key
distinction between polity and NGA. Seshat’s 30 NGAs provide merely a sampling
scheme, used to identify the 414 polities constituting our units of analysis. A
closely related misunderstanding is apparent in the Slingerland et al. charge that
Seshat “flattens” historical information into distinct 100–300 year periods. In
fact, the Seshat periods are simply a convenience for organizing data. When
there is evidence of change during these periods, such changes are reflected by
attaching a specified time range to them. Of course, when a particular
characteristic doesn’t change for a long period of time, the resulting trajectory is
indeed a flat horizontal line. Ironically, the DRH is much more vulnerable to the
charge of ‘flattening’ historical information. For example, the entry for “Religion

9

in Mesopotamia (3300 BCE – 539 BCE)” flattens nearly three thousand years of
history in this region into a single period. Another example is for “Chinese State
Religion (Shang and Western Zhou), 1750 BCE–850 BCE”, considered above.
There is no well-defined consensus among historians that we must confine
ourselves to archaeological periodization. Most Roman historians do not use
archaeological periodization for all periods “that pre-date the turn of the eras.”
Traditional periodization (e.g., “Roman Republic”) remains widely accepted, with
minor variations, in the discipline of Roman history. For the earliest part of the
Roman polity, these dates are conventional and ultimately drawn from accounts
which are to some degree legendary (for Romulus wholly legendary). Some
historians adopt a scrupulously archaeological approach at the expense of the
abundant (later) literary evidence; others prefer to use both archaeological
and literary sources. For the eighth through fifth centuries, the terminology
varies. Two key sources, Cornell (1995) and Forsythe (2006), draw on
archaeological evidence while also engaging in extensive critical analysis of the
texts which purport to give historical information about early Rome. Cornell opts
for a hybrid approach (chapter titles include e.g., “The Power of Rome in the
Sixth Century,” “The Beginnings of the Roman Republic”). His analysis makes
clear that there was a period during which Rome was ruled by reges, nonhereditary kings. Similarly, Forsythe has a chapter devoted to “Archaic Italy c.
800–500 BC” and another on “Rome During the Regal Period.” While critics of
Seshat may disagree with this practice on methodological grounds, it is hardly
the case that Cornell and Forsythe “have failed to distinguish between emic,
mythologized accounts and etic scholarly reconstructions of the past”, as claimed
by Slingerland et al. Likewise, it does not follow that because Seshat describes a
“Roman Kingdom” which virtually all historians agree existed prior to the
Republic, Seshat is also suggesting that Romulus and/or Numa were historical
figures. Finally, we should emphasize that while the critics deploy an attack on
Seshat’s periodization in order to suggest that the information in the database is
suspect, they do not point out any errors in coding that may have arisen from the
periodization.

On the uses and abuses of open science
The Seshat project has gone to unprecedented lengths to achieve transparency
in its research processes and outcomes. It has sought to share publicly the
evidential basis on which the moralizing gods paper was based, allowing others
to replicate the findings and test alternative assumptions using the same dataset.
One significant cost of such openness is that it lays researchers open to hostile
critique. We believe this is a price worth paying because it also helps improve the
quality of the database and the work resulting from it.
The full database, which we made freely available on the web
(http://seshatdatabank.info/data/) in tandem with the publication of the
moralizing gods paper, should be considered in addition to the raw machinereadable data and analysis scripts published alongside our paper. These
spreadsheets contain the precise dataset that was used in the moralizing gods
10

paper, presented in a format that is optimized for reproducibility. As such, our
research and the data we published to support it follows the highest standards
for openness and reproducibility in science. Alongside the publication of the
data we also made the dataset available through a website designed for sharing
our research and the sources from which the data was drawn with reviewers and
interested members of the public. We incorporated features into this site that
allowed us to capture feedback to help us spot errors in the data. This was in
addition to, not instead of, normal standards in research data openness.
It should be noted that from a data curation perspective, Seshat presents many
special challenges (Peregrine et al. 2018). Our computational experts have rolled
out more than a dozen software updates to attempt to clarify aspects of the
sourcing and checking of the data that we have published. They have updated
and corrected hundreds of variables, improved references, and responded to
multiple critiques of our process. We continually strive to improve our data and
the clarity of the checking, provenance, and validation and to publish and
present our data in a way that allows us to enhance it over time and to provide
more contextual information. But the perfect should not be the enemy of the
good. We have made our data publicly available inviting feedback, and we have
collectively received hundreds of minor criticisms, corrections, and
improvements through that process. We would like to be able to publish the
entire data curation process pertaining to every variable that we use, and we
continue our efforts to improve our software in this regard, but we will probably
never be able to fully capture, crystallize, and communicate the breadth of
expert opinion that has been applied to overseeing our data collection,
modelling, and results.
The benefits of open science are clear and compelling, the technical limitations
notwithstanding, but the approach is also open to abuse. For example, it enables
attacks to be launched at a lightning pace, using data made available for
replication, in ways that can be hard to regulate or rebut. Such attacks can
resemble more a smear campaign than an effort at scientific debate, especially
when using social media platforms, such as Twitter, that privilege sound bites
over carefully weighed argument and evidence. In these circumstances, even
erroneous critiques that have not been subjected to peer review such as the
ones made by Beheim et al. (2019) can be made to appear far more devastating
and authoritative than is actually the case (see Savage et al., Under review for
rebuttal).
In the present context, our openness with the data prompted an unexpectedly
aggressive attack in pre-published papers that were widely advertised on social
media, including ones tagging leading media outlets such as the New York Times
and Scientific American (e.g.,
https://twitter.com/JoHenrich/status/1124038389995585536). These could
have created an impression among our academic colleagues that the moralizing
gods paper was of scandalously poor quality and did not deserve to be published.
Most shockingly, these online statements included an allegation that Seshat

11

researchers lied about the involvement of one of our expert historians, Vesna
Wallace, in providing professional advice on data used in the moralizing gods
paper. Specifically, Slingerland et al. claim that Wallace played “no part in any
aspect of coding, vetting or recommendation of sources”, citing “Personal
communications to Brenton Sullivan and Edward Slingerland.” That allegation is
disproved by documented evidence. In January 2017, Wallace participated in a
two-day Seshat Axial Age workshop held in Oxford (Levine, Larson, Baines,
Wallace, and ter Haar 2017). During this workshop, as part of a subgroup that
also included the Seshat RA Agathe Dupeyron and the Seshat director Peter
Turchin, Wallace generously shared her expertise on aspects of Buddhist religion
in Mongolia, India, Japan, Indonesia, and Cambodia. Later, in a series of emails
with postdoc Patrick Savage in October 2017, she confirmed that our key dates
listed for the spread of Buddhism to these five regions (ultimately published in
Table S2 of our original paper) were accurate, and provided additional nuance for
our description of the system of karmic retribution that were also incorporated
into Table S2. Note that for the purposes of the moralizing gods paper we sought
and obtained her expertise on the first appearance of Buddhism, not on other
characteristics of these diverse regions.
Relatedly, Slingerland et al. charge: “After our e-mail of March 25, 2019 to the
authors, they appear to have gone through the Seshat data provided to Nature
referees and systematically changed their claim about Prof. Wallace having
vetted all of the religion and ritual variables to this statement: ‘verified key data
regarding earliest appearance of moralizing gods/doctrinal rituals’.” But we
never made any claim that Prof. Wallace or other experts “vetted all of the
religion and ritual variables.” Our logs show that in September 2018, as a
response to comments arising during the review process, we added statements
indicating which experts had provided input for each polity, and included
descriptions of the general topics on which expert input had focused, such as
“Vesna Wallace (Religion or Normative Ideology System)”, “Barend ter Haar
(Ritual variables, Religion or Normative Ideology System),” etc. Because the key
variable for analyses reported in our original Table S2 was the first evidence of
moralizing gods, we focused our expert checks on this question. Slingerland et al.
claim that “Even if these scholars have verified this data concerning “earliest
appearance,” this statement can logically only apply to one polity—whichever
was characterized by this earliest appearance.” The logical error to which they
refer is unclear. Confirming the earliest evidence of moralizing gods in a given
NGA logically requires confirming the absence of evidence for earlier polities. On
March 27, 2019 we clarified this statement further as follows: “Vesna Wallace
(verified key data regarding earliest appearance of moralizing gods/doctrinal
rituals)”. Slingerland and colleagues fail to mention that we notified them by
email that we would update the website in precisely this manner to better
address the concerns that we thought they had emailed us about in good faith.
Slingerland et al. make the following observation which, in light of the above, is
chilling: “'The apparent lack of appreciation for historical scholarship that…
[Seshat’s] coding strategy displays runs the risk of permanently alienating the

12

community of academic historians”. Academic historians and archaeologists are
the life blood of Seshat but the multi-pronged attack launched by our critics,
rather than lack of appreciation of historical scholarship, could be enough to
deter some scholars from contributing to this project in the future. Indeed, the
allegation that Wallace played “no part in any aspect of coding, vetting or
recommendation of sources” for Seshat could hardly have been better designed
to alienate experts. We take this opportunity to emphasize that Wallace’s
contributions to Seshat are significant and highly valued. Her authorship on our
PNAS paper (Turchin et al. 2018) was fully deserved and her contributions to the
data used in the moralizing gods paper contributed directly to our main analysis.
Slingerland et al.’s claim above is not only unfair to Wallace, it also wrongly
accuses the Seshat team of serious malpractice by allegedly lying about her
involvement in the project. Seshat will continue to work to expand its growing
community of expert researchers, and welcomes back any who might have been
alarmed by unwarranted allegations.

Conclusions
We stand at a potential turning point in the history of history. A number of highly
influential scholars of the past couple of centuries, including Marx, Spencer,
Tylor, Frazer, and Durkheim, dreamt of establishing generalizable theories of
history but they were held back by the ‘cherry picking problem’. That is, theories
of history – from grandiose visions of economic and technological determinism
through to the idea that the division of labour in society evolves through
discernible stages – have always emphasized evidence that supported the
theory, while less congenial evidence was rejected or overlooked. What is
radically new about the approach adopted in our Nature paper is that it tests
theories of history based on a serious effort to avoid bias in the selection of data
by coding for features of social complexity, religion, and ritual, in exactly the
same way across hundreds of societies throughout world history. All data and
analysis code are publicly available so that colleagues can inspect it, replicate and
criticize our efforts, and run analyses of their own.
An effort to do precisely that was pre-published online by Beheim et al. (2019) to
coincide also with the pre-publication of Slingerland et al. (2019). Both papers
were widely advertised by their authors on Twitter as effectively debunking our
moralizing gods paper. As we have seen, Slingerland et al.’s critique has little or
no direct relevance to our main findings. In the case of Beheim et al., the claim
was that reanalysis of our data “correcting” certain assumptions reverses our
original analyses. But Savage et al. (under review) have shown that this is not the
case and that their reanalyses, when appropriately performed, confirm the
robustness of our original conclusions. Both Beheim et al. and Slingerland et al.
took advantage of social media to advertise their hyperbolic criticisms of our
work in ways that were difficult to rebut effectively at the time.
The speed of the destructive attacks on Seshat described above contrasts with
the much slower, painstaking pace at which our database has been constructed.

13

Work to build Seshat has been underway for nearly a decade and yet we have
only recently reached a point at which we believe specific subsets of that data
are ready for analysis and publication. We continue to strive to improve our data
and the clarity of its provenance and validation, and to publish and present our
data in such a way that we can improve it further over time, as well as providing
more contextual data. This goal should be tempered with the caution that it is
impossible to do so for every individual data record in Seshat (of which there are
currently ca.300,000). By using such an unprecedented degree of transparency,
in the short-term we open ourselves to hostile cherry-picking of imperfections
that any large databank will have. But we are willing to pay this price, because it
makes the Seshat data better in the long-term.
Our goal is to use Seshat to test theories of global history in increasingly diverse
ways, fully realizing that the Seshat vision will require the input of very large
numbers of experts from fields as diverse as history, archaeology, classics,
linguistics, cultural anthropology, and comparative religion (among others).
Wariness of scientific methods in these fields is widespread, so it is no mean feat
to have already attracted such large numbers to participate in
the Seshat enterprise. Continuing to do so will mean not only retaining our list of
current experts but attracting many more. It remains to be seen whether this is
achievable. Those who are heavily invested in theories that can be refuted by
Seshat data, or who aspire to building rival databases, may understandably seek
to critique our work, but we hope this will be done increasingly in ways that are
constructive and do not discourage humanities scholars from working with us.
If our new approach to the study of global history survives and flourishes, this
will be very good news for the humanities. It will not change the fundamental
methods of historical enquiry but will complement them. Existing historical
research will become more thoroughly integrated with many areas of the social
sciences and attract more resources. On the other hand, it will be bad news for
many theories. Few theories will survive unscathed. But that is a desirable
situation scientifically. We are confident that, despite disagreements between
the various teams of scholars involved, we all share the same fundamental goal
of integrating the sciences and humanities through the creation of new
interdisciplinary databases, helping us to build new knowledge to answer old
questions about the human condition.

Acknowledgements
We thank the following for feedback (although this does not imply that they
necessarily endorse any of the views expressed here): Pascal Boyer, Daniel
Hoyer, and Christopher Kavanagh. Vesna Wallace reviewed and approved our
description of the nature of her work for Seshat, in the penultimate section of
this paper. H.W. and P.F. were supported by an Advanced Grant from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
Research and Innovation Programme (‘Ritual Modes: Divergent modes of ritual,
social cohesion, prosociality, and conflict’, grant agreement no. 694986), H.W. by

14

an award from the Templeton World Charity Foundation entitled ‘Cognitive
and Cultural Foundations of Religion and Morality’ (TWCF0164), P.E.S. by a
Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists from the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science, Keio Research Institute at SFC Startup Grant, and a Keio Gijuku
Academic Development Fund grant, and T.C. by a Starter Grant from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
Research and Innovation Programme (‘The Cultural Evolution & Ecology
of Institutions’, grant agreement no. 716212).

References
Beheim, B., Q. Atkinson, J. Bulbulia, W. Gervais, R. D. Gray, J. Henrich, M. Lang, et
al. Under review. “Corrected Analyses Show That Moralizing Gods Precede
Complex Societies but Serious Data Concerns Remain.” Preprint:
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/jwa2n.
Bagley, R. 1999. “Shang archaeology.” In The Cambridge History of Ancient China:
From the Origins of Civilization to 221 BC, ed. M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy,
124–231. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cornell, T. J. 1995. The beginnings of Rome: Italy and Rome from the Bronze Age
to the Punic Wars (c. 1000-264 BC). London: Routledge.
Eno, R. 2009. Shang State Religion and the Pantheon of the Oracle Texts. In: Early
Chinese religion: Part one: Shang through Han (1250 BC–22 AD), ed. J. Lagerwey
& M. Kalinowski, pp. 41–102. Brill.
Forsythe, G. 2006. A critical history of early Rome from Prehistory to the First
Punic War. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hsu, Cho-yun and K. M. Linduff. 1988. Early Chinese Civilization Series. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Keay, J. 2009. China, A History. London, HarperPress.
Keightley, D. N. 2000. The Ancestral Landscape: Time, Space, and Community in
Late Shang China (ca. 1200-1045 B.C.). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Levine, J., J. Larson, J. Baines, V. Wallace, and B. ter Haar. 2017. “Experts Reflect
on Their Experiences Working with Seshat: Global History Databank.” Seshat:
Global History Databank Blog. http://seshatdatabank.info/expert_reflections.
Liu, L. and X. Chen. 2012. The Archaeology of China: From the Late Paleolithic
to the Early Bronze Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peregrine, P. N., R. Brennan, T. Currie, K. Feeney, P. François, P. Turchin, and H.
Whitehouse. 2018. “Dacura: A new solution to data harvesting and knowledge
15

extraction for the historical sciences.” Historical Methods: A Journal of
Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History. doi:10.1080/01615440.2018.1443863
Savage, P. E., H. Whitehouse, P. François, T. E. Currie, K. C. Feeney, E. Cioni,
R. Purcell, et al. Under review. “Reply to Beheim et al.: Reanalyses confirm
robustness of original analyses.” SocArXiv preprint (doi forthcoming).
Slingerland, E. and B. Sullivan, 2017. “Durkheim with Data: The Database of
Religious History.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 85 (2): 312–
347. https://doi.org/10.1093/jaarel/lfw012
Slingerland, E., W. Monroe, B. Sullivan, R. Faith Walsh, D. Veidlinger, W.
Noseworthy, C. Herriott, et al. In press. “Historians Respond to ‘Complex
Societies Precede Moralizing Gods throughout World History.’” Journal of
Cognitive Historiography. Preprint: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/2amjz.
Thorp, R. L. 2006. Encounters with Asia: China in the Early Bronze Age: Shang
Civilization. University of Pennsylvania Press: Philadelphia
Turchin, P., R. Brennan, T. E. Currie, K. C. Feeney, P. François, D. Hoyer, J. G.
Manning, A. Marciniak, D. Mullins, A. Palmisano, P. Peregrine, E. A. L. Turner, and
H. Whitehouse (2015). Seshat: The Global History Databank. Cliodynamics: The
Journal of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution 6(1): 77-107.
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qx38718
Turchin, P., T. E. Currie, H. Whitehouse, P. François, K. Feeney, D. Mullins, D.
Hoyer, et al. 2018. “Quantitative Historical Analysis Uncovers a Single Dimension
of Complexity That Structures Global Variation in Human Social Organization.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (2): E144–51.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1708800115.
Turchin, P., H. Whitehouse, P. François, et al. In press. “An Introduction to
Seshat: Global History Databank”. Journal of Cognitive Historiography. doi:
10.31234/osf.io/2amjz
Wang, H. 2014. Writing and the Ancient State: Early China in Comparative
Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whitehouse, H., P. François, P. E. Savage, T. E. Currie, K. C. Feeney, E. Cioni, R.
Purcell, et al. 2019. “Complex Societies Precede Moralizing Gods throughout
World History.” Nature 568 (7751): 226-229. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586019-1043-4.
Zhu, X. (Translated by P. B. Ebrey) 1991. Chu Hsi's family rituals: a twelfthcentury Chinese manual for the performance of cappings, weddings, funerals, and
ancestral rites. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

16

