Arab World English Journal (March 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.230

Theses ID 230

Pp. 1- 51

Translating Idioms from English into Arabic: Appointment with Death as a Case Study
Arwa Abdulaziz Assaf Al-assaf
Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
College of Languages and Translation, Saudi Arabia

Author: Arwa Abdulaziz Assaf Al-assaf
Thesis Title: Translating Idioms from English into Arabic: Appointment with Death as a Case
Study
Subject/major: Translation
Institution: College of Languages and Translation, Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University
Degree: MA
Year of award: 2016
Supervisor: Dr. Montasser Mohamed Abdelwahab Mahmoud
Keywords: idioms, source language, strategies of translation idioms. target language
Abstract
This study aimed at identifying the English idioms as well as fixed expressions used by Agatha
Christie in her novel, Appointment with Death, and how they was translated into Arabic by Omar
Abdulaziz Ameen. The study principally aimed to highlight the strategies used by the translator to
overcome the problem of no equivalence in the target language. Baker's strategies for translating
idioms (1992) formed the basis of the theoretical part of the study. The analytical part comprised
Agatha Christie's novel, Appointment with Death (2001) and the translation of the novel by Ameen
from English into Arabic. The study concentrated on the most dominant translation solutions when
translating idioms from English into Arabic. A lack of equivalent idioms in the Arabic language
was one of the outcomes of this study. Further investigations showed that the most prevailing
translation strategy used by the translator encompassed paraphrasing. The translated version
highlighted the challenges of switching between different cultural, conceptual and linguistic frames
of reference.
Cite as: Al-assaf, AA. A. (2016). Translating Idioms from English into Arabic: Appointment with
Death as a Case Study. College of Languages and Translation, Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud
Islamic University. (Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab World English Journal (ID Number: 230.
March 2019, 1-51 DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.230

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Ministry of Education
Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
College of Languages and Translation
Department of English Language and Literature

Translating Idioms from English into Arabic:
Appointment with Death as a Case Study

By:
Arwa Abdulaziz Assaf Al-assaf

A Study Submitted to the Department of English of the College of
Languages and Translation in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for
the Master Degree of Arts in Translation

Supervised by
Dr. Montasser Mohamed Abdelwahab Mahmoud
Shaaban' 1437 – May 2016

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

i

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful
And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, then He will suffice him.
Verily, Allah will accomplish his purpose. Indeed Allah has set a
measure for all things.(AI-Talaq 65:3)

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

This thesis is entitled:
Translating Idioms from English into Arabic:
Appointment with Death as a Case Study.
Written by Arwa Abdulaziz AL-assaf
Has been approved for the Department of English Language and Translation

_________________
Supervised by
(Dr. Montasser Abdelwahab)

_________________
( Dr. Abdulhamid Elewa)

_________________
( Dr. Imed Bouslama )

Shaaban' 1437 – May 2016

ii

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

iii

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

iii

Abstract
This study aimed at identifying the English idioms as well as fixed expressions
used by Agatha Christie in her novel, Appointment with Death, and how they was
translated into Arabic by Omar Abdulaziz Ameen. The study principally aimed to
highlight the strategies used by the translator to overcome the problem of no
equivalence in the target language. Baker's strategies for translating idioms (1992)
formed the basis of the theoretical part of the study. The analytical part comprised
Agatha Christie's novel, Appointment with Death (2001) and the translation of the novel
by Ameen from English into Arabic. The study concentrated on the most dominant
translation solutions when translating idioms from English into Arabic. A lack of
equivalent idioms in the Arabic language was one of the outcomes of this study. Further
investigations showed that the most prevailing translation strategy used by the translator
encompassed paraphrasing. The translated version highlighted the challenges of
switching between different cultural, conceptual and linguistic frames of reference.

‫‪iv‬‬

‫‪TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH‬‬
‫الملخص‬

‫هدفت هذه الدراسة الى تمييز التعبيرات االصطالحية والتعبيرات الثابتة في اللغة االنجليزية‬
‫التي استخدمتها اجاثا كريستي في روايتها جريمة في الصحراء وكذلك ايضاح الطريقة التي‬
‫استخدمها عمر عبد العزيز أمين في ترجمتها‪ .‬كما هدفت هذه الدراسة بشكل اساسي على تسليط‬
‫الضوء على االستراتي جيات التي استخدمها المترجم لتغلب على مشكلة عدم وجود المكافئ اللغوي‬
‫في اللغة الهدف‪ .‬وشكلت استراتيجيات بيكر لترجمة التعبيرات االصطالحية (‪ )2991‬االساس‬
‫النظري للدراسة‪ .‬كما اشتمل الجزء التحليلي على رواية اجاثا كريستي جريمة في الصحراء‬
‫(‪ )1002‬وترجمتها بواسطة أمين من االنجليزية الى العربية‪ .‬باإلضافة الى أن هذه الدراسة ركزت‬
‫على الحلول المختلفة لترجمة التعبيرات االصطالحية من االنجليزية الى العربية‪ .‬ويعد غياب‬
‫المكافئ اللغوي لهذه التعبيرات االصطالحية في اللغة العربية احد مخرجات هذه الدراسة‪.‬‬
‫وأظهرت الدراسة ايضا ان استراتيجية الترجمة السائدة المستخدمة بواسطة المترجم هي اعادة‬
‫الصياغة‪ .‬كما القت الترجمة الضوء على التحديات التي تعوق المترجم لما تحتويه من مفاهيم‬
‫لغوية وثقافية مختلفة ‪.‬‬

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

v

Acknowledgments

Alhamdulillah, all praise be to Allah for His blessing in completing this study.
Then, Special thanks go to my supervisor, Dr. Montasser Mohamed, for his endless
support, patience, encouragement, good humor, and his effort in guiding me in writing
my research. I have learned a lot through his experience, comments, and knowledge.

Deepest gratitude goes to the members of the supervisory committee for their
advice and guidance in this study, Dr. Abdulhamid Elewa and Dr. Imed Bouslama.

I would like to express my gratitude to all English language staff at the College of
Languages and Translation at Al-Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic University
especially Dr. Tariq AlKhalifa and Dr. Abdullah Al-Sahli for their advice and support.
Finally, I would like to thank Dr. Abdullah Al-Munief, Library director of king Saud
university for providing me with reverences and books.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

Dedication

To my parents

To my husband and children

To my sisters and brothers

For their support, prayers, patience, and encouragement.

vi

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

vii

Table of Contents

ABSTRACT-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ACKNOWLEDGEMENT---------------------------------------------------------------------DEDICATION-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------CONTENTS--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------LIST OF TABLES-------------------------------------------------------------------------------LIST OF FIGURES------------------------------------------------------------------------------ABBRIVATIONS--------------------------------------------------------------------------------CAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION----------------------------------------------------------------1
1.1. Background of the Study-------------------------------------------------------------1
1.2. Statement of the Problem-------------------------------------------------------------4
1.3. Research Question---------------------------------------------------------------------5
1.4. Significance of the Study-------------------------------------------------------------5
1.5. Definition of Terms-------------------------------------------------------------------6
1.6. Limitation of the Study---------------------------------------------------------------7
CAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW--------------------------------------------------------8
2.1. Introduction----------------------------------------------------------------------------8
2.2. Translation of Idioms-----------------------------------------------------------------8
2.3. Difficulties in Translating Idiomatic Expressions-------------------------------10
2.4. Strategies Used in Translating Idiomatic Expressions--------------------------13
2.5. Translation of Idioms and Fixed Expression-------------------------------------15
2.6. Previous Studies Related to Translating Idioms---------------------------------17
CHAPTER 3 METHODOLOGY-----------------------------------------------------------20
3.1. Introduction---------------------------------------------------------------------------20

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

viii

3.2. Sample of Study----------------------------------------------------------------------20
3.2.1. The Author----------------------------------------------------------------------21
3.2.2. The Translator------------------------------------------------------------------21
3.3. Instrumentation-----------------------------------------------------------------------22
3.4. Data Analysis ------------------------------------------------------------------------23
CHAPTER 4 FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION---------------------------------------------26
4.1. Introduction----------------------------------------------------------------------------26
4.2. Idioms to Idioms Translation--------------------------------------------------------26
4.2.1. Using an Idiom with Similar Meaning and Form--------------------------27
4.2.2. Using an Idiom with Similar Meaning but Different Form---------------28
4.3. Translation by Paraphrase------------------------------------------------------------32
4.4. Translation by Omission--------------------------------------------------------------35
4.5. Discussion------------------------------------------------------------------------------41
CHAPTER 5 CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS---------------------------43
5.1. Conclusion------------------------------------------------------------------------------43
5.2. Recommendations---------------------------------------------------------------------46
REFERENCES------------------------------------------------------------------------------------47

ix

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
List of Tables
The Number of Tables
Table (1)

The Title of Tables
Examples of idioms translated

Page Number
27

by using similar meaning and
form.
Table (2)

Examples of idioms translated

29

by using similar meaning but
dissimilar form.
Table (3)

Examples of idioms translated

32

by using paraphrasing.
Table (4)

Examples of idioms translated
by using omission.

35

x

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
List of Figures
The Number of Figure

The Title of Figures

Page Number

Figure.1

The four strategies of translation

25

idioms.
Figure.2

Strategies of translating idioms in

41

Christie's Appointment with
Death.
Figure.3

Strategies used for translating
idioms in Christie's Appointment
with Death.

42

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
Abbreviations
SL

Source language

TL

Target language

ST

Source Text

TT

Target Text

xi

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

1

Chapter I
Introduction
In recent studies, more focus has been targeted towards descriptive and
comparative translation studies.Translation has customarily been seen as an interlingual
correspondence though some translation scholars, as Hans J. Vermeer, are energetically
against the origination of translation principally as a culturally diverse exchange or
intercultural correspondence (Bassnett and Lefevere, 1990).
1.1. Background of the Study
The spread of the human race through the course of time came along with a variety
of languages and dialects that created a profound hole of disconnection among the
languages users because of their insufficiency in translating the message of source
language to their own language. Progressively, this need of having the capacity to
understand other languages set the way to the rise of a new discipline, concerned with
expressing a language in different words of another language which is known mostly by
translation.
Translation scholars as well as etymologists all concur that there is a nearby
connection in the middle of language and society. Vermeer (1992) considers dialect to
be a characteristic piece of society, whose perspective is shared by Mary Snell-Hornby
especially when culture is characterized as "a totality of information, capability and
discernment" (Nord,1997, p.23). Lyons (1968), an English etymologist, as well,
considers the language of a specific culture as an indispensable piece of its way of life;
he also holds that the lexical refinements drawn by every language will have a tendency
to mirror the socially vital components of items, establishments and exercises in the
general public in which the language works. Similarly mindful of the entwined state of
language and culture, Nida (1993) trusts that since culture is summed up as "the totality

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

2

of convictions and practices of a general public, nothing is more deliberately critical
than the language through which its convictions are communicated and passed on and
by which most association of its individuals happens."(p.105). Munday (2001,p.127)
reports that "Bassnett and lefevere (1990) go beyond language and focus on the
interaction between translation and culture, on the way which culture impacts and
constrains translation and on the larger issues of context, history and convention".
Regardless of whether those scholars view language as a component of culture or not,
they all recognize that language and culture are firmly associated or related. It is,
consequently, not astounding that language and culture are here and there discussed as
"languaculture"- a solitary substance (Nord, 1997,p.25).
Bassnett (1980) states that Since language and culture are interrelated, and
translation is considered as an interlingua communication and additionally a procedure
of social exchange, translators are quite often required to be both bilingually and
culturally skillful. The translator, as an extraordinary kind of reader and his very own
insider society, cannot generally be a passkey to opening all the social locks. He cannot
totally rise above the limits of his own social legacy into the universe of the other. He
himself, some of the time, may be excessively bolted into his own social state of mind
to have the capacity to share different societies. Consequently, the level of trouble and
the nature of translation have more to do with culture than with language itself.
"Translation is a sort of action which definitely includes no less than two dialects
and two cultures customs."(Toury1978:200). As this announcement suggests, translator
are forever confronted with the issue of how to treat the social angles verifiable in a
source content (ST) and of discovering the most suitable procedure of effectively
passing on these viewpoints in the objective dialects (TL).

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

3

The aim behind this paper is to exhibit the intricacy of issues which can be
experienced by a translator in translation of idioms from English into Arabic.
Bassnett states that "the translation of idioms takes us a stage further in considering
the topic of which meaning and translation, for idioms, similar to puns, are culture
bound"(p.32). At the point when two dialects have compared informal expression that
renders the idea of prevarication, thus during the time spent interlingua translation of
one idiom substituted for another. That substitution is made not on the premise of the
semantic components in the expression, nor on the premise of a relating or comparative
picture contained in the expression, yet in the phrase. The SL expression is supplanted
by a TL expression that fills the same need in the TL society, and the procedure
includes the substitution of SL sign for TL sign. Dagut's qualification among translation
and production (1980), like Catford's refinement in the middle of "strict" and "free"
translation does not consider the perspective that considers translation to be semiotic
change. In his explanation of translation identicalness, Popovic (1976) recognizes four
types:
1- Semantic comparability, where there is homogeneity on the phonetic level of both SL
and TL writings, i.e. word for word translation.
2- Paradigmatic equality, where there is identicalness of the components of a
paradigmatic expressive pivot, i.e. of language structure, which Popovic sees just like a
higher classification than lexical identicalness.
3-Stylistic (translation) equality, where there is useful comparability of components in
both unique and translation going for an expressive character with an invariant of
identical meaning .
4-Textual (syntagmatic) equality, where there is proportionality of the syntagmatic
organizing of a content, i.e. equality of structure and shape.(P.33)

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

4

Though most idioms oppose variety in shape, some are more adaptable than others.
A man's ability in effectively utilizing the idiom and altered articulations of a remote
language scarcely ever coordinates that of a local speaker. The larger part of translation
working into an outside language cannot accomplish the same affectability that local
speaker appear to have for judging when and how a colloquialism can be controlled.
This gives backing to the contention that translators ought to work into their native
language.
However, one cannot face fairly the translator's problems without reckoning with
the many and sometimes striking differences between cultures. Cultural differences
have a direct bearing on the problems of understanding expression encountered in
translation. Everything observed as being different from our own culture is specific to
the other culture, whereas a cultural difference between language-couples (that are
culturally closely relevant or far culturally closely related or those with only a far
cultural connection ) is one of degree and not of kind (Bassnett and Lefevere, 1990).
1.2. Statement of the problem
Idioms are considered to be one of the hardest and most interesting parts of the
English vocabulary. On the one hand, they are considered one of the most peculiar parts
of the language; on the other hand, they are difficult to translate because of their
unpredictable meaning and grammar. Moreover, idioms may be culture bound and this
may cause even greater problems for the translator. The translator is faced with many
complicated hurdles that are not easy to overcome. Finding an idiom in the target
language with the same form and meaning as in the source language could turn out to
be a mark of perfection for the translator. While each language owns its own idioms, it
is still difficult to find its exact equivalent.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

5

Therefore, in order to transfer a source idiom into the target language, the
translator must choose the most appropriate strategy. The translator must learn a lot
about the function of idioms in the source and the target languages, and the
characteristic of idioms in both languages. Moreover, in order to deal with the problem
that arise in the process of idiom translation, translators use different strategies. The
examination and categorization of strategies is very useful and helpful for the work of
the translator.
1.3. Research Questions
To identify the problem and find a solution to it, the current study attempted to
answer the following research question:
1.What are the main types of translation strategies used in the translation of
idioms in Christie's novel Appointment with Death?
2.What are the best and worst choices of translation strategies used by the
translator of Christie's novel Appointment with Death?
1.4. Significance of the Study
This study belongs to the field of descriptive analytic translation. Appointment with
Death by Agatha Christie is the source of application of this study. Appointment with
Death has been chosen because it depends on idioms. It is a detective story by Agatha
Christie. Christie states that Appointment with death reflects the author's ability to make
sardonic references to human lacks and prejudices in funny and rather non-abuser and
forgiving way.(1977)
The study analyzed strategies used by Ameen in translating idioms from English
into Arabic included in the English novel Appointment with Death by Agatha Christie.
It focused on the problem of no equivalence in the target language. Moreover, it

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

6

presents the most prevailing translation solutions used in the translation from English to
Arabic.
1.5. Definition of Terms
Idioms:
Nida (1964) defines idioms as "The most numerous and serious errors made by
translators arise primarily from their lack of thorough knowledge of the receptor
language".(p.150)
Baker (1992) defines idioms in her book In Other Words as "frozen patterns of
language which allow little or no variation in form and often carry meanings which
cannot be deduced from their individual components".(p.63)
Catford (1965) states that "idioms and phraseological units should not be considered as
"the only possible translation units on the level of combination of words". Also, he
defines idioms as "a free combination of words whose source language meaning is built
up out of the meaning of its separate components."(p.54)
Equivalence :
Vinay and Darbelnet (1995) define equivalence as "the replicates the same situation as
in the original, Whilst using completely different wording". They also suggest that, "if
this procedure is applied during the translation process, it can maintain the stylistic
impact of the SL text in the TL text".(p.342)
Catford (1965) suggests that "textual equivalence occurs when any TL text or portion
of text is observed on a particular occasion to be the equivalent of a given SL text or
portion of text".(p.27)
Baker (1992) gives equivalence a new descriptions: grammatical, textual, pragmatic
equivalence.(p.11)

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

7

Translation Strategy:
Krings (1986) defines translation strategy as "translator's potentially conscious plans
for solving concrete translation problems in the framework of a concrete translation
task,"(p.18).
Seguinot (1989) believes that there are at least three universal strategies employed by
the translators: (1) translating without interruption, (2) correcting surface errors
immediately, (3) leaving the monitoring for qualitative or stylistic mistakes in the text
to the revision stage.(p.3)
Loescher (1991) defines translation strategy as "a potentially conscious procedure for
solving a problem faced in translating a text, or any segment of it." (p.8)
Jaaskelainen (1999) considers strategy as, "a series of competencies, a set of steps or
processes that favor the acquisition, storage, and/or utilization of information. "He
maintains that strategies are "heuristic and flexible in nature, and their adoption implies
a decision influenced by amendments in the translator's objectives."(p.71)
Fixed expression
Baker (1992) defied the fixed expression as "The extreme end of the scale from
collocations in one or both of these areas: flexibility of patterning and transparency of
meaning".(p.63)
Cater (1998) classifies the fixed expression as "a type that include proverbs, stock
phrases, catchphrases, allusions, idiomatic similes and discoursal expressions."(p.66)
1.6. Limitation of the Study
For the comparative purpose of the study, this study focused on analyzing,
assessing the Arabic translation of English idioms in Christie's novel Appointment with
Death. The study was confined to the Arabic translation done by Omar Abdul Aziz
Ameen.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

8

Chapter II
Literature Review

2.1. Introduction
This chapter reflects a review of previous research related to the main translation
strategies used in translation of idioms from the source language to the target language
in the light of the problem of no equivalence in the target language. This chapter
discusses the theoretical part of the study as well as the previous related studies in the
field of translating idioms.
2.2. Translation of Idioms
Idioms can be considered a part of our everyday language. They are the substance
of any language and the most problematic part to handle with. Not all idioms have
direct reciprocals in another dialect, in light of the fact that they are phonetic
expressions which are common for a language and particular to a single culture. It is
difficult to characterize any extraordinary methodology in the translating process of
idioms since such a large number of idioms are culturally. Translation scholars have
been contributing to the field of comparative translation to gain correct models of
assessing translations for judging translational decisions and actual translated texts;
Baker (1992), Moon (1998), House (1997), Leuven-Zwart (1989,1990), Nord (1988),
and Toury (1995) are scholars who contributed to that field.
Baker (1992) provides a definition for the idiom as "frozen patterns of language
which allow little or no variation in form and often carry meaning which cannot be
deduced from their individual components."(p.63)
Also, Moon (1998) defines idiom as "an ambiguous term, used in conflicting ways.
In lay or general use, idiom has two main meanings. First, idiom is a particular means

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

9

of expressing something in language, music, art, and so on, which characterizes a
person or group. Secondly (and much less commonly in English ) an idiom is a
particular lexical collocation or phrasal lexeme peculiar to a language."(p.3).
McMordiew (1983) states "we can say that an idiom is a number of words which,
taken together, mean something different from the individual words of the idiom when
they stand alone."(p.4)
Moon (1998) claims that "idioms denotes a general term for many kinds of multiword expressions whether semantically opaque or not."(p.4). Idioms are combinations
of words whose meaning cannot be deduced from the meaning of the individual parts.
They are heavily culturally- loaded phrases or sentences, usually highly specialized in
meaning and closely tied to distinctive cultural features and attitudes. Idioms belong to
figurative language, in which cultural differences are often mirrored and from which
translation problems often arise. Here the term "idioms" is used in its broad sense,
encompassing phrase, clause and sentence idioms (proverbs and sayings ).
Idioms that are treated as figures of speech are difficult to translate. It is sometimes
hard to find the right equivalent for a single word without finding equivalence for a
sequence of words that convey one specific meaning.
Fernando and Flavell (1981) state that the method an idiom is translated relies on
the context in which it is utilized. We have distinctive and different translation
methodologies however the translator ought to see the utilization of which sort of these
systems can assist with focusing on language readers to better comprehend the idiom
meaning. At the point when translating the idiom of the source; the translator ought to
be aware of the sense. The translator may change a few parts of the colloquialism to
protect the sense and to exchange it to the TL readers. For the situation that the first
idiom does not have its comparable in other languages, the translator ought not to erase

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

10

that maxim from his content but rather he ought to elucidate more on it to let the readers
comprehend which means better. Fernando and Flavell (1981) state that there is solid
oblivious urge in many translators to hunt hard down an idioms in the receptor
language, however wrong it might be.
The strategies utilized in this study are those proposed by Baker (1992). Baker
(1992) states that it is possible to find an idiom in a target language, which has similar
meaning and form as the source language (p.76). This means that the semantic
equivalence of source idioms is given to target text, but the lexical item of the SL idiom
is not kept in the target text.
Baker (1992) suggests that the meaning of words that constitute idiomatic
expressions cannot be understood from the superficial meaning of the individual single
words in isolation, or from the constituent words as a group, there are usually some
problems in both processes of understanding and translating them.(p.64)
2.3. Difficulties in Translating Idiomatic Expressions
Translating idioms is one of the most difficult tasks for translators. It is not a
matter of replacement of lexical and grammatical items between languages only, it
involves rejecting the basic linguistic elements of source language text.
Awwad (1990) identifies two major difficulties when translating idioms. The first
one is misinterpreting the intention of the writer or speaker, and the second is
recognizing the cultural differences among languages with regard to both traditional
and innovative idioms.
Bassnett (1980) states that "idioms should be translated on the basis of the function
of the phrase: the source language idioms should be replaced by a target language
idioms that has the same meaning."(p.24)

11

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

Baker (1992) suggests the main difficulties that a translator faces in translating
idioms as follows:(pp.68-71)
1) An idiom or fixed expression may have no equivalent in the target language. The
way a language chooses to express, or not express, various meanings cannot be
predicated and only occasionally matches the way another language chooses to express
the same meaning. One language may express a given meaning by means of a fixed
expression, by means of an idiom, or by means of a single word. Idioms may be culture
specific such as "yours faithfully" and "yours sincerely" in English which have no
equivalents in Arabic (Baker,1992).
2) "An idiom or fixed expression may have a similar counterpart in the target language,
but its context of use may be different, the two expressions may have different
connotations, for instance, or they may not be pragmatically transferable"(Baker,
1992.69).
3)An idiom may be used in the source text in both its literal and idiomatic sense at the
same time". Unless the TL idiom corresponds to the SL idiom both in form and in
meaning,

the

play on

idiom

cannot

be

successfully

reproduced

in

the

TL"(Baker,1992.69).
4) The very convention of using idioms in written discourse, the contexts in which they
can be used, and their frequency of use may be different in the SL and
TL"(Baker,1992.70).
Baker (1992) provides that "the main problems that idiomatic and fixed expressions
pose in translation relate to two main areas: the ability to recognize and interpret the
idiom correctly, and the difficulties involved in rendering the various aspects of
meaning that an idiom or a fixed expression conveys into the target language".(p.65)
Baker (1992) mentions two cases which might lead to misinterpreting an idiom:

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

12

1) When an idiom's literal meaning also makes sense.
2) When there is an idiom in the target language which has a similar form but refers
to a different solution.
According to Newmark (1988): "In translating idiomatic into idiomatic language,
it is particularly difficult to match equivalence of meaning with equivalence of
frequency"(p.28). Moreover, Newmark (1988) provides that "the main problems in
translating idioms are not grammatical but lexical, i.e. words, collocations, and fixed
phrases or idioms."
Davies mentions a number of problems students may face in translating idioms and
fixed expressions:
-Recognition.
-No equivalent in the target language.
-A similar counterpart in the target language with a different context of use.
-An idiom used in the source text both in its literal and idiomatic sense at the
same time .
-Difference between the convention, context and frequency of use in the source
and target language (2004, p.193).
According to Mollanazar (2004) "The first step in translating idioms is to
recognize them. The pitfall for the translators is to translate idioms literally. A wordfor-word translation of idioms is often nonsense or even sometimes amusing."(p.52)
For Straksiene (2009), the main problem that a translator faces in translating idioms
is the lack of equivalence on the idiom level. All languages have idioms. But it is
difficult to find an equivalence in the target language (TL) that matches to the idiom in
the source language (SL) in both meaning and form. Idioms may contain a culturebound item and this poses a problem for the translator.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

13

2.4. Strategies Used in Translating Idiomatic Expressions
Newmark (1981) states that "idiom should never be translated word for
word"(p.125). Newmark (1988) states that "for most texts, the translator has to make
sure that 1) his/her translation makes sense and it reads naturally, written in ordinary
language, using the common grammar, idioms and vocabulary that meet the situation."
He also states that "the natural use of language comprises different idioms, styles or
registers which are determined by the setting of the text, the author, topic and
readership"(p.47). Moreover, he makes a compassion between the translation of idioms
and idiomatic translation and says that "reproduces the message of the original but tends
to distort nuances of meaning by preferring colloquialism and idioms where these do
not exist in the original."(Newmark,1988,p.47)
Larson (1984) provides that "the first crucial step in the translation of idioms is to
be absolutely certain of the meaning of the source language idioms. Therefore, the most
important issue in translating idioms is the ability to distinguish the difference between
the literal meaning and the real meaning of the expression."
Larson (1984,pp.48-49) provides that "a literal word-for-word translation of the
idioms into another language will not make sense. The form cannot be kept, but the
receptor language word or phrase which has the equivalent meaning will be the correct
one to use in translation."
Larson (1984) suggests that "translators who want to make a good idiomatic
translation often finds figures of speech especially challenging"(p.49).
Baker (1992,pp.26-43) states that the main strategies in translating idioms are: 1)
using an idiom of similar meaning and form to the source language idiom, ( It must
convey roughly the same meaning and be of equivalent lexical items); 2) using an idiom
of similar meaning but different form (In this case the lexical items of an idiom are not

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

14

preserved, it is translated as a semantic equivalent; 3) translation by paraphrasing, using
this kind of strategy a translator transfers the meaning of an idiom using a single word
or a group of words which roughly corresponds to the meaning of idiom but is not an
idiom itself; 4) translation by omission which Toury (1995) calls it "metaphor to 0", as
this strategy implies that sometimes an idiom may be omitted, leaving no traces in the
target language.(p.82)
According to Baker (1992) translators should learn the various factors in translating
idioms, such a availability of an idiomatic expression with a similar meaning in the TL,
the significance of the specific lexical items constituting the idiom, i.e. whether they are
manipulated elsewhere in the SL, and the appropriateness or inappropriateness of using
idiomatic language in a given register in the TL, style, register and rhetorical effect.
Baker (1992,p.68) believes that idioms and fixed expressions which contain culturespecific items are not necessarily untranslatable or difficult to translate.
Mollanazar (2004) suggested two ways to translate an idiom: the first is using an
appropriate idiom which is found in the target language as its equivalent, the second is
when there is no proper idiom in the target language, meaning should be used."(p.52)
Catford (1965) argues that "The meaning of such units is not identical with the
total meaning of their constituents and it is impossible to translate such units word for
word in most cases. The idiom or phrase is considered as the unit of translation"(p.44).
Baker (1992) suggests that "a person's competence for using idioms and fixed
expressions of a foreign language is not comparable with that of a native speaker". She
argues that "most of translators working into a foreign language cannot hope to achieve
the same sensitivity of the native speakers of a language in judging when and how an
idiom can be manipulated."

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

15

Gottlieb (1997) taking the contrastive analysis approach, gives the following
typology for the translation of idioms:
1- SL idioms matched by TL idioms
a) Convergence (identical at word level)
b) Equivalence (differing at word level)
2- SL idioms matched by other TL lexemes:
c) Single –word matches
d) Formula(i.e. non-metaphorical multi-word matches)
e) Free form (i.e. encyclopedic meaning ) (p.319)
Helleklev (2006) suggests four ways of handling idioms:
"1-By translating an idiom with an equivalent idiom.
2-Word for word.
3-With an explanatory everyday expression
4-An everyday expression is translated by using an idiom"(p.27)
2.5.Translation of Idioms and Fixed Expression
Both idioms and fixed expressions convey many cultural aspects such as religious
beliefs, superstitions, ideologies of different people from different societies and nations.
Idioms and fixed expressions reflects everyday speech.
Most of the scholars such as Baker and Carter consider idioms and fixed
expressions as being of no flexibility to change in form and grammar. Baker (1992)
states that:
Idioms and fixed expression are at the extreme end of the scale from
collocations in one or both of these areas: flexibility of patterning and
transparency of meaning. They are frozen patterns of languages which allow

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

16

little or no variation in form and, in the case of idioms, often carry meanings
which cannot be deduced from their individual components.(p.63)
Moreover, Carter (1998,p.66) classifies idioms as a type of fixed expression that
include proverbs, stock phrases, catchphrases, allusions, idiomatic similes and
discoursal expressions.
Glucksberg (2001; pp.68-69) also tries to explain the difficulty of defining idioms.
What separates idioms from fixed expressions is the absence of any relation between
the semantic meaning and the idiomatic meaning.
Moon (1998) defines Idioms as "an ambiguous term, used in conflicting ways.
Idiom has two main meanings; 1) a particular meaning that expresses something in
language such as music, art, and so on, which characterizes a person or group; 2) a
particular lexical collocation or phrasal lexeme, peculiar to a language"(p.3)
Baker (1992) states that "words rarely occur on their own; they almost always
occur in the company of other words. But words are not strung together at random in
any language; there are always restrictions on the way they can be combined to convey
meaning"(pp.47-48). Moreover, Baker(1992) states that
The main problems that idiomatic and fixed expressions pose in translation
relate to two main areas: the ability to recognize and interpret an idiom
correctly; and the difficulties involved in rendering the various aspects of
meaning that an idiom or a fixed expression conveys into the target language.
(p.65)
Baker (1992) also states that difficulties are encountered largely in the case of idioms
and not fixed expressions.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

17

2.6.Previous Studies Related to Translating Idioms
Teilanyo (2014) conducted a study in order to provide a comparative study of
selected idioms in Nembe (Nigeria) and English. The researcher in his study discussed
certain English idioms that have parallels in Nembe. His study revealed that idioms in
English and Nembe were similar despite the distance between the two languages and
cultures. It was discovered that the idioms shared the same propositions but used
different lexical items according to the socio-cultural nuances of these people. For
example, "To rain cats and dogs" is phrasal in structure but has its propositional
equivalent in the compound-sentential "Kana ka bura terigha; buru ka kana terigha."
Alagoa (1986,pp.60,61) gives only a half of it : "kana buru terigha". The English uses
the local animals "cats" and "dogs". The Nembe idiom uses the equally domestic such
as "basket" and "yam". It is derived from the fact that a basket with its holes is
incapable of shielding a yam from rain, just as a yam does not have enough surface area
to cover a basket from rain . The two idioms express the proposition of a heavy rain. In
a few cases, the lexical items were even identical. In some cases, the grammatical forms
were different or the images were more clear in one language than in the other, but the
two were still propositionally equivalent. The study denoted that some idioms were
easily translatable between these languages. It also implied that when an English user of
Nembe heard a Nembe idiom that had a similar idiom or proverb in his/her native
English language, she/he was likely to make an informed guess of the communicative
import, rather than be dislocated as often thought. Therefore, idiomatic usage was an
area to be exploited further in subserving intercultural communication and global
culture in general.
Nemcova (2013) conducted a study in order to tackle a comparative study of
English and French body parts idioms by selecting a group of English and French body

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

18

organs: hand, head and foot. The method of this comparative analysis was based on the
concept of equivalence between idioms of the source and target language. The analysis
was carried out to prove or reject the hypothesis that human body idioms represented an
important part of the essence vocabulary both in English and French since human body
expressions appeared in a large number of idioms. For example, Keep one's head,
garder sa tete, zachovat si hlavu. These category covers idioms that have the same
meaning and follow the same syntactic structure of a verbal or non-verbal idiom. The
English idiom Keep one's head with its French equal are an example. The lexical means
employed are identical, both idioms used the same body part and stylistically neutral
verb with the same denotation. These idioms are absolutely equivalent on the formal,
lexical and semantic level. The research showed that English and French shared a
similar cultural bequest. Thus, they shared many metaphorical idiomatic expressions.
The hypothesis showed that the high numbers of partially and non-equivalent idioms
were not similar in the meaning, structure and usage. As a result, idioms that were
certainly equivalent represented the smallest group.
Vokacova (2005) conducted a study in order to represent a comparative view of
English, Czech, French and German idioms. This study focused on one idiom areahuman body. The study adopted the hypothesis that there is more corresponding idioms
in Czech and German than in Czech and English or Czech and French. For example, To
be at one's elbow, Byt po ruce, Etre sous la main, In Reichweite/ bei sich sein. The
meaning of these idioms is to be near someone in order to help them. The idiom focuses
on the elbow rather than the arm or some other body part. It means either that someone
is so nearby as to form a disturbance or in order to readily provide help. Czech and
French idioms both use hand in the position of the elbow. The German expression could
be translated within reach. The study showed that the idioms corresponding in all four

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

19

languages compared represented 13% of the body idioms, which suggested that even
four different languages can have corresponding idioms. As a result, Czech and German
represented 39% of all the couplets which made them the most several among all
couplets as opposed to Czech and French with their 25% of the couplets or Czech and
English which formed 14% of the couplets. In sum, the study of the body parts idioms
proved the hypothesis that there existed more corresponding idioms in Czech and
German than in Czech and English or Czech and French.
Straksiene (2009) conducted a study in order to compare English and Lithuanian
idioms, to discuss the problem of no equivalence in the target language, to focus
through main translation strategies used in translation of idioms and examined the
choice of translation strategies used by R. Kirvaityte. The theoretical part was based on
Baker's, Moon's, Newmark's and Toury's strategies. The analytical part was based on
two Christie's novels Appointment with Death (2001) and Death on the Nile (1977). For
example, strategy provided by Bakers is translation of idioms by using an idiom with
similar meaning but different form in the target language such as he was like a cat on
hot bricks (Christie,2001,p.64) and Paprasciausiai jam padai svilo (Kristi,1998,p.84).
The English idiom a cat on hot bricks means to be very nervous. Although Lithuanian
idiom has different lexical structure ,but, its definition "darosi neramu" conveyed the
same meaning as English idiom. The result of this study showed that translating idioms
from those novels required a lot of knowledge about idioms and the usage of different
strategies in translation of idioms in literary translation illustrated the variegated ways
of treatment of this interesting and difficult part of languages.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

20

Chapter III
Methodology

3.1. Introduction
This study focuses on the English novel Appointment with Death and its Arabic
translation. It shows the way idiom is reproduced in the Arabic translation of Christie's
Appointment with death. It provides some basic information about the novel
Appointment with death, the author and the translator of the novel. It presents the main
procedures relating to this study. The main source that has been the theoretical
framework of this study is Baker's strategies which deals with idioms.
3.2. Sample of Study
The novel adopted by this study is Appointment with death and the translated
version by Omar Abdul Aziz Ameen. This novel has another two Arabic versions made
by Yusuf Fakuory and Beirut library. It is a work of detective fiction by Agatha
Christie, first published in United Kingdom by the Collins Crime Club on 2 May1938.
The novel reflects Christie's experience travelling in the Middle East with her husband.
The novel opens as the family and the victim are introduced through the seeable of
Sarah King and Dr. Gerard, who discuss the behavior of the family. It begins in
Jerusalem at the King Solomon Hotel as passengers from different countries check into
the hotel during their respective vacations. The rest of the novel takes place in the
traveler's camp at Petra. It is about Boynton family headed by Mrs. Boynton and her
three adult stepchildren, Ginevra, Lennox, Raymond and Lennox's wife, Nadine. This
novel has been chosen in particular because it includes a large number of idioms, where
it displays a clever mystery, and reflects the author's ability to make sardonic references

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

21

to human foibles and prejudices in humorous and rather non-offensive and forgiving
way.
3.2.1. The Author
Agatha Christie was a famous character in the world of literature. She was born
into a wealthy family in Torquay, Devonshire, England. She did not go to school in her
childhood. Instead, she got her education at home by her mother. She concerned her
mother as her main source of courage. Her mother was strongly convinced that her
daughter was a great person who had a successful life. After her marriage, she had the
chance to visit most of the Eastern countries that gave her an opportunity to write her
most interesting novels. The stability of her life beside other factors were the main
reasons for her creative writing. She was the only crime novelist to have created two
equally famous and much loved characters, Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple. Also, she
was the first crime writer to have 100,000 copies of ten of her titles published by
Penguin on the same day in 1948 -A Penguin Million. She was the only female
dramatist ever to have had three plays running simultaneously in London's West End.
She wrote six bitter sweet novels under the name Mary Westmacott. In 1993 a Christie
novel, Chimneys, received its premiere in Canada over 60 years after it was written.
The Guinness Book of the world record lists her as the best novelist of all time. She
sold billions of copies of her work. Moreover, she was a noted playwright and romance
author.
3.2.2. The Translator
Omar Abdul Aziz Ameen (1908- 1986) was a well-known Egyptian translator. He
was a famous writer and author, too. In 1936, he founded an Egyptian publishing house
known as "Pocket Novels". He published the translation of some crime novels such as
Appointment with Death, Death on the Nile, Towards Zero. Omar Abdul Aziz Ameen

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

22

translated some famous novels such as, Victor Hugo's Les Miserables and Alexandre
Dumas's Les trois mousquetaires. Ameen published some magazines such as Superman,
The spider man, Tarzen, Jokes, Laugh.
3.3. Instrumentation
The analysis of this novel is based on Baker's strategies. Analysis will be made to
overview the most prevailing translation solutions used in all the translations from
English to Arabic. The Arabic and English idiomatic expression in the novel are listed
in preparation for comparison.
3.4. Data Analysis
The data collection in this study depended on identifying English language idioms
included in Appointment with Death and examining the way by which they were
translated into Arabic by Ameen. The basic theoretical part of this study was Mona
Baker's strategies for translating idioms (1992).
Baker provides some cases in which avoiding translation of an idiom will cause a
loss in its meaning and sense:
1) The translator cannot change the order of the word in an idiom,
2) The translator cannot delete a word from it,
3) The translator cannot add a word to it,
4) The translator cannot replace one word by another one and
5) The translator cannot change its grammatical structure (Baker 1992,p.63).
Baker (1992,pp. 72-77) discusses four strategies in translating idioms:
1-Using an Idiom of Similar Meaning and Form
This strategy contains an idiom in the target language which conveys the same
meaning as in the source language idiom and has the same form. The reason of this
matching occurs when the source language and the target language belong to the same

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

23

language family, sharing cultural similarities, Larson (1984: 21) states that "idioms are
often based on stories or historical incidents".
Following is an example for using this strategy in translating idioms;
1- "A true friend does not stab in the back" (ST).
) ‫( ( ال يطعن الصديق الحقيقي في الظهر‬TT).
2-"He killed his neighbor in cold blood" (ST).
( ‫( )قتل جاره بدم بارد‬TT).
2-Using an Idiom of Similar Meaning but Dissimilar Form
This strategy contains an idiom or fixed expression in the target language which
conveys the same meaning as in the source language idiom but has different lexical
items. It is difficult to find an idiom in the target language which has a similar meaning
to that of the source language idiom. In this kind, the translator should own a good
cultural background about the idiomatic expression to find the correct meaning and a
suitable equivalent idiom that has the same function in the target language.
Following is an example for using this strategy in translating idioms;
1-"How nice to remember your palmy days !" (ST).
(! ‫( )ما أجمل أن تتذكر أيام الرغد والرخاء‬TT).
2-"He is a big shot gun" (ST).
(‫( )هو شخص مهم‬TT).
3-Translation by paraphrase
This is one of the most famous procedure of translating idioms when the translator
cannot find the equivalence in the target language. By using this strategy, the translator
reduces the meaning of an idiom by using a single word or a group of words which
match to the meaning of idiom. In fact, the translator can apply this strategy for idioms
that are less culture-specific than others.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

24

Following is an example for using this strategy in translating idioms;
1-"Wrong end of the stick" (ST).
(‫( ) أخطأ في فهم‬TT).
2-"To keep both feet on the ground" (ST).
(‫( )تبقي أقدامنا على األرض‬TT)
4-Translation by Omission
In some cases, the translator needs to omit the idiomatic expression because it has
no equivalent idiom in the target language or when the translator cannot paraphrase the
meaning of this idiom. According to Baker (1992,p.77) "omission is allowed only in
some cases: First, when there is no close equivalent in the target language. Secondly,
when it is difficult to paraphrase, finally an idiom may be omitted for stylistic reasons".
The study attempted to access dependable conclusions applicable to the translation
of idioms and the different strategies which were found in Agatha Christie's novel,
Appointment with Death. The translation was assessed on the basis of achieving four
strategies: Idiom to idiom translation in its both kinds Idioms of similar meaning and
form, Idioms of similar meaning but dissimilar form and Omission.( Figure 1).
Following is an example for using this strategy in translating idioms;
1- "If it's all the same to you, I'd rather take my chances in open space"(ST).
)‫( ) افضل استخدامه في الفضاء‬TT).
2- "Why do not you just buy him a new outfit and call it a day? (ST)
(‫( ) لماذا ال تشتري له لباسا جديدا؟‬TT).

25

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

Strategies for Translating Idioms
SL(Idioms)

TL(Idioms)

Idiom of Similar

Idiom of Similar

Meaning and

Meaning

Form

Paraphrasing

but Dissimilar Form

Figure. 1
Four Strategies for Translation Idioms

Omission

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

26

Chapter IV
Findings and Discussion

4.1.Introduction
This chapter tackles the analytical part of this study which is the translation given
by Ameen in the Arabic translated version of the novel Appointment with death by
Agatha Christie. The strategies that were used in the translation, and a suggested
translation to some of idioms if needed will be provided.
The analysis of idioms in the translated Arabic version of Christie's Appointment
with Death (2001) was based on Baker's four basic translation strategies for translating
idioms:
1) Idiom to idiom translation which consists of; a) using an idiom of similar meaning
and form, and b) using an idiom of similar meaning but dissimilar form; 2)
paraphrasing; and 3) Omission.
4.2. Idiom to Idiom Translation
This kind of idiom includes using an idiom of similar meaning and form, andusing an idiom of similar meaning but dissimilar form.
Helleklev (2006) mentions four ways of handling idioms. Unlike many scholars,
one of the methods he proposes is a word for word rendering of idioms:
1-By translating an idiom with an equivalent idiom.
2-Word by word .
3-With an explanatory everyday expression.
4-An everyday expression is translated by using an idiom.(p.27)

27

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
4.2.1 Using an Idiom with Similar Meaning and Form in the Target Language

This strategy includes an idiom in the target language which reflects the same
meaning in the source language. Also, it involves the same equivalent lexical items.
The following example, taken from Appointment with Death, matches the above
strategy in translating idioms:
Table (1)
Examples of Idioms Translated by Using Similar Meaning and Form

1

Idiomatic

Idiomatic

Assessing as well as explaining the context

Expression (ST)

Expression (TT)

in which the idioms used

I made a fool on
myself. (P.59)

‫ شعرت انني ارتكبت‬The idiomatic expression here is Sarah and
)12‫ (ص‬.‫ اكبر حماقة‬Dr. Gerard's monologue. It is suitable
expression as it expresses Sarah's mistake for
her interfering in Mrs. Boynton's family
matters.

2

Oddly apathetic.
(p.18)

‫ ضعيف الشخصية‬This idiomatic expression expresses Lennox's
.‫ والميل الى االنطواء‬spineless and isolation.
)22 ‫)ص‬

3

Distorted old
spider in the
center of a web!

‫ أشبه ما تكون بعنكبوت‬The idiomatic expression here describes Mrs.
‫ ضخم سام قابع في‬Boynton's personality. She is a wicked and
)21 ‫ (ص‬.‫ شبكة نسيجه‬bossed woman.

(p.5)
4

Greek head (p. 5)

‫ كإلهة االغريق‬The

idiomatic

expression

expresses.

)22‫ (ص‬Raymond's external look. His face is very
beautiful as Greek head.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

5

28

Idiomatic

Idiomatic

Assessing as well as explaining the context

Expression (ST)

Expression (TT)

in which the idioms used

For standing me

‫ شكرا جزيال على القهوة‬The idiomatic expression (standing me )is

coffee.(p.23)

)21 ‫ )ص‬used to place Sarah's thanking into a standing
position.

6

He took stock of
them.(p.27)

‫ يختلس النظر الى‬The idiomatic expression reflects Dr. Gerard's
) 21‫ (ص‬.‫ افرادها‬deep look towards Mrs. Boynton's family and
his own analysis towards the members of this
family.

The translator in the above examples tried to translate idioms that have similar
meaning and form. Idioms in this kind of strategy are translated directly, but should be
understood indirectly. They have metaphorical meanings. Moreover, they are all fixed
idioms, saying something to mean something else. As a result, these idiomatic
expressions own a very important position in the novel in order to understand all the
precise details such as Mrs. Boynton's family and their strange behaviors.
4.2.2. Using an Idiom with Similar Meaning but Different Form
This strategy contains an idiomatic expressions in the target language which have a
similar meaning in the source text but convey different lexical items. In the examples
below, the translator has cultural background relating to the idiomatic expression in
order to find the equivalent idioms having the same functions in the target text.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

29

Table (2)
Examples of Idioms Translated by Using Similar Meaning but Dissimilar Form

1

Idiomatic

Idiomatic

Assessing as well as explaining the

Expression (ST)

Expression (TT)

context in which the idioms used

Shied like a nervous
horse. (p.22)

‫ ثم أجفل كجواد فزع من‬This idiom (nervous horse) conveys
)21 ‫ (ص‬.‫شيء‬

a good meaning as it reflects
Raymond's behavior towards his
family.

2

Her voice deep and
hoarse. (p.1)

)6‫ بصوت متهدج (ص‬In this example, it is Carol and
Raymond's monologue through
which the reader is introduced to
Carol's erratic behavior (fear). This
idiom conveys a good value for the
way it reflects Christie's overall
purpose of the novel theme which is
death. It is a reasonable translation
for this idiom as the translator
gathered between two similar words
into one simple word.

3

A placid face not

‫ تشبه في غموضها لوحة‬The reader is introduced to Nadine's

unlike a Luini

‫ مرسومة بريشة ليوناردو‬personality. This idiom reflects her

Madonna (p.5)

)22 ‫(ص‬. ‫ دافينشى‬character which is mysterious and
ambiguous person. The translator in
this example replaced the original
expression of his own, so the
researcher though it was
unsuccessful translation.

30

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

4

Idiomatic

Idiomatic

Expression (ST)

Expression (TT)

She just looked at us
as though we were –as

Assessing as well as explaining the
context in which the idioms used

‫ نظرت إلينا وكأننا حشرات‬In this idiomatic expression, the
) 99 ‫ (ص‬translator

over

acted

at

his

though we were dirt!

translation and twisted the meaning

(p. 61)

a little bit by using more aggressive
words for the translation, so the
researcher thought he was not
successful for this one.

5

What a horror of a
woman!" old, swollen,

‫ ياللهول انها نموذج لزوجة‬This idiomatic expression reflects
‫الشيطان ان كان للشيطان‬

Gerard and Sarah's dialogue to

. ‫ زوجة‬discuss Mrs. Boynton's abnormal

bloated.

)21 ‫ (ص‬personality which is wicked.
6

The strange unearthly
smile that lifts the lips
of the Maidens .( p 10)

7

A soft husky voice

‫ وقد ذكرته ابتسامتها‬This

expression depicts

Carol's

‫ بابتسامات تماثيل االلهه في‬smiling which is similar to Maidens.
. ‫معابد االغريق‬
( 29 ‫)ص‬
‫ تسمع هذا الصوت الذي‬The idiomatic expression reflects
.‫ يشبه فحيح األفعى‬Mrs. Boynton's wicked voice.

(P23)

)10‫(ص‬

8

With the assurance of
a

transatlantic

coming into dock.
(p.59)

‫ بثبات عابرات المحيطات‬This expression expresses Lady

liner

Westholme's self confidence even
) 91 ‫(ص‬

she was in a criminal case. In fact,
this idiom is used when there is a
criminal case especially in a court of
law.

31

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

9

Idiomatic

Idiomatic

Expression (ST)

Expression (TT)

Take

a

snubbing

laying down.(p.24)

Assessing as well as explaining the
context in which the idioms used

.‫ تقبل مثل هذا التصرف‬In this example, it is Sarah's
)21 ‫ )ص‬monologue with herself to endure
something

unpleasant

without

fighting back.

10 Produced by a cobra.
(p.35)

.‫ نموذج للطاغية الرهيب‬This idiom presents Mrs. Boynton's
) 12 ‫ (ص‬bad behaviors towards her family.

11 His keen professional

‫ وتأمل أفراد االسرة بنظرة‬The idiomatic expression conveys

glance flitted swiftly

)22‫ فاحصة (ص‬Dr. Gerard's amazement towards

from face to face.

Mrs. Boynton's family as they live

(p.17)

in isolation from the outside world.

12 Isn't it rather a fuss
about nothing. (p 55)

.‫ زوبعة في فنجان‬In this example, the translator
) 99 ‫(ص‬

paraphrased the meaning of the
idiom in the source language to be
more clear to the reader.

In this kind of idioms, the translator needs to understand the context only because
they cannot be understood in isolation. That is the reason for having them in full
sentences. If the context does not help, literal translation of words can be suggested on
the condition that it is clearly understood. If not, it must be wrong, and the reader have
to recourse to a special English-English (monolingual) or an English-Arabic (bilingual)
dictionary of idioms or other reference. So, the translator must be aware at attempting
direct translation of any idiom. Noteworthy, some examples are not idioms but they

32

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

were used idiomatically in the context of this novel. Also, all these idiomatic
expressions play an important role in describing Mrs. Boynton's family and the criminal
case in the novel.
4.3. Translation by Paraphrase
This is the most popular procedure of translating idioms when the equivalence
cannot be found in the target language or when it seems unsuitable to use idiomatic
language in the target text because of the stylistic differences in the source and target
languages. This strategy is suitable to idioms which are less culture-specific than others.
Table (3)
Examples of Idioms Translated by Using Paraphrasing in Christie’s Appointment
with Death
Idiomatic Expression

Idiomatic Expression

Assessing as well as explaining

(ST)

(TT)

the context in which the idioms
used

1

"I do. she's got a-oh, a
malevolent eye!"
(p 7)

‫ اني أنفر منها وكأنها افعى‬, ‫ نعم‬In this idiomatic expression, the
.‫ شريرة النظرات‬translator paraphrased the idiom in
( 21 ‫ ) ص‬the source text (malevolent eye) to
be more easier in the target text.
) ‫) شريرة النظرات‬

2

You poor old thing.
(p.88)

.‫يا لك من مخلوقة عجوز بائسة‬

In this idiomatic expression, the

)11 ‫(ص‬

translator gave more information
in the TT to clarify the meaning
for his readers such as (‫)بائسة‬

3

Rule the roost (p.44)

)19‫ يعتمد عليها في شؤونه (ص‬The translator used this idiomatic
expression to show that Mrs.
Boynton is the boss and manager

33

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
Idiomatic Expression

Idiomatic Expression

Assessing as well as explaining

(ST)

(TT)

the context in which the idioms
used
especially at home. The idiom in
this expression conveys idiom
with similar meaning but different
form.

4

The best part of a
week. (p.39)

‫ تحتاج الرحلة الى ستة أيام على‬The translator used this idiomatic
)11 ‫ (ص‬.‫ األقل‬expression to show the exact time
that the trip needs to arrive to
Petra. The idiom here presents
similar meaning but different
form.

5

Work's a good tonic
(p.45)

. ‫ ليبحث عن عمل يرتزق منه‬The idiomatic expression shows
)19 ‫ (ص‬Raymond's opportunity in finding
a good job.

6

Have to lamp it. (p.52)

. ‫ نعرف الحقيقة‬In this idiomatic expression, Sarah
) 99 ‫ )ص‬asked Hercule Poirot to discover
the reality in Mrs. Boynton's
death.

7

The rabbit out of the
hat (p.52)

.‫ أن نكشف غموض الجريمة‬The idiomatic expression presents
)91‫ (ص‬Dr. Gerard's attempts in order to
discover the crime of Mrs.
Boynton's death.

8

His eyes shone with a
green light (p.71)

.‫ ركز بوارو نظراته عليه‬This idiomatic expression
explains M. Poirot's attempts in
order to discover the crime.

34

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
Idiomatic Expression

Idiomatic Expression

Assessing as well as explaining

(ST)

(TT)

the context in which the idioms
used

9

A wounded dog or a

.‫ وبدا له انسان يائس تماما‬This idiom expresses Dr. Gerard's
) 29 ‫ (ص‬first impression towards Lennox's

sick horse(p.29)

personality which is weak and
despair. The researcher though
that it was a successful translation
because the idiomatic expression
reflects the exact features of
Lennox.
10 Approaching it from

.‫ انما العكس هو الصحيح‬This example presents Sarah and

the wrong angle.(p.55)

)11 ‫ (ص‬Gerard's dialogue. In this idiom,
the translator tried to find the
correct equivalent which has a
similar meaning but different
form.

In these examples, the translator made an addition in his translation. This addition
reflects his neutrality which covered on his objectivity at the novel. Noteworthy, some
examples are not idioms but they were used idiomatically in the context of this novel.
The translator tended to use this strategy when equivalence is not available. As a
result, the translator tried to convey the sense and the meaning of the source text (ST).
Toury (1995) stated that "There are plenty of terms used to refer to this strategy:
"metaphor into non-metaphor."(p.82)

35

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
4.4. Translation by Omission

Sometimes the translator needed to omit an idiomatic expression in the target text
because no equivalence in the target text or the meaning cannot be easily paraphrased,
or for stylistic reasons. According to Baker (1992) "Omission is allowed only in some
cases: first, when there is no equivalent in the target language, secondly, when it is
difficult to paraphrase, finally an idiom may be omitted for stylistic reason." (p.77)
Table (4)
Examples of Idioms Translated by Using Omission in Christie’s Appointment with
Death

1

Idiomatic Expression

Idiomatic

Suggestion

(ST)

Expression (TT)

Translation

Had the world at her feet.(40)

‫وانفصلت سارة عن زمالئها‬

‫وترى العالم بين يديها‬

‫وتجولت بعيدا عنهم بعض‬,
‫الشيء وفيما هي واقفة فوق‬
‫ مستغرقة‬----------‫مرتفع‬
)61‫ (ص‬.‫في التفكير‬

2

Dr. Gerard, a twinkle in his eye, and
quite unperturbed. (p.30)

‫كان يجب ان اواصل‬

‫وأضاف دكتور جيرار‬

‫ ولكن الوقت قد‬, ‫المحاولة‬

‫ هذا جعلك‬. ‫مسرعا‬

‫ كان بهو الفندق‬--------‫فات‬

.‫كساحرة‬

‫مسرحا لنشاط كبير بسبب‬
‫استعداد بعض من النزالء‬
.‫للقيام ببعض الرحالت‬
) 11‫(ص‬

‫‪36‬‬

‫‪TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH‬‬
‫‪Suggestion‬‬

‫‪Idiomatic‬‬

‫‪Idiomatic Expression‬‬

‫‪Translation‬‬

‫)‪Expression (TT‬‬

‫)‪(ST‬‬

‫توقف الحديث ثم قال‬

‫ال‪..‬ال‪ ..‬إنها ليست امنا‪-------‬‬

‫‪His voice now quietly matter- of- fact:‬‬

‫ريموند بصوت هادئ‬

‫‪ ------‬هل توافقين يا كارول؟‬

‫)‪"you do agree, Carol?" (p.12‬‬

‫وصريح‬

‫(ص‪)1‬‬

‫بالتأكيد انه رجل بارز في‬

‫إنه الدكتور جيرار هل‬

‫مجاله‪.‬‬

‫سمعت عنه ؟ ‪------------‬‬

‫‪A very distinguished man in his own‬‬

‫‪3‬‬

‫‪4‬‬

‫)‪line. (p.46‬‬

‫ويحسن أن أستدعيه لنسمع‬
‫أقواله ‪(.‬ص‪)11‬‬
‫إنه من السىء أن يعتمدوا‬

‫وهذا يعني أنهم يعتمدون في‬

‫عليها في الوقت الذي يجب‬

‫معاشهم عليها تماما‪---------‬‬

‫على الشخص أن يتصرف‬

‫ال شك أن زوجته غير سعيدة‬

‫على هواه‪.‬‬

‫بهذا الوضع‪( .‬ص‪)19‬‬

‫ثم قال لماذا قمتي بتحطيم‬

‫صمت لينوكس لمدة دقيقتين‪-‬‬

‫أعصابي‪.‬‬

‫‪ ---------‬كنت مذهوال‪.‬‬

‫‪It's up to him to kick over the traces of‬‬

‫‪5‬‬

‫)‪his own accord. (p.46‬‬

‫‪A creak on the head. (p.87).‬‬

‫‪6‬‬

‫وفجأة رأيت كم كنت أحمق‪.‬‬
‫(ص‪)212‬‬

‫وكان في صوتها غصة‬

‫ما رأيكم يا أوالد؟‪----------‬‬
‫‪ ----‬وجاءت اإلجابات‬

‫‪There was a queer ring in her voice.‬‬

‫‪7‬‬

‫)‪(p.39‬‬

‫سريعة متوالية‪( .‬ص‪)11‬‬
‫فتوقف دكتور جيرار وهو‬

‫إن الرحلة شاقة ‪,‬واعتقد ان‬

‫‪He paused. Gerard heard the even click‬‬

‫يسمع ادق األشياء لمسز‬

‫المسز بونتون ال تتحملها ‪,‬‬

‫‪of Mrs. Boynton's knitting needles.‬‬

‫بوينتون‬

‫ولهذا البد أن يبقى معها‬
‫بعضكم هنا ‪,‬على أن يذهب‬

‫)‪(p39‬‬

‫‪8‬‬

‫‪37‬‬

‫‪TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH‬‬
‫‪Suggestion‬‬

‫‪Idiomatic‬‬

‫‪Idiomatic Expression‬‬

‫‪Translation‬‬

‫)‪Expression (TT‬‬

‫)‪(ST‬‬

‫البعض االخر لزيارة هذه‬
‫المدينة التاريخية‪,‬انها جديرة‬
‫بالزيارة حقا‪ ---------‬فقالت‬
‫األم ‪ :‬اننا ال نحب ان نفترق‪.‬‬
‫(ص‪) 11‬‬

‫اعتقد انها مدينة معزولة‬

‫كما أرجو أن أتمكن من‬

‫‪I believe that is and right off the beaten‬‬

‫وغير معروفة عند كثير‬

‫زيارة مدينة بترا األثرية‬

‫)‪track.(p.39‬‬

‫من الناس‬

‫الناشئة في واد من الصخور‬

‫‪9‬‬

‫الوردية‪ ---------‬انها بعيدة‬
‫عن العمران‪( .‬ص‪)11‬‬
‫الرجل الذي يحترم نفسه‬

‫ضاعت منه كل الفرص‬

‫هو الذي يعتمد على نفسه‬

‫ليثبت جدارته بالحياة‪------.‬‬

‫عندما يكون في وقت‬

‫‪-‬ال شك أن زوجته غير‬

‫صعب ‪.‬‬

‫سعيدة بهذا الوضع‪(.‬ص‪)19‬‬

‫رفع دكتور جيرار قبعتة ثم‬

‫كانت سارة قليلة الكالم ‪-----‬‬

‫ودع سارة‬

‫‪ ----‬وترك الفندق‪( .‬ص‪)11‬‬

‫وقد أضاع وقته سدى وبال‬

‫أما لينوكس‪ ,‬فإنه قد انتهى‪.‬‬

‫فائدة‪.‬‬

‫ضاعت منه كل الفرص‬
‫ليثبت جدارته بالحياة ‪------.‬‬
‫ال شك أن زوجته غير‬‫سعيدة بهذا الوضع‪( .‬ص‪)19‬‬

‫‪10 A man who respects himself strikes out‬‬
‫)‪on his own.(p.46‬‬

‫‪11 Dr. Gerard hastily raised his hat "I take‬‬
‫)‪my leave." (p.85‬‬

‫‪12 He doesn't just sit round and twiddle his‬‬
‫)‪thumbs.(p.47‬‬

‫‪38‬‬

‫‪TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH‬‬

‫‪Suggestion‬‬

‫‪Idiomatic‬‬

‫‪Idiomatic Expression‬‬

‫‪Translation‬‬

‫)‪Expression (TT‬‬

‫)‪(ST‬‬

‫المشكله في العقل وليس‬

‫وتكلمت مسز بوينتن بصوت‬

‫الجسد‪.‬‬

‫خشن وحزين‪-------------‬‬

‫‪13 I don't give in to my body! It's the mind‬‬
‫)‪that matters.(p.38‬‬

‫واختفى صوتها‪.‬‬
‫(ص‪)11‬‬
‫كانت ردة فعل ريموند‬
‫عصبية‬

‫فغمغم‬

‫لينوكس‬

‫قائال ال ‪14 Gerard saw Raymond Boynton give a‬‬

‫أعرف‪-----------------.‬‬

‫)‪nervous jerk.(p.38‬‬

‫إني ارجو أن أفرغ من رؤية‬
‫كل شئ في القدس خالل‬
‫يوميين‪.‬‬

‫(ص‪)11‬‬

‫حيث أعطته سحر‬

‫تشبه ابتسامات تماثيل االلهه‬

‫‪16 The magic of the smile, her exquisite‬‬

‫ابتسامتها سكون رائع‬

‫في معابد االغريق‪---------‬‬

‫)‪stillness gave him a little pang.(p.30‬‬

‫مصحوبا بذرة ألم‪.‬‬

‫ولكنه الحظ فجأة ان يديها‬
‫اللتين كانتا في حجرها‪,‬‬
‫مشغولتين بتمزيق منديل‬
‫حريري صغير‪( .‬ص‪)29‬‬

‫وقد ذكرته بشيئا ما وخطر‬

‫وكأنها تحلق في عالم بعيد‬

‫في باله فجأة‬

‫عن مدينة القدس‪,‬وفندق الملك‬
‫سليمان‪ ----------‬ان‬
‫ابتسامتها الذاهلة‪ ,‬تشبه‬
‫ابتسامات تماثيل اآللهة‪,‬في‬
‫معابد االغريق‪( .‬ص‪)29‬‬

‫)‪17 Presently it came to him in a flash(p.30‬‬

39

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

Idiomatic Expression
(ST)

Idiomatic

Suggestion

Expression

Translation

(TT)

18 I think, for the blow to fall. (p.29)

‫فقد كانت امارات اليأس و‬

‫ينتظر موته‬

.‫االستسالم ناطقة على وجهه‬
‫ إن المسكين يشبه‬--------)29‫ (ص‬.‫مريضا بالسرطان‬
19 I weave a story of black magic round it
.(p.36)

‫وأدرك في تلك اللحظة‬

‫سأنسج قصة تتمحور حول‬

‫المعاني الحقيقة التي كانت‬

. ‫الشر‬

‫تختفي خلف عبارات أفراد‬
.‫األسرة عند الحديث العادي‬
‫انها معاني تنم عن الحقد‬
.‫والكراهية والتمرد المكبوت‬
‫ وعاد ينظر باهتمام‬--------‫إلى السيدة الشابة المدعوة‬
)12‫ (ص‬.‫نادين‬

These idioms have some deletion and some adding of the translator, he did not
used his objectivity in a right way because he added some parts of his own mind that
are not useful for the translation and turned the novel into a new one, and deleted very
important parts that are supposed to be the plot of the novel. For example,
Lennox spoke apathetically- without interest. Find it kind of disappointing, do you?
I will confess it struck me that way at first. But perhaps you haven't been around much
yet?
Carol Boynton said: "We can't do very much because of mother". Mrs. Boynton
explained: "A couple of hours" sight-seeing is about all I can manage every day".

40

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

The stranger said heartily: I think it's wonderful you manage to do all you do, Mrs.
Boynton." Mrs. Boynton gave a slow, wheezy chuckle; it had an almost gloating sound.
"I don't give in to my body! It's the mind that matters !
Yes, it's the mind….
Her voice died away. Gerard saw Raymond Boynton give a nervous jerk.(p.38)
The previous paragraph is taken from the novel Appointment with Death. The
translator ignored to translate this part. This is may be due to the large numbers of
idioms that this novel contain. The translator may think that the translation of this part
would confuse the readers' understanding. However, The researcher thought that this
part should be translated because idioms in this part will add a lot of meaning especially
in understanding the relationship among the members of the family. As a result, the
researcher does not agree with the translator in this part. The researcher suggests this
translation:
.‫تحدث لينوكس بفتور ومن غير مباالة‬
‫إنها خيبة أمل اليس كذلك؟‬
‫ ولكن ربما بسبب غياب وجودك حتى االن؟‬.‫أنا اعترف أنها استوقفتني في البداية‬
. ‫ "نحن ال نستطيع أن نفعل الكثير بسبب األم‬:‫وقالت كارول بوينتون‬
"‫ "بعد مضي بضع ساعات‬:‫أوضحت السيدة بوينتون‬
.‫التجول بالمنطقة هو ما أقوم به كل يوم‬
:‫وقال الغريب بحرارة للسيدة بوينتون‬
.‫اعتقد أنه ألمر رائع إن استطعت أن تفعلي كل ما عليك فعله‬
.‫ وهفتت بصوت ساخر‬, ‫ضحكت السيدة بوينتون ضحكة بطيئة وصفراء‬
!‫أنا ال استسلم لمتاعب جسدي ! ما دام عقلي بكامل صحته‬
...‫بالفعل انه العقل‬
.‫ رأى جيرار ريموند بوينتون عاكسا ردة فعل عصبية‬. ‫وانطفئ صوت السيدة بوينتون‬

41

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
4.5.Discussion

The analysis of idioms' translation in Appointment with Death by Agatha Christie
(2001) showed that the translator used more than one strategy.
Firstly, the translator applied all kinds of strategies used in translating idioms in
order to clarify the meaning to the reader in the framework of the original text.
However, it can be seen that the most prevailing strategy was idiom to idiom strategy
in its both kinds, idiom of similar meaning and form, and idiom of similar meaning but
dissimilar form strategy. Idioms of similar meaning and form comprises 40% of all
applied strategies and idioms of similar meaning but dissimilar form comprises 30% of
all applied strategies. Secondly, it was clear that the translator tended to use omission in
translating some idioms that have no equivalence. It comprises 30% of all used
translation strategies. Thirdly, he used paraphrasing when it enriches the meaning of the
text. It comprises 15% of all used translation strategies. The following figures will
illustrate different preference for strategies by the translator.(figure 2-3).
45
40
35

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Idioms of Similar Idioms of Similar
Meaning but
meaning and form
Dissimilar Form

omission

paraphrasing

Figure (2)
Strategies for Translating Idioms in Christie's novel Appointment with Death

42

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH
45
40

40

35
30

30

25

25

20
15

15

10

5
0
Idioms of similar
Idioms of Similar
Meaning but dissimilar meaning and form
form

omission

paraphrasing

Figure (3)
Strategies Used for Translation Idioms in Appointment with Death

Finally, the analysis of the translation of idioms in Agatha Christie's novel
Appointment with death (2001) has showed that translation of idioms required that the
translator needs special and specific ability to recognize and translate an idiom correctly
in the target language and he/she should be familiar with source language idioms.
Moreover, the translator should focus on the various aspects of meaning and the
function of the idiom in the novel since the function of idiom determines the importance
of idiom's appearance.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

43

Chapter V
Conclusion and Recommendations

5.1.Conclusion
This study shed some light on idioms translation included in Christie's novel
Appointment with Death (2001). The translated version made by Omar Abdul Aziz
Ameen was chosen for this study to represent the difficulties in the process of
translating idioms. Translating idioms are seemingly the most complex and serious
errand for translators because mastering a language requires being aware of its idioms
and their specific meaning.
The previous discussion has revealed that there are general similarities between the
use of idioms in Arabic and English despite the differences between the two languages
and cultures. It is clear that the idioms share the same suggestions but need different
procedures in order to translate them. There are a few strategies which can be utilized
for translating idioms. The translator ought to pick a fitting system as indicated by the
motivation behind the translation however in the meantime he/she must put into
consideration that nothing ought to be wiped out. Each idiom in one specific language
has its own meaning that might be confined to the context as well as the culture of that
language.
This study has shown that there are some difficulties related to the translation of
idioms and fixed expression such as:
1) An idiom may have no equivalent in the target text,
2) An idiom may have a different meaning,
3) Idioms may convey its literal sense,
4) The different contexts in which idioms can be used.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

44

To avoid these difficulties, the translator should be able to select the suitable
strategy. Translating idioms includes four basic translation strategies: idiom to idiom
translation which contains using idiom of similar meaning and form and using idiom of
similar meaning but dissimilar form, paraphrasing, and omission.
In Christie's novel, the translator has disclosed certain procedures in order to find
suitable equivalence in translations. So, the main focus in this study was to discuss
translator's preferences for strategies of translating idioms. As a result, he translated
idioms by using idiom of similar form and meaning, and idioms of similar meaning but
different form in order to find the meaning of the original idioms. Also, he used
translation by paraphrasing to seek the equivalent meaning when a match cannot be
found in the target language or when it seems inappropriate to use idiomatic expression
in the target text because of differences in the stylistic aspects between the source and
target languages. This strategy causes an influence of interference of another language.
In addition, he used translation by omission in which an idiom is deleted by the
translator in the target language due to lack of close match in the target language. Using
this strategy, may not help the translator gives the translation the correct meaning since
an idiomatic expression is totally omitted. In fact, the translator ignored to translate
some parts of the novel. This is may be due to the large number of idioms that these
parts contain. The translator may think the translation of these parts would confuse the
readers' understanding. However, the researcher thought that these parts should be
translated because idioms will add a lot of meaning especially in understanding the
relationship among the members of the family.
It is the situation which decides which strategy to be taken. Moreover, the comparison
between the source and target texts reflects the most suitable strategy in translating
idioms.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

45

The current study focused on grouping words such as idioms and idiomatic
expressions. The translation of idioms in Agatha Christie's novel Appointment with
Death (2001) needs a deep knowledge on both source language and the target language
to understand the meanings of idioms and fixed expressions of the source language and
the equivalent meaning in the target language beside the strategies in translating them in
order to deal with the problems that arise in the process of idiom translation.
With a specific end goal to better translate an idiom, the translator ought to
recognize those expressions which are not colloquialisms. At that point, the translator
needs to explore the characterization to which that specific idiom has a place and
chooses the suitable methodology for his translation. Amid this procedure, the translator
ought to be cautious of the instinctive nature and meaningfulness of his content. He
would better attempt his best to discover equivalences to exchange both the structure
and meaning and be mindful of not erasing the entire meaning when translating idiom
for which there is no correspondence for.
The impact that culture has on translation may help to uncover the parts of
translation that the abstractly based and semantically based translation hypotheses have
neglected to do. Without a methodological investigation of translation and society, any
so-asserted hypothetical arrangement of translation studies is fragmented. This
commitment concentrates on the treatment of idioms and will reveal insight into the
translation of other social specificities. It is expected to introduce further inside and out
investigation of relations among culture and translation.
In sum, learning idioms is very important in our life since we find them in many
aspects and different domains such as Quran, Poetry, Drama, Cultures, Saying, Novels
and so on. Idioms economize the writer's style in writing by using little words that
reflect the exact meaning. Another important feature to point out through investigating

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

46

the translated version of this novel was that idioms are fixed, which means that people
cannot just determine to make up their own. Finally, the glossaries and dictionaries of
idiomatic expressions are very important because they help the translator to enrich
his/her knowledge in idioms.
5.2.Recommendations
Translation in the field of literature does not have enough studies concerning the
Arabic language. Thus, translators should exert their great efforts to meet the needs of
the Arabic language. The field of translating idioms requires more depth that what
meets the eye. The themes and how they are manifested in the literary text must be
analyzed during the process of translation. This research should be useful to other
researchers interested in idioms. They can learn different strategies in translating idioms
in order to gain the precise meanings of idioms in novels.
Recommendations For Further Research and Studies:
The researcher recommends the following:
1) Analyzing the strategies used for translating idioms in other Arabic translations
of the same novel Appointment with Death and make a comparison between the
strategies used by different translator in order to identify the best translation.
2) Doing more investigation regarding the strategies of translating idioms in other
literary works to identify the most common strategy used in translating idioms in the
field of literature from English to Arabic.
3)Doing more research for analyzing the strategies used in translating idioms in
other fields, such as political, cultural, religious and scientific fields.
4)Practicing idiomatic expressions in translator's everyday use of English language.
5)Focusing on dictionaries concerning with idioms in order to understand the meaning
of idioms and the correct function for them.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

47

References
Awwad, M. (1990). "Equivalence and translatability of English and Arabic idioms".
Yarmouk University : Irbid.
Baker, M. (1992). In other words: a course book on translating. London and New York:
Routledge.
Baldick, C. (1990). Concise dictionary of literary terms. Oxford, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Bassnett, S. (1980). Translation studies, third edition. London: Routledge.
Bassnett, S. and Andre (eds) (1990). Translation, history and culture, first chapter.
London: Casell.
Basnett, S. (1992). Translation studies, revised edition. London and New York:
Routledge.
Bell, R.T. (1991). Translation and translating: theory and practice. London: Longman
Group.
Cacciari, C. and Tabossi, P. (eds) (1993). Idioms processing structure and
interpretation. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Carter, R. (1998). Vocabulary: applied linguistics perspective. 2nd edition. London and
NewYork: Routledge.
Catford, JC. (1965). A linguistic theory of translation. London: Oxford University Press.
Chen ,W. (2005). The story behind English idioms. Haikou: Nan Hai publish House.
Christie, A. (2001). Appointment with death. London: Harper Collins publishers.
Davies, M. G. (2004). Multiple voice in the translation classroom: Activities tasks and
projects. Amesterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Fernando, C. ( 1994). Idioms and idiomaticity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

48

Fernando, C. and Flavell, R. (1981). On idiom: critical views and perspectives. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Fernando, C. and Flavell, R. (1985). Idioms and idiomaticity. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gentzler, E. (2001). Contemporary translation theories (Rev. 2nd ed.). Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Ghazala, H. (2014). Translation as problems and solutions. Riyadh, Konooz Al-Marifa.
Gottlieb, H. (1997). Quality revisited: the rendering of English idioms in Danish
television subtitle vs. printed translation. in A. trosborg (ed.), text typology and
translation (pp. 309-338). Amesterdam: John Benjamins B.V.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language: from metaphor to idioms.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatim, B. and Mayson, I. (1990). Discourse and the translator. London and New York:
Longman.
Hatim, B. and Mayson, I. (1997). The translator as communicator. London and New
York: Routledge.
Helleklev, C. (2006). Metaphors and terminology in social science: a translation and an
analysis. Sweden: Vaxjo University.
Hervey, S. Higgins, I. (1992). Thinking translation: a course in translation method:
French-English. London/ New York: Routledge.
Hornby, A.S. (2005). Oxford advanced learner's dictionary of current English. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hou, N. (2008). Popular English phrases and idioms. Nanjing: Nanjing University
Press.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

49

Jaaskelainen, R. (1999). Tapping the process: an explorative study of cognitive and
effective factors involved in translating. Joensuu: University of Joensuu
Publications in Humanities.
Krings, H.P. (1986). Translation problems and translation strategies of advanced
German learners of French. In J. House, and S. Blum- Kulka (Eds.), Interlingual
and intercultural communication (pp.263-75).Tubingen: Gunter Narr.
Larson, M.L. (1984). Meaning-based translation: A guide to cross-language
equivalence. Lanham, New York: University Press of America.
Leuven-Zwart, K. V. (1989). Translation and original: similarities and dissimilarities, I.
Target 1(2), 151-181.
Loescher, W. (1991). Translation performance, translation process and translation
strategies. Tuebingen: Guten Narr.
Lyons, J. (1968). Semantic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McMordiew, J.S. (1983). English idioms and how to use them. Moscow: Vyschaja
Shkola.
Miremadi, A. (1993). Theories of translation and interpretation. Tehran: Samt.
Mollanazar, H.(2004). Principles and methodology of translation. Tehran: Samt.
Moon, R. (1998). Fixed expressions and idioms in English: a corpus based approach.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Munday, J. (2001). Introducing translation studies: theories and applications. London,
England: Routledge .
Munday, J. (2008). Introducing translation studies. London and New York: Routledge.
Nemcova, M. (2013). "Comparative analysis of English and French body idioms."
Masaryk University Brno.
Newmark, p. (1981). Approaches to translation. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

50

Newmark, P. (1988). A textbook of translation. New York: Prentice-Hall International.
Nida, E.A. (1993). Language, culture and translating. Shanghai: Shanghai Foreign
Language Education Press.
Nord, C. (1991). Text analysis in translation: theory, methodology and didactic
application of a model for translation-oriented text analysis. Atlanta, GA:
Rodopi.
Nord, C. (1997). Translation as a purposeful activity: functionalist approaches
explained. Manchester: St. Jerome.
Procter, P. (1995). Cambridge international dictionary of English. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ritchie, J. M. (2008). Functional context: underlying principles of language structure in
literary interpretation. University of California, Berkeley.
Straksiene, M. (2009). Analysis of idioms translation strategies from English into
Lithuanian. Kaunas University of Technology.
Teilanyo, D. (2014). A comparative study of selected idioms in Nembe (Nigeria) and
English. University of Bennin, Nigeria.
Toury, G. (1978). The Nature and Role of Norms in Translation. In Lawrence Venuti
(ed.) The translation studies reader. New York: Routledge. 198-211.
Toury, G. (1995). Descriptive translation studies and beyond. Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Trrefry, D.(ed.) (2006). Collins English dictionary. Glasgow, UK: Harper Collins
Publisher.
Tylor, E. (1920/1871). Primitive culture. New York: J.P. Putnam's Sons.
Venuti, L.(2000). The translation studies reader. New York: Routledge.

TRANSLATING IDIOMS IN APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

51

Vinay, J. and Darbelnet, J. (1958/1995). Comparative stylistics of French and English:
A methodology for translation. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Vokacova, J. (2005). A Comparative view of English, Czech, French and German
idioms. Faculty of Philosophy, University of West Bohemia, Plzen.
Watson, D. (1991). Practicing idioms. Hong Kong: Nelson.
Wehmeier, S. (2000). Oxford advanced learner's dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
William, H. (1993) Western civilization, Volume 1. Guilford: The Dushkin publishing
Group.
Zwart & T. Naaijkens (Eds.), Translation studies: The state of the art , Atlanta, GA:
Rodopi.

‫ المكتبة‬:‫ بيروت‬.)‫(ترجمة عمر عبد العزيز أمين‬, ‫) جريمة في الصحراء‬2996( .‫ أ‬,‫كريستي‬
.)2910 ‫الثقافية (العمل األصلي نشر في عام‬
.‫ مكتبة الشروق الدولية‬:‫ القاهرة‬,1 ‫ ط‬.‫ المعجم الوسيط‬.)1020( ‫مجمع اللغة العربية‬

