Indigenous knowledge on ground-nesting stingless bees in
southwestern Ethiopia

Amenay Assefa Kidane1, Fisseha Mengstie Tegegne1 and Ayco J. M. Tack2,*

1

2

Department of Animal Science, Jimma University, P.O.Box 378, Jimma, Ethiopia
Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Stockholm University, SE-106 91

Stockholm, Sweden

*

Corresponding author; e-mail: aycotack@gmail.com; phone: +46-(0)70 4942557; ORCID:

0000-0002-3550-1070

1

Abstract
While Ethiopia has several species of stingless bees, indigenous knowledge on them has not
been well documented. Here, we document the indigenous knowledge of the Sheka
community in southwestern Ethiopia on stingless bees. We used the snowball sampling
technique to locate 60 experienced honey collectors, conducted semi-structured interviews,
and complemented interviews with field observations during honey collection trips with
interviewees. Honey collectors did not collect honey from aboveground nesting stingless
bees, but only from stingless bees nesting belowground. To find the underground nests in the
field, honey collectors used several methods, including direct observation of nest entrances
and worker bee movement, attaching a thread to the worker bee, and listening for the
humming sound of the bee’s natural enemy (wasp). Nests were harvested destructively.
Interestingly, a single farmer kept ground-nesting stingless bee colonies at his backyard using
uniquely tailored squared box hives. Collected honey is used for home consumption, disease
treatment, and the generation of income. Our findings illustrate the deep indigenous
knowledge of the Sheka community on wild ground-nesting stingless bees. To facilitate the
establishment of stingless bee beekeeping (meliponiculture) in the study area, we may build
upon this indigenous knowledge by field research on the biology of stingless bees, taxonomic
studies to assess the diversity and identity of ground-nesting stingless bees, and engineering
studies to develop beekeeping practices. Together, this may allow for better income for local
farmers and avoid the risk of overexploitation of wild stingless bee nests.

Key Words: ground-nesting stingless bees, honey collection, indigenous knowledge,
meliponiculture, nest identification, Sheka zone, subterranean stingless bees

2

Introduction
Stingless bees (Apidae: Meliponini) are mostly found in the tropical and subtropical regions
of the world (Michener 2007). Like honeybees of the genus Apis, all stingless bees in Africa
are eusocial, and live with many individuals in a single nest. They are ecologically,
economically and culturally important. For example, stingless bees contribute to the
pollination of crops and wild plants (Slaa et al. 2006), stingless bee honey can be sold for
cash (Quezada-Euan et al. 2018), and stingless bee honey is used in the treatment of several
diseases (Kumar et al. 2012, Rao et al. 2016). Meliponiculture, which is beekeeping with
stingless bees, takes place across the world, but is most advanced, and has the longest history,
in the Neotropics (Quezada-Euán et al. 2001, Cortopassi-Laurino et al. 2006).
In Africa, the honey of stingless bees is mostly collected from wild colonies (Eardley 2004,
Cortopassi-Laurino et al. 2006). But there are exceptions, with a few communities in
Tanzania and Angola using hollow logs or clay pots as hives (Cortopassi-Laurino et al.
2006). Furthermore, a keen interest to develop meliponiculture has existed in Ghana, Kenya,
Botswana and South Africa (Cortopassi-Laurino et al. 2006). Despite this interest, the
knowledge on the diversity and taxonomy of stingless bees in Africa is relatively low, with
many species still to be discovered and described (Eardley 2004).
Only six species of stingless bees are known from Ethiopia (Fichtl and Admasu Adi 1994,
Pauly and Hora 2013). While there is a long tradition of honey collection from wild stingless
bees by different communities, meliponiculture is unknown from the country. Sheka Zone is
one of the areas in Ethiopia with the highest forest cover, and the area may have potential for
stingless bee honey production. However, while honeybees (Apis mellifera) are commonly
kept in purpose-made hollow logs placed in large trees, the local community is known to
collect honey from stingless bee colonies only from the wild (Shenkute et al. 2012).
Despite the potential for production of honey from stingless bees, the value of stingless bees
and their products for the community is not recognized by the government and is not included
in the agricultural extension system. Moreover, we lack documented information associated
with indigenous knowledge on honey production practices and its use, even though stingless
bee honey collection is considered an important activity in the culture of the Sheka
community. Studying the indigenous knowledge on stingless bees may be a first important
3

step towards domestication and establishment of meliponiculture, which could provide
pollination for crops and wild plants, honey as food and medicine, and cash income (Eardley
2004). Moreover, it would halt the destruction of wild stingless bee nests. In order to fill this
knowledge gap and contribute to the effort to introduce meliponiculture, we documented the
indigenous knowledge on stingless bees and the use of their products by the people in the
Anderacha and Masha districts in Sheka zone, southwestern Ethiopia.

Materials and Methods
Study area
The study was conducted in the Sheka zone located in southwestern Ethiopia (Fig. 1). Sheka
zone is divided into the three woredas (henceforth ‘districts’) Masha, Anderacha and Yeki
(7°24’–7°52’ N, 35°13’–35°35’ E). The altitudinal range of the area falls between 900 and
2700 m a.s.l., and the area receives between 1800 and 2200 mm of rainfall per year.
According to the Sheka Zone Administration Office, c. 47% of the 2175 km2 is covered by
natural forest preserved by the local community, and the remaining land area is cultivated,
grazed by livestock, or otherwise used by humans. The main economic activities in Sheka
zone are agriculture and livestock production. The Sheka community also earns cash from
honey and spices collected from the natural forest.

Study design and methods
A cross-sectional study design was employed to document the indigenous knowledge of the
Sheka community on stingless bees and their products. The study was conducted during 2017
and 2018 in the Masha and Anderacha districts (Fig. 1). From each district, we selected three
kebeles (the smallest administrative units, henceforth ‘villages’) based on prior information
obtained from elderly inhabitants on the potential of the area for stingless bee honey
production. Within each village, we then held informal discussions with the elders and local
administrators to identify those persons knowledgeable about stingless bee’s honey
production. Using the snowball sampling method (Bailey 2007), we then selected ten
4

stingless bee experts from each village (n = 60 in total). Thereafter, we clarified the purpose
of the study and received consent to interview the 60 honey collectors.
To complement the semi-structured interviews, we conducted field observations to describe
in detail, and validate, the information obtained from individual honey collectors. For this, we
joined local honey collectors in their search for, and harvesting of, wild stingless bee nests in
each of the three villages. During our search, we found 18 wild stingless bee nests. We noted
and recorded all activities such as searching for wild nests, digging out the nest from the
ground, and harvesting of the products from the nest. One local honey collector kept stingless
bees in wooden box hives, and we recorded this practice in detail.

Results
Socio-economic characteristics of the respondents
From the 60 honey collectors, 58 were male and 2 were female (Table 1). The majority was
literate and married (Table 1). The most common occupation was farmer and local mead
brewer, with a minority being government employee or student (Table 1). Honey collection
from stingless bees was done by those with and without livestock, and those that own or do
not own land (Table 1). The average age of the honey collectors was 43 years, but the age
varied widely from 18 to 73 years (Fig. 2a). The respondents had collected stingless bee
honey for 2 to 52 years (Fig. 2b). The age at which the honey collectors started to collect
honey was highly variable, with ages ranging from 10 to 62 years (Fig. 2c). The respondents
said that the knowledge of stingless bees and use of their products is obtained orally from
their parents and neighbours and in this way transferred through generations, and that honey
of ground-nesting stingless bees had been collected by their ancestors for centuries.
Knowledge on taxonomy and habitat
The respondents distinguished between stingless bees that nested below- or aboveground.
The stingless bees nesting below- and aboveground are referred to as shaweti and bobbao,
respectively, in the local language shekinnono. The aboveground nesting stingless bees build
their nests mainly in hollow tree trunks, cavities, under the roof of dwellings and in empty log
5

hives. The ground-nesting stingless bees build their nests in the soil, with only the nest
entrance visible (Fig. 3ab). According to the respondents, they did not collect honey from
aboveground nesting stingless bees, because these aboveground bees are mainly found in
remote and inaccessible lowland areas. Hence, our study focused only on the ground-nesting
stingless bees. The respondents stated that the ground-nesting stingless bees are abundant,
and they frequently collected its honey. All honey collectors recognized two types of groundnesting stingless bees, with the ‘black type’ characterized by a larger body size, higher
number of nest inhabitants, and higher productivity than the red species. Moreover, they
differentiated the two types of bee based on the nest entrance: the black type had a wider
entrance, which protruded further from the ground, than that of the red species (Fig. 3ab).
The nests of ground-nesting stingless bees can be found in intact forest and on grazing and
farming land. However, the respondents stated that most of the nests were found far away
from residential areas, and nests were only rarely found near residences.

Methods for locating wild stingless bee nests
The honey collectors in the surveyed districts shared several methods to locate the nests of
the ground-nesting stingless bees. First, when walking through the intact forest, disturbed
forest, and other areas searching for wild stingless bee nests, they look for nest holes on the
ground. Second, they look for the presence of stingless bees, and when they observe the bees,
they will conduct a dedicated search within the vicinity. When observing any bee activity in
such areas, they also silently squat down on the ground and look for forager stingless bees
returning to or leaving their nest. Third, they catch stingless bee foragers on flowers of
several plant species, and tie a coloured thread, which is most often red, around their petiole
(i.e., the narrow waist). After tying the thread, they squat down on the ground, release the
foraging bee, observe the flight direction of the bee, and then follow the bee in the direction
of its nest. Fourth, when they search during the harvesting season (see below), they also use
the nest smell to locate the nest: the honey has a strong smell that can be detected from a
distance, and is very helpful to decide the searching area and for locating the nest. In addition
to the aforementioned methods, the respondents from the Anderacha district used the

6

stingless bee enemy (a wasp) as an indicator to locate the nests, by listening for its humming
sound at the stingless bee nest entrance.
According to the respondents, one can search for wild stingless bee nests between 8:00-11:30
and 13:30-17:30, but the most effective time of the day for searching of wild stingless bee
nests is in the morning from 8:30-10:30 and in the afternoon from 14:00-16:30. The
respondents thought that stingless bees prefer cool weather conditions for foraging, and do
not exit the nest during the hottest time of the day.
The major period for harvesting of stingless bee honey was during March and April, with
some of the respondents mentioning a minor harvesting period from November to January.
All respondents described that when they find stingless bee nests outside of the honeyharvesting season, they place their own unique symbol around the nest, and then leave the
nest untouched until the start of the harvesting season. They placed the nest markers in great
secret, to avoid other people spotting the markings and harvesting the nest’s honey. As
markers, they used small sticks, stones, or any other unique objects that could serve as an
indicator of the nest location, and would allow finding it back during the honey-harvesting
season.

Harvesting of the honey from wild nests
Honey is a non-timber forest product that is highly appreciated by the local communities in
the study area. Although the respondents recognized several types of products within the
bee’s nest (honey, pollen, propolis and cerumen), they mainly collected the honey, and only
infrequently collected propolis.
To harvest honey from wild stingless bee nests, the respondents used different local
materials, such as a spade, gejera (machete) and/or knife, a metal collection plate, and small
plastic or glass bottles. To safeguard the nest entrance, the honey collectors started by placing
an indicator at the nest entrance and cleaning the ground surface up to 35 cm from the nest
entrance. They then dug around the nest until they reached the bottom of the nest, which is
generally 35 to 40 cm deep (Fig. 3cd). Third, they pulled out the entire nest, and placed it on
a broad leaf of false banana Ensete ventricosum, or on a flat piece of plastic. Fourth, they
7

removed dirt, like soil and other materials, from the external surface of the nest (Fig. 3e).
Finally, they cut the nest from above and pulled out the brood areas to separate them from the
honey pots (Fig. 3f).
The majority of the respondents (69%) strained the honey using Ensete ventricosum fibres
locally known as qacha. After separating the brood areas from the honey pots, they placed
the fibres on top of the metal plate, and then crushed and squeezed the honey pots with its
content above it. The fibrous material is used to retain any impurities, and allows passing
through of the pure, liquid honey. The other respondents (31%) pierced a hole in each
individual honey pot, so that the pure honey flowed directly to the metal plate (honey
container). However, they noted that if the nests were constructed between the roots of trees
or shrubs, the nest could suddenly crush and become difficult to pull out of the ground. In
such scenario, they would cut the nest, crush all of its contents together, and squeeze out the
storage pots. They would then strain the impure honey later using qacha. The respondents did
not give any attention to the broods, and during the harvesting the whole nest was destroyed,
resulting in the bees absconding. In all study areas, honey was stored in a plastic or glass
bottle. However, they stated that the small plastic bottles are hard to clean and are therefore
less hygienic.
The average number of wild stingless bee nests harvested per respondent per year was 9.6 ±
8.7 (mean ± SD), and was higher in Masha district (12.4 ± 10.7) than in Anderacha district
(6.77 ± 4.78; Fig. 4a; t58 = 2.61 and P = 0.01). The average amount of honey harvested per
nest was similar in Masha (2.4 L ± 1.2) and Anderacha district (2.2 L ± 1.1; Fig. 4b; t58 =
0.73 and P = 0.47). According to the respondents, honey yield of wild colonies can differ
based on nest age, and when a nest is older than one year it can produce up to 5 litres.

Local meliponiculture
All but one of the interviewees collected honey from wild stingless bee nests. According to
these respondents, domesticating and managing colonies of ground-nesting bees using
artificial hives is difficult, and they believed the reason is that the colonies obtained heat from
the soil underground and were thus not adapted to hives placed aboveground.
8

However, one out of the sixty interviewees practiced meliponiculture, thereby illustrating that
it is possible to establish meliponiculture. The interviewee lived in Anderacha district, and
kept colonies of ground-nesting stingless bees in his backyard using square box hives (Fig.
5). The box hives were prepared in a traditional manner from wooden boards joined by nails,
with each side of the box measuring 36 × 36 cm. Each box hive had a single small hole at the
fixed upper wooden board, which served as the hive entrance (Fig. 5a). The bottom board of
the hive is designed to be opened for the purpose of honey harvesting (Fig. 5b). To support
the nest, each hive had four thin wires attached to the upper board and suspended towards the
inner part of the hive. Two small sticks that crossed each other, and were joined by a nail,
were prepared and attached to the wires, so it could hold the nest. The interviewee described
that after he prepared the box hive, he collected a wild stingless bee nest, placed it on the
supportive sticks and attached it using the wires to the upper board, so that the nest was
hanging inside the hive (Fig. 5cd). Thus, the nest does not have contact with the sides of the
hive, and this is mainly to avoid any difficulty during honey harvesting, when the hive is
opened from its lower part. The stingless bee hives were placed at his backyard together with
honeybee colonies (Apis mellifera). According to the respondent, he was able to harvest
honey from the colonies in the wooden box hives twice a year, and opened the hives only
during honey harvesting time. During the study, we observed many hives without colonies
and the respondent told that 21 out of the 26 colonies had absconded for unknown reasons.
The honey harvesting method from the stingless bee colonies kept in wooden hives was nondestructive, and only honey was harvested. The pure honey was harvested by using a
purposively prepared dry sharp stick to penetrate each pot and letting the honey flow out.

The use of products from stingless bees
The reasons for honey collection were quite similar throughout the study area. The stingless
bee honey is mainly used for home consumption. According to the respondents, honey is
consumed either immediately after being extracted, or after storage, when it is drunk either
pure or mixed with water or local drinks known as borde and tella. The honey is valued as a
food supplement, and also used for the treatment of different types of diseases, like
tuberculosis, coughing, malaria, constipation, asthma, tonsillitis and oral thrush. Propolis was
used to seal or repair cracked clay pots, plastic containers and other home equipment.
9

Because of its medicinal and nutritional value, the price of honey of stingless bees was more
than twice that of Apis mellifera honey at the local market (c. 150-200 versus 60-78 Ethiopian
birr [ETB] per litre).

Threats to stingless bees
The respondents did not observe signs of brood diseases or diseased bees, suggesting that
stingless bees are largely disease-free in the study area. However, they indicated that stingless
bees are attacked by several natural enemies, which included, in order of their relative
importance, honey badgers (21.2%), moles (19.8%), wasps (14.6%), termites (14.3%), ants
(13.8%), foxes (13.1%), and snakes (3.2%). This matches with the findings from Shenkute et
al (2012), who reported that ground-nesting stingless bee colonies in Sheka, Kaffa and Bench
Maji zones were affected by honey badgers, ants and moles.
The respondents also noted that deforestation, forest and soil degradation, and pesticides
posed a threat to the stingless bee colonies.

Limitations to the adoption of local meliponiculture
The respondents pointed out several obstacles that were limiting the development of
improved stingless bee beekeeping practices or meliponiculture: stingless bees were not yet
domesticated, stingless bees produced small amounts of honey, no extension services and
training were provided, there was no appropriate technology for keeping stingless bees, and
there was a general lack of knowledge on improved stingless bee honey harvesting,
processing, handling and other management practices.

Discussion
Using semi-structured interviews and detailed field observations, we characterized the
traditional knowledge on stingless bees in Sheka zone, southwestern Ethiopia. We found deep
10

indigenous knowledge on honey harvesting and the usage of bee products from wild,
underground stingless bee nests, which is part of a cultural tradition that has been passed on
orally from one generation to the next. Honey collectors used several direct and indirect
methods to find the wild stingless bee nests, and harvested the nests destructively. A single
respondent maintained stingless bee nests in wooden boxes in his backyard, indicating the
potential for meliponiculture.

Socio-economic status of honey collectors
Our findings indicate that the participation of women in stingless bee’s honey collecting
activities in the study areas is low, with only two out of sixty honey collectors being female.
The major reason may be that nest hunting, just like the placement of hollow wooden logs for
the honeybee Apis mellifera into large trees, are generally considered as the work of men.
Hunting usually involves searching the wild bees in forests, far from residential areas, and
roaming through forests alone is culturally considered as taboo for females. Interestingly,
women participation may increase with the adoption of meliponiculture. Honey was collected
mostly by married persons (85%), which the respondents attributed to the medicinal value of
stingless bee honey for children. Interestingly, the honey collectors had a diverse economic
background: honey was collected by both economically productive and economically
dependent age groups (the latter defined in Ethiopia as ages below 15 and over 65), literate
and illiterate persons, farmers and local mead brewers as well as students and government
employees, those with and without livestock, and those with and without land. Overall, this
indicates there is no restriction of honey collection to specific sub-groups within the local
community.
The experience of the respondents with honey collection ranged from 2 to 52 years. The long
experience of some honey collectors indicates that honey collection from wild stingless bees
has been practiced for several generations. The short experience, and low age, of some of the
honey collectors are a testimony that honey collection is a living tradition within the study
area, and is not restricted to older generations. Of particular note is the fact that honey
collectors started with harvesting stingless bee nests at a range of ages, indicating that both

11

younger and older people can acquire the necessary skills, and/or start the practice of honey
collection.

Stingless bee diversity and taxonomy
As pointed out repeatedly, the diversity and distribution of stingless bees in Africa is poorly
known (Eardley 2004, Eardley and Kwapong 2013, Pauly and Hora 2013). Within Ethiopia,
only six species of stingless bees have been reported, which is most likely a strong
underestimation (Pauly and Hora 2013). From the species recorded in Ethiopia thus far, only
Meliponula beccarii is known to build its nests underground (Pauly and Hora 2013). We
expect that the larger ‘black type’ corresponds to M. beccarii, which is widespread in Africa
and has been documented very well (Pauly and Hora 2013). However, the identity of the ‘red
type’ is unknown (Alain Pauly, personal communication). This lack of knowledge on the
taxonomic identity and biology of stingless bees hampers progress (Eardley and Kwapong
2013), and we need future research to characterize the taxonomic diversity of stingless bee
species within Africa and within the study area.

The road toward meliponiculture
As stated by Eardley (2004), meliponiculture in Africa is relatively uncommon, and
harvesting of meliponine honey is mostly destructive. This matches the described cultural
practices in Sheka: The local communities had a diverse and deep indigenous knowledge on
local wild stingless bee nest identification, nest harvesting, and the use of its products, and
this practice has for long been an integral part of the communities’ culture. Despite this, only
a single interviewee practiced beekeeping with stingless bees. It would be worthwhile to
further explore the potential for meliponiculture. For this, we need to complement the
valuable indigenous knowledge on ground-nesting stingless bees with field studies on the
ecology and behaviour of stingless bees in the field, surveys that characterize the taxonomic
diversity of stingless bees, and engineering studies that develop the technology necessary for
improved beekeeping. With such improved knowledge at hand, we can harness the
agricultural extension services to promote and spread knowledge on meliponiculture.
12

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the ground-nesting stingless bee honey collectors of Sheka
community for their participation in the study and for sharing their knowledge on stingless
bees and their products. We would also like to acknowledge the Southern Agricultural
Research Institute for financially supporting the study.

References
Bailey, K. 2007. Methods of social research. 4th edition. Simon and Schuster.

Cortopassi-Laurino, M., V. L. Imperatriz-Fonseca, D. W. Roubik, A. Dollin, T. Heard, I.
Aguilar, G. C. Venturieri, C. Eardley, and P. Nogueira-Neto. 2006. Global
meliponiculture: challenges and opportunities. Apidologie 37:275–292.
Eardley, C. D. 2004. Taxonomic revision of the African stingless bees (Apoidea : Apidae :
Apinae : Meliponini). African Plant Protection 10:63–96.

Eardley, C., and P. Kwapong. 2013. Taxonomy as a tool for conservation of African stingless
bees and their honey. Pages 261–268 in P. Vit, S. R. M. Pedro, and D. Roubik, editors.
Pot-Honey: A legacy of stingless bees. Springer New York, New York, NY.

Fichtl, R., and Admasu Adi. 1994. Honeybee flora of Ethiopia. Margraf Verlag, Weikersheim,
Germany.

Kumar, M. S., A. J. A. R. Singh, and G. Alagumuthu. 2012. Traditional beekeeping of stingless
bee (Trigona sp) by Kani tribes of Western Ghats, Tamil Nadu, India. Indian Journal
of Traditional Knowledge 11:342–345.

13

Michener, C. D. 2007. The bees of the world. 2nd edition. Johns Hopkins University Press.

Pauly, A., and Z. A. Hora. 2013. Apini and Meliponini from Ethiopia (Hymenoptera: Apoidea:
Apidae: Apinae). Belgian Journal of Entomology 16:1–35.

Quezada-Euán, J. J. G., W. de J. May-Itzá, and J. A. González-Acereto. 2001. Meliponiculture
in Mexico: problems and perspective for development. Bee World 82:160–167.

Quezada-Euan, J. J., G. Parra, M. Maues, D. Roubik, and V. L. Imperatriz-Fonseca. 2018. The
economic and cultural values of stingless bees (Hymenoptera: Meliponini) among
ethnic groups of tropical America. Sociobiology 65:534.

Rao, P. V., K. T. Krishnan, N. Salleh, and S. H. Gan. 2016. Biological and therapeutic effects
of honey produced by honey bees and stingless bees: a comparative review. Revista
Brasileira de Farmacognosia 26:657–664.

Shenkute, A. G., Y. Getachew, D. Assefa, N. Adgaba, G. Ganga, and W. Abebe. 2012. Honey
production systems (Apis mellifera L.) in Kaffa, Sheka and Bench-Maji zones of
Ethiopia. University Library of Munich, Germany.

Slaa, E. J., L. A. S. Chaves, K. S. Malagodi-Braga, and F. E. Hofstede. 2006. Stingless bees in
applied pollination: practice and perspectives. Apidologie 37:293–315.

14

Table 1. Socio-economic status of the stingless bee honey collectors interviewed during the
study in Sheka zone (N = 60)

Response variable

Categories

Sex

Male

Marital status

Educational status

Occupation

Livestock possession

Land possession

Number (%)
58 (97%)

Female

2 (3%)

Married

51 (85%)

Single

9 (15%)

Literate

54 (90%)

Illiterate

6 (10%)

Farmer and local mead brewer

53 (88%)

Government employee or student

7 (12%)

Livestock keeper

47 (78%)

No livestock

13 (22%)

Land owner

53 (88%)

No land

7 (12%)

15

Figure legends
Fig. 1. Overview map of the study area. Shown are Ethiopia (top-right), Sheka zone (bottomright) and the Masha and Anderacha districts (left)
Fig. 2. Age and experience of 60 local honey collectors in Sheka zone, southwestern
Ethiopia. Panel a shows the age of the honey collectors, panel b shows the number of years
of experience with honey collection, and panel c shows the age at which the honey collectors
started collecting honey
Fig. 3. Overview of the harvesting process. Panels a and b show the nest entrances of the red
and black stingless bee type, respectively. Panel c shows the digging up of the underground
nest using a spade. Panel d shows an excavated nest. Panel e shows the cleaned nest, with the
brood surrounded by honey jars. Panel f shows the extraction of honey from the nest, with the
metal collection plate in the background.
Fig. 4. The amount of wild stingless bee nests and honey harvested by 60 honey collectors in
Sheka zone, southwestern Ethiopia. Shown are density plots for a the number of nests harvested
and b the average amount of honey harvested per nest by the honey collectors from the Masha
and Anderacha districts (‘woredas’)
Fig. 5. Wooden box hive for ground-nesting stingless bees. Panel a shows the wooden box
hive from the upper side, with the arrow pointing towards the hive entrance (hole) in the
upper board. Panel b shows the bottom board of the hive, which can be opened for the
purpose of honey collection. The red arrow points towards the metal strip used to close the
board. Panels c and d show how the stingless bee nest is placed inside the hive. The nest is
placed on two crossed, supportive wooden sticks, which are attached to the inner surface of
the upper board using wire.

16

Figure 1

17

Figure 2

18

Figure 3

19

Figure 4

20

Figure 5

21

