"x"
"1" "When the “Blank Slate” is a White One: White Institutional Isomorphism in the Birth of National Public Radio"
"2" "Laura Garbes"
"3" "Department of Sociology"
"4" "Brown University"
"5" "laura_garbes@brown.edu"
"6" "Brown University Box 1916"
"7" "Maxcy Hall, 108 George Street"
"8" "Providence, RI 02912"
"9" "Laura Garbes is a PhD candidate in sociology at Brown University, where she studies racism, whiteness, and cultural organizations. Her research explores the racialization of sound in public broadcasting. She is affiliated with Brown University's Swearer Center for Public Service, and a member of the Du Boisian Scholar Network."
"10" "Abstrac t"
"11" "A burgeoning literature at the intersection of the sociology of race and organizations explore s  the organization’s role in (re)producing racial inequalities.   The present paper  builds from this growing literature in its   analysis of  the formation of National Public Radio (NPR ), to  better understand how  organizational actors translate  racialized practices  into new organizations at their foundation,  even when they seek greater racial inclusivity .   I coin  a  new  analytical  concept, white institutional isomorphism,  to analyze how   organizations that embrace a mission of diversity may end up reproducing racially exclusionary practices.  White institutional isomorphic pressures are racialized norms that shape the standards and practices adopted across organizations within a given field.  Using organizational meeting minutes, external reports, oral histories, and founder memoirs,  I show  that early  implementation of  station membership criteria , hiring  practices , and programming  priorities, while considered race-neutral decisions by the founders that shared a white habitus,  inhibited the inclusion of nonwhite voices into NPR’s workforce, station membership, and programming."
"12" "Acknowledgements"
"13" "I would like to acknowledge and thank the archivists at the National Public Broadcasting Archives in College Park ,  Maryland for their help in identifying relevant materials. I would also like to thank the following individuals and groups for their feedback on earlier versions of this draft: prabhdeep s. kehal, José Itzigsohn, Chinyere Agbai, Amanda Ball,   Danielle Falzon,   Ieva Zumbyte, Daniel Hirschman, Tina Park, Mark Suchman ,  Michael Kennedy, the Eastern Sociological Society 2018 Mini-conference on Race and Organizations, and the 2018 Work, Organizations, and Economy Workshop at Brown University."
"14" "When the “Blank Slate” is a White One: White Institutional Isomorphism in the Birth of National Public Radio"
"15" "Work  at the intersection of the study of race and organizations   shows  that race  in organizations , beyond a  demographic  variable,  is an ordering principle that structures organizations and informs their  cultural practices ( Nkomo 1992;  Ward 2008; Berrey 2015) .   This research   has yet to explain the  agentic  process by which organizational decisionmakers embed  racialized  mechanisms into organizational structure, policy, and norms.   In this paper,  I show how organizational actors translate prevailing patterns  of  racial exclusion from the broader field into new organizations, even when they seek greater racial inclusivity.   I consider this process at National Public Radio (NPR), a nonprofit media organization whose mission espouses pluralism and service to a diverse set of publics. Despite this mission, NPR served  a disproportionately white audience   from 1970-1977 . How did the founders implement organizational practices at NPR’s founding that inhibited racial inclusivity, even as  they  sought to create a media organization built on  stated  ideals of pluralism? I argue that when the founders  and employees   translated  standards from the existing racialized organizational field of noncommercial radio, they  transferred  much of that field’s  racially exclusionary pr a ctices , even as they thought themselves to be striking out a new path."
"16" "I introduce a new concept,  white institutional isomorphism , to examine NPR founders’ adaptation of racially exclusionary mechanisms from the larger organizational field of noncommercial radio.  White institutional isomorphism  adapts DiMaggio and Powell’s concept of institutional isomorphism (1983),  which has been used  to understand why  so many characteristics are shared across an organizational field. I amend DiMaggio and Powell’s original formulation in two major ways. First,  I draw on recent literature on  inhabited institutionalism to emphasize micro- level interactions and decisions that shape  organizational formation within a field .  Second,  I use  the concept of  white habitus (Bonilla-Silva , Goar, and Embrick  2006), to understand how white racial subjectivities are socialized and orient micro-level interactions and decisions ."
"17" "I examine NPR’s organizational meeting minutes, external reports, oral histories, and founder memoirs  in  the time period 1967-1977 to explore how institutional actors, shaped by both larger field-wide precedents and their own white subjectivities, developed policies that, while race-blind on their surface, inhibited racial inclusivity in station membership, workforce composition, and program production. These decisions were shaped by  what I term  w hite institutional isomorphic pressures :  racialized norms that shape  how founders and employees adopt  standards and practices across organizations within a given field.  Ultimately, the process of white institutional isomorphism create s  a white racialized organization (Ray 2019)."
"18" "WHITE RACIALIZED ORGANIZATIONS"
"19" "I situate this work  within  a growing body of scholarship on racialized organizations  (Ray 2019) , which takes seriously race as a structuring force in society’s institutions .  Racial  inequality is the outcome of historically constructed processes  of exclusion  that become institutionalized through organizational practice  ( Beggs 1995 ;  Lewis and Diamond 2015). White dominance pervades  job market processes   (Royster 2003),  normative structures and ways of thinking  within organizations  (Leo Moore 2007) ,  and workplace labor distribution  (Wingfield 2019) . E ven radical  racial justice  projects , once  folded into existing organizations ,  conform to  white dominant structures to  fit and survive (Rojas 2007)."
"20" "I join this scholarship in  approach ing  whiteness as a historically constructed category of classification inextricably linked to the creation of the race concept.  I n the United States context, the distinction of ability and humanity by race  emerged in the  eighteenth   century to  serve the  interests of elite settlers and slaveholders in structuring the economic and social systems of the British colony, and later nation (Omi and Winant 2015 ;   Robinson 1983 ).  The settler’s logic of ordering bodies by race made processes of subordination, chattel slavery, and indigenous genocide thinkable alongside rhetorics of democracy and freedom by deigning non-settlers as “raced” for dehumanization and settlers as unraced, or white (Du Bois 1940 ; Nakano Glenn 2015 ; Wolfe 2016).  Crucial to the success of this larger colonial project of racial formation was the advancement of a white racial project (Winant 2001) entrenching ideologies of white supremacy as common sense amongst elite settlers.   Given mass media’s role  upholding these ideologies,  media   influence s  the experiences of people of color, and white racial attitudes towards communities of color  ( Saha 2018 ;  Wang  Yuen 2017 )."
"21" "W hitenes s,  an  ideolog y  whose utility is maintaining power, and whose definition hinges on the creation of racial “others,” is a remarkably flexible construction ( Mills 1997;   Painter 2010 ;  Roediger 1991; Scott 2009) that shifts to endure macro-level policy changes (Bonilla-Silva 2013) .  Through this lens, whiteness as an ideology  creates  the category of white people (Fields and Fields  and Fields 201 4 ), whose racialization grants the group and its attendant norms material advantages.  In the contemporary organizational context, white dominance remains ideologically salient amidst the inclusion of nonwhite bodies when an organization institutionally privileges the behaviors and norms associated with  white populations .   The dominance creates expectations of  employees  –  white and (especially) nonwhite  –  to conform to such standards if they are to remain legitimate (Ray 2019).   In the cultural industries, nonwhite actors are often expected to conform to stereotyped expectations of their racial ized  groups ( Wang  Yuen 20 1 7)."
"22" "NPR  is  a particularly  relevant  case for understanding racialized organizations given these colonial origins of whiteness  and its ideological persistence to present . As a public entity  established through U.S. government legislation in the Civil Rights Era,  N P R  sought to advance democracy and provide a news source that reflected America’s many voices. NPR’s failure to do so  in its first ten years of operation  suggests  that organizational formation in an era of racial inclusion is still profoundly shaped by the exclusionary legacies that preceded it.   F oregrounding the racial ized  dimension of institutional theory,  I  employ the concept of   white institutional isomorphism   to understand  the enduring   importance of whiteness as a field-wide factor in organizational formation and development."
"23" "ORGANIZATIONAL FIELDS AND INSTITUTIONAL ISOMORPHISM"
"24" "To understand  white institutional isomorphism,  it is necessary to  first  explain  organizational field theory.  A  field is “a community of organizations that partakes of a common meaning system and whose participants interact more frequently and fatefully with one another than with actors outside the field” (Scott 1995: 56). DiMaggio and Powell (1983) theorize that organizations are not only subject to competitive market pressures, but also to institutional pressures of the organizational field. They outline three  possible  pressures .  First, organizations face coercive pressures to conform to fieldwide technical standards.  Second, organizations face normative pressure s  to gain legitimacy through the field’s professionalization.  Third, organizations experiencing uncertainty face mimetic pressures to model their organizations after legitimate and successful organizations in the field.   These three  fieldwide  pressures give rise to institutional isomorphism, “a constraining process that forces one unit in a population to resemble other units that face the same set of environmental conditions” (DiMaggio & Powell 1983:149)."
"25" "T he concept of institutional isomorphism has been generative   but  has faced critique for  underestimating  possibilities of change.  In response, recent  work focuses on agentic possibilities  in organizations  (Hallett and Ventresca 2006) .  Employees  can  play  an  integral role in shaping the  organization through their daily actions   and  can  turn  symbolic cultural values   into reality (Hallett 2010).   Further underscoring agent ic  possibilities , scholars have increasingly understood fields as “ relational spaces  that provide an organization with the opportunity to involve itself with other actors” (Wooten and Hoffman 2008: 64).   Conceptualizing organizational fields as relational spaces, and organizational members as actors rather than diffusors of macro-level norms (Binder 2007), leads researchers to  consider how inequalities are generated through relational processes   (T omaskovic-Devey and Avent-Holt  2019) .   In Lauren Rivera’s work, for instance, she demonstrates that in the hiring process, interviewers consider cultural fit in their assessment of candidates,  which often match along race, class, and gender lines, exacerbating inequalities in white dominant fields .   Relational accounts also  trace the founders’ active  translation and inscription of old norms in new organization s  (Emirbayer and Johnson 2008 ; Wooten 2006 ).   Fieldwide  norms are  thus  subject to change through human agency. Attention to this interactional process  highlights  micro-processes of decision making that lead founders to adapt a field-wide features into a new organization’s practice (Zeitz ,   Mittal,  and McAuley  1999),  and  to the founders’ own subjectivities (Geiger and  Antonacopoulou 2009).  I draw on  this  literature   to center the role of institutional actors, shaped by fieldwide pressures but  active agents in a  translation process ."
"26" "White Institutional Isomorphism"
"27" "Though organizational  scholars have accounted fo r  institutional isomorphism’s  shortcomings by  conceptualizing  the  institutions  as inhabited by agentic agents  within an organizational field,  inhabited institution alism  still lacks an understanding of how  racial ized  subjectivities  shape such human agency.  While Rivera’s influential concept of cultural matching demonstrates that shared cultural affinities shape the hiring process, it does not account for  the role of  white norms  in this matching.  I incorporate insight s  of white habitus to understand racialized  organizational patterns  that reproduce racial ized  inequality  across organizations in a given field. What might scholars find in analyzing how  white dominance  translates from an organizational field into a new organization?  I draw on Bourdieu’s concept of habitus to understand  how  organizational actors’  common socialization in white-dominant spaces   facilitates the process of   white institutional isomorphism."
"28" "A h abitus  is   a   set of practices and beliefs acquired by social actors through internalization of dispositions valued within the social structures, or fields, they occupy (Bourdieu 1980). Bonilla-Silva et al. (2006) explored the concept’s racial dimension . They defined white habitus as  a shared value system of racial ized  attitudes with practical implications. This racial ized  white habitus is reified through narratives that facilitate white ignorance regarding how their behaviors perpetuate racial inequality.  White habitus brings specificity to how racial formation as a sociohistorical project (Omi and Winant 2014) endures through both racialized social structures (Bonilla-Silva 2013) and   pattern s   the  behaviors of individual social actors who are dominant within such social structures. The white habitus simultaneously is conditioned by and upholds white dominant norms of larger institutions in American society.  In  the context  of institutional isomorphism , social actors’ translation of white dominant norms , due to their shared white habitus,  is  rendered  a  race -neutral process to them."
"29" "W hite  institutional isomorphism   explains  a process wherein racialized norms shape  how founders adopt particular racialized standards and practices over other alternatives within an organizational field .   The  case of NPR’s founding bears resemblance  to  other cases of organizations using diversity ideology  to  provide lip service to equality ,   un coupl ed   from  actions that would  mitigate  racial ized  inequality  ( Embrick 2011 ) . Indeed, there are emergent colorblind discourses (Bonilla-Silva 1997) among NPR’s founders that shallowly support diversity while  creating racially exclusionary policies.  However, the period under investigation, 1967-1977, is  a time of transition from Civil Rights activism to legislation  (Fligstein and McAdam 2012) , when fields were in flux and institutional fields were grappling with how  “ to construct new rules of the game and define identities”  (Fligstein 2014).   I focus less on guiding ideologies in this paper, and more on how racialized fields condition  social actors’   orientations towards potential actions."
"30" "Furthermore, as  I demonstrate with the case of NPR, white institutional isomorphism provides an analytical lens  to analyze organizational fields as  sites  in which  deeply embedded racialized norms  are translated by organizational actors that do not see the racially unequal implications of their decision-making.   Through this lens,  white   coercive  isomorphic pressures  may disqualify nonwhite participants from entry into the field, based on established technical and legal standards. In the historical case of NPR,  founders set  technical standards  that  prevented  a disproportionate number of  non-white radio stations from qualifying for membership. Second,  white   normative  i somorphic pressures   may  maintain homogeneity  through workforce training and professional network credentialing, especially if the field itself is predominantly white. In the case of NPR,  founders and managers recruited  employees of existing noncommercial stations and from government bureaucracies, both predominantly white workforces. Finally, organizations dealing with uncertainty may experience  white   mimetic   isomorphic pressures   to make their  output and process similar to established racialized organizations in the same field, which historically privileged white people’s norms.  At  NPR,  founders set the norms for  the content of their programming , supposed to be “of interest to the whole nation,” based on their own racialized subjectivities."
"31" "METHODOLOGY"
"32" "I analyze NPR’s organizational meeting minutes, external reports, oral histories, and founder memoirs on the time period 1967-1977 to explore how institutional actors  made founding  organizational decisions when  shaped by both larger field-wide precedents and their own white subjectivities.  To understand conditions of racial ized  minorities employed and served by public broadcasting by 1977, I drew on political histories of NPR ( Engelman 1996 ;  McCauley 2005 ) ,  and  on  the Minority Task Force Report of 197 8 ,  an assessment of how public media  fared  on addressing the needs of  minoritized  publics . The findings of pervasive racial ized  inequity in station ownership, workforce composition, and programming oriented my  exploration of NPR’s institutional archive, with a focus on how these inequalities emerged.   The  National Public Broadcasting Archives (NPBA) at University of Maryland, College Park,  comprise  my principal  data source . Established by the original authorizing legislation of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the site contains official documents, collections  of informal intra - organizational and inter - organizational correspondences, oral history interviews by institutional leaders in public broadcasting, and papers of interest  from  former employees at NPR and CPB , dating back to the earliest days of the public broadcasting system ."
"33" "From the National Public Broadcasting Archives,  I digitized and analyzed the personal collections of  five key leaders in public broadcasting governance:  two NPR presidents,  one CPB president, and  two public media consultants  that set up the national public broadcasting system. Further, I analyzed the papers of Susan Stamberg, co-host of NPR’s  All Things Considered  from 1971-1986; CPB and NPR employee Elizabeth L. Young’s papers ,  which included both NPR’s articles of incorporation and the meeting minutes of the NPR Board of Directors from 1967-1972; and the work of two researchers, Burt Harrison and Christopher Buchanan,   who  conducted qualitative interviews and oral histories with founding members of public broadcasting."
"34" "In laying out a history of the larger racialized organizational field of radio broadcasting, I use the NPBA’s John Macy Files to understand the  policy  studies that motivated  NPR’s   formation.   To  expand  the breadth and depth of  my  description of  this  organizational field, I draw on histor iographies  analyzing  radio broadcasting and race in the  twentieth  century  ( Barlow 1999 ;  Savage 1999; Stoever 2016).   To understand the founders’ perspectives in decision-making, I use  accounts by  professionals in the public radio field at the time  from research by Harrison and Buchanan as well as employee memoirs  (Mitchell 2005;  Roberts and Stamberg  2010) ."
"35" "T hrough organizational handbooks and policy change memoranda,  I identified policies and practices that had a direct impact on each of these inequalities.  I analyzed meeting minutes to identify moments of organizational choice and how founders made and justified decisions at those junctures   to  understand  the process by which  founders  and employees translated the  norms of the larger organizational field of noncommercial radio into NPR’s policies and practices .   Institutional archives  give a rich sense  of  the  logic of decisions to adopt certain practices in real time .   H istories and memoirs written by those connected to NPR  illustrate  the stories that founders tell themselves about such decisions in retrospect."
"36" "A BRIEF HISTORY OF EDUCATIONAL RADIO"
"37" "First, to contextualize the larger field in which NPR is situated, I provide a brief history of educational broadcasting and its legacy of racial exclusion, from World War II until its intersection with the Civil Rights Movement.  I establish  that the   radio system inherited by NPR  was  racially exclusive, white-controlled, and normed to a majority-white workforce and audience."
"38" "Contextualizing  a  “Blank  Canvas ”: The Emergence of the Noncommercial Radio Field"
"39" "In a speech,  President Lyndon B. Johnson noted that in passing the  National Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 , Congress “created a new institution.”  As Jack Mitchell, NPR’s first employee, recalls the formation of NPR:  “No stations or individuals, as in television, stood ready to lead. No constituency demanded action. No expectations existed. The slate was blank.”   However, the slate, far from blank, was historically white. In  1977, on the tenth anniversary of the National Public Broadcasting Act, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) commissioned a task force to assess how public media  addressed th e needs of minority publics. “A Formula for Change: The Report of the Task Force on Minorities in Public Broadcasting” concluded that “11 years after the taxpayer subsidy began [with the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 ]..  the public broadcast system is asleep at the transmitter.”  The report linked policy and practices formed in NPR’s foundational years to adverse outcomes for minority audiences. By 1977,  the  consequences  of NPR’s policy and practices  manifested in workforce composition, audience composition, and lack of programming by and/or for minority audiences. The Task Force’s investigation reveals organizational mechanisms that reinforced racial ized  exclusion."
"40" "These findings  surprised the  founders of NPR, who built this organization at  the   tail end of the  c ivil  r ights  e ra, between 1967 and 1972. The professionals instrumental in the formation of a national public radio system variously belonged to either (a) the larger, predominantly white political field that was tasked with implementing civil rights victories; or (b) the smaller organizational field of educational broadcasting; or (c) both.  NPR’s founders and first employees were optimistic that their organization would be representative of all Americans despite  having been socialized on the white dominant side of a racially segregated system .  Indicated in their policy documents, written primarily by board member Bill Siemering, NPR’s  programming purposes  had consciously infused values of pluralism ,  noting that the programming should reflect genuine diversity of the nation and “speak with many voices and dialects . ”  An influential consultant for the public radio system Bernard Mayes foresaw the need for this diversity, prognosticating that “the   70s will see the emergence of the Fragmented Society composed  entirely of many large, demanding Minorities.”   Why were these  visions of diversity in workforce and programming  left unfulfilled in NPR’s first ten years?"
"41" "Although NPR was new to  the public broadcasting  field, the field itself was  already  institutionalized .   The main institutional precursor s  to NPR  were  the National Association for Educational Broadcasters (NAEB)  and later the National Educational Radio Network (NERN) . By 1938, NAEB had lobbied the FCC to reserve five channels for noncommercial radio purposes, which grew to 40 channels by 1945. As government involvement in the medium increased, nonwhite access to the airwaves was more formally excluded, ensuring solely white control of noncommercial stations ( Barlow 1999;  Savage 1999; Stoever 2016).  S tations reserved for noncommercial radio were primarily owned by  white dominant  universities and were all managed by white men who drew from their predominantly white student body to recruit radio trainees.   T he demographic makeup of noncommercial radio producers between World War II and the formation of the National Public Radio System was predominantly white and male."
"42" "As commercial radio reached its Golden Age in the years leading up to World War II, the government seized the opportunity to  use  radio as a political tool by funding programming through the U.S. Office of Education to  air  on noncommercial stations. Some programming included the accomplishments of Black America in the voices of Black intellectuals, a step above the commercial stations at the time that were known for their use of sonic blackface :  a white speaker posing on the air as a Black character through racially stereotyped modes of speech   (Barlow 1999). However, the government-funded programs operated on a system of contingent inclusion; Black voices were included if they served the political ends of the Office of Education at the time."
"43" "Despite  advocacy by prominent Black scholars, including W.E.B. Du Bois, there were no Black-owned noncommercial stations on the air until 1949 .  While Du Bois was an initial proponent  of radio for the acousmatic possibilities for Black discourse across space, he distanced himself from radio’s efforts as regulations of the airwaves  limited  possibilities of Black  control  (Stoever 2011). On the whole, Black voices were relegated to the realms of entertainment in white-owned stations, excluded from general news broadcasts; Black stations comprised only .002 percent of  national  radio outlets (Barlow 1999)."
"44" "In subsequent decades  grassroots social movements led by radical activists fought for and achieved  legislative victories for racial and gender justice. The federal government institutionalized the legislative victories of the Civil Rights era in the years following under the Nixon administration (Fligstein and McAdam 2012).  The   National Public Broadcasting Act of 1967  passed within this era, creating  the Corporation for Public Broadcasting .   A s accounts from the preceding decades highlight, by the time NPR was founded in 1970,  white men dominated  the  noncommercial radio  field. By  1970 ,  then,  there  was  an established pattern of exclu ding  Black individuals from controlling the means of radio production.   W ithin the field of radio as a whole  in 1970 , only 16 radio outlets nationally, commercial and noncommercial, were owned by Black individuals (Barlow 1999: 247)."
"45" "White Institutional Isomorphism: Adopting Racialized Policy and Practice at NPR"
"46" "Many  of the practices adopted at NPR mirror ed  the practices of the organizational field of noncommercial radio. Despite  the Civil Rights Era’s  political shifts, the white professionals involved in the creation of public radio had been socialized on the white-dominant side of a legally segregated system throughout their entire lives.  They  trained within historically white universities, apprenticed within the historically white organizational field of educational broadcasting, and received their most salient feedback from white audiences. As communications scholar Michael McCauley notes, “NPR, in the most basic terms, is a network founded by well-educated baby  boomers and targeted toward listeners with similar demographic and psychographic profiles” (McCauley 2005). The founders did not see their “similarities” to their target listeners as racialized."
"47" "Jack Mitchell, NPR’s first employee, was hired by Don Quayle three weeks after Quayle’s election.  Mitchell’s account of  his  good fortune to be hired reflects a shared orientation towards action, or habitus, that is illuminated in the decisions analyzed throughout this paper : “By happenstance of birthplace [Michigan] and year [1941], I landed in the right place at the right time to play a part in launching public radio” (Mitchell 2005). However, the fact that his birth on the right side of the color line structured his life chances in this place and time eludes mention entirely.  NPR’s founders , like most whites of their generation, were socialized into a “white habitus”  (Bonilla-Silva et al. 2006)  that oriented  their  action s . Central to this habitus was a recognition of a civic duty to “the public interest,” coupled with misrecognition of the “public” and its “interest” in largely white (middle class) terms.  For NPR’s founders, t his habitus conditioned a  civic - minded understanding of their work  by defining  a stated commitment to create a radio network for all Americans but hampered by actions that contradicted this commitment."
"48" "I trace three  types of  white  institutional isomorphism  at NPR’s founding : (a) coercive isomorphism in how founders implemented  membership criteria  that precluded many nonwhite community stations from membership while privileging university stations; (b) normative isomorphism in how founders sought out hires through informal connections; and (c) mimetic isomorphism in how the founders set NPR’s programming priorities, by privileging national news programming that reflected the perspective of what the board and hired employees deemed general and appropriate, based on the larger educational radio field."
"49" "Table 1:  Mechanisms of Institutional Isomorphism and their racial dimensions"
"50" "Mechanisms of Institutional Isomorphism and their racial dimensions"
"51" "Mechanisms"
"52" "Description"
"53" "Mechanisms in a white-dominant field"
"54" "National Public Radio, 1967-1972"
"55" "Coercive"
"56" "Regulations imposed on the field"
"57" "Regulations that disproportionately exclude social actors of color from participation"
"58" "Membership criteria: Wattage, budget minimums, staffing minimums"
"59" "Normative"
"60" "Norms of the profession"
"61" "Basing decisions on existing credentialing and professional networks"
"62" "Hiring"
"63" "Mimetic"
"64" "Organizational responses to ambiguity"
"65" "A tendency to follow the status quo and adopt field-wide policies when alternatives are uncertain"
"66" "Programming"
"67" "RESULTS"
"68" "Coercive Isomorphic Pressures :  M embership  C riteri a"
"69" "Coercive  isomorphic pressures are legal and technical regulations imposed on the broader organizational field. In the case of NPR, regulations take the form of  station membership criteria .  The board of directors in an April 1971 statement of particular program priorities, committed to “utilize the most advanced techniques of the medium, introduce new concepts and have the highest technical standards in the field.”  In radio transmission, stations with higher watts have higher technical quality. The founders of NPR had to consider airwave standards for national station membership when creating the membership network. The board deferred to the expertise of educational broadcasters in the room, like board member Al Hulsen, who had a decade of experience as a reporter and educational radio manager.  Al Hulsen embraced the technological standards of the field as a given. One such standard was the need for a higher watt station power to meet the criteria of a national member station."
"70" "Hulsen and the NPR board imposed those standards on member stations.  According to  founding members, this  imposition  ensured excellence as defined by technical programming quality and consistency. However, the standards limited the range of stations that could receive national funding, heightening the barrier to entry. On its surface, raising technological standards does not appear to be racialized,  until considering  longstanding racial ized  inequities in station resources. President Herbert Hoover passed the Radio Act of 1927 in an attempt to regulate the airwaves. It created the Federal Radio Commission (FRC), which controlled station licenses and reduced the number of stations on the air. Stations applied for frequencies, and the commission used their discretion to decide which broadcasts were most worthy to get airtime on a given frequency at a particular time. The commission often deferred to the station with the most capital, i.e. ,  for-profit stations (McCauley 2005). Educational stations that banded together to form a larger network after the Radio Act of 1927 were largely white-owned universities, as the cost of a license for a noncommercial station was prohibitively expensive for many community centers and nonprofits in which nonwhite communities more often participated."
"71" "Fledgling  community stations had to find the funds to match membership standards, or they would not receive national funding or national programming.  Furthermore, the operating budget of each station had to be at least $75,000 per year, prior to receiving any community service grants.  Taken together, these criteria eliminated a disproportionate number of minority-owned community stations from eligibility.   In  raising  barriers to entry and providing only limited grants for station development, these standards discouraged would-be members without existing formal institutional backing.  By 1977, only six public radio stations in the continental United States were controlled by nonwhite managers.   In contrast,  established  stations were rewarded for existing infrastructure backed by university funding, despite their disproportionately white and elite  racial ized  and class ed  composition. By 1977, “[t]he lowest level of minority participation on public radio boards was found among stations licensed to universities-6.4 per cent (56 of 869 ) . ” ."
"72" "To   NPR  b oard members,  race had nothing to do with the decision. R elying on  the expertise  among them ,  they   rarely consulted  local  stations about  such  challenges.  Had they realized that they were operating against their stated goal they could have acted  to ensure greater racial ized  equity;   however,  the ir   shared  white habitus made th e racial ized  impact  invisible to them .  Liz Young, first Station Relations Associate, reflected on these stations in 1977, reasoning that these technological standards in fact encouraged minority group stations to rise up to higher standards:"
"73" "“I mean we now have stations that are owned and operated by minority groups, like  American Indians, Eskimos, what have you. Sometimes those communities are finding it  difficult to meet the criteria …  having them has thrust forward the thinking: well, if this is  what we have to do to get the money and get the programs, we'll do it. Which is probably  not all bad.”"
"74" "Hulsen , reflecting on this decision in 1978,  described the process of implementing this technological standard as painless due to lack of contact with the affected stations: “I never felt too terribly uncomfortable with any of that because, first of all, you have to remember the structure. There weren't a lot of national meetings. There weren't a lot of get-togethers. Most of the business then was done by small meetings of boards of directors.”   Hulsen   advocated  the  exclusion of any station below ten watts ; he  justified his  decision   in this same interview ,  quipping : “Democracy has its place; but if you believe that educational radio is important, you might just say that the boards ought to do it …  the boards did a pretty good job …  they were conscientious and careful in their dealings.”   His attitude revealed prioritization of growth and coherence of national station membership over consideration of lower-resourced stations  and reaching  the more racially  diverse  public s   who  listened to those stations .  NPR ’s  founders  had the option to  garner input from local stations  but  recognized that  opting to do so  would open up lines of dissent and slow the process.  Moving  forward with  the  ten-watt standard  exacerbate d  inequalit y among community radio stations , rewarding well-endowed stations and punishing those historically disadvantaged."
"75" "Hulsen ,   in translating these fieldwide standards into NPR’s membership standards,  remain ed insulated from  the racially biased implications .  Because of his  shared socialization process among his peers within a white-dominant field  – or white habitus –  he  co nsidered his decision to be  based  solely  on technological limitations.  I solation from smaller, ten-watt stations allowed him to  overlook  the racialized resource allocation that the standards promoted .  This insulation relied on his own view and the view of his white colleagues from similar backgrounds as  sufficient  to make decisions on behalf of the public interest.   Hulsen admitted that he felt “life might be a lot better today if they had   less  national meetings and more actions by boards of directors.”   This quote  reveals that  his  structurally conditioned ignorance ,   contributing  to  racialized inequality,  was in fact welcomed  and beneficial , as it facilitated the  all-white  board’s ability to set standards  in line with the larger field - wide  standards  with less objections.   Had the Board been more reflective or responsive, it might have recognized how its actions perpetuated a legacy of exclusion from the early days of radio, when resources were concentrated under the umbrella of university stations, and universities were white- dominan t."
"76" "Normative  Isomorphic Pressures: Hiring Networks"
"77" "Normative isomorphic pressures arise within an organizational field as a profession seeks to legitimate itself.  NPR’s president, board of directors, and staff were chosen for their respective positions to highlight how hiring networks, drawn from white dominant fields in order to foster legitimacy and respond to uncertain conditions, resulted in a white dominant workforce.   DiMaggio  and Powell  (1983)  note two main aspects of the professionalization process that create such pressures: formal education and professional networking.  The recruitment process of NPR’s original executive board and employees reveals that  both  the  fields of government service and  educational radio shaped the racially exclusionary formation of NPR’s workforce.  The decision to rely on colleagues and familiar figures in the educational radio and public service fields demonstrates NPR’s reliance on field-based legitimizing professional markers in constructing a workforce.  Processes of recruitment for positions on the board  and  executive staff, reveal the salience of governmental and educational radio  professional  networks in deciding who should be considered and hired for positions in public radio from 1968-1972.   T he use of informal networks  inhibited workforce racial diversity at all levels at NPR, despite  commitment to serving a diverse plurality of  America ns ."
"78" "Figure 1 below is a simplified organizational chart that illuminates each organization’s relationship to the other. The National Public Broadcasting Act of 1967, passed by Congress and signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson, established the Corporation for Public Broadcasting as a nonprofit organization in the United States dedicated to providing funding for public radio and television.  Johnson appointed his colleague Frank Pace, third U.S. Secretary of the Army, as the first Chairman of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. He was concurrently the co-founder and president of the  International Executive Service Corps,  established to consult developing nations with neoliberal policies on private enterprise.  The CPB was charged with establishing exactly  how  it would promote public broadcasting, which it did through the establishment of NPR and PBS."
"79" "Figure 1: Public Broadcasting Organizational Chart"
"80" "The  corporation’s executives sought expertise from existing educational radio networks, relying on pre-existing professional norms to garner legitimacy and a swift formulation of a path forward. Don Quayle from CPB consulted Robert (Bob) Mott, Executive Director of National Educational Radio Network (NERN), to brainstorm candidates to head the Radio Division of Corporation for Public Broadcasting. The short list consisted of educational radio producers affiliated with the NERN. By Quayle’s account: “working with Ward Chamberlin [Chief Operating Officer of CPB] and Frank Pace [Chairman of CPB], we went through a number of possible candidates for the CPB radio job. We came up with young Al Hulsen… Al had worked with me at Ohio State, and at WGBH, and with the Educational Radio Network.”"
"81" "Frank Pace had recruited his friend and squash partner Ward Chamberlin as Chief operating officer of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. Mr. Chamberlin was a corporate lawyer with no public broadcasting experience in general, let alone experience from educational radio.  Pace and Chamberlain were entrusted with stewardship of the new public broadcasting system based on their positions as leaders in the government field and their connections to other such leaders.   When these leaders made decisions on the workforce of CPB’s executive Radio Office, they, in conversation with Don Quayle ,  conformed to normative pressures of the  white dominant  field of educational radio by favoring personnel with professional training in the same industry.  The department  was ultimately a reflection of existing, majority-white educational radio stations. “Al [Hulsen], Liz Young, Bill Kling and secretarial help constituted the Radio Office. Al and Mott worked very well together. They brought in John Witherspoon as a consultant to help design an organization that, unlike PBS, would both produce and acquire and distribute and promote national programming for radio .”"
"82" "The use of these closed networks with similar occupational training in hiring CPB executives cascaded through to NPR’s executives, as these selected CPB architects were then charged with constructing a board of directors for the public radio network. Don Quayle, who transitioned from his role at CPB to becoming the first president of NPR, delineated the search process in a retrospective interview: “NPR was set up by consensus of regional meetings. [Al] Hulsen and [Robert] Mott, and sometimes [John] Witherspoon, went out to talk to all of the [local station] managers, and to have them elect six [members]. These six elected three more [public members], and that constituted the Board of Directors of National Public radio. Working with legal counsel, they wrote the by-laws, the charter, etc.” The group of public radio professionals and managers from the  CPB  comprised the initial board of directors for the organization. Of the original 13 board members of NPR, none identified as women or as members of racial ized  minority groups. These  13   white men were tasked with selecting NPR’s president, and working with this selected president to recruit its executive staff."
"83" "When the  first NPR President Don Quayle and the elected NPR Board of Directors worked on hiring initial executive staff , he  utilized cold   calls to put individuals he believed to be a good fit for the job in management positions, many of them close friends or at the very least acquaintances from his professional networks (McCauley  2005 ).  His  trust was contingent on previous contact through professional networks within the existing organizational field —  networks which were inaccessible to people of color at the time. Like the hiring process within CPB, Quayle hired largely through informal networking to create a workforce that reflected the white field of educational radio of the time. Accounts from early NPR employees’ oral histories demonstrate a pattern of informal network usage in hiring. For the position of director of station relations, Quayle hired Elizabeth Young, who had been working with Quayle on the CPB radio  staff at the time and who had already asked Quayle for any job within NPR. By her own account, when Quayle was elected, she “went to him and said, ‘I don't know what I want to do, but I'd like to work for you.’ [she] went on board  with NPR in September of '70.”  Elizabeth Young, first director of station relations.”   By contrast, Lee Frischknecht had never heard of National Public Radio before he was recruited for one of its lead positions, director of network affairs , recalling:  “[NPR President] Don Quayle calls from Washington. He says,  ‘ Hey, what do you know about National Public Radio? ’  I said,  ‘I  never heard of it. ’ ”"
"84" "The contextual details of these hires differ- in particular, Young was already embedded in CPB while Frischknecht was not privy to the project; but they are united through their informality. Rather than conducting an open job search, NPR’s president used his existing national networks in noncommercial radio to find good fits for these executive positions.  Recall that DiMaggio and Powell  highlight that normative isomorphic pressures lead organizations to seek homogeneity in training of their professional workforce.   Drawing on previous professional experience as a marker of legitimacy for job candidates, despite the known racial ized  exclusion within the professional field ,  r esulted in  further  racial ized  exclusion; however, Quayle’s  white habitus, or  social conditioning within a predominantly white field ,  obscured to Quayle the connection between network recruitment and the resulting  white dominant  executive staff."
"85" "T he  normative isomorphic pressure to legitimize the public radio profession  lessens  the  potential for a diverse racial and socioeconomic base of  radio professionals  within NPR .  Further, Quayle’s understanding of these recruitment strategies  is  limited by his own white habitus.  As Ray notes in his explanation of whiteness as a credentialing mechanism, “access to mainstream organizations facilitates 'cumulative advantage processes stretching across the life course, as much of what counts as ‘merit” in hiring or access to education is produced through prior access  to credentialing organizations” (2019: 42) .  The shared white habitus of NPR’s board conditioned the board to understand this credentialing process as a race neutral way to screen people for experience and potential in the noncommercial radio field.  Professional credentials  were  structured by whiteness  in the fields of noncommercial radio and universities from 1967-1977, the immediate era following Jim Crow."
"86" "Mimetic  Isomorphic Pressures: Programming Priorities"
"87" "Mimetic isomorphic pressures are those areas of uncertainty in organizational  decision-making when there may not be a clear way to ascertain the  best  decision  for organizational practice. In lieu of a clear best practice,  organizations model themselves off existing legitimate d  paradigms. As outlined in the previous section,  the founding board members  were tasked with  deciding on station standards,  selecting NPR’s president, working with the president to recruit its executive staff.    They also met to set priorities for what programs NPR would offer on the national level, an ambiguous task  for the  first national programming network of its kind.  NPR aimed to produce national content, in part because there were an insufficient number of high quality local noncommercial programs to air nationally (McCauley 2005 ). The  founders, despite believing they were working with a blank slate, were influenced by characteristics of other noncommercial radio programming, and sought to model themselves after it ."
"88" "Figure  2 : NPR Incorporation Meeting at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, Washington, D.C., 1970."
"89" "Seated, left to right: Dick Estell (WKAR East Lansing); John Macy, Jr. (Corporation for Public Broadcasting); John Witherspoon (KPBS San Diego); Bernard Mayes (KQED San Francisco). Standing, left to right: Joe Gwathmey (KUT Austin); Karl Schmidt (WHA Madison); David Platts (WFSU Tallahassee); Marvin Segalman (KPFK Los Angeles); Bill Kling (KSJR Collegeville, MN). Not Pictured: Bill Siemering (WBFO Buffalo )"
"90" "Image 1  above of NPR’s incorporation meeting highlights visually the homogeneity of decision-makers’ aesthetics. However, the  collective inattention of NPR founders, and the employees they hired, to their own whiteness and to the whiteness of their models inhibited them from seeing their own perspectives as particular, not general, in this endeavor.  For instance, one of the founders Jack  Mitchell   describes his own position within the noncommercial radio field  in his memoir .   Within his self-assessed experience at NPR, he discusses how the audience was like him as educated and civic-minded.  When he discusses his own values becoming the values of public radio, Mitchell understands these values as emphasis on expanded higher education and social progressiveness. Mitchell reflects on his own professionalization process in radio at BBC, University of Wisconsin, and University of Michigan as the sites in which he was immersed in the  ideas of public service  that  guided him at NPR.  Founders thought of themselves as admittedly left-leaning and accounted that in their biases; however, they saw their white male perspectives as universal and “general” among this educated, left-leaning populace.  He furthermore conceives of the audience to be like him. “Public radio has a symbiotic relationship with its listeners …  who are well-educated and societally conscious and who feel so connected to the medium that they are willing to support it financially” (Mitchell 2005: xii)."
"91" "In the abstract, there was a commitment to diverse publics: board member Dick Estell, in discussion of his aims for the programming, stated  that “ aside from the human compassion which should dictate a service to these groups, it must be remembered that minorities comprise part of the  ‘ Public ’   in National Public Radio. ”  However, i n conversations about what national programming would cover and sound like during NPR’s first board meeting in January 1970,  there was not a clear mandate to cover particular topics over others, nor was there a  format required from the new broadcaster .   In  the face of this ambiguity, board members faced a mimetic pressure to conform to  existing legitimate paradigms.  Much as  the educational radio field was well established as a medium dominated by the perspective of white Americans (Savage 1999) ,  b oard members decided that minority groups would be served by their local communities .  NPR’s national team , instead,  would only focus on “general programming of interest to the whole nation.”  T he whole nation  becomes conflated  with a  narrow part  of it, the part to which the board members belon g .   Board members “agreed that NPR should not be duplicating local stations' efforts, nor should it initially be providing a special service to minority groups, except in so far as ‘minority’ programs were of national interest .”  It soon became clear that general programming of interest, defined by the board and national programming staff, would not be about communities of color."
"92" "Furthermore, the Minority Task Force Report of 197 8  found that  in  the national samples used for audience research, nonwhite respondents were underrepresented, privileg ing the program feedback of  white respondents.   The attitude of nonwhite perspectives as the “other” manifested in founders’ conversations regarding news produced on the national level. The board’s discourse differentiated between general and specialized audience programming ;  they would handle the general daily programming whereas local stations would provide more specialized community programs, such as shows for racial ized  and ethnic minorities.   Implicitly in this vision, a general  audience was understood as white audience .   NPR allocated just 3 percent of its programming budget to specialized audiences over its first seven years of operation.  W hen the Minority Task Force of 1977 surveyed 1,543 station hours, only 71.5 hours were designed for a nonwhite audience; the majority of those 71.5 hours consisted of music programming rather than news or culture."
"93" "The national programming that  NPR  did invest in was a unique shift from  either commercial radio or  more traditional molds of educational radio .  Programming manager  Bill  Siemering   insisted that they develop a show akin to a newsmagazine, that hits a variety of topics within three hours. By May of 1971,  All Things Considered , staked as their flagship program, went on the air (Stamberg and Roberts 2010).  NPR was  notable  in breaking with gender norms,  white women dominated and led  the programming’s voice rather than white men (Loviglio 2008).  Engelman, in his political history of NPR, notes that while this form deviated from the archetypal news broadcasts, its form and content mirrored those programs that station employees worked on before their switch to NPR."
"94" "“Various precedents are said to have influenced its format   -among them, Al Hulsen's  former show Kaleidoscope on the Eastern Educational Network, a program called  This Is  Radio  broadcast by WBFO/Buffalo during Siemering's tenure as station manager, the  CBC's early-morning offering  America as It Happens , and the public and cultural affairs  programming of the BBC, which influenced Jack Mitchell, another veteran of  WHA/Madison who helped create ATC  [ All Things Considered ] ” (Engelman 1996)."
"95" "While  aesthetically innovative and experimental in format, the program’s innovations came from existing models of nonprofit radio in the U nited  S tates , Canada, and  Great  Britain  (McCauley 2005) , whose workforce and audiences were predominantly white.   Given  the shared habitus of NPR’s board, this whiteness was unremarkable to the group, and thus went unmarked."
"96" "Meanwhile , the  assumption that NPR’s local stations would automatically reflect the demographic diversity of their locale ignored the history of racial ized  exclusion in noncommercial radio  stations, some of which they were drawing from as inspiration for national programming.   P assing the responsibility  of creating  “specialized” programming down to local-level stations  implied that the national interest  was  the interest of the white majority. The embrace of racial ized  pluralism without a corresponding investment in nonwhite stations was an illogical one, only made comprehensible when a person’s  racial ized  habitus  facilitates a normalization of white dominance. Furthermore, the model of local stations providing minority group programming proved insufficient. For instance, Detroit’s local station served a majority-Black district, and the white staff wanted to create specialized Black programming.  The  white station manager lamented to his fellow public radio professionals:"
"97" "“As a white person you’re not exactly in the most advantageous position to determine the  needs of the Black community, or to judge the standards of programming by and for  Blacks- that is, the Black aesthetic. That’s why you need to find a committed Black to do  this for you. But where do you look?”"
"98" "The sentiment was shared across this 1971 conference, as the write-up declared that “many managers who stated they were interested in minority programming said they didn’t know where to start .”     The statement that they would need to “find a committed Black to do this for [them]” is reminiscent of practices spanning back decades, of Black Americans being called on to consult and comment on their own communities but not to become station owners, or even members of the station , as was the case in Du Bois’s engagement with radio  (Savage 1999; Stoever 2011). This attitude  is a product of  a shared white habitus that   conditions an  inability to see their  Black  peers as equal."
"99" "In this recruitment of Black voices, the white manager does not consider the possibility for  nonwhite  management of media.  As Mitchell noted  candidly,   “[p]ublic radio and the broader academic world are liberal or progressive in their thinking but are not radical.  They  are not about to jeopardize their own comfortable situations  by fostering fundamental change ”  ( McCauley  2005:  114 ) .   NPR’s founders and employees sought to promote pluralism, but from a field position within the  white dominant  organizational field of noncommercial radio.  In their uncertainty about which programming to air, they faced mimetic isomorphic pressure to imitate the stylistic choices of the existing field-wide norms.  The resultant  politically liberal programming demonstrated an appreciation of pluralism and of differen t perspectives , curated through the ears of the white liberal producers, managers, and reporters."
"100" "THE REPRODUCTION OF WHITE RACIALIZED ORGANIZATIONS"
"101" "In viewing the organizational formation process through the lens of white  institutional  isomorphism, it becomes clear how NPR  f ailed to serve nonwhite public s  in its first ten years.   In  response to coercive isomorphic pressures to conform to   existing field-wide standards of technology,  founders  implement ed  a high- watt  station requirement  that  precluded many nonwhite  community stations from membership .  T he organization did not offer stations that were denied membership funding to purchase higher-watt stations and conform to membership standards .   In response to the normative pressure to recruit a legitimate workforce, NPR’s president hired  his  own professional executive connections .  Relying  upon their connections in white-dominant institutions of government and university  facilitated the creation of a  white dominant  workforce .   Finally,  in response to the mimetic pressure to choose programming that conformed to existing stylistic formats of U.S. educational radio,  NPR ’s board decided that the  national team would only focus on “minority” programming if it were of interest to the whole nation . This decision   followed the structure of other noncommercial stations in  making white communities unmarked  and minoritized communities a special interest group somehow apart from the whole of the nation .   In  choosing the organizational elements that build NPR as a  legitimate  organization, the founders operated following their white habitus. Their choices ,   though  logical from a purely technical point of view, were not logical from the point of view  of  nor conducive to the stated goals of the organization :  the goal of build ing   an  organization that reached a diverse population."
"102" "NPR’s founders would have needed to actively resist the field-level legacy of racialized exclusion to achieve the organization’s stated goals of pluralism and service to all Americans . Yet, NPR founders were hesitant to consult outside their board meetings, staff meetings and their immediate social circles for the sake of efficiency.  Had they been attuned to the  historical inequities of their field of noncommercial radio, the discrepancy between their own insular decision-making processes and their desire for racialized inclusivity would have been made apparent.   Instead, NPR’s founders and original workforce puzzled over outreach to racialized minorities without questioning  why  there were so few nonwhite station managers . While it falls beyond the scope of the paper, the racialization of this founding context will be relevant for future  work linking foundational contexts to contemporary racialized inequities in the same industry , considering the extensive literature on how founding contexts can inform the operation of institutions for decades to come (Stinchcombe 1965; Johnson 2017)."
"103" "In  the conclusion of the 197 8  Minority Task Force Report,  Gloria  Anderson states ,"
"104" "“The scenario would not be so dismal for minorities however, if the public broadcast  industry were alone: in negating the minority presence and the positive aspects of the lives  and cultures of the diverse and ethnic minorities in America. However, finding no place  set for them at the commercial broadcasting table, minorities have discovered that they  must look further than public broadcasting to find a place at all.”"
"105" "In other words,  National Public Radio ’s formation  was not an aberrant case .  A s an adopter of existing organizational norms,  NPR  was reflective of racial inequities across broadcasting organizations.  Founders , when  embedded in institutional spaces  they set out to shift,   can become  agents of fieldwide norms."
"106" "The analytical concept of white-dominant isomorphism introduced in the present paper exposes the how founders translate standards and practices from a white-dominant field into new organizations. Without rethinking modern professional standards in American organizational fields—often created by well-educated white men in an era of legalized racial segregation— organizational attempts at racial inclusion shall continue to be merely invitations into a white-dominant world, contingent on white discretion."
