Running head: HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
How Journalists Think about Media Effects—And Why We Should Care

Philipp Müller1 & Ralf Hohlfeld2

1

Department of Communication, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany
2

Chair of Communication Studies, University of Passau, Germany

This is an authors’ postprint of the article:
Müller, P., & Hohlfeld, R. (2017). How journalists think about media effects—And why we should
care. Atlantic Journal of Communication, 25, 88-100. doi: 10.1080/15456870.2017.1286343

1

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS
How Journalists Think about Media Effects—And Why We Should Care

Abstract
Research suggests that journalists’ beliefs about media effects are influenced by
unsystematically gathered knowledge and subjective-intuitive judgments. However, it has
also been shown that these presumptions must be considered important factors for the
formation of journalistic coverage. Against this background, this article synthesizes existing
research on dimensions, determinants, and consequences of journalists’ presumptions of
media effects. The resulting framework offers researchers in the field of journalistic content
production a comprehensive overview of the possible role that presumptions of media effects
could play for journalistic content creation. In a second step, we summarize the implications
that the current state of research points at. We discuss why journalism scholars should
integrate presumed media effects into their research agendas and what communication
researchers as well as journalists themselves could do to promote more realistic beliefs about
media effects among journalists.

Keywords
Journalism, media effects, content production, influences on media content, influence of
presumed influence.

2

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

3

How Journalists Think about Media Effects—And Why We Should Care

The relationship between journalists and their audiences plays an important role for the
understanding of news production (Schudson, 2000, p. 194). Many authors agree that
journalists think about their audience in one way or another when producing media content. It
has been argued that journalists, at least to a certain degree, try to match the (presumed) needs
and expectations of the audience (e.g., DeWerth-Pallmeyer, 1997; Napoli, 2003; Schudson,
1978; Shoemaker & Reese, 1996, 105–12; Witschge, 2012). However, media bias research
suggests that journalists do not only think of their audience in terms of a customer they
provide a service for but also as a group they intend to influence with their work in different
respects (for an overview, see Lee & Grimmer, 2013). That said, it seems important to
understand how journalists think about media effects. Their presumptions about the
mechanisms behind media effects might be an important influence on many journalistic
decisions during the publication process.
While several studies have already engaged in measuring journalists’ cognitions about
media effects and exploring their consequences, yet there is no synthesis of the existing
research that discusses the practical implications of what is known so far. The present article
aims at this task. It proceeds in two steps. First, we summarize the current state of research
about dimensions, determinants, and consequences of journalists’ presumptions about media
effects. For this purpose, we combine theoretical ideas and empirical findings from existing
research with new thoughts on the subject matter. This leads to an integrated model of
dimensions, determinants, and consequences of journalists’ presumptions about media effects
that is intended to serve as a framework for empirical research. It identifies analytical
categories which should be considered in future studies. In the second step, we discuss the
societal implications of the existing research. This seems especially relevant since results

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

4

indicate that journalists might be insufficiently informed about media effects and that their
publication decisions might thus be based on biased perceptions of media effects. We look at
this problem from two different perspectives. We discuss why and how journalism scholars
should integrate presumed media effects into their research agendas and what communication
researchers as well as journalists themselves could do to promote knowledge transfer from
academic media effects research to the journalistic field.
Dimensions of Journalists’ Presumptions about Media Effects
Journalists’ presumptions about media effects can be understood as “subjective
theories” (Groeben, 1990), i.e., inter-individually different mental representations of the
world that can be crucial starting points for different forms of human behavior (on subjective
media theories in particular see, e.g., Seiter, 2003). It is important to note that these
presumptions can differ in terms of quality. That means that different cognitions describe
social reality differently well. Many authors distinguish between lay theories and scientific
theories (see, e.g., Furnham, 1988). Expert theories of practitioners such as journalists are
then deemed to lie somewhere in between (MacDougall, 2003). Journalists’ knowledge about
media effects should, thus, be more sufficient than that of complete laypersons but less than
scientific theories. However, such a classification seems over-simplistic. Instead, it can be
assumed that there is a qualitative continuum of subjective theories with completely
insufficient lay theories at the one end and highly systematic and valid knowledge at the other
end of the scale (Furnham, 1988, p. 208). Just as scientific theories may not per se reach the
highest possible level of system and validity—merely because they are scientific—lay theories
and practitioners’ expert theories are not automatically less systematic and valid (Kruglanski,
1989, pp. 223–246).
A higher quality of presumptions about media effects is also related to a higher
complexity and range. Do journalists merely have vague notions of an influence of the media

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

5

or do they think in more complex and concrete terms, perhaps even differentiate between
diverse causes, consequences or even third variables of media effects? While media effects
research itself deals with complex models of media influence and sophisticated middle range
theories, the investigation of presumed media influence mostly remains on the level of quite
general assumptions. Respondents are often asked to estimate the strength of a presented
media stimulus or the media in general on themselves, the population at large or other more
specific groups of people (for a summary, see Andsager & White, 2007). This presumed
strength is moderated by the evaluation of the social desirability of the media influence in
question (Eveland & McLeod, 1999). This suggests that researchers—at least implicitly—
assume that laypersons do not develop complex and sophisticated assumptions of media
effects. Rather, they seem to imply that laypersons merely think in the comparatively simple
categories of the strength and desirability of media effects.
Consequently, most of the studies that investigate journalists’ presumptions of media
effects also mainly deal with these two categories. In early journalism surveys, participants
were very generally asked to assess the strength of media influence on public opinion as one
aspect among many others (Donsbach, 1983, p. 31; Weaver & Wilhoit, 1986, pp. 142–143).
More recent research investigates journalists’ third-person perceptions, i.e., the difference
between presumed strength of media influence on self and others (Bernhard & Dohle, 2014;
Dohle & Vowe, 2010; Tsfati & Livio, 2008). These studies are designed as quasi-experiments
and test for differences in third-person perceptions between journalists and other groups of
people. They point to an important aspect as they distinguish between descriptive and
evaluative propositions of media effects which might both contribute to shaping journalists’
production decisions. But, the studies still operate at a very general level instead of comparing
presumptions about different forms of media influence.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

6

This route is tackled by Lee and Chan (2009) and Li (2013), who ask journalists in
Hong Kong to assess the strength of different types of media influence on the public and in
politics. Lee and Chan (2009) find that media influences on political attitudes and on citizens’
political mobilization are estimated significantly stronger than media influences on social
grievances, on suicidal behavior, or on politicians’ behavior and government policy. A survey
among German communication technology journalists (Geiß, Jackob, & Quiring, 2013) takes
a similar direction and shows that these special interest journalists assume that their product
reviews have a considerable influence on different consumer behaviors (further information
search, detention of purchase decisions, and cancellation of purchase decisions already made).
However, such area-specific journalistic presumptions of media effects are still not
necessarily complex. It would be worthwhile to explore the existence of more elaborate
presumptions of media effects as well as their presumed constraints and causalities.
Journalists might form subjective theories of media effects in the sense of Groeben (1990)
which also refer to different causes and consequences of media effects, and thus are not
merely descriptive or evaluative but also explanatory. Different more specific notions of
media effects within the same individual might even contradict each other. One or the other
presumption about media effects could be salient in different situations. Future research
should attempt to detect journalists’ sets of specific presumptions about media influence.
There seems to be an imbalance between the nuanced and complex theories of media effects
research, such as cultivation, agenda-setting, or persuasion, and the very general way in which
journalists’ presumptions of media effects are studied. It remains unclear whether journalists
develop perceptions of media effects that resemble (or mirror) the academic theories or
whether they even form theories of media effects that academic research has not yet
considered.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

7

Therefore, an investigation of more elaborate presumptions about media effects seems
necessary. A first step in this direction could be made with qualitative interviews and group
discussions that identify the media effects mechanisms journalists assume. Such research
could also examine at which levels journalists’ presumptions of media effects are situated.
Journalists might be able to distinguish between media effects on the individual and societal
level (Chaffee & Berger, 1987; Pan & McLeod, 1991): Journalists should have an idea of the
difference between media-induced social change and media effects on the individual. It would
be interesting to see how journalists balance these two levels against each other. Media
messages that might have beneficial effects for individual users could have negative social
consequences (and the other way around). Therefore, research should consider whether
journalists distinguish between the two levels and how they think about them together.
Determinants of Journalists’ Presumptions about Media Effects
Information sources
The most important determinant of journalists’ presumptions of media effects are
probably the information sources on which they are based. The question where journalists’
assumptions come from has a massive influence on the complexity, system, and validity of
these assumptions. Generally, journalists’ beliefs about the audience can emerge in two ways:
(1) it can be based on available information about the audience (e.g., from market research or
from direct feedback such as commentaries on news websites) or (2) it could stem from
intuitive and not at all empirically grounded presumptions and projections. Several authors
have criticized that journalists’ actual knowledge of and contact with their audience is very
limited (e.g., Burgoon, Burgoon, Buller, & Atkin, 1987; Gans, 1979; Schlesinger, 1978). This
leads to the assumption that intuitive judgment contributes to the formation of journalists’
audience beliefs to a considerable extent. The resulting impressions are probably not of a very

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

8

high quality in terms of system, validity, and complexity. They might even be described as
“newsmen’s fantasies” (Pool & Schulman, 1959)
However, there are sources that could give journalists a reliable impression of the
audience—first and foremost the results of market research and academic audience research.
Also, journalists could rely on direct encounters with audience members, letters to the editor,
audience calls, and different kinds of online user feedback (Coleman & Ross, 2010, pp. 52–
71). But direct audience feedback is less informative than research results because only
“selected parts of the audience” (Loosen & Schmidt, 2012, p. 871) engage in such a behavior.
Audience feedback necessarily does not offer the whole picture. A German journalist survey
(n = 418) shows that journalists indeed regard sources such as letters to the editor (78.3%),
personal encounters with audience members (77.3%) or audience calls (70.2%) as important
factors for the emergence of their audience image (Hohlfeld, 2003, pp. 256-263). However,
such arbitrary and unsystematic direct contacts might result in a biased picture. Concerning
research results the study unveils a gap: while many journalists consider the results of applied
media market research (74.2%) an important source for their audience image, hardly any of
them concern themselves with the results of academic communication research (9.3%). From
this it can be concluded that journalists will probably have a well-balanced idea of how their
audience is composed and what it looks for in a media product since these questions are
answered by market research. But, they will probably have scarce reliable information about
the effects of their work on the audience which is only provided by academic research.
This is highly problematic since it means that journalists’ presumptions about media
effects are mostly based upon intuitive everyday reasoning and arbitrary cues that can
originate from a number of sources. Among these, conversations with colleagues should be an
important factor. Research has shown that journalists’ attitudes and decisions strongly depend
on co-orientation (Gans, 1979; Shoemaker & Reese, 1996, pp. 105–138). The same has been

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

9

found for journalists’ audience image (Donsbach, 1981). It seems likely that journalists
exchange their thoughts about media effects, especially among colleagues within the same
organization. Besides, also conversations with members of their private social environment—
and observations of these persons during media exposure—will probably receive special
attention (Hartmann & Dohle, 2005, p. 290). This almost necessarily results in large blind
spots in the knowledge about media effects. If journalists mostly gain their ideas about media
effects from talking to and observing individuals who are similar to themselves in terms of
sociodemographics, political attitudes, lifestyles etc. they do not arrive at an impression that is
representative for the whole society. Moreover, observing others and talking to them does not
inform journalists about the intra-individual cognitive and emotional processes that take place
during media exposure. These processes are barely observable from the outside and are also
not articulated in most cases. They may even occur subconsciously.
Therefore, it must be assumed that journalists also form parts of their presumptions of
media effects based on a projection or “looking-glass perception” (Fields & Schuman, 1976).
In lack of knowledge about other individuals’ cognitions and emotions they could fill this
black box with their own experiences as a media user and their introspective observations
during media exposure on other audience members. This means that journalists’ presumptions
about media effects on the audience might in large parts depend on their perceptions of media
effects on themselves (Shen, Palmer, Mercer Kollar, & Comer, 2015). Also, the mere
existence of media outlets or messages or, more specifically, the knowledge about their
amounts of users could result in presumptions about effects. Such an “exposure-is-effect
heuristic” (Sun, Shen, & Pan, 2008, p. 260) is built on a magic-bullet logic that assumes direct
interrelations between the exposure to a media message and its effect on the audience
(Eveland, Nathanson, Detenber, & McLeod, 1999). So to wrap it up, there is a variety of

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

10

sources that journalists probably rely upon when reasoning about media effects that might
offer them a biased picture.
Epistemic motivation and cognitive mechanisms
But information sources are not the only possible origins for biased presumptions
about media effects. Which of the numerous accessible information sources is given more or
less weight depends on the individual journalists’ information selection and processing.
Cognitive psychology assumes that there are two key factors in human information selection
and processing: the cognitive mechanisms that are applied and the underlying motives of
reasoning (Kruglanski, 1989, pp. 13–22). The epistemic motivation should have a
considerable influence on the choice of information sources. A journalist who has a high
intrinsic or externally induced motivation to learn about media effects (e.g., because this is
expected by superiors) will probably put more effort into finding reliable information on
media effects. Someone who only deals with the topic peripherally, on the contrary, may use
the most easily accessible or most salient information (Kruglanski, 1989, pp. 66–68) that
results, e.g., from observations in the private social environment or from direct audience
feedback.
The epistemic motivation will also be an important factor in the way information is
processed. The two-process models of information processing (Chaiken, Liberman, & Eagley,
1989; Petty and Cacioppo, 1986) suggest that factors such as need for cognition or personal
involvement determine whether incoming information is processed in a more superficial
heuristic way or in a systematic manner. Therefore even journalists who use similar
information sources might arrive at very different conclusions about media effects, depending
on how they deal with the information they receive. Low cognitive motivation probably
supports judgments about media effects that are based on heuristic cues rather than on

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

11

thoughtful consideration. Nevertheless, these judgments can become important factors for
journalists’ message production.
In the motivational context, also consistency theory might play an important role
(Kruglanski, 1989, pp. 85–110). Tsfati and Livio (2008, p. 115) have pointed out that
journalists have to assume a certain positive influence of the media (or at least of their very
own coverage) in order to maintain a positive self-image. Otherwise, their whole professional
occupation would appear pointless. To assume the existence of a (desirable) media influence
on society seems a necessity for journalists in order to justify the effort they put in their work
(Aronson & Mills, 1959). On the contrary, research points in the direction that experts in a
specific field tend to overestimate negative media influences in their specific area of expertise
(Price & Tewksbury, 1996). For journalists, this is true on two counts. Not only are they
experts in their specialized field of coverage (politics, culture, sport, etc.), they are also
experts when it comes to the media’s mechanisms of reality construction. These two
alternative mechanisms make it hard to predict under which circumstances journalists will
assume negative or positive media effects. It is thus important to further explore how
journalists evaluate the impact of their own coverage and of the media in general in different
contexts.
Organizational and societal context
When talking about journalistic work the picture cannot be complete without
considering the organizational and societal background of the individual journalist see, e.g.,
Shoemaker & Reese, 1996). It has already been pointed out that journalists’ professional
socialization and their professional social environment plays an important role for the
formation of presumptions about media effects. Studies have demonstrated that the degree of
audience orientation in journalism varies among editorial departments, publishing companies,
types of media, or hierarchical levels within an organization (Hohlfeld, 2003; Meyen &

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

12

Riesmeyer, 2009). It can be assumed that presumptions of media effects vary accordingly.
Research has, e.g., shown that ICT journalists in a higher hierarchical position more strongly
believe that their audience reverses buying decisions based on their coverage (Geiß, Jackob,
& Quiring, 2013).
Beyond the organizational context, also the broader professional environment could
give journalists an idea of (strong) media effects. Journalists are constantly confronted with
public relations’ attempts to influence their coverage. From this, they can deduce that
business companies or non-profit organizations of all kinds, assume a certain influence of
their work on the public. This could encourage journalists to assume strong media effects.
Along with professional socialization, academic socialization is an important factor in
the formation of presumptions about media effects. Journalists who have studied
communication, journalism, or a similar discipline should have been extensively confronted
with the results of scientific research on media effects. This should put them in the position to
form more valid presumptions about media effects in comparison to journalists who did not
study communication. However, the question remains whether those who have an academic
background in the communication field try to stay up-to-date by regularly reviewing recent
research findings. For one thing, the knowledge acquired during the course of study might
become outdated so that presumptions about media effects that build upon it become
outdated, too. Apart from that, the academic knowledge might also simply fade away over the
course of time if it is not regularly activated. For both reasons, it seems necessary that even
journalists with an academic background in communication regularly stay in touch with
media effects research.
Consequences of Journalists’ Presumptions about Media Effects
How journalists think about media effects is relevant because it could have various
consequences. Following an action theoretical approach (see, e.g., Coleman, 1990) it can be

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

13

argued that human action—as long as it is not habitual and follows an automated script—is
based upon an individual’s presumptions about the social environment that are cognitively
salient during the respective action sequence. Since the audience is the direct reference group
of journalistic action, it can be argued that presumptions about the audience play an important
role for journalists’ content production. These presumptions can either deal with the needs
and expectations of the audience or with the effects of journalists’ work on the audience. It
has to be expected that such presumptions influence journalists’ coverage in one way or
another (as will be explicated in the course of this article). Journalists’ presumptions of media
effects should thus be an important factor in content production. Since journalists’ coverage
fulfills quite a range of societal functions (see Christians, Glasser, McQuail, Nordenstreng, &
White, 2009) it is important to understand how presumptions of media effects contribute to
this coverage.
Research has demonstrated that within the general population presumed media
influences (Gunther & Storey, 2003) and, more specifically, the so called “third-person
perception” (Sun, Shen, & Pan, 2008) have numerous consequences. They reach from effects
on the processing of received media messages (Scherr, Müller, & Fast, 2003), to behavioral
intentions such as strategic voting (Cohen & Tsfati, 2009) and the willingness to speak out in
public (Mutz, 1989). The most prominently discussed effect in the literature is that thirdperson perceptions increase the support for media censorship. This effect has been
demonstrated for journalists, too (Bernhard & Dohle, 2014). The same could be true for other
behavioral consequences that have been so far only been investigated among the general
population. Where it really gets interesting is when these consequences touch on journalists’
work and its outcomes.
One aspect that is already pretty well explored is how presumptions of media effects
affect journalists’ attitudes towards professional roles and norms. Tsfati and Livio (2008, pp.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

14

115–116) assume that journalists who believe in strong (negative) media effects on the public
are more conscious of their professional responsibility and, therefore feel more strongly
attached to professional norms and ethical standards. The authors test this hypothesis with
data from an Israeli journalist survey and find that the perception of strong media effects on
public opinion significantly correlates with a conservative journalistic role image and with the
perceived importance of journalistic neutrality and distance to the object of coverage. Strong
third-person perceptions are, in turn, related to a liberal role image (Tsfati & Livio, 2008,
122). Lee and Chan’s (2009) and Li’s (2013) surveys of Hong Kong journalists yield similar
findings. Both studies show that presumptions of strong media effects generally bolster the
approval of journalistic professional norms.
This amplification of professional ethical standards through presumptions of strong
media effects could indirectly influence the formation of journalists’ coverage in different
ways. Berkowitz and Limor (2003) have demonstrated that journalists’ work-related ethical
convictions have the power to influence their publication decisions and lead them to a more
ethical behavior. However, these effects depend on the situational context and are specifically
affected by organizational imperatives. Thus presumptions of strong media effects do not
necessarily have to result in a more conscientious coverage, even if they increase ethical
standards in a first step.
Beside these rather positive consequences of presumptions of strong media effects on
ethical decisions within journalism, also more problematic consequences are conceivable. The
idea that their work is in one way or another able to change the audience’s attitudes,
emotional states or behaviors could reinforce journalists with a more missionary role
perception (see e.g., Hanitzsch, 2011; O´Sullivan & Heinonen, 2008; Weaver & Wilhoit,
1986) in their attempts to influence the audience through their coverage. Such an effect would
be in line with the basic assumption of news bias research that journalists try to influence the

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

15

audience in favor of their own political convictions (see e.g., Hofstetter, 1976; Kepplinger,
Brosius, & Staab, 1991). More complex subjective theories of specific media effects
mechanisms and the success of different persuasive strategies could guide journalists´
behavior in this context. However, the relationship between the assumptions of news-bias
research and journalists’ presumptions of media effects has not been investigated empirically
so far. Studies that intend to do so should recognize the empirical relationship between
presumed media effects and professional ethical orientations that point in the direction of
positive effects. Ideally, studies would compare both directions in which journalists’
presumptions about media effects on the audience could influence coverage.
Moreover, it has also been suggested that presumptions of reciprocal media effects
(Kepplinger, 2007) on the groups that are subject to journalists’ coverage (e.g., politicians,
athletes, artists or businessmen) could lead to an increase in attempts to influence these
groups. More specifically, research suggests that political journalists’ coverage could be
related to their presumptions of media effects in politics and on politicians (Dohle & Vowe,
2010; Lee & Chan, 2009; Li, 2013; van Aelst et al., 2008). When journalists recognize that
their coverage provokes politicians to respond and react or when they observe policy changes
in reaction to media coverage (Yanovitzky, 2002) this might reinforce them in reporting in a
critical tone towards policy and politics. If journalists, on the contrary, observe that critical
media coverage does not significantly impact political decisions they might be disencouraged
to further engage in critical coverage. Therefore, future research should continue to
investigate journalists’ presumptions of reciprocal media effects, especially in politics.
On a minor note, journalists’ presumptions of media effects also influence media’s
reporting on media and their effects and societal functions (see, e.g., Müller, 2013). Despite
the fact that it may seem generally opportune for journalists to publicly downplay media
effects within society (Noelle-Neumann, 1982), they should nevertheless be reflected in

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

16

media coverage about media. Research has, e.g., demonstrated that traditional media’s
framing of media innovations often over-exaggerates their possible positive and negative
consequences (see, e.g., Rössler, 2001). Such portrayals are probably closely related to
journalists’ belief about the respective new media technologies and their effects.
Another imaginable consequence concerns journalists personally. It has been shown
for other groups of professional communicators (for politicians: Cohen, Tsfati, & Sheafer,
2008; for scientists: Tsfati, Cohen, & Gunther, 2011) that presumptions of strong media
effects lead people to strive for an intensified self-presentation in the media which is also
related to a greater amount of actual media attention. Such effects might also occur among
journalists. Certain presumptions of media effects could lead journalists to put a stronger
emphasis on their own person and their self-presentation. They could, e.g., support their
decision to engage in personal branding on social media platforms (Molyneux, 2015).
Differences regarding such behaviors could be moderated by introversion/extraversion or the
degree of striving for social acknowledgment.

[Figure 1 about here]

How Journalists Think about Media Effects: An Integrated Model
Figure 1 summarizes the dimensions, determinants, and possible consequences of
journalists’ presumptions about media effects that have been discussed so far. We have
argued that a range of different information sources can help journalists to arrive at their
impressions of media effects. Based on an individual’s epistemic motivation, the information
from these different sources is selected and cognitively processed either in a thorough and
systematic way or in a more heuristic manner that does not require as much cognitive effort.
This cognitive process results in a set of different, maybe even contradictive, presumptions of

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

17

media effects. These presumptions differ regarding their system and validity, complexity and
range. Three different types of proposition have been identified (descriptive, evaluative, and
explanatory). Furthermore, the different propositions can either aim at media effects on the
individual or the societal level, or they can even describe relationships between individual and
societal media effects. A number of consequences of these different presumptions about
media effects have been discussed. Some of them could be mediated through attitudes of
professional roles and norms. Studies have shown that these attitudes are connected to
presumptions about media effects and that they can affect journalists’ decisions to be more
conscientious and ethically oriented. However, journalists’ presumptions about media effects
could also motivate attempts of influencing the audience or other groups of actors within
society in specific ways. They could, e.g., promote a more critical coverage of politics.
Moreover, they should also be reflected in coverage about the media themselves and their role
in society and they could enhance journalists’ strive for self-presentation.
All of these individual-level processes are embedded in a broader social environment
that is being defined by the organizational context and the society at large. Especially the
individual journalists’ professional and academic socialization could be important factors in
the formation of presumptions about media effects.
The model appears to describe a unidirectional process. But it could end in a cycle.
Journalists’ coverage, which is formed under the influence of presumptions about media
effects, could for instance provoke audience feedback that could serve as additional
information about media effects in a next step. Moreover, we have argued that the mere
existence of media messages and knowledge about the audience’s exposure to these messages
could function as a heuristic indicator of effects. Therefore, journalists might assume media
effects based simply on the coverage that they themselves and their colleagues produce.
Implications of the Current State of Research

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

18

The current state of research on journalists’ presumptions about media effects unveils
two main reasons for thinking about its practical implications: First, studies have
demonstrated that journalists’ conceptions of media effects could have considerable
consequences for their work. It has been shown that presumptions of strong media influences
can lead to a higher sensitivity for professional norms and ethics (Lee & Chan, 2009; Li,
2013; Tsfati & Livio, 2008). But they could also encourage and guide journalists who see it as
their task to change society for the better (Hanitzsch, 2011) in their attempts to influence the
audience as well as other actors, e.g. policy-makers. This has not yet been assessed
empirically. But, based on the arguments of news bias research it should at least be taken into
account. Taken together, these considerations suggest that presumptions of media effects
could be an important factor in the emergence of journalistic coverage that is yet to be fully
explored by journalism research.
Consequently, it seems important to understand how journalists think about media
effects and where their ideas on the subject matter come from. Survey data (Hohlfeld, 2003)
suggest that journalists form their audience image based mainly on arbitrary direct audience
contacts and on the results of market research. Academic audience research does not seem to
play an important role as a source of information about the audience. This suggests that many
journalists have a high epistemic motivation (Kruglanski, 1989) to learn about the wishes and
needs of their audience. They seem to be motivated to look for reliable information on these
questions and find it in market research. This is not very surprising. Journalists’ job safety and
personal income depends on the circumstance that the journalistic product they contribute to
finds its audience (Napoli, 2003). It is therefore of vital significance for journalists to have an
idea about what their audience wants. This knowledge can be acquired from market research.
However, market research cannot tell journalists anything about media effects.
Systematic insights to this field are only provided by academic media research which is rarely

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

19

taken into account. This means that journalists’ presumptions of media effects are mainly
based on information from direct audience contacts. Additionally, journalists could also
project their own media usage experiences upon the general audience or rely upon heuristic
indicators such as the “exposure-is-effect heuristic” (Sun, Shen, & Pan, 2008, p. 260). We
have argued that these sources are far from offering valid and systematic information about
media effects. Moreover, the choice of sources suggests that, contrary to the needs and desires
of the audience, journalists do not seem to be very motivated to arrive at a complete and valid
picture of media effects. As a result, not only information selection but also information
processing on the topic of media effects should be rather unsystematic and rely upon heuristic
reasoning. This is problematic because it means that journalists’ ideas about media effects
might be flawed.
At the same time, this does not mean that presumptions about media effects are
unimportant for journalists’ message production. Even though their ideas about media effects
are probably unsystematically gathered, journalists might still consider them consciously or
subconsciously in their work. In fact, it seems highly unlikely that they are not interested at all
in the possible consequences of their work. As mentioned above, several studies suggest
relationships of presumptions about media effects and journalists’ work. Against this
background, the conclusion that journalists’ presumptions about media effects seem to rely
upon unsystematic sources and heuristic information processing is worrisome. It has several
practical implications for both the investigation of audience production in journalism research
and for knowledge transfer from media effects research to the journalistic field.
Implications for journalism research
The basic take-home message for journalism researchers is that while there is ample
justification to consider presumptions about media effects as a factor in journalists’ content
production there is not enough research that actually does so. Many of our conclusions in the

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

20

present article had to be drawn by analogy or based on theoretical considerations. More
research is necessary regarding all aspects of journalists’ presumptions about media effects
that have been discussed in the present article.
Looking first at the dimensions of journalists’ presumptions about media effects, we
have seen that most of the existing studies have investigated them with quantitative surveys
and on a high level of abstraction (strong vs. weak effects). Further exploration of the forms
and contents of media effects beliefs is necessary. Research should start with qualitative
interviews that identify different elements of journalists’ sets of media effect beliefs and their
interrelationships. A more detailed picture of the specific media effects mechanisms that
journalists assume is required. In a second step, quantitative research should try to determine
the prevalence of the respective presumptions. Turning to their determinants, evidence points
in the direction that media effect beliefs could be based mainly upon insufficient indicators
and heuristic judgment. However, a more exhaustive exploration of the sources for
journalists’ presumptions about media effects and the epistemic motivation that lies behind
their formation is necessary. Experimental studies, think-aloud interviews, or in-depth
interviews could be used to gain insight into information processing in this field.
Finally and most importantly, journalism research should aim at extending our
knowledge about the consequences of journalists’ presumptions about media effects. Most of
the ideas that have been discussed in the present article have not been examined empirically
yet. In order to identify relationships between presumptions of media effects and journalistic
content production, studies could combine surveys and content analyses on an aggregate
level. Or they could use surveys that ask journalists about their media effects presumptions
and their behavioral intentions and work routines. This approach is quite common in research
on the consequences of presumed media effects. However, its external validity has been
criticized (e.g., Perloff, 1999, p. 368).

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

21

In summary, the empirical examination of the questions raised in this article is not an
easy task. However, especially the relationships between journalists’ presumptions of media
effects and their attempts to influence or persuade the audience should be explored. That is
not to say, of course, that we assume a majority of journalists to have bad intentions which
could be reinforced by media effect beliefs. For one thing, research has already demonstrated
that presumptions of strong media effects can make journalists more responsible. Beliefs
about media effects could also lead journalists to more strongly or more successfully engage
in activities that are socially functional from a normative point of view, e.g. the control and
critique of policy-makers (Christians et al., 2009). However, if these assumptions were flawed
the outcomes could be dysfunctional nonetheless. Moreover, some journalists could pursue
objectives that might not be socially desirable and could be driven by their media effects
beliefs in this context. That is why it is important to extend knowledge about the causes and
consequences of journalists’ presumptions of media effects.
Implications for knowledge transfer
On the flipside, communication scholars are not only responsible for investigating
how journalists produce media content but also how that content affects the general audience
and more specific actors, for instance politicians. Having argued that journalists’
presumptions about media effects might be flawed due to heuristic reasoning it is our societal
responsibility as a scientific field, to more actively engage in knowledge transfer to the
journalist profession. At this task, communication research should not content itself with the
education of future journalists in academic programs. We have argued that the knowledge
gained at university probably fades away over the life course. Moreover, although a growing
number of journalists in many countries has in fact studied communication large parts still
have not. That is why media effects researchers should actively seek contact to the journalist
profession and offer easily accessible information about the current state of media effects

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

22

research. First and foremost, this means to translate academic research papers into everyday
language summaries and to circulate them among journalists. But it could also mean to offer
specific trainings and courses in media effects research for professional journalists.
Journalists should at the same time recognize the importance that their own
conceptualizations of media effects might have for their work and its societal impact. This
should motivate them to more actively search for reliable information about how, why, and
when which media effects actually occur. Journalists who have been trained in
communication could fulfill an opinion leader function in this context. They should try to stay
up-to-date with the current developments of academic media effects research and help their
colleagues gain access to this knowledge. To sum it up, knowledge transfer is always a twosided task. Journalists as well as media effects scholars should try to approach one another in
order to ascertain a successful flow of insights from academic media effects research to the
domain of journalism.
Conclusion
In the present article, we have reviewed the current state of research on journalists’
presumptions about media effects. The result is twofold: We have developed an analytical
framework of the dimensions, determinants, and consequences of these presumptions within
which future empirical work can be conducted. Moreover, we have discussed the practical
implications of what is known so far. Our literature review has demonstrated that journalists’
presumptions about media effects constitute a field of research that still has a remarkable
amount of research gaps but also numerous connections with existing research from different
areas of communication studies. Its social relevance and the large number of open research
questions make further investigation of the matter within the field of journalism research
necessary. At the same time, we are also dealing with a research subject that can be
influenced directly by communication scholars. When we know about the insufficiencies of

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

23

journalists’ presumptions of media effects and their consequences, we can attempt to reach
current and future journalists and supply them with more sufficient knowledge about media
effects. Such knowledge transfer is a two-sided task to which journalists also should
contribute.
Most of the considerations in this article have remained within the theoretical borders
of unidirectional linear mass communication with clearly defined communicator and recipient
roles. It appeared reasonable to us to stick to this limited frame for the first systematic outline
of this field of research because this allows for clear classifications and reduces the
complexity of the task. However, future steps must integrate the dynamic user and producer
roles of online environments (see, e.g., Bruns, 2008). Today, it is daily routine for many
media users to produce their own content, be it in the form of short commentaries and tweets
or as complete blog entries. This changes the game between journalists and their audience
(Loosen & Schmidt, 2012; Yeo, 2016). User-generated content could serve as a new source of
information about media effects for journalists. Also, knowledge about media effects might
become more important to journalists in the new competitive situation of the Internet where
an increasing number of actors contributes to media content. This could change the way
journalists approach information on media effects. These are questions that future research
needs to address.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

24

References
Andsager, J. L., & White, H. A. (2007). Self versus Others. Media, Messages, and the ThirdPerson Effect. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Berkowitz, D., & Limor, Y. (2003). Professional confidence and situational ethics: Assessing
the social-professional dialectic in journalistic ethics decisions. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, 80, 783–801. doi: 10.1177/107769900308000403.
Bernhard, U., & Dohle, M. (2014). Do even journalists support media restrictions? Presumed
political media influences and its consequences. Journalism & Mass Communication
Quarterly, 91, 250–271. doi: 10.1177/1077699014527456.
Boczkowski, P. J. (2004). Digitizing the News: Innovation in Online Newspapers. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Bruns, A. (2008). Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life, and Beyond. From Production to
Produsage. New York: Lang.
Burgoon, J. K., Burgoon, M., Buller, D. B., & Atkin, C. (1987). Communication practices of
journalists: Interaction with public, other journalists. Journalism Quarterly, 64, 125–
132. doi: 10.1177/107769908706400117
Chaffee, S. H., & Berger, C. R. (1987). Levels of analysis: An introduction. In: S. H. Chaffee
& C: R. Berger (eds.), Handbook of Communication Science (pp. 143–145). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and systematic information
processing within and beyond the persuasion context. In J. S. Uleman, & J. A. Bargh
(eds.), Unintended Thought: Limits of Awareness, Intention, and Control (S. 212–
252). New York: Guilford.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

25

Christians, C. G., Glasser, T. L., McQuail, D., Nordenstreng, K., & White, R. A. (2009).
Normative Theories of the Media: Journalism in Democratic Societies. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
Cohen, J., & Tsfati, Y. (2009). The influence of presumed media influence on strategic
voting. Communication Research, 36, 359–378. doi: 10.1177/0093650209333026
Cohen, J., Tsfati, Y., & Sheafer, T. (2008). The influence of presumed media influence in
politics: Do politicians’ perceptions of media power matter? Public Opinion
Quarterly, 72, 331–344. doi: 10.1177/0093650209333026
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Coleman, S., & Ross, K. (2010). The Media and the Public. ‘Them’ and ‘Us’ in Media
Discourse. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
D´Alessio, D., & Allen, M. (2000). Media bias in presidential elections: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Communication, 50, 133–156. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2000.tb02866.x
DeWerth-Pallmeyer, D. (1997). The Audience in the News. London: Routledge.
Dohle, M., & Vowe, G. (2010). Wahrnehmung der politischen Einflüsse von
Medienangeboten. Third-Person-Effekte bei Bürgern, Journalisten und Politikern im
Vergleich [Perception of political media influences. Third-person effects among
citizens, journalists, and politicians in comparison]. In C. Schemer, W. Wirth, & C.
Wünsch (Hrsg.), Politische Kommunikation: Wahrnehmung, Verarbeitung, Wirkung
[Political communication: Perception, processing, effects] (pp. 11–30). Baden-Baden:
Nomos.
Donsbach, W. (1981). Journalisten zwischen Publikum und Kollegen: Forschungsergebnisse
zum Publikumsbild und zum in-group-Verhalten. [Journalists between audience and
colleagues. Findings on audience image and in-group behavior]. Publizistik, 29, 168–
184.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

26

Donsbach, W. (1983). Journalists’ conceptions of their audience. Comparative indicators for
the way British and German journalists define their relations to the public. Gazette, 32,
19–36. doi: 10.1177/001654928303200102
Eveland, W. P., & McLeod, D. M. (1999). The effect of social desirability on perceived
media impact: Implications for third-person perceptions. International Journal of
Public Opinion Research, 11, 315–333. doi: 10.1093/ijpor/11.4.315
Eveland, W. P., Nathanson, A. I., Detenber, B. H., & McLeod, D. M. (1999). Rethinking the
social distance corollary: Perceived likelihood of expsoure and the third-person
perception. Communication Research, 26, 275–302.
doi:10.1177/009365099026003001
Fields, J., & Schuman, H. (1976). Public beliefs about beliefs of the public. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 40, 427–448. doi: 10.1086/268330
Fiske, S. T. (2004). Social Beings: A Core Motives Approach to Social Psychology.
Chichester: Wiley.
Furnham, A. (1988). Lay Theories: Everyday Understanding of Problems in the Social
Sciences. Oxford: Pergamon.
Gans, H. J. (1979): Deciding What’s News. A Study of CBS Evening News, NBC Nightly
News. Newsweek and Time. New York: Vintage.
Geiß, S., Jackob, N. & Quiring, O. (2013). The impact of communicating digital technologies:
How ICT-journalists conceptualize their influence on the audience and the industry.
New Media & Society, 15, 1058–1076. doi: 10.1177/1461444812465597.
Groeben, N. (1990). Subjective theories and the explanation of human action. In G. R. Semin
& K. J. Gergen (eds.), Everyday Understanding: Social and Scientific Implications.
Inquiries in Social Construction (pp. 19–44). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

27

Gunther, A. C. & Storey, J. D. (2003). The influence of presumed influence. Journal of
Communication, 53, 199–215. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2003.tb02586.x
Hanitzsch, T. (2011). Populist disseminators, detached watchdogs, critical change agents and
opportunist facilitators. Professional milieus, the journalistic field and autonomy in 18
countries. International Communication Gazette, 73, 477–494.
doi:10.1177/1748048511412279
Hartmann, T., & Dohle, M. (2005). Publikumsvorstellungen im Rezeptionsprozess
[Conceptions of the audience in the process of reception]. Publizistik, 50, 287–303.
doi: 10.1007/s11616-005-0133-5
Hofstetter, C. R. (1975). Bias in the news: Network television coverage of the 1972 election
campaign. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press.
Hohlfeld, R. (2003). Journalismus und Medienforschung. Theorie, Empirie, Transfer
[Journalism and Media Research: Theory, Empirical Results, Transfer]. Konstanz:
UVK.
Kepplinger, H. M. (2007). Reciprocal effects. Towards a theory of mass media effects on
decision makers. The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 12, 3–23. doi:
10.1177/1081180x07299798
Kepplinger, H. M., Brosius, H.-B., & Staab, J. F. (1991). Instrumental actualization: A theory
of mediated conflicts. European Journal of Communication, 6, 263–290. doi:
10.1177/0267323191006003002
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay Epistemics and Human Knowledge. Cognitive and
Motivational Bases. New York: Plenum.
Lee, F. L. F., & Chan, J. M. (2009). The impact of perceived media influence on professional
orientations: A survey study of Hong Kong journalists. Full paper presented at the 59th
ICA Annual Conference in Chicago, IL, 05-22-2009.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

28

Lee, T.-T., & Grimmer, K. (2013). Bias in the news. In W. Donsbach (ed.), The International
Encyclopedia of Communication. Retrieved from
http://www.communicationencyclopedia.com/subscriber/tocnode.html?id=g97814051
31995_yr2013_chunk_g97814051319957_ss14-1
Li, M. (2013). Journalists’ perceptions of media influence in Hong Kong. Full paper
presented at the 63rd ICA Annual Conference in London, 06-19-2013.
Loosen, W., & Schmidt, J.-H. (2012). (Re-)discovering the audience. The relationship
between journalism and audience in networked digital media. Information,
Communication & Society, 15, 867–887. doi: 10.1080/1369118x.2012.665467
MacDougall, C. (2003). Learning from differences between ordinary and expert theories of
health and physical activity. Critical Public Health, 13, 381–397. doi:
10.1080/09581590310001615907
Meyen, M., & Riesmeyer, C. (2009). Diktatur des Publikums. Journalisten in Deutschland
[Dictatorship of the Audience. Journalists in Germany]. Konstanz: UVK.
Molyneux, L. (2015). What journalists retweet: Opinion, humor, and brand development on
Twitter. Journalism, 16, 920–935. doi: 10.1177/1464884914550135
Müller, P. (2013). National identity building through patterns of an international third-person
perception in news coverage. International Communication Gazette, 75, 732–749. doi:
10.1177/1748048513482546
Mutz, D. C. (1989). The influence of perceptions of media influence. Third-person effects and
public expression of opinions. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 1,
3–23. doi: 10.1093/ijpor/1.1.3
Napoli, P. M. (2003). Audience Economics. Media Institutions and the Audience Marketplace.
New York: Columbia University Press.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

29

O´Sullivan, J., & Heinonen, A. (2008). Old values, new media. Journalism role perceptions in
a changing world. Journalism Practice, 2, 357–371. doi:
10.1080/17512780802281081
Pan, Z., & McLeod, J. M. (1991). Multilevel analysis in mass communication research.
Communication Research, 18, 140–173. doi: 10.1177/009365091018002002
Perloff, R. M. (1999). The third-person effect: A critical review and synthesis. Media
Psychology, 1, 353–378. doi: 10.1207/s1532785xmep0104_4
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and Persuasion: Central and
Peripheral Routes to Attitude Change. New York: Springer.
Pool, I. d. S., & Shulman, I. (1959). Newsmen’s fantasies, audiences, and newswriting. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 23, 145–158. doi: 10.1086/266860
Price, V., & Tewksbury, D. (1996). Measuring the third-person effect of news: The impact of
question order, contrast, and knowledge. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research, 8, 119–141. doi: 10.1093/ijpor/8.2.120
Rössler, P. (2001). Between online heaven and cyberhell: The framing of ‘the internet’ by
traditional media coverage in Germany. New Media & Society, 3, 49–66. doi:
10.1177/14614440122225985
Scherr, S., Müller, P., & Fast, V. (2013). Do third-person perceptions amplify exemplification
effects? International Journal of Communication, 7, 1603–1621.
Schlesinger, P. (1978). Putting ‘Reality’ Together: BBC News. London: Constable.
Schudson, M. (1978). Discovering the News. New York: Basic Books.
Schudson, M. (2000). The sociology of news production revisited (again). In J. Curran & M.
Gurevitch (eds.), Mass Media & Society (3rd ed., pp. 175–200). London: Arnold.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

30

Seiter, E. (2003). Lay theories of media effects. Power Rangers at pre-school. In G. Dines &
J. M. Humez (eds.), Gender, Race, and Class in Media. A Text-Reader (2nd ed., pp.
367–384). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Shen, L., Palmer, J., Mercer Kollar, L. M. & Comer, S. (2012). A social comparison
explanation for the third-person perception. Communication Research, 42, 260–280.
doi:10.1177/0093650212467644
Shoemaker, P. J., & Reese, S. D. (1996). Mediating the Message. Theories of Influences on
Mass Media Content (2nd ed.). London: Longman.
Sun, Y., Shen, L., & Pan, Z. (2008). On the behavioral component of the third-person effect.
Communication Research, 35, 257–278. doi: 10.1177/0093650207313167
Tsfati, Y., Cohen, J. & Gunther, A. C. (2011). The influence of presumed media influence on
news about science and scientists. Science Communication, 33, 143–166. doi:
10.1177/1075547010380385
Tsfati, Y., & Livio, O. (2008). Exploring journalists’ perceptions of media impact. Journalism
and Mass Communication Quarterly, 85, 113–130. doi:
10.1177/107769900808500108
van Aelst, P., Brants, K., van Praag, P., de Vreese, C., Nuytemans, M., & van Daalen, A.
(2008). The fourth estate as superpower? An empirical study of perceptions of media
power in Belgium and the Netherlands. Journalism Studies, 9, 494–511. doi:
10.1080/14616700802114134
Weaver, D. H., & Wilhoit, G. C. (1986). The American Journalist. A Portrait of U.S. News
People and their Work. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Witschge, T. (2012). Changing audiences, changing journalism? In P. Lee-Wright, A. Philips
& T. Witschge (eds.), Changing Journalism (pp. 117–134). London: Routledge.

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

31

Yanovitzky, I. (2002). Effects of news coverage on policy attention and actions: A closer look
into the media-policy connection. Communication Research 29, 422–451. doi:
10.1177/0093650202029004003
Yeo, T. E. D. (2016). Communicating legitimacy. How journalists negotiate the emergence of
user-generated content in Hong Kong. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly,
93, 609–626. doi: 10.1177/1077699016628823

HOW JOURNALISTS THINK ABOUT MEDIA EFFECTS

32

Figures

Figure 1. A model of dimensions, determinants, and consequences of journalists´ presumptions about media effects

