Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019.

Pp.206-219

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.15

Memory Stay Or Stray?: Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!
Melor Md. Yunus
Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Bangi
Selangor, Malaysia
Mohd Azmanuddin bin Azman
Sekolah Kebangsaan Putrajaya Presint 14(1), 62300 WP
Putrajaya, Malaysia

Abstract
Even though gamification has been lingering for years now, its popularity has been rising ever
since. In fact, across disciplines and contexts, the amplification of 21st century learning has been
giving gamification a special place in education. There are numerous studies conducted on the use
of gamification among school children, university students or even trainee teachers.
Coincidentally, all of these studies have shown that gamification does impact their learning.
Hence, as harmless as it seems, any teachers who are not equipped with such knowledge on the
benefits of gamification may hinder their learners and themselves from reaching their utmost
teaching and learning experience especially when it comes to grammar learning among the
younger pupils. Considering this thought in mind, this research was conducted to prove that the
use of Kahoot! helps the Year 3 pupils in retaining the English Irregular verbs. This quasi –
experimental designed research gathered data from a sample of 35 Year 3 pupils using the pre-test
and post-test results. The findings which were analysed descriptively using sample t-test showed
that pupils’ performances in the post-test improved over the use of Kahoot! in classroom. In
conclusion, this research provides an insight on number of ways that gamification can actually
impacted the pupils’ learning; especially in terms of memory retention. It also works as a stepping
stone for more researches to study on the effectiveness of using Kahoot! in tackling any part of
learning especially among the younger learners.
Keywords: Game-based student response system, gamification, irregular verbs, kahoot!, memory
retention
Cite as: Yunus, M. M., & Azman, M. A. (2019). Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs
Learning Using Kahoot! . Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5). 206219. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.15

206

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

Introduction
For the past decades, the world was not that reliable on the technology. However, as 4th Industrial
Revolution is kicking in, the use of technology has been blooming and spreading like wildfire to
all aspects of lives in the current days. As a matter of fact, statistics showed that there were over
40% of online transactions are done as compared to the past years. This is the simplest evidence
to show the influence of ever growing technology towards mankind’s daily lives including
shopping! On top of that, Perry (2015) reiterates that three billion hours were spent on gaming all
across the world and with the presence of mobile technologies, gaming is now mobile. Besides
influencing mankind’s current lifestyle, the domination of Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) seemed to play an integral part in the current education world especially with
the emphases on 21st Century Learning.
In fact, according to Yunus (2018), teachers these days are ‘forced’ to shift their pedagogy
practises as it is very much influenced by the ever-updated technology. Consequently, the notion
of gamification which was introduced by Nick Pelling in 2002 has resulted to the birth of
interactive applications namely known as Kahoot!, Socrative, Quizziz, Quizlet and Plickers. This
concept is idealised with the application of parts of game mechanics into other web properties to
enhance engagement. Over the recent years, researchers proved that gamification have shown
worthy in assisting learners’ motivation and engagement in learning. Even though, there are a
number of researches on the use of Kahoot! to enhance English grammar learning, unfortunately,
there aren’t as much when it comes to local research on how Kahoot! impacted the Irregular verbs
learning particularly among the nine year old school pupils. As one might know, Irregular verbs
learning is viewed as one of the toughest grammar elements to be mastered especially among those
who learn English as their second, third or foreign language. As a matter of fact, the researcher
also found out that this issue affected his pupils at school too.
An average Malaysian students would have roughly about 11 – 12 years of English
language education before starting the tertiary level which means that they should at least possess
a satisfactory level of English by then. However, a research carried out by Singh et al. (2017) have
proven otherwise. Almost thirty percent of the grammatical errors made by the Diploma students
in Malaysia is contributed from verb tense including the Irregular verbs. From this finding, it is
more apparent as to how significant it is to curb this issue as early as possible. Traditionalist
believed that memorisation is the only way to retain information on Irregular verbs. To certain
extent, this belief is somewhat true considering that “one rule doesn’t apply to all” concept of
Irregular verb. However, this technique only turns the whole learning experience dreadful and
mundane, which in the end contradicts to Malaysian’s Ministry of Education vision of “fun
learning in classroom”. Since the growing population of educational applications has been taking
a lot of attention lately, it only makes more sense if current teaching and learning employs any of
these applications in making even mundane and complicated part of grammar more fun and
relatable to the learners especially the young ones.
Among the reason to resistance towards English practise is using the right grammar. To
top that of, irregular verbs in particular seems to be very confusing with the inconsistent and ever
changing rules. This led to low mastery on Irregular verbs among them. Meanwhile, to some
others, they chose to simply use the same concept on everything; in other word, they
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

207

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

overgeneralised. According to Richards (1974), overgeneralisation happens when one deviant
structure is used against two regular structures. Dörnyei (2009) inferred to this by stating that,
fewer attentional resources are necessitated when rules have been highly automatized. This
resulted to larger portion of rules functioned on auto pilot. Sadly, with limited knowledge of past
tense form, inflections such as ‘ed’ is added after action words (verbs); “She cutted the fruits last
night” (Wee, Sim & Jusoff, 2010). Another cause to this would be the influence of the first
language or mother tongue such. Let’s take the Malay language for an example. Ideally, Malaysian
Malays do not have any irregular forms or additional suffixes to indicate the action that has taken
place in fact, they use the word telah or expression of time such as semalam (Suppiramaniam,
2012).
Another issue pertaining this topic is the low memory retention among pupils in learning
Irregular verbs. Up until now, there are no specific style in teaching irregular verbs. Even so, we
could somehow agree that the option is to go with rote learning, in which pupils are given a list of
irregular verbs and asked to memorise them. It could work on some of them with some of the
words. However, in most cases pupils tend to get it mixed up especially when the words are
grouped together with the past participle form. Therefore, before deciding on the correct method
to teach irregular verbs, teachers must know that there are two types of memory; declarative
memory and procedural memory. According to O’Grady (2006), declarative memory deals with
the “leaning and storage of facts and events including arbitrary information” (p.2). This type of
memory is often associated to lexicon or mental dictionary, in which the memory works when the
learner is able to relate to the new knowledge obtained including its meaning, pronunciation and
use. Nevertheless, the information stored in this memory required ones’ conscious awareness upon
retrieving it. As for the procedural memory, it centres on the use of broad range of motor and
cognitive skills particularly the ones involving sequencing (Pinker & Ullman, 2002). It is believed
that this type of memory assists the computations and symbol manipulation in regards to grammar
components such as syntax, non – lexical semantics, morphology, and phonology. Unlike its
counterpart, this memory operates through unconsciousness, in other words, the learners may not
be aware of what enable them to form or interpret sentences especially in first language acquisition.
Often, whenever learning second language is discussed, the memory involved would be
declarative. So the question at hand would be, how to ensure that the lesson employed hits this
part of their memory in learning about irregular verbs? Therefore, the aim of this paper is to
scrutinize the use of Kahoot! in developing English Irregular verbs among the young English
language learners.
Literature Review
In this world of technology, everything is possible. In the olden days, teaching and learning only
requires a simple tool as a blackboard and a chalk. However, these days, even social media
platforms can be transferred into a learning experience. A research conducted by Jalaludin, Abas
and Yunus (2019), resulted that the function of “askme” in Instagram can provide a conducive
learning to the pupils besides improving their English writing skill and parent-child interaction at
home. If one might wonder, what are the reason behind all these possibilities, the answer would
be “the computer technologies”. According to Yunus, Salehi and Amini (2016), there are many
ways computer technologies can be corporate into language learning. Among of this contribution
would be the existence of the computer facilities such as graphics, videos, text, audio, animations
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

208

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

and above all, interactivity. The idea of computer technologies has been given pathways to other
ideologies to surface such as gamification and game-based student response system.
Gamification and Game-based Student Response System (GSRS)
Khaleel et. al (2016) define gamification as an integration of game elements in a non-game to solve
task at hand effectively. Why is gamification a huge deal among the educators around the globe?
As agreed by many, gamification has effectively improved learners’ learning experience in
comparison to the traditional teaching and learning. Yolageldili & Arikan (2011) concluded in
their study that gamification encourages grammar learning to be more enjoyable and permanent
because the game successfully provides a meaningful context for communicative grammar
practice. In fact, 63.33% of the participants of the aforementioned study disagreed when learners’
knowledge of grammar is claimed not to be measurable when games are used in classroom. This
testimony indicates that gamification has great potential to be used in aiding grammar learning. In
fact, through games, teachers could create contexts which allows for unconscious learning to take
place because learners’ attention is on the message, not on the language (Cross, 2000). As a result,
once learners are paying attention to the game as an activity, they are acquiring the language in the
same way they acquired their mother tongue which is by not being aware of it. This element of
unconscious learning would be very fitting with this study especially in applying the irregular
verbs learning which is said to be prompted even before than the regular verbs. Hussein (2015)
highlights four key domains on how gamification benefitted the learners. Among the two domains
involved learners especially the young ones see this approach rather more entertaining and fun
hence lowering their affective filter and keep the engagement level at bay. Secondly, gamification
allows learners to reflect upon their own learning.
As similar it is to the traditional quizzes, gamification reaches another level on its own as
it encourages the learners to compete with each other to be placed among the upper ranks. Hence
making the experience more fun and meaningful to the learners particularly those nine year olds.
Coincidentally, apart from making the learning more fun to the learners, this approach comes very
handy to the teachers as it allows them to assess their pupils’ learning formatively. The data can
be retrieved right away and enables future intervention to be made. Finally, gamification-based
such as Kahoot! allows learners to keep on trying to get themselves onboard with the lessons
without feeling intimidated or fear of making themselves seemed foolish. An example of this
practise is exemplified from the display of only the three top places in the final leaderboard. This
way, those who didn’t score well won’t be at any risk of exposing their performance to the others.
Hence, enable them to work at their own pace without feeling any pressure or embarrassment from
it, which eventually contributed to meaningful learning; a form of learning resulted from a well
organised and relevant structures as well as its association to emotional commitment tangled
between the new and existing knowledge. Normally, this form of learning takes place once all of
the following prerequisites must be met by the learners; (1) the material learned must be potentially
meaningful (2) the learner must have relevant concepts and propositions in their mind (3) the
learner opted to relate and integrate the new ideas with the existing ones.
In earlier discussion, when the writer mentioned ‘game elements’, this refers to game
mechanics, game design and game techniques. ‘Leaderboard’ as the one instilled in Kahoot! is one
of the core game elements which shows rankings of game players based on their accomplishment
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

209

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

levels. During a semi-structured interview carried out with the respondents, the writer found out
that the pupils found the marks display as a drive to compete with not only others but their own
selves. This situation clearly evident the presence of intrinsic motivation among the pupils. Just
when there’s leaderboard, there will be points or scores and Kahoot! is all about that. According
to a study carried out by Flores (2015), for each of the Kahoot! quizzes, learners are awarded with
points based on their performance. The basic calculations offer 1,000 points for any correct
responses answered under 0.05 seconds. From this feature, a trace of extrinsic motivation is made
more visible particularly when the pupils tried to answer the questions all by themselves. Besides
the leaderboard and scoring system, other features which help maintain its acceptance among its
users are the integration of technical features such as music, graphics, and colours as well as
feedback and problem solving or challenge with uncertain outcomes.
Above all, Kahoot! can be perceived as a resurrection of the clicker in the modern day. The
evolution of the older Student Response System (SRS) to Game-based Student Response System
(GSRS) is historically drawn during the reign of “iClicker” and “Poll Everywhere” to the current
user-friendly application such as Kahoot! Licorish, Owen, Daniel & George (2018).Besides
replacing SRS, GSRS is relatable to Novak’s meaningful learning model, which differentiate
learners’ deep and surface learning approaches. The whole learning experience began with
teachers’ selecting meaningful materials according to the learners’ existing knowledge followed
with their initiative to engage the learners with a deeper learning instead of rote memorising.
Ironically, this ideology is well reflected in Kahoot! as learners experiment, reflect and evaluate
their knowledge (when answering the questions) and receives immediate feedback from the game.
On top of that, Licorish, Owen, Daniel & George (2018) added that learners who were practised
with deep learning strategies such as GSRS are highly engaged which resulted to them to be able
to “apply their deep learning strategies to their study practises”.
Gamification and language
Earlier, the discussion wasn’t emphasising much on how gamification is used in learning
particularly language learning. Zakaria, et. all (2018) conducted a research among the pre-service
teachers enrolling in Academic Writing course in Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). The
research focussed on implementing Kahoot! as an assessment for the course. The student’s
achievement was evaluated after 14 weeks using descriptive analyses based on how well they did
in Kahoot! quizzes. The highlight of the research was seen when the students in the extremely
improved learners obtained 40 – 55% of improvement rates. Apart from the that, the result also
proved that gamification can be used as an alternative to formative assessment in language
learning. From this analysis, it is noted that the use of gamification do have impact on learning
especially language learning. Interestingly, the findings also prove that even the adults can benefit
from this approach.
Kahoot! : Features and Past Studies
Kahoot! is ranked 36th on the list of apps related for educational trends besides being one of the
top 100 current apps which has been used in the classroom (Kapuler, 2015). The compliment
continues as Ciaramella (2017) adds that Kahoot! benefits the educational trends with the
integration of gamification approach which impacted positive pupils’ engagement. So, what is
Kahoot! and what’s with the uproar and its coronation as the most hip teaching styles? By
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

210

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

definition, Kahoot! is a “free assessment program that can be used at any time of the lesson to
increase the participation of the students to the lesson by the teachers and it can be used as a
formative assessment as well” (Barnes, 2017). Not only that, this program requires limited
instructor or student training, making it very user-friendly besides easily accessible using
smartphones, computers or tablets (Wichadee & Pattanapichet, 2018). The steps in using Kahoot!
begins with the teachers creating their own Kahoot! account. Once they are done, they can proceed
with the material preparation based on any one of the three modes provided which according to
Chotimah & Rafi (2018) involve; quiz, jumble, discussion and survey. Being the most popular
among the users, quiz mode allows teachers to create unlimited questions accompanied with or
without pictures or videos this include giving teachers the full authority in creating the quizzes as
they can choose to restrict the answer choices to 2, 3 or 4 as well as setting the time limit for each
question from 5 seconds to 2 minutes. The assessment is based on how fast the pupils can answer
the questions displayed on the main screen. Even so, the pupils can only join in once they have
keyed in the pin number as shared by their teacher on the main screen.
As flexible as it sounds, Kahoot! can be used in various ways; either (1) at the beginning
of the class with the intention to identify gaps in the learners’ existing knowledge (2) during mid
– class session to reinforce the concepts taught (3) at the end of the class to review and practise
the concepts learnt and finally (4) as assessment either formative or summative. This visual cues
in Kahoot! is reported to be a positive influence to the learners with learning disabilities and special
education. In addition, according to Inclusive Design (2010) the visual cues with different shapes
and colours combined with simple easy-to-read questions and answer format is beneficial to both
group or individuals with the different learning needs. Being aligned with the 4c’s concept in 21st
Century Learning, collaborative learning is visible in this apps through the player options; Player
VS Player (classic) and Team VS Team (team mode). Besides that, just as explained by Flores
(2015), Kahoot! is flowing with the elements of gamification such as leaderboards, points,
feedbacks, performance graphs, and social elements/community collaboration.
The findings from a research carried out by Zarzycka-Piskorz (2016) entitled Kahoot it or
Not? Can games be motivating in learning grammar? showed that 70% of the respondents feel
motivated to learn grammar after they have played Kahoot!. The statistics is convinced to be driven
from the four common reasons behind the motivation; desire to win, to master own knowledge,
playing with the others and knowing the purpose of the game which include revising, checking
and consolidating knowledge. Besides that, 80% of the respondents believed that this application
impacted their learning motivation because they are well aware of its purpose, which is to check,
consolidate and revise their knowledge on the content.
Another research carried out by Ganesan, Idris, Yunus (2018) showed that almost 66% of
the overall sample improved in a grammar test which focussed on the Simple Present Tense, while
another 78% showed significance improvement on Simple Past Tense and 61% was proven to
improve themselves in a test on conjunction.
Irregular verbs learning
Often times, the notion of ‘overgeneralisation’ has always been synonymous with irregular verbs
learning. As most ESL learners are aware of, any verbs in past tense form must be added with
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

211

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

either -d, -ed, -ied inflections to show that the actions have taken place in the past. Hence, mistakes
such as goed, eated, wented and felled keep recurring in ESL learners’ writing. The ignorance on
irregular verbs form often caused ESL learners to repeat the same mistakes either in their writing
or speaking attempts. According to Prapobaratanakul & Pongpairoj (2016) there are four sub-types
of irregular verbs; (1) ablaunt (vowel change; eg run becomes ran), (2) pseudo-inflection (from
a long vowel to short vowel; eg feed becomes fed), (3) suppletive (completely different; eg go
becomes went) and (4) identical forms (does not change; eg put becomes put). Steven & Alan
(1994) add that, the inquisition of irregular inflection (e.g., sing – sang) is made easier with the
presence of brute - force memory due to its varying degrees of unpredictability. For this reason, a
child who heard of the word sang being mentioned repetitively by his parents would soon grow to
be familiar of the form as the brute memory was working.
On top of that, Brown (1973) states that, unlike ESL learners, an English-speaking child,
acquired irregular past tense inflection before the regular counterpart -ed . Therefore, for a nonEnglish speaking learners, learning irregular verb form may be a bit difficult due to the nonexistent of both environments. Another scenario which is related to the difficulty in irregular verbs
acquisition is the interference of the dominant rules. As explained by Kuczaj (1977), once a child
has achieved sufficient amount of control of the regular past tense form, he will start to make two
types of errors with the irregular past tense form. He either adds the -ed suffix to an irregular
generic verb form (eated) or attaches the suffix to the past tense form itself (ated). Apart from the
rule confusion, mother tongue’s interference also contributed to the lack of English Irregular verbs
mastery. Based on the the studies by Ashari and Munir (2015) and Watcharapunyawong and Usaha
(2013) as cited by Denizer (2017), mother tongue’s acquisition has been proven to affect at least
sixteen parts of English grammar which includes both regular and irregular verbs in past tense.
Besides that, the findings with more than 100 verb tense errors in each scripts collected also proves
the influence of the mother tongue towards the learner’s writing Due to the aforementioned issues,
this study is aimed to unravel the following research question; Does the use of Kahoot! helps young
language learners in learning English Irregular verbs?
Methodology
Since the data from this research were derived solely from the comparison of pre - test and post test data, this research is indeed a quasi - experimental research involving manipulating an
independent variable without random assignment of conditions or conditions orders to participants.
On top of that, this design was chosen by the researcher since the participants for this research was
a class of 35 Year 3 pupils; without any controlled group. The data collection is done quantitatively
instead of qualitative because the aim of this research is to examine the impact of Kahoot! towards
the pupils’ memory retention of irregular verbs (Creswell & Poth, 2017). The use of Kahoot! quiz
was the independent variable (X) of the research meanwhile the final score on Irregular verb quiz
was the dependant variable (Y). This score, which signifies the memory retention was used as the
yardstick to prove the impact of Kahoot! towards the Year 3 pupils’ irregular verbs learning. The
only instrument used for this research was the Irregular verbs test which were given before and
after the treatment (Kahoot! quiz sessions).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

212

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

Table 1. Pretest-posttest design
Participants

Pre-test
A

Treatment
O

Post-test
X

Information of table 1:
A
: Irregular Verbs Pretest
O
: Class treatment with Kahoot!
X
: Irregular Verbs Posttest
Research Procedure
The researcher started by listing down 46 common irregular verbs, which were then translated into
Kahoot!, together with appropriate picture to aid the learning process. These 46 words are chosen
due to their common frequencies in English language learning. Not only that, the researcher also
believed that exposing more than 46 irregular verbs may cause the participants to burn out. Hence,
selecting only 46 irregular verbs are well suited to accommodate to the research aim which is to
investigate the impact of Kahoot! towards memory retention of the subject matter. Before the
teaching and learning process began, the pupils were asked to answer the pre-test questions, which
covered the selected 46 irregular verbs in a form of 22 multiple choice questions. Once the pretest was completed, the researcher continued on with the first lesson by explaining about irregular
verbs as well as introducing the pupils to all 46 targeted irregular verbs. They were asked to copy
the wordlist in their exercise book for future reference.
Immediately after the introduction, the pupils were introduced to Kahoot! Since none of
them were exposed to this application before, the researcher had to demonstrate how the
application works; from key-in the game pin, to creating nickname and answering the quiz
questions. Once the pupils were well versed with the idea, the quiz on irregular verbs was launched
and the pupils were asked to answer it in a smaller group. This practise went on every day for the
whole one week, with at least 5 minutes allocated during each interaction. On the last day of the
experiment periods, the researcher handed out the same questions as the pre-test for the participants
to be completed.

Figure 1. Example of pupils’ Irregular verbs notes.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

213

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

Data Analysis
The process began with the researcher marking all of the scripts by the participants. Once the
marking process was completed, the researcher viewed the results (marks) in two ways. The first
one is by listing out the marks scored by each participants in pretest and posttest. These marks
were then translated into percentages. In order to verify any improvements made from both tests,
the percentage from the posttest were deducted with the one from the pretest. And then, the
document analysis was continued by scanning through any items from the quiz that showed
remarkable differences in both pre and posttest. The second step was by recording the participants’
achievement in both test into statistical software known as IBM SPSS Statistics Version 20. Paired
sample t-test was run to describe the difference in the mean before and after the use of Kahoot!.
The result from the data was very significant in proving the effectiveness of Kahoot! in retaining
the participants’ memory and understanding of English Irregular verbs.
Findings and Discussions

Figure 2. (1) Individually, pupils answered the Irregular verbs quiz before they used Kahoot!
(2) In smaller groups, pupils were taking turns to use Kahoot!
As previously stated in the methodology section, there were 22 multiple choice questions total in
both of the tests. Before proceeding with the statistical analysis, the data from the tests were
translated from the document analysis. This analysis were done by transferring all of the scores for
both tests into a table form using Microsoft Excel. Percentage was counted for both pretest and
posttest. Since the intention of this study is to explore the impact of Kahoot! in Irregular verbs
learning, the researcher needed to see there’s improvement in posttest score in comparison to the
pretest scores. Therefore, the percentage from the posttest was minused with the pretest
percentage.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

214

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Yunus & Azman

Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Table 2. An excerpt Comparison of results in pretest and posttest.
Pretest Scores
Percentage
Posttest Scores
Percentage
1/22
0/22
3/22
6/22
0/22
18/22

4.5%
0.0%
13.6%
27.3%
0.0%
81.8%

22/22
21/22
19/22
14/22
5/22
20/22

100%
95.5%
86.4%
63.6%
22.7%
90.9%

Improvement
Percentage
95.5%
95.5%
72.7%
36.4%
22.7%
9.1%

From this data, it shows that all of the participants showed an improvement in terms of their quiz
scores before and after the use of Kahoot! Some of the participants even showed a tremendous
improvement by scoring almost 96% improvement score. This was evident from those who scored
either 0 or 1 out of 22 questions during the pretest. With regards to the percentage, we could also
see from the excerpt that there’s a participant who only improved 9% from the initial pretest. This
could be perceived as a very low improvement percentage indeed, however it is fair to conclude
that this only happened because this participant has already possessed a well range schemata on
Irregular verbs, which was further evident from her capability to use words that other don’t know
yet. Therefore, it only made sense that she didn’t show much improvement as compared to others.
An analysis according to each items was also conducted to conclude if there’s any particular
significance to the intervention. The most striking result was perceived in item number 17.
Table 3. Item number 17 in the pretest and posttest
17. What is the past tense of “CUT”?
A cutted
B cuts
C cutting
D cut
Based on the document analysis, during pretest, only 2 out of 35 participants managed to answer
this question correctly. Ten out of 35 participants chose cutted, while 16 out of 35 answered cuts
and the remaining 7 answered cutting. This confusion might occur due to fact that some irregular
words normally undergo changes such as in terms of vowels or additional inflections such as -ed.
To top that off, there are not many words who shares the same formula as this word; cut. Therefore,
it is either they know about it or they don’t. However, tremendous change was obtained from the
posttest when 29 out of 35 participants answered cut as the past tense of cut. Meanwhile, only
1/35 chose cutted, leaving 5/35 answered cuts and 0/35 answered cutting. Another item that
showed massive improvement would be item number 18. During the pretest, only 5 out of 35
participants manage to answer this item correctly, however the table turned during the posttest
screening when 25 out of 35 participants managed to remember the correct past tense form of the
irregular verb; choose. With no other exercise but Kahoot! practises, the link between the use of
this application and memory retention is more apparent and obvious. This achievement could be
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

215

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

related to Steven & Alan’s (1994) ideology that the inquisition of irregular inflection (e.g., sing –
sang) is made easier with the presence of brute - force memory. In this very situation, the
participants who were repetitively exposed to the word cut during Kahoot! sessions were evident
to find retaining the information a lot easier as their brute memory was working well throughout
the process.
Table 4. Item number 18 in the pretest and posttest
18. What is the past tense of “CHOOSE”?
A choose
B choosing
C chosen
D chose
In order to further supported the data from the document analysis, the researcher keyed in the result
of pre-test and post-test into SPSS to get the mean value, standard deviation value, t-value and
significance value. The result for the aforementioned statistics are as follows:
Table 5. Comparison of results in pretest and posttest.
N
Mean
Std. Dev
Pretest Score Section
35
5.57
5.089
A
Posttest Score Section
35
17.29
5.039
B

t-value
-12.708

Sig.
.000

A paired sample t-test was conducted to compare the pretest and posttest result on the Irregular
verb quizzes. There was a significant difference in the scores between pre-test (mean=5.57,
s.d=5.089) and post-test (mean=17.29, s.d = 5.039); (t = -12.708, p = .000).
The result from this table showed greater difference in terms of means for the post-test.
This statistic proved that the pupils’ performance was improving over the treatment given during
the experimental period. From the result displayed in Table 3, the value of sig (p) paired sample t
test is 0.000 which is less than 0.05. Therefore, it can be concluded that Ho is rejected, which
indicated that there was significant difference after the pupils were exposed to the use of Kahoot!
in learning (to remember) about English Irregular verbs.
The effectiveness of Kahoot! in retaining the participants’ memory of the Irregular verbs
could be related to the features embedded in the application and its relevance to the younger
learners. Apart from the aforementioned significant features, another element which made this
application stood out is its capability to maximise the users’ engagement as agreed by Ciaramella
(2017). On top of that, Zarzycka-Piskorz (2016) reiterates that Kahoot! helps to heighten ones’
motivation to learn as well. The researcher found these two claims to be true based on his
observation of the participants’ behaviour throughout the process in which they were observed to
be very engaged and motivated. This experience also proved Hussein’s (2015) statements on
gamification domains that there is a high chance that this achievement is also driven from the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

216

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

lowered affective filter resulted from the concept of gamification. Traditionally, learning grammar
is mostly terrifying to any second language learners.
Conclusion
To sum up, the results from this research advocates that Kahoot! can be very impactful in helping
the younger English language learners especially the nine year olds to retain their memory on
English irregular verbs. Furthermore, the findings from this research also suggest that gamification
is among the current teaching tool which can be very effective in enhancing the teaching and
learning experience.
Apart from the aforementioned strength of this research, this research could be the start of
implementing gamification in handling other parts of English grammar. Therefore, it is
recommended that the future replication of this research to be conducted in a larger scale context.
Among other concerns would be the existence of stable internet connection as well as sufficient
netbooks or mobile devices for the process to take place.
However, there are a few suggestions which could be taken into considerations to make
the result of this research more reliable. Firstly, a larger scale approach can be adapted in ensuring
that the reliability and validity of the research. This could be done by having a few classes involved
at once in the similar research, instead of just a class of 30 – 40 pupils. Secondly, there should be
a record of observations for each Kahoot! sessions conducted instead of just the comparison
between pretest and posttest. Another modification which can be looked into is the nature of the
research itself. As this one involved mostly the subject teacher taking both roles as the teacher as
well as the researcher, it would be great to have another researches which separates the teachers
and the researchers, which could be very helpful in making sure that the data collected are not
tainted with personal view or attachments to the participants. Regardless of the shortcomings, this
research has done justice in proving the potential of Kahoot! in aiding learning, especially when it
comes to retaining the information.
About the authors:
Dr. Melor Md Yunus is an Associate Professor and Deputy Dean of Research and Innovation at
the Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. Apart from her best reputation in the
integration of ICT in education, she is a league on her own when it comes to journal publications
in numerous Citation-Indexed journals such as SCOPUS.
Mohd Azmanuddin bin Azman is a primary English teacher in Wilayah Persekutuan Putrajaya,
Malaysia. He had won silver award for International Invention& Innovative Competition (InIIC)
in 2017 and had presented papers at conferences such as Malaysian English Language Teaching
Association (MELTA) and the 1st International ASEAN-ELT Conference.
ID ORCid: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3472-8246

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

217

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

References
Barnes, R. (2017). Kahoot! In the Classroom: Student Engagement Technique. Nurse
Educator, 42(6),1.
Brown, R. (1973). A First Language: The Early Stages. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Chotimah, I.C. & Rafi, M.F. (2018). The Effectiveness of Using Kahoot as a Media in Teaching
Reading. E-Link Journal. 5(1),19-29.
Ciaramella, K. E. (2017). The Effects of Kahoot! on Vocabulary Acquisition and Retention of
Students with Learning Disabilities and Other Health Impairments. (Unpublished
doctorate thesis).Ph.D. Rowan University, New Jersey.
Cross, D. (2000). A Practical Handbook of Language Teaching. Harlow: Longman.
Denizer, E. A. (2017). Does Mother Tongue Interfere in Second Language Learning? Journal
of Foreign Language Education and Technology. 2(1),39-54.
Dörnyei, Z. (2009). The Psychology of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Flores, J.F.F. (2015). Using Gamification to Enhance Second Language Learning. Digital
Education Review, 27,32-54.
Ganesan, S., Idris, M.I., Yunus, M.M. (2018) Kahoot: Learn Grammar, Together We Be
Glamour, Eduinnov tion, 41.
Hussein, B. A. (2015). A Blended Learning Approach to Teaching Project Management: A
Model for Active Participation and Involvement: Insights from Norway. Education
Sciences, 5(2),104-125.
Inclusive Design. (2010). Kahoot! Retrieved from http://www.inclusivedesign.no/ict/ict-Kahoot!article172-261.html
Jalaludin, A. M., Abas, N. A., & Yunus, M. M. (2019). AsKINstagram: Teacher-Pupil
Interaction. International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences,
9(1), 125–136.
Kapuler, D. (2015). Top 100 Sites and Apps of 2014. Tech & Learning, 35(6),14-16.
Khaleel, F.S., Ashaari, N.S., Meriam, T.S., Wook, T., & Ismail, A. (2016). The Architecture
of Dynamic Gamification Elements Based Learning Content. Journal of Convergence
Information Technology (JCIT), 11(3),164-177.
Kuczaj, S.A. (1977). The Acquisition of Regular and Irregular Past Tense Forms. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 16,589 - 600
Licorish, S.A, Owen, H.E., Daniel, B., & George, J.L. (2018). Students’ Perceptions of
Kahoot!’s Influence on Teaching and Learning. Research and Practise in Technology
Enhanced Learning. 13 (9),1-23.
O’Grady, W. (2006). The Problem of Verbal Inflection in Second Language Acquisition. Pan
Pacific Association of Applied Linguistics Conference, 1-21.
Pinker, S. & Ullman, M.T. (2002). The Past and Future of the Past Tense. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 6(11),456-463.
Prapobaratanakul, C., & Pongpairoj, N. (2016). Variable Production of English Past Tense
Morphology: A Case Study of a Thai-Speaking Learner of English. PASAA: Journal of
Language Teaching and Learning in Thailand, 51,71-96.
Richards, J. C. (1974). Error Analysis: Perspective on Second Language Acquisition. London:
Longman.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

218

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Memory Stay Or Stray? : Irregular Verbs Learning Using Kahoot!

Yunus & Azman

Singh, C., Jageer Singh, A., Abd Razak, N. and Ravinthar, T. (2017). Grammar Errors Made
by ESL Tertiary Students in Writing. English Language Teaching, 10(5),16.
Steven, P. & Alan, P. (1994). Regular and Irregular Morphology and the Psychological Status
of Rules of Grammar. In Susan, D.L., Roberta, L.C. & Gregory, K.I. (Eds.). The Reality of
Linguistics Rules.( pp.321-352).
Suppiramaniam, R. D. (2012). Interference in Learning English: Analysis of Verb Tense Errors
Among Malay ESL Learners. (Unpublished masters thesis). University of Malaya,
Malaysia.
Wee, R., Sim, J., & Jusoff, K. (2010). Verb-form errors in EAP writing. Educational Research
and Review, 5(1), 016 – 023.
Wichadee, S. & Pattanapichet, F. (2018). Enhancement of Performance and Motivation
Through Application of Digital Games in an English Language Class. Teaching English
with Technology, 18(1),77-92.
Widianingsih, N.K.A & Gulo, I. (2016). Grammatical Difficulties Encountered by Second
Language Learners of English. Proceedings of the Fourth International Seminar on
English Language and Teaching (ISELT4)(,pp.141-145).Universitas Negeri Padang,
Padang.
Yolageldili, G. & Arikan, A. (2011). Effectiveness of Using Games in Teaching Grammar to
Young Learners. Elementary Education Online. 10(1),219 - 229.
Yunus, M.M. (2018). Innovation in Education and Language Learning in 21st Century.
Journal of Sustainable Development Education and Research. 2(1),33-34.
Yunus, M. M., Salehi, H., & Amini, M. (2016). Impact of using CALL on Iranian learner’
vocabulary knowledge. English Language Teaching, 9(1), 173-187.
Zakaria, N.Y.K., Zakaria, S.N., Yazid, M.I.M, & Zakaria, H.Y. (2018). Game-based
Assessment for Pre-service teachers in Academic Writing. Eduinnov tion, 41.
Zarzycka-Piskorz, E. (2016). Kahoot It Or Not? Can Games be Motivating in Learning
Grammar? The Journal of Teaching English with Technology. 16(3),17-36.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

219

