“Swinging Pendulum”:
Lives of Family Members Caring for A Dying Relative
Robert Sumaguingsing, RN, MAN1,3; Rudolf Cymorr Kirby Martinez, PhD, RN2,3
1

The Medical City
San Beda University College of Nursing
3
Arellano Graduate School of Nursing
2

ABSTRACT
Among cultures which place emphasis on the centrality of family in ones lives, the care
for the dying patient is more often than not delegated on family members. Given this context, it
is interesting to note that few research have been done on the experiences of these individuals
who provide care to their dying relatives.
This research aims to understand the lives of these informal carers as they provide care to
their dying relatives. After securing clearance from an IRB, seven (5) informants, deemed as coresearchers, were recruited and agreed to participate in this study. The co-researchers where
selected based on a pre-set criteria and the number were reached based on theoretical saturation.
Multiple individual in-depth face-to-face interviews were done to create the individual narratives
which was later reflectively analysed.
Interpretive phenomenology as espoused by van Manen served as the philosophical
underpinning of the study. Consequently, the proposed analytic technique of van Manen was
utilized as the process of reflective analysis.
After the process of reflective analysis, three (3) themes were gathered, namely:
Ambivalence in anticipation, Courage in uncertainty, Meaning in suffering. These themes
represent for the co-researchers their lives as they care for their dying relatives. Further, these
themes reflects for the co-researchers a phenomenon of living moment-to-moment, unsure of
what tomorrow will bring, patiently waiting for their relative to cross over. For them, there seems
to be a constant struggle of finding a reason for being and a sense of what has happened, what is
happening and what could happen to their dying relative and their family after their death. This
essence can be symbolically represented by a swinging pendulum, constantly in motion trying to
situate ambivalence in their anticipation, looking for courage amidst uncertainty and finding for
meaning in their experience of suffering.
The insights suggest that there is a need for constant dialogue among family members
and health care providers as they assumed the role of primary caregivers. Further continued
emotional, moral and spiritual support is implied during this transition as well as follow-ups
when the families are at the home setting.

INTRODUCTION
In the advanced stage of a life-limiting illness it may be apparent that despite the best
care, curing the disease may not be possible anymore. Aggressive attempts may prove futile as
these may even become financially draining and physically and emotionally exhausting both for
the patient and the family. Nevertheless, care does not come to a halt. In the final stages of many
terminal illnesses, care priorities tend to shift. The continuum of care assumes a special form and
shifts its focus from curative into palliative. The goal is set on relief of symptoms, especially
pain, and emotional stress making sure that the patient will be as comfortable as possible (Krau,
2016). As for the family, the focus of care is to see to it that a loved one's final moments are
spent as quality family time, making sure that every moment counts as a memorable experience
rather than a distressing nightmare. This holistic approach of addressing the needs of the patient,
as well as the welfare of the family are the focus of the care modality termed as palliative care.
End of Life Care (EoLC) is a portion of palliative care that is specifically focused on care
of the dying patient (Kraus, 2016). The UK Department of Health (2008) defined EoLC as the
care provided to help all clients with progressive and terminal illness for them to live optimally
until death, and which includes supportive and palliative care that aims to help meet the needs of
both the client and his family until the last phase of life. Pain management, symptomatic relief
and provision of psychological, social, spiritual and practical support are integral components of
this care modality.
Providing care and comfort during the most difficult times generally generates a
rewarding altruistic experience. Jean Watson (1979) described human care and eventually came
up with her Ten (10) Carative Factors, which includes the formation of humanistic-altruistic
system of values which relates caregiving and satisfaction through the sense of giving. Outside
the professional aspects of healthcare, caregiving takes place in the context of established family
and friendship relationships and from here the concept of informal care emerged. Gordon (1998)
defined informal care as care given to the sick and the elderly by people who have no formal or
structured training as preparation for the caregiving task. In most cases, the immediate family
members instinctively assume the role of the family caregiver since caring is a family affair
especially in the face of a life-limiting illness. Filipinos are known for their tight family
relationships and illnesses, especially those with terminal prognosis, highlight this cohesion.

In the end-of-life, care priority shifts into palliative approach, Patients and relatives prefer
to keep the patient at home and death at home would be more preferable (Higginson & SenGupta 2000; Gott, et al, 2004). Care provided by the family at home is also considered as a
demonstration of love (Gott et al, 2004). This care is more desirable since it comes with
familiarity, ease, and less intrusion during this vulnerable period compared to the institutional
setting. Since home is synonymous with love, warmth, memories and basically life, it is a more
desirable place to continue care at the end of life since further stay in the hospital comes with
greater financial consequences and both patients and relatives perceive this burden that will
persist even after the patient dies.
However, the idea of caring for someone at home may not be a readily-welcome option
for everyone since it is dependent on important considerations such as the ability of the family to
cope with the demands and their readiness for a major change in life situations. For example,
family caregivers need to learn how to provide physical care, ranging from basic skills (Bee et al,
2009) such as feeding, bathing, oral care, etc., up to the advanced nursing procedures such as
tracheostomy care, stoma management, etc. This is quite a handful of task for them, considering
that they have no formal trainings for these tasks. No formal preparatory training is available to
equip the family members in assuming the responsibility of being a family caregiver.
Assumption of this role resembles a leap of faith and family members who become the lay carers
tread this new journey with ambivalence as they are driven with altruism yet struggling with
uncertainties.
For a formal carer (a person who underwent professional and structured training) like a
registered nurse, the patient-caregiver relationship may be of casual and professional nature
initially, but given the magnitude and chronicity of the illness, paralleled by the time spent
together may lead to personal attachments between the patient and the nurse (Owen, 2007). The
same vulnerability increases exponentially for family members who are tasked to be the family
caregiver due to their emotional bond with the patient. Since caregiving spontaneously emerges
out from empathy, family carers tend to become emotionally involved hence their susceptibility
(Gaugler, et al, 2005).
Results of the literature review presented in this section reveal varying perspectives in the
end of life. Caregiving in the end of life elicited antipodal meanings (burden vs. reward) in
different countries, with a multitude of references citing it in their own sociocultural context. The

researcher recognized that there is an obvious scarcity in related studies in the Philippines
showcasing the said phenomenon within the Filipino context. Caring is innate in the Filipino
psyche and the "Filipino Brand of Care" is of unique reputation (Martinez, 2014) sought after by
many; however, our limited access to structured palliative care (Lynch et al, 2013), leading to
poor caregiver support, with financial challenges (Aoun et al, 2005) and misconceptions making
things more complicated, tips the scale towards the unpleasant meanings of EoLC associated
with caregiver burden and burnout.
It is interesting to note that related literatures in the Philippine setting are scanty, with
most of them designed as a quantitative inquiry. Published phenomenological, most especially
interpretive studies are sparser. The researcher recognizes this literature gap in the meanings
placed on End-of-Life Caregiving, especially in the Philippine setting as there are limited studies
available, hence this qualitative inquiry.
This paper sought to understand the essence of caregiving in the end-of-life among
family members who do not have a medical/clinical background or formal training for the
caregiving task. The investigator aimed to understand the lived experience of family caregivers,
as well as the effects of the caregiving experience to them as end-of life drew near. How do you
go on a long, painful journey with little or no support? How do you give more, with so little that
you have? What does the experience mean to them?
METHODOLOGY
A. Philosophical Underpinning
Qualitative researchers study things in their natural settings, attempting to make sense of,
or to interpret the meanings of the phenomenon as perceived by people. Talbot (1994) further
discussed that it explores real-life situations as they occur naturally. Qualitative research is
intended to penetrate to the deeper significance that the subject of the research ascribes to the
topic being researched. It involves an interpretive, naturalistic approach to its subject matter
and uses an inductive analysis as it discover and explore a phenomenon rather than deductively
determining them through testing of predetermined hypotheses, as in the case of a quantitative
study. In this chapter, the entirety of the methodology of the researcher’s qualitative
investigation will be presented.

Research Design
Research designs serves as the investigator’s blueprint on how data should be collected
and analyzed to answer the specified problem. It also lays out the strategies that researchers
undertake to acquire precise and objective information that will provide the evidences needed
(Polit and Beck, 2004). To obtain rich and in-depth understanding of the phenomenon being
studied, phenomenological method was used for this qualitative inquiry. The meaning/s placed
on experience (interpretation) was explored and understood the way the study subject
sees and concretely describes it (De

Castro,

2003),

making

the

participants “co-

researchers”. This term will be discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Interpretative Phenomenology
Contrary to the Husserlian descriptive phenomenology which aims look for the
eidetic structures (or universal essence) among those who experience the same phenomenon
under

study,

Interpretive

Phenomenology

contextual meanings entrenched in the

seeks

everyday world.

to

understand the

These

meanings are

oftentimes obscure to the participants but can be deciphered from their narratives (Lopez and
Willis, 2004). Moreover, interpretive phenomenology intends to explore meanings in the context
of sociocultural, historical, political and other factors within the subject's life world (Smith,
1987). World, in the phenomenological sense as described by Leonard (1989), does not
pertain to mere nature or environment, but on the meaningful set of relationships, practices, and
language inherited from the culture one is born to. He also noted that from a phenomenological
perspective, a

person is a capable

of

putting

meanings

and

values

on things. As Heidegger (1927/1962) puts it, to be human is to interpret; hence every experience
entails an interpretation perceived through the lens of the person’s background and
situation. Given these philosophical

viewpoints, the

researcher concurs

with Heidegger's (1962) proposition that phenomenological inquiries should also look at
the invariable influence of the subject's life world in the meanings he/places on certain
phenomena, including the decisions they make. Unlike Husserl's descriptive inquiry, interpretive
phenomenology acknowledges the presuppositions arising from what is considered an expert
knowledge of

the researcher,

which

may

even tilt

the

rudder towards

a

more substantial inquiry of co-creating meanings with the study subjects (hence the term "coresearchers"), since this pre understanding kick starts the desire to pursue the study on the first
place.
B. Ethical Standard
Ethical considerations are basic principles relevant to conduct research. They are
necessary when human beings are involved because people have the right to self-determination
and treatment as an autonomous agent. They have the freedom to participate or not in a research
project (Polit & Hungler 1999). This study espoused ethical standards throughout its process of
inquiry. Respect for human dignity was upheld with utmost importance and was exercised by
undertaking the following measures:
1. Sought approval of the Ethics Review Committee prior to the commencement of the
inquiry.
2. Informed consent was secured from the prospective co-researchers on the premise of
adequate explanation and reiteration of the study objectives, the possible risks involved,
the extent of their participation, guarantee of identity anonymity and information
confidentiality. The researcher also ascertained that the co-researchers fully understood
that they may voluntarily withdraw at any point of the study without any consequential
interrogation, need for explanation or strain. Finally, the possibility that the research
might be published in a local or international journal was also disclosed.
3. Aliases were used to conceal the co-researchers’ identity and their narratives were kept
confidential and unidentifiable with them.
4. Access to their identity information and their narratives was restricted. Only the
researcher and the research adviser has the full privilege in retrieving these files,
including recorded audio files, consents, memory cards, audio recorder, etc. These files
will also be kept secured in a locked cabinet, with the key always with the researcher’s
custody.
5. Closed-loop to Spiral process of validation and counter validation and final approval of
the content of the study was observed
6. Storage materials and hard files of collected information and narratives will be disposed a
year after completion of the study.

C. Selection of Participants
This paper explored the lived experience of family caregivers who took care of patients
with advanced illness beyond cure. The researcher worked with five (5) co-researchers based on
the following criteria: (1) Family members (parents, spouse, siblings, children) of patients
afflicted with advanced to terminal stage cancer; (2) With end-of-life caregiving experience up to
6 months after the death of the patient / care recipient; and (3) They are willing and able to
describe and share their caregiving experience and the meaning they placed on it. For this study,
purposive sampling was used based on the afore-mentioned inclusion criteria and this study
included selected participants within Metro Manila and bordering provinces.
D. Ways of Gathering the Narratives
Data collection in qualitative studies is unique from its quantitative counterpart.
According to Polit and Beck (2004), data collection in qualitative studies is more spontaneous
compared to quantitative research and topics are further explored according to the set of
information emerging from the interview.
Conroy

(2003), purported in her Hermeneutic Principles

of

Research

(HPR) that other innovative means of data collection that will foster engaged participants are
recommended,

such

as

narrative-telling

(story-telling), dialogue, reflection,

elaborating meanings, etc. Adhering to this recommendation, the investigator conducted informal
interviews and preliminary visits as needed so that the participants will feel more comfortable
and at ease. When the participants appeared to be more acquainted and interactive, the researcher
engaged in-depth interviews to facilitate story-telling.
A voice-recording hand-held device was used to record the conversation for easy replay
and transcription. Prior to the actual interaction, participants were informed that the said device
will be used to ensure that the exact verbatim will be noted down. A simple interview guide was
kept handy to guide the flow of the conversation. The interview started with a grand tour
question followed by supplemental questions which were deemed necessary for continuity and
elaboration. To facilitate the narration of the lived experience of the family caregivers, the
interview was formally started with an open-ended question, followed by a series of subquestions to guide the participants in expressing their thoughts.

Recorded conversations were transcribed and processed thereafter. Results of the initial
interview were presented back to the participants for validation and further revision until the
exhaustive description was achieved. Finally, researcher synthesized the meanings which family
caregivers placed on their EoLC experience through inductive process.
E. Process of Reflective Analysis
Electronically-recorded narratives were carefully transcribed. Afterwards, the researcher
adapted the step-by-step process designed by Van Manen, elaborated by Taylor et al in 2007, as
follows: "(1) Turning to the nature of the lived experiences; (2) investigating the experiences as
it is lived rather than how it is conceptualized by the researcher; (3) reflecting on the essential
themes which characterize the phenomenon; (4) describing the phenomenon through the art of
writing and rewriting; (5) maintaining a strong and oriented relation to the phenomenon;
(6) balancing the research context by considering the parts and the whole”
Van Manen's proposed approach unveils themes from the experience, which he appears
to be interchangeably mentioning as phenomenon (Dowling, 2005). His approach attempts to
grasp

and

hence merging the

comprehend the

essence of the phenomena or experience under study,

features of both interpretive and descriptive inquiry. To

achieve

this

objective, an immersive attention to the data gathered is essential through repeated appraisal of
both

the

recorded

and

transcribed narratives,

with

specific focus on identified significant statements. By repeatedly listening and analyzing the
recorded interview, essence and themes will surface and become prominent to the researcher. He
proposed doing this process as follows:
1. Preliminary

listening to

whole conversation

and

the

entire audiotape recording. Listening

narratives

help

the

researcher

to

the

grasp

the

meanings as each statement is analyzed.
2. Next, standing out crucial statements are sorted and singled out.
3. Each compelling statement selected is analyzed individually.
Reflection and interpretation revolved around the emerging themes. The repetitive
process of deduction and induction was pursued until the main essence of caregiving in the endof-life was synthesized. The by-product was presented back to the co-researcher for validation

and

counter-validation. After

the

themes

and

essence have undergone the exhaustive process of deduction, induction,

the

main

and synthesis, the

researcher returned to the co-researchers for inter-subjective confirmation of the essence and
themes’ validity (Polit & Beck, 2008; Speziale & Carpenter, 2007; Taylor et al, 2007; Dowling,
2005; Colaizzi, 1978).
F. Maintaining Rigor
Qualitative research should exhibit trustworthiness and this is achieved by the extent to
which the study questions tap the participants’ experience and not merely their theoretical
knowledge about it (Streubert and Carpenter, 2011). Primarily, criteria-eligible participants were
selected purposively. Next, the co-researchers were to talk freely about their experience. Follow
up questions were limited to general leads so as to help participants express their thoughts.
Leading questions were avoided so as not to unconsciously impose the researcher’s own biases.
Moreover, the researcher allowed the participants to express both their positive and negative
experience of the phenomenon under study. Negative descriptions “is helpful in establishing
authenticity and trustworthiness of the data” (Streubert and Carpenter, 2011). To further ensure
the trustworthiness of the analyzed data, verbatim transcription of digitally-recorded
conversations was done. Repeated proof-reading and cross-checking with the hired
transcriptionist was observed to eliminate typographical or transcription-related errors.
The researcher also acknowledges the existing first-hand pre-understanding of the
phenomenon, as stated in the earlier part of this chapter. Awareness of this potential bias is
important in order not to compromise the credibility of the study, although this preunderstanding is essential in exploring deeper meanings and arriving at a co-created universal
essence. Participant validation was also utilized wherein the researcher will present the
exhaustive descriptions back to the study participants to validate if these reflected their
experiences. This iterative process went on until the exhaustive description was attained and data
saturation was achieved. As part of the audit trail, the selection of significant statements,
formulation of meanings, identification of emerging themes, and the implementation of entire
research methodology was closely discussed with the research adviser.

RESULT AND RESONANCE
Results
Verbatim accounts obtained through interview were analyzed by extracting the elements
each significant statement holds. These elements identified by the researcher outlines the
intrinsic meaning of the experience. Afterwards, these elements were clustered and then coded
based on the idea that they collectively form. This chapter will discuss the results of the
reflective analysis revealing the essential themes and eventually leading to the construction of
the eidetic insight.
Thematic analysis enables the researcher to examine the content for recurrent patterns
that link the data gathered. This iterative process is important in synthesizing the shared
meanings co-created by the study participants as the analysis of themes tends to be expansive
and evolving. With this process, the following themes were identified: Ambivalence in
Anticipation, Courage in Uncertainty, and Meaning in Suffering.
I.

Ambivalence in Anticipation
Cancer is a dreadful illness everyone silently hopes not to have an encounter with, either

directly or indirectly. Unfortunately, cancer may afflict anyone at any point of time. The
disclosure of this terminal illness of a loved one placed the co-researchers in a spiraling course of
unpleasant emotions. This emotional roller-coaster in which the co-researchers went through is
discussed on this theme. It includes concepts on Conglomerated Responses, Fear in Anticipation,
Ambivalence in the Course of Action and Capitulation.
“Halo-halo na… (It’s all mixed up)”
It all starts with trepidation over the results of the diagnostic workup: patients and their
families wait anxiously for the reports to come in. Anxiety lingers and increases during the
waiting period. Co-researcher Lioness remembered accompanying her mother (the patient) on
her multiple outpatient visits. They have a strong family history of cancer and she had suspicions
that her mother’s breast lumps are not to be shrugged off. They had family discussions about the

possibilities concerning the histopathological tests of her breast masses. There were also regrets
that diagnostic tests should have been done earlier.
Finally, the undesirable news was revealed: the suspicious mass was confirmed to be
malignant. Co-researchers claimed that they were not expecting the diagnosis. They were
shocked and frightened while trying to reconcile the situation to reality:
“Na shock” (shocked), Courie.
The co-researchers went through a repetitive cycle of disbelief, shock, fear, and dread as
they attempt to process the information they received. A once dreaded situation taking place
right before one’s eyes usually catch people off-guard and unprepared. The disclosure of a
dreaded illness may prove to be too much to handle:
“Syempre napaiyak kami…nag iyakan kami (we broke into tears) , Gallany
This torrent of unpleasant emotions persisted for some time. As soon as they were able to
gradually process the information, they could not help but weep every so often.
“Kapag sinabing cancer, mahirap na (It will be difficult if it’s cancer)”
To somehow re-establish control over a situation, people seek to understand its cause, its
course, and the possible outcomes so that the succeeding series of actions can be contemplated
and executed. However, this process of anticipation generates anxiety as cancer is generally
embraced as a life-limiting illness despite the emergence of various treatment modalities and
protocols. Since cancer has a very unfavorable outcome, this anxiety triggers a myriad of
responses, mainly unpleasant ones, as people equate cancer with a lifelong journey of misery.
Living with cancer is almost always perceived as a long and tormenting journey while
fighting a losing battle. Auda easily described the entirety of it as:
“Sobrang sakit, sobrang hirap (It’so painful. So hard)”
Apparently, there was a pre-conceived notion that the illness would be beyond acceptable
management with a definite deteriorating progress. Co-researcher Courie seemed to know how
things would end up:

“Tsaka alam ko naman kasi talagang yung cancer, dun na din yan pupunta (I already knew that
cancer will eventually lead to death)”, Valerie
At this point, people usually attempt to analyze the situation and anticipate the possible
scenarios in order to prepare themselves for what is going to happen next, as well as on how they
will respond. Having an almost uniform perception of the course and prognosis of cancer, the coresearchers seem to be anticipating the worst cases on their ill loved one:
“Hinahanda na lang (namin sarili namin) (We just set our minds to be prepared)” Courie
Anticipation as a coping response came with a disadvantage. It generated excessive
anxieties when triggered by both specific and nonspecific situations. Co-researcher Lioness even
remembered being restless whenever she would receive text messages or calls from her siblings
or their neighbors asking her to skip classes and promptly head home to attend to her sick
mother. It appears that there was a constant reminder that death is imminent.
“Aware kami na parang pag sinabing cancer magastos sya (We are aware that cancer is
costly)”, Auda
Cancer treatment and comfort measures are already expected to be really expensive. The
co-researchers were aware that cancer entails funneling of precious, limited resources. This
added burden posed further anticipatory and actual anxieties over our co-researchers.
“Naguguluhan pa din po ako. Di ko maintindihan (I am still confused. I don’t understand)”
Having been aware of the course of the illness, eventual outcome, cost, and other things,
accepting the reality remained to be a struggle. There were questions as to why their family was
not spared, of all the people. She could not help but be saddened by this reality. Co-researcher
Lioness also encountered difficulty processing the situation:
“Naguguluhan pa din po ako. Di ko maintindihan (I am still confused. I don’t understand”
Having empathy for people who suffer from cancer causes one to feel sorry about the
illness. This grief increases exponentially whenever the afflicted patient is a loved one, much

more, an immediate family member. This misery seems to be directly proportional to the degree
of closeness and blood relations between the patient and the empathizer:
“Masakit din po…syempre masakit kasi nanay ko po yun (It’s painful, of course. She’s my
mother)”
This shock and disbelief caused intrapersonal and interpersonal disruption among the
family members. Moreover, this gave them a hard time accepting the reality and embracing the
situation. There was also an initial uncertainty with the next course of action among the coresearchers, making things more complicated than it already was. Co-researcher Valerie claimed
that she was perplexed and undecided on what to do next:
“Mahirap mag desisyon (ng susunod na steps) (It’s hard to decide on what to do next)”
There was also indecisiveness with co-researcher Valerie whether to continue with the
treatment and management. Due to the terminal stage of the disease, aggressive approaches may
just turn out to be futile and at the same time, uncomfortable and inconvenient both for the
patient and the carers.
“Tinanggap na lang po namin (We just accepted it)”
When the emotional outbursts started to dissipate, the co-researchers eventually decided
to accept the reality. They knew that they had to embrace the situation for them to be able to
move forward and do what must be done. Co-researcher Lioness claimed that she just accepted
the tried to understand that things are different now:
“Tinanggap ko na lang din po…Intidihin na ganito na po talaga yung sitwasyon namin (I
just accepted it, anyway… to understand that this is our situation now)”
It was hard at first, but along the way they started to make good strides in their progress
and eventually learned how to just make do with the situation. Acceptance, no matter how
reluctant it may be, was a pre-requisite before they could

make

that

crucial

decision

assuming the caregiving role. Co-researcher Lioness knew that she ought to fill in the role:
“Dapat gawin ko to... (I have to do this)”

of

There was a courageous assumption of the role, as co-researcher Valerie recognized that
she was preordained for the role.
“Iniisip ko na ako yun (nakalaan mag alaga) (I thought I am destined to be the caregiver)”
They were headed for a long, challenging journey ahead, hence they must be ready. Coresearcher Auda started off with mental conditioning:
“Si-net ko yung mind ko na kailangan kong maging handa (I set my mind to be ready)”
This mental preparation was crucial in their assumption of the role. It was not an easy
task, but the decision was already made. The present reality may not be as desirable as they
would have wanted, but there was no profit in mere whining void of action. The co-researcher
demonstrated their willingness to ensure that all medical attention and comfort measures will be
continued.
This deteriorating course of cancer draws a myriad of responses from the co-researchers.
Upon disclosure of the diagnosis and eventually its terminal prognosis, shock and disbelief
disrupts them for a time as they struggle to process the information overloading their senses and
reasoning. As reality sinks in, fear and anxiety ensue as the co-researchers start to realize that
they are indeed afflicted by the fearsome situation. In the process, worst case scenarios are
fearfully anticipated due to the illness’ life-limiting nature. There was also confusion and
uncertainty over their succeeding course of actions. Despite this, the co-researchers choose to
make that important yet difficult decision of accepting the present reality and embrace the
caregiving role no matter what was at stake.
II.

Courage in Uncertainty
Assuming the caregiving role in the end-of-life seemed to be the most rational response

since the co-researchers involved in this study are immediate family members. The role is
unbelievably challenging and required extraordinary commitment. The co-researchers somehow
seemed to have an idea of this sacrifice. This selfless service will be discussed in this theme, and
will include concepts, namely Ambivalent Acquiescence, Taxing Tasks, Selflessly Unreserved,
Recurrent Compunction, and Courage in Uncertainty.

“Pikit mata…lakasan ng loob… (With eyes closed… be courageous)”
As the family recovers from the undesirable impact of the shocking revelation of the
diagnosis and the eventual prognosis, they seemed to have come into their senses and muster the
courage to respond. Their attempt to convince and reassure themselves that they could take on
the challenges ahead was observable. They knew that they had to stand up and shake the fear off.
Living with fear as a constant companion is by itself a difficult situation, yet inadequate to hinder
the volunteering family member from providing end-of-life care. As per co-researcher Auda:
“Pikit mata na kung anong kailangang gawin, gawin (With eyes closed, just do whatever needs
to be done)”
Despite the very unwelcoming news that the patient and the family has to live with, it is
interesting to note that family members assumed the responsibility of being the caregiver
anyway. What lies ahead may be uncertain and tough but doing nothing was not part of their
options. They knew they had to step up because much was at stake. Gallany claimed that she
could not bear standing on the side lines and watch helplessly:
“Di pwedeng pababayaan ko yan (I will not forsake him)”, Gallany
The role was viewed as something that must be accepted courageously and
wholeheartedly. There was a sense of obligation and a necessity to respond, as stated by Lioness:
“Dapat gawin ko ito (I ought to do this)”, Lioness
The co-researchers shared the readiness for the task ahead. They had high hopes that they
would be able to fill in the tall order of the caregiving role. Even as the challenges and the drastic
shift of everyone’s situation were acknowledged to be taxing, the co-researchers’ almost
instinctive response to the question of who will take up the role was evident. Family members
knew it by instinct that they have to be that caregiver. They believe that they have to step up and
act despite the uncertainties that lie ahead.
“Sobrang Sakit. Sobrang Hirap (So painful. So difficult)”
Over time, the co-researchers, who have already assumed the caregiver’s role, came to
realize the immense complexity of the situation. Their first-hand experience continues to give

them realizations that the journey is indeed life-changing. The role required them to embrace
both subtle and drastic changes in their lifestyle and patterns. As co-researcher Lioness puts it:
“Medyo po nalulungkot na ang laki na ng pinagbago ng buhay ko (I’m still quite sad that my
life has changed drastically)”
Committing on the life-changing journey is one thing; embarking on and pursuing it is a
different story. Co-researcher Auda realized that the responsibility is indeed tough:
”Yun pala yung mas mahirap…na kailangan na kami na mismo yung hands-on na mag aalaga
sa kanya (So that was the harder part…that we ourselves needed to be hands-on in taking care of
him)”
Caregiving in the end-of-life at home involves round-the-clock care and attention. That
requires exceptional physical endurance since there are no definite break times nor defined
relievers. Constant presence and immediate attention to needs are fundamental to this role in
order to ensure comfort and relief of the terminally-ill patient. However, despite the nobility of
this role, its demands may push one’s physical capacity to its limit. Due to the anticipation of
immediately attending to whatever needs that the patient may have, or partly because of many
things that pre-occupy their thoughts, sleep deprivation is common among them:
“Walang tulog (sleepless)”, Valerie
Aside from the lack of decent sleep, loss of appetite, or simply the inability to eat
uninterruptedly, results to weight loss.

Altogether, these physical wear eventually takes its

toll among the co-researchers. Effects were described as physical exhaustion and irritability. As
per Courie:
“Minsan nagagalit din ako kasi napapagod din ako (Sometimes I get upset because I get
exhausted, too)”
“Parang pagod na pagod na rin ako (It seems like I am so exhausted)”
On top of the physical demands of the caregiving role, there are upshots on the coresearchers’ thoughts and emotions. To start with, there is constant anticipation of the worst
outcomes of the disease prognosis, as discussed in the prior essential theme. The fear and the

anticipatory grieving persisted throughout the end-of-life care journey. The dread of the
inevitable endpoint kept on bothering them. Co-researcher Courie put it into words:
“Lalo na nung umuwi kami sa bahay natakot ako. Kasi mamaya yung katabi ko baka kako di na
humihinga (I was scared, especially when we went home. I might find him breathless next to
me)”, Courie
Co-researcher Valerie even encountered the dilemma of making the tough call
concerning her patient’s advance directive, to which she admitted to have felt guilty about:
“Nako-konsensya din ako (na pumirma ng DNR) (I feel guilty signing the DNR)”
Moreover, the everyday hurdles of the caregiving tasks, as well as the unavoidable
decision-making crossroads posted constant assault to the co-researchers’ emotional wellbeing.
As for the day-by-day routines, there were times when their sick family member displaced their
pique on them. The co-researchers could not help but be affected and hurt yet they knew the
reason for their patient’s irrational behaviour stemming from frustration.
Witnessing a dearly loved one fight a losing battle daily also adds up to the pain they
experience. At this point, the physical exhaustion and the emotional burden are piling up,
making the caregiving role more challenging. Interestingly, however, there was still a wishful
desire to relieve the patient from the suffering:
“Ayoko na siyang mahirapan (I don’t want her to suffer anymore)”, Valerie
In the long run, the co-researchers appear to have worn down emotionally. There were
times when they felt emotional exhaustion and getting fed up. There were times when they
would get irritable and emotional out of fatigue. They would sometimes feel frustrated and
unintentionally display signs of exhaustion. They were aware that they sometimes lose their
patience yet the outward manifestation was kept discreet and somewhat filtered. Sometimes,
emotions just leaked out of their guards that they just cried for no readily determined reasons.
Their need for support and burden share was also observable. It may have been
demonstrated in various ways but their subtle message could be deciphered. One co-researcher
felt that she had not been receiving enough tangible support from her family in caring for her ill
husband. Another co-researcher mentioned that she owes her ability to fulfil her caregiver role to

her brother; had it not been with her brother, she was not sure if she would have made it. Most
notably, Co-researcher Valerie somehow regresses whenever her siblings visited her in her ill
sister’s home. She admitted to have cried and clung on to them, as if she was looking for comfort
and consolation:
“Pag nakikita ko sila parang gustong gusto ko magsumbong (I feel like asking for rescue
whenever I see them)”, Valerie
She would feel consoled and somehow reassured just by having her siblings visit her.
Though they were not really actively involved in caregiving, their presence meant so much for
the co-researcher.
“Umikot yung mundo ko sa kanya (My world revolved around him)”
In order to accomplish the responsibility, our co-researchers made a commitment to
embark on the journey together with the patient. It was more than a sacred vow of responsibility;
it was a demonstration of love. A tall order awaits; hence they had to make sure that they can
size up to the measure of the task. They had to make sacrifices. These sacrifices include
prioritizing their patient over studies, or choosing the role over work promotions. Co-researcher
Auda was a dedicated and decorated employee, yet she had to file for an indefinite leave for a
greater cause:
“Leave muna sa work para mabantayan yung kapatid ko (I filed for indefinite leave so that I can
look after of my brother)”, Auda
The responsibility was so special that it requires the virtue of strength and endurance.
There seems to be no room for weakness, nor any sign of it to be seen by the patient because the
co-researchers believed that their vulnerable side would be the last thing that their sick loved one
needs to see, hence a facade of strength and reliability should be displayed instead.
Putting up a wall to cover any trace of weakness seems to leave them keeping things to
themselves. This adaptive response tends to create an imagined sense of being alone in their
duties and this contributes to the weight of the role itself. Co-researchers Courie and Valerie
mentioned that they opt to keep some sensitive information to themselves to avoid unwanted
stress to the patient. As self-suppression translates into selflessness, the co-researchers desire to

somehow spare their patient from all the possible hurts and stressors. In the process they ended
up more hurt yet they had to be extra cautious in their display of emotions lest their ill loved one
would notice their grief.
This self-suppression was evident but their purpose was to direct their focus on their ill
loved one’s welfare instead. This selflessness goes as far as deprivation of their basic
physiological needs, sacrificing their pastimes, and even choosing the responsibility over their
own personal aspirations and current endeavours. This genuine compassion and love enables
them to understand the patient’s experience deeper and somehow experience a fraction of how
the patient feels, even it meant leaving more rooms for their patient’s emotional displacement:
“Naiintindihan ko kahit sumisigaw sya (I understand him even when he’s yelling)” Gallany
The co-researchers were so entrenched in their caregiving role that they had almost, if not
completely, taken their own welfare for granted. While treading the journey with their patient as
they live with death, they almost forgot to look after and live for themselves, according to Auda:
“Umikot yung mundo ko sa kanya (My world revolved around him)”
“Parang hindi ko na rin alam kung paano magsisimula (I don’t know how to start over
again)”
This was especially true whenever they would have unusual times off away from the
patient, such as when someone would look after their patient for them to have a little break. Even
after the death of their sibling, co-researcher Auda and Valerie encountered difficulty in
returning to their usual lives before the cancer struck their families.
“Di ko talaga alam ang gagawin ko (I really don’t know what to do)”
The caregiving role is not an easy task; doing it in the end-of-life stage would require so
much from the caregiver. Despite knowing that the role must be embraced wholeheartedly, a hint
of slight reluctance in the form of self-doubt can be traced. This compunction loomed and
persisted throughout their caregiving experience in the end of life.
There always was reluctance due to the uncertainty on what to do on certain situations,
and whether care is done correctly since our co-researchers have no formal or structured
healthcare backgrounds or even trainings (hence the term Family caregiver), making the
caregiving role more challenging:

“Di ko naman naiintindihan lahat yun kasi wala naman akong background sa ganun (healthcare
profession) (I don’t understand everything since I did not have background on the healthcare
profession)”, Auda.
Since they had no prior experience or preparations, the caregiving task triggers anxiety
and other unpleasant emotions. There were times when they would be baffled and perturbed as
various situations were beyond their menial preparations:
“Sana nga wag na magka aberya…para di ako mataranta na naman (I hope things will not go
wrong so that I won’t get rattled again)”, Courie.
Due to this lack of structured preparatory trainings, they resorted to observational and
experiential learning. There was neither positive validation nor corrective coaching in the care
they render, hence the trial-and-error approach.

This method may be practical due to

financial and logistic scarcity, yet the unnecessary and lingering stress that comes with it
aggravates the burden.
“Kailangang tapangan. Nandyan na eh (I have to be brave. It has already come)”
The co-researchers admitted that they somehow felt hesitant and fretful as they lived each
day with their loved one’s death inevitable. The fear was still there. However, they had to
persevere, anyway:
“Kailangang tapangan. Nandyan na eh (I have to be brave. It has already come)”, Gallany
Natatakot ako, pero kailangan kong lakasan loob ko (I am scared but I have to be brave)” Auda
“Pinipilit ko pong magpakatatag (I have to remain strong)”, Lioness
Every moment counts. Since they were not prepared for the task and they do not have the
luxury of time, they could not afford to stay weak and helpless. It was deemed necessary to
remain strong for their loved one depends on them. When their back was against the wall, they
had to push back and continue the fight. They had to be resourceful and think of ways on how to
make the most out of the remaining opportunities. Everyday might be their last moment with
their patient; that is why availing the best possible care on time even in the end-of-life stage is
still in their best interest

The promise of going all-in was evident even if it meant increasing costs and inflating
debt. It did not matter because their loved one’s welfare is far more important than its financial
implications:
“Kahit ipangutang namin basta lang gumaling sya (Even if we have to borrow money, as long
as he gets well)” Auda
Cancer treatment and management is lengthy and expensive. Depletion of resources is a
very common story among cancer patients and their families. However, the status of their
financial condition was kept from their patient’s awareness, lest the addition of unnecessary
worry.
Because of this emerging concern, our co-researchers had to find other means in order to
sustain the treatment and afford comfort measures. Austerity measures and exclusion of other
simple luxuries were assimilated to their already modified daily routines. They also tried availing
the government and the non-government organizations’ assistance programs, such as the
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office (PCSO) Medical Assistance Program (MAP) and the
Philippine Cancer Society financial aid.
This is very exhausting since the said institutions accommodate and serve a very huge
number of people seeking financial and logistic support. Anyone requesting for assistance should
be at their office’s registration area as early as 5 AM and it would usually take a full whole day
before all steps are completed and guarantee letters (GLs) are released. There are times when a
person requesting for aid is asked to return on a particular day due to incomplete or insufficient
requirements. Once they go back on their scheduled date, they had to undergo all the tedious
steps all over again. In summary, availing financial assistance entails long queues, hunger, sleep
deficiency, uncomfortable waiting areas, and tiresome series of steps.
With regards to their depleting resources, our co-researchers had to learn simple to
complex nursing procedures for them to be able to take care of their patient. However, because
of their lack of formal educational or vocational background on caregiving, there were instances
where they had to resort to observational and experiential learning:
“Tingnan mo kung ano yung mga ginagawa ng nurse na magagawa mo (You have to observe
what the nurses do that you can perform as well)”, Gallany.

Every day was not easy but the co-researchers were persistent; the harder the task, the
stronger they should be. The road trodden was tough, but their pledge to hold nothing back was
stronger. It was an all-out effort. They wanted to convey to the patient that he/she is not alone in
his/her journey for they would walk with the patient all the way as they live with inevitable
death. This was a vow:
“Magiging all out kami na we will be there for him kahit na gaano kahirap yung pagdadaanan
(We will be there for him all-out regardless of the hardships that we will go through)”, Auda
Even though the enormity of the responsibility appeared to be disproportionate to their
preparations, even if there are any, their caregiving commitment remained unfaltering. They
remained true to their word no matter what the cost, material or non-material, may be.
Caregiving in a terminal illness is a very challenging responsibility. This is very much
different from the typical experience of taking care of a sick family member. Unlike cancer,
other non-terminal illness somehow guarantees recovery which makes the caregiving role easier.
Recovery is very likely; therefore, caregiving can easily be associated with rewards. As for
cancer, they knew what the situation really was and what will happen soon.
The journey is as painful as the revelation of the dreaded diagnosis and the anticipated
outcome of the illness. There were many occasions where the co-researchers realized that not
only that having a family diagnosed with cancer is painful, but the day-to-day adjustments is of
proportional, if not greater, difficulty
These repetitive encounters with the various undesirable scenarios brought about by the
deteriorating course of cancer draw a relentless myriad of responses from the co-researchers.
Responses vary from fear and anxiety in anticipation of the worst, uncertainty with the safety and
accuracy of the care provided, and their constant dilemma as they struggle to remain strong and
resilient in order for them to effectively perform their roles and the responsibilities. Family
caregivers continuously experience these various emotions from the moment the diagnosis was
disclosed and this pattern persist throughout the caregiving experience until the terminal phase of
the disease. As the prognosis advances to its terminal phase, feelings of ambivalence resurface.
Family carers continue to experience a repetitive cycle of plethoric difficulties.
III.

Meaning in Suffering

Amidst the torrential outpouring of unpleasant emotions and downpour of seemingly
unending difficulties, the co-researchers eventually started to find meaning and purpose.
Although the process of acceptance and moving forward took a while, they were able to see the
positive aspect of the experience of their end-of-life caregiving role. This theme showcases the
following concepts: Questions the Reasons, Privilege for a payback, Finding Purpose and
Meaning, Sourcing Support, and Surrender and Submission
“Naitanong ko na lang sa Diyos (I questioned God)”
Living with death, or more elaborately, living everyday while dealing with the inevitable
reality that cancer is real and death is imminent, turned out to be a daily struggle. As laid out in
the prior section, the diagnosis and its terminal prognosis exposed the family members acting as
family caregivers to difficulties of varying kinds and degrees. The co-researchers seemed to be
stuck in a loop of interconnected challenges to their physical, psychological, social, and spiritual
being. Moving forward and finally making a progressive decision concerning patient care and
role assumptions were wearisome.
Acceptance was more than just a one-time decision. It is a daily encounter with
ambivalence; a daily struggle between the disbelief of affliction versus relinquishing the nearlyparalyzing pain and just make do with the situation in hand. While in her anger stage, Coresearcher Auda admitted that she once became indignant with a handful of questions over the
situation:
“Nag question ako. Nagalit ako (I asked questions. I got mad)
”
There was also a progression to the bargaining stage, as co-researcher Auda desired for
an ability to change the situation towards a different turn of events:
“If only I had the power na baguhin yung sitwasyon (If only I had the power to change the
situation)”
The co-researchers who received the discouraging news concerning the diagnosis and the
eventual prognosis went through a great deal of sadness and possibly anticipatory grieving. This
foresight of perceived worst outcomes emanates from their mental picture of the situation, and in

this case, of a loved one’s terminal illness. At this point, the reality cannot be denied nor
bargained for anything else anymore. There was nothing left to do but to face their immediate
reality. Depression insidiously seeped in as they realized that nothing could be done to revert the
situation. Before and while co-researcher Courie was caring for her terminally-ill husband, she
admitted being extremely sad over her situation up to the point of depression:
“Parang nadi depress din ako na (It seemed like I’m getting depressed)”
Prior to their acceptance, the co-researchers endured this loop of sadness and anticipatory
grieving. Nevertheless, they displayed the ability to proceed to the next stage despite still being
troubled by their anticipatory grieving. It seemed that sorrow, hurt, disbelief, understanding, or
the lack thereof, were just temporary stopovers eventually leading them to acceptance.
Assumption of a very demanding role would require acceptance of things that could not be
changed and carrying out measures while they still matter.
Part of acceptance is the acknowledgement that things are beyond one’s control now.
Acknowledging their limited comprehension of the situation, co–researchers resorted to the
belief that only the God knows the entirety of the bigger picture and they could only see but a
fraction of it. As co-researcher Auda puts it:
“Only God knows kung ano mangyayari (Only God knows what’s going to happen)”
Yielding enables one to deal with the immediate reality and make use of all available
options. It is noteworthy, however, that this form of surrender is not of the hopeless kind. The
co-researchers still upheld their entreaty, believing that the likelihood of recovery could not be
completely dismissed:
“Alam kong darating yung time na gagaling sya (I know she will get well in time)”, Lioness.
This optimism was noted among the narratives of the co-researchers. This attitude seems
to be a universal phenomenon among them amidst the unfavorable circumstances and uncertain
outcomes.
“I’d Rather Be Here than Anywhere Else”

Although the hopeful desire for the patient to recover still lingers, co-researchers
gradually reached the transcendence of accepting the situation even if this petition ends up
unfavorably. There seems to be an interesting connection between the acceptance of the terminal
situation and just letting things run its course. A submissive attitude was observed among the
family caregivers:
“Kung kaylan Niya gustong bawiin, wala tayong magagawa (There’s nothing we can do
whenever He wants to take something back)”, Valerie
Eventually approaching the acceptance stage, there was an assent, complemented by the
optimism that things are temporal. This temporality was believed to have a reciprocal promising
turn of events. Some questions may have been left unanswered and bitter truths may not make
sense, yet there was acquiescence:
“Siguro talagang ganun kaya tinanggap na din naming (Maybe it’s just like that so we accepted
it)”, Courie.
Learning to accept the prognosis helps them fulfill their roles and meet the demands that
come with such responsibility. Co-researchers sought meaning and purpose in a reality that they
could not fully comprehend:
“Baka yun talaga nakaplano; para mag alaga sa kanya (maybe that’s the plan, that I would take
care of her)”, Valerie.
The meaning and purpose apparently involves being the responsible carer in the end-oflife phase despite having no formal educational or vocational background, or even preparatory
trainings, as elaborated in the previous theme. All they needed was their love for the person to
drive that courage into action:
“Kaya kong gawin kasi mahal ko yung kapatid ko (I can do it because I love my
brother)” Auda.
“Di naman po ako nagsisi na ganito po yung sitwasyon ko (I have no regrets with my
situation)”

Amidst the morass, a clear message was deciphered by the co-researchers: everything
may not be good, but there is something good in everything. Caregiving in the end of life
revealed a myriad of unexpected opportunities to be thankful for. Though painful as it is,
caregiving in the terminal stage of illness was somehow viewed as an opportunity for payback:
“Parang return na rin po ito sa pag aalaga nya sa amin (It’s our way of reciprocating her
care)”, Lioness.
As if bargaining against time and making up for all the lost times, an all-out sacrifice was
deemed as a noble gesture of returning all the favor and making the last remaining chances
count:
“Chance na bumawi sa kanya (Chance to make up with him)”, Auda.
No matter what lies ahead, the vow to walk with the patient all the way was observable:
“Nag promise talaga ako sa kanya (I did make a promise to him)”, Auda
They could have asked for more time with their beloved patient, but the longing was set
aside in exchange for the selfless desire for the patient to be taken out of the torment. The bailout
was something they were and will be thankful for:
“Thank God kasi di Niya na rin pinatagal yung hirap ng kapatid ko (Thank God because He did
not prolong my brother’s suffering)”, Auda.
Caregiving in the end of life also opened avenues for them to demonstrate their
unconditional love as a spouse or as a sibling.
“A privilege and opportunity to show how much I love my family”
Moreover, the situation seems to have forged them to be a better version of themselves as
they become someone and something they were not: an family caregiver who only capitalized on
courage and hope. They were able to give without holding anything back. Their own personal
weaknesses were superseded by a newfound strength which emerged out of necessity. According
to co-researcher Auda:

“Sobrang maselan ako pero kinaya ko na alagaan sya (I used to be picky but I was able to take
care of him)”
Despite being unable to understand some medical terms and procedures, the compelling
need to adjust enabled them to learn important basic nursing care such as intravenous and
administration of medications either via peripheral or implantable central venous access device,
turning to sides, catheter insertion, tube care, ostomy care, etc. Co-researcher Gallany claims that
she puts in extra work in making sure she learns what the nurses could do:
“Pinagaaralan ko lahat (I make sure to learn everything)”
The caregiving role required them to be proactive in hands-on care round the clock, both
in the hospital and at home. Providing comfort measures were their main intention to make sure
that the final moments are not distressing for the patients. Moreover, they also had to learn the
more technical aspects of care in the form of nursing procedures since they had to be prepared
and able for anything even if they are at home with the patient and no immediate medical support
is available. No sense of powerlessness could be hinted; In fact, there was striking pattern of
transcendence across the co-researchers.
“Wala naman akong regrets (I have no regrets)”
The co-researchers could have pled for another one to take over their role instead, or they
could have bargained for a completely different situation; instead they desired for the ability to
carry on their tasks effectively. They were aware that it would never be easy. Safe and accurate
care was crucial for the patient’s life quality and dignified death. In the process, they learned
how to overcome uncertainties and accomplish every single task that had to be done. The coresearchers were able to satisfactorily fill their role without compunction as their purpose
outweighs their perceived inability. As per co-researcher Gallany:
“Wala akong iniisip kundi pagsilbihan sya (I don’t think of anything else but to serve him)”
At the latter part of their caregiving time, the co-researchers learned acceptance. The only
regret mentioned was if the best care was rendered of if it could have been better. They did not
want to settle for anything else less than the best care. Co-researcher Auda looked back and
reflected:

“Sana I could have done better (I wish I could have done better)”
Selflessness through the pursuit of excellent care seems to persist among the coresearchers. These family caregivers’ ability to surpass their perceived and actual intrapersonal
boundaries enabled them to effectively handle their roles.
“…Makakasama, makakatulong man lang? (A companion or a helper, at least?)”
The situation seemed to be an eye-opener to the co-researchers; they got to see what they
consider as the essential truths and realized important lessons in life. Being trapped unprepared
in a horrendous situation they did not ask for nor imagine, acceptance and bravery may not
thrive. Nevertheless, they managed to overcome the daily hurdles through their newfound
strength. Moreover, the fortitude they drew from their support systems, comprised of their family
members and friends, was unequivocal.
Support was described in various ways and stretches. It may start from a simple check on
how the family caregiver was doing, as mentioned by co-researcher Auda:
“Marami naman akong kaibigan na nangangamusta… nagdasal (I have many friends asking
how I am doing…they pray for me)”
A simple visit, with prayers and words of encouragement were also appreciated and
recognized as a fundamental component of their ability to manage:
“May laging pumupuntang ka church...Lagi nila akong pinagpi pray (People from our church
always come…and they pray for me)”, Valerie.
More importantly, an immediate family’s display of staunch reliability provided the much
needed support, as pointed out by co-researcher Auda:
“Nasuportahan naman (ako sa responsibilidad bilang tagapag alaga) kasi dalawa naman kami
ng kapatid ko (nagtutulong) (I feel supported in my responsibility as a caregiver since my
brother is helping me)”
A family member who helped with the tasks and shared with the day by day
responsibilities provided a much-needed boost for the family caregiver. This assistance was very
important for the carer because the role proves to be too much to be handled alone. It served as a

mitigating factor to the end-of-life caregiving stress. Family appears to provide a respite for
them. According to co-researcher Valerie:
“Pag nakikita ko sila parang gustong gusto ko magsumbong (I feel like asking for rescue
whenever I see them)”
There were times when there was a longing for a helping hand in the responsibilities. The
very taxing responsibility grows harder with time. This yearning may be outspoken:
“Kaya kako, bakit parang nagiisa lang din … Bakit mga anak ko kako parang
di nila ako tinututulungan “Why does it seem that I am alone…why don’t my children help me”
There were also times when this desire to be helped out and supported was subtle. Coresearcher Valerie recalls an instance when she wanted to just vent out to her family:
“Pagod ba ‘to o gusto ko ng makakasama, makakatulong man lang? (Is this fatigue or do
I just want a companion, or a helper, at least?)”
As discussed in the previous theme, she confessed a feeling of loneliness and an indirect
request for support. This was manifested in her sudden, unprovoked cries whenever relatives
would visit, as if she was regressing and asking for back up. The presence of a consistent support
system, either by a family member, friends, or even church folks, is consciously and
unconsciously, valued by the co-researchers

“Basta’t hayaan ko lang po na i-drive Niya po yung buhay ko (Just let Him drive my life)”
There was a discernible pattern among the co-researchers as to their ultimate source of
strength. They all profess clinging on to God in every step of the way and their ability to find
meaning and purpose amidst the situation they were not prepared for seemed to be expedited by
this dependence. Co-researcher Auda claimed that their situation taught them that they could
only rely on God and one’s own self:
“Wala kang ibang aasahan kundi ang sarili mo at si Lord (you have no one to rely on
except for yourself and God)”

Recognizing the disproportion between the task and the expenses versus their role
readiness and capabilities, they knew that they could not have done it alone by themselves. They
acknowledge a higher power and a higher being sustaining them all throughout. This expression
of spirituality allowed them demonstrate their faith by believing that terminal cancer and all its
effects are all but challenges designed to bring out the best in everyone and in everything.
First, the reframing of the perception that terminal cancer and end-of-life caregiving are
just a complex of challenges designed to accomplish a greater good no matter how unpleasant
the means may be. As per co-researcher Lioness:
“Challenge lang to sa akin ni Lord (This is just God’s challenge for me)”
Next, faith in the form of optimism and positivity was also evident among the coresearchers. The situation was less than encouraging, but there was an assurance from within that
things will get better soon. An unrelenting faith and stalwart perseverance were believed to yield
their favorable outcomes in due time. The complete surrender and daily leap of faith was
necessary for the ordained purpose and meaning to come to their full measure. This constant
seeking allowed the co-researchers to grasp important lessons on hope, faith, reliance, reliability,
essence of time, and love. Finding purpose and meaning was believed to be connected to their
ability to reconnect with God. The experience allowed the co-researchers to have more time for
reflection and soul-searching. Co-researcher Lioness claimed that her mother’s terminal illness
enabled her to seek God more:
“Nung nagkasakit po si mama parang mas dun po ako nagkaroon ng time kay Lord (I seemed to
have more time with the Lord when mother got sick)”
Despite finding themselves ensnared to an unfavourable situation with a dreadful
outcome, the co-researchers were able to find meaning and purpose. Challenges were overcome
in small, daily successes. Every dead end revealed opportunities for breakthroughs. Breaking
barriers and accomplishing all necessary tasks that come with the caregiving role took the coresearchers to a new level of personhood.
The terminal illness caused ambivalence among the co-researchers. Their ambivalence
stemmed from their dilemma as they transitioned between anger, bargaining, depression and
acceptance. Moreover, the caregiver role proved to be a life-altering decision on top of the
illness’ impact on their lives. The transition between these stages was a struggle itself and the co-

researchers had to deal with this on a daily basis. However, there was not a trace of hopelessness
nor powerlessness. Furthermore, their eventual acquiescence and acceptance empowered them to
find meaning and purpose in their experience as they live with death and provide care in the endof-life
Thematic Resonance
Thematic resonance presents how the significant insights gathered from the process of
reflective analysis situate itself in the contemporary nursing knowledge. It does not affirm,
negate, rationalize, nor provide reason for the results; rather, it presents how these insights fit on
what is already known in the topic. This section will discuss the appraised literatures to further
explore and appreciate the phenomenon under study.
I.

Ambivalence in Anticipation
Almost by default, family members assume the caregiving role whenever a loved one

falls ill. Cancer seems to make things more dramatic and complicated with its poor prognosis.
With a rational knowledge of its trajectory, family caregivers, hereby termed as family
caregivers, go through a plethora of mostly unpleasant reactions to the illness. Even when shock
and disbelief start to dissipate, the ambiguity of the situation results to uncertainties in their next
course of actions, role, and expectations.
Cancer remains to be one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality locally and
globally. Due to its chronicity and poor survival rate, its diagnosis triggers a plethora of
responses. Cancer does not only disrupt and devastate the diagnosed patient. Family members
are equally affected as well (Kim & Given, 2008). There is a consensus among related
literatures, underlining the multidimensional implications of this life-limiting illness associated
with caregiving. In her study on spouses of breast cancer patients, Reodica (2011) described the
myriad of emotions to which cancer caregivers go through. There are mixed responses and
roller-coaster of emotions as family members process a surreal report.
Initial responses to the diagnosis and the terminal prognosis result from their shock and
disbelief. Due to the unfavorable prognosis and the downward trajectory of the disease, family
members lose sense of control. Anticipation as an attempt to regain a sense of control seems to

yield the opposite outcome: cancer equating with distressing symptoms and eventual death elicits
negative appraisals of the situation. Instead of serving an adaptive purpose, anticipation turns
into anticipatory grief. Anticipatory grief was described by ThereRando in 1988 (which she
preferred to call anticipatory mourning) as a multidimensional, complex process in response to a
loss during a terminal illness of a loved one. Nielsen et al (2016) further shed light on this topic
with his study showing high levels of pre-loss grief among family caregivers of cancer patients.
Losses are related to either impending death, or non-death events, such as deterioration, life
pattern alteration, restrictions, and uncertainties about the future (Rando, 1988).
Cancer is almost always equated with prolonged suffering and eventual mortality.
Literature suggests the complicated, contagion effect of cancer to physical, emotional,
psychosocial, and financial wellbeing of the patient and of their family caregiver. The constant
fear of death is prevalent among the co-researchers and is a significant predictor of higher
caregiver burden (O’Hara et al., 2010). This is consistent with other literatures, such as that of
Hudson et al (2011) which profiled that significant proportion of family caregivers of patients on
palliative care experience recurrent patterns of anxiety. A loved one’s death triggers fear and
anxiety, and the degree of closeness and emotional bond amplifies this unpleasant emotion.
While still struck with shock and disbelief, family members will need to take action
despite the ambiguous appraisal of their current reality. Contrasting emotional responses
dominate at this point. Ambivalence, as described by the co-researchers of this study, stem from
their uncertainty on the succeeding series of actions. Learning about the diagnosis entails a series
of situations where every decision-making is crucial. Cancer care is complex and costly; hence
subsequent course of actions should be thoroughly appraised and consulted with each involved
family member (Nambayan & Lu, 2015; Manalo, 2013). With the patient’s best possible care
and comfort in mind, family members will maximize all resources and options. This process is
usually long and exhaustive, especially if financial constraints are taken into consideration.
It is considered a filial duty to volunteer as the person responsible for their family
member’s care and failure to do so may result to undesirable societal perception of their
behavior. However, in the study of Smith in 2009, family caregivers of terminally ill cancer
patients concurred that love and concern was their motivation for caring, regardless of the
challenges and perceived burden. In a study of Kotronoulas et al (2012), family members are
required to assume multiple roles, and consequently, make significant adjustments in their lives,

in order to gratify the complex demands of their cancer patients. Family members were not
expecting the diagnosis; hence, their unpreparedness for the burden of caregiving, most
especially at home-based end-of-life care (EoLC) (Saleh &O’Neill, 2018). As they assume a new
identity, family caregivers desire to receive every single detail that would help them in their role
(Zapart et al., 2007). This need for continuous supply of supportive information on various
aspects of the disease, including, but not limited to, the disease course, plan of care, symptom
control and physical care, is consistent with existing literatures, such as those of Wikes et al
(2000), Harrop et al (2014), and Zapart et al (2007). Ironically, the healthcare team seems to be
mainly focused on the patient and hardly ever, consider involving the family caregivers in the
continuity of care (McLaughlin et al., 2011). It is important to note, however, that the said study
was intended to explore the perceptions of family caregivers of patient’s with Parkinson’s
disease (PD). Nevertheless, the similarity of PD’s and cancer’s chronic and debilitating course
clusters them under the same category for this study’s research aim.
Linderholm and Friedrichsen (2010) pointed out that despite these antipodal perceptions,
family caregivers of cancer decedents share the imperative to project an impression of security
and strength. Showing signs of breakdown or inefficiencies are a taboo. This abiding dilemma
further contributes to the ambivalence that family caregivers constantly deal with. A randomized
clinical trial (RCT) of Bultz et al in 2000 shed light on how cancer patients draw strength from
their significant others. This is especially true whenever the coping abilities of diagnosed cancer
patients are yet to gain traction. Out of their caring instinct (Coristine et al., 2003) and familial
bond (Mok et al., 2003), family members choose to capitulate and instead do what is necessary,
disregarding their unpreparedness and ambivalence.
Acknowledgment of the current situation and the new realities that they have to live with
is crucial since there is already an alteration in their life and family dynamics (Bowden-Tucker,
2012). Acceptance is a pre requisite to their caregiving role. This argument resonates with the
results of the study of Kim et al in 2007, signifying that coming to acceptance of the new
situation relates to a more effective adaptation and role performance. In order to strategize a
comprehensive plan aimed towards optimal patient care, Mehta et al (2010) accentuated that
accepting the caregiving responsibility is a vital factor. In the same study, it was found that
family caregivers of patients on pain management at home were able to satisfactorily perform

practical and intermediate aspects of caregiving once they were able to accept their family’s
current situation and the corresponding roles.
II.

Courage in Uncertainty
At any given point of the illness trajectory, feelings of ambivalence continue to resurface.

Family caregivers continue to circle the loop of suffering that presents in varying forms and
degree. Their travail takes its toll to a certain, limited degree. Amidst the hardships and
inadequacies, a resilient courage emerges to go beyond one’s personal needs and move towards
selflessness.
Assumption of the caregiving role emanates from the family centrality in every Filipino
(Manalo, 2017). In the Philippines where care is integral in the family bond (Martinez, 2014),
caregiving is innate, and this caring nature is evoked most especially during a terminal illness.
Once a loved one is diagnosed with a terminal illness, family members recognize the imperative
to immediately take responsibility of the patient’s care. They are quick to count themselves in
and be part of the patient’s lifelong journey especially that their time is running short. This desire
to be included in the patient’s care is described by Linderholm & Friedrichsen (2010) in their
study involving family caregivers of cancer decedents. This desire to be acknowledged and
involved in the patient care plan is also describe in a similar study in 2011 by McLaughlin et al.
Although their study focused on family caregivers of patients with Parkinson’s Disease, the
context of illness chronicity and complexity demonstrated comparable result.
Cancer caregiving requires complex care. At any stage, cancer patients require holistic
and comprehensive care from trained professionals. Similarly, family caregivers serve as an
important cornerstone of palliative and end-of-life care (McGuire et al., 2012) to ensure the
continuity of care. According to Aoun et al in 2005, successful palliative care requires the
substantial contribution and participation of family members to ensure the continuity of care
even after the patient is discharged. However, complex care may be too much for lay people and
their readiness versus their competence for the role may not be congruent. Research on cancer
patients and their family caregivers, such as those of Harding & Higginson (2003) and Bee et al
(2009), conferred that there are inadequate preparatory trainings offered to the identified family
member who will be responsible for the patient’s care. While there may be few structured
supportive programs available, these are not optimally utilized by the family caregivers (Harding

et al., 2012; Hudson et al., 2004) for a number of reasons: Their current competence and needs
were not integrated to the discharge planning (Lindholm and Friedrichsen, (2010); (2) contents
of the program may have an emotive nature (Hudson et al., 2004) to which the family caregivers
may not wish to entertain, lest they will feel more vulnerable; and (3) healthcare professionals
are not trained to support and educate them enough to make them feel significant (Giles &
Miyasaki, 2009)
As the battle with cancer endures, family caregivers eventually come to realize the details
of the new reality. Realizing that the role and its responsibilities prove to be enormous and lifealtering (Bowden-Tucker, 2012) they find themselves ambivalent towards the new role (Brobäck
and Berterö, 2003). Their ambivalence manifests as feeling of insufficiency in their adjustment
to the role and altered patterns and feelings of uncertainty, both in their role performance and in
their patient’s day-to-day condition. This makes the continuation of palliative care at home more
challenging and distressing in the long run.
Due to the complex nature of cancer, caregiving in the end-of-life (EoL) is almost
perceived as synonymous with multifarious responsibilities, mostly exhausting and taxing. The
adverse effects of caregiving, particularly in the EoL stage, have been outlined by numerous
studies such as those of Jack & O'Brien (2010), and Robinson et al (2012). In a systematic
review conducted by Stenberg et al in 2010, there were numerous problems reported that comes
with the caregiving responsibilities. These negative aspects range from physical, psychosocial,
emotional, and financial domains.
Palliative care at home requires round the clock readiness to attend to the patient’s needs.
As a result, sleep deprivation is a staple complaint among family caregivers (Northouse et al.,
2012). An incompletely subdued fear of deterioration and eventual death may also cause sleep
disturbances, hence the feeling of fatigue and energy drain over time.
Exhaustion was also related to various factors aside from altered sleep pattern. In the
study of O’Hara et al (2010) on family caregivers of cancer patients, the increasing dependence
of patients for their activities of daily living (ADL) demands is directly related to exhaustion and
burnout. Although these basic ADLs, such as bathing, hygiene, feeding, and toileting are simple
and do not require technical nursing expertise, these are still physically exhausting activities.
Moreover, due to the patient’s decline in function and independence, together with other
complicating details such as tubes, ostomies, drains, pressure injuries, stumps, etc., simple tasks

may otherwise become complex. Other reports include back pain, weight loss, and muscle strain
(Jo et al., 2007)
Negative aspects of caregiving also include emotional torment. An elaborate array of
literature on how cancer affects the various aspects of the patient’s personhood have been
published to date. Kim and Given (2008) stressed out that family members are equally affected
by the multi-aspect effects of cancer. This result is especially observable among Filipino families
due to the strong sense of family centrality where personal and emotional connections are part of
their culture. Filipinos are known to be driven by empathy. This empathic nature of the Filipinos
enables them to be more effective in their caregiving role. However, one setback of this innate
characteristic is their exposure to the nearly same level of emotional torment, while
simultaneously balancing their physical, psychosocial, and financial problems associated with
their caregiving role. This puts additional stress to family caregivers, eventually leading to
caregiver burden.
The constant fear of witnessing a loved one deteriorate and their imminent death
consciously and subconsciously affects the role performance of the family caregivers. Dumont et
al (2006) associated this lingering fear of declined functioning and terminal outcome with
increasing caregiver burden. Furthermore, Northouse et al. (2000) found that the patient’s
distress affects their caregivers’ perception of their caregiving effectiveness. Deterioration is
somehow perceived as an outcome of poor care, making them question their competence and
whether they were doing things correctly.
Eventually, as the entire weight of the caregiving in the end of life comes to its full
measure, the role slowly transforms into a distressing experience. Adverse effects eventually take
their toll on family caregivers. Numerous studies expose how the carer’s needs are
underexplored and profiled. (Soothill, 2001; Caress et al., 2009; Linderholm & Friedrichsen,
2010). It is even uncertain whether these needs are definitively addressed by existing support
programs (Harrop et al., 2014), due to the lack of methodologically rigorous evaluation studies
(Harding and Higginson, 2003; Hudson, 2004; Hudson, 2006). In fact, studies converge on their
findings that caregivers have significant unmet needs related to their caregiving role. In a related
study, Giles & Miyasaki, 2009, showed that family caregivers feel alone, isolated, and left out on
their own. Overall, there is an evident lack of longitudinal and empirical studies on how to
prevent the adverse events of EoL caregiving (Grande et al., 2009).

Caregiving in the end of life is very demanding. This entails enormous sacrifices on the
part of the person in charge of the patient’s care. Over time, family caregivers find themselves
struggling to balance their caregiving responsibilities with their personal interests (Kotronoulas
et al., 2012). With the patient’s best interest as the priority, the family caregivers can often ignore
their own needs, leading to unfavorable health outcomes (Clemmer et al., 2008). What was seen
as important at this stage was to support the ill person in both practical and emotional terms. By
placing the ill person's need over their own, the tendency is for family caregivers to ignore or
hide the recognition of their own forthcoming loss. This may have enabled them to continue in
the family caregiving role for a time, but it also has reduced their ability to prepare for the death
of their loved one.
They usually resist acknowledging their own personal needs in exchange of striving to
become a better caregiver and be able to balance the patient’s needs and wishes (Robinson et al.,
2012). In the process, this abnegation results to other adverse effects on the carer’s emotional
well-being, as described in previous literatures. In their descriptive, correlational study in 2002,
Cameron et al links higher emotional distress with cancer carer’s inability to participate in his /
her valued activities and interests. Since the caregiving tasks require so much time and effort,
family caregivers would concentrate their depleting physical and mental reserves on their
responsibilities, leaving them unable, or even remorseful, to take some time off for their leisure.
Personal or social time may be viewed as merely a secondary priority. This social isolation is
also mentioned in the study of Goldstein et al (2004) and Zapart et al (2007) where cancer and
palliative caregivers who have limited social networks and altered lifestyle patterns reported
higher caregiver burden.
Aoun et al., (2005) linked the largely unmet needs of the cancer caregivers to the dearth
of evidence-based programs aimed at mitigating the adverse effects of the role. This finding
strongly associates with the study of Lynch et al in 2013 which revealed the weak and selectively
accessible palliative care services in the Philippines. This care modality is mostly
institutionalized and lacks congruity among healthcare facilities. Since palliative care is still yet
to gain strong national traction legislatively and executively, there is considerably little, or even
misconceived, knowledge about palliative care. Due to this prevalent inaccessibility to
professional palliative care services, and the consequent nescience, carers resort to experiential
learning and mostly via trial-and-error approaches (Stajduhar et al., 2013).

Lack

of

tangible professional support and feedback mechanisms leave the family caregivers attrited as
they struggle to continue providing complex care despite the worry of additional discomfort or
injury. Uncertainty with the basic care skills expected of them draws recurrent guilt whether they
were doing things correctly. The fear of doing more harm than good was always present.
Brobäck & Berterö (2003) described this as feelings of insufficiency where family caregivers
constantly feel uncertain with their task, leading to poor perceptions of self-efficacy.
Alongside the sparse palliative care services, there is also a scarcity in published
literatures on research-based carer support interventions in the Philippines. Only selected
healthcare facilities offer palliative care services, hence the inadequacy of published research.
The need for a national policy and healthcare programs that will address the overall welfare of
the family members acting as family caregivers is evident. Even for other countries with an
already established and structured palliative care system (including hospice and end of life care),
recommendations for further needs assessment and research-based intervention development are
part of their quality improvement processes. Their focus also includes reducing the negative
aspects of caregiving and provide basis for cost-effective resource allocation. (Aoun et al, 2005).
This healthcare paradigm has significant advantages in the Philippine healthcare setting
since there are no tangible carer support programs to date. Moreover, the limited healthcare
budget has direct effects on its markedly reduced healthcare workforce. The intricate interplay of
the lack of a robust palliative care program, limited access to relatively unaffordable palliative
care services, and the significant patient-to-hospital/healthcare professionals disproportion,
leaves caregivers unaided and unsupported. It is highly-recommended that the government
should aggressively devise and implement a carer support program since family caregivers are
replacing skilled health workers in the delivery of complex care in cancer.
Helplessness is not an option upon recognition of the need for a responsible caregiver.
Since time is running out, family members strive to make use of the remaining times with the
patient. The need to remain reliable is so ingrained that family caregivers refuse acknowledging
their own needs over their patient’s. They must not show any sign of breakdown or at least
exhaustion lest they become a source of discouragement (Linderholm and Friedrichsen, 2010).
This is consistent with the study of Northouse in 2000 which pointed out that caregiver
symptoms (role adjustments problems) affect their appraisal of how they effectively perform
their caregiving role. Hence, family caregivers needed to demonstrate courage and dependability

for them to effectively carry out their tasks, instill hope, and improve their patient’s quality of
life.
Cancer care comes with considerable financial costs. From diagnosis, to treatment, and
up to palliation, financial implications have been a source of stress and burden among family
caregivers (Gardiner et al., 2014). Co-researchers of this study acknowledged the effect of cancer
care in their finances. Depletion of resources is common report among them. In order to sustain
palliative care at home and not to make the patient feel forsaken, family caregivers would
maximize all possible sources of funds. Financial resources are extracted from their family
savings, properties, loans and even aids from government and non-governments entities.
Obtaining financial assistance from these sources is physically exhausting and time-consuming.
Family caregivers recognize this as an additional cause of stress, especially when their debts start
to accumulate beyond their perceived ability to pay. The study of Nijboer et al (1999) and Guada
et al (2011) provided evidence that low socioeconomic status further complicates the adverse
effects of end of life caregiving. Consequently, the family caregivers’ quality of life is
significantly lower among those with socioeconomic deprivation (Iqbal et al., 2010).
Nevertheless, worrying on payment and their own quality of life are of lesser priority compared
to the more urgent concerns on how to afford the best possible care and comfort measures in the
end of life.
In congruence with other studies on Filipino culture of care, this study suggests that filial
bond seems to be the most important factor in the role assumption. It is interesting to note that
family members assume the caregiving role despite having no formal educational background or
prior competency. However, willingness to take part in the patient’s cancer journey entails
immense responsibility and implications. Symptoms management and personal care needs were
identified as significant stressors (Brazil et al., 2010). Daily activities associated with these
aspects vary from practical caregiving to more complex tasks, such as medication administration,
assessment and identification of warning signs, symptom relief, safety, and comfort measures
(Wikes et al., 2000). Caregiving strain appears to increase proportionally with the patient’s
dependency on caregiver as end of life draws near (Jack & O’Brien, 2010). In the study of
Kalnins (2006) family caregivers of terminally ill cancer and stroke patients reported the explicit
need for supportive education, especially on practical caregiving. This finding resonates with the

research of Lai & Thomson (2011), when they studied the family caregivers of elderly patients
with several comorbidities and varying levels of dependency.
Consequences of self-deprivation and neglect of family caregivers accumulate over time.
They have complex needs that usually get unnoticed as most of the attention and resources are
funneled towards the patient. Failure to address the caregivers adversely affects the caregiving
outcomes. Patient’s long-term adjustment to the illness is negatively affected by the family
caregiver’s role adjustment problems (Northouse, 2000). Similarly, the study of Park et al (2010)
on 1662 family caregivers of cancer decedents revealed that unmet needs adversely influenced
the quality of care delivered.
III.

Meaning in Suffering
Ultimately, the co-researchers were able to find meaning and purpose in their ordeal.

Making sense of their situation was a difficult and gradual. Family caregivers suffered the
adverse effects of cancer caregiving in an enduring pattern before they discovered the rewards
and benefits of their experience. Their need for holistic support to alleviate the deleterious effect
of end-of-life caregiving is evident. Interestingly though, regardless of the amount of actual or
perceived support received, family and spirituality was of great importance in shaping the
meanings they derived from the experience
The unequivocal need for caregiver support is already mentioned in several literatures
(Harding and Higginson, 2003; Kalnins, 2006). There seems to be a contradicting view on the
adequacy of existing programs aimed at supporting family caregivers. Harding et al (2012)
pointed out that numerous interventional studies on how to support family caregivers are already
circulating. Perhaps, this result applies to western countries where palliative care has strong local
activity (Group 3B) and integration to mainstream service provision (Group 4), according to the
global palliative care level map by Lynch et al (2013). Despite the presence of evidence-based
interventions, such as those of Bultz et al (2000), Hudson (2004), Hudson (2006), these
programs’ structure, contextual feasibility, and access or delivery are still areas to be focused on
and streamlined. Palliative care as a comprehensive service is yet to gain national coverage and
accessibility in the Philippines. Hudson et al (2004) and Bee et al (2009) argued the insufficiency
of available support programs for family caregivers. In the same paper, Lynch et al (2013)
labeled Philippines with Category 3A (Isolated Provision) in terms of perceived palliative care

development. This category indicates patchy scope and modestly supported palliative care
services, with funding often donor-dependent. It is important to note that supportive care for
family caregivers strongly emanates from an established palliative care service.
Moreover, the chronicity of the illness depletes financial resources; hence even if
palliative care services are available it may not be fully utilized. Families will have to settle with
what they have after having spent most of their resources on their patient’s diagnostic and
treatment expenses. This means that family members take over a completely unfamiliar role as
they take charge of their loved one’s care despite having neither prior technical preparations nor
supportive trainings. In the course of their caregiving experience, family caregivers feel alone
and left on their own without adequate information or training on caregiving (Giles & Miyasaki,
2009; Hasson et al., 2009)). Experiential learning bears physical, psychosocial and emotional
downsides (Stajduhar et al., 2013). Without a professional team actively assisting them and
providing feedback, family caregivers experience recurrent uncertainty, compunction, and guilt,
all of which contributes to the caregiving burden.
Positive reinforcements predict life satisfaction among caregivers (Kaufman et al., 2010).
For family caregivers to effectively and satisfactorily perform their role, they need to be
reassured that they are not alone and that they are a significant part of the patient’s care.
Corrective measures should be implemented with gentleness and respect; otherwise they may
feel guilty or incompetent. They need to be encouraged that they are doing a good job.
Literatures have pointed out the importance of boosting the family caregiver’s morale as a form
of emotional support, optimizing patient care and role effectiveness (Hudson et al., 2008), and
improving quality of life and satisfaction (Kaufman et al., 2010)
In a study of Lai & Thomson in 2011, they examined the difference between actual vs.
the caregivers’ perceived adequacy of social support. They found out that the perceived
adequacy, rather than the actual amount of social support, predicted lesser caregiver burden. This
finding provides a framework in addressing caregiver burden, especially when palliative care
services could not be afforded or even accessed. The presence of family and friends is an
excellent source of emotional support. The inclusion of family members and social networks
(friends, relatives, etc.) in the comprehensive plan of end of life care at home is extremely
important, especially in the Philippine setting. Manalo (2013) discussed the pivotal role of the
family in the shared decision-making process concerning their patient's care. They provide

invaluable emotional, financial, and respite support, both for the patient and the family caregiver.
Moreover, Varona et al (2007) underlined the buffering effect of social support in perceived
caregiver burden. In a quantitative study involving caregivers of patients with lung cancer, Haley
et al (2003) linked social activities, visits from family and friends, and larger social networks
with lesser depression and greater life satisfaction.
The ability to care for a terminally-ill loved one generates feelings of satisfaction (Haley
et al., 2003; Wong & Ussher, 2009). In a study to determine how the family caregivers of
terminally ill cancer patients cope, Hudson (2006) discovered that in contrast to the already
known negative aspects, there were strong positive emotions associated with the opportunity
given to them. The role enabled them to demonstrate their love through care (Smith, 2009). Their
ability to handle and master the role generates
pride and satisfaction (Jo et al., 2007). Keeping their promise was precious, especially when it
was a commitment made to a dying loved one. According to Funk et al (2010), caregiving in the
end of life was described by family caregivers as positive and rewarding. The role generated a
sense of accomplishment as they were able to handle an extremely challenging responsibility.
According to them, family caregivers found strength and comfort as they discovered a sense of
meaning in their role, enabling them to cope. Meaning was associated with the privilege to
reciprocate the care and affection they once received from the patient. This payback was
considered their final sendoff offering as the patient prepares for eventual death.
Another positive benefit of the caregiving experience is the formation of deeper sense of
connection and togetherness (Seal et al., 2014). Caregiving in the advanced stage of illness
means following the patient in every step of the way and being an immediate responder to every
need (Brannstrom et al., 2007). Since time was not a luxury as the patient’s life draws to an end,
moments spent together were considered priceless. Further undermining end of life caregiving’s
positive facets, family caregivers even claimed that if they had to do the same thing again, they
would not hesitate to do so (Linderholm and Friedrichsen, 2010). The positive rewards of
caregiving help create meanings that enable family caregivers to generate a sense of purpose out
of the hardships and loss they went through (Wong & Ussher, 2009).
As discussed earlier in this chapter, acceptance of the current situation and how it will
alter lifestyle patterns and family dynamics is crucial. This enables strategic planning on optimal
patient care. While questions on why such things had to happen resurface every now and then,

family caregivers resort to their spiritual connection to a higher being / power for anchor of faith
and hope. Religion (or spirituality) is considered and important factor in benefit finding and
discovering meanings of life experiences, as stated in the study of Donovan et al (2011). In a
systematic literature review by Becker et al in 2007, only a fifth of the studies appraised
differentiated religion from spirituality. Although technically distinct in terms of expression and
definition, scientific papers use both words interchangeably since concepts of religion and
spirituality in the research context still requires further juxtaposition. For this paper’s purpose,
religion and spirituality will convey the same meaning and will be used interchangeably.
Surrender and submission to God characterizes a good death (Manalo, 2017) among
Filipinos. As end of life comes near, coming at peace with God is a priority. Likewise,
reconciliation with family and friends is among every dying person’s wish in preparation for
death. Since Filipinos are mostly christians, (believing in God, regardless of denomination or
order), religion plays an important role in their lives, illness, and death, as well as in every
decision concerning these aspects (Nambayan & Lu, 2015). Therefore, to ascertain a dignified
death that patients and families desire, spiritual care should remain among the priority
intervention of healthcare providers, particularly nurses (Doorenboss et al., 2010). Moreover,
religion positively relates to grief and bereavement (Becker et al., 2007). Spiritual care aimed at
helping to understand the illness and how to cope with the situation yielded higher satisfaction
among family caregivers of seriously ill patients, as cited in the study of Hanson et al in 2008.
Therefore, religion and spirituality complements their attempt in finding purpose and meaning
(Donovan et al., 2011) in their experience despite the hardships and losses. It enables them to
cope effectively during and even after their end of life caregiving experience.

IMPLICATIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Implications
This study depicts the emotional journey to which family caregivers embark on when
they took the caregiving role in terminal illness. Upon diagnosis, the myriad of emotions starts to
revolve and tasked family members confer their ambivalence in the anticipation of major life
changes, crucial decisions, new role assumption, and altered family dynamics. Since cancer

affects the family as well, it is suggested that the disclosure of diagnosis, treatment options, and
prognosis be done on a multi-disciplinary team conference together with the family. Their active
involvement in the team’s plan of care will give them access to necessary emotional supports
that will somehow alleviate their unpleasant responses to their new situation. This multidisciplinary team may include doctors, nurses, social workers, and psychiatrists. Since family
members are already considered as equal care recipients, the healthcare team should not merely
include them in the care provision to the patient. It is essential to include their mental,
psychosocial, and emotional wellness in the team’s care plan. Counseling, mental hygiene, and
emotional wellness programs are just some of the measures that may be explored for this
purpose. Further, communication skills with emphasis on conveying empathy and sensitivity are
excellent trainings that the healthcare team should undergo.
The explicit need for professional support among family caregivers is also accentuated in
this study. As mentioned earlier, family caregivers desire information on the diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment options. To support them in their new role, they will need structured
programs that will help them in the practical and technical aspects of caregiving. Patient and
family empowerment through their active engagement in the actual care is a widely-used
approach in preparing lay persons for independent caregiving. Systematic demonstration and
return-demonstration provides opportunity for them to learn with lesser fear since the supervision
of a healthcare professional offers continuing assurance. This resembles training in a controlled
environment with the presence of a mentor. Positive reinforcements and corrective feedbacks
will also improve their caregiving competence, while boosting their confidence in their ability to
handle the role.
There is a stark difference in the perspectives of patient care when healthcare in the
Philippines is to be compared to other countries. Not all healthcare facilities move with the
philosophy of patient and family partnership through their active participation in care and carerelated decisions. Seemingly, patient care is focused on attending to a passive, “sick patient”
until they recover. Family members are like spectators on the side line, waiting anxiously on how
things will turn out. Whether patients will improve or continue to deteriorate (which will either
prompt them to be transferred to other cheaper facilities or go home against advice), the
hospital’s responsibility does not appear to go beyond the patient’s hospital stay. Prior to
discharge, family members who will assume the caregiving role are inadequately prepared for

their role. Not all facilities have structured program for information and skill acquisition support
that will make home caregiving less strenuous. Care recipients (both the patient and their
families) are left on their own. Hospitals, therefore, should be more aggressive in integrating
patient/family empowerment and continuity of care in their services. This should not be merely
confined to offering private duty services, but rather, the empowerment to care for themselves
and their family members at home. This may range from simple, practical caregiving tasks to
more complex skills (oxygenation, suctioning, tube feeding, wound care, ostomy management,
etc.)
As life draws to an end, the focus of care tilts toward palliation where the goal is to
provide comfort and relief while making sure that the last remaining moments are lived with
quality and dignity. However, cancer care, including the palliative modality, can be costly and
healthcare programs in the Philippines have limited coverage due to political and economic
factors. Resources are most likely depleted at the illness’ terminal stage as well. With death
nearing and financial drain to consider, patients and/or their families will resort to be discharged
even against medical advice. EoLC is continued at home where family members are primarily in
charge of taking care of the patient. Its involvement in every details requiring decision indicates
the significance people place on their families. Out of this intricate structure comes the voluntary
assumption of the caregiving role. This study emphasized the promising contributions of family
members in the end of life. Although they are recognized as the critical piece in palliative care at
home, the attention seems to be exclusively focused on the patient’s needs. This leaves the
family members, now acting as family caregivers, unattended, vulnerable, and deprived. This
study provides evidence that the inclusion of family caregivers as equal recipients of care will
maximize their contributions on EoLC. The researcher believes that this is an economically
practical and cost-effective investment that will offer short and long term solutions for the
financial and caregiving-related challenges. One specific intervention is to design training
sessions for family caregivers regarding basic nursing care prior to discharge.
Likewise, the nursing profession can also make good use of this study’s result, as well as
those of the related studies reviewed. Patient education should not be limited to verbal teachings,
brochures, or pamphlets. Enhancing the curriculum to include patient and family engagement for
a more active, hands-on role in their care is an upgrade to our profession’s current state. This is a
very encouraging embodiment of the nurse’s educator-advocate function. Further, a follow

through mechanism via structured hospital-wide patient/family involvement programs will
strengthen this educator-advocate function of nurses.
This study was able to shed light on the profound dearth of affordable and accessible
national program on palliative care and how its provision can positively affect EoLC at home.
Even with the encouraging progress over the last decades, there is still a long way to go,
especially in gaining government-initiated funding and implementing tangible services. Until
then, taking care of those who take care of others is a win-win solution for all the concerned
parties (government, hospitals, healthcare professionals, patients, and their families). Policies
that will create comprehensive and nationally-accessible support programs for them will
optimize available financial and human resources. The researcher considers this as a sustainable
and culturally congruent solution, compatible with the inherent set of morals, values, and faith
that Filipinos are known for. The Philippines may not be endowed with a hefty national budget,
nor substantial allocations on healthcare compared to other countries yet, but we can tap a
sustainable resource unique among the Filipinos. We have our families unconditionally
demonstrating their affection through selfless care. Their unpaid contributions make up for the
lack of attention to healthcare and so this is the appropriate time to start involving them in the
care delivery, both as providers and recipients
Another significant insight in this study is that towards the end of the trajectory of their
experience as caregiver of a dying relative, they will begin to find meaning in their ordeal.
However, for them the process of finding meaning is influenced by the availability of support
coming from all possible sources (their need for information and instructions was already
explicated in this chapter). One interesting finding is how the family caregivers value the
comfort of social support coming from their family and friends. It is suggested that the family
caregivers should have other family members, or even willing friends, with them that will
assume active participation in EoLC. This will provide respite for the main family caregiver in
order for them to attend to their personal needs and dissipate the stress buildup. This option can
be discussed with the patient to ensure his / her willingness to involve people other than the
immediate family in his / her care. Again, this will be traced back to the suggested creation of
multi-disciplinary care programs that recognize the invaluable contributions of social networks.
The integral role of religion and spirituality in EoLC was also discussed in this paper.
Spirituality seems to be a deeply ingrained trait evoked by crises such as, for this paper’s

purpose, cancer. Since Filipinos are known for their resilient faith, the inclusion of spiritual care
will supply the missing, and often neglected, piece in the holistic care of patients and families.
Hospitals should involve spiritual services in their multi-disciplinary care approach. The
availability of spiritual support in every institution is expected to contribute dramatic
improvements in coping and meaning finding among patients and their family caregivers. A
wary strategic formulation is, however, necessary to ensure respectful considerations since there
are different religions and sects / orders already in existence. Spiritual care can be a sensitive
topic in both ways; care recipients may not be appropriately addressed, or it may not be able to
adequately provide the desired quality of care. The researcher, therefore, advocates for close
coordination with religious authorities for this matter.
REFERENCES / BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aoun, S. M., Kristjanson, L. J., Currow, D. C., & Hudson, P. L. (2005). Caregiving for the terminally ill:
at what cost?. Palliative medicine, 19(7), 551-555.
Aoun, S., Deas, K., Toye, C., Ewing, G., Grande, G., & Stajduhar, K. (2015). Supporting family
caregivers to identify their own needs in end-of-life care: Qualitative findings from a stepped
wedge cluster trial. Palliative medicine, 29(6), 508-517.
Becker, G., Xander, C. J., Blum, H. E., Lutterbach, J., Momm, F., Gysels, M., & Higginson, I. J. (2007).
Do religious or spiritual beliefs influence bereavement? A systematic review. Palliative
Medicine, 21(3), 207-217.
Bee, P. E., Barnes, P., & Luker, K. A. (2009). A systematic review of informal caregivers’ needs in
providing home‐baseD end‐of‐life care to people with cancer. Journal of clinical nursing, 18(10),
1379-1393.
Bowden-Tucker, J. R. (2012). End of Life Care in the Home: Supporting and Sustaining Family Carers.
Brazil, K., Bainbridge, D., & Rodriguez, C. (2010). The stress process in palliative cancer care: a
qualitative study on informal caregiving and its implication for the delivery of care. American
Journal of Hospice and Palliative Medicine®, 27(2), 111-116.
Brobäck, G., & Berterö, C. (2003). How next of kin experience palliative care of relatives at
home. European journal of cancer care, 12(4), 339-346.
Bultz, B. D., Speca, M., Brasher, P. M., Geggie, P. H., & Page, S. A. (2000). A randomized controlled
trial of a brief psychoeducational support group for partners of early stage breast cancer
patients. Psycho‐Oncology: Journal of the Psychological, Social and Behavioral Dimensions of
Cancer, 9(4), 303-313.
California Health Care Foundation. (2012). Final Chapter: Californians' Attitudes and Experiences with
Death and Dying.
Cameron, J. I., Franche, R. L., Cheung, A. M., & Stewart, D. E. (2002). Lifestyle interference and
emotional distress in family caregivers of advanced cancer patients. Cancer, 94(2), 521-527.
Caress, A, K Luker, K Chalmers, and M Salmon. "A review of the information and support needs of
family carers of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease." Journal of Clinical Nursing
18.4 (2009): 479-491. Wiley Online Library. Web. 16 Feb. 2013
Choi, J., Miyashita, M., Hirai, K. et al. Support Care Cancer (2010) 18:
1445. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-009-0767-3

Clemmer, S. J., Ward-Griffin, C., & Forbes, D. (2008). Family members providing home-based palliative
care to older adults: the enactment of multiple roles. Canadian Journal on Aging/La Revue
Canadienne Du Vieillissement, 27(3), 267-283.
Colaizzi, P. (1978), Psychological Research as a Phenomenologist Views it, in Valle, R. and King, M.
(Eds), Existential Phenomenological Alternatives for Psychology, Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.
Coristine, M., Crooks, D., Grunfeld, E., Stonebridge, C., & Christie, A. (2003). Caregiving for women
with advanced breast cancer. Psycho‐Oncology: Journal of the Psychological, Social and
Behavioral Dimensions of Cancer, 12(7), 709-719.
Department of Health. End of Life Care Strategy . London: Department of Health, 2008.
Donovan, R., Williams, A., Stajduhar, K., Brazil, K., & Marshall, D. (2011). The influence of culture on
home-based family caregiving at end-of-life: A case study of Dutch reformed family care givers in
Ontario, Canada. Social Science & Medicine, 72(3), 338-346.
Doorenbos, A. Z., Perrin, M. E., Eaton, L., Abaquin, C., Balabagno, A. O., Rue, T., & Ramos, R. (2011).
Supporting dignified dying in the Philippines. International journal of palliative nursing, 17(3),
125-130.
Dowling, M. (2007). From Husserl to van Manen. A review of different phenomenological approaches.
International journal of nursing studies, 44(1), 131-142.
Dumont, S., Turgeon, J., Allard, P., Gagnon, P., Charbonneau, C., & Vézina, L. (2006). Caring for a
loved one with advanced cancer: determinants of psychological distress in family
caregivers. Journal of Palliative Medicine, 9(4), 912-921.
Ewing, G., Grande, G., & National Association for Hospice at Home. (2013). Development of
a Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) for end-of-life care practice at home: a
qualitative study. Palliative Medicine, 27(3), 244-256.
Family Caregiving Alliance. (2006). Caregiving. [http://www. caregiving.org/caregiver].
Foster, M. and Chaboyer, W. (2003), Family carers of ICU survivors: A survey of the burden they
experience. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences, 17: 205–214. doi:10.1046/j.14716712.2003.00230.x
Funk, L., Stajduhar, K. I., Toye, C., Aoun, S., Grande, G. E., & Todd, C. J. (2010). Part 2: Home-based
family caregiving at the end of life: a comprehensive review of published qualitative research
(1998-2008). Palliative medicine, 24(6), 594-607.
Gardiner, C., Brereton, L., Frey, R., Wilkinson-Meyers, L., & Gott, M. (2014). Exploring the financial
impact of caring for family members receiving palliative and end-of-life care: a systematic review
of the literature. Palliative medicine, 28(5), 375-390.
Gaugler, JE, Hanna, N, Liner, J, Given, CW, Tolbert, V, Kataria R, et al. Cancercaregiving and subjective
stress: a multi-site, multi-dimensional analysis. Pscychoonlcology 2005; 14: 771 – 785
Giles, S., & Miyasaki, J. (2009). Palliative stage Parkinson’s disease: patient and family experiences of
health-care services. Palliative Medicine, 23(2), 120-125.
Goldstein, N. E., Concato, J., Fried, T. R., & Kasl, S. V. (2004). Factors associated with caregiver burden
among caregivers of terminally ill patients with cancer. Journal of palliative care, 20(1), 38.
Gomes, B, Higginson, I. Factors influencing death at home in terminally ill patients with cancer:
systematic. BMJ 2006; 332: 515 – 521.
Gordon, Marshall. "informal care." A Dictionary of Sociology. 1998. Retrieved March 19, 2013 from
Encyclopedia.com: http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1O88-informalcare.html
Gott M, Seymour J, Bellamy G, Clark D, Ahmedzal S. Older people’ss views about home as a place of
care at the end of life. Palliat Med 2004; 18: 460 - 467
Grande, G., Stajduhar, K., Aoun, S., Toye, C., Funk, L., Addington-Hall, J., Payne, S., & Todd, C.
(2009). Supporting lay carers in end of life care: current gaps and future priorities. Palliative
Medicine, 23(4), 339-344.

Grande, GE, Ewing, G. Death at home unlikely if informal carers prefer otherwise: implications for
policy. Palliat Med 2008; 22: 971 - 972
Grbich, C., Parker, D., & Maddocks, I. (2001). The emotions and coping strategies of caregivers of family
mambers with a terminal cancer. Journal of Palliative care, 17(1), 30.
Guada, J., Land, H., & Han, J. (2011). An exploratory factor analysis of the burden assessment scale with
a sample of African-American families. Community mental health journal, 47(2), 233-242.
Gysels, Marjolein, and Irene Higginson. "Caring for a person in advanced illness and suffering from
breathlessness at home: Threats and resources." Cambridge Journals Online 7.02 (2009): 153-162.
Cambridge Journals Online. Web. 17 Feb. 2013
Haley, W. E., LaMonde, L. A., Han, B., Burton, A. M., & Schonwetter, R. (2003). Predictors of
depression and life satisfaction among spousal caregivers in hospice: application of a stress process
model. Journal of palliative medicine, 6(2), 215-224.
Hanson, L. C., Dobbs, D., Usher, B. M., Williams, S., Rawlings, J., & Daaleman, T. P. (2008). Providers
and types of spiritual care during serious illness. Journal of palliative medicine, 11(6), 907-914.
Harding, R., & Higginson, I. J. (2003). What is the best way to help caregivers in cancer and palliative
care? A systematic literature review of interventions and their effectiveness. Palliative
medicine, 17(1), 63-74.
Harding, R., Epiphaniou, E., Hamilton, D. et al. Support Care Cancer (2012) 20:
1975. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-011-1300-z
Harding, R., List, S., Epiphaniou, E., & Jones, H. (2012). How can informal caregivers in cancer and
palliative care be supported? An updated systematic literature review of interventions and their
effectiveness. Palliative medicine, 26(1), 7-22.
Harrop, E., Byrne, A., & Nelson, A. (2014). “It’s alright to ask for help”: findings from a qualitative study
exploring the information and support needs of family carers at the end of life. BMC palliative
care, 13(1), 22.
Hasson, F., Spence, A., Waldron, M., Kernohan, G., McLaughlin, D., Watson, B., & Cochrane, B. (2009).
Experiences and needs of bereaved carers during palliative and end-of-life care for people with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Journal of palliative care, 25(3), 157.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. New York: Harper. (Original work published 1927)
Help the Hospices (London, 2009. Identifying carers’ needs in the palliative setting: guidance for
professionals
Higginson I.J. & Sen-Gupta G.J.A. (2000) Place of care in advanced cancer: a qualitative systematic
literature review of patient preferences. Journal of Palliative Medicine 3, 287–300.
Hudson, P. (2004). Positive aspects and challenges associated with caring for a dying relative at
home. International journal of palliative nursing, 10(2), 58-65.
Hudson, P. L. (2006). How well do family caregivers cope after caring for a relative with advanced
disease and how can health professionals enhance their support?. Journal of Palliative
Medicine, 9(3), 694-703.
Hudson, P. L., Aranda, S., & Kristjanson, L. J. (2004). Meeting the supportive needs of family caregivers
in palliative care: challenges for health professionals. Journal of palliative medicine, 7(1), 19-25.
Hudson, P. L., Thomas, K., Trauer, T., Remedios, C., & Clarke, D. (2011). Psychological and social
profile of family caregivers on commencement of palliative care. Journal of pain and symptom
management, 41(3), 522-534.
Hudson, P. Positive aspects and challenges associated with caring for a dying relative at
home. Int J Palliat Nurs 2004; 10:58-65
Hudson, P., Quinn, K., Kristjanson, L., Thomas, T., Braithwaite, M., Fisher, J., & Cockayne, M. (2008).
Evaluation of a psycho-educational group programme for family caregivers in home-based
palliative care. Palliative Medicine, 22(3), 270-280.
Iqbal, J., Francis, L., Reid, J., Murray, S., & Denvir, M. (2010). Quality of life in patients with chronic
heart failure and their carers: a 3‐year follow‐up study assessing hospitalization and
mortality. European journal of heart failure, 12(9), 1002-1008.

Jack, B., & O'Brien, M. (2010). Dying at home: community nurses' views on the impact of informal
carers on cancer patients' place of death. European journal of cancer care, 19(5), 636-642
Jo S, Brazil K, Lohfeld L, Willison K. Caregiving at the end of life: perspectives from spousal caregivers
and care recipients. Palliat SupportCare. 2007;5:11Y17.
Kalnins, I. (2006). Caring for the terminally ill: experiences of Latvian family caregivers. International
Nursing Review, 53(2), 129-135.
Kaufman, A. V., Kosberg, J. I., Leeper, J. D., & Tang, M. (2010). Social support, caregiver burden, and
life satisfaction in a sample of rural African American and White caregivers of older persons with
dementia. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 53(3), 251-269.
Kim, Y., & Given, B. A. (2008). Quality of life of family caregivers of cancer survivors: across the
trajectory of the illness. Cancer, 112(S11), 2556-2568.
Kim, Y., Schulz, R., & Carver, C. S. (2007). Benefit finding in the cancer caregiving experience.
Psychosomatic medicine, 69(3), 283-291.
Kotronoulas, G., Wengstrom, Y., & Kearney, N. (2012). Informal carers: a focus on the real caregivers of
people with cancer. In Forum Clin Oncol (Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 58-65).
Krau, S. D. (2016). The Difference Between Palliative Care and End of Life Care: More than
Semantics. Nursing Clinics, 51(3), ix-x.
Lai, D., & Thomson, C. (2011). The impact of perceived adequacy of social support on caregiving
burden of family caregivers. Families in Society: The Journal of Contemporary Social
Services, 92(1), 99-106.
Leininger, M. M. (1991). Culture care diversity and universality: A theory of nursing. In George, J.
(Ed.). Nursing theories: the base for professional nursing practice. Norwalk, Connecticut: Appleton
& Lange.
Leonard, V. W. (1989). A Heideggerian phenomenologic perspective on the concept of the person.
Advances in Nursing Science, 11(4), 40-55.
Linderholm, M., & Friedrichsen, M. (2010). A desire to be seen: Family caregivers' experiences of their
caring role in palliative home care. Cancer nursing, 33(1), 28-36.
Lopez, K. A., & Willis, D. G. (2004). Descriptive versus interpretive phenomenology: Their contributions
to nursing knowledge. Qualitative health research, 14(5), 726-735.
Lynch, T., Connor, S., & Clark, D. (2013). Mapping levels of palliative care development: a global
update. Journal of pain and symptom management, 45(6), 1094-1106.
Manalo, M. F. C. (2013). end-of-Life Decisions about Withholding or Withdrawing Therapy: Medical,
ethical, and Religio-cultural considerations. Palliative Care: Research and Treatment, 7, PCRTS10796.
Manalo, M. F. C. (2017, April). End-of-Life Care. Health and Lifestyle. Retrieved from
http://www.healthandlifestyle.com.ph/end-of-life-care/
McGuire, D. B., Grant, M., & Park, J. (2012). Palliative care and end of life: The caregiver. Nursing
outlook, 60(6), 351-356.
McLaughlin, D., Hasson, F., Kernohan, W. G., Waldron, M., McLaughlin, M., Cochrane, B., &
Chambers, H. (2011). C. Palliative Medicine, 25(2), 177-182.
Mok, E., Chan, F., Chan, V., & Yeung, E. (2003). Family experience caring for terminally ill patients
with cancer in Hong Kong. Cancer nursing, 26(4), 267-275.
Nambayan, A., & Lu, H. (2015-01). Palliative care in the Philippines. In (Ed.), Oxford Textbook of
Palliative Nursing. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,. Retrieved 19 Dec. 2018, from
http://oxfordmedicine.com/view/10.1093/med/9780199332342.001.0001/med-9780199332342chapter-81.
Nielsen, M. K., Neergaard, M. A., Jensen, A. B., Bro, F., & Guldin, M. B. (2016). Psychological distress,
health, and socio-economic factors in caregivers of terminally ill patients: a nationwide populationbased cohort study. Supportive Care in Cancer, 24(7), 3057-3067.

Nijboer, C., Triemstra, M., Tempelaar, R., Sanderman, R., & van den Bos, G. A. (1999). Determinants of
caregiving experiences and mental health of partners of cancer patients. Cancer, 86(4), 577-588.
Northouse, L. L., Mood, D., Templin, T., Mellon, S., & George, T. (2000). Couples' patterns of
adjustment to colon cancer. Social science & medicine, 50(2), 271-284.
Northouse, L., Williams, A. L., Given, B., & McCorkle, R. (2012). Psychosocial care for family
caregivers of patients with cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 30(11), 1227-1234.
OECD
(2012), The
Future
of
families
to
2030,
OECD
Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264168367-en
O'Hara, R. E., Hull, J. G., Lyons, K. D., Bakitas, M., Hegel, M. T., Li, Z., & Ahles, T. A. (2010). Impact
on caregiver burden of a patient-focused palliative care intervention for patients with advanced
cancer. Palliative & supportive care, 8(4), 395-404.
O'Hara, R. E., Hull, J. G., Lyons, K. D., Bakitas, M., Hegel, M. T., Li, Z., & Ahles, T. A. (2010). Impact
on caregiver burden of a patient-focused palliative care intervention for patients with advanced
cancer. Palliative & supportive care, 8(4), 395-404.
Park, S. M., Kim, Y. J., Kim, S., Choi, J. S., Lim, H. Y., Choi, Y. S., ... & Jeong, H. S. (2010). Impact of
caregivers’ unmet needs for supportive care on quality of terminal cancer care delivered and
caregiver’s workforce performance. Supportive Care in Cancer, 18(6), 699-706.
Payne S, Smith P and Dean S. Identifying the concerns of informal carers in palliative care. Palliat Med
1999; 13: 37–44.
Payne, S., Chan, N., Davies, A., Poon, E., Connor, S., & Goh, C. (2012). Supportive, palliative, and endof-life care for patients with cancer in Asia: resource-stratified guidelines from the Asian Oncology
Summit 2012. The lancet oncology, 13(11), e492-e500.
Polit, D. and Beck, C. (2008). Nursing Research: Generating and Assessing Evidence for Nursing
Practice. (8th Ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincot, Williams and Wilkins.
Polit, D., & Beck, C. T. (2004). Designing Quantitative Studies. In Nursing Research: Principles and
Methods (7th ed., pp. 195-196). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Proot IM, Abu - Saad HH, Crebolder HFJM, Goldsteen M, Luker KA, Widdershoven GAM. Vulnerability
of family caregivers in terminal palliative care at home: balancing between burden and
capacity. Scand J Caring Sci. 2003;17:113Y121.
Rando, T. A. (1988). Anticipatory grief: The term is a misnomer but the phenomenon exists. Journal of
Palliative Care.
Robinson, C. A., Pesut, B., & Bottorff, J. L. (2012). Supporting rural family palliative caregivers. Journal
of Family Nursing, 18(4), 467-490.
Saleh, F., & O’Neill, C. S. (2018). The experiences of caregivers providing home care for terminally ill
family members at the end of life: A phenomenological study in Bahrain. Clinical Nursing
Studies, 6(3), 57.
Seal, K., Murray, C. D., & Seddon, L. (2015). The experience of being an informal “carer” for a person
with cancer: A meta-synthesis of qualitative studies. Palliative & supportive care, 13(3), 493-504.
Smith, D. E. (1987).The everyday world as problematic: A feminist sociology. Boston:
Northwestern University Press
Smith, P. (2009). The family caregivers journey in end of life care: Recognizing and identifying with the
role of carer. International Journal on Disability and Human Development, 8(1), 67-74.
Soothill K, Morris SM, Harman JC, et al. Informal carers of cancer patients: what are their unmet
psychosocial needs? Health Soc Care Community 2001; 9: 464–475.
Soothill, K, S Morris, J Harman, B Francis, C. Thomas, and M McMurray. "Informal carers of cancer
patients: what are their unmet psychosocial needs?." Health and Social Care in the Community 9.6
(2001): 464-475.
Speziale, H. and Carpenter, D. (2007). Qualitative Research in Nursing: Advancing The Humanistic
Imperative. (4th Ed.). New York: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Stajduhar, K. I., Funk, L., & Outcalt, L. (2013). Family caregiver learning—how family caregivers learn
to provide care at the end of life: a qualitative secondary analysis of four datasets. Palliative
medicine, 27(7), 657-664.
Stajduhar, KI, Davies, B. Variations in and factors influencing family member’s decision for palliative
home care. Palliat Med 2005; 19:21-32
Stenberg U, Ruland CM and Miaskowski C. Review of the literature on the effects of caring for a patient
with cancer. Psychooncology 2010; 19: 1013–1025.
Streubert, H., & Carpenter, D. (2011). Qualitative Research in Nursing: Advancing the Humanistic
Imperative (5th ed.). Philadelphia, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Supportive and Palliative Care. (n.d.). Department of Health, Social Services, and Public Safety.
Retrieved
November
18,
2012,
from www.dhsspsni.gov.uk/rsf__supportive_and_palliative_care.pdf
Talbot, L. A. (1995). The Qualitative Research Process. In Principles and Practice of Nursing Research
(pp. 463-489). Missouri: Mosby.
Tallman, K, R Greenwald, A Reidenouer, and L Pantel. "Living With Advanced Illness: Longitudinal
Study of Patient, Family, and Caregiver Needs." The Permanente Journal 16 (3) (2012): 28-35.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Web. 16 Feb. 2013.
Taylor, B., Kamock, S., Roberts, K. (2007). Research in Nursing and Health Care: Evidence For Practice.
(3rd Ed.). Victoria: Thomson.
Varona, R., Saito, T., Takahashi, M., & Kai, I. (2007). Caregiving in the Philippines: A quantitative
survey on adult-child caregivers’ perceptions of burden, stressors, and social support. Archives of
Gerontology and Geriatrics, 45(1), 27-41.
Watson J. Nursing: the philosophy and science of caring. Boston (USA): Little Brown; 1979. Boulder
(Colorado/USA): Colorado Associated University Press; reprinted 1985.
WHO
(2003)
WHO
–
definition
of
palliative
care.
World
Health
Organization. http://www.who.int//cancer/palliative/definition/en
Wong, W. T., & Ussher, J. (2009). Bereaved informal cancer carers making sense of their palliative care
experiences at home. Health & social care in the community, 17(3), 274-282.
Yin T, Zhou Q & Bashford C (2002) Burden on family members. Caring for elderly: a meta- analysis of
interventions. Nursing Research 3, 199–208.
Zapart, S., Kenny, P., Hall, J., Servis, B., & Wiley, S. (2007). Home‐based palliative care in Sydney,
Australia: the carer's perspective on the provision of informal care. Health & social care in the
community, 15(2), 97-107.

