Transitional Temporality

Daniel Hirschman
Brown University
daniel_hirschman@brown.edu

Forthcoming in Sociological Theory.

Abstract:
Sewell (1996) identified three temporalities which underlie many social scientific accounts. This
paper identifies a fourth: transitional temporality. This approach is inspired by Polanyi's (1944)
comparative analysis of the rate of change of economic transformation surrounding the respective
commodification of land and labor. Following Polanyi, transitional temporality focuses not on the
endpoints of social transformation (as in teleological approaches), nor on moments of
transformation (as in eventful approaches), but on the potentially lengthy transitions between
structures. While eventful temporality equates agency with the choices made by individuals during
relatively rare events, transitional temporality identifies the capacity for agents to alter the rate of
change and, in so doing, to prevent or bring about events. This approach recovers Polanyi's oftignored analysis of the state's role in modulating the rate of change and foregrounds the social
costs of disruption and dislocation resulting from abrupt transitions.

Acknowledgments:
I thank Tony Chen, Matt Desan, Camilo Leslie, and Isaac Reed for insightful commentary on
previous versions of this manuscript.

1

Introduction
It is perhaps only a slight exaggeration to say that William Sewell’s 1996 essay “Three
Temporalities” is the most important agenda-setting piece in historical sociology. While earlier
eras of historical sociology were characterized in part by their attention to particular kinds of
historical events - especially revolutions and state formation (Clemens 2007) - after Sewell,
historical sociology came to be identified with a particular understanding of time. Simply put, good
historical sociology is eventful (Clemens 2015). Sewell defined his eventful approach in contrast
with two earlier, and quite widespread, understandings of temporality: teleological and
experimental.
In this short article, I revisit Sewell’s foundational essay and identify a fourth potential
approach to time that I call transitional temporality. Transitional temporality is concerned with
how fast societies move from one set of structures to another. The two motivating questions for
transitional temporality studies are: why did a transition occur as fast (or as slow) as it did? And
what are the consequences of a given transition occurring through a fast vs. slow process? Research
employing transitional temporality may or may not espouse a strong deterministic stance towards
the eventual outcome, but either way, this research provisionally brackets the question of why a
particular new set of structures came to dominate in order to investigate the speed and process of
transition. This emphasis on speed and process contrasts with teleological temporality; transitional
temporality takes seriously the rate of change, and treats the rate of change as itself the outcome
of agentic contestation. While eventful temporality equates agency with the choices made by
individuals during relatively rare events, transitional temporality identifies the capacity for agents
to alter the rate of change between events, and even to prevent or bring about events by speeding
up or slowing down transitions. For scholars pursuing research under the banner of transitional

2

temporality, the journey thus remains important even if the destination is unchanged.
My interest in transitional temporality comes out of my experience reading, citing, and
teaching Karl Polanyi’s (2001 [1944]) The Great Transformation. Interest in Polanyi has increased
in the past 15 years, including publication of major secondary works (Dale 2010) and the rise of
a school of Polanyian economic sociology (see Krippner and Alvarez 2007) following three
decades of groundwork laid by Fred Block and Margaret Somers (compiled in Block and Somers
2014). Polanyi’s work has inspired new approaches to understanding the politics of the welfare
state, the role of finance, and the return of market fundamentalism. Despite this resurgence of
interest Polanyi’s work, and especially in The Great Transformation, Polanyi’s own understanding
of temporality has not been explored. Polanyi, I will argue, did not adopt an eventful approach - at
least not entirely. Rather, I will show that Polanyi analyzed history, in part, through the lens of
transitional temporality.
To make this point, I focus on Polanyi’s comparison of the 150 year process of enclosure versus
the quick process of Poor Law Reform. Polanyi argues that both processes were, in a particular
sense discussed further below, determined by larger economic and technological forces. Yet
Polanyi also argues that the two processes played out quite differently because of how powerful
actors reacted to that inevitability. Polanyi argues that the enclosure movement could have been
destructive to the fabric of society but, due to the actions of the state, the process of enclosure was
slowed down enough to permit society to adapt. In contrast, the transition from Speenhamland to
the New Poor Law was frighteningly quick and workers did not have time to adapt to the new
regime.
Without taking a strong stance on the historical accuracy of Polanyi's interpretation of
enclosures and poor laws, I conclude by arguing that Polanyi’s emphasis on the rate of change

3

would be worth revisiting in the light of modern struggles over technological change and
environmental catastrophe. Much as Schumpeter (1942) both lauded and condemned large
corporations for simultaneously producing the “perennial gales of creative destruction” and for
protecting individuals from those gales by providing stable shelters, Polanyi’s understanding of
the temporality of social change reminds us to keep an eye on how fast such transformations occur
and especially whether or not large scale transformation happens much faster than an individual’s
lifespan - and society’s collective capacity to adapt.
Sewell’s Three Temporalities
In this section, I briefly revisit Sewell’s analysis of experimental, teleological, and eventful
temporalities. I show how Sewell argues that the first two approaches obscure the possibility of,
respectively, significant historical transformations and the role of agents in producing such
changes, and theorizes eventful temporality as an alternative that emphasizes these two
possibilities. I then identify a fourth temporality which similarly acknowledges both historical
transformation and the role of agency, but which emphasizes agency between rather than during
events. In each case, I follow Sewell's example in presenting an "un-nuanced" (cf. Healy 2017)
reading of theorists whose work exemplify these temporalities. These un-nuanced readings are at
times uncharitable, and do not do justice to the full richness of each author's historical explanations.
Rather, I aim to draw out the underlying logic of part of each argument to illustrate the associated
approach to temporality.
Experimental Temporality
Experimental temporality involves treating the past as outcomes of a (mostly) unchanging
process whose features we are determined to uncover by making inferences from observed data

4

understood as akin to a random sample.1 This metaphor is not perfect; even historical sociology in
the experimental temporality mode tends to pay at least some attention to process and mechanisms.
But, as Sewell (1996: 258) shows in his analysis of Theda Skocpol’s (1979) States and Social
Revolutions, the deep logic roughly follows this approach. Sewell argues that Skocpol’s attempt
to hew closely to Mills’ method for comparing cases leads her to ignore, among other things, how
revolutions interact over time, how the fact of the French Revolution changes the discourses and
possibilities for the Russian Revolution which in turn influences the Chinese Revolution and so
on. For Skocpol, at least in her most programmatic mode, each case is separate, and helps to
illustrate the necessary and sufficient features of social revolution, which is itself imagined as a
stable sort of process that sometimes happens when the right features happen to line up.
For Sewell, then, experimental temporality rests on several, interrelated, faulty assumptions:
that different moments in history are equivalent, that these moments are independent, and that
there is a “a uniformity of causal laws across time and a causal independence of every sequence
of occurrences from previous and subsequent occurrences” (Sewell 1996: 262). Experimental
temporality therefore involves an assumption that structures are fundamentally ahistorical, that the
“causal laws” governing the possibility of, say “social revolutions” are fixed and unchanging. This
presumption of the fixity of causal laws also effectively eliminates the possibility of any version
of agency defined by the capacity of actors to "significantly reconfigure the very structures that
constituted them" (Sewell 1992: 5).
Teleological Temporality
In some ways, teleological temporality is the polar opposite of experimental temporality. While
experimental temporality assumes that the structures underlying the world (the data generating

1

I thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting more precise language here.

5

processes) are fixed, teleological temporality assumes not only that these structures change, but
they are progressing (or occasionally regressing) towards some fixed endpoint. Change is not only
possible but inevitable.
Sewell argues that much of the classical sociological canon exhibits elements of teleological
thinking, from Durkheim to Tonnies to, perhaps most prominently, Marx. While a nuanced reading
of Marx's larger body of work showcases the complexities of his understanding of technological
and economic determinism (e.g. MacKenzie 1984), strong teleological claims do appear
prominently in some of his most iconic writings, especially The Communist Manifesto.2 Capitalism
follows Feudalism, and works according to a very different logic. In turn, Socialism will follow
Capitalism. The Revolution is coming, and once it occurs, the entire system will work differently.
The structures of capitalism will fall by the wayside, replaced by a new set of structures.
Mid-20th century historical sociology was rarely quite so deterministic as this simplified
reading of Marx, but Sewell argues that teleological temporality does enter into projects as distinct
as Immanuel Wallerstein’s (1974) World-Systems Analysis and Charles Tilly’s work on the
French Revolution (e.g. Tilly 1964). For example, Sewell argues that Wallerstein reads history
backwards: arguing from the end state of capitalism back to what must have happened at the
founding moment/collapse of feudalism. And in particular, although Wallerstein’s account is “full
of contingencies” in the specifics, “in Wallerstein's analysis, the contingencies, choices, and
consequences are foreordained by the necessity” built into the system from the beginning that
made it possible for capitalism to emerge (Sewell 1996: 250). The contingencies are irrelevant.

2

MacKenzie (1984: 474) distinguishes a strong and a weak form of technological determinism and argues that Marx
exhibits the first but not the second. Specifically, MacKenzie reads Marx as arguing for the claim that "machines
make history" but not for "the autonomy of technical change." This position is quite similar to the one I will argue
characterizes Polanyi's understanding of determinism, and thus the inspiration for transitional temporality. I thank an
anonymous reviewer for this connection.

6

More generally, the whole notion of “modernity” tends to lead us to think teleologically. Some
aspects of the world are throwbacks, holdovers, or fetters; others are progressive, forward-looking,
on the path towards the next thing (for better or for worse). The same problems occur in the
sociology of race; Seamster and Ray (2018) show how the assumption of racial progress underlies
most contemporary research in the sociology of race, often leading to a misreading of evidence
about the extent to which racial inequality persists or even deepens.
In sum, teleological temporality errs by assuming too fixed an endpoint for history, and thus
reads history through the lens of a perceived inevitable finale, much as demographers “read history
sideways” (Thornton 2001) when they treat poor countries as if they were inevitably going to
follow the path that rich countries took with just a few centuries' delay. While experimental
temporality assumes that contingencies are irrelevant because the causal structure of history is
unchanging, teleological temporality assumes that contingencies are irrelevant because
transformations in those causal structures are pre-ordained. And thus while experimental
temporality rules out agency by virtue of the lack of change, teleological temporality rules out
agency on account of the predetermined character of the important changes. Without meaningful
contingencies, there's simply nothing for agents to be agentic about.

Eventful Temporality
The final mode that Sewell elaborates is eventful temporality. This mode elaborates on prior
work emphasizing the importance of theorizing events, and especially the possibility for eventful
historical accounts to overcome tensions between action and structure (Abrams 1983: 192).
Sewell’s definition is worth quoting at length:
Eventful temporality recognizes the power of events in history. Social life may be
conceptualized as being composed of countless happenings or encounters in which

7

persons and groups of persons engage in social action. Their actions are constrained
and enabled by the constitutive structures of their societies. Most happenings
reproduce social and cultural structures without significant changes... Events may
be defined as that relatively rare subclass of happenings that significantly transform
structures. An eventful conception of temporality, therefore, is one that takes into
account the transformation of structures by events. (Sewell 1996: 262)
Sewell contrasts eventful temporality with both experimental and teleological temporality.
While experimental temporality emphasizes uniformity of causal laws and independence of events,
eventful temporality focuses on the heterogeneity of causal laws (things work differently at
different points in time) and interdependence (events at time two are partly a function of what
happens at time one). Similarly, while teleological temporality denies the importance of
contingency and assumes a fixed endpoint, eventful temporality allows for radical contingency.
In a teleological mode, no individual decision can alter the course of history; in eventful
temporality, it very much can, if the decision happens to be made during an event. Sewell’s (1996b)
own analysis of the storming of the Bastille in the French Revolution is probably the most famous
“eventful” argument. In this account, while structural forces may have partially determined that a
revolution of some sort would occur, the particular, contingent choices made during important
events shaped exactly what the revolution would mean, and how it would transform the structures
of French society. During an event, the rules of the game are up for grabs. Agency happens during
events – the particular, contingent decisions actors make establish new rules of the game for the
next period of relative stability. Contingency and agency go hand in hand.
This model has come under significant criticism (e.g. Steinmetz 2008, Martin 2018). Here, I
focus on just two questions that the model leaves unaddressed: why do events happen when they
do? And what might agency look like between events? Answering these questions points to a fourth
potential approach to time: transitional temporality. Here, I turn to the work of Karl Polanyi for
inspiration.

8

Polanyi and Transitional Temporality
I argue that Karl Polanyi’s Great Transformation offers an intertwined pair of answers to the
question of the timing of events and the character of agency between events. Polanyi’s comparative
analysis of the enclosure movement and Poor Law reform illustrates what I will call transitional
temporality. Like teleological temporality, transitional temporality assumes a fixed outcome to
some process of historical change. Unlike teleological temporality, this outcome need not be
toward some ultimate or final end, but may instead take the form of the unfolding of some local
process which was in turn set in place by some prior contingent process. In other words, transitional
temporality is at least roughly compatible with eventful temporality, but it focuses on the periods
between events rather than the events themselves.3 Polanyi’s version particularly emphasized how
the rise of large-scale machinery called forth particular changes; in this sense, Polanyi offers at
least a weak form of technological determinism in which "machines make history" (MacKenzie
1984: 474). Yet Polanyi also embraces contingency and agency. Polanyi resolves this
contradiction by focusing on how actors can affect the rate of change and in so doing potentially
bring about or prevent events, in Sewell's sense.
To make this case, I will focus especially on Polanyi’s (largely ignored) analysis of the
enclosure movement. I should note that I am not arguing that Polanyi’s analysis of this movement
is correct - I am not a historian of early modern England, and do not wade into the extensive
secondary literature on this period (see Christophers 2018 for a recent review). Rather, my point

3

In the postscript to the 2005 reprint of "Three Temporalities", Sewell (2005) himself notes that his original
argument failed to sufficiently showcase how eventful temporality handles questions of directionality and
macrohistorical dynamics. As a first step in addressing these questions, he offers a reading of Mann's work on the
emergence of civilization as an eventful alternative to Wallerstein, one combines an emphasis on contingency and
eventfulness in initial conditions with directed tendencies, e.g. "for power resources to increase" (Sewell 2005: 123).
In this sense, then, my argument is intended as more of an extension and less of a critique of Sewell, one that
highlights different forms of contingency and agency and draws out certain possibilities from meshing together a
version of directionality in social history with Sewell's attention to agency. I thank a reviewer for this point.

9

here is to unpack the logic of the argument, and in so doing, hopefully recover something of use
no matter what we make of Polanyi’s empirics. Similarly, I am not arguing that Polanyi exclusively
employs a transitional temporality approach, but rather that this approach best characterizes his
historical account of enclosure and his comparison between enclosure and Poor Law reform.
Very briefly, Polanyi argues that the 19th century saw the rise of a “market system”, including
an intendedly (but not actually) self-regulating economic sphere where action was motivated by
hunger and gain. Polanyi shows that such a self-regulating sphere was novel and utopian (Block
and Somers 2014). This market system required that all major factors of production be
commodities, that is, be produced for sale on the market, and thus capable of being regulated by
the market system itself. Paradoxically, the three most important factors of production - land, labor,
and money - were not produced for sale on the market and they were thus, at best, fictitious
commodities. Polanyi argues that the attempt to let the market regulate all three eventually led to
the collapse of the 19th century market system in the early to mid-20th century. Although the Gold
Standard (and more broadly, finance) plays a central role in this narrative of collapse, Polanyi
spends most of his historical discussion on the enclosure movement (which tried to commodify
land) and Poor Law reform (which tried to commodify labor).
Polanyi argues that both enclosure and Poor Law reform were, in some sense, inevitable.
Polanyi's argument reads similarly to MacKenzie's (1984) interpretation of Marx as a kind of soft
technological determinist, one who emphasized how technology can transform social relations
without necessarily arguing that technology itself developed autonomously from social forces.
Specifically, Polanyi argued that machinery required a market system, and the market system in
turn required commodities:
Since elaborate machines are expensive, they do not pay unless large amounts of
goods are produced. They can be worked without a loss only if the vent of the goods
10

is reasonably assured and if production need not be interrupted for want of the
primary goods necessary to feed the machines. For the merchant this means that all
factors involved must be on sale, that is, they must be available in the needed
quantities to anybody who is prepared to pay for them. (Polanyi 2001: 43)
Collectively-held land and support for the unemployed were direct threats to the
commodification of land and labor and thus had to be eliminated. And yet, Polanyi argues that
only one of these movements caused society-imperiling chaos. Although the enclosure movement
involved dislocation and a change in the structure of agriculture and markets for land, the
movement played out slowly. The enclosure movement was not characterized by one or a small
number of events, but rather by a continual tug-of-war resulting in a gradual transition.
Polanyi argues that this slow rate of change allowed society to adapt to enclosures - and that,
in particular, the state played a beneficial role precisely by modulating this rate of change. Polanyi
describes how the Kings of England fought for 150 years to slow the rate of enclosure, first against
lesser nobles, and then against merchants:
The fabric of society was being disrupted; desolate villages and the ruins of human
dwellings testified to the fierceness with which the revolution raged, endangering
the defences of the country, wasting its towns, decimating its population, turning
its overburdened soil into dust, harassing its people and turning them from decent
husbandmen into a mob of beggars and thieves. Though this happened only in
patches, the black spots threatened to melt into a uniform catastrophe. The King
and his Council, the Chancellors, and the Bishops were defending the welfare of
the community and, indeed, the human and natural substance of society against this
scourge. With hardly any intermittence, for a century and a half-from the 1490s, at
the latest, to the 1640s they struggled against depopulation. (Polanyi 2001: 37)
By struggling - successfully! - to slow the rate of change, the Kings of England prevented an
event from occurring, that is, they prevented sudden and dramatic changes of the sort associated
with the repeal of the Poor Laws:
Yet, but for the consistently maintained policy of the Tudor and early Stuart
statesmen, the rate of that progress might have been ruinous… For upon this rate,
mainly, depended whether the dispossessed could adjust themselves to changed
11

conditions without fatally damaging their substance, human and economic,
physical and moral; whether they would find new employment in the fields of
opportunity indirectly connected with the change; and whether the effects of
increased imports induced by increased exports would enable those who lost their
employment through the change to find new sources of sustenance. (Polanyi 2001:
39)
In contrast, Polanyi argues that Poor Law Reform was a disaster, in part because the
transformation was so sudden:
Improvements, we said, are, as a rule, bought at the price of social dislocation. If
the rate of dislocation is too great, the community must succumb in the process.
The Tudors and early Stuarts saved England from the fate of Spain by regulating
the course of change so that it became bearable and its effects could be canalized
into less destructive avenues. But nothing saved the common people of England
from the impact of the Industrial Revolution. (Polanyi 2001: 79)
Polanyi’s analysis of the Speenhamland system - which we now believe to be quite flawed (see
Block & Somers 2003 for a loving but critical discussion) - argued that the system was unstable
and immiserating. Its repeal was thus inevitable and not wholly bad. But the way that repeal
happened was neither inevitable nor desirable. The Poor Laws were not just ended, they were
ended abruptly. And therein lay the problem: “the abruptness with which an institution of old
standing was uprooted and a radical transformation rushed into effect.” (Polanyi 2001: 86) There
was, for example, no time for workers to organize and acquire a class consciousness, to match the
organization and consciousness of the employers. The problem was not just that the market
economy required labor to be sold as if a commodity, but that the transition to it happened so
quickly because it began when the Liberal Creed (what Block and Somers [2014] call “market
fundamentalism”) had taken over, and so there were no Tudor-like rulers left to slow things down.
In sum, I see in Polanyi’s comparison of enclosures and Poor Law reform four features which
we might usefully identify as constituting the transitional temporality approach. First, history
sometimes has a direction (if not an ultimate end), and structural transformations occur as we head

12

in that direction. Second, the rate of change with which those transformations take place is not
itself inevitable. Third, the rate of change can be controlled and actively contested. Agency consists
of actions taken to speed up or slow down an ongoing transformation and in so doing may bring
about or prevent a set of occurrences perceived of as an event. Transitional temporality bears
similarities to Pierson's (2004) account of long-term processes, but while Pierson tends to assume
that some processes are inherently long-term (such as demographic trends), transitional
temporality asks precisely how and why a process become long (or short) term.4 In Polanyi's
narrative, the state played a particularly important role, slowing down enclosures into a gradual
transition while bringing about an event with the sudden elimination of the Poor Laws. Fourth, and
finally, the social consequences of those (contingent, agentic) decisions to alter the rate of change
are potentially dramatic.
Discussion & Conclusion
In the above sections, I identified a fourth mode of temporality, transitional temporality, that
offers one approach to understanding agency outside of the context of events and how that agency
may help explain the timing of events. Through a reading of Karl Polanyi’s The Great
Transformation, I identified four features of that mode: locally deterministic directionality,
contingent rate of change, the potential for agency to affect the rate of change, and the social
importance of the rate of change. For a transitional temporality approach, the relevant questions
include: How fast does change occur? What actors and institutions affect that rate of change increasing or decreasing it? How do individuals and societies grapple with that rate of change?
When does gradual change erupt into an event?
Although I derived my understanding transitional temporality from a close reading of Polanyi's

4

I thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out the relevance of Pierson's work on long-term processes.

13

historical narrative, I believe we can identify elements of this approach in a diverse range of
literatures and empirical settings which have not previously been linked together. I offer four brief
examples. First, scholars of contemporary Korea have described its historical development as
undergoing "compressed modernity" (e.g. Kyung-Sup 1999), moving through a predefined
sequence of transformations at a faster pace than comparable countries. 5 Second, we can see
similar dynamics in debates over demographic transition theory and fertility dynamics in China
following the one child policy, which transformed a predicted gradual decline in fertility into a
sharp political event (e.g. Feng 2011). Third, research on deindustrialization (understood as a
decline in manufacturing employment) showcases heterogeneity in the speed and extent of job
losses in different countries and regions, even as the fact of automation-induced declines in
employment is presumed as largely overdetermined (e.g. Rea and Hirschman 2019). Fourth, and
finally, discussions of climate change assume that a transition away from fossil fuels is inevitable,
but that the rate at which such a transition occurs is the product of intense agentic contestation
which will determine the extent and distribution of loss (Elliott 2018). Identifying shared aspects
of these conversations may suggest further elaborations of transitional temporality and, in turn,
may offer new insights into the particulars of each case.
Beyond its potential utility in analyzing other cases, there are at least three lessons we can
derive from Polanyi's particular vision of transitional temporality. First, to the extent we find
Polanyi’s account compelling, we should revisit Sewell’s (1996: 263) dismissal of “surface”
contingencies. Sewell writes:
For example, a teleological Marxian account might argue that the particular
situation in which a conflict between workers and bourgeois occurs may affect the
outcome of their struggle and may even result in a local victory for a retrograde
form of social organization, say, for handicraft over factory production. But no
5

I thank Paul Chang for this suggestion.

14

combination of such local victories can "turn back the clock" definitively. The builtin directionality of underlying causal forces guarantees that local variations are
mere surface perturbations with no long-term effect on the course of history.
(Sewell 1996: 263-264)
One of the main differences between transitional and teleological temporality lies in that word
mere. Put another way: For Polanyi and those approaching history through the lens of transitional
temporality, a social transformation that takes a century to transpire is fundamentally different
from that “same” transformation occurring in a decade. Contingencies that alter the rate of change
fundamentally alter the character of that change. Yes, at the end of the enclosure movement, land
was (partially) commodified, and sold on the market. But society had generations to adapt to that
transformation. As a result, the enclosures were not a disaster (in Polanyi's reading). In contrast,
the immediacy of Poor Law Reform yielded (again, in Polanyi's eye) immense human misery that
could have been avoided with a slower transition to commodified labor. As Polanyi himself
argued:
Why should the ultimate victory of a trend be taken as a proof of the ineffectiveness
of the efforts to slow down its progress? … That which is ineffectual in stopping a
line of development altogether is not, on that account, altogether ineffectual. The
rate of change is often of no less importance than the direction of the change itself;
but while the latter frequently does not depend upon our volition, it is the rate at
which we allow change to take place which well may depend upon us. (Polanyi
2001: 39)
Inspired by Polanyi and by MacKenzie's (1984) more nuanced reading of Marx's determinism,
it may well be worth asking if Marx himself could be reconsidered through the lens of transitional
temporality. Perhaps Marx, at least in some writings, projects the inevitability of the collapse of
capitalism. But perhaps he also believes that motivated actors – philosophers, revolutionaries –
can precisely alter that rate of change, and in so doing the lives of generations that might have
otherwise continued to suffer under capitalism.
Second, and related, transitional forms of argument are useful for thinking about the role of
15

the state and contemporary technological and ecological developments. Agency may be found
precisely in the delay of the inevitable. Historically, and perhaps in the future, the state is the most
likely candidate for that form of agency (though one could also imagine revisiting the Luddites as
a source of inspiration, see e.g. Anderson 2017). Debates surrounding the “Precautionary
Principle” (which cautions against rapidly introducing technological innovations that have the
potential to be irreversible) might be usefully understood as part of the politics of transitional
temporality. Again, back to Polanyi:
A belief in spontaneous progress must make us blind to the role of government in
economic life. This role consists often in altering the rate of change, speeding it up
or slowing it down as the case may be; if we believe that rate to be unalterable - or
even worse, if we deem it a sacrilege to interfere with it - then, of course, no room
is left for intervention. (Polanyi 2001: 39)
Finally, Polanyi offers a model for resignation matched with action that may be uniquely
valuable in our contemporary moment characterized by the omnipresence of loss (Elliott 2018).
The last chapter of The Great Transformation takes on the question of “Freedom in a Complex
Society.” Polanyi argues that we must resign ourselves to the existence of power and thus limits
to human freedom as classically construed. And yet, having resigning ourselves to power does not
mean abandoning action:
Resignation was ever the fount of man's strength and new hope. … He resigns
himself, in our time, to the reality of society which means the end of that freedom.
But, again, life springs from ultimate resignation. Uncomplaining acceptance of the
reality of society gives man indomitable courage and strength to remove all
removable injustice and unfreedom. (Polanyi 2001: 268)
I read this passage both as a narrow call for a social democracy or welfare state of the sort that
obtained in much of Europe and the United States in the mid-20th century and also as a broad
reminder that one can accept a deterministic trend and yet still fight to “remove all removable

16

injustice and unfreedom” in how that trend manifests.6 The next century will see massive climate
change, and also massive economic disruption rooted in technological change. Both of these trends
feel inevitable. But what cannot be avoided can be delayed, smoothed out, and made to serve
society over generations rather than destroying it in short bursts.
References
Abrams, Philip. 1983. Historical Sociology. Cornell University Press.
Anderson, Elizabeth. 2017. Private Government. Princeton University Press.
Block, F. and M. Somers. 2003. “In the Shadow of Speenhamland: Social Policy and the Old
Poor Law.” Politics & Society 31(2):283.
Block, Fred and Margaret R. Somers. 2014. The Power of Market Fundamentalism: Karl
Polanyi’s Critique. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Christophers, Brett. 2018. The New Enclosures. Verso.
Clemens, Elisabeth S. 2007. “Toward a Historicized Sociology: Theorizing Events,
Processes, and Emergence.” Annual Review of Sociology 33(1):527–49.
Clemens, Elisabeth S. 2015. “Organizing Powers in Eventful Times.” Social Science History
39(1):1–24.
Dale, Gareth. 2010. Karl Polanyi: The Limits of the Market. Polity.
Elliott, Rebecca. 2018. “The Sociology of Climate Change as a Sociology of Loss.”
European Journal of Sociology 59(3):301–37.
Feng, Wang. 2011. “The Future of a Demographic Overachiever: Long-Term Implications of
the Demographic Transition in China.” Population and Development Review 37:173–90.
Healy, Kieran. 2017. “Fuck Nuance.” Sociological Theory 35(2):118–27.
Krippner, Greta R. and Anthony S. Alvarez. 2007. “Embeddedness and the Intellectual
Projects of Economic Sociology.” Annual Review of Sociology 33:219.
Kyung-Sup, Chang. 1999. “Compressed Modernity and Its Discontents: South Korean
Society in Transition.” Economy and Society 28(1):30–55.
Lacher, Hannes. 2019. “Karl Polanyi, the ‘Always-Embedded Market Economy,’ and the Re6

The political implications of Polanyi's understanding of freedom and the reality of society are controversial among
scholars. For alternative readings of these passages, and the politics of the Great Transformation more generally, see
Thomasberger (2005), Block and Somers (2014), and Lacher (2019).

17

Writing of The Great Transformation.” Theory and Society.
MacKenzie, Donald. 1984. “Marx and the Machine.” Technology and Culture 25(3):473–
502.
Martin, John Levi. 2018. “Getting off the Cartesian Clothesline.” Sociological Theory
36(2):194–200.
Pierson, Paul. 2004. Politics in Time: History, Institutions, and Social Analysis. Princeton
University Press.
Polanyi, Karl. 2001 [1944]. The Great Transformation. Beacon Press.
Rea, Christopher and Daniel Hirschman. 2019. "Manufacturing Deindustrialization: The
Origins of a Public Idea and Stylized Fact in the United States, 1974-2016." Paper presented at
the Annual Meeting of the Social Science History Association, Chicago.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper and
Brothers Publishers.
Seamster, Louise and Victor Ray. 2018. “Against Teleology in the Study of Race: Toward
the Abolition of the Progress Paradigm.” Sociological Theory 36(4):315–42.
Sewell, William H. 1996. “Three Temporalities: Toward an Eventful Sociology.” In The
Historic Turn in the Human Sciences 245–80.
Sewell, William H. 1996b. “Historical Events as Transformations of Structures: Inventing
Revolution at the Bastille.” Theory and Society 25(6):841–881.
Sewell, William. 2005. The Logics of History. University of Chicago.
Skocpol, Theda. 1979. States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France,
Russia and China. Cambridge University Press.
Steinmetz, George. 2008. “Logics of History as a Framework for an Integrated Social
Science.” Social Science History 32(4):535–53.
Thomasberger, Claus. 2005. “Human Freedom and the ‘Reality of Society’: Origins and
Development of Karl Polanyi’s Ideas during the Interwar Period.” The History of Economic
Thought 47:1–14.
Thornton, Arland. 2001. “The Developmental Paradigm, Reading History Sideways, and
Family Change.” Demography 38(4):449–465.
Tilly, Charles. 1964. The Vendee. Harvard University.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1974. The Modern World System: Capitalist Agriculture and the
Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century. New York: Academic Press.

18

