"x"
"1" "Factors influencing low  prevalence of neurodevelopm ental disabilities among Hispanic/Latino  children"
"2" "Sarah Garcia, MPH"
"3" "Jennifer Hall- Lande , PhD"
"4" "Kelly Nye- Lengerman , PhD"
"5" "University of Minnesota"
"6" "Abstract"
"7" "Objectives.   Hispanic/Latino   children have substantially lower prevalence of neurodevelopmental disabilities than other groups   (Boyle et al., 2011; Froehlich et al., 2007; Pedersen et al., 2012) .  The  explanation for variations in prevalence   are  complex, but are generally thought to be related to language barriers and lack of access to and utilizati on of healthcare services.  Previous research focused on how language barriers and lack of access to and utilization of healthcare services affects children with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD), but no research has examined whether these factors predict NDD.  T his study extends  prior  research  by   examining  if   social and environmental factors  explain low preval ence of NDD in this population."
"8" "Methods.   This  study  uses  nationally representative  Integrated Public Use Microdata Series National Health Interview Survey  data  and  multivariate analyses  to compare NDD prevalence in whites and  Hispanics/Latinos  and exa mines whether healthcare access, healthcare utilization,  language barriers , and  length of time living in the U nited States  (U.S.)   explain s   this  disability disparity."
"9" "Results.   F ind ings reveal  that  the  H/L  NDD disparity is not explained by differences in access to or utilization of healthcare ,  or as a result of spoken language differences that may create barriers to NDD diagnosis.  However,  while  H/L s born in the U .S.  have lower rates of  NDD  than whites,  H/L s who were not born in the U.S. have even lower probability of  NDD  than  H/L s who were born in the U.S."
"10" "Conclusions.   These findings  may be a result of cultural differences in understanding of  disability knowledge,  differential treatment within the U.S. healthcare system , avoidance of the U.S. healthcare system out of mistrust, or difficulty navigating the complex U.S. healthcare system .  These findings underscore the importance of accessible and culturally appropriate health and clinical care interventions among  H/L   families, and emphasize the importance of ongoing, culturally responsive education for parents, childcare providers, and healthcare professionals to ensure early and culturally appropriate intervention among  H/L  children."
"11" "Keywords :  neurodevelopmental disabilities, racial  and ethnic  disparities"
"12" "Factors influencing low prevalence of neurodevelopm ental disabilities among Hispanic/Latino  children"
"13" "The p revalence  of  neuro developmental disabilities  (NDD)  among children  has increased over time   (Baio et al., 2018; Blumberg et al., 2013; Fombonne, 2009; Getahun et al., 2013) .  Neurodevelopmental disabilities  are a group of conditions that  present   during the early  developmental period , birth to  age five . NDD are  characterized by developmental differences that  affect social functioning and  produce delays in achieving expected  developmental  milestones   (Fombonne, 2009) .  NDD  comprises  a   broad  group of disabilities  and includes  intellectual disabilities  (ID)  whic h affect mental abilities  or capacity  (i.e.  Down syndrome), commu nication disorders which affect  language and speech, autism spectrum disorder  (ASD)  which affects social communication and interaction, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder  (ADHD)  which affect  attention and impulsivity, neurodevelopmental motor disorders which af fect motor functioning (i.e.  Tourette's sy ndrome), and learning disabilities which affect  perception and processing of information   (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) .  The increase  in NDD   prevalence  is thought to be due to  a combination of potential factors including  expansion of diagnostic criteria,  increased awareness, focus on early identification, and  development of  expanded s ervice  options   (Christensen et al., 2018; Fombonne, 2009; Friedman, Gibson Parrish, & Fox, 2018; Fujiura, Li, & Magaña, 2018) ."
"14" "The p revalence of NDD varies by race, ethnicity, sex, and geographic location  (Blumberg et al., 2013; Getahun et al., 2013; Mandell et al., 2009) .  Despite the growth in awareness and prevalence of NDD in the U.S., diagnosis  rates remain  low  among  Hispanic/Latino   ( H/L )  children   (Boyle et al., 2011; Froehlich et al., 2007; Pedersen et al., 2012) .  From 2014 to 2016, the percentage of children diagnosed with any  NDD  increased over 1% from 5.8% to 7 .0 %. The  percentage  of any  NDD  diagn osis was 2.8% among non- H/L  whites and 1.8% among  H/L  children; a statistically significant difference. Prevalence  of NDD   among  non-Hispanic Blacks and other race/ethni city categories were about 2.5% ,   suggesting  that there is something  distinctive   about the low diagnosis rates among   H/L  children  (Zablotsky, Black, &  Blumberg, 2017) .  While diagnosis rates have increased among  H/L  children  (Baio et al., 2018; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012)   , they have not increased as  substantially  relative to white children   (Pedersen et al., 2012) ."
"15" "The low  prevalence of NDD among  Hispanic /Latino  children is thought to be due to  a variety of factors  including  language barriers, lack of access to health services, and health insurance coverage rather than indicative of a true difference in prevalence  (Boyle et al., 2011; Magaña, Lopez, Aguinaga, & Morton, 2013) , but these theories have gone largely untested.  The overarching go al of this study is to examine whether these factors account  for the low prevalence of NDD among  H/L  children in the  U.S.  using a nationally representative sample from the  Integrated Public Use Microdata Series National Health Interview Survey  (IPUMS NHIS)   (Blewett, Drew, Griffin, King, & Williams, 2018) ."
"16" "H/L s are the largest and  one of the  fastest growing minority population s  in the  U.S.  (United States Census Bureau, 2017) ,  therefore  under-diagnosis of NDD may have social implications for the future of  H/L  children and society at large  including medical systems that are not culturally responsive,  lack of enough healthcare providers, and ill-prepared school systems   (Fry, 2008) .  The  H/L  population  also  experiences  persistent inequality  (Cauce & Domenech-Rodriguez, 2002; Macartney, Bishaw, & Fontenot, 2013; Magaña, Lopez, & Machalicek, 2017) , necessitating an understanding  of whether  H/L   experience low er  rates of NDD as a result of inequality  and subsequent lack of access .  The ethnic NDD-disparity  may be indicative of   inequalities in  socioeconomic status or in  the healthcare system , and this   inequality  violate s  the fundamental right to health  (Adhanom-Ghebreyesus, 2017) ."
"17" "One potential explanation for the low prevalence of NDD among  H/L  children is that  H/L s  are less likely to have access to and utilize healthcare than other populations  (Flores, Olson, & Tomany-Korman, 2005; Raphael, Guadagnolo, Beal, & Giardino, 2009) .  H/L  children are more likely to be uninsured  and are less likely to have continuous healthcare coverage  (Abdullahi et al., 2018; Flores et al., 2005) .   P roviders are  also  less likely to refer  H/L  children to specialists for further care  or additional  assessment   (Abdullahi et al., 2018; Flores et al., 2005) .  H/L  families are less likely to have access to and utilization of  high-quality  healthcare—defined by access to and efficacy of care in achieving desired outcomes  (Campbell, Roland, & Buetow, 2000) — and yet no research has examined whether  the  lack of access to high-quality healthcare explains the low prevalence of NDD among H/L children.  This is especially poignant because e thnic disparities in healthcare access, use, and quality are also common among children with special healthcare needs   (Flores, 2010) . Access to  quality   health care is  lower  among ethnic minorities with  autism spectrum disorder   (Magaña et al., 2013; Magaña et al., 2017; Magaña, Parish, Rose, Timberlake, & Swaine, 2012; Parish, Magana, Rose, Timberlake, & Swaine, 2012; Thomas, Ellis, McLaurin, Daniels, & Morrissey, 2007) . Specifically,  H/L  parents are more likely to report that their doctor did not spend enough time with their child, that providers were not sensitive to their values and customs, that doctors did not include them in decision-making about the child's health, and that doctors did not provide enough information   (Magaña et al., 2012) .  Missing from this  literature is an understanding of whether access to healthcare  explains  the lower prevalence of NDD among  H/L  children.  The current study  extend s   prior  research  in the field  by examining whether ethnic differences in healthcare acce ss and utilization predict NDD rather than examining healthcare access and use among children previously diagnosed with NDD. In other words,  the  aim  is  to understand whether ethnic differences in healthcare access and use explain the ethnic NDD disparity  in NDD diagnosis."
"18" "Language barriers may be another mechanism through which  H/L  children are less likely to receive a NDD diagnosis. The findings of  Kogan et al. (2009)  suggest this may be the case. The authors found slightly  lower rates of  ASD  among  H/L  children as compared to non- H/L  white children, but the rates were significantly lower among  H/L  children living in households that speak primarily Spanish as compared to households that speak primarily English .  L ow healthcare access and utilization among  H/L s  may be partially related to language barriers , and language barriers are associated with lower quality of care  (Amant, Schrager, Peña-Ricardo, Williams, & Vanderbilt, 2018; Timmins, 2002) .  For example,  Coker  (1995)  found that  net of  child health conditions, socioeconomic factors, heal th insurance status and healthcare access,  H/L  children and children in non-English speaking primary households had the lowest rates of time spent with a healthcare provider and provider sensitivity to the family's values and cu stom.  Other research found that  while general developmental screening was offered in about 30% of primary care settings, only 18 % offered  general developmental screening in Spanish  as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines  (Zuckerman et al., 2013) .  While  ASD -specific screening was offered at 43% of primary care settings, only about 29% offered  ASD  screening in Spanish  (Zuckerman et al., 2013) .  Quality  and language-specific  care is important in ensuring children receive screening and early intervention. Children who participate in developmental screening programs —regardless of race and ethnicity—are  more likely to be identified as having a developmental delay and to be referred to early intervention services as compared to children who do not  (Guevara et al., 2013) . Language barriers may lead to the ethnic NDD disparity through receipt of lower quality care and less access to developmental screening."
"19" "Language barriers can  also  affect diagnosis  rates  through miscommunication or  mis understanding about symptoms , and n ot all clinics or healthcare centers offer interpreters  to families .   In one study, primary care pediatricians with higher Spanish proficiency, a  H/L  provider in their practice, or greater than 25%  H/L  patients reported less difficulty identifying symptoms of autism in  H/L  patients than providers with less Spanish  proficiency , no Latino providers in the practice, or those treating a low percentage of Latino patients  (Zuckerman et al., 2013) . Language barriers can also affect diagnosis  rates   as  a result of insensitivity of the provider to  H/L  culture .  H/L  families may be less likely to utilize healthcare or feel  less  empowered to discuss their child's health  (Parish et al., 2012; Zuckerman, Sinche, Mejia, et al., 2014) .  Language barriers may contribute to lower quality of care  through  misdiagnosis or a lack of understanding of patient symptoms and concerns,  or  because providers may not respect or  understand  cultural differences beyond the language barrier."
"20" "Cultural beliefs and practices may also  affect  knowledge of disability and  health  service-seeking behavior   (Norbury & Sparks, 2013) .  H/L  families may receive strong support from extended family and avoid professional services as a result of \" familismo ,\" or strong familial cohesion and support. If family values conflict with the standards of the majority culture,  H/L  families may view raising  a  child as their  personal  responsibility and not as the  responsibility of the state or health professionals , regardless if support  is  available  and accessible  to them   (Bailey Jr, Skinner, Rodriguez, Gut, & Correa, 1999; Blacher, Lopez, Shapiro, & Fusco, 1997; Cohen & Miguel, 2018; Marolda, 2018; Reyes et al., 2018) .  Further, there is some evidence to suggest that  H/L  families are less  likely to be familiar with NDD, and this  may be explained by cultural differences in health literacy or understanding of what constitutes typical behaviors. In other words,  H/L s  may be less familiar with NDD because they are less likely to  pathologize  their child's behavioral differences  (Zuckerman, Sinche, Cobian, et al., 2014; Zuckerman, Sinche, Mejia, et al., 2014) .  Cultural differences may also exist by generational status or length of time since immigration. Health and health behaviors among children have been shown to vary substantially not just by ethnicity, but also by generational status and length of time since immigration to the U.S  (Singh, Yu, & Kogan, 2013) . Acculturation has been shown to  lead to changes in  dietary habits,  increases in  disruptive behavior s  and mental health  conditions ,  and poorer health  among  immigrant  H/L s  (Chang, 2018; Cuy Castellanos, 2015; Kim et al., 2018) .  In this study, length of time since immigration is used to examine  whether cultural factors may explain the ethnic NDD disparity."
"21" "Another factor that may influence prevalence  of NDD among  H/L  families is  socioeconomic positioning.  H/L  families are more likely to live in poverty than white families   (Cauce & Domenech-Rodriguez, 2002; Macartney et al., 2013; Magaña et al., 2017) , and this in turn influence s  access to health insurance and healthcare.  Durkin et al. (2017)   found that  higher socioeconomic status is associated with ASD prevalence, suggesting  that socioeconomic disparities in access to diagnostic and other services may lead to disparities in ASD diagnosis rates.  Additionally, families who live in poverty  may be less concerned about  behavioral  differences because other priorities—such as adequate nutrition and housing—are of higher importance  (Norbury & Sparks, 2013) . Medicaid and higher income have been shown to increase the odds of autism-related service use ,  such as occupational therapy and behavioral specialist , demonstrating that socioeconomic status  may affect  healthcare service utilization   (Thomas et al., 2007) . Because  H/L  families are more likely to live in poverty, the ethnic NDD disparity may  also  be related to socioeconomic positioning. Other research, however, has shown that socioeconomic positioning did not explain the inverse relationship between  the  percentage of  H/L  students in school districts and the prevalence of autism in Texas school children  (Palmer, Walker, Mandell, Bayles, & Miller, 2010) .  S ocioeconomic differences  (poverty level based on income and number of kids in the family)   are accounted for in this study  to isolate the key relationships of interest."
"22" "All of these factors suggest that   H/L  children  may not be benefitting from  improved awareness of and development al  services for NDD .  There are numerous medical, practical, and social implications of the ethnic NDD disparity.  From an individual  perspective, the  b ehavioral  differences  associated with  NDD   can  impact multiple domains of life such as learning, educational attainment, language, self-care,  social skills ,   employment, and cap acity for independent  living   (B. Johnson, 2016; Lowe et al., 2007) .  Children who are diagnosed with NDD will be more likely to receive interventions that have been shown to positively impact the domains of life listed above  (Petrenko, 2013) .  Additionally,  H/L  c hildren who are diagnosed with NDD are more likely to be diagnosed at later ages   (Liptak et al., 2008; Magaña et al., 2013; Mandell et al., 2009)  and early diagnosis of NDD  has been shown to significantly improve key life skills including social interactions, communication, motor skills, and daily living skills  (Dawson et al., 2010) ."
"23" "From a social perspective,  low  cultural acceptance and social well-being of  H/L  children  may be the result of  unrecognized NDD  (Norbury & Sparks, 2013) . As a result of deviating from socially acceptable behavior and interaction,  H/L  children with unrecognized NDD may experience social  exclusion as well as ethnic and cultural discrimination. Socially  objectionable  behavior and interactions among  H/L  children with unrecognized NDD can lead to negative social effects for individual children as well as collective ethnic stereotyping.  These beliefs may be also more prominent in regions with higher populations of  H/L s , such as the southern and western regions of the U.S .  Additionally,  NDD screening and  prevalence also varies by state , as do policies and interventions  (Hirai, Kogan, Kandasamy, Reuland, & Bethell, 2018) ."
"24" "The ethnic NDD disparity may also be partially as a result of differential access to services     required under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act  (IDEA) .   Access to services is a function of numerous factors including awareness of early intervention services that vary by state.  Specifically, t he"
"25" "Individuals  with Disabilities  Education  Act (IDEA) was  reauthorized  in  2004—and  recently  amended in"
"26" "2015 as the   Every Student Succeeds Act —with   the goal of ensuring children with disabilities have access to public education that is tailored to their needs.  Part B of IDEA mandates educational intervention services for all children with disabilities, and Part C mandates intervention services for infants and toddlers. While IDEA is federally mandated,  states have discretion i n implementing regulations that  guide the  enforcement of the federal law   (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 2018) .  Unfortunately ,   IPUMS NHIS  does not contain state-level data, but  region is available and include d  as a covariate in the analysis."
"27" "Current Research"
"28" "The low diagnosis rates of NDD among  H/L  children are believed to be as a result of a multitude of factors. Cultural differences, inequality in healthcare access and utilization, language barriers, and socioeconomic differences are believed to be the primary reasons for low prevalence of NDD in the  H/L  community. Much of the research examining healthcare and language focus es  on children who have previously been diagnosed with NDD .  The current study  extend s   this  research by examining whether langu age barriers, healthcare access,  healthcare utilization , and  length of time  living in the U.S.  as a  proxy for  cultural factors   explain s  the low prevalence of NDD in the  H/L  po pulation .   The research questions are as follows:"
"29" "1) Does lack of access to and utilization of healthcare explain the ethnic NDD disparity  among children in the United States?"
"30" "2) Do language barriers explain the ethnic NDD disparity among children in the United  States?"
"31" "3) Does length of time spent living in the U.S.—as a proxy for cultural factors—explain  the ethnic NDD disparity among children?"
"32" "Methods"
"33" "Data"
"34" "The current  study uses  the  Integrated   Public Use Microdata Series – National  Health Interview Surv ey  (IPUMS NHIS)  data for this project. IPUMS  NHIS  is a harmonized — defined as data that is   integrated across time and space—version  of the N ational Health Interview Survey   (P. J. Johnson, Blewett, Ruggles, Davern, & King, 2008) .   The sample is  a nationally  representative cross-section of the non-institutionalized United States population. Data are collected on  health  and disability , healthcare access, health care utilization, and demographics  ( Blewett ,  Drew, Griffin, King, & Williams, 2018).  IPUMS NHIS   includes an oversample of  H/L  households. The data are   available from 1963-2016 , but data on  NDD  for sample children under age 18 are  only  available from 1997-2006 and for 2008-2017 , therefore  the sample  for this study  is restricted to these years."
"35" "Measures"
"36" "Dependent variable.   The outcome of interest is NDD  diagnosis .  Parents  were asked if a doctor or other healthcare provider ever told them that their child has any of the following developmental disabilities : Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder  (A DHD ) , autism  spectrum disorder (ASD) ,  learning disability  (LD) , other developmental delay  (DD) , or  intellectual disability (ID), which  is   referred to  as  mental  retardation  in the NHIS survey .  The analyses  combine d  all  neurodevelopmental  disabilities into a dichotomous indicator of any NDD ."
"37" "Independent variables .   The main predictor of interest combines ethnicity and length of time living in t he U.S. Respondents  reported  whether  they consider themselves to be to Hispanic or Latino as well as their  primary  racial background.  Respondents were also asked what country they were born in, and for those born outside of the U.S. they were asked how long they had been in the United States. From this information, we generated a categorical variable that classified respondents into one of the following categories:  (0)  White,  (1)  Hispanic/Latino and born in the U.S.,  (2)  Hispanic/Latino and lived in the U.S. for one to less than five years,  (3)  Hispanic/Latino and lived in the U.S. for five to less than 10 years, and  (4)  Hispanic/Latino and lived in the U.S. for 10 or more years.  Non-HL whites are included as a reference category in this study because H/L children have lower rates of NDD than all other racial and ethnic groups, but especially lower rates than non-H/L whites  (Zablotsky et al., 2017) ."
"38" "For health insurance,  IPUMS NHIS staff creates  a variable indicating whether the respondent lacks health insurance coverage based on a series of questions asking about type of coverage including: private health insurance, military health insurance, Medicaid, Medicare, state-sponsored health plan, or other government program coverage. IPUMS NHIS staff  creates  a separate variable indicating whether the respondent has any public health insurance including:  Medicaid,  Children's Health Insurance Program ,  state-sponsored health plan, or other government program coverage.  T hese variables  are combined  into a  three-category  measure indicating if the respondent did not have health insurance, has public health insurance, or has another type of health insurance.  For healthcare access, respondents were asked if they needed medical care in the past 12 months but did not receive it because it was too expensive. For healthcare utilization, respondents were asked if they have a usual provider that they see when they need medical care."
"39" "Additional  demographic  variables  that may predict the ethnic  NDD disparity  are considered .  A  measure in dicating whether the interview  was conducted in English or Spanish   as an indicator of potential language barriers was used.  M ore specific  measures   of  language (e.g.  what language is spoken  at home or what language the respondents usually speaks)  exist in  IPUMS NHIS ,  but  these measures are only available for a subset of the sample years  so we did not include them .   Respondents were  also  asked about a variety of demographic characteristics for themselves and their child  including gender, number of children in the household, household income  ( translated to an income-to-poverty ratio by  IPUMS NHIS  research staf f) , and age."
"40" "Sample Selection C riteria"
"41" "NDD measures are available  for 1997-2006 and 2008-2017.   The  sample  for  these survey years  results in a sample size of  n = 1,913,385 . One adult and one child were randomly selected for additional health-related questions that include the dis ability variables of interest. T he analytic sample is limited to sample adults and sample children who were randomly selected for these measures (n= 1,644,600).   Finally,  the  sample  is limited  to those  not missing on the outcome of interest and imputed missing data for other covariates of interest  for a final study sample of  n =243,177 .  Results estimated using  listwise  deletion were substantively similar and are not shown here."
"42" "Analysis P lan"
"43" "All years of data are  pooled and  person weights  (divided by the number of years of data to adjust for sample size)  were used to ge nerate  descriptive statistics. Logistic regression was used to estimate the effect of ethnicity and immigration-status  on NDD diagnosis among children in model 1.  Each subsequent model estimates the odds of NDD diagnosis by ethnicity with the inclusion of moderators of interest, and in the final model covariates of interest are included. Model 2 includes health insurance status as a moderator. Model 3 includes healthcare access, and model 4 includes healthcare utilization. Model 5 includes spoken language. Model 6 includes age, region, gender, number of children living in the family, and percent of the federal poverty line. The predicted values  from model 6  for NDD diagnosis are presented in figure 1, and the  pairwise  difference in predicted values for each group is reported in  A ppendix 1."
"44" "Results"
"45" "Table 1 reports the  weighted  descriptive results for the full sample  (n =243,177)  and then separately by NDD status.  Descriptive analyses reveal that t he sample is 74% non- H/L  white, 24%  H/L  and born in the U.S., 1%  H/L  and has lived in the U.S. for one to less than five years, 0.8%  H/L  and has lived in the U.S. for five to less than 10 years, and 0.7%  H/L  and has lived in the U.S. for 10 or more years.  A small percentage of the sample needed medical care but did not receive it in the past  12 months due t o cost (2.2 %), and do not have a  u sual place for medical care (5.2 %)."
"46" "The  NHIS  interview  was conducted in Spanish for 15 % of the sample. Men made up  the majority of the sample (52 %). The mean age of the sample child was 8.6, and the average family size was  about  two. A  smaller  percentage of the s am ple lived in the Northeast (16 %) than in other regions of the U.S. Finally, the majority of the sample did not  l ive below the poverty line (83 %). About 12% of children in the sample have ever been diagnosed with any NDD, but these results were not evenly split by ethnicity  and immigrant-status . Of t hose  with an NDD diagnosis, about 81 % were non- H/L  white , about 18% were native  H/L , and less than 1% were included in the other ethnicity and immigration categories.  Non-H/L w hite children were significantly more likely to have an NDD diagnosis  than   H/L  children in all immigration categories."
"47" "Respondents with out  health insurance  or  with non-public coverage were  less  likely to have an NDD diagnosis   β = 0.16,  t ( 196,207) = 6.50,  p  < 0.001   and respondents with  public insurance  coverage  were more likely to have NDD   β = 0.66,  t (196,207) = 26.13,  p  < 0.001.  Surprisingly, those who needed medical care but could not afford it  were more likely to have an NDD diagnosis   β = 0.66,  t ( 196,207) = 19.20,  p  < 0.001.  Respondents without a usual medical provider were less likely to have NDD   β =  -0.31 ,  t ( 196,207) =  -9.94 ,   p  < 0.001 ."
"48" "Similar to national statistics,  women were less likely to have NDD   β = -0.72,  t (196,207) = -53.44,  p  < 0.001  and older children were more likely to have an NDD diagnosis  β = 0.10,  t (196,207) = 76.40,  p <  0.001   (Zablotsky et al., 2017) . Respondents from the western region of the U.S. were less likely to have an NDD diagnosis  β = -0.30,  t ( 196,207) = -19.42,  p < 0.001. Respondents from the northern regions β = 0.14,  t ( 196,207) = 9.08,  p < 0.001, southern regions β = 0.08,  t (196,207) = 5.89,  p < 0.001, and northeastern regions β = 0.10,  t (196,207) = 5.62,  p < 0.001 were more likely to have an NDD diagnosis.  This may be as a result of higher  H/L  populations living in western regions of the U.S.  (United States Census Bureau, 2017) . The higher above the poverty line a family lived,  the less likely they were to have an NDD diagnosis β = -0.10,  t ( 196,207) = -16.35,  p < 0.001. The higher diagnosis rates among those living in poverty may be as a result of access to Medicaid which is  a large insurer of poor families with children  and in particular children with special healthcare needs  (Artiga & Ubri, 2017; Musumeci & Foutz, 2018) ."
"49" "Table 2 reports the initial results for a logistic regression analysis of any NDD diagnosis on various p redictors of interest  (length of time living in the U.S., health insurance coverage, access to healthcare, and language) .  Model 1 shows the bivariate relationship between the main predictor of interest and NDD.  H/L  children are less likely to have an NDD diagnosis than non- H/L  whit e  children , but the strength of the effect varies  based on whether the children  were   U.S. or foreign-born.  N ative-born  H/L  children have 24 % lower odds  (OR = 0.76; 95% CI = 0.73, 0.79;  p <  0.001)  of an NDD diagnosis than white children, but  H/L  children whose families have been in the U.S. for less than five years have  55 % lower odds  ( OR = 0.45 ; 95% CI =  0.37 ,  0.57 ;  p <  0.001) ,  H/L  children whose families have been in the U.S. for  more than five but  less than 10 years have  45 % lower odds   (OR = 0.55; 95% CI = 0.45, 0.67;  p <  0.001),  and  H/L  children whose families have been in the U.S.  for longer than 10 years have 35 % lower odds of a n  NDD diagnosis   (OR = 0.65; 95% CI = 0.53, 0.77;  p <  0.001)."
"50" "The multivariate analysis results reveal that t he inclusion of health insurance, healthcare access, and language do not significantly alter these results  (all  p -values remain <0.001) .  Children whose families have public health insurance are significantly more likely to have a n  NDD diagnosis than children without health insurance  ( OR  =   1.74 ;  95% CI = 1.64, 1.84;   p   <   0.001) ,  and  children with another  type of coverage  have  lower  odds of NDD than those without health insurance  (OR = 0.90;   95% CI = 0.85, 0.96;  p   = .001 ) .  Surprisingly, respondents who needed medical care but could not afford it were more likely to have children with NDD  ( OR  =  2.22;   95% CI = 2.04, 2.41;  p   <   0.001) , and respondents who  had  a typical medical provider had children who were less likely to have an NDD diagnosis  ( OR  =   0.84,  95 % CI = 0.78, 0.91;  p   <   0.001) . Respondents who w ere interviewed in Spanish had  50% lower odds of having children with an NDD diagnosis than respondents who were interview ed  in English  (OR =  0.50 ,  95 % CI =  0.47, 0.53 ;  p <  0.001) .   Model 6 shows the results with the inclusion of all covariates  (sex, age,  number of children in the family,  percent of the federal poverty line, region) . While the odds vary slightly between the models, the overall results are the same:  H/L  children have lower odds of NDD diagnosis than white children  independent of health insurance, healthcare utilization, and primary spoken language,  and  H/L  children whose families were not born in the U.S. have even lower odds of NDD diagnosis."
"51" "Figure 1  depicts the predicted probability of NDD for each group. Whites have the highest predi cted probability at 0.13  [95%  CI   =  0.12, 0.12 ] , U.S. -born  H/L  children  have a predicted probability of  0.10  [95%  CI   =  0.09, 0.10 ] , and the predicted probability is similar for the other three categories ranging from 0.07  [95%  CI=  0.05, 0.08 ]   and 0.08  [95%  CI   =  0.06, 0.09 ] .  In other words, the probability of an NDD diagnosis is 13% among white children, 10% among U.S.-born  H/L  children, and 7%-8% among  H/L  children not from the U.S. net of moderating and confounding factors.  Appendix 1 shows the pairwise  comparisons between each group and show s   that  difference in predicted probabilities for white and  H/L  children   is statistically significant and the predicted probabilities are statistically significantly different among  H/L  children whose families have been in the U.S. longer. The difference in predicted probabilities for  H/L  children who were not born in U.S. and have lived in the U.S. for different periods of time are not statistically significant.  The overall conclusion from the pairwise tests is that  non-H/L  whites have  a  higher probability of NDD  diagnosis  than  H/L s, and that  H/L s who were not born in the U.S. have even lower probability of NDD regardless of how long they have been living in the U.S."
"52" "Discussion"
"53" "While rates of NDD have increased with time,  research continues to reveal that  H/L  children have significantly lower rates  of NDD than white children  (Boyle et al., 2011; Froehlich et al., 2007; Pedersen et al., 2012) .   The low diagnosis rates of NDD among  H/L  children are believed to be as a result of a multitude of factors  including low access to healthcare and health insurance among  H/L s, language barriers that affect access to quality healthcare, cultural factors related to assimilation and  socioeconomic differences  (Boyle et al., 2011; Magaña et al., 2013) .  This study  so ught  to isolate these factors  with a  purpose  of determining   whether language barriers, healthcare access, healthcare utilization, and  length of time living in the U.S.  ( as a proxy for  cultural factors )   explain s  the low prevalence of NDD in the  H/L  po pulation in the U .S.  using  a nationally representative sample .  The  results  demonstrate that  H/L  children have lower probabi lity of NDD than white children  and  that healthcare access, healthcare  utilization ,  and language barriers do not explain lower rates of NDD among  H/L  children in the  U.S.   Of note,   H/L  children  who se families  were not born in the U.S. have even l ower probability of NDD than  H/L  families  who were born in the U.S.  H/L s who were born in the U.S. have lower rates of NDD than whites, but  H/L s who were not born in the U.S. have  even  lower rates.  These findings are consistent with  prior research demonstrating that immigrant-status affects  NDD  diagnosis rates among ethnically diverse samples  (Dealberto, 2011; Hall-Lande, Esler, Hewitt, & Gunty, 2018; Lauritsen, Pedersen, & Mortensen, 2005) .  These find ings suggest that other factors —discussed below—may  ex plain the ethnic NDD disparity."
"54" "Cultural explanations.   Prior research in this area shows that  H/L  families are less likely to be familiar with NDD and this may be explained by cultural differences in the understanding of what constitutes socially acceptable interactions and behaviors  (Hall-Lande et al., 2018; Zuckerman, Sinche, Cobian, et al., 2014; Zuckerman, Sinche, Mejia, et al., 2014) .  H/L  families who were born in the U.S. and are surrounded by other  H/L  families may not  pathologize   developmental  differences in their children  based on shared cultural understandings of behavior, but  H/L  families who were born in the U.S. and are surrounded by non- H/L  whites may  be more likely to notice and  pathologize   developmental  differences in their children.  H/L  families born outside of the U.S.—especially those who have not lived in the U.S. for long periods of time—may not have developed social relationships with non- H/L  whites and therefore may not have developed new cultural understandings of social behavior in the way the U.S.-born  H/L s surrounded by non- H/L  whites have."
"55" "Another possibility is that  H/L  families are aware of behavioral differences  in  what constitutes socially  typical  interactions, but they do not seek out professional services for their children. Strong familial cohesion—or  familismo —promotes seeking out support from extended family as opposed to seeking out professional support  (Bailey Jr et al., 1999; Blacher et al., 1997) .  H/L  families may  pathologize  their children's  developmental differences , but may not seek out professional assistance as a result of  cultural  differences.  Alternative ly ,  H/L  families may  pathologize  developmental differences but avoid the U.S. healthcare system  out of fear and mistrust .  H/L s are less likely than no n- H/L  whites to seek out medical care   (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012) , and u ndocumented  H/L s avoid the healthcare system out of fear of  deportation   (Berk & Schur, 2001; Ortega et al., 2007) .  Fear and mistrust al so cascades into other social services in the H/L community .  Despite higher prevalence of poverty,  H/L s are  also  less likely to use  other  social safety net services  (López-Cevallos, 2014) .  The current political climate for immigrants may exacerbate  these  issue s  out of fear and mistrust of the U.S.  government and  healthcare system  (Rhodes et al., 2015) . Interventions to increase immigrant  H/L ' s understanding of their rights and eligibility to use healthcare services ma y be key to reducing the ethnic- NDD disparity  and to promoting  good health among the  H/L  population in the U.S.  (Rhodes et al., 2015) ."
"56" "Treatment  within the U.S. healthcare system .  Given that  H/L   families report  receiving  lower quality healthcare as compared to non- H/L  white children  and that the results of this study show barriers to healthcare do not explain the ethnic-NDD disparity, these findings suggest that the ethnic- NDD disparity may  be  as a result of  differential treatment within the healthcare system  (Magaña et al., 2012; Parish et al., 2012) .  Cultural differences in healthcare practices may be an important factor in the low prevalence of NDD diagnosis among  H/L  children. NDD is influenced by genetic risk factors, but no biological markers or tests exist to diagnose these disorders. NDD is diagnosed exclusively from observed behavior and parental reporting. The threshold for disordered behavior becomes an arbitrary decision that is likely to be influenced by cultural values and expectations and is derived from white, middle-class, Western cultural standards. Speech and language therapists—often the first provider to  acknowledge the presence of a potential disability —consist primarily of white, middle-class, English-speaking women  (Data-USA, 2016; Norbury & Sparks, 2013) . Research on NDD emerges primarily from Western societies, and this is not representative of the majority of the world's population. The assumption in this research—and in the diagnostic and treatment approaches that are derived from it—is that these \"standard\" research subjects are representative of the entire population and that findings are universal. In reality, this western sample is unusual along many psychological and behavioral dimensions  (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010; Norbury & Sparks, 2013) .  Low diagnosis of NDD among H/L children may be as a result of  cultural barriers in understanding what constitutes developmental or behavioral differences within the healthcare system."
"57" "Access to screening services  through federal and state-level policy .   One surprising finding related to access to care was that respondents who needed medical care but could not afford it were more l ikely to have children with NDD . These findings may be attributable to access to mandated screening  through Part B of the IDEA where NDD are identified through the school system rather than a traditional medical appointment or checkup. Health insurance is not a requirement to receive Part B services under IDEA, so school-age children with NDD may be identified through the school system   (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 2018) .  The percentage of total public school enrollment that represents children serviced by Part B has increased over time. In particular students identified as having learning  disabilities and autism increased 5.5% (from 8.3% to 13.8%) from 1976-77 when IDEA was implemented to 2004-05  (U.S. Department of Education, 2018) .  This finding  suggests that lack of access to healthcare may not be a barrier  to  an  NDD diagnosis  as a result o f mandated screening and services  withi n the school-system under IDEA . If this is the case, the ethnic-NDD disparity may be as a result of differential treatment within the school system that may result from cultural differences in development and behavior among H/L children."
"58" "Practical Implications"
"59" "The current study findings  highlight  a number of important questions worthy of further research study such as  how cultural factors   and  treatment within the U.S. healthcare system impacts NDD diagnosis among  H/L  children.  It is important to continue tracking these data trends over time. The current study data re veal the critical importance of  culturally  appropriate  health and clinical car e interventions for  H/L  children and families. Further, regular public health outreach in   H/L  communities  promoting  regular developmental monitoring, early developmental screening, early identification, and early intervention with NDD should be integrated into programs and systems serving families."
"60" "Research reveals that children who participate in regular developmental screening are more likely to receive an NDD diagnosis at a younger age and are connected to intervention services earlier (Guevara et al., 2013). There is evidence  that professionals may be less likely to implement developmental screening protocols with children from culturally and linguistically diverse b ackgrounds  (Begeer, El Bouk, Boussaid, Terwogt, & Koot, 2009) .  Given the significant benefits of early diagnosis and early intervention, health care professionals  should  implement regular developmental screening and increase awareness around early signs of NDD. Public health campaigns such as CDC’s  “Learn the Signs. Act Early.”  promotes understanding of early childhood developmental milestones and early developmental screening in young children by parents or caregivers, childcare providers, and health care  professionals. These materials are all translated in Spanish, and many of the materials have been designed for specific outreach in the   H/L  community."
"61" "These findings also fit with in  the broader literature to emphasize the importance of ongoing, culturally responsive education for parents, child care providers, and health care professionals  (A. Bernier, Carlson, & Whipple, 2010; Bronheim, Soto, & Anthony, 2015; Magaña et al., 2017) .  Developmental expecta tions and recognition of developmental concerns are shaped by cultural norms as well as  environmental and socioeconomic variables  (Magana et al., 2013; Bernier et al., 2010), and these expectations can influence when parents seek help for developmental concerns . Further, so ciocultural factors such as cultural perspectives, family/caregiver knowledge, and clinician knowledge and comfort discussing concerns all contribute to the timing of initial diagnosis, particularly with families from culturally diverse backgrounds   (R. Bernier, Mao, & Yen, 2010; Bronheim et al., 2015) .  It   is important for future research to identify screening, assessment and diagnostic practices that incorporate   cultural perspectives on NDD and different clinical presentations of NDD across culturally and linguistically diverse communities. Also, it  is  important to closely examine clinician interactions with families across different cultural groups and how well a developmental concern is heard from families, as well as how practitioners communicate concerns to families. Future research in these areas will contribute to both greater understanding of the factors   influencing age of diagnosis across different cultural groups as well as strategies for effective outreach with   H/L  families."
"62" "Finally ,  research reveals that culturally designed and informed family interventions around NDD and specific to the cultural  needs of  H/L  families can enhance parent/caregiver knowledge, model culturally competent advocacy skills, and significantly increase parent skills in developing their child’s social communication abilities (Magana et al., 2017). Culturall y  appropriate  family interventions can help to increase NDD identification and decrease health   disparities around NDD in the   H/L  community."
"63" "Future work"
"64" "Given these findings, future work might extend this study  in multiple ways. Because age of diagnosis and access to developmental screenings predict  early interven tion services and early intervention services have positive outcomes, examining age of diagnosis among H/L and other populations could lead to development of  more  effective interventions  such as better targeted outreach and training of health professionals and educators . Similarly, a better understanding of where H/L and other populations received a diagnosis of NDD could lead to better tailored intervention, outreach, and training for professionals  so that H/L children with NDD are identified earlier. Early identification among H/L children will lead to early intervention services which have been shown to yield educational and health outcomes among those with NDD  (Karoly, 1998; Zwaigenbaum et al., 2015) ."
"65" "Future work might also extend this research  through an international comparison or focus on different populations. Research on the Somali population has suggested that native-born children received an earlier diagnosis of ASD than non-native born children  (Hall-Lande et al., 2018) . These findings propose that the  H/L  population may not be unique with respect to the findings; it may be that foreign-born individuals of all racial and ethnic backgrounds may be diagnosed later as a result of cultural assimilation into that U.S. that increases awareness of NDD. Another next step could be an international comparison to determine whether these findings are unique with respect to the U.S., or whether there are similarities among immigrants in countries that have different healthcare systems, policies, and cultural beliefs and norms than the United States. An international comparison may illuminate the ways in which the social structural arrangement of a society affects disability diagnoses."
"66" "Limitations"
"67" "It is possible that the results  are due to the time period or manner in which the data were collected .  The data rely on parental self-reports of NDD diagnosis as opposed to more objective criteria. Among patients whose primary language is not English or who have lower health literacy, misunderstanding of diagnostic screening results may bias the results. Language was included in the analysis to minimize this limitation. Additionally, p arents may not report that children have NDD. Children may have received a diagnosis at one point in time but lack of precision in diagnosis at very young ages could mean some children met the diagnostic criteria for NDD at one time point but not at the time of survey.  This limitation is minimal  as the parents were asked if their child  was  ever told by  a healthcare provider that their  child had a n  NDD, but it is possible that parents would not report a prior diagnosis if the child no longer has the diagnosis. One other limitation is that racial minorities and children from low socioeconomic status households are also diagnosed at later ages, so it is possible that the  IPUMS NHIS  does not  capture diagnoses among younger  H/L  children  (Mandell et al., 2009) . To minimize this limitation, age  of the children in the sample was included in the analysis as a covariate."
"68" "An additional limitation is that these results only capture a snapshot in time. In particular, questions related to healthcare access and utilization may not capture access to and utilization of healthcare during critical periods. H/L children are more likely to be diagnosed at later ages and NDD incidence rates tend to be lower in developing countries  (Liptak et al., 2008; Maguire, 2013) , suggesting that lack of access to screening at younger ages may explain the ethnic NDD disparity. The finding that access to and utilization of healthcare in the U.S. did not explain the ethnic-NDD disparity does not account for prior access to and utilization of care. Immigrant families may have experienced lack of access to healthcare in their  origin  countries   during  critical developmental periods, such as during pregnancy. For example, prenatal multivitamin/folic acid supplements may reduce the risk of ASD  (Schmidt et al., 2011; Surén et al., 2013)  and H/L women are less likely to consume foods high in folic  acid and to take prenatal vitamins  (Tinker et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2007) . The results related to healthcare access and utilization can only be understood in the context of the U.S. healthcare system and during a snapshot in time."
"69" "Additionally , these results are generalizable to the U.S. population but may not be genera lizable to specific contexts. For example,  lacking interprete r services are a barrier  to quality care in certain environmental contexts. For example, rural communities often lack interpreter services that can affect quality of care among H/Ls  (Casey, Blewett, & Call, 2004) . Interpreting services may also  be  limited in emergency departments (ED) where communication and comprehensive can be crucial for proper care, and patients requiring interpreting services use ED services significantly more than those who do not require interpreting services  (Brenner et al., 2018; Nailon, 2006; Njeru et al., 2015) .  While the findings of this study suggest that language barriers do not explain the ethnic-NDD disparity, these results may not be generalizable across all contexts."
"70" "Conclusion"
"71" "Similar to prior research,  this study  found that Hispanic/Latino children are less likely to have a diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disabilities than non- H/L  white children   (Boyle et al., 2011; Froehlich et al., 2007; Pedersen et al., 2012) . This  work builds on  prior  research by showing that  the ethnic NDD disparity is not explained by differences in access to or utilization of healthcare or as a result of spoken language differences that may create barriers to NDD diagnosis.  Results indicated  that while  H/L s born in the U.S. have lower rates of NDD than whites,  H/L s who were not born in the U.S. have even lower probability of NDD than  H/L s who were born in the U.S.  These findings  may be as a result of cultural differences in understanding of social b ehavior,  differential treatment within the U.S. healthcare system , avoidance of the U.S. healthcare system out of mistrust, or difficulty navigating the complex U.S. healthcare system .  These findings suggest that culturally appropriate health and clinical care interventions for  H/L  children and families may be a critically important component to reduce the ethnic  NDD disparity.  These findings also fit with in  the broader literature to emphasize the importance of ongoing, culturally responsive education for parents, child care providers, and health care professionals  to ensure early and culturally appropriate intervention among  H/L  children  ( Bronheim  & Anthony, 2015; Bernier et al., 2010;  Magaña  et al., 2017)."
"72" "References"
"73" "Abdullahi, I., Leonard, H., Cherian, S., Mutch, R., Glasson, E. J., de Klerk, N., & Downs, J. (2018). The risk of neurodevelopmental disabilities in children of immigrant and refugee parents: current knowledge and directions for future research.  Review Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 5 (1), 29-42."
"74" "Adhanom-Ghebreyesus, T. (2017). Health is a fundamental human right.   Retrieved from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/fundamental-human-right/en/"
"75" "Amant, H. G. S., Schrager, S. M., Peña-Ricardo, C., Williams, M. E., & Vanderbilt, D. L. (2018). Language Barriers Impact Access to Services for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders.  Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 48 (2), 333-340."
"76" "American Psychiatric Association. (2013).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-5®) : American Psychiatric Pub."
"77" "Artiga, S., & Ubri, P. (2017). Key Issues in Children's Health Coverage.  Medicaid.   Retrieved from https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/key-issues-in-childrens-health-coverage/"
"78" "Bailey Jr, D. B., Skinner, D., Rodriguez, P., Gut, D., & Correa, V. (1999). Awareness, use, and satisfaction with services for Latino parents of young children with disabilities.  Exceptional Children, 65 (3), 367-381."
"79" "Baio, J., Wiggins, L., Christensen, D. L., Maenner, M. J., Daniels, J., Warren, Z., . . . White, T. (2018). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2014.  MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 67 (6), 1."
"80" "Begeer, S., El Bouk, S., Boussaid, W., Terwogt, M. M., & Koot, H. M. (2009). Underdiagnosis and referral bias of autism in ethnic minorities.  Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 39 (1), 142."
"81" "Berk, M. L., & Schur, C. L. (2001). The effect of fear on access to care among undocumented Latino immigrants.  Journal of immigrant health, 3 (3), 151-156."
"82" "Bernier, A., Carlson, S. M., & Whipple, N. (2010). From external regulation to self‐regulation: Early parenting precursors of young children’s executive functioning.  Child development, 81 (1), 326-339."
"83" "Bernier, R., Mao, A., & Yen, J. (2010). Psychopathology, families, and culture: autism.  Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics, 19 (4), 855-867."
"84" "Blacher, J., Lopez, S., Shapiro, J., & Fusco, J. (1997). Contributions to depression in Latina mothers with and without children with retardation: Implications for caregiving.  Family Relations , 325-334."
"85" "Blewett, L. A., Drew, J. A. R., Griffin, R., King, M. L., & Williams, K. C. W. (2018). IPUMS Health Surveys: National Health Interview Survey, Version 6.3 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018.   Retrieved from http://doi.org/10.18128/D070.V6.3"
"86" "Blumberg, S. J., Bramlett, M. D., Kogan, M. D., Schieve, L. A., Jones, J. R., & Lu, M. C. (2013).  Changes in prevalence of parent-reported autism spectrum disorder in school-aged US children: 2007 to 2011-2012 : US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics."
"87" "Boyle, C. A., Boulet, S., Schieve, L. A., Cohen, R. A., Blumberg, S. J., Yeargin-Allsopp, M., . . . Kogan, M. D. (2011). Trends in the prevalence of developmental disabilities in US children, 1997–2008.  Pediatrics, 127 (6), 1034-1042."
"88" "Brenner, J. M., Baker, E. F., Iserson, K. V., Kluesner, N. H., Marshall, K. D., & Vearrier, L. (2018). Use of Interpreter Services in the Emergency Department.  Annals of emergency medicine, 72 (4), 432-437."
"89" "Bronheim, S. M., Soto, S., & Anthony, B. J. (2015). Addressing Disparities in Access to Information for Hispanic Families of Children with Special Health Care Needs: Increasing Use of Family-to-family Centers.  Journal of Health Disparities Research & Practice, 8 (2)."
"90" "Campbell, S. M., Roland, M. O., & Buetow, S. A. (2000). Defining quality of care.  Social Science & Medicine, 51 (11), 1611-1625."
"91" "Casey, M. M., Blewett, L. A., & Call, K. T. (2004). Providing health care to Latino immigrants: Community-based efforts in the rural Midwest.  American Journal of Public Health, 94 (10), 1709-1711."
"92" "Cauce, A. M., & Domenech-Rodriguez, M. (2002). Latino families: Myths and realities.  Latino children and families in the United States: Current research and future directions , 3-25."
"93" "Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders—autism and developmental disabilities monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Surveillance Summaries, 61 (3), 1-19."
"94" "Chang, J. A. (2018).  Health, health insurance coverage, health care service utilization and family structure among children of immigrants."
"95" "Christensen, D. L., Braun, K. V. N., Baio, J., Bilder, D., Charles, J., Constantino, J. N., . . . Kurzius-Spencer, M. (2018). Prevalence and characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years—autism and developmental disabilities monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2012.  MMWR Surveillance Summaries, 65 (13), 1."
"96" "Cohen, S. R., & Miguel, J. (2018). Amor and social stigma: ASD beliefs among immigrant Mexican parents.  Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 48 (6), 1995-2009."
"97" "Coker, C. C. (1995). A Comparison of Job Satisfaction and Economic Benefits of Four Different Employment Models for Persons with Disabilities."
"98" "Cuy Castellanos, D. (2015). Dietary acculturation in latinos/hispanics in the United States.  American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine, 9 (1), 31-36."
"99" "Data-USA. (2016). Speech-language Pathology.   Retrieved from https://datausa.io/profile/cip/510203/#demographics"
"100" "Dawson, G., Rogers, S., Munson, J., Smith, M., Winter, J., Greenson, J., . . . Varley, J. (2010). Randomized, controlled trial of an intervention for toddlers with autism: the Early Start Denver Model.  Pediatrics, 125 (1), e17-e23."
"101" "Dealberto, M. J. (2011). Prevalence of autism according to maternal immigrant status and ethnic origin.  Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 123 (5), 339-348."
"102" "Durkin, M. S., Maenner, M. J., Baio, J., Christensen, D., Daniels, J., Fitzgerald, R., . . . Van Naarden Braun, K. (2017). Autism spectrum disorder among US children (2002–2010): socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic disparities.  American Journal of Public Health, 107 (11), 1818-1826."
"103" "Flores, G. (2010). Technical report—racial and ethnic disparities in the health and health care of children.  Pediatrics , peds. 2010-0188."
"104" "Flores, G., Olson, L., & Tomany-Korman, S. C. (2005). Racial and ethnic disparities in early childhood health and health care.  Pediatrics, 115 (2), e183-e193."
"105" "Fombonne, E. (2009). Epidemiology of pervasive developmental disorders.  Pediatric research, 65 (6), 591-598."
"106" "Friedman, D. J., Gibson Parrish, R., & Fox, M. H. (2018). A Review of Global Literature on Using Administrative Data to Estimate Prevalence of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.  Journal of policy and practice in intellectual disabilities, 15 (1), 43-62."
"107" "Froehlich, T. E., Lanphear, B. P., Epstein, J. N., Barbaresi, W. J., Katusic, S. K., & Kahn, R. S. (2007). Prevalence, recognition, and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in a national sample of US children.  Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 161 (9), 857-864."
"108" "Fry, R. A. (2008).  Latino settlement in the new century : Pew Hispanic Center Washington, DC."
"109" "Fujiura, G. T., Li, H., & Magaña, S. (2018). Health Services Use and Costs for Americans With Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities: A National Analysis.  Intellectual and developmental disabilities, 56 (2), 101-118."
"110" "Getahun, D., Jacobsen, S. J., Fassett, M. J., Chen, W., Demissie, K., & Rhoads, G. G. (2013). Recent trends in childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.  JAMA pediatrics, 167 (3), 282-288."
"111" "Guevara, J. P., Gerdes, M., Localio, R., Huang, Y. V., Pinto-Martin, J., Minkovitz, C. S., . . . Kavanagh, J. (2013). Effectiveness of developmental screening in an urban setting.  Pediatrics , peds. 2012-0765."
"112" "Hall-Lande, J., Esler, A. N., Hewitt, A., & Gunty, A. L. (2018). Age of Initial Identification of Autism Spectrum Disorder in a Diverse Urban Sample.  Journal of autism and developmental disorders , 1-6."
"113" "Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world?  Behavioral and brain sciences, 33 (2-3), 61-83."
"114" "Hirai, A. H., Kogan, M. D., Kandasamy, V., Reuland, C., & Bethell, C. (2018). Prevalence and variation of developmental screening and surveillance in early childhood.  JAMA pediatrics, 172 (9), 857-866."
"115" "Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. (2018). Statute and Regulations.   Retrieved from https://sites.ed.gov/idea/statuteregulations/"
"116" "Johnson, B. (2016). Early intervention in children with developmental disabilities.  BMH Medical Journal, 3 (1)."
"117" "Johnson, P. J., Blewett, L. A., Ruggles, S., Davern, M. E., & King, M. L. (2008). Four decades of population health data: the integrated health interview series as an epidemiologic resource.  Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 19 (6), 872."
"118" "Karoly, L. A. (1998).  Investing in our children: What we know and don't know about the costs and benefits of early childhood interventions : Rand Corporation."
"119" "Kim, J., Nicodimos, S., Kushner, S. E., Rhew, I. C., McCauley, E., & Vander Stoep, A. (2018). Comparing Mental Health of US Children of Immigrants and Non‐Immigrants in 4 Racial/Ethnic Groups.  Journal of School Health, 88 (2), 167-175."
"120" "Kogan, M. D., Blumberg, S. J., Schieve, L. A., Boyle, C. A., Perrin, J. M., Ghandour, R. M., . . . van Dyck, P. C. (2009). Prevalence of parent-reported diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder among children in the US, 2007.  Pediatrics, 124 (5), 1395-1403."
"121" "Lauritsen, M. B., Pedersen, C. B., & Mortensen, P. B. (2005). Effects of familial risk factors and place of birth on the risk of autism: a nationwide register‐based study.  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46 (9), 963-971."
"122" "Liptak, G. S., Benzoni, L. B., Mruzek, D. W., Nolan, K. W., Thingvoll, M. A., Wade, C. M., & Fryer, G. E. (2008). Disparities in diagnosis and access to health services for children with autism: data from the National Survey of Children's Health.  Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics, 29 (3), 152-160."
"123" "López-Cevallos, D. (2014). Are Latino immigrants a burden to safety net services in nontraditional immigrant states? Lessons from Oregon.  American Journal of Public Health, 104 (5), 781-786."
"124" "Lowe, K., Allen, D., Jones, E., Brophy, S., Moore, K., & James, W. (2007). Challenging behaviours: Prevalence and topographies.  Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 51 (8), 625-636."
"125" "Macartney, S., Bishaw, A., & Fontenot, K. (2013).  Poverty rates for selected detailed race and Hispanic groups by state and place: 2007-2011 : US Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US …."
"126" "Magaña, S., Lopez, K., Aguinaga, A., & Morton, H. (2013). Access to diagnosis and treatment services among Latino children with autism spectrum disorders.  Intellectual and developmental disabilities, 51 (3), 141-153."
"127" "Magaña, S., Lopez, K., & Machalicek, W. (2017). Parents taking action: A psycho‐educational intervention for Latino parents of children with autism spectrum disorder.  Family process, 56 (1), 59-74."
"128" "Magaña, S., Parish, S. L., Rose, R. A., Timberlake, M., & Swaine, J. G. (2012). Racial and ethnic disparities in quality of health care among children with autism and other developmental disabilities.  Intellectual and developmental disabilities, 50 (4), 287-299."
"129" "Maguire, C. (2013). Autism on the Rise: A Global Perspective.  Harvard Global Health Review.   Retrieved from http://www.hcs.harvard.edu/hghr/online/autism-on-the-rise-a-global-perspective/"
"130" "Mandell, D. S., Wiggins, L. D., Carpenter, L. A., Daniels, J., DiGuiseppi, C., Durkin, M. S., . . . Pinto-Martin, J. A. (2009). Racial/ethnic disparities in the identification of children with autism spectrum disorders.  American Journal of Public Health, 99 (3), 493-498."
"131" "Marolda, C. A. (2018).  Effects of Cultural Assimilation on Latino Parents' Knowledge and Attitudes Towards Autism and Perceived Barriers to Health Care.  Capella University."
"132" "Musumeci, M., & Foutz, J. (2018).  Medicaid’s Role for Children with Special Health Care Needs: A Look at Eligibility, Services, and Spending . Retrieved from Kaiser Family Foundation website: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/medicaids-role-for-children-with-special-health-care-needs-a-look-at-eligibility-services-and-spending/"
"133" "Nailon, R. E. (2006). Nurses’ concerns and practices with using interpreters in the care of Latino patients in the emergency department.  Journal of transcultural nursing, 17 (2), 119-128."
"134" "Njeru, J. W., Sauver, J. L. S., Jacobson, D. J., Ebbert, J. O., Takahashi, P. Y., Fan, C., & Wieland, M. L. (2015). Emergency department and inpatient health care utilization among patients who require interpreter services.  BMC health services research, 15 (1), 214."
"135" "Norbury, C. F., & Sparks, A. (2013). Difference or disorder? Cultural issues in understanding neurodevelopmental disorders.  Developmental psychology, 49 (1), 45."
"136" "Ortega, A. N., Fang, H., Perez, V. H., Rizzo, J. A., Carter-Pokras, O., Wallace, S. P., & Gelberg, L. (2007). Health care access, use of services, and experiences among undocumented Mexicans and other Latinos.  Archives of Internal Medicine, 167 (21), 2354-2360."
"137" "Palmer, R. F., Walker, T., Mandell, D., Bayles, B., & Miller, C. S. (2010). Explaining low rates of autism among Hispanic schoolchildren in Texas.  American Journal of Public Health, 100 (2), 270-272."
"138" "Parish, S., Magana, S., Rose, R., Timberlake, M., & Swaine, J. G. (2012). Health care of Latino children with autism and other developmental disabilities: quality of provider interaction mediates utilization.  American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 117 (4), 304-315."
"139" "Pedersen, A., Pettygrove, S., Meaney, F. J., Mancilla, K., Gotschall, K., Kessler, D. B., . . . Cunniff, C. (2012). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders in Hispanic and non-Hispanic white children.  Pediatrics , peds. 2011-1145."
"140" "Petrenko, C. L. (2013). A review of intervention programs to prevent and treat behavioral problems in young children with developmental disabilities.  Journal of developmental and physical disabilities, 25 (6), 651-679."
"141" "Raphael, J. L., Guadagnolo, B. A., Beal, A. C., & Giardino, A. P. (2009). Racial and ethnic disparities in indicators of a primary care medical home for children.  Academic pediatrics, 9 (4), 221-227."
"142" "Reyes, N. M., Lindly, O. J., Chavez, A. E., Folan, A., Macias, K., Smith, K. A., . . . Zuckerman, K. (2018). Maternal beliefs about autism: A link between intervention services and autism severity in White and Latino mothers.  Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 51 , 38-48."
"143" "Rhodes, S. D., Mann, L., Simán, F. M., Song, E., Alonzo, J., Downs, M., . . . O’brien, M. C. (2015). The impact of local immigration enforcement policies on the health of immigrant Hispanics/Latinos in the United States.  American Journal of Public Health, 105 (2), 329-337."
"144" "Schmidt, R. J., Hansen, R. L., Hartiala, J., Allayee, H., Schmidt, L. C., Tancredi, D. J., . . . Hertz-Picciotto, I. (2011). Prenatal vitamins, one-carbon metabolism gene variants, and risk for autism.  Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 22 (4), 476."
"145" "Singh, G. K., Yu, S. M., & Kogan, M. D. (2013). Health, chronic conditions, and behavioral risk disparities among US immigrant children and adolescents.  Public health reports, 128 (6), 463-479."
"146" "Surén, P., Roth, C., Bresnahan, M., Haugen, M., Hornig, M., Hirtz, D., . . . Reichborn-Kjennerud, T. (2013). Association between maternal use of folic acid supplements and risk of autism spectrum disorders in children.  Jama, 309 (6), 570-577."
"147" "Thomas, K. C., Ellis, A. R., McLaurin, C., Daniels, J., & Morrissey, J. P. (2007). Access to care for autism-related services.  Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 37 (10), 1902-1912."
"148" "Timmins, C. L. (2002). The impact of language barriers on the health care of Latinos in the United States: a review of the literature and guidelines for practice.  The Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 47 (2), 80-96."
"149" "Tinker, S. C., Devine, O., Mai, C., Hamner, H. C., Reefhuis, J., Gilboa, S. M., . . . Honein, M. A. (2013). Estimate of the potential impact of folic acid fortification of corn masa flour on the prevention of neural tube defects.  Birth Defects Research Part A: Clinical and Molecular Teratology, 97 (10), 649-657."
"150" "U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). Americans Are Visiting the Doctor Less Frequently, Census Bureau Reports [Press release]. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/health_care_insurance/cb12-185.html"
"151" "U.S. Department of Education. (2018). Fast Facts: Students with Disabilities.   Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=64"
"152" "United States Census Bureau. (2017). Facts for Features: Hispanic Heritage Month 2017.  Fast Facts.   Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/newsroom/facts-for-features/2017/hispanic-heritage.html"
"153" "Yang, Q.-H., Carter, H. K., Mulinare, J., Berry, R., Friedman, J., & Erickson, J. D. (2007). Race-ethnicity differences in folic acid intake in women of childbearing age in the United States after folic acid fortification: findings from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2001–2002–.  The American journal of clinical nutrition, 85 (5), 1409-1416."
"154" "Zablotsky, B., Black, L. I., & Blumberg, S. J. (2017). Estimated Prevalence of Children With Diagnosed Developmental Disabilities in the United States, 2014-2016.  NCHS data brief (291), 1-8."
"155" "Zuckerman, K. E., Mattox, K., Donelan, K., Batbayar, O., Baghaee, A., & Bethell, C. (2013). Pediatrician identification of Latino children at risk for autism spectrum disorder.  Pediatrics , peds. 2013-0383."
"156" "Zuckerman, K. E., Sinche, B., Cobian, M., Cervantes, M., Mejia, A., Becker, T., & Nicolaidis, C. (2014). Conceptualization of autism in the Latino community and its relationship with early diagnosis.  Journal of developmental and behavioral pediatrics: JDBP, 35 (8), 522."
"157" "Zuckerman, K. E., Sinche, B., Mejia, A., Cobian, M., Becker, T., & Nicolaidis, C. (2014). Latino parents' perspectives on barriers to autism diagnosis.  Academic pediatrics, 14 (3), 301-308."
"158" "Zwaigenbaum, L., Bauman, M. L., Choueiri, R., Kasari, C., Carter, A., Granpeesheh, D., . . . Fein, D. (2015). Early intervention for children with autism spectrum disorder under 3 years of age: recommendations for practice and research.  Pediatrics, 136 (Supplement 1), S60-S81."
