"x"
"1" "Running head: SCUBA DIVING AND SENSING THE DEEP"
"2" "Scuba Diving and Sensing the Deep"
"3" "Peter M Forster"
"4" "University of Worcester"
"5" "John Hockey"
"6" "University of Gloucestershire"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "R esearch into the sensuous  practices which constitute the phenomenological foundations of sporting experience  has been relatively underdeveloped . This paper seeks to address this  state of affairs by portraying the sensory activity involved in doing scuba diving. Drawing on the work of Bourdieu and  Crossley  and using data from interviews with an expert  scuba divi ng instructor, the paper details  a spectrum of sensuous activity encompassing moving, touching, listening and hearing in the underwater environment. The paper concludes with a call for the  development of sensory  studies across the spectrum of sporting activit y so as to provide a more adequate foundational link to theorising about sport."
"9" "Scuba Diving and Sensing the Deep"
"10" "During the previous 25 years there has been a plethora  of analysis generally on  the  social  body.  However, the corpus of literature that has subsequently developed is one within which the orising and textual  analysis have  been overwhelmingly predominant (Shilling , 2003) and studies of practical  corporeal experience are still rare. So much so that Wainwright and Turner (2006 ) could recently note  that a “systematic empirical resear ch tradition is lacking” (p.238) .  In spite of consider able and wide ranging social analysis  it remains possible to assert that the bulk of this research has been concerned with data  about  that body rather than  from  it (Shilling,  2003) .    More specifically for the purposes of this paper ,  this same lack of attention to the directly corporeal is  also  e vident in studies of leisure and sporting activity within  which  phenomenological  analyses have rarely been attempted  (K erry &  Armour,  2000), the exception being analyses of how participants respond to injury,  which has attracted the attention of researchers  ( e.g. Allen-Collinson, 2003 ).   The result is,  as three  recent reviews of t he literature indicate ( Haldrup  & Larsen, 2006; Hockey &  Allen -Collinson 2007; Sparkes  2009) , research into  the  sensing and sensuous  e xperie nces which constitute the  phenomenologi cal grounds of actually doing leisure-sport is currently underdeveloped and requires much urgent attention. Leisure and sport, after all, are irremediably corporeal and our understanding of their thoroughly embodied nature needs to be developed through a sustained analysis of the fundamental elements that make practice possible, namely the sensory work of participants. Leisure and sporting expertise demands a synthesis of sensory  practices which  underpin performance, and constitute the phenomenological foundations of practicing such activities. Whilst one can find large amounts of abstract theorising about sport and leisure (e.g. Maguire & Young, 2002) there has been little connection between this level of analysis and the phenomenological ground of the activities themselves. This connection needs to be  made in order to further our understanding of the ways such activities are done both personally, collectively (teams) and across a spectrum of sport and leisure. Without this analytic connection one can arguably call into question the foundational adequacy of theories about ‘doing sport/leisure’. Activities, which, after all, are achieved on every occasion they are practiced, and the skilled practices themselves, are ultimately sensory. So the challenge is not so much to establish the theoretical problem of order, which allows such physical activities to be done, but rather to establish analytically the empirical production of order on singular occasions (Lynch, 2001). An  accomplishment which is achieved each time sport/leisure is done via the deployment of sensory  practices particular to specific sports and leisure pursuits. Once the latter is achieved then abstract generalisations about leisure and sport can be situated on a firmer foundational analysis. Therefore, this  paper adds to a  small but emerging stock of material (see  de  Garis , 1999; Lewis, 2000;   Wacquant ,  2004 ; Downey,  2005;  Bar-on Cohen, 2006;  Schwaiger , 2008 )  which  directly engages  in embodied analysis at the sensory level  of activity.  It does so by examining the se nsory activity of scuba diving.  The social science literature on this  pursuit has developed since the  1960s and as a  literature  review indicates it is overwhelmingly psychological and psy chiatric in content ( Capodieci ,  2008) ,  focusing in particular on the investigat ion of stress, motivation and satisfaction  amongst divers  (Dimmock, 2009).   There is also a small amount of sociological material   pertaining to the general  sub - cultural behavio ur (Hunt, 1995; Cater, 2008: pp.49-54; Di mmock, 2009) of divers, but little  of this material specifically addresses sensory issues in-depth."
"11" "The  remainder of this  paper is structured as follows: initially the research in terms of data collection and analysis is outlined, next  follows a section situating scuba diving conceptually and subsequently  the data is  then  portrayed ."
"12" "The Research"
"13" "This research started  like a lot of research during numerous informal  discussion s  about weekend  leisure  activities, with the first  author talking about his passio n for scuba diving, and the second  author who had no knowledge about the activity, becoming more and more intrigued by the corporeality of diving in the deep for leisure. Th is  led to  the second  author making copious notes for a number of weeks and later  the joint decision being  made  to instigate some research. The data on which this paper is  a composite of the aforementioned notes, and subsequent  semi structured qualitative interviews whic h were conducted  with the second   author interrogating the first  author on  diving generally and then on  each of the sensory aspects (moving, seeing, hearing and touching) of his  recreational diving. The se face-to-face  interviews lasted up to six ty minutes, were tape recorded and  transcribed . Subsequently the first  author departed to fill an academic post in Australia, and follow up interviewing on the same corporeal topics took place via email. The data was then analysed thematically (Flick,  1998). The first  author is a highly competent diver with  38  years of scuba experience having dived in the UK, Hawaii, the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, Australia ,  Vanuatu, the Cook Islands , the Red Sea  and Fiji. He has been an accredited scuba instructor with the Professional Association of Diving In structors (PADI) for the last 15  years.  Hence, he possesses what  Garfinkel  (2002) has termed a “unique adequacy requirement” (p.175 ) which  enables him to understand the complexities of how scuba diving is accomplished at the phenomenological level. Given the under-development of literature  on both the senses in sport /leisure  generally and on scuba diving in particular, this research is necessarily exploratory. Its primary purpose was not t o generate statistical generalis ations but rather to initially explore the  corporeal complexities of the experience of diving.  In common with much qualitative analysis, extrapolation from the data relies on  what  Michell  (1983) has termed  “the validity of the analysis rather than the representati veness of the events” (p.10).   There are precedents for this kind of exploratory research involving a single interviewee both w ithin sport/leisure (Curry, 1993;  Krane , Greenleaf & Snow,  1997) and occup ations (Griffiths & Mack ,  2007 ), with the latter example also focusing on the senses and their relationship to the sea, albeit on its surface.  There are also precedents for i nterviewees also being involved  in t he authoring of research papers  (E vans et al. 2000; Griffiths &Mack,  2007), as is the case with this research. The data portrayed in this paper comes from the aforementioned interviews and it will demonstrate  how divers move, feel, listen and see during dives.   Interestingly, the interviews revealed tha t taste and smell play little  part in the sensuous experience of scuba diving; an absence which is due to divers wearing a  mask which encloses the nose, and an air demand valve in their mouths, which means that little water  enters the mouth."
"14" "Conceptualising the Scuba Diving Body"
"15" "To make sense of  the  scuba diving body  we make use of some of  Bourdieu’s armoury of concepts,  which constitute powerful  heuristic devices. For Bourdieu the concepts of field, capital, habitus, and practice are relational ,  each influencing the other and their interaction constitutes the very ‘logic of  practice’ (Bourdieu, 1990a), the latter being the direct activities which people accomplish in particular contexts.   Leisure activity ,  of which scuba diving constitutes a part ,  is  in Bourdieu’s (Bourdieu &  Wacquant , 1992 ) terms a   field , a  concept he uses to analytically identify particular social spaces in contemporary society. Each fiel d is distinct from other fields  possessing a relative autono my.  Usefully ,  on occasion Bourdieu equates fields to games ( Bourdieu  &  Wacquant  , 1992:66 ) within which individuals and groups work to  accomplish specific objectives.  Each field possesses its own normative structure, institutions, end products, and  investments which  participants make to achieve objectives pertinent to the particular ‘game’ which is being played.   Whilst there is no single regulatory agency for scuba diving internationally, there are numerous national bodies (e.g. British Sub  Aqua Club, Australian Scuba Council) with codes of  practice which  focus on training standards and safety procedures in particular. These organisations also run training programmes for certifying divers and instructors, which constitute for individuals the particular investments they need to make so as to be competently and safely involved in the sport of scuba diving.  Competency at diving constitutes in Bourdieu’s ( 1998 ) terms a form of  capital  and embraces  assets which are both technical and physical  and consists of a specific combination of knowledge and action. Some of this is obtained through  passing formal training courses;  other  parts of it are obtained by long exposure to the under-water  activity via a  range of marine conditions and is  lear ned informally in an un-codified  fashion.  Formally t his capital allows experienced  individuals to train others and informally when not in an instructional role, it still allows them to define and influence underwater activities when in the comp any of  less experienced divers, by dint of the aforementioned combination. The accumulati on of individual and shared  capital specific to the field of scuba diving generates a particular form of  habitus  which for Bourdieu (1977) is  an inter-linked set of durable, transposable dispositions, acquired within and adjusted to the particular so cial context which generates it.  These schemes of perception, thought and action result in divers’  development of  a ‘practical sense as the feel fo r the game’ (Bourdieu, 1990b: 62-3). T he sense of the game being contingent upon the particular field and the particular habitus individuals both oc cupy and manifest within it. This practical  sense of  the game allows divers to effect strategies to deal with  particular underwater  contexts, particular kinds of  social relations which occur within those contexts and to ‘cope with unforeseen and ever -changing situations’ (Bourdieu, 1977). Hence  divers ,  once trained properly, possess like a ll effectively socialised  actors, the capacity to improvise their  practice  when faced wi th practical underwater problems (Bourdieu &  Wacquant ,  1992)."
"16" "Whilst Bourdieu’s work is useful for situating the scuba diving body in a particular social space, and showing that being in that space results in certain embodied competencies  developing, to actually examine those competencies requires the incorporation of a phenomenological  stance  which  Bourdieu does not detail to any degree, as  Crossley  (2004, pp.39-40) notes. Of considerable utility here is  Crossley’s  (2004) concept of ‘reflexive body  techniques’ which  he has developed, building on the work of  Mauss  and  Merleau-Ponty . These:"
"17" "orientate  to pre-reflective principals. To learn to swim, for example, is not merely to learn to perform a fixed set of movements, but rather to grasp, in a practical and pre-reflective way, principals of buoyancy, water displacement, etc. It is to develop an understanding of ‘deep water’ sufficient to allow one to stay afloat and move around within it. Moreover, swimming embodies a purpose and thus a meaning. (p. 38)"
"18" "Furthermore, as  Crossley  (2004) indicates ,  these embodied competencies and their  meaning s which are  specific to particular physical activities  become shared and thus are not  just individual but also social.  They help construct and maintain in Bourdieu’s terms a particular habitus containing a degree of embodied commonality which is simultaneously both collective and individual ,  the one flowing into the other (Jenkins ,  1996:35). Each reflexive body technique consists of an ensemble, that is a group of corporeal competencies ,  which are done together to  effect  a common objective ( Crossley , 2005, p. 10). Together they constitute the phenomenological  ground-work  required to accomplish effective  sporting/leisure  activity. At root they are sensory in thei r constitution and it is to the  particular amalgam of sensory competencies evident within  scuba-diving , that the paper now turns ."
"19" "Moving in the Deep"
"20" "Lund (2006) in her ethnography of hill walking has noted the importance of analysing the moving body as this “may provide us with a scope for looking at the body that senses...and how all these senses are integrated by the way in which the living body moves” (p.41). This  movement has two principal interrelated  components: rhythm and timing   ( Goodridge ,  1999) .  There are then a series of rhythms to  every  dive , and also within each dive rhythms will  change according to how individuals are feeling, and the changing conditions (currents, visibility, topography, wildlife) and priorities (investigating wildlife, wrecks, reefs etc ) .  The rhythms of diving are  both  constant ones together with  stop-start ones.  Thus t he rhythm of  descending is usually constant as is moving to objects, wildlife or other locations that are relatively far off. Other patterns of movement are essentially stop-start dependent upon objects of interest, or physical features whose traversing causes difficulty. The movement of ascent can be constant ,  but it can also be stop-start, depending upon the amount of stopping at particular depths, which is required for the diver to surface safely and avoid the dangers  of Decompression Sickness  (the ‘bends’) caused by nitrogen leaving the body’s tissues  too rapidly . This stop-start process is complicated by gas-filled spaces expanding on ascent, which tends to accelerate the speed of ascent, making controlled ascent more difficult.  Today this rhythm is controlled by information from a dive computer which is carried by most divers and which issues instructions about such ‘safety stops’.   Achieving rhythm involves, above all,  a coordination of bodily parts  as the demands of  the underwater  terrain are negotiated via precise bodily adjustments necessary for effective movement. A coordination that needs to be learnt:"
"21" "When you watch beginners they tend to look as if they are thrashing about a bit, whereas someone who is more experienced, they are moving their legs much more gracefully through the water. It’s different from being on the surface, unless you are disabled you don’t use your arms... you need your arms for other things basically, holding kit like a torch, pressure gauge, camera. It’s a real sign of a novice flapping your arms about."
"22" "To swim underwater effectively  also  requires the development of a particular sense of timing.   This corporeal understanding  is made up of a highly dev eloped awareness of feelings derived from body parts.  So a simple movement such as swimming over a rock involves awareness of fin movements, body orientation, breath control, buoyancy control, sensing the  changing flows of water around objects and becomes known via differing assemblages of corporeal sensations, which become taken for granted with experience. The angle of the head and torso, the positioning of the arms,  the extension, contraction and   cadence of the legs and feet,  these constitute the  directly corporeal elements the particular “somatic mode of attention” ( Csordas , 1993 ) of the diving body, which are produced via corporeal choices made on the basis of  such sensory feedback.  Divers then  develop a sense of efficient movement and of efficient timing of their movements so that they become  a taken for g ranted phenomena (Tuan, 1993:  36), one which  however always  has an element of personal experimentation within it:"
"23" "Someone who is experienced makes smaller movements from just their legs, and if they are not holding something their arms are just tucked underneath or folded...you tend to have your leg movements much more from the hip, it’s a longer leg movement and a slower movement than when you are swimming on the surface because it works better...Everyone finds what works for them and they play around a little with the movement, but it’s basically the same, with some small variation, movement from the hips."
"24" "This underwater movement is initially learnt from instruction on land and then via mimicking instructors when under water. Primarily though, it involves divers developing a new form of kinaesthetic awareness directly from the sensations of their own bodies, for as  Tangen  (2004)  has noted: “It is movements that trigger sensory activity that the consciousness in turn experiences as feelings” (p.21)."
"25" "Touching the Deep"
"26" "Paterson (2007) has noted that touch has a number of possible dimensions including the metaphorical, but for the purpose at hand we concentrate on touch as “a world of movement and exploration, of non-verbal social communication” involving the “immediacy of our  everyday, embodied tactile-spatial experience” (pp.2-3).  This experience for divers begins prior to their entry into the water, as they put their equipment on (suits, weights, air tanks, masks, fins, marker buoys, etc). Overwhelmingly this experience is one in which participants feel loaded and cumbersome:"
"27" "The kit feels heavy before you get into the water and there’s loads of bits of equipment that’s dangling off you or you are holding onto and it’s a bit of a weight, until you get into the water. Then the weight goes because you become neutrally buoyant."
"28" "At the point of immersion there is then a feeling of release and freedo m as the interviews revealed: “a glorious moment”. Divers, when  traversing the Deep, touch it and in turn are touched by its properties in a  reciprocal haptic relationship, corresponding to  Merleau-Ponty’s  (1962) concept of “reversibility”.  The nature of this relationship tends to vary and is dependent, to a large degree, upon the temperature of the water. Immersion requires wearing a mask and in colder water a ‘dry suit’, hood and gloves, whilst warmer temperatures require a ‘wet suit’ and possibly a hood, or perhaps just a swimming costume:"
"29" "If it’s a dry suit your skin feels pretty much normal because you’ll have reg ular clothes on underneath, because  your body is completely dry inside the suit. The only bit that will get wet will be parts of your face and maybe your hands, but sometimes you put dry gloves on as well... In a wet suit you have always got a layer of water between the skin and the suit because it’s not sealed so water gets in around the wrists, ankles and neck."
"30" "So whilst there are feelings of release as the weight of the diver’s equipment and gravity diminish, there are also feelings of being constrained by both dry and wet suits, albeit less in the latter due to the thinness and open form of its construction. Such feelings of being constrained are intimately connected to feelings of being distanced from the water that surrounds divers:"
"31" "I prefer to feel wet when I dive, so I prefer to wear a wet suit or no t a protective suit at all, because  it just feels otherwise that I’m disconnected. It’s like my mind is telling me I’m underwater, and I’m looking around and swimming around, but my body feels dry (in a dry suit). Again you adapt to that but I just don’t like it as much. I like to feel in touch with my environment and I like feeling that direct contact."
"32" "D irect contact between the skin and the water constitutes a powerful sensuous experience:"
"33" "It ’ s so much freer and I really enjoy the sensation of being in the water and in tactile contact with it. I can feel the movement of currents and I can feel subtle changes in temperature...Well a current is like an underwater wind so it’s like if you could imagine a wind against you on the surface...That’s why I like tropical diving because I can feel these changes all over, it’s like my skin gets back to being a tactile area again... As far as touch is concerned it’s a much less enjoyable experience in the dry suit compared to a wet suit, and a wet suit compared to being in shorts."
"34" "D ivers feel currents, th e water in varying temperatures  and experience a particular kinaesthetic awareness as they move through the Deep. Divers are also affected by, and in turn respond to, their relationship to pressure, for as they descend the water pressure mounts. This manifests itself directly on the body in the form of feelings of pressure, followed by discomfort and eventually pain, if the sensations are not compensated for . Initially this occurs with their mask being pressed against their face, which is relieved by breathing out through the nose. There is also painful pressure in the ears and sinuses , which demands  the nose to be pinched and blown simultaneously to equalise the pressure in the middle ear.   When wearing a dry suit,   individuals feel discomfort  as the suit begins to constrict their flesh; a state of affairs that requires them to respond quickly to being touc hed by the pressure of the Deep:"
"35" "The  pressure   of the suit against you as you descend , as the water pressure increases, that can feel really quite uncomfortable, so when you put some air into the suit that makes it  more comfortable. You get pinching at certain points and sometimes a general effect. You know when you get your blood pressure taken and the collar squeezes your arm, it’s like that, but all over, as you descend. You are very quick to respond to changes in pressure, so you don’t get that feeling of being squeezed. I think you are very sensitive to pressure because pressure changes in very small distances under water, so you  are always having  to make adjustments (with air) because of those changes."
"36" "Divers are constantly making small, improvised adjustments to their air pressure so as to avoid pain and discomfort (also to remain ‘neutrally buoyant’, o r to move up or down) becoming “attuned” ( Ingold , 2000 ) to their pressured environment. A further feature of their  sensory experience concerns their touching of objects .  This constitutes the  immediately corporeal engagement of f eelin g the  underwater  world and comprehending its features   haptically . However such touching in the Deep is characterised by a degree of tentativeness, even for the very experienced:"
"37" "I think I grasp more cautiously (than on land) because one of the things I have noticed is that being immersed in water makes your skin a bit soft. So I’ve noticed I’ve found it very easy to get cut if I touch surfaces underwater. Like on a wreck, something which if I was on the surface would be no problem at all... And then there  are  loads of wildlife that will sting or is sharp, so you are generally more cautious about touching anything underwater... You do it slowly and you do it carefully until you know it (species) really quite well and know it’s safe for you  and safe for the wildlife, because  some   things yo u do not want to touch them because  you can damage their protective coating and render it more prone to disease."
"38" "Divers are then engaged in a reciprocal process of touching the Deep and being in turn touched by its properties (water, pressure) and objects both manufactured and natural. A  further dimension to being touched involves a specific state of being, wh ich is particularly fascinating  to many divers, namely that of weightlessness."
"39" "Deep Embracing"
"40" "By skilfully adjusting their buoyancy via their B uoyancy  C ontrol  D evices,  divers can reach a condition of ‘neutral  buoyancy’ that allows them to hover  motionless in mid -  water, or above or alongside a feature or object. This state of being is unique in the world, in the sense that the only condition that approximates it is floating in space, which is why astronauts practice for space  walks in dive tanks. This state  is  often experienced as  intensely pl easurable for participants ( Strang , 2005, p.100; Dimmock, 2009, p.284 ) as  pressures which are imposed upon humans by gravity  are absent:"
"41" "It’s hard to describe, um, it’s like now I’m aware of my weight pushing the different parts of my body into the chair; when I’m weightless there is none of that. I don’t have any pulls, I feel weightless,  I  can feel freer than I can at any other time. It’s a big part of it – it’s freedom."
"42" "The pressures of gravity are then absent, but simultaneously the diver feels  the powerful sensation of being  embraced by the Deep: “I feel held. I feel embraced by water when I’m neutrally buoyant, it’s a really nice sensation”. Another radically different sensory experience (from the surface) becomes possible for divers when hovering becomes combined with certain depths and water conditions in what is known as a ‘Blue Water Dive’:"
"43" "I have done  dives which  are called blue water dives where the bottom is far down and you can’t see it, and if you are a bit deep also it’s sometimes hard to tell which way up and which way down is. For some people like novice divers that can be very disorientating, but I love it...But if you do it a few times you get used to it and you know you are safe and you can relax and enjoy this unique sensation where you are not quite sure of your position... Even when I am diving over a wreck or checking out the wildlife  and taking photos, I will come back to that sensation and experience its uniqueness...I lose a lot of my sense of me as a social entity and all those sort of things and get into becoming just an experiencing entity, in moments like that...when I’m just hovering in mid-water I lose all sense of me engaging with other people and become very, very, aware just of the sensations. I lose a sense of self if you like, in some ways I’m just experiencing."
"44" "In such relatively deep blue water dives visual capacity is severely limited whilst simultaneously individuals actively  minimise  all bodily sense of movement (kinaesthesia) by hovering, and engage with a different experience of their corporeal felt position (proprioception) and balance (vestibular sense).  Sensory capacities, which constitute the foundations of human spa tial experience (Paterson, 2007,   p. 59), and  which when minimised  account for both the novelty and attractiveness to divers.  This unique hove ring weightless experience  produces a new kind of sensory knowledge for the individuals involved. Moreover, as the previous interview quote indicates, this state of being has the  capacity to temporarily change  the individual ’s “felt identity” (Goffman, 1963, p. 106), a perhaps not surprising outcome as the latter is rooted in  self-feelings (McCall &Simmons,  1978) which themselves are partially sensory. At this juncture we turn to another dimension of the diving sensorium that of the auditory."
"45" "Listening to the Deep"
"46" "L istening  (for information) and hearing  are vitally important  skills in social life generally for  as Feld (1996) has noted humans partially understand their environments by developing “acoustic knowing”  (p.97). This auditory understanding is crucial  for traversing the Deep efficiently, for as the second author noted during the interviews: “You can never see very far even in fabulously clear water, maximum visibility might be forty to fifty meters”.  Moreover, perhaps in contrast to popular mythology, the underwater is  a noisy environment  ( Helmreich ,  20 07, p.625). Sounds underwater   then  become arguably a more important source of information than on land and  the Deep  const itutes a particular “soundscape” (Schafer 1977) filled with particular auditory data."
"47" "Divers become practised at making auditory  evaluations as they traverse the Deep . Their primary concern is one of safety and they are constantly monitoring sound in relation to this crucial issue. Whilst the diving body is propelled by a skeleton and musculature, it is also propelled by a respiratory system.  The divers own breathing patterns and those of peers constitute an  ever present  fund of auditory information, which is constantly being scrutinised."
"48" "Your dive gear is always making noises. You have the bubbling into the water all the time; you can hear that it makes a racket!  ...Both in-breath and out-breath of yourself.  It’s quite noisy breathing. You can hear other people breathing ‘ cos  sound travels reasonably well under water and it travels faster underwater."
"49" "Via this auditory scrutiny breathing becomes one of the means by which the condition of the particular dive is evaluated.  From the dive r’s stance dives are evaluated  in terms of how efficiently or inefficiently one is using up air along a continuum ranging between  fast and slow use of air. How divers breath influences how they feel about how they are diving which impacts upon how particular dives are socially categorised (Lyon, 1997).  Experienced divers listen to and evaluate their own breath ing patterns so as to effect a good dive , namely one  which allows them to remain underwater  as long as possible:"
"50" "My own breathing I sort of use it...I use the feedback to make sure I’m br eathing really quite slowly because  I usually want th e dive to last a long time because  I enjoy diving so I listen...In most dive gear the bubbles come out around your mouth. You can hear them. So I use it as feedback for how deeply I am breathing because I want to breathe quite slowly and not breathe fast because I want my air to last."
"51" "Rapid breathing results in the quicker use of air and a shorter period of time enjoying the Deep. That might we ll be due to inexperience, but  it also indicates there may well be a safety problem with individuals. So experienced divers are alert to patterns of sound which indicate this:"
"52" "Especially when I am an instructor I am listening to how other people are breathing for clues as to how nervou s they are, because  they will breath e  faster and shallower if they are nervous. I can hear the changes. If they suddenly start breathing rapidly I might go over and check them out and see what’s going on with them."
"53" "As Downey (2005)  notes  “the trained ear is emphatically  intercorporeal ; that is, it hears relationships with other people’s bodies” (p.100).  How  divers are breathing then becomes a major indicator of how they are diving in terms of safety and enjoyment. If the dive is goin g well there will be a rhythmic order (Clarke, 1998)  to the pattern o f respiration, which will be deep and slow. Where there is no perceivable order ,  or when breathing is shallow and rapid  levels of enjoyment and safety margins tend to decrease, and listening to the breathing of oneself or others constitutes an individual and collective monitoring.  The diver’s auditory monitoring also extends to  other human-based sounds in two particular ways. Firstly , it is  used as a means of communication, on the one hand to indicate to peers items of interest (wildlife  or features of a wreck  for example )  and on the other hand more importantly to ensure proximity between individuals thereby increasing safety:"
"54" "You also usually have some means of communicating via sound, um, so the first thing you would do if you noticed someone was a long way away, and if they are not looking at you, then you use various sound-making devices. I’ve got a jacket which if you press a button it will make honking noises like Donald Duck. You also have things like ‘tank bangers’ which is a bit of plastic and you bang on the side of your (air) tank, or if you tap on the tank with your knife, that will attract people’s attention."
"55" "The second important sound source that needs to be identified and categorised comes from the surface, for boat sounds constitute an alarm call to divers indicating potential danger.  Recognition of such sounds means that if divers are anywhere near the surface they will immediately try to descend so as to avoid collis ion with boats. The problem for them  is that whilst sound travels faster underwater and it gets very loud, it is only when the boat is close to divers , that the latter can recognise whe re it is coming from  ( Helmreich , 2007, p. 624) .  As the interviews ind icated,  “The curse is you   can hear them but you don’t know what direction they are or how near, so you react to them anyway, just because you associate the sounds with danger”."
"56" "Divers also learn to listen for and interpret other  sounds which  are non-human. On one level this is necessary to fully enjoy features of the Deep such as wildlife, for being able to identify particular patterns of sound tells the diver that certain kinds of wildlife are in the vicinity and therefore can be looked for, engaged with, photographed, etc:"
"57" "You can also hear lots of different things from underwater wildlife... Depending where you are you can often hear this constant crackling noise and that’s from different kinds of shellfish when they are eating. Then there are lots of other kinds of fish which make noises, because some like the Parrotfish are actually biting off chunks of reef, making all these sharp tapping noises... Dolphins and whales make  noise,  so for example Humpbacks make a characteristic singing varying in pitch, squeaking and  honkings . Dolphins often make clicking noises."
"58" "Interpreting and u nderstanding these wildlife sounds also provides divers with intelligence about safety, namely that the source is likely to be benign, for as the interviewee indicated “predators very rarely make a noise. The first thing you would notice would be  teeth  clamped around you!”  At this juncture we move our analysis on and examine the ocular dimension of diving."
"59" "Viewing the Deep"
"60" "Numerous sports demand a particular and developed way of seeing (Downey, 2005, pp.162-168;  Wacquant , 2004, p.87). Such sports groups  through the building of experience at particular  physical  activities, construct a store of knowledge and the latter informs what is seen and how it is seen. A  complex intricate linked interaction occurs  in which knowledge and vision mutually influence each other as the acc omplishment of activities ensues. There is some evidence that having underwater visual experiences constitutes an important motivator for diving (Dimmock, 2009, p.289).   In scuba diving  the fundamentals of this visual  practice take a certain degree of learning:"
"61" "It changes your vision, um, on the surface it’s not a big deal but once you go down below the surface, the way the light refraction works and the combination of the  face mask  and the water. It means that objects appear larger, and closer, so again you have a period of adjustment. What tends to happen is if you are reaching for something underwater you ‘undershoot’. You don’t reach it, then you have to reach a bit further, then gradually you adjust, but it takes time to readjust to the underwater world, and you are seeing things differently."
"62" "Social interaction permeates the lived space of each dive and is manifest in a number of ways. Firstly, in terms of communicating features of the Deep  that are  to be enjoyed as previously noted. Secondly, divers habitually dive together principally for reasons of safety  (Dimmock, 2009, p.286) , sometimes in groups, but nearly always within what is known as the ‘buddy’ system (where two are paired up for the dive).  There is then a sociality to diving involving what Lee &  Ingold  have termed a “physical co-presence, emphasised by common movements’ (p. 69) and concerns.  Diving together then constitutes a complex interactional accomplishment in terms of maintaining physical proximity over particular stretches  of  underwater  space, which are liable to be variable in terms of terrain (wrecks, coral reefs etc),  population of divers, conditions (visibility and strength of currents) and different levels of ability (fitness, experience). The visual is then important on a number of accounts, none more so than in relation to proximity, which is monitored via the all i mportant “glance” (Downey, 2005, p.160 ):"
"63" "Every few seconds you check on other people.  I’m an instructor and even when I’m not teaching someone, I’ve got this tendency to keep a close watch on what other people are doing, and especially if they are people who are not experienced. I will never go for more than 20-30 seconds without looking around and seeing where everyone is, and if they are not visible taking steps to go and find them. If I know everyone on the dive is experienced as I am, I will not check them as often, but I will still every minute or two. Mostly it’s a glance, pretty much always... If you lose track of them then you start emergency procedures if you can’t find them. It’s not good to lose a buddy underwater."
"64" "A further dimension to this visual practice is the scr utiny for, and comprehension of,  hand signals.  Scuba divers  have developed a system of non-verbal sig ns, which novices have to learn  and which are used to communicate intent, interest, distress, danger, etc:"
"65" "There is an international set of signals – there is a core set of basic ones for handling the things that all divers do, to do with you have a problem, or what direction you want to move in, or something is not quite right, or you want to point (at something). Beyond that you get a certain number of variations, so for example if you are travelling you need to learn these local signals. But there are understood internat ional signals, for example for ‘ I  am soon going to run out of air’ ."
"66" "This constant practice of visual monitoring perhaps unsurprisingly also exten ds to that most important topic: the self. A  self  which  is operating in an essentially alien environment and one permeated with potential hazard:"
"67" "You will always be checking your equipment, you will always have an indicator of how much air you have got and keep an eye on that every couple of minutes. You also have an  instrument which will tell you how long the dive has been and your depth ... I ran out of air once on my only 3 rd  time of doing it in the sea... I just had not been keeping an eye on my dive gauge to notice... Not paying attention enough and I certainly learned from that experience!"
"68" "The last dimension of  visual monitoring pertains to wildlife, as experienced divers accrue knowledge about species, which indicates that the latter’s appearance is not always indicative of the likely degree of hazard they manifest towards humans:"
"69" "Things that look dangerous like Barracuda or Moray Eels, with loads of teeth, but unless you seriously annoy these species they are not going to cause you any problems. Most divers have problems from things like touching  corals which  will sting you, and maybe touching a jelly fish, or sea urchins and you get the spines stuck in you... Most things are camouflaged; if it’s not camouflaged it’s a very good sign ‘don’t touch’, they don’t need to camouflage, they have other defences like nasty stings."
"70" "Learning to see in this way is then important for enjoying the Deep and, more crucially, for ensuring mutual safety within it, resulting in a very particular, socialised and shared “point of view” (Lee &  Ingold , 2006, p.83)."
"71" "Conclusion"
"72" "Scuba diving as a leisure activity is situated within a particular kind of social  space which  Bourdieu (1990a) terms a  field .  Within that social space divers learn to accumulate  capital  comprising a combination of knowledge and action, which is materialised via specific kinds of embodied  practices . These habituated practices create and sustain a particular kind of  habitus  and are simultaneously part of that very habitus, which is thoroughly embodied. The practices themselves are ultimately sensory in their make-up and when combined in action  (Howes, 2003: 47)  form a specific “reflexive body technique” ( Crossley , 2005) particular to this kind of diving .  A technique which with much practice and over time results in a skilful performance which is largely taken for granted, for as  Leder  ( 1990 )  notes a “skill is finally and fully learned when something that was extrinsic, grasped only through explicit rules or examples, now comes to pervade my own corporeality” (p.31). This habituated and skilled underwater performance is never completely similar for conditions in the Deep are subject to frequent change,  demanding  an  improvisational capacity on the part of divers who are continually effecting sensory monitoring of  the conditions which surround them ( c.f.  Ingold : 2000, p.353); a n awareness that encompasses interrogating both the Deep, the self and peers for important intelligence pertaining to both enjoyment and crucially safety. Therefore the “feel for the game” divers manifest is, as Bourdieu (1990b) indicated, truly a “practical sense” (pp. 62-63). The skilled performance of these combined sensory practices constitutes the end product of what Shilling (2007) has called “body pedagogics” (p.13), formal and informal instruction into embodied learning processes, which constitute the socialisation of novices within the sport, or outside of the latter, for example in work; processes that have traditionally been amenable to anthropological and sociological analysis. Novices learn the embodied sensory practices of scuba diving through doing those practices and in turn reproduce the very structure of the sport itself, or as  Crossley  (2004), following Bourdieu, has put it: ‘Habitus  structures practice, practice structures habitus’ (p. 52). The reflexive body technique of scuba diving constitutes an interesting example of the development of a set of sensory competencies that fuse with a particular technology (breathing equipment, depth gauges, fins etc), so as to function in an alien environment whilst engaging with human and non-human species. There is a high degree of imperative to learn these competencies effectively so as to enjoy the uniqueness of underwater attractions, but also more importantly to safeguard the self and peers whilst traversing the Deep."
"73" "Brekhus  (1998, p. 36)  has noted that people’s everyday and mundane  tasks have all too often been left unmarked, unaccented, and taken for granted in the pursuit of more abstract, theoretical generalisations about social life.  Sensory activity whilst everyday and mundane is also foundational, constituting the phenomenological ground upon which much of social life is based. Given the relative underdevelopment of studies examining the phenomenological grounds of doing sport, there remains much to do to meet  Classen’s  (1997) call for ‘in-depth’  analysis of specific  kinds of  sensory behaviour  (p.410). This underdevelopment needs remedying so as to strengthen the analytic link between the sensory foundations of sporting activity, which allows sport to be practiced and theorising about the latter."
"74" "Note"
"75" "Divers do not experience pinching pressure when descending on their torso when in a wet suit or bathing costume. When ascending they do not usually experience this pinching pressure however clad, or through masks, nose, or ears,  yet  if  they do not release air in a controlled way via their Buoyancy Control Device (BCD) the dangers are  great er in the form of the crippling  Decompression Sickness ( ‘Bends’)."
"76" "References"
"77" "Allen-Collinson, J. (2003) .  Running into injury ti me: D istance running and the temporal.  Sociology of Sport Journal ,  20 (4),  331-350."
"78" "Bar-On Cohen, E. (2006).   Kime  and the moving body: somatic C odes in Japanese martial a rts.  Body & Society ,  12 (4), 73-93."
"79" "Bourdieu, P. (1977).  Outline   o f a  theory of p ractice .  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"80" "Bourdieu, P. (1990a).  The l ogic of practice .  Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press."
"81" "Bourdieu, P. (1990b).  In other words: Essays towards a r eflexive  s ociology . Stanford. CA: Stanford University Press."
"82" "Bourdieu, P. (1998).  Practical r eason . Cambridge: Polity Press."
"83" "Bourdieu, P. &  Wacquant , L. (1992).  An invitation to reflexive s ociology .  Cambridge: Polity Press."
"84" "Brekhus , W. (1998).   A sociology  of the unmarked: Redirecting our focus.  Sociological Theory ,  16 (1),  34-51."
"85" "Capodieci , S. (2008) .   Psychology of diving: literary review and state of the art . Retrieved July 8, 2008, from  http://www.psychomedia.it/pm/grpind/sport/capodieci3.htm"
"86" "Cater, C. (2008) . Perceptions of and interactions with marine environments: Diving attractions from Great Whites to Pygmy Seahorses.   In  B.  Garrod  & S.  Gossling  (Eds. ) ,  New frontiers in marine tourism   (pp.44-66).  Oxford: Elsevier."
"87" "C larke, E.F. (1998).  Rhythm and t imin g in m usic.   In   D . Deutsch (Ed.),  Psychology of Music  (pp. 473-497) . New York: Academic Press."
"88" "Classen , C. (1997) . Foundations for  an anthropology  of the senses .    International Social Science Journal ,  49 (3),  401-412."
"89" "Crossley , N. (2004).  The circuit t rain er’s habitus: Reflexive body techniques and the sociality of the w orkout.  Body & Society ,  10 (1), 37-69."
"90" "Crossley , N. ( 2005 ).   Mapping reflexive body techniques: On body m od ification and m aintenance.   Body & Society ,   11 (1),  1-35."
"91" "Csordas , T.J.  (1993) .   Somatic modes of attention .   Cultural Anthropology ,   8 (2),  135-156."
"92" "Curry, T.J. (1993) . A little pain never hurt anyone: athletic career socialization and the normalization of sports injury.  Symbolic Interaction ,  16 (3),  273-290."
"93" "de   Garis , L. (1999).  Experiments in pro wrestling.   Sociology of Sport Journal ,  16 (1), 65-74."
"94" "Dimmock, K. (2009). Finding comfort in adventure: experiences of recreational SCUBA divers.  Leisure Studies ,  28  (3), 279-295."
"95" "Downey , G. (2005) .  Learning c apoeira:    Lessons in cunning from an Afro Brazilian art . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"96" "Evans, L., Hardy, L. & Fleming, S. (2000) .  Intervention strategies with injured athletes: An action research study.  The Sport Psychologist ,  14 (2),  188-206."
"97" "Feld, S. 1996. Waterfalls of song: an  acoustemology  of place resounding in  Bsavi , Papua New Guinea.  In  S. Field & K. Basso (Eds.),  Senses of place   (pp.91-136). Santa Fe: School of American Research Press."
"98" "Flick, U. ( 1 998).   An introduction to qualitative  research .  London: Sage."
"99" "Garfinkel , H. (2002).  Ethnomethodology’s  p rogramme: Working out Durkheim’s aphorism . New York:  Rowman  & Littlefield."
"100" "Goffman, E. (1963) .   Stigma: Note s on the management of spoiled i dentity.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall."
"101" "Goodridge , J. (1999) .  Rhythm and timing of movement in performance .  London: Jessica Kingsley."
"102" "Griffiths, J. & Mack, K. (2007) . Going to sea: Co-creating the a esthetic dimension of shipboard  organizational life.  Culture and Organization ,  13 (4),  267-281."
"103" "Haldrup , M.  & Larsen, J. (2006).  Material cultures of t ourism.   Leisure Studies ,  25 (3), 275-289."
"104" "Helmreich , S. (2007).   An anthropologist underwater: Immersive soundscapes, submarine cyborgs, and  transductive  ethnography.   American Ethnologist ,  34 (4),  621-641."
"105" "Hockey, J. & Allen-Coll inson, J. (2007).  Grasping the p henomenology of sporting bodies.  International Review for the Sociology of Sport ,  42  (2),  115-131."
"106" "Howes, D. (2003) .  Sensual relations. Engaging  the  senses in cultural and social theory . Ann Arbour: University of Michigan Press."
"107" "Hunt, J. C. (1995).  Divers’ accounts of  normal risk.     Symbolic Interaction ,  18 (4),  439-462."
"108" "Ingold , T.   (2000) .  T he perception of the environment: Essays in livelihood, dwelling  and skill .   London:  Routledge ."
"109" "Jenkins, R. (1996).  Social Identity . London:  Routledge ."
"110" "Kerry, D. S. & Armour, K. M. (2000) .  Sports sciences and the promise of phenomenology: Philosophy, method, and insight.   Quest ,  52 (1),  1-17."
"111" "Krane , V., Greenleaf, C. A. &  Snow,  J. (1997).   Reaching for gold and the price of glory: A motivational case study of  an  élite gymnast.  The Sport Psychologist ,  11 (1),  53-71"
"112" "Leder , D. (1990) .   The absent body .  Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"113" "Lee, J. &  Ingold , T. (2006). Fieldwork on foot: perceiving, routing, socialising.  In  S. Coleman & P. Collins (Eds.),  Locating the  f ield:  Space,  p lac e and context in a nthropology  (pp.67-85).   Oxford: Berg."
"114" "Lewis, N. (2000) .   The climbing body, Nature and the experience of modernity.   Body & Society ,  6 (3/4),  58-80."
"115" "Lund , K. (2006). Seeing in motion and the touching e ye: Walking over Scotland’s mountains.  In   Bendix , R. &  Brenneis , D. (Eds.), special issue, Senses,  Etnofoor , Anthropological Journal ,  18 (1), 27-42."
"116" "Lynch, M. (2001) .  Ethnomethodology and the logic of practice.   In  T.R.  Schatzki , K. K norr  Cetina , & E. Von  Savigny  (E ds.) ,  The practice turn in contemporary social theory   (pp. 131-148).  London:  Routledge ."
"117" "Lyon, M.L. (1997) . The material body, social processes and emotion: Techniques of the body revisited.  Body & Society ,  3 (1),  83-101."
"118" "Maguire, J. & Young, K. (2002).  Theory, sport & s ociety .   Oxford: JAI."
"119" "McCall, G.J. & Simmons, J.L. (1978).   Identities and interactions .  New York: Free Press."
"120" "Merleau-Ponty , M. (1962) .   Phenomenology   of perception .  London:  Routledge  &  Kegan  Paul."
"121" "Mitchell, J.C. (1983) .  Case and situation analysis.   Sociological Review ,  31 (2),  187-211."
"122" "Paterson , M. (2007) .  The senses of touch:  Haptics , affects, technologies.  Oxford: Berg."
"123" "Schafer, R.M. (1977).  The tuning of  the world .  New York: Knopf."
"124" "Schwaiger , L. (2008). The flesh and the world:  Intercorporeal  body-selves, ageing and d ancing.  The Senses  &   Society ,  3 (1),  45-59."
"125" "Shilling, C. (2003) .   The body and social theory.   London: Sage."
"126" "Shilling, C. (2007) .  Sociology and the body: classical traditions and new agendas   In  C. Shilling (Ed.), special issue,  Embodying sociology: Retrospect, progress and prospects ,  Sociological Review , S1 monograph, 1-18."
"127" "Sparkes, A.C. (2009). Ethnography and the senses: challenges and possibilities.  Qualitative Research in Sport and Exercise ,  1 (1), 21-35."
"128" "Strang , V. (2005).  Common senses: Water, sensory e xper iences and the generation of m eaning.  Journal of Material Cultur e ,  10 (1), 92-120."
"129" "Tangen , J.O. (2004). Embedded expectations, embodied knowledge and the movements that connect: A system theoretical attempt to explain the use and non-use of sports facilities.  International Review for the Sociology of Sport ,   39 (1), 7-25."
"130" "Tuan, Y.F. (1993).   Passing  strange and wonderful.  Washington, D.C: Island Press-Shearwater."
"131" "Wa cquant , L. (2004) .  Body and soul: Notebooks of an apprentice boxer .  Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"132" "Wainwright, S. P. & Turner, B. S. (2006) . Just crumbling to bits’?  An exploration of the body, ageing, injury and career   in classi cal  ballet dancers.   Sociology ,  40 (2),   237-255."
"133" "Author note"
"134" "Peter Forster"
"135" "Institute of Health and Society"
"136" "University of Worcester"
"137" "Henwick Grove"
"138" "Worcester"
"139" "WR14 3HH"
"140" "United Kingdom"
"141" "Email: peter.m.forster@gmail.com"
